THE UNIVERSAL BODY OF PHYSIC In five Books; COMPREHENDING THE SEVERAL
TREATISES Of Nature, of Diseases and their causes, of Symptoms, of the
preservation of Health, and of Cures.

Written in Latin by that famous and learned Doctor LAZ. RIVERIUS, Counselor
and Physician to the present King of France, and Professor in the University of
MONTPELIER.

Exactly translated into English by WILLIAM CARR Practitioner in Physic.

Quid non Gallia parturit ingens?

LONDON, Printed for Philip Briggs at the Dolphin in Paul's Churchyard. MDCLVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE And truly noble Sir WILLIAM PASTON Knight and Baronet.
Right Worshipful,
LEst the honor of your Worships patronage should contract a blemish by
undertaking for and fixing on so mean an object as my self, I beseech your
Worship think that most noble Physician Riverius himself humbly prostrate at
your Worships feet, and (as a stranger to this Climate) ambitious of your
gracious protection. To present to your Worships favorable acceptance any
thing which I dared call mine own, were highly presumptuous and injurious to so
discerning an eye as yours, being conscious to my self of these superficial
besprinklings and that slender knowledge which is allowed me in Physic; as
unseemly it were to offer to your Worships view any one but this, or one so
nobly learned as this Princely Physician Riverius, who I hope will not be the
less acceptable to your Worship for that he has learned to speak English. If
these the first fruits of my undeserving endeavors may be cherished with the
warm rays of your Worships favor, and defended against those storms and
winds with which puffing Censurers may attempt to blast them, they may at
length become more mature, and afford a sweeter and more pleasing relish to
your Worships palate. I beseech your Worship pardon and accept this my humble
boldness; and though I should acknowledge my self very happy in your Worships
perusal of these unpolished lines, yet that your Worship may never have
occasion to use any thing in this or any other such treatise contained, is the
real desire of

SIR, Your Worships ever humble servant WILLIAM CARR.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Presume thou will be courteous when that precious and invaluable jewel
Health is offered unto thee, and does as it were desire thy acceptance. Here
she is richly attended and furnished with all those necessary conveniences
which are requisite for her preservation when she is in a good state; so that
if thou will make a careful disquisition into those things which are here
presented thee, thou may stand impregnable against the assaults and violence
of diseases, and be a stranger to sighs and groans the bed-fellows and
campanions of sick persons; or if thou art fallen into a valetudinary and
sickly state, here thou may have materials to repair those ruins and
batteries which are caused by the fury of vehement diseases: here you are
instructed how to break and quell the rebellion of those contumacious humors
which treasonably conspire and make head against the body that harbors them;
which though they have found lurking holes in which they may lie to a less
cautious eye undiscovered till they have gathered strength enough to assail and
overthrow Health; yet an accurate observer may by the rules herein proposed
open their secrecy, and prevent their malignity; so that prehapes some may
think us no less commendable then the American Travelers, who by the
periclitation and endangering of their health labor after newfound worlds,
while we by further discoveries and inquisitions into nature endeavor to
preserve the old one. I omit other things whereby this book is commendable, and
ought to be acceptable, lest I should swell an Epistle beyond its natural
proportion, and here prevent that praise which will be due upon perusal of the
matter it self; This includes the whole: that Riverius is the Author, who
because an eminent Physician, is worthy of respect and honor; because a
stranger, a fit object of (the glory of this Nation) entertainment and
hospitality. Nor need any one cavil that he is a Frenchman, for we may embrace
a French cure, though we abhor a French disease: he that will peruse this
Treatise may be his own Physician and patient, and reserve his Angels to be
tutelary to himself.

AN Index of all the Books and Chapters contained in this Treatise.
Introduction to the whole body of Medicines. Page 1
THE FIRST BOOK Containing Physiology. The Preface. The first Section. Of
Elements.
OF the nature of Elements. Chapter 1. Page 4 Of the number of Elements. chap.
2. p. 4 Of the qualities of the Elements. chap. 3. p. 5 Of the mixtion of
Elements. chap. 4. p. 8
The second Section of Physiology. Of Temperaments.
OF the nature of Temperaments. chap. 1. p. 10 Of the difference of
Temperaments. chap. 2. p. 10 Of a well mixed Temperament. chap. 3. p. 12 Of the
judging of Temperaments. chap. 4. p. 13 Of the Tempers of the several ages.
chap. 5. p. 14 Of the Temperaments of the sexes. chap. 6. p. 16 Of the Tempers
of the seasons of the year. chap. 7. p. 17
The third Section of Physiology. Of Humors.
OF the nature of Humors. chap. 1. p. 19 Of the differences of Humors. chap. 2.
p. 19 Of blood properly so called. chap. 3. p. 21 Of a limentary phlegm. chap.
4. p. 22 Of alimentary choler. chap. 5. p. 23 Of alimentary melancholy. chap.
6. p. 24 Of secundary humors. chap. 7. p. 25 Of Excrementitious choler. chap.
8. p. 26 Of Excrementitious melancholy. chap. 9. p. 27 Of serum. chap. 10. p.
29 Of Excrementitious phlegm. chap. 11. p. 30
The fourth Section of Physiology. Of the spirits and innate heat.
Of the nature of spirits. chap. 1. p. 32 Of the differences of spirits. chap.
2. p. 33 Of innate heat. chap. 3. p. 36
The fifth Section of Physiology. Of the Parts.
OF the nature of the Parts. chap. 1. p. 40 Of the differences of parts, and
first of similar parts. chap. 2. p. 41 Of dissimilar and organical parts. chap.
3. p. 42
The sixth Section of Physiology. Of the faculties and functions.
OF the nature of faculties and functions. chap. 1. p. 44 Of the differences of
faculties and functions. chap. 2. p. 45 Of the natural faculty and function,
and their species, and first of nutrition. chap. 3. p. 46 Of the Auctive
faculty and of accretion. chap. 4. p. 51 Of the generative faculty and of
generation. chap. 5. p. 53 Of the vital faculty. chap. 6. p. 54 Of the animal
faculty and fanction, and first of the principal faculties. chap. 7. p. 55 Of
sleeping and waking. chap. 8. p. 57 Of dreams. chap. 9. p. 58 Of the less
principal faculties. chap. 10. p. 59
The seventh Section of Physiology. Of the procreation of Man.
OF the seed of both sexes. chap. 1. p. 60 Of Menstreous blood. chap. 2. p. 62
Of Conception. chap. 3. p. 63 Of the delineation and perfection of every part.
chap. 4. p. 64 Of parturition of bringing forth. chap. 5. p. 65 Of likeness of
children to their parents. chap. 6. p. 65
The second Book of Medicinal Institutions Containing Pathology. Introduction
to Pathology. The first Section of Pathology. Of the nature and differences of
diseases.
OF the nature of a disease. chap. 1. p. 69 Of the kinds and differences of
diseases. chap. 2. p. 72 Of the species of a similar disease. chap. 3. p. 73 Of
the species of an organical disease. chap. 4. p. 77 Of the difference of the
common disease, or solution of the continuum. chapter 5. p. 80 Of the accidental
differences of diseases. chap. 6. p. 81
The second Section of Pathology. Of the changes of diseases, and chiefly of
Crisis.
OF the changes contingent in diseases. chap. 1. p. 85 Of the nature of a
Crisis. chap. 2. p. 86 Of the differences of Crisis. chap. 3. p. 87 Of the
signs of Crisis. chap. 4. p. 91 Of the Critical days. chap. 5. p. 92 Of the
causes of Crisis and Critical days. chap. 6. p. 99
The third Section of Pathology. Of the causes of diseases.
OF the nature of the morbifick cause. chap. 1. p. 102 Of the differences of
causes. chap. 2. p. 102 Of the causes of similar diseases. chap. 3. p. 104 Of
the causes of organical diseases. chap. 4. p. 106 Of the causes of common
diseases. chap. 5. p. 106 Of the causes of the accidental differences of
diseases. chap. 6. p. 108
The fourth Section of Pathology. Of the nature, differences, and causes of
Symptoms.
OF the nature of Symptoms. chap. 1. p. 109 Of the difference of Symptoms.
chap. 2. p. 109 Of the differences of action hurt. chap. 3. p. 110 Of the
difference of excrement. chap. 4. p. 112 Of the difference of changed quality.
chap. 5. p. 112 Of the causes of Symptoms in the genus. chap. 6. p. 113 Of the
causes of injured actions. chap. 7. p. 113 Of the causes of Symptoms which are
in excrements. chap. 8. p. 114 Of the causes of changed qualities. chap. 9. p.
115
The third Book of Medicinal Institutions containing the Semeiotical part. The
Preface. The first Section. Of Signs in their Genus.
OF the nature and definition of a sign. chap. 1. p. 116 Of the differences of
signs. chap. 2. p. 117 Of the general originals of signs. chap. 3. p. 118
The second Section of the Semeiotical part. Of the diagnostick signs.
OF the signs of bilious humor predominant in the whole body. chapter 1. p. 119 Of
the signs of pituitous humor predominant in the body. chap. 2. p. 121 Of the
signs of blood predominant in the body. chap. 3. p. 122 Of the signs of
melancholy predominant in the body. chap. 4. p. 124 Of the signs of the
affected part. chap. 5. p. 126 Of the signs of a part primarily diseased, or
by consent. chap. 6. p. 129 Of the signs of the species of a disease. chap. 7.
p. 131 Of the signs of a great and a small disease. chap. 8. p. 133 Of the
signs of a great and malignant disease. chap. 9. p. 134 Of the signs of an
acute and chronical disease. chap. 10. p. 136 Of the signs of morbifick
causes; and first of the signs of preternatural choler. chap. 11. p. 138 Of
the signs of preternatural phlegm. chap. 12. p. 139 Of the signs of serum
abounding. chap. 13. p. 139 Of the signs of flatulency. chap. 14. p. 141 Of
the signs of the times of diseases. chap. 15. p. 141
The third Section. Of the Semeiotical part of the Prognostical signs.
OF the signs discovering when a disease shall be long or short. chap. 1. p.
142 Of the signs of a disease tending to health or death. chap. 2. p. 147 Of
the manner how a disease will end, whether by Crisis, or a leasurable
dissolution. chap. 3. p. 207 Of the time when the disease will end, wherein the
day and hour of the Crisis is foretold. chap. 4. p. 208 Of the place where the
Crisis shall appear, and first of the signs of the approaching Crisis by vomit.
chap. 5. p. 209 Of the signs of the Crisis by looseness. chap. 6. p. 209 Of
the signs of an approaching Crisis by sweat. chap. 7. p. 210 Of the signs of
future Crisis by urine. chap. 8. p. 212 Of the signs of future Crisis by
bleeding. chap. 9. p. 212 Of the signs of future Crisis by the months and
hemorrhoids. chap. 10. p. 214 Of the signs of an ulcer. chap. 11. p. 214 Of
the signs of those things which will happen to one already sick, or falling
into a disease; and first of the signs of approaching madness. chap. 12. p. 215
Of the signs of approaching convulsions. chap. 13. p. 217 Of the signs of a
future relapse. chap. 14. p. 218
The fourth Book of Physical institutions. Of the conservation of health. The
Proem.
OF meat, drink, or of the matter of our nourishment. chap. 1. p. 220 Of the
substance of aliments. chap. 2. p. 221 Of the quality of aliments. chap. 3. p.
222 Of the quality of meats. chap. 4. p. 225 Of the order of aliments. chap. 5.
p. 226 Of the time and hour of eating. chap. 6. p. 228 Of the preparation of
the nourishment. chap. 7. p. 232. Of custom, and delight in the use of meats.
chap. 8. p. 233 Of meat convenient for every age. chap. 9. p. 234 Of diet
convenient for every season of the year. chap. 10. p. 236 Of Bread. chap. 11.
p. 257 Of Barley, Rice, Oats, Beans, Pease, Vetches, and Lentiles, chap. 12. p.
259 Of pot herbs most in use, and their faculties. chap. 13. p. 261 Of roots
fit to eat. chap. 14. p. 263 Of fruits fit to eat. chap. 15. p. 264 Of animals
fit for nourishment, and first of flesh in general. chap. 16. p. 278 Of the
flesh of fourfooted beasts. chap. 17. p. 279 Of the entrails and extreme parts
of beasts. chap. 18. p. 280 Of the nourishment contained in the parts of
fourfooted beasts. chap. 19. p. 281 Of nourishment from birds. chap. 20. p. 283
Of fish. chap. 21. p. 285 Of sauces. chap. 22. p. 285 Of honey. chap. 23. p.
287 Of drink and matter fit for drink. chap. 24. p. 288 Of the air. chap. 25.
p. 295 Of the season of the year. chap. 26. p. 297 Of motion and rest. chap.
27. 299 Of sleep and watchings. chap. 28. p. 300 Of Excretions and Retentions.
chap. 29. p. 302 Of the passions of the mind. chap. 30. p. 303
The fifth Book of Physical institutions containing the cure of diseases. The
Preface. The first part of the cure of diseases. Of the general method of
curing. The Proem. The first Section. Of the method of curing, and the
indications.
WHat is the method of curing, what curation is, and what are the conditions of
it. chap. 1. p. 307 Of Indications and their differences. chap. 9. p. 308 Of
the things that indicate. chap. 3. p. 310 Of coindicaments, contraindicaments
and correpugnants. chap. 4. p. 311 Of the things indicated. chap. 5. p. 313 Of
the first and most general principle of curation. chap. 6. p. 316 Of the
invention of remedies. chap. 7. p. 318
Section the second. Of Indications from the cause.
OF Evacuations in general and their differences. chap. 1. p. 319 Of Revulsion,
drivation and particular evacuation. chap. 2. p. 320 Of letting blood. chap. 3.
p. 325 Of Purgation. chap. 4. p. 330 Of the preparation and concoction of
humors. chap. 5. p. 335 Of Evacuation by urine. chap. 6. p. 336 Of Evacuation
by sweating. chap. 7. p. 336
The third Section of the first part of Therapeuticks Of Indications from the
disease.
OF Indications from a similar disease. chap. 1. p. 337 Of Indications from an
organical disease. chap. 2. p. 338 Of Indications from a common disease, or
solution of unity. chap. 3. p. 339
The fourth Section of Therapeuticks. Of Indications from strength.
WHat it is that indicates and coindicates diet in sick people. chap. 1. p. 340
What those things are that diet. chap. 2. p. 341 What are the kinds of diet,
and which are best suitable in diseases. chap. 3. p. 341 Of the quantity of
diet. chap. 4. p. 342 Of the time of going to victuals. chap. 5. p. 343
The second part of Therapeuticks. Of the Physicians Instruments. The Preface.
The first Section of the second part of Theraputicks Of the matter of Physic.
The Proem. The first part of the first Section. Of the internal matter of
Physic. The Preface.
OF medicines cooling and attenuating choler. chap. 1. p. 347 Of medicaments
cooling and thickening choler. chap. 2. p. 348 Of medicaments altering choler.
chap. 3. p. 349 Of medicaments altering melancholy. chap. 4. p. 350 Of
medicaments altering black choler. chap. 5. p. 351 Of opening medicines. chap.
6. p. 351 Of purging medicines. chap. 7. p. 353 Medicaments purging choler.
chap. 8. p. 354 Medicaments purging phlegm. chap. 9. p. 355 Medicaments purging
melancholy. chap. 10. p. 356 Medicaments purging watery humors. chap. 11. p. 357
Of vomiting medicaments. chap. 12. p. 358 Of sudorifick medicaments. chap. 13.
p. 360 Of diuretic medicaments. chap. 14. p. 361 Of medicaments called
Errhines. chap. 15. p. 363 Of sternutatories. chap. 16. p. 363 Of
masticatories. chap. 17. p. 363 Of Cephalic medicaments. chap. 18. p. 364 Of
Ophthalmick medicaments. chap. 19. p. 366 Of medicaments for the breast. Chap.
20. p. 367 Of Cardiacall medicaments. chap. 21. p. 368 Of Hepatical
medicaments. chap. 22. p. 369 Of stomachical medicaments. chap. 23. p. 371 Of
splenetick medicaments. chap. 24. p. 372 Of Nephritick medicaments. chap. 25.
p. 372 Of hysterical medicaments. chap. 26. p. 373 Of Arthritical medicaments.
chap. 27. p. 377 Of medicaments increasing and diminishing milk. chap. 28. p.
378 Of medicaments increasing or diminishing seed. chap. 29. p. 379 Of
medicaments discussing wind. chap. 30. p. 379 Of astringent medicaments. chap.
31. p. 379 Of medicaments that kill the worms. chap. 32. p. 380 Of medicaments
for wounds. chap. 33. p. 380
The fifth Book. The second particle of the second part of the first Section.
Of external medicinal matter.
OF refrigerating and repelling medicaments. chap. 1. p. 381 Of Emplasters.
chap. 2. p. 382 Of medicaments that ease pain. chap. 3. p. 383 Of Narcotick
medicaments. chap. 4. p. 384 Of Emollients. chap. 5. p. 384 Of resolving
medicaments. chap. 6. p. 385 Of attracting or drawing medicaments. chap. 7. p.
386 Of suppurating medicaments. chap. 8. p. 386 Of cleansing medicaments. chap.
9. p. 387 Of sarcotick medicaments. chap. 10. p. 388 Of cicatrizing
medicaments. chap. 11. p. 389 Of medicaments stopping blood. chap. 12. p. 389
Of glutinating medicaments. chap. 13. p. 390 Of vesicating medicaments. chap.
14. p. 390 Of gnawing medicaments. chap. 15. p. 391 Of Causticks. chap. 16. p.
391
The second Section of the second part of Therapeuticks. Of the composition of
Medicaments. The Proeme. The first article of the second Section. Of the
Composition of internal Medicaments.
OF an altering apozeme. chap. 1. p. 393 Of a purging apozeme. chap. 2. p. 394
Of a purging potion. chap. 3. p. 395 Of potions corroborating, provoking to
sleep, killing worms, and the like. chap. 4. p. 397 Of Juleps. chap. 5. p. 397
Of syrrups, and first of altering ones. chap. 6. p. 398 Of Magisterial purging
syrrup. chap. 7. p. 398 Of vomitories. chap. 8. p. 399 Of Emulsions. chap. 9.
p. 400 Of Milk. chap. 10. p. 400 Of Whey. chap. 11. p. 400 Of sudorifick
decoctions. chap. 12. p. 401 Of the decoction of an old cock. chap. 13. p. 402
Of Broths. chap. 14. p. 403 Of a Bolus. chap. 15. p. 403 Of Opiates. chap. 16.
p. 404 Of Conditements. chap. 17 p. 404 Of a Lohoch or Clegma. chap. 18. p. 405
Of Tablets. chap. 19. p. 405 Of Troches. chap. 20. p. 406 Of Powders. chap. 21.
p. 406
The second Article of the second Section. Of the composition of midling
medicaments.
OF Suppositories. chap. 1. p. 407 Of Clyster. chap. 2. p. 407 Of Ingections.
chap. 3. p. 408 Of Pessaries. chap. 4. p. 409 Of Errhines. chap. 5. p. 409 Of
Sternutatories. chap. 6. p. 409 Of a Gargarisme. chap. 7. p. 410 Of
Masticatories. chap. 8. p. 410 Of Collyriums. chap. 9. p. 410
The third Article of the second Section. Of the composition of external
medicaments.
OF an Epitheme. chap. 1. p. 411 Of Fomentations. chap. 2. p. 412 Of Bathes.
chap. 3. p. 413 Of a Semicupe. chap. 4. p. 413 Of Oils. chap. 4. p. 413 Of
Liniments. chap. 6. p. 414 Of Ointments. chap. 7. p. 414 Of Emplasters. chap.
8. p. 415 Of a Cataplasme. chap. 9. p. 415 Of a vesicatory. chap. 10. p. 416 Of
Little Baggs. chap. 11. p. 416 Of quilts. chap. 12. p. 417 Of Frontals. chap.
13. p. 417
ERRATA.
PAge 6 line 43 read in concertation, p. 13. l. 22 r. equality, p. 17 l. 15 r.
from setting to rising, p. 21 l. 28 dele with, p. 21 l. 14 r. woad, p. 32 l. 26
r. nobility, p. 33 l. 20 r. over-swilling, p. 34 l. 11 r. have influx, p. 45 l.
29 r. nourishes heat of the ventricle, p. 50 l. 4 r. crowd up, p. 55 l. 11 r.
intermediate, p. 72 l. 8 r. prejudiceth, same p. l. 22 r. for them, p. 170 l.
13 r. intercident, p. 171 l. 26 r. hunger or, p. 173 l. 30 r. vitiation, p. 203
l. 35 r. be not shut, p. 257 l. 3 del. though more, r. and new, but so, p. 267
l. 42 r. Galen calls this a meat of, p. 314 l. 30 r. lesser dose, p. 315 l. 11
del. in the beginning, p. 318 l. 28. r. easily, same p. l. 37. dele are, p. 321
l. 11 r. are to, same p. l. 33 r. phlegm, same p. l. 45 r. unlike, p. 323 l. 4.
dele, either from, same p. l. 21 comma after revulsion, p. 328 l. 12 r. he be,
p. 335. l. 2. r. concoction, p. 339 l. 11. r. five, p. 340 l. 16 r. busied, p.
344 l. 1. r. of instruments, p. 348 l. 23, 25, 28 for poppy, pinetree,
pineapples, pine flowers, r. red poppy, p. 350 l. 18 r. grains of p. 354 l. 18
r. infusion, p. 364 l. 31 r. Lilly, p. 368 l. 21 r. Doronicum, p. 375 l. 30 r.
snakeweed, p. 395 l. 37 r. spike.

LAZ. RIVERIVS HIS UNIVERSAL BODY OF PHYSIC.
Introductions to the Whole Body of MEDICINE.
Medicine is a Science unravelling the Dispositions of Man's Body, for the
Conservation of present Health, and the Restitution of it being lost.
A Controversy has been with much heat moved among Authors, concerning the
determination of the Genus of Medicine; which being for the most part
conjectural, and aiming at a certain end, viz. the acquisition or conservation
of Health, it seems to be fitly ranked in the number of Arts. But because it
stands upon the Basis of its proper Principles, Actions and Demonstrations,
raised upon natural, and some of which are more evident than Natural
Demonstrations, as being entrusted to the apprehensions of Sense, and having
one real Subject, existing of it self and excellent above others, viz. Man's
body, whose proprieties it unmasketh; it seems in all reason more aptly to be
related to the Sciences. To which opinion I rather incline, for the knowledge of
Arts is acquired only by frequentation of practice, in which they are wholly
employed, and the habit of Medicine, as true Sciences, is gained by customary
study, and instruction of learned Men: Nor can any Art be produced, which by
Actions and Principles demonstrates the passions and proprieties of its subject
as Medicine does; For though it be in some part conjectural; and delivers some
precepts which are something wide of certainty: This is no argument or ground
for us to imagine it related to the Arts, for by this means Natural Philosophy
should be referred to the Arts also; because of the conjectural probation of
many things, by reason that their true causes are not brought under perfect
knowledge. Now the end which it intends is discerned by the method of its
institution, as Alexander Aphrodisaeus has well observed; For Medicine falls
under the notion of a double consideration: First, Either as it is taught by
sure solid and indubitable principles, and thus it has no less right to the
name of a Science, than Astrology, Geometry, or Arithmetic, being able to
traffic upon her own single stock. Or secondly, as it is applicable to the
benefit of Men, as Astrology to the constitution of hours, Geometry to the
commensuration of the Earth, Arithmeticke to numerical computations. And
Medicine thus considered steers to the most beneficial and excellent and of
all. But yet lest I should seem too obstinate in the defense of mine own
opinion, I say, Medicine may entertain the appellation of Science in a wider
sense, which Aristotle in the second Book of his Metaphysics and the second
Chapter proposes; as it comprehends sciences speculative and practical, but
yet in such method that sciences practical are distinguished from true Arts.

The Subject of Medicine is Man's body as Curable.
In every subject of sciences there are required four qualifications, two
relating to the subject it self, two to the science. First, as to the subject,
it is requisite, that it comprehend all those things which are proposed in the
science. Secondly, that it give unity and specification to the science, that
from thence may be spun a definition. But as to the science it is necessary that
it make no digression to any thing, which is not its object, or consequential
to it. Next, that it unravel the causes, passions and proprieties of its
subject, as Aristotle proves in the fourth book of his Metaphysics Chapter the
first: All which do so evidently appear in Man's body, that it may without
exception deservedly be called the true Subject of Medicine. It may be
objected, that Medicine does not only treat of Man's body, but also of things
natural, not natural, and preternatural, and so circles almost the whole
Creation, as plants, animals, minerals, and what ever else is comprehended in
the large extent of the universe, may be termed the subject of Medicine. To
this I Answer, that a Physician handles not these things simply and in
themselves, but as they bear a relation to Man's body, as they may be
prejudicial or commodious for it, and these things are termed the subject of
contemplation, but man's body the subject of reduction, viz. to which all other
things are reduced.

But the End is Health.
Galen calls that the end in the acquisition of which the Artist rests,
because no action starts forward to infinity, but is at length brought to some
perfection, in which the Agent does acquiesce, which he is always intent to
attain, which is the scope of all precedent actions; and this perfection is
called the end, which in Medicine is Sanity, to which all Medicinal operations
are directed, which being attained the Physician sits down for company.

Some again may object, That Medicine being as to its genus a Science
practical, whose end is action, as Contemplation of Sciences speculative, the
end of Medicine is not rightly placed in rest. I Answer to this, That there is
one ultimate end, to which the rest are subordinate, but there are more
intermediate ends, which are actions previous to the arriving to that end: to
these we refer when we constitute action the end of practical Science.

The Parts of Medicine are Five; the Physiological, Pathological, Semeiotick,
Hygiastick, and Therapeutick.
The first and general division of Medicine is into two parts, The one consists
in Theory, the other in Practice: the Theory delivers doctrines and Theorems,
which are only officious in the acquisition of knowledge, and of no affinity to
practice: they enquire into the nature, constitution, and various passions of
their subject, viz. as it declines from Health into Disease, and the contrary:
they also instruct by what symptoms those various dispositions may be
apprehended by a Physician. Hence from the Theory of Medicine flow three parts,
the Physiological, Pathological and Semeiotick. But because these are points of
Speculation in Medicine, that present Health may be preserved, or Health lost
recovered; There are two other parts constituted which belong to practice,
which squares our operations to a method and order, viz. the Hygiastick, To the
conservation of Health, and Therapeutick to banish Diseases; The whole bulk
therefore of these institutions shall be divided into five Books comprehending
all the parts of Medicine.

The first Book of Medicinal Institutions containing Physiology.
THE PREFACE.
In Physiologie we are to consider all those things which are naturally
coincident to the constitution of Man's body.
THE Subject of Medicine being Man's body, we must first make a curious enquiry
into the nature thereof, that afterward we may with the more ease understand
the preternatural affections, which accidentally accompany it, and that means
may be found to dissipate them, and preserve the state of nature. To this
purpose the first part informs us in all those requisits, the concurrence of
which constitutes Man's body, and are necessary to the performance of all his
operations.

And this is quartered into Seven Sections, in the first we treat of the
Elements, in the second of Temperaments, in the third of Humors, in the fourth
of Spirits and natural Heat, in the fifth of the parts, in the sixth of the
faculties and Functions, in the seventh of the generation of Man.

The first sensible principles which are the foundation of the fabric of Man's
body are the first elements of all things, from the various permistion of which
there results a various temper; various Humors have a dependence upon the
temper, upon the Humors Spirits, which preserve and make vigorous the natural
Heat. To the Humors Spirits and natural Heat all the parts owe their production
and sustenance, all which cannot be effected without the help of the Soul,
which being richly furnished with faculties, compleates all these operations,
and is the first mover in the conservation and primary generation of the whole
Man. And this is the order which Physiology observes in delivering the
instructions of natural things, which is merely compositive, proceeding
punctually from the first principles to their productions, till it has fully
represented the perfect and absolute artifice of Nature.

The First Section of the first Book of Elements.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Nature of Elements.
Elements are Simple bodies, out of which all others are compounded, and into
which they are at last resolved.
ELements are called simple bodies, because they are not compounded of other
bodies of a diverse species, but only of Matter and Form, which are the first
principles of all things, yet are not bodies. The Elements therefore are the
first Simple bodies, and the ingredients to the composition of all others; for
it is beyond the reach of knowledge to find a body perfectly mixed which
comprehends not in it self the substance of the four Elements, which is
evidently visible in our bodies, which are compounded of four Humors of strait
affinity to the nature of the four Elements; but this is more clearly
manifested from the dissolution of mixed bodies, which thereupon flow again into
Elements (as it is asserted in the definition) for example, in the combustion
of Wood, part thereof is converted into Air, as it appears by smoke, which
abundantly streaming from it, is changed into air, part alters into water,
sweating out at both ends, part into earth by ashes, which are of a terrene
Nature, lastly part thereof is transmuted into fire, as it is apparently
demonstrated by the coals and flame. But though many bodies in their corruption
have not straightway an immediate transition into Elements, but by a kind of
vicissitude invest themselves in other substances, yet they at length in their
ultimate resolution, retire into those Elements out of which they were
conflated, as it appears in our Food, which in Man's body first is changed into
Chyle, then into blood, and next into the substance of the body, which after
Death is resolved into Elements, but part of this aliment degenerates into
excrements, which in their dregs partly represent Earth, partly Water in Sweat
and Urine, partly Fire and Air in Steams, which insensibly leave the body
being habitually disposed to such transpiration.

CHAP. II. Of the Number of Elements.
The Elements are four; Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.
SOme of the ancient Philosophers held the Elements to be infinite, whom
Aristotle in his First Book of the Heavens convinces; others contracted the
Elements into one only, whom Hipocrates in his Book of Humane Nature confutes
by the force of this indissoluble Argument; If, says he, man were constituted
by one Element, he would not be sensible of any pain.

The reason which confirms this consequence is this, because what ever
Sympathize in pain, partake of the same sense, and are alterable, but
contrariety is the cause of every alteration; if therefore there were but one
Element, there could not exist any contrariety, because nothing is contrary to
it self, and whatsoever suffers, the passion thereof proceeds from another
thing.

But the cause why we precisely oblige our selves to four Elements, appears by
the first qualities, which being four are very distinct one from another, to
wit, Calidity, Frigidity, Humidity and Siccity, which being accidents, it is
necessary every of them should have its particular distinct and separate
subject. Nor can it be conclusively objected, that there are but two Elements,
because calidity with siccity, and frigidity with humidity are coupled together
in one and the same body; For if from hence we gather that there are two
Elements; Calidity being linck'd with Humidity, and Frigidity with Siccity, we
may gather that there are two more: besides the probation of four Elements is
sensibly confirmed by the dissolution of mixed bodies, which are resolved into
those four first bodies according to the assertion of the preceedent Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Qualities of the Elements.
The Qualities of the Elements are first and second.
The First Qualities are those, which are primarily in the Elements, and upon
which the others have a dependence.

And they are Active or Passive.

The Active are those, which have chief efficacy in the mutual alteration of
the Elements, and in the constitution of mixture.

THese are not nominated Active simply and absolutely, as some were of opinion,
because they only act, the rest being purely passive; but this distinction is
caused only by Comparison, because the Action of them is more efficacious than
of those others which are termed Passive, for that they are more Passive than
Active, though they be not wholly destitute of action, for Humidity acts upon
Siccity, Siccity upon Humidity.

And these Actives are Calidity and Siccity.

Calidity is the first Active Quality; the effect of which is the congregating
of things Homogeneous, and dissipating of Heterogeneous, as Aristotle in his
second Book of generation.

Logicians term those things Homogeneous, which partake of the same nature and
species, Heterogeneous which are of diverse Species, which understanding
closes not with this discourse; for Heat in the generation of a mixed body,
does not only congregate things Homogeneous but Heterogeneous also, viz. moist
with dry, which differ in Species. So also different Aliments in the ventricle
are congregated by Heat and chylifyed. We must then here understand by things
Homogeneous, those which bear such a relation of similitude to one another,
that they may be convenient to constitute the nature of one thing and to be
converted into it. So moist and dry, by reason of their unition in generation
of a mixed body are called Homogeneous; so in concoction Aliments distinct in
their Species, are Homogencous; whereof that part which cannot aptly be reduced
to Chyle, as the excrements, are only Heterogeneous, and therefore segregated.

And there are other proprieties of heat, viz. Resolution, Operation, Incision,
Maturation, and Attenuation.

Nature is infinitely stored with examples of these proprieties, but they are
more apparent in the matter of Medicaments, which by the virtue of them are
very efficacious.

Frigidity is a first active quality which musters together things Homogeneous
and Heterogeneous.

So water with water, wax with wax, and any other thing adhering or incident to
them, as Straws, Stone, Wood, Sand, Chafe, and other things are coagmented
together by conglaciation; till by Heat dissolving this combination they are
separated.

The work of Frigidity is to allay Heat to a due temperament, lest the mixed
body should be Overheated to a dissolution.

This quality does not only rally together things Homogeneous and
Heterogeneous, but also fixes them to adstriction, condensation, obstruction,
and incrassation.

Cold being contrary to Heat intailes a necessity to the contrary production of
effects, nor must we comply with Cardan, who is of opinion that cold is merely
the absence and privation of Heat, and nothing positive; which Avicenna seems
to intimate, who says, that cold is no ingredient to the operations of Nature.
But Scaliger learnedly opposes them both, Exercit. 22. And before his time
Averroes, whose assertion, that cold is requisite in the works of nature, is
established upon the basis of two reasons, first by tempering the Heat; next by
operating in things a consistency and coherence of parts; which cannot be
effected by Heat whose propriety is dissolution.

Thus much of the Active qualities.

The Passive are those which are less Active, and therefore in the mixtion of
bodies are subordinate to the Active. And they are Humidity and Siccity.

Humidity is a Passive quality, whose effect is to make things exorbitant as to
their own bounds, but easily confined to the limitation of another, Arist. 2.
gene.

So water, wine, oil and other humid bodies diffuse themselves, and can only be
contained within the bounds of vessels.

Siccity is a passive quality making things to be easily content with their own
limits, but impatient to be bounded by any other.

So wood, stones and other such like things, do obstinately hold their proper
figure, nor easily receive the impression of another.

It may be objected, that fire which is highly dry is not confined within its
own but rather some aliene boundary; which may also be affirmed of dust and
ashes.

To which I oppose, that this is by accident and not naturally contingent to
fire, because of the tenuity of its substance, which will not admit such
cohibition, for there must be a copulation of Siccity with some density, that
this description may properly be applied to a substance. But dust and ashes in
conservation retain their proper figure: for they are not a body continued, but
a contiguity of the smalest parts of the earth, which by reason they are so
exile can be entertained in any place.

These four first qualities are found in the Elements, as they can in
possibility comply. For we meet with Calidity and Siccity in Fire, Calidity and
Humidity in Air, Frigidity and Humidity in Water, Frigidity and Siccity in
Earth.

The inherence and conjunction of these first qualities, are at large disputed
with much opiniative Heat of controversy by Professors in Physic, to whom for
brevity sake we refer the Reader.

Thus far concerning first qualities.

The second qualities are those which immediately result from the temperature
and mixtion of the first.

By this description we casheer from the second qualities, colors, smell, and
taste, which are not the immediate effects of the first, nor so manifestly, but
more remotely and obscurely depend upon them. For this cause some, though not
significantly, place them in subordination by the term of third qualities. In
which if there be any difficulty the enucleation thereof must be referred to
the doctrine of the Senses, because without these perspectives they cannot be
brought under a right understanding.

These are fourteen, viz. Rarity and Density, Gravity and Levity, Hardness and
Softness, Subtility and Crassity, Aridity and Lubricity, Friability and
Clamminess, Asperity and Laevity.

Rarity is a second quality produced chiefly by Heat, by which things are
extenuated to a possibility of dissipation.

So Water by the Heat of the Sun is attenuated, thin, and dissipable: so clouds
easily pierced by the rays of the Sun, are usually termed rare.

It Is worth observation, that rarity is twofold, one, which consists in the
tenuity of substance: and this is properly reduced to the Predicament of
quality, accompanying Heat as the effect thereof, and so the air is thin, the
earth thick. The other consists not in the tenuity of substance, but in the
remoteness of parts, so we call a sponge rare, because of those intervalls and
distances of the parts which lodge the air: and this Rarity takes place in the
Predicament of Site, and is, though better understood by us, more improperly
termed Rarity.

Density is a second quality arising from Cold, by which things become more
compact, firm, and with difficulty dissipable.

So water congealed by cold, so stones and metalls are dense.

Gravity is a quality produced by cold and density, by which things tend
downwards.

Levity is a quality produced from Heat and rarity, by virtue of which things
make upwards.

Hardness is a quality arising from Siccity, by which things yield not easily
to the touch.

Softness is a quality arising from humidity, which renders things tangible
without a repulse.

Subtility is the production of Heat, Siccity, and Rarity, by which things are
attenuated and fitted for penetration.

It differs from rarity, as the effect from its cause; rarity being the
Procatarctick of subtility. But not all rare things are subtle, for there is
rarity in the air, but no subtility, and some air is crasse; so by our advice
our patients remove from gross air, which in many diseases is not good to
breath in.

Crassity is a quality which owes its being to cold, and density, by which
things become Solid and less fit for penetration.

For Crassity is differenced from density, as the effect from its cause, for
all dense bodies cannot properly be termed crasse.

Aridity is a quality generated by Siccity, which banisheth almost all humor.
Lubricity is a quality flowing from humidity, by which things being rendered
slippery deceive the touch.

So a Snake, and a way conglaciated is slippery.

Friability is a quality arising from Siccity, by which things for want of
coherency may easily be crumbled.

So salt and sugar are friable.

Clamminess is a quality arising from humidity, which causes things to be
sticking and glutinous.

So pitch, glue and other such like things are called sticking.

Asperity is a quality issuing from Siccity, by which the superficies of things
is unequal, and not tangeable without offense.

So the barks of Trees and pumices are offensive by their asperity.

Levity is a quality arising from humidity, by which things being of an even
superficies are pleasing to the touch.

This quality is not the effect of humidity only, but may also be artificially
produced, when the rudeness of things solid and dense is polished and plained.

CHAP. IV. Of the Mixtion of Elements.
Mixtion is the union of things miscible upon their alteration. Arist. 1. of
generation, Chap. 10.
BY Miscibles are understood Elements which are disposed to commixtion by a
mutual alteration, and reduction to such a temper, that they may be united into
one. From which union springs a new form, which is termed the form of a mixed
body: for example, when seeds of diverse plants, are so mingled that there
remains a possibility of separation, this is called apposition; but when water
and wine or such other things are mixed, so that the union cannot be parted,
and yet no new form produced, this is called Confusion. And both of these are
improperly termed mixtion.

Four Conditions are requisite to produce mixtion.
1 The Miscibles must be contrarily qualified, that they may be fit for mutual
action and passion.

If the things mixed did not mutually act one on the other, they could not be
reduced to a due temper, whose spawne mixtion is, and by that means they would
not be moved from their former state.

2 A just proportion of Miscibles is necessary as well for quantity as for
quality.

For if one exceed in quantity or quality, that will destroy the rest, and
appropriate them to its own nature, hence will arise the generation of one, and
the corruption of the rest, but no mixtion.

3 While the Elements are mixed, they must be minced into very small particles,
that every iota of the mixed body may comprehend in it self the four Elements.

This unition is caused by nature, which by making the Elements penetrable fits
them for a mutual incursion, that so the transmutation may be the easier.

4 The forms of the Elements must remain in mixed bodies.

This causes a difference between generation and mixtion; for in generation by
the accession of a new form the precedent are corrupted; but in mixtion, the
new form produced, together with the constitutive form of the mixed bodies,
dwell peaceably under the same roof. The truth of which may hence be asserted,
because the form is author of all action; but the skirmish of contrary
qualities in mixed bodies, of which their destruction is the consequence, cannot
be caused by their form; for by this means it would be treacherous to it self,
and accessory to its own destruction, which runs counter to true Philosophy.
This implies a necessity of its dependence upon the forms of the Elements, and
so that the Elements remain formally in mixed bodies.

This affords matter of objection; That if a mixed body admits of plurality of
forms, it loses its unity of being, for of many actual beings, cannot arise
one being by it self, as Aristotle in the 2. of his Metaph. but only
accidentally aggregate, but the form gives an actual being to every thing. For
the delumbation of this argument, I Answer; that this is true, if we level the
virtue of forms into an equality, so that no one may Lord it over the rest; but
in mixed bodies there is a herauldry, one form being nobler than another: which
is the form of the mixed body it self, to the commands of which the forms of the
Elements, coming short of it in perfection, pay the tribute of obedience, and
comparatively to it they are as the Matter, though in relation to the Matter of
the Elements, they are true forms. Which that we may the more easily
understand, we must know, that the Elements are considered in a double
relation, either in relation which they bear to the Materia prima, out of which
they are conflated with their proper forms; or to that body, whose matter they
are; in the first consideration they are said to have an actual being, in the
latter a potential only.

For as in Logical predication, the intermediate genus is in regard of its
inferiors a genus, of its superiors a species; so in the essence of things,
there are some mediate acts, which compared to the precedent matter may be
called actual, which in respect of a compleater composition are only potential.
Now though the forms of Elements in comparison to the form of a mixed body are
as matter and only potential, yet in respect of the matter of which the
Elements are compounded, they are always actual and continually laboring to
alter the matter, that they may retreat into their former nature, and be set at
liberty, but the form of the mixed body, according to its authority quels and
suppresses these active tumults for the better securing of its preservation,
till they summon in external causes as Auxiliaries to invade the honor and
disloyally shake off the yoke of this noble form and so procure the destruction
of the mixed body. I might enlarge in the explanation of this knotty and
intricate Theoreme, but in which I have been brief, because as Galen himself in
the first book of the Elements affirms, it is very little conducible to
Medicine. Here therefore I will put a period to the first section.

The Second Section of Physiology of Temperaments.
The First CHAPTER.
Of the Nature of Temperaments.
A Temperament is a proportion of the four Principal Qualities resulting from
the mixtion of the Elements, for the due performance of operations.

A Temperament retains to mixtion as the effect to its cause, arising from that
mutual contemperation of the first qualities, which produces that due
proportion requisite to the execution of all actions: but it is called
proportion, as being a relation, which the qualities so tempered mutually bear
to themselves, not a quality differing from the four first, as Avicenna
fansyed, whose opinion Fernelius copiously confutes.

It may be objected; That if Temperament be a relation, the actions shall have
no dependence on it: because relation has no active virtue, nor can one
Temperament be properly termed contrary to another, because relation admits of
no contrary. To this I Answer, That the Temperament acts not, by virtue of
proportion, which is a relation, but of the foundation, on which this relation
is established, for the first qualities are laid as the basis of this
proportion, and upon these the actions do essentially depend, for the whole
essence of the Temperament consists not in the relation of the proportion, but
necessarily imports such a relation; as if we should say, that Temperament were
the first qualities reduced to a certain proportion.

CHAP. II. Of the Difference of Temperaments.
The Temperaments are Nine, four simple, Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry; four compound,
Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and Dry; one moderate, called
Eucrasy.
BOdies so tempered that one quality exceeds the rest, are said to be of a
simple Temperament, but when two qualities stand as it were in competition for
supremacy over the rest, they have a compounded Temperament; but when all the
qualities are fixed to a due Mediocrity, they are then esteemed to be perfectly
tempered.

Hence may arise an objection, That the first eight differences of Temperaments
are caused by some predominant Element, or at least in our bodies by some
predominant Humor; hence some Temperaments are termed bilious, some pituitous,
and so of the rest; but every Element is fortified with two qualities, by whose
excess the consequence of theirs is necessary; humors also have two predominant
qualities; therefore there can be no simple Temperament, but all are compound.

To this I oppose. That in mixtion or alteration there may possibly be such a
concurrence of the Elements, that one quality may be broken, when the other is
in excess, viz. if Air and Fire exceed, the humidity of the one will temper
the Siccity of the other, but when both are hot, they will cause an excess of
heat; so it fares with humors, for the Siccity of Choler tempers the humidity
of the blood, but when both are hot they inflame to an intemperancy of heat.

These Temperaments are said to be such, either absolutely or comparatively.

Absolutely such are those in which one or two qualities are predominant, which
afford them a denomination.

So Fire is absolutely hot, water cold; so all perfect animals are absolutely
hot, because of the predominancy of Heat in them, for Heat is the vigor of
life.

Comparatively such are those, in which these qualities do more or less
exceed, then in those with which they are compared.

So a man in relation to a Fish is hot, to a Lion cold; the brain cold in
respect of the heart: from whence it appears, that one and the same thing is
comparatively cold, which notwithstanding is absolutely hot.

And this comparison may be triple, either according to the genus, or the
species, or Individuum.

Comparison according to the genus, is that which is between things of a
diverse genus.

As when we compare the temper of an animal with a plant or mineral.

Comparison according to the species, is between things differing in species.

As when we compare the temper of a Man with the temper of a Lion or a Dog.

Comparison according to the Individuum is, when individuals of the same
species are conferred.

As when we compare the Temperament of: Socrates with that of Plato; and
thereupon pass judgment that one is hotter or colder then the other.

There arise also many comparisons of Temperament in an individual by a
comparison reflected upon it self, and that either in the whole individual, as
when Socrates now decrepit casts a comparative glance upon the time of his
youth; or when he is dismembered to a comparison, as when the Temperament of his
Liver is compared to that of his Stomach, and other such like, of which
knowledge is easily attained.

CHAP. III. Of a well mixed Temperament.
A well mixed or moderate Temperament is twofold; one balanced by Weight, the
other by Justice.

Moderate according to Weight, is that in which the first qualities of the
Elements are reduced to such an accurate proportion, that one is not
counterpoised by another.

SOme term that a body tempered according to Weight, in which there is not
only found an equal proportion of Qualities, but of Elements also, which is an
impossibility in Nature, and not comprehensible by Fancy, for Immobility is the
necessary attendant thereof, every mixed body steering by the motion of its
predominant Element; nor would any find its proper place, for every thing
naturally has a station, which is proper to such predominant Element. We must
therefore understand it only of qualities equally mixed, which whether there
be any such thing in Nature, is with some disputable; who are of opinion, that
it was by Authors constituted, only to represent as an Idea a perfect
Temperament, and to be the rule and square of the rest, that by comparison we
might pass the better judgment of their excess; As Plato has modelled such a
perfect Commonwealth, Cicero such a perfect Orator, and the Stoics such a
perfect Sage, as never were in being. And Galen himself in his first Book of
the Preservation of Health, Chap. 5. affirms, that such a Mediocrity is not
easily found. And if any one should accidentally meet with it, it will escape
the quickest stroke of the understanding, subsisting not the least divisibility
of time without variety of change. It is therefore rather imaginable then
truly subsisting, especially being not so conducible to the exercise of
various acts, as that which is called Temperament according to Justice, as it
shall after appear.

It is called Temperament according to Weight, because it consists of the just
measure, and at it were, balance of Elements, which is not ground enough to
make this denomination proper. Philosophers call it Temperament according to
Arithmetical proportion; because, as in Arithmetical proportion there is a
parity in numbers, or in the distances of the numbers, so that there is no
larger interstitium from 2 to 3, then from 3 to 4: So in this Temperament there
is a kind of parity in the qualities, so that one is equal to another.

That Temperament is called Moderate according to Justice, in which the first
qualities of the Elements are so apportioned, that every thing according to its
species is fitted for the execution of its proper actions. Things different in
species, differ in Functions, and all the Functions of every thing depend upon
the Temperament, therefore it is necessary that their Temperaments be various,
whereby that may incline to such variety of action; so that in one body Heat
masters Cold, in another Humidity reigns over Siccity, for differing tempers
are required to execute the operations of a Man, a Lion, and an Horse, and so
forth. And this is called a Temper according to Justice; for as Justice
scatters not her favors, nor inflicts her penalties equally on all, but
according to the dictates of Reason, proportions to some more, to some less; by
which disparity of distribution, there appears much equality in Justice: So the
justice of Nature lends diverse Temperaments to things distinct in species, by
the help of which they may be enabled to a complete and perfect execution of
those duties to which they are by Nature designed. This is called by the
Philosophers, a Temperament according to a Geometrical proportion; for as in
Geometrical proportion we examine not the equality of Difference but of Reason;
so in this Temperament, we weigh not the proportion of these qualities by the
balance, but by their apt congruity and acommodateness to the nature of every
species.

CHAP. IV. Of the Judging of Temperaments.
All the differences of Temperaments are perceptible by the Touch.

ALL those differences rely upon the excess of the first qualities, which are
the object of the sense of touching, as Colors of Seeing, Sapors of Tasting,
and Odors of Smelling.

The organ of Touch is the Skin, which chiefly we have at our fingers ends.

An organ adapt for the disquisition of the excess of all qualities, must have
an inherent mediocrity of them all, and not lean to a partiality. This is the
Skin of a well-tempered Man, in which resides an equal portion of seed and
blood, which cause a moderate Temperament, parts wholly Carnous being hot and
moist, Spermatick cold and dry: But that the excess of qualities may be
perceptible by the Skin, it must enjoy its natural temper, free from the
overballancings of any one quality; for instance, if it be almost congealed
with cold, it is incapable of this office. The skin of the Hand is better
qualified for it then of any other part, not that extended over the palm,
because of the hard tendon which lurks under it, which being condensed by
continual attrition, becomes callous, but that which terminates the fingers, as
retaining usually its natural constitution.

But the Skin has a positive sense of the inequality and excess of
Temperaments, but a privative of their quality and moderation.

All Sense comes by Passion, and all Passion by Contrariety, but the Excess of
Tempers stands in contrariety to the Moderation of them; by this means they do
really and positively affect a temperate skin; but a moderate temper being not
heightened to an excess of qualities, therefore not affecting the Touch falls
only under the understanding of Privation. For those things which being
neither hot nor cold, do no way affect the Sense, because of their congruity to
it, are esteemed temperate.

A COROLLARY.
Concerning the Judging of Temperaments.
THough the umpeerage in the determination of Temperaments is attributed to the
Touch, yet we cannot absolutely conclude it thus without an exception; for
Galen in his third Book of the Temperaments, asserts Touch to be the absolute
Arbitrator of Heat and Cold, but of Moist and Dry not simply, but by a rational
application, for Humidity cannot be known but by Softness, nor Siccity but by
Hardness; but the Touch meets with many hard things void of Siccity, and with
many soft things of Humidity. For a thing may be termed Hard three ways, as
Galen in the fifth Book of the Faculties of simple Medicaments, Chap. 4.
affirms: by dryness, as is evident by the bones; by concretion, as in Ice, and
other things condensed by the force of cold; and by repletion, as in the
bladder of men inflated with Hydropical tumors. Hence it appears that many
things are hard, yet not dry; So many things natural dry, as Lead, when
liquefied, seem to be soft: Hence we may gather, that these qualities will
easily decoy the Touch by such impostures, unless we take advice of Reason.

But some may spin from hence an Objection, That the same assertion will hold
good of Heat and Gold; whereas of things Hot or Cold, some are so actually,
some potentially; some in themselves, others by accident; as Pepper is
potentially very hot, yet being exposed to the severity of a nipping Winter,
will represent it self cold; and Water, which in it sown constitution is cold,
by calefaction will be counted hot, because it presents it self to the Touch.
This may be a ground of no despicable doubts in passing judgment of them;
unless we call Reason to the Bar, which may unriddle the mystery of their
natural constitution.

To this I reply; When we assert that the Touch only is the great umpire of
Cold and Heat, we principally understand this of the Temperament of the whole
body, without any relation, which properly belongs to Reason. The like
judgment may be passed of those things which are such in themselves, not by
accident; actually, not potentially: For as to these it will hold true to say,
that the Touch is the true Judge of Heat and Cold, as they affect it being
present; which is not contingent in things moist and dry, being represented to
the Touch, not by themselves, and immediately, but by the intercession of other
qualities, viz. Softness and Hardness.

CHAP. V. Of the Tempers of the several Ages.
An Age is a space of life, by which with the concurrent action of the natural
heat operating upon the Native moisture, is produced an evident mutation in the
constitution of the Body.
WE owe the conservation of our life to natural heat, which uses the native
moisture as food, and by degrees preys upon it, the action of which calls a
repassion, by which being debilitated by a kind of sympathy, it moulders away,
together with the moisture: so that our bodies in the cradles of our life are
abounding in heat and moisture, which in the maturation of Time become cold and
dry, and this gradation of Time which leads us forward to these mutations, and
measures out our lives, is called Age.

The principal differences of which are four; 1 Puerility, 2 Youth, 3 Settled
Age, 4 Old Age.

This whole continuity of life is signalized with four grand mutations, as it
may be exemplified by all things, every thing having a beginning, growth,
stature, and declination; therefore the whole age of man is divided by
Hippocrates into four parts correspondent to the number of the Elements, the
seasons of the yenr, the humors of our bodies, and their Temperaments, which is
of special use to Physicians. For though Lawyers and Astrologers for the better
accommodating them to the doctrines of their Sciences, have made another
division of the Ages, this is little considerable, though in our Authors we
meet with some subdivisions of these Ages as we shall after show.

Puerility from its first blossom shoots out to twenty five, and is of
constitution hot and moist.

This bears a relation of similitude to the spring, and of the humors to the
blood, for both are judged to be hot and moist.

This again crumbles into four parts; of which the first is termed Infancy,
sprouting to the fourth year, or according to the opinion of some to the
seventh: the second Puerility in progress to the fourteenth year; the third,
Youth, hasting to eighteen; the fourth Adolescency, terminated by twenty five.

In that interval whose extent is to twenty five, the moisture is in a deep
Consumption, therefore man's life was minced into these subdivisions according
to the proportion of that; but there happens a more notable change in youth
then in the other divisions, for then a downy chin is fashionable from whence
this Age took its appellation, then maidens breasts are impregnate and their
Months issue, and the voice of males is more full and rough; hence Hippocrates
calls them Goatish, because they are then addicted to Venery, which is caused
by the vigor of heat, which then breaks out of prison from the humors, and
begins to exert it self.

Youth ranges to thirty five or forty, and is hot and dry.

It is set in comparison with the summer and the bilious humor; for then heat
is in the highest point of its horizon, which by its vehement action out of the
ashes of moisture rouzeth up Siccity.

Here a Quere is made, whether youth be hotter then Puerility? I Answer, that
boys are extensively hotter, youths intensively; or boys are hotter in
consideration of the quantity, youths in respect of the quality. For this heat
falling under the consideration both of substance, and quality, as to the
quantity or copiousness of the substance, there is greater plenty of it in
boys then in youths, for the less we are distant from the womb of our natural
principles, we are the more fertile in heat and moisture. But as to the
quality, heat is without doubt more intense in youths, because of their
Siccity, which is the accomplishment of heat: hence the heat in boys is
gentle, sweet, and habituous, as being allayed to a moderation by the natural
moisture: but the heat of youths is biting, sharp, and unsavory, by reason of
sharp vapors, which exhale out of dry bodies.

Constant Age dilates it self to forty five or fifty, and is cold and dry.

It is denominated constant Age, because though there begins to be some
diminution of the strength, yet this change is not perceptible in any habit or
action, but men so aged seem to be fixed in the same station; this age is
comparatively related to Autumn, and the Melancholic humor, which now abounds,
because of the ill cookery of Choler scorched in youth, which is now converted
into Melancholy.

Old Age puts a period to life, and is cold and moist.

The temper of old men is twofold, either according to the temper of the solid
parts, or the liberality of the excrements. As to the solid parts they are cold
and dry, because of the great diminution of their native moisture, by which
means the parts are much dried. But as to the excrements, which for want of
heat are very copious in them, and are cold and moist; they are thence said to
be cold and moist also; which sense we keep to, that we may not lose the
Analogy of the Ages with the seasons of the year and the humors, and so old Age
is compared to the Winter, and to the pituitous humor, which in them is copious.

And this is subdivided into three parts. The first is called Old Age,
extending from fifty to sixty; the second, Ingravescent Age, from sixty to
seventy: the third decrepitness, from seventy to the conclusion of life.

Men in the first entrance of old Age, are yet able enough to execute civil
duties. In Ingravescent Age they are weaker and want more ease, but not a
total recesse. But in Decrepit Age, being plundered of all strength, there
must be a total cessation from business, they must be favorable to
themselves, and entertain only thoughts of futurity. But here we must take
notice, that all these Ages are of a large extent according to the strength or
invalidity of men's constitutions, so that some are more sensible of the defects
of Age at fifty then others at sixty or more.

CHAP. VI. Of the Temperaments of the Sexes.
Males generally are Hot and Dry, Females Cold and Moist.
THE infallibility of this Theoreme will easily appear by the knowledge of
those signs which discover a Hot and Dry temper, which are deduced from the
causes and effects of it. And first as to the causes; the seed (which in
generation performs the duties of the efficient, and the matter) ingredient to
the generation of Males is hotter then that, which produces Females. For
acccording to Hippocrates, the closet of Males is on the right. But it appears
by Anatomical disquisition that the right vessel which is the treasure of
seminal matter takes rise from the bottom of the Vena Cava, by which means the
seed is hotter; but the left is not derived from the very bottom, but from the
emulgens ramus, which conveying the serum to the reins renders the seed more
cold and serous.

Among the effects are numbered actions, excrements, and habitual accidents.

It Is obvious and discernible to every eye, that by their animal actions males
are hotter, they being much stronger, and of greater ability to labor, but
females dull and slow, and not pleased but with delicacy. As to the vital
actions, it is evident that the pulse beating higher, and respiration being more
vehement in males then in females, the voice fuller and more intense, is a
pregnate ground of their greater heat, they are also better at natural exercise
as appears by their excrements.

The excrements of Males are in quantity few, but plentiful in females, as may
be instanced in their monthly purgations, which are caused by the inefficacy of
heat to discuss all that blood which is generated in the Liver. But in Males
all are so thoroughly digested, that there remains no superfluity.

Lastly, the habit of the body is a plain demonstration, that Males are much
hotter, for not only their Chin but their whole body is hairy, they are
fortified with a hard and rough skin, they have large and dilated veins, and
muscles firm and well cemented, but females are smooth and weak, they have a
skin soft to fluitation, and narrower muscles, and vessels.

But here we must not pass without an Asterisk, it being worth notice, that
the Theoreme expresses, that Males are generally the hotter, because this sex
is to be generally considered, and to be understood that for the most part the
Males are the hotter, for some females there are, which are of a hot temper,
exceeding some cold men, but because this in both is beyond their ordinary
constitution, it does not therefore at all invalidate our assertion.

CHAP. VII. Of the Tempers of the Seasons of the Year.
The year is quartered into four seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter.
THese seasons are chiefly fathered upon the Sun, which by his anniversary
motion causes diverse mutations in the air. But there are two motions
observable in the Sun, one diurnal in which is twenty four hours, the
limitation of a natural day, being hurryed by the wheeling of the primum mobile
he perfects his course from East to West; the other proper, which is from the
rising to the setting, to finish which course, he is allowed the time of 365
days, in which space he is a sojourner in the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and
fills up a complete year, and by reason of the turnings and doublings in the
Zodiac, his access to, and recesse from our Zenith is various, therefore he
produces vicissitude of cold and heat, which distinguish the seasons of the
year.

The Spring is Hot and Moist.
The Spring begins then to peep forth when the Sun takes possession in the sign
Aries, and heates the air to a mediocrity, which as yet being not well armed
accompanies the moisture left by the precedent winter, which by degrees it
masters, so that the spring in its vigor is commonly temperate; it symbolizeth
with the air, and with a sanguin and indifferent temper; according to
Hippocrates, it is the most wholesome of all seasons, and the most fertile, for
heat and moisture heightens all things to a vigor and fertility. For though
Hippocrates in his Aphorisms shows us a catalogue of many and dangerous
diseases which attend that season, this takes not away the salubrity of it, for
it is but an accident or contingency in ill mixed bodies, which in the winter
have mustered up a legion of vitiated humors, which are diffused by the
succeeding warmth of the spring, and sometimes putrify: but for wholesome and
sound constitutions there is no better preservative it keeps them in their
proper temper, as representing them, by a lively similitude.

The Summer is Hot and Dry.
Whose original is when the Sun is entertained in the sign Cancer, which then
is our near neighbor, and darts his rays very direct, prolonging the days,
and producing violent heat, by which the moisture, the relict of the spring, is
exiccated, in whose room succeeds a great drought: it bears a likeness to the
Element of Fire, and bilious humor.

The Autumn is Cold and Dry.
The Autumn then comes upon the stage, when the Sun takes in at the sign Libra,
then begins the Aequinoctium, which is upon this ground called Autumnal, as the
beginning of the spring the Vernal Aequinoctium; the Sun having retreated so
far from us, that it poizeth to an equality the nights and days; the night
stealing the proportion from the day, by this recesse of the Sun, coldness
invades the air, which in conjunction with Siccity, the offall of the
antecedent Summer, ushers in a temper cold and dry, lience Autumn is in Analogy
with the Element of earth and the melancholic humor: Yet because the Sun, does
indifferently exercise his strength, therefore in the vigor of his luster; viz.
at noon, the air is refreshed with warmth, by which means this season about
the middle of the day is hot enough, but at morning and night cold, when the
Sun imprisons his strength, and not seldom in this season, we are sensible of
both heat and cold intense enough, which is caused by Siccity, the perfection
of the first qualities, but these neutralities in the air do usually visit us
in the company of great and dangerous diseases, as Hipp. in his Aphorisms.

The Winter is Cold and Moist.
This season starts up when the Sun is a guest to the sign of Capricorn, this
introduces the winter solstice, as in the beginning of summer the summer
solstice: for the Sun gives back so far from us, that he casts his rays
very indirectly, and curtales the days, but extends the nights, which is the
cause of great cold, which singles out moistness for its companion, because
that the vapors exhaled are not dissipated, but imbodyed by cold into clouds,
rain and snow; hence the winter is assimilated to the Element of water, and
pituitous humor. Thus far of Temperaments.

The Third Section of Physiology of Humors.
The First CHAPTER.
Of the Nature of Humors.
An Humor is a fluid body, produced in us by the coction of the Aliment, for
better nutrition, or other advantage of the body.

THis term Humor is used in a double sense; First, in its general and usual
acception it implies any thing, which is hardly contained by its own, but
easily by the limitation of another, whether it be generated in our bodies, or
not, and so all liquors are comprehended in the latitude of this understanding.
But Secondly, to draw it into a lesser circle, to its proper and strict
signification known to Physicians, it is taken for liquid bodies, which spring
from the second, and third coction, as appears by the definition; in which
humor is called a fluid body, because as other liquors, it easily diffuseth it
self, and transgresses its own bounds. It Is said also to be generated in us by
the coction of the aliment, to distinguish it from other moistures, which may
by diverse inlets surprise our bodies without any alteration or change, and that
we may know how these humors are generated in our body. For Nature being
careful of the preservation of living creatures, and chiefly of man, invented
diverse ways of nourishment furnished with diverse qualities, by which they
might receive nourishment, and growth, not immediately, but by many preparative
mutations; and so the aliments are first grinded in the mouth, then being sent
into the stomach, they are confused, concocted and converted into a kind of
creamy substance, which is called Chyle: which Chyle being exactly cooked in
the stomach is turned out into the intestines, and there the useful part of it
is abstracted from the earthy and useless matter, out of which is generated
dung; but the purer part of it is conveyed to the Liver by the help of the
Mesaraick veins, in which they are reconcocted and changed, from whence springs
the fountain of blood, which comprehends various differences of humors, of
which we shall treat.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Humors.
All Humors are divided into Nutritive and Excrementitious.

Nutritive are those, which have an aptitude to invest themselves in the
substance of our bodies.

Which are again subdivided into two, Primary and Secundary.

The Primary are those which are contained in the veins, retaining the impresse
of that form which they borrowed from the Liver, and communicate themselves
with an indifferency to every member.

THey are called Primary, because they are the womb of the Secundary, and also
because as soon as they are generated in the Liver, they then first entertain
the name of humors; for Chyle with the Physicians is never termed an humor. But
as long as the veins are the closet of these humors, they always retain the
same name and the form received in the Liver, till coursing through every part,
they begin to be changed by them, then they reform themselves, and get new
names as in its season shall be showed.

And they are Four; Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy.
The portion of the Chyle which is defecated, streams thorough the channel of
the Mesaraick veins to the Liver, by whose heat it is concocted and changed,
and partakes somewhat of its nature, acquiring not only a scarlet die, but a
temper resembling that of the Liver: but this substance after its mutation in
the liver is called the Mass of blood wherewith it abounds, not that it is
conflated of that only. For as every Agent though it act in the same method
produces different effects according as the patient lies disposed, as the Sun
by the same heat, whitens linen and browns the skin, hardens dirt and softens
wax; so our food being conflated of four Elements, the heat of the Liver which
is the efficient in the generation of humors, changes the airy part of the
aliment into blood, the fiery into choler, the watery into phlegm, the earthy
into melancholy. Though it cannot be impugned, but that the efficient conduces
much to the copious production of either humor, for a hotter Liver out of the
same aliment makes more choler, then one cold; contrary to which a colder
generates phlegm more copiously. Yet the excess can never swel to such a
disproportion, but that out of every aliment there will issue always these
four humors, though not obliged to a just equality, which naturally ought so to
be tempered, that there should be greater plenty of blood, less of phlegm, less
yet of melancholy, and least of all of choler. But that these four humors are
contained in the mass of blood, it is evident from the variety of the parts of
our body, which differing in temper, cannot all receive nutriment from one and
the same humor, for nutriment proceeds only from similitude. And so only
considering the parts we may easily pass judgment, viz. that the substance of
the milt is very like the melancholic humor; of the Lungs resembling the
bilious humor; of the Liver the Sanguin, of the brain the pituitous, and so
that they attract nutriment from thence.

CHAP. III. Of Blood properly so called.
Blood properly so called is the more temperate part of the whole mass,
inclining to heat and moisture, and painted with red.

THE more temperate part of the Chyle, and indifferent in substance, is
converted into blood properly so called, which is of affinity to the nature and
temper of the Liver, which being hot and moist communicates its temper to a
substance like to it self, and it not only tempers, but dies it red, in so deep
a grain that it outvies the color of other humors partaking of the same mass,
so that the whole mass of humors is vested in red, and in an absolute term
embraces the name of blood. Which that it might be plentiful these accessaries
are requisite, viz. temperate aliment, and of a good juice, the flower of Age,
spring time, an hot and moist temper of the Liver.

Though blood proceeds from all aliment, yet some are more, others less copious
in the production of it: When therefore all these causes convene, from this
concurrence will result a Sanguin Temperament, because blood is very
predominant. It is useful for the nutrition of carnous parts, as of the
muscles and bowels which are nourished by blood properly so called. The effect
of it is to raise in men hilarity and mirth, a propensity to sports and love,
and flourishes them with a lovely color; because they are well fraught with
temperate heat, which is the original of these merry frolicks. As we may take
notice that all creatures in the cradle of their Age, are much addicted to
hilarity, because that is the furnace of natural heat.

But whatever blood confines it self to the veins, is stockt with many fibers,
by the benefit of which it acquireth concretion and assimulation with the
parts.

These Fibers, a great number of which the blood harbors, are manifestly
evident, when the blood is tempered with much water, or stirred with the hand,
as may be specified in Swines blood, all the fibers following this agitation
that may be an hindrance to concretion; for such is the virtue of these fibers
that they presently rally to an unition with the blood which flows out of the
veins, as is manifest in the proposed examples. And by the help of these the
blood, being conveyed to diverse parts, for the better nutrition is condesed and
solidated, so that it may easily be assimilated to the parts, otherwise, if
destitute of fibers, it would remain liquid. For it is out of the reach of
credit, that Aristotle's opinion should hold true, that Hearts, Does and Camels
want them, but we must apprehend that they have but few, which are sufficient
to cause an indifferent concretion. But these fibers are of color wholly
white, representing a nervous substance, from whence we may fetch an opinion,
that they derive themselves not from the Liver, but from the ventricle which is
wholly nervous, and does in some manner impart the nature of its substance to
the Chyle.

But Blood is twofold; the one lodged in the Veins, the other in the Arteries.

The venal is more crasse, cold, and ruddy; and designed for the nourishment of
parts of a solid substance.

Arterial is thinner, hotter and inclining to yellow, and officious in the
nutrition of parts of a spiritous substance.

The blood in the veins is derived immediately from the Liver, which it
signifies by a tincture of the nature and temper thereof; and so is colder then
the arterial, whose forge is the heart, where it is elaborated to tenuity, and
acquires a yellowish color, by reason of air confused with it in the left
ventricle of the heart, which washes away that rich dye; therefore it is so
much hotter then the heart, according to the proportion of that heat, which
causes an excess in the temper of the heart, in relation to that of the Liver.

A COROLLARY.
Some have impudence enough to deny, that there is such a thing as blood
properly so called, but will needs argue the whole mass of humors to be
constituted only of choler, phlegm and melancholy, and that the mixtion of
these three humors is termed blood; of which assertion they endeavor to make
demonstration by the example of milk, which is immediately produced from
blood, for in it there are only three homogeneous substances to be found, viz.
butyrous, serous and caseous, which are correspondent to these three humors.
But this opinion is weakened by this, that nothing but true blood can paint in
red the mass of humors: For choler is yellow, phlegm white, and melancholy
black. Besides the carnous parts which in our body are many, bearing Analogy in
color and temper to blood, do peculiarly instance that this is the humor which
they prey upon. But to the example of milk I reply; that it is not necessary
that all things should have the same parts as those to whom they owe their
generation: for the seed generated by the blood has only two parts, viz.
spirit and incrassation. To this may be added, that that example argues rather
against the choler than the blood, for butter is Analogous to blood, as hot and
moist, as cheese to melancholy, but the serum admits of no such comparison to
phlegm, but rather to ichors, which are evacuated by Urine and sweat, and
obtain the very name of serum.

But especially notice is to be taken of that axiom, upon which we ground,
that the resolution of things is into the same mass from which they took their
composition, by this is understood only their ultimate resolution into the
Elements. For things by a kind of gratitude surrender themselves into the
bosom of their first causes: But the Elements are the first bodies ingredient
to the composition of all mixed bodies, which fall back again into them, but owe
no such duty to their second causes; viz. the flesh and bones after the decease
of the creature are resolved into the Elements, but not into bread and other
aliment, which supplies nutrition to them, or into seed and blood, out of which
they were framed in conception.

CHAP. IV. Of Alimentary Phlegm.
Alimentary Phlegm is the more unconcoct part of the blood, Cold and Moist,
almost destitute of taste, or sweetish.

THE more cold and moist part of the mass of blood, is called phlegm,
generated out of the cruder part of the Chyle, hence Galen terms it, crude and
parboiled blood, who asserts also that in a famine of blood, this being brought
to maturation by a farther coction converts to blood, and that in the very
veins by a Sanguifying virtue sent to them as Auxiliary from the Liver.

Cold and moist aliments produce a great fertility of it, so Age, winter, and a
cold and moist temper of the Liver.

From the winter arises cause of doubt, for that our bellies according to
Hippocrates are hotter in winter by reason they are the randezvouz of the
native heat, which in this season concentring there must necessarily be
commodious for concoction, and so there will be no plenty of crude humors
generated. To this I oppose; that phlegm is abundantly generated in winter, not
in respect of the efficient cause, but of the matter, viz. aliments, which in
this season are cold, compact, and not easily concocted. Now also the appetite
is very vigorous, and makes room for a large quantity of aliment, which by
reason it is so copious cannot be well dressed, but remains a crude Chyle,
which converts into crude blood; for the error of the first is not amended by
the second coction, as Galen affirms.

It is useful for the Nutrition of the Cold and Moist parts.

The brain and the Spinalis medulla bear an Analogy to phlegm, therefore they
are nourished by it, as appears by the customary excretions of the brain. This
alimentary phlegm is commonly termed pituitous blood, as choler and melancholy
bilious and melancholic blood; into which we must make a curious inquiry, lest
we in perusing Authors, should be lead into an error, when we find them assert,
that all the parts acknowledge their nutrition from the blood.

The effect of it is where it is predominant to induce upon men stupidity,
Laziness, Sleepiness, Softness and Whiteness all the body over.

Cold in conjunction with moisture incrassates, and settles the spirits to
almost an immobility, from whence these accidents follow.

CHAP. V. Of Alimentary Choler.
Alimentary Choler is the thinner part of the blood, Hot and Dry, something
bitter and yellow.

AS the four humors correspond to the four Elements, so Choler to a fiery
nature, generated from the more hot and dry part of the Chyle; having a touch
of amaritude, though not so copious as excrementitious choler, for then it
would be unfit so nutrition. For it is undoubtedly true, that bitter things
afford no nourishment, viz. those which excel in amaritude, for hysope,
succory, and many other things, which have but a slight tincture of it, are
nutritive. So alimentary choler, having but a small stock of it, viz. so that
the parts nauseate it not. It is also potentially not actually dry, because all
humors are fluid, and actually moist; yet potentially it causes dryness, as
sea water, or brine may be termed dry.

Hot and Dry aliments, fat and oily, Manly age, Summer season, a Liver of a hot
and dry temper causes it to abound.

It seems averse from Reason, that fat and oily aliments, being hot and moist,
and so more accommodate to the production of blood, should be converted into
Choler.

To this may be answered, That in their proper temper they are more fit for the
generation of blood; but being of a substance easily inflammable, and meeting
with bodies prepared and disposed to the production of bilious siccity, they
are easily naturalized into Choler: Hence it is customary with Physicians to
assert, that sweet things do with little difficulty change into Choler; which
is always to be understood of bodies hot and bilious; for in bodies more cold
and temperate is rather produced blood, as is evident in Honey and Milk; for
Honey for Old men, and Milk for Children is very nutritive, but both in men of
full age, or hotter constitutions, are reduced into Choler.

The duty of which is to nourish the similary parts, and to be in place of salt
to the blood, which as sauce being pleasant to the parts, causes in them a
greedier appetite to imbibe the blood.

Of the parts which receive nutrition from the bilious blood, the Lungs are
esteemed the principal, whose substance being so rare that they can easily
entertain the Air, want not much nutriment from the blood.

But the sweetness of the other humors being tempered by a slight mixture of
bilious amaritude, gives a pleasing taste to the whole mass, which makes the
parts prey with more delight upon the aliment.

The effect of it is to make men in whom there is plenty of it, ready,
watchful, inclined to anger, and lean.

All these are the effects of Calidity and Siccity.

CHAP. VI. Of Alimentary Melancholy.
Alimentary Melancholy is the thicker part of the blood, cold and dry, of a
sharp taste, and of color black.

THE thicker part of the Chyle alters into Melancholy, which is as it were the
mud and dregs of the blood, like the lees of wine, which usually repair to the
bottom of the tub; it is therefore set in similitude with Earth.

The plenty of it proceeds from crasse and earthy aliment, constant age, autumn
and continued anxietie.

It affords nourishment to the parts of a like temper.

Of this nature the Milt is the chief, then the bones, which though not
resembling it in color, are yet of a relative temper, but acquire whiteress by
a further coction.

The effect of it is, where it is predominant, to produce fear, sadness,
rudness in carriage, and a black color.

Obscure and dark spirits run through the bodies of melancholy men, which
represent sad apparitions to their mind, and introduce dullness.

That assertion of Aristotle well known among Physicians, that melancholy men
are ingenuous, does nothing impugn the truth of this, being not to be
apprehended of such melancholicks, as are naturally so, being of a temper cold
and dry, but of those who become so accidentally, having been naturally of a
sanguin or bilious complexion, but in progress of time some thinner part of
the blood being scorched and incrassated, is ambitious to be naturalized into
melancholy; but is much hotter and clearer, for blood is in it self very clear,
therefore spirits clear and indifferent hot, thick and consistent, as it were
bred out of a crasse humor, being generated out of this humor, are very fit to
cause prudence. This then is that melancholic humor which causes ingenuity,
invention of Arts and Sciences and excellent skill in tillage, but not that
natural melancholy, which operates stolidity and stupidity, from whence it is
denominated Asinine Melancholy.

CHAP. VII. Of the Secundary Humors.
Thus far of the Primary alimentary Humors, the Secundary succeed; and they are
so termed, because they do immediately result from the 1, and are subservient to
some peculiar member.

THE Primary humors lodged in the veins and honored with the title of blood,
are wafted to every part, that they may be nutritive to them all: but when they
begin to be changed by the parts, they entertain the name of Secundary Humors.
Some rather term them humidities then humors, because part of them fall into
the nature of the Substance of the parts rather then of the humors: so that
they stand in opposition to the four siccities of the parts proposed by Galen,
which is not void of reason. But yet they will admit the name of humors, by
reason that they are the immediate consequences of the primary humors, nor are
yet true parts.

And they are four; the first is called Unnamed or inbred Humor, the second
Dew, the third Glue, the fourth Cambium.

These four secundary are anthenticated by Avicen. Fen. 1. first Can. Doct. 4.
Cap. 1. which he spins out of Galen, who in book 7. Meth. Cap. 4. reckons four
siccities, contingent to the parts of our body, by reason of the consumption of
the four contrary humidities: which humidities are generated by blood,
converting (as is before mentioned) into the substance of the parts, to which
total conversion are precedent four grand mutations, every of which deserves a
peculiar name.

The Unnamed or inbred humor is that, which borders upon the small veins, and
begins to be slightly changed by the particular members.

As soon as the blood is conveyed out of the larger vessels into the more
narrow, which nature has placed in every part, the qualities of that part flow
into it, and by this change beginning to invest it self in the nature of the
part, it becomes the first of the four Secundary humors, which wanting an
imposed name is called unnamed, but some moderns have termed it inbred.

It is then called Dew, when like Dew it waters the substance of the parts, and
is entertained in the small pores, it is generated out of the Unnamed humor, but
not without much alteration, till it is assimilated to the nature of the part.

It is then called Glue, when this rorid humor closes with the parts to an
agglutination.

Lastly, it is termed Cambium, when this Glue alters into, and stands in
Analogy with the substance of the parts.

The discrimination of these two last humidities is understood, from the
difference distinguishing between union and assimilation. This appears by the
demonstration of most evident examples, for in the Itch, the Leprosy and such
like diseases, there is a sticking and agglutination of much humor, yet no
assimilation, but corruption by the depraved qualities in it, whence we may
conceive the wide difference between union and assimilation.

CHAP. VIII. Of Excrementitious Humors, and first of Excrementitious Choler.
Hitherto of alimentary humors. Excrementitious are those, which are not
disposed for nutrition, but are banished and separated from the body.

They are four; Choler Melancholy, Serum and Phlegm.

Excrementitious Choler, is an excrement attenuated in the second coction, hot
and dry, of color yellow, of taste bitter, the purgation of which is at the
bladder of the Gall.

ALL coctions have their excrements, because all parts of the aliment cannot be
fitly designed to nutrition, therefore the useful part is separated from the
useless and turned out of doors, so the excrements of the first coction are
the dregs which are conveyed thorough the belly. But the excrements of the
second Coction are 3, which being referred to the humors, are in this place to
be explained.

Now the first excrement of the second coction, is a thin humor hot and dry,
and very bitter, therefore of no aptitude for nutrition, it is conveyed to the
bladder of the gall partly by the expulsive faculty of the Liver, partly by the
attractive of that bladder, which nature has framed to a familiarity and
sympathy with that humor, that it might desire and delight in its company.

It is useful to summon the expulsive faculty of the intestines to her duty,
and to scour the sticking phlegm which is apt to adhere to the tunicles ofthe
intestines.

When the felleous bladder has attracted the choler, and for some space
entertained its welcome guest, till being sharpened by this delay, it moves this
vessel to an expulsion, and is sent to the duodenum by a vessel designed for
this office, which is called porus cholidochus. Now this choler being brought
down to the intestines, by its acrimony, stirrs and moves their expulsive
faculty, by which our purgaments are with more ease excluded, which many times
by the intermixtion of choler, represent a yellow or reddish tincture. And also
the intestines usually abounding with much viscid and sticking phlegm, receive
this benefit from the choler, that it cuts and purges it away, and so helps its
exclusion.

It is differenced two ways, either as it confines it self to its natural
constitution, or as it dilates it self beyond the proportion and allowance of
nature.

When it is content with its natural limits it is twofold, Yellow and Pale.

Yellow is that which is contained in the bladder, clean and unmixt, which was
now mentioned. Pale is when a Serous humor is mixed with the Yellow.

Serum mingled with choler, washes away its yellowness, and induces palenesse,
cold and moisture.

When it is in excess beyond the bounds of nature, the species of it are four,
Vitelline, Porraceous, Eruginous and Glasteous.

The Vitelline in color and consistency is like the yolk of raw eggs, hot to a
higher degree than the yellow, and is produced from it by the alteration and
incrassation of vehement heat.

When by the acrimony of preternatural heat the natural choler is scorched, its
thinner parts are dispersed; by which means it is incrassated, and acquires a
deeper grain, and more intense heat. For we must shut our ears against
Avicenna, who asserts that the transmutation of yellow choler into Vitelline is
caused by the admixtion of phlegm; for by this reason it would become more
pallid and cold.

Porraceous Choler, representing the color of a Leeke, is hotter then the
Vitelline, and is commonly bred in the ventricle, being produced by impure
aliments.

This is green like a leeke, which tincture it receives from bad aliments, such
as garlic, onions, leekes, watercresses, colewortes, and the like; which by
reason of the disability in the ventricle to concoct them, and naturalize them
to Chyle, are parched, yet generally retaining their own hue, from whence this
is termed porraceous choler. Here it is observable, that this happens not but
in very hot stomachs; It is also sometimes generated in other parts of our
body, out of the vitelline choler overheated, whence it cloths it self in
green.

Eruginous choler, being of the color of rust, is produced by a more parching
heat.

While the porraceous choler delays its remove out of the ventricle, being
adust by preternatural and intense heat, it alters into eruginous choler. The
seat sometimes of its generation is the veins, by heat very intense, which
scorches the aforementioned species of choler, and is very sharp and malignant;
hence eruginous dejections are counted by Hippocraies deadly.

Glasteous choler, assimilated in color to wood, is produced from the rest by
a greater inflammation, and is more dangerous then all of them.

This is nearly allied to black choler, being of a color more obscure and dull
then the rest, which is caused by a greater torrefaction, therefore it is more
dangerous and pernicious then the other.

A COROLLARY.
GAlen in his Treatise of black Choler, mentions red choler, from whence it
seems there must be a larger Catalogue of the species of choler, but this is
not properly choler but the feculency of the blood, as Galen himself explaines
comment 5. in 6. Epid.

CHAP. IX. Of Excrementitious Melancholy.
Excrementious Melancholy is a crasse excrement of the second coction, cold and
dry, of color black, of taste sharp, which is purged out at the Milt.
THat part of the Chyle which is more crasse and feculent, so that it is beyond
the art of the Liver to change it into alimentary substance, is secluded from
the mass of blood, that that may not be infected with the least adhesion of
impurity; which crasse and earthy matter is termed excrementitious melancholy,
and that the expurgation thereof may be the more commodious, the good Artist
nature contrived a peculiar part for it, nearly related in likeness to this
humor, which therefore it attracts to it self, and imprisons in its soft and
loose substance; but in the interim, being solicitous for its own nourishment,
it separates the melancholic blood confused with it, for that purpose and
assimilates it to it self.

It is helpful to the coction of the Stomach, and excites in it a natural
appetency.

When this humor has been long harbored in the milt, and grows burdensome to
it, its banished to the ventricle, by a passage whose extent is to the bottom
of it, which is termed the short vessel. It is not wholly useles, but helps the
coction and retention of the ventricle, as Galen, 5. of the use of parts. For
it contracts the ventricle, and collects the aliment into a narrower
circumference, causing retention till it be concocted, for this humor is
something astrictive. Avicenna is of opinion that it moves a natural appetency
by that acidity which it carries along with it, as all acide things do the
like; hence a custom is derived to present first at the Table vinegar-cates to
rouse the appetite. This is the reason that melancholic men have craving
stomachs, because of the plentiful effusion of this humor into the ventricle.

We may conjecture Galen to have been of this opinion, who in his first book
of the causes of Symptoms, asserts this doglike appetite to proceed from the
plenty of acide juices generated in the ventricle, or flowing into the orifice
of it from some other place. If therefore melancholic juice which is acide,
being too plentiful and overflowing the bancks of nature, causes hunger
preternatural, it is without exception true, that that moderate one which is
content with the limitation of nature, should move natural hunger.

Here some may take occasion to object, That phlegm being acide excites a
canine appetite, no less than melancholy, therefore natural hunger may be the
effect of it, when it exceeds not a moderate proportion. I Answer, The
consequence is weak, because acide phlegm is always preternatural, and the
effect of a disease; but melancholy is natural, being by the operation of
nature daily unloaded in the stomach, therefore it is efficacious in natural
productions; so is not acide phlegm, nor an over-repleat or morbous melancholy,
which being preternatural, can only produce preternatural hunger. Besides this
the melancholic humor affords other assistance to the coction and appetency of
food, viz. as it helps their dissolution, as we perceive all acide things do,
as vinegar, the dissolution of Stones by the juice of limmons, and rebellious
metals by the spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, and Sulphur. I have treated more at
large of these in my Medicinal praxis, Chapter of offended concoction.

But when excrementitious melancholy is preternatural, it admits the term of
black choler, which is very hot, and acrimonious.

Black choler is the most pernicious of all humors, which is always
preternatural, enemy to all the parts of the body, and plotting our
destruction, corroding, exulcerating, and scorching the parts to which it
adheres, by reason of its extraordinary acrimony: If it be powered upon the
earth, like the most sharp vinegar, or aqua fortis, it ferments it, and by
boiling inflateth bubbles. It is generated from the intemperate heat of the
parts, which inflames to ashes the juice contained in them, or from a
putredinous heat in the humors, the force of which causing a consumption in the
more thin and humid parts, the more gross remain as adust and incinerated
dreggs. But this incineration cannot be so unnatural in the humors, as to
deprive them of a fluid consistency and the proper form of humors.

But this black Choler is differenced four ways, extracted from the
differences of its causes, viz. as it is generated out of Melancholy, Choler,
Blood, or salt Phlegm.

The First species of black Choler is produced from the putrefaction and
adustion on of natural melancholy, and is different from it, as dregs burnt
from unburnt, firebrands from coals, red hot Iron from cold. The Second
proceeds from yellow choler much scorched, for as from a less combustion the
Vitelline, Porraceous, Eruginous, and Glasteous; so from a more fervent is this
production of black choler, threatening more danger then all the rest, which is
really that which excommunicates flies, and ferrnentates the Earth. The Third
issues from an extreme putrefaction or exustion of blood; for then the more
subtle parts of it are converted into yellow choler, the more gross into
black, if the adustion be vehement; otherwise it abhorrs the nature of this
noisome humor, and only alters into a melancholy, cold and dry. But when by an
intense heat it is heightened to ignition retaining very Empyreuma of heat, it
is changed into the true nature of black choler, yet it is more candid then the
rest, as often remembering its former nature. But that there is black choler may
be demonstrated in carbunculous tumors, which are caused by thick and hot
blood, and often become true Cancers. The Fourth and last proceeds from salt
Phlegm, which by a long continued scorching becomes so biting and infestious
that it seems to be very near allied to black choler; though it be very seldom
reckoned with the species of black choler, and many do obstinately contend that
there is no such thing: For phlegm being white, cannot discolor it self into
black, unles it be by the mediation of other colors, as yellow, green, and the
rest: Besides, if the phlegm be exust, the more thin parts of it will suffer a
resolution, but the thicker converted into a Limy substance, which usually
retains its whiteness. And it is thought that salt phlegm, having been
incensed by a vehement combustion, obtains such a degree of malignancy and
force of erosion, that as to its qualities, it is nothing different from black
choler; but as to the whiteness of it, it is not absurd to affirm, that it may
sometimes convert into black, in a violent and unequal ustion, by the
permistion of smoke and steams: as we see the whitest wood, to be immediately
changed into coals, but when it is easily concocted and by degrees, as when it
becomes a Limy substance, then it retains its color.

CHAP. X. Of Serum.
Serum is a thin and watery excrement of the second concoction, purged out
partly by Urine, partly by Sweat.
THE concoction of aliments is executed by elixation, therefore as in
artificial elixations much humidity is very requisite, lest things should be
rather roasted then boiled, so in natural concoctions the aliments must be
entertained in abundance of moisture, which is that, which about feeding time
we quaffe in large proportions, and this taplaffi, is so mingled with the meat
in the ventricle, that they are consubstantiated, but are so thin that they
represent milk or cream, which is therefore termed Chyle, that is, juice:
which is absolutely necessary that the aliments being prepared by that first
coction may pass freely thorough those narrow veins, which usualy conduct
them to the Liver, and also those small veins which are dispersed thorough the
substance of the Liver. But when the Liver has discharged its duty in
sanguifying, there is not further necessity for so much moisture, therefore
nature segregates the greater part of it, which it has designed to be
attracted by the Reins, and from thence is excluded to the bladder, where it is
called Urine, but before while it confines it self to the veins it is called
Serum. Part of which remaining still in the veins, is confused with the mass
of blood, to be the vehicle of the humors, which being made more thin and
fluid, may have an easier access to every particle of our body; but when this
portion of Serum has performed its office, part of it retires to the Reins,
and accompanies the other Urine, part inclines to the bulk of the body, and is
purged by sweat.

The office of it is, to be a conduct to the alible humors, for their easier
transmigration thorough the body.

It is called to this duty as long as it is lodged in the veins: but when it
has broke up house there, it is useless in the body, as choler, and melancholy.

The differences of it are four, viz. sanguinious, bilious, pituitous, and
melancholic.

Every humor has its Serum properly and peculiarly appertaining to it, and
assimilated to its proper nature and temper; so the Serum of the blood, is held
to be hot, moist and somewhat red; the Serum of choler hot, dry, and somewhat
yellow; the Serum of phlegm cold, moist, and somewhat white; and the Serum of
melancholy cold, dry, and of color dark.

CHAP. XI. Of Excrementitious Phlegm.
Excrementitious phlegm is an excrement of the third concoction, Cold and
Moist, of color white, as to the taste insipid, or something sweat, generated
in diverse parts, but principally in the brain.
PArts of a cold and moist temper, derive their nutrition from pituitous blood,
from whence proceed many excrements, caused either by the coldness of the part
it self unapt to concoct perfectly, or by the humor it self, which being the
more crude part of the blood, is of a difficult concoction, and a great part of
it converts into excrements. Which is very evident in the brain, for that
copiously gathers excrementitious phlegm, which is purged out of the mouth and
nose. But the brain collects not this phlegm, solely by the concoction of its
proper aliment, but by reason of its advanced situation, which is the cause
that many vapors from the ventricle, Liver and other bowels make upward to the
head, and by the frigidity of the brain are condensed into a waterish matter,
which is the original of this phlegm. Hence by reason of the copiousness of
phlegm congregated in the brain these two ways, Hippocrates and other
Physicians have termed the brain, The Metropolis of Phlegm, and Author of all
defluxions.

It is differenced by the taste and consistency of it.

In relation to the taste it is fourfold, Insipid, Sweet, Acide and salt.

Insipid proceeds from moderate cold, which causes no taste.

This is the most natural, being an excretion in well disposed bodies conveyed
away by the spittle.

The Sweet is produced from the insipid by a small alteration of heat.

When the insipid is concocted by a moderate heat, it is sweetened, for
sweetness is the produce of heat: but yet hence we must not infer that sweet
phlegm is hot; because indeed an intense sweetness signifies heat, but not a
slight and moderate one; so fruit and milk of a cold temper, yet are much
sweeter then any phlegm.

The Acide is caused by intense cold inducing Acidity.

When the small heat of the phlegm is extinguished, or dissipated, the necessary
consequence is acidity: no otherwise then as the juyces of many fruits meanly
hot, being infrigidated, become easily acide; which fares not so with hotter,
which do usually retain their soundness longer; as appears by wine.

Salt Phlegm is produced either by putrefaction, or the permixtion of salt
serous moisture. As Galen in Book 2. of the diff. feb. cap. 5.

It becomes salt by putrefaction, because when putrefaction makes a separation
between the siccity, and humidity, and that siccity being parched by a
putredinous heat, falls again into conjunction with the humid substance, it
causes a salt taste. But it proceeds from the permixtion of salt serous
humidity, which being too much brin'd by intense heat, is mingled with the
sweet phlegm; but the serous humidity becomes salt, when the action of heat
upon it produces scorched vapors, which by permistion with it cause saltness.

Observe that these two species of phlegm, viz. the acide and salt are
preternatural, but the sweet and insipid natural.

As to its consistency, it is also fourfold, Thin, Thick, Vitreous and
Gypseous.

The Thin is of a watery consistency, very fluid and easily diffusing it self
into diverse parts.

Such is that which distilles from the brain thorough the nose, and flows
thorough the mouth, and is effused also in many parts, thorough the middle
intervals of the muscles.

Thick is when this thin has acquired incrassation and clamminesse by heat.

The heat by resolution incrassates the thinner parts, whence this phlegm being
gluish, is properly called Snot.

Vitreous phlegm is still thick, but transparent as liquefied glass, or the
white of a raw Egg.

It is a sturdy doubt, and resolved to my knowledge, by no Auther, why vitreous
phlegm, and that which is termed crasse, are for the most part equally crasse,
yet one is very transparent and diaphanous, the other very obscure. This in my
opinion, proceeds from the diversity of the efficient cause, which of crasse
phlegm is heat, but of the vitreous, cold: In the crasse the heat resolves the
thinner, more airy and waterish parts, which cause perspicuity, hence it is
clouded with opacity; but in the vitreous, being incrassated by cold, not by
heat, while it is so condensed nothing is resolved, but the diaphanous parts
remain, from whence it seems transparent; as is manifest in ice.

But it will be objected; That phlegm cannot acquire such a degree of cold in
our body, that by the force of it, it may be condensed and incrassated, all our
body being actually hot; therefore whatsoever is cold, is necessarily heated by
the part in which it is contained. To this I Answer, That that phlegm, to which
the vitreous owes its production, is exceedingly crude, and out-vying the
strength of nature, therefore it is banished her dominious as contumacions and
insuperable, and remised to its proper nature, viz. coldness, communicated to
it by water, and invincible by the weak heat of the parts in which it is
contained, as the intestines, which are the head quarters of this vitreous
phlegm, and does not seldom torture them with most painful fits of the
Colic, for by its glewy nature adhering to the intestiness, by its cold it
bites and nips them, for coldness is biting, according to Hipp. it is cold to
such extremity, that the expurgation of it is actually cold, by the testimony
of Galen by a near experiment in himself, as in his 4. book of affected parts.

Gypseous phlegm is the production of crasse phlegm, emulating Limc or a stone
almost in hardness.

This rejects the name of humor, being consolidated; therefore improperly
placed in the class of humors. It proceeds from heat pillaging all the humid
parts, so that there is nothing left but earthy parts, which are indurated into
a Tophaceous matter, almost resembling lime, this often perplexeth the joints
causing the knotty Gout.

The Fourth Section of Physiology. Of the Spirits and innate Heat.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Nature of Spirits.
Thus much of the Humors: the Treatise of Spirits succeeds, which are generated
out of them, but chiefly out of Blood.
THE Spirits of our bodies being of substance so thin, that they are
imperceptible to the quickest glance of sense; and by this means reason only
can confirm us in the truth of their existence: it will not be amiss therefore
to inform, that our bodies have such attendents, before their nature and
essence be proposed,

First, Therefore the context in Hippocrates, 6. Epid. sect. 8. is very
convincing, where he reckons three things which constitute the composition of
our body, viz. things containing, contained, and causing motion; by the
containing, he signifies the parts, by the contained the humors, by those that
cause motion the spirits, according to the explanation of Galen himself, for
such is the tenuity and nobility of the spirits, that with wonderful
swiftness they can shoot themselves to any place, and insinuate themselves
into all the parts of the body.

Secondly, Platonicks do thus demonstrate the necessity of spirits; nature does
not usually join two contraries or things of wide distance without the help of
a medium, but the soul and body differ in the whole latitude of their genus,
for the soul is incorporeal, and immortal, but the body corporeal, frail and
mortal, therefore such a dissiliency in natures cannot be forced to unition but
by some medium and common obligation, leaning as it were to both natures; such
are the spirits, which indeed are material, but in tenuity ambitious of the
nature of things immaterial.

Thirdly, This appears by prolifical seed, which is wholly spumous, and
inflated with spirits, which disappearing leave nothing but a waterish and
unfruitful liquor.

Fourthly, We are nourished by the same things of which we are conflated, but
attraction of breath or air is necessary to our conservation; therefore we
comprehend in us some such substance.

Lastly, This is evident by those great and empty cavities, which are found in
the ventricles of the brain, and arteries of men deceased, which are observed
in the living swelled to a palpitation, which clearly convinces, that those
vacuities could not be repleat with any other thing then such spirits.

But a Spirit is a substance thin, clear and etherial, proceeding from the
exhalation of pure blood, and the inspiration of air, necessary for the due
performance of all duties the body is engaged to.

It is called a thin substance, because with incredible subtility and clerity
it penetrates and courses thorough the whole bulk of the body, and steals into
the narrowest pores of the least particles and intervals of the muscles: it is
called clear, and bright, not according to the vulgar opinion (as Argenterius
fancies) but because it excels in splendour and perspicuity, which is easily
seen in the observation of the eye, the ball of which is very clear, and we may
spin an argument for the probation of it out of this, that when some vapors of
the melancholic humor, or of over-swelling in drunken men, are predominant,
the mind is in a present perturbation, by reason of the dullness of these fogs
which suffocate the spirits. And of this Avicenna's demonstration is beyond all
exception, because, says he, our soul (which transacts every thing by her
servants the spirits) loves light and no darkness, and the spirits do their
duty with much more alacrity, in a serene then in a cloudy day; hence it is
plain, that they are excited by similitude. They are also called Aetherial,
because the matter of them is by long elaboration so defecated, that it stands
in competition with that higher Element, which is next neighbor to the
celestial bodies, and is called the Element of fire, or etherial.

But that the spirits start out of the permixtion of blood and air, shall
appear in the explication of their differences.

The uses of them are declared in the end, for the soul cannot in the least
operate upon the body without the officiousness of the spirits, because they
have the honor to be immediately and principally subservient to her.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Spirits.
Spirits are twofold; Inbred and Adventitious. Inbred is the relict of the
first principles in every part.
IT is called inbred, innate, or implanted, according to the Greek Connate, but
while our parts are composed out of the first principles of our generation,
viz. seed and blood, that spiritous substance which is contained in the seed
constitutes the inbred spirit. But this reason convinces that this spirit is
communicated to every part, because the adventitious cannot be brought forth
without the midwifery of this, every production being like to its Author. And
also the prolifical seed issuing from every part argues that a spiritous matter
is derived from every part, from the sound parts sound, from morbous parts
morbous, which in the issue represent their dispositions.

Adventitious is that which flows, and is sent in from some other place for
the nutrition and conservation of the Inbred.

The Inbred spirit continually laborious in the performance of the functions of
the parts would easily be consumed, unless it were preserved and refreshed by
the continual influence of this stranger; therefore nature has contrived some
parts, which should be the forge of great plenty of spirits, which by their
allotted courses, influx into all the parts of the body, to defend the inbred
spirit.

This spirit is threefold; Natural, Vital and Animal; The Natural is produced
in the Liver, out of the thinner part of Blood tempered with a little Air,
whose influence is thorough the veins into the whole body, for the due exercise
of the natural faculties.

This Natural spirit has caused much dissension among Authors because some
upon the ground of pregnant reasons, deny nature the assistance of any such
spirit.

First, Because Galen was not resolved of it, book 12. method. cap. 5. where he
thus discourses, If any spirit be natural, it is contained in the Liver as its
fountain, and in the veins as its instruments: And his first book of parts
affected, last chap. the natural faculties are by him differenced from the
animal by this distinction, that the natural are implanted in the parts, but
the animal are sent in from some other principle, as light from the Sun: whence
it happens that animal actions do not seldom perish in the parts, though they
receive no hurt, but only the principle of them, but the natural are never
hurt, while the parts are free from harm.

Secondly, Air is the matter of all spirits, for out of it and clear
exhalations from the blood, they are produced. But there is no passage thorough
which the air may be conveyed to the Liver. Therefore that can be no seat for
the generation of spirits.

Thirdly, The spirits are according to Hippocrates the causers of motion,
therefore if the veins harbor spirits they should beat no less then the
Arteries.

But the principal argument to confirm the assertion of natural spirits is
this; Three actions specifically distinct are exercised in our bodies, viz.
Animal, Vital, and Natural; but the exercise of action is the duty of the
spirits, as Galen very often affirms; therefore we must necessarily constitute
three spirits differing in species, viz. the Animal, Vital and Natural. If you
object, that natural actions are exercised by the inbred spirits. I Answer,
that the adventitious are absolutely necessary for conservation of the inbred,
which bear a similitude of nature to them, the production of which is
acknowledged from the Liver.

I Oppose therefore to the first argument, established by the authority of
Galen in opposition to this; that the rudeness, obscurity, and non-purity of
this spirit created sometimes in Galen a doubt, it being more caliginous and
terrestrial, then the Vital, and proportioned to those actions which it is
designed to perform. But though the faculties be implanted in the parts, they
want the help of the adventitious spirits for exercise, and to hinder the
dissipation of the implanted spirits.

To the second I Answer, That the natural spirits want but little air, which
by insensible transpiration, by the Arteries knitted to the veins of the Liver,
and by the continual ventilation of the Diaphragma are easily imparted to the
Liver.

To the third I Answer, That the beating of the Arteries is not caused by the
spirits, but by a pulsifick virtue communicated to them from the heart. But the
Liver being not endowed with such a faculty, the veins which have a dependence
upon it, do not beat, for it is not necessary, because the blood and natural
spirits want no such ventilation, but are well enough preserved only by
transpiration.

The Vital is generated in the heart, by the natural spirit, and the attraction
of the air by inspiration, and by the help of the Arteries flows into the
whole body, for the preservation of natural heat, and defense of life.

It stands better with reason, that the vital spirits, which surpass in
tenuity, should be generated out of that spiritous substance prepared and
attenuated in the Liver, rather then out of the venal blood only, which is
destitute of spirits, for as the animal owes its production to the vital, so it
may be supposed the vital is related to the natural. Therefore that natural
spirit being conveyed to the left cavity of the heart with the purer part of
the blood is intermixed with air, arriving thither by the inspiration of the
Lungs thorough the venal artery, whence by the inbred force of the heart and
innate heat by joint elaboration the vital spirits are generated, which being
after transported to the Arteries, are conducted thorough the whole body, that
they may nourish and preserve the whole body by their vigorous heat.

The Animal is generated in the brain by the concurrence of the Vital, and the
air attracted by the mouth and nostrils, whose influence on the whole body is
by the nerves, for the exercise of animal functions.

A portion of the vital spirit is conducted to the brain by the Artery
Carotides, whose course is thorough the neck: and in the ventricles of the
brain is mingled with air, attracted thorough the highway of the mouth and
nostrils, where by the idiosincracy of the brain it is changed, and acquires a
new form, and becomes Animal spirit fit for the performance of animal actions,
for during its continuance in the veins, it is the principal officer and chief
instrument in the execution of these actions, but while it flows thorough the
nerves into the various parts of the body, it compleates and perfects the
motion of the senses.

A COROLLARY.
THE reasons following will sufficiently evince, that there is no Animal spirit:

First, The cold and moist substance of the brain cannot be convenient for the
generation of spirits, which are hot and thin; since there must necessarily be
a relation of similitude in all productions.

Secondly, All vapors which ascend to the brain, by the frigidity of it, are
condensed to a concretion, and turned into water; Therefore if the spirits,
which are of a like nature, were contained in the brain, they would in like
manner be infrigidated to a concretion.

Thirdly, If there were such spirits, their chief place of residence would be
the ventricles of the brain, but that is impossible, because those ventricles
are continually feculent with excrements, to the expurgation of which they are
designed, but they would infect the spirits.

Fourthly, If these spirits were lodged in these ventricles of the brain, they
would easily make escape thorough those passages which are appointed for the
evacuation of the excrements.

Fifthly, If these spirits were housed in the brain, sensation and cogitation
would always be quick, because the faculties of the soul give constant
attendance, and are always in action, till they want instruments.

To the first I Answer, That the brain is not in such a measure cold, but that
it is actually hot, which heat is sufficient for the generation of the Animal
spirits, which are not simply the production of heat, but of the very
idiosyncracy of the brain, which must necessarily incline to coldness, that the
heat of the vital spirits might be allayed, that our cogitations and sensations
may be constant and firm, which otherwise those incendiaries the spirits, would
blow up to a deliration and madness, as we see in men phrenetical.

To the second I Answer, That the spirits are not concrete in the brain, as the
vapors, because they are not the chief constitutions of a waterish nature, but
rather of Aerie, or Ethereal one.

To the third, with Aristotle's consent, 2. of the soul chap. 8. I Answer, That
Nature can employ the same thing in the business of diverse offices, as the
tongue primarily for the taste, secundarily for speech: the nostrils primarily
for smell, and inspiration of air, but secundarily for the conveying away of
mucous phlegm: so the ventricles of the brain are primarily contrived for the
generation of spirits; secundarily for the expurgation of excrements, but these
excrements by reason of their continual purging and effluxion cannot be
infectious to the Animal spirits, as long as the brain squares to Nature.

To the fourth I oppose, That the spirits break not forth thorough those
channels in which the excrements stream, being retained by the friendly nature
of the part and familiarity of the substance.

To the fifth I Answer, That the concurrence of three things cause cogitation,
Faculty, Instrument, and Object; all which being supplied, the mind operates
indefatigably: for not only waking, but often also sleeping we exercise our
cogitations, because we use the object of the internal senses, but both
failing, cogitation cease: as also in default of the Instrument, viz. Animal
spirit, which is tired with many operations; whence the careful ingeniety of
nature, has provided sleep for living creatures, by the benefit of which, as
it were by a truce, the Animal actions keep high Holy Day, and the spirits are
refreshed.

CHAP. III. Of Innate Heat.
Innate Heat is the primigenious moisture, diffused thorough all the parts of
the body, and every where replete with implanted spirit and native Heat.
HEat is a concrete term, which signifies not only an accident, but the subject
to which it inheres. There are therefore three things concurring to the
constitution of innate heat; viz. primigenious moisture, implanted spirit, and
native heat; in the spirit is constant heat, but this implanted spirit is
always in conjunction with this primigenious moisture and confused with it,
and from them so united, results the innate heat. The true understanding
therefore of these three will cause an easy knowledge of the nature of innate
heat, and the implanted spirit was at large explained before, the primigenious
moisture and native heat only rest for explication.

Primigenious moisture is a humid, fat, and oily substance diffused thorough
all the body, by preying on which as its proper food the native heat is
preserved.

Aristotle defines life to be the dwelling of native heat in certain moisture,
that therefore this heat, the Author and preserver of life, may long continue
in the parts, it wants certain fuel, no less than our fire, to keep it from
extinction. But moisture being twofold in our body, one waterish, the other
fat and aerie, this vivifying heat cannot be fuelled, by the waterish, but by
the fat and aerie moisture, as a lamp or candle lighted is not inflamed by
waterish, but oily and pinguedinous liquor, or some such like substance: so
Trees and other Plants, which abound in this fat substance, are of long
continuance, and excellent fuel, when they are burned; But on the other side
green wood, in which waterish humidity is as copious, or wood of too much
growth, in which this fat humidity is exsiccated, make no good fire. But when
we discourse of oily and fat substance, we understand not that fat or grease
which most commonly in women or idlers is collected about the skin and
membranes, but hardly comes nigh the substance of the bones, nerves and bowels,
for those are not the subjects of vital heat, but are rather by their
over-growth an impediment to actions. But this native and genital humidity,
according to its copiousness is more useful and commodious to the exercise of
all functions and the prolongation of life.

It derives its original from the first principles of our generation, viz. from
the seed, and maternal blood.

The first upstart of our generation is abundantly furnished with this radical
moisture; hence it is, that when this is substantialized into the parts of our
body, the whole mass in the preface of life is very well stocked with this
moisture, which afterward by the continual action of the native heat is by
degrees as our Age posts away wasted and dried, till it arrives to the last
stage of exsiccation, whose consequence is the extremity of Age, and natural
death.

But the fat and oleous moisture of Aliments is the cause of preservation.

While this moisture continually suffers under the insulting activity of heat,
it would quickly fall into a consumption, unless the loss were recompensed by
the access of new aliment: At the charge of this reparation are fit aliments,
prepared by diverse coctions, in which we find twofold moisture, one fat and
aerie near related to the nature of the primigenious moisture, and makes up the
loss of it, the other waterish, keeping in repair the common humidity of the
parts, which breaks the force of heat, lest it should consume this fat and
aerie moisture, as appears in Sugar, Honey, or Oil, when they are boiling,
that the water mixed with them encounters the forces of the external fire, and
is vanquished, when they remain in their integrity or with small diminution. And
though the loss caused by heat is continually repaired by new aliment, yet that
which is acquired in the place of what is lost, is much worse, and more impure,
and deficient both in quantity and quality, otherwise it were possible for life
to be stretched to infinity, but this primigenious moisture by degrees
decaying, and it being impossible to equalize this diminution with any aliment,
it inferres an absolute necessity of death.

Native heat is a quality proper and familiar to all living creatures, by the
help of which they live and act.

It is in our bodies twofold, one the consequent of the first mixtion of the
body and parts, which after the destruction of the creature removes not, as
long as mixtion keeps its dwelling, which is made out of the four Elements
guarded with the retinue of their qualities; the other proper only to living
creatures, termed Vivifical, because by it, as long as it is our guest, we
obtain the advantage of nutrition, growth, conservation and life; whence
Aristotle defines Life, as is before mentioned, the conservation of this heat
in certain moisture.

It is derived from the first principles, as is the primigenious moisture. The
first principles of generation, seed especially, is well fraught with many
spirits, and much heat; hence this heat in our first conception exactly
commensurates all the parts, and as long as it sojourns with us, afterward
increases and preserves them.

Conservation proceeds from the primigenious moisture, by the ambiency of air,
and influence of heat.

The primigenious moisture is the subject of native heat, and its ordinary
fare, which it continually devours for its own safety, as a Lamp always needs
Oil for its conservation; and Fire, the continual addition of Fuel; of which,
as plenty causes the inflammation to rise higher, and withdrawing it a
diminution, so native heat is increased or diminished according to the
proportion of the primigenious moisture: But, as is before alleged, this
moisture never increasing, but wasting from the very Prologue of our life, it
happens, that the heat also is perpetually diminished to the Epilogue of our
life. And as our Fires lack not fuel alone for their preservation, but also the
kind embraces of Air, by which they may be refreshed to refocillation; for
being confined to a narrow circumscription, though they have sufficient fuel,
yet they are suffocated; which is evident in Medical Cupping-glasses: So our
native heat wants the ambient air, for commodious eventilation. But this air by
the benefit of the Lungs is conducted to the Heart, which is the principal
furnace of heat, but to other parts by insensible transpiration; by the defect
of which the heat is immediately suffocated, as appears in Suspension.

But this native heat being weak in most parts of our body, and so easily
obnoxious to extinction, Nature has so provided, that by the continual
influence of heat it may be nourished and sustained. Hence Physicians divide
Heat into two parts, viz. implanted, and adventitious. The adventitious flows
in from the two fountains of heat, viz. the Heart and Liver, in company of the
spirits and blood.

A COROLLARY.
LEarned Fernelius was so transported in admiration of the noble effects of
this native heat, that he was of opinion that it was to be struck out of the
number of Elementary qualities, as being of a higher extract, and wholly divine
and heavenly; which lest he should seem an indeliberate babbler, he endeavors to
evince by the following reasons;

First, All action depends upon a predominant quality, but there are in Nature
examples of many Plants, as Poppy, Hemlock, Mandrakes; and of Animals, as the
Salamander, which is thought to be cold in the fourth degree, yet they live,
and heat is the cause of life; it is therefore necessary to constitute another
heat, differing from the Elementary, (which in them is very weak) by the help
of which they live, and exercise their actions.

Secondly, If Elementary heat caused life, Brimstone, Arsenick, and such like
things, which are intensely hot, would chiefly live; but they live not, because
they are destitute of this celestial and vivifying heat; so cadaverous relics
retain Elementary heat, yet live not.

Thirdly, If our heat were Elementary, it would admit of no contrary Elementary
heat, as that of a Fever, which most of all dissolves it.

Fourthly, Fernelius grounds this assertion upon the authority of Aristotle,
Book 2. of the Gener. of Anim. Chap. 3. where he affirms, That native heat is
not of an igneous, but some more divine nature, correspondent in proportion to
the Element of the Stars.

But though this opinion is grounded upon the invention of a most ingenious and
excellent Artist, we cannot betray our reason to it by a quiet assent; for the
species of the qualities of our bodies are not without the command of necessity
to be multiplied; our judgment therefore is, that native heat is wholly of an
Elementary nature, as we shall prove by the following arguments:

First, Celestial bodies have not the first qualities, for then they would be
corruptible, for all corruption depends upon the qualities; so the Philosophers
prove the Heavens incorruptible, because they have no qualities. So they argue
the Sun to have no heat in it, but to produce it in these inferior bodies
energetically and virtually, viz. by motion, light, and influence.

Secondly, If native heat were celestial, it would abhor a contrary, according
to the sense of Fernelius himself. But Elementary cold has a contrary, for the
extremity of cold sometimes causes death, by the extinction of native heat;
therefore it is not celestial.

Thirdly, If it were celestial, it would want no fuel to prey on; and if it
wanted, it could not be proportioned to it in our body, for Celestial cannot be
nourished by Elementary. To this is opposed, That this heat, though it be
celestial, is by a familiarity with elementary heats, changed as it were into
elementary, or at least models it self into an elementary fashion; which seems
not satisfactory, because celestials receive the impress of no passion from
elementaries, it is not possible their nature should be so inverted, as to
savor of the conditions of things elementary.

Fourthly, Native heat derives its original from seed, and seed from blood and
spirits, which are also the production of blood; but the blood is elementary,
therefore by consequence native heat.

The Arguments of Fernelius, though they represent some truth, yet may be
easily thus resolved by us.

To the first I answer, That heat in a living body is twofold; one as the body
is mixed, the other as it is living; as mixed, it has the four first qualities
tempered, and so only potential heat, mixed bodies inanimate affecting not the
touch with heat; as living, it has actual heat, by the help of which it
exercises the functions of life; and this heat, though it be no ingredient of
mixtion, and though its operations are performed in a different manner from the
operations of mixed heat, yet it is not distinguished from it specifically, but
only numerically; as if Pepper be heated in the fire, that acquired actual
heat, differs from the heat produced by mixtion, yet both are elementary.

To the second I reply, That Brimstone, Arsenick, and such like, live not
through the defect of a soul, which is the true and principal Author of life,
whereof heat is but only the instrument; but the instrumental cause acts
nothing of it self but at the command of the principal; though that heat
proceeding from mixtion, as before is said, concurs not to the operations of
life, but only the living heat, of which they are destitute: So dead carcasses
have neither soul, nor that actual heat; so bodies just expired retain that
heat for some time, yet live not, wanting a soul: So seed is largely fraught
with that native heat, though it live not, through defect of a soul: though our
learned Neoterikes judge it to be animate: which discourse shall be referred to
its proper place.

To the third I answer, That feverish heat is contrary to the native, as it is
more intense; for an intense degree of the same quality, in comparison with a
more remiss, is accounted contrary, because it effects its destruction, by
raising it to intensity. Besides, feverish heat is contrary to native, by
reason of the passive quality attending it; for feverish heat is dry, native
moist.

Lastly, we shall thus disoblige our selves from the duty we owe to Aristotle's
authority, that he referred to the effects, not the nature of native heat. But
the effects of this heat are almost divine, the honor of which is rather to be
conferred upon the soul and its faculties; though the heat of our fire being
tempered according to Art produces admirable effects in Chemistry: And so even
in our Culinary fire, as in Egypt (according to the report of Scaliger) Eggs
are wont to be excluded in some Furnaces, so artificially built, that the heat
of the fire may be in them so temperate, that it may be fit to effect
generation.

The fifth Section of Physiology. Of the Parts.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of the Parts.
A Part is a body cohering to the whole Mass, and participating of life, and
fit for its functions and offices.
THIS definition of a Part being the most ingenious invention of Fernelius, was
afterward ratified by the consent of most learned men. For he considers a Part
as it is related to Medicine, viz. as it is capable of health or disease; and
in his opinion, all those deserve not the name of Parts, which though they
concur to constitute the body, yet they cannot sympathize in a Disease.
Therefore the Humors and Spirits have no share in this definition, because they
do not wholly cohere, nor participate of a common life. So it extends not to
the hairs, nails, fat, and marrow of the bones, which though they wholly
cohere, yet they are not sharers in life, neither are they truly nourished, but
only increased by neighboring position; so those things which are
preternaturally adnate to the body; as gravel, hard skin, and warts, which
though they have a total adhesion to the body, yet enjoy no life. So neither
are carnous excretions Parts, though they cohere to the whole, and communicate
in life, because they are not appointed to any action or use.

You will object, that Galen and Aristotle often honored the hairs, nails, fat
and marrow, with the compellation of Parts. I answer, That in their time this
term Part was taken in a great latitude, as it signified any thing concurrent
to the constitution of the Body, but with us the acceptance is strict, as
being taken for parts only animate, and subject to Diseases.

Yet the hairs and nails cause sturdy doubts, which many Neotericks add to the
number of living parts; of which dispute see Tardine in his most elegant
Treatise of the Hairs.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of the Parts, and first of the Similar Parts.
All Parts are divided into Similar and Dissimilar. The Similar Parts are they
which are divided into Parts of the same nature, and not differing in species.
THE Matter of the Parts lends occasion of this division; for some Parts being
made of the same and every where alike matter, are called Similar; but if the
matter be diverse, they fall under the notion of Dissimilar. But we say they
have a like matter, because at the first glance they represent themselves so to
the sense; such is the substance of the nerves, whose parts appear to sense
wholly similar: but yet a curious Scrutinist will discover some dissimilar
parts in them, for their interior substance is soft and marrowy, but the
internal hard and membranous. But this difference is not of such validity, nor
so manifest, but that the nerves may find place in the catalogue of Similar
parts: Avicen defines a Similar part thus, whose parts retain the same name and
definition with the whole: So every part of the bone is bone, and every part of
the nerve nerve. But you must always apprehend this discourse to signify the
matter of the Parts, not their figure or use: for in relation to these, every
particle of them retains not the definition of the whole; for example, a nerve
is defined a similary part, white, arising from the brain, or the spinalis
medulla, prepared for the communication of motion and sense to the whole body;
which definition is not agreeable to every particle of it.

These Similar parts are two, Spermatick and Carnous.

The spermatick are produced by the incrassation of seed in the first
fashioning of our bodies.

The principles of our generation are two, viz. the seed and menstruous blood,
which are the platform of all the parts of our bodies: for seed is the Author
of those first rafters, viz. bones, ligaments, tendons, membranes, and such
like.

The Carnous owe their composition to blood.

The carnous parts are easily distinguished from the spermatick, because they
are red, but these white and most commonly solid and hard; but blood being hot
and moist, therefore the carnous parts have also acquired a temper hot and
moist: Yet it is not so with the spermatick parts, which, though seed be hot
and moist, are yet cold and dry, because the calidity of the seed depends upon
its spirits, which convert not into the substance of the part, but have the
title only of efficients in generation; but the moisture of the seed is wasted,
that the parts generated out of it, may become dry and hard: whence heat
subsisting upon moisture is diminished proportionally to the diminution of
moisture.

The flesh of the similary parts is threefold; of the muscles, of the bowels,
and flesh properly so called.

But the quantity of the musculous flesh is greatest, for almost the whole bulk
of the body is composed of muscles, and their substance is commonly and simply
termed flesh, but the substance of the bowels also is called flesh, and the
greater part of them is composed of blood alone; yet to the constitution of
some there goes a permixtion of seed with blood: such is the substance of the
ventricle, intestines, the womb, and such like.

For the due execution of the actions of the similar parts, there is but one
condition necessary, viz. their just temper.

The similar parts as similar, and as distinguished from the organical,
exercise only one action, viz. Nutrition, for which cause they attract,
retain, and assimilate to themselves their proper and convenient aliment, which
cannot be effected but by their temper, for according to the various temper of
any part, the aliment must be various and diversely changed; whence a similar
action is defined, whose original being only from the temper of the part, it is
perfected by the same, and is wholly and perfectly exercised by every punctilio
of the part.

CHAP. III. Of the Dissimilar and Organical parts.
The Dissimilar parts are those which are divided into parts unlike in nature,
and differing in species.
SO the Heart, Liver, Reins, and other parts, are termed Dissimilar, as being
composed of many similar parts, viz. membranes, veins, arteries, nerves, and a
parenchyma. So the hand and arm is pieced up of bones, nerves, musculous flesh,
skin, and the rest.

Every Dissimilar part is Organicall, but every Organicall part is not
Dissimilar.

Many confound the Organical with the Dissimilar, so that they suppose it to
imply all one, if we divide the parts into similar and organical, as into
similar and dissimilar: But in this they err, because many similar parts are
also organical; for the bones, veins, and arteries are similar parts, yet being
variously formed, and exercising organical actions, they are usually called
organical: and so in relation to their matter they are similar, but in respect
of their form and figure organical.

But an Organical part is that, which by the virtue of its own conformation
acts determinately.

The similar parts simply and strictly considered, as being conflated of one
matter, and busy in one action, viz. Nutrition, may stand in direct opposition
to the organical: hence it is common to divide all the actions of our body into
similar and organical, and though, as before is noted, there be but one only
similar action, yet the organical run almost to infinity, as they are various,
and particularly want an organ variously conformable, this signifies a
necessity of constituting many instrumental parts: Hence is that large
catalogue of the parts contrived with such rare artifice, that causes us to
stand amazed in admiration of the juncture of our own bodies.

To cause the action of the organical parts, there are four things necessary,
conformation, magnitude, number and conjunction.

Conformation imports three things; figure, passage and cavity, asperity and
laevity.

It is impossible that an organical part should duly perform its action, unless
it first rightly conform, and especially acquire a proper figure; so for
instance, the head ought to be round, the arm long, and so forth. Besides, the
parts for the discharge of their offices must have certain passages and
cavities: so the veins and arteries have their passages, the ventricle uses
the passage of the Esophagus, but the cavity is all that space which contains
the aliment. Thirdly, some parts for their more convenient operation ought to
be smooth, as the aspera arteria, whose interior superficies is smooth and
polite, for the sweeter modulation of the voice; for it is not termed rough, as
being unequal and rugged, (according to the usual acception of that term) but
being made up of an unequal, viz. cartilaginous and membranous substance. But
it is requisite some parts should be rough and rugged, as the interior
superficies of the ventricle, that it may the better contain the aliment.

A certain and determinate magnitude also is proportioned to every member,
requisite to the exercise of its action.

So the Liver is bigger than the Heart, the Brain than the Eye, and so forth.

But one part of the same kind are sufficient for the exercise of certain
actions, for others many.

So for speech, the tongue only is requisite; but to hold any thing, many
fingers are necessary.

Conjunction signifies two things, viz. site, and connection.

So the liver is situated on the right hypocondrium, but the milt in the left;
the intestines in the middle of the abdomen, the womb between the bladder and
the intestinum rectum: so the bones effect motion by their mutual connection in
the joints: on the contrary, the lips and the eyelids for the performance of
their offices ought not to have any connection, but are open and separate.

But the organical parts are two; the principal, and the ignoble.

The principal are they which are without exception necessary for the
conservation of the individual, and are liberal in the distribution of faculty
and spirit to the whole body.

And these are three; the brain, the heart, and the liver.

There are in our bodies three faculties, as we shall afterward instance; the
animal, vital, and natural; every of these keeps a peculiar court in peculiar
members, in which it is more glorious and majestical, and from which in
fellowship with the spirits, which are also generated in it, it flows into the
whole body: hence these parts are nobilitated with the title of Principal. This
is the ancient and customary tenent of School-Physicians, which we propose for
the sake of young Practitioners, from which opinion in the Physical Schools it
was a sin to dissent, though it be inconsistent with the assertions of the
Peripateticks, who obtrude, that the Soul with the train of all its faculties,
resides wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part, therefore there needs no
influence of faculties, they dwelling in every part, and operating every where,
if they want not convenient instruments; which caused Aristotle to say, If the
eye were placed in the foot, the foot would see.

The ignoble are they which send forth no faculties nor spirits, or which are
the servants and vassals of the principal.

So the organs of the senses are framed for the sake of the brain only; so the
lungs, midriffe, and arteries are designed to the temper and purgation of the
heart; so the ventricle, intestines, milt, reins, both bladders, are made for
the use of the liver. To be short, all the parts of the whole body are ignoble,
excepting the three principal parts mentioned. Yet Galen in his Ars parva
reckons the testicles among the principal parts, because they are necessary for
the conservation of the species. We must therefore distinguish, that in respect
of the species they are principal parts, not in relation to the individuum.

A COROLLARY.
THat which should here be discoursed of the substance, temper, figure,
situation, action, and use of every part, is so accurately and perspicuously
handled by the learned Laurentius in his Anatomical History, that repetition
will be superfluous. Therefore thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the
Parts.

The sixth Section of Physiology. Of the Faculties and Functions.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Nature of Faculties and Functions.
The Faculties and Functions depending upon the Soul as their first cause, it
will not be amiss to explain what the Soul is.

The Soul therefore is the substantial form of a living body, by which we enjoy
life, sense, nutrition, understanding, and local motion.

ARistotle defines it, the perfection or act of an organical body potentially
living, which definition lies invelop'd in obscure terms, and is a point of
nice speculation; We therefore suppose this our definition to be more clear,
and more convenient for our conduct in the course of Physic: for man being
constituted of matter and form, as all other natural bodies, and all his parts
being the matter, it is consequent that the soul should be the form. For all
actions having a dependency upon the form, and the soul being the cause and
principle of all the actions of a living body, we must necessarily acknowledge
that the soul is the form. Hence in the absence of the soul, action cease. By
this means we arrive at the knowledge of her by her actions only, because
immaterial substances are understood only by their effects. But these various
actions are exercised by the soul, through the help of diverse virtues and
proprieties, which are the immediate retainers to its Essence, and immediately
depend upon it, and these proprieties are termed faculties, of which we
institute our following discourse.

A Faculty is a proper and inseparable accident of the soul, which is
instrumental to it in the execution of certain Functions in the body.

The faculties are accidents referred to the second species of quality. Their
subject is the soul, in which they inhere, not as common but as proper and
inseparable accidents: hence Fernelius weakly asserts them separable from the
soul, which he endeavors to verify by an instance of the auctive faculty,
which he affirms to be abolished, when the vigor of Age declines. Yet this
faculty is not abolished, but only lies idle for want of Instruments: for the
whole Aliment is wasted in nutrition, because the body being well grown,
requires more nutriment; and innate heat being debilitated cannot operate
accretion, of which nature also is unmindful, while it has filled the body to
its due proportion: yet this faculty is not extinct, as neither the procreating
faculty in a Child, though it is quiet without wantonizing, till Youth, when it
finds the seed elaborated to maturity fit for the exercise of its functions.

A Function is an Active motion, or the effect of a Faculty in any part of the
body.

As the faculties wait immediately upon the form or the soul, so the functions
upon the faculties, as effects depend upon their causes. But in this lies the
distinction between the actions and faculties, that they are appropriated to
the soul, the functions to the whole mass: therefore for the exercise of
action, there is not only required the presence of the soul, with its retinue
of faculties, but also a disposition of the Organ fitted for action, which
being disorderly, the actions are lamely, or not at all exercised.

But it is observable, that in the parts, beside the action properly so called,
there are two other things considerable, viz. their Work and Use. The Work is
the effect of action, viz. when it has a real and permanent object; as for
example, the Chyle, which proceeds from concoction in the ventricle, is named
the Work, so the blood in the Liver. But the use of a part is, when it exerts
no action from it self, but is only auxiliary and commodious to the action of
another part, as the mesenterium which is only the pillar supporting the
mesaraick veins; the epiploon of the ventricle nourishes heat, and involves it
as a vestment. Therefore Use is distinguished from action, because this is
perpetually in motion which cannot in conceit be abstracted from it; but Use is
placed in the idleness of the part, which sometimes remains after the decease,
as appears by the use of the skin, which covers the whole body, and by the skul
useful to contain the brain.

CHAP. II Of the Differences of Faculties and Functions.
The Faculties and Functions are threefold; Natural, Vital, and Animal.
THE spirits were before divided into three differences, every one of which is
produced in its peculiar part, and streams from it into the whole body; where
we mentioned three parts which are the shops of these parts, it remains now
that we constitute three faculties and enthronize them in those parts, which by
the disposition of instruments, may in them chiefly exercise their actions,
whose actions ought not to exceed in number the faculties, being their effects;
and because we attain not the knowledge of the faculties but by the functions
aforesaid, they were divided into three, because there appear three kind of
actions, distanced by a great latitude, every of which is subdivided into its
species, as after shall appear.

But experience does often inform us, that those three functions, and so the
faculties are mutually distinguished.

For First, it is evident enough by this that the Animal faculty is
distinguished from the natural, because many parts, as the bones, and
cartilages are destitute of sense and motion, yet they live and receive
nutriment.

Besides, It is plain by this that there intercedes a difference between the
Vital and Animal, because when we sleep or desist from all operation, yet the
heart with the Arteries is in continual agitation, and is in no wise obedient
to the command of the will. Lastly, The distinction of the vital from the
natural is manifest in a part consumed by an Atrophy, or the whole body in a
Marasmus, which for want of Aliment is pined, yet it lives by the help of a
faculty issuing from the heart, which defends and preserves it.

Some may object, That Galen in his books of the differences of symptoms,
constitutes only two faculties, the Animal and Natural, omitting the Vital. I
Answer, That Galen there understands that term Natural, at large, for all
that which is not voluntary, and so comprehends the Vital faculty in the
latitude of the Animal, for he there engages himself to the strict law of
division, which is made, when the members are opposite, so that in this manner
voluntary is opposed to involuntary: seeing then the Animal functions are
voluntary, but the Vital and Natural involuntary, and both performed only by
the virtue of nature, therefore he there expresses both by the term of
Natural, though in many other places he distinguishes them.

CHAP. III. Of the Natural Faculty and Function, and their species: and First
of Nutrition.
The Natural faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which through the
assistance of native heat the body is nourished, and increased, and the same
according to its species is generated.

And it is threefold, Nutritive, Auctive, and Generative.

Hence the Function is threefold, Nutrition, Auction, and Generation.

IN Animate bodies three things are very necessary, the conservation of the
Individuum, its just proportion, and the conservation of the species. The
substance of the Individuum by diverse causes, as well internal as external,
daily moulders away, and something always departs from it, which unless a
restoration were made by Aliment, life would soon be extinct: that therefore
this body may be preserved to while away some time, the first faculty called
Nutritive is requisite. But because Nature has confined all things to a
certain magnitude, convenient for the exercise allotted them, the second
necessary will be the Auctive faculty, by the help of which the animate body
fills up every particle of that magnitude; whence this virtue proposes not for
its end the conservation of the form in the matter, but the operation of the
living creature. Lastly, animate bodies being frail, and subject to corruption,
lest their species should fail the Procreative faculty was necessary, by which
though the individuals yield to corruption, the species it self is preserved.

The Nutritive faculty is that virtue of the soul, which by the help of innate
heat converts the Aliment into the substance of the body, to repair its loss.

The Action of this faculty is called Nutrition, which is the instauration of
that substance of our bodies which is consumed.

The Native heat in our bodies is never idle, as is before alleged, but acts
continually upon the humidity, which it wastes and dissolves; therefore lest the
creature should pine away, and dye, the loss must be made up, this caused that
opinion of Hippocrates, that a man cannot subsist without Aliment seven days:
And so Nutrition is proper only to living creatures; for though by Aristotle
himself, fire is said to be nourished and increased by combustible matter, yet
this is no true Nutrition, but only improperly so called: for there are three
things requisite to true nutrition and accretion, according to the mind of
Aristotle; First, That a thing be nourished and increased by the access of
external matter; Secondly, That the thing increased remain numerically the
same; Thirdly, That this access of magnitude accrue not only to the whole, but
to every particle thereof: But now in the nutrition of the fire, it remains not
in its numerical identity, but by reason of the combustible matter is
continually successive, neither is every particle thereof complete with the
addition of magnitude, and for this cause, true and proper nutrition is not
agreeable to fire, but by Analogy only.

It may be objected, That if the Aliment in Nutrition convert into the
substance of the parts, there is no intervening difference between nutrition
and generation. I answer, That there is no real, but only a rational
distinction between them, viz. according to the diversity between the whole and
a part, for nutrition is the generation of a part of the substance, viz. of
that small part of the flesh which is wasted; but generation is of the whole
flesh, and the total substance: This therefore the Philosophers term an
adgeneration of the parts, but the other is simply named generation.

The nutritive faculty is attended with four servants; the attractive,
retentive, concoctive, and expulsive.

And their actions are, attraction, retention, concoction, and expulsion.

Every of these is twofold; one official, the other private.

The official is that which is not only subservient in the nutrition of the
part in which it is exercised, but also of the whole body. But the private is
only servitor to that part in which it is exercised.

The parts which exert official actions, are said to exercise public duty, the
rest private: So the ventricle and liver are official in their actions, as
attracting, retaining, concocting, and expelling the aliment, not for the
nourishment of themselves only, but also of the whole body; but the mouth, the
flesh, and such like, do only act privately, as attracting aliment only
sufficient for their own nutrition.

The attractive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which the parts attract
their usual aliment.

All the parts not being of one and the same substance nor temperament, any
aliment is equally fit for their nutrition, but every part attracts that which
is to it self most convenient, by that faculty which is the handmaid of the
nutritive, viz. that which is called the attractive.

Private attraction is caused by heat and siccity.

But the official, partly by those qualities, partly by the direct fibers.

All natural actions proceed from the temper, though not all from the same; but
as they are diverse, so they delight in variety of temperament. Yet it is
undoubtedly true, that all are helped by heat, though they be sometimes
sociable with humidity, sometimes with siccity. And so the attraction of every
singular part is strengthened by heat and siccity, and performed by them alone,
which is to be understood of private attraction; for official actions are not
exercised by the temper alone, but they must necessarily use a due disposition
of instruments, and so official attraction is not only performed by the
aforementioned qualities, but also by direct fibers which by their contraction
insinuate the aliment.

The retentive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which the parts retain
the attracted aliment.

The parts invite by attraction the aliment as their familiar and acquaintance,
and therefore attract it, that they might enjoy the company of so dear a
friend; which cannot be effected, unless they retain it for some space: this
then implies the necessity of another quality, by whose help the aliment may be
retained in every part.

Private retention is exercised by calidity and siccity, as also attraction.

But official is performed, not only by these qualities, but also by oblique
fibers.

The natural parts on which it is incumbent to exercise official actions, are
interwoven with three kinds of fibers, direct, oblique, and transverse, by the
help of the direct attraction is performed, of the oblique retention, of the
transverse expulsion, as afterward shall appear. But all these fibers
officiate their duties by self-contraction; as all the muscles when they
agitate the parts by various motions, usually perform it by a retreat,
contracting them toward their principle.

The concoctive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which the parts change
and assimilate to themselves the aliment.

So we say that our meat is then concocted in the ventricle, liver, and other
parts, when in color, smell, taste, and first qualities, as also in substance
it is assimilated to the parts, which was the mind of Galen himself, Book 8. of
Composition of Medicaments, where he terms concoction alteration, which
proceeds so far, till the aliment be changed into a resemblance to the part:
Where also he instructs us in the difference between concoction and
nutrition, for concoction is an assimilation, but nutrition is an union of that
which is assimilated. Aristotle defines concoction, a perfection arising from
the natural and proper heat by opposite passives; which definition is too
Philosophical, and extends too far, nor does so nearly touch upon the nature of
those coctions which are performed in our bodies.

Every concoction in our body is perfected by heat and moisture.

The Philosophers propose three species of concoction: Maturation,, which is
the concoction in fruits: Assation, which is by the heat of fire; and
Elixation, by heat and moisture. That concoction which is performed in our
bodies, is a kind of elixation, or an alteration like to elixation, for it is
caused by our native heat, tempered with much moisture: So the aliments, for
the more convenient concoction, ought to be well drenched with moisture.

Observe, That official concoction is performed only by these qualities, and
stands not in need of any fibers, as the other three actions subservient to
Nutrition.

But concoction in our body is threefold, viz. Chylification, Sanguification,
Assimilation. Chylification is performed in the Ventricle, Sanguification in
the Liver, and Assimilation in every part.

The manner of these Coctions and their Excrements, were treated in the Section
of humors; which Exposition, if it be not copious enough for the satisfaction
of any ones desires, and the controversies agitated concerning it; let such an
one appeal to Andreas Laurentius in his Anatomical History, where he may find
all of them largely and perspicuously handled.

In Concoction of this kind we must take special notice of a Theoreme consented
to by Philosophers and Physicians, viz. that all concoction is caused by
incrassation.

In good concoction moisture is joined with siccity, and the humid parts more
convenient for nourishment, are united to the terrene alimentary parts; but the
more thin and dissipable part of moisture is consumed by the action of heat,
hence coction is produced by incrassation.

But these sequels seem to force our judgment to a contrary sentence: For
first, Chyle produced out of bread is thinner than bread, blood than chyle,
spirits than blood, which consequentially derive their original from them.
Besides, if urine be more thin or crass, it is termed crude, therefore coction
consists in a certain moderation of the substance, and not in crassity. To the
first I give this answer; that is, In every coction the crass excrements are
excluded; from the separation of which, the tenuity of the rest of the
alimentary mass proceeds; yet this distinct by it self, and from the
excrements, is incrassated, and this also is only termed concoct, the rest is
set apart as useless; for these exiles are not properly the subject matter of
coction, but that only ought to be termed the subject of coction, which after
the departure of the excrements is fit for concoction; from which the
excrements being totally separated, it is evident that necessarily, in that
whole interval in which coction is performed, the action of heat should cause
some effluxion, and so the incrassation of the thing which is concocting. To
the second I reply, That the urine, which by reason of too much thickness is
termed crude, is not in its proper substance inclined to this crassity, but by
the permixtion of some other crass thing, not separated through some defect in
concoction, which by the assistance of heat is wont to banish things
heterogeneous.

The expulsive faculty is that, by which the parts after concoction expel
things of no use.

All that is attracted by the parts, cannot be wholly consubstantiated with
them, but there always remains something which estranges it self, and will not
accept of the benefit of concoction, which therefore ought to be removed as
strange and superfluous, which for this reason is called Excrement. This
faculty then was requisite to turn out of doors this alien, lest it should
contrive any thing prejudicious to nature. The official parts also drive out
not the excrements only, but the useful substance, being unable to naturalize
all the aliment, after they have for some time entertained it, and pleasur'd
themselves in it, they thrust it away to other parts as a burdensome
superfluity, and useless mass. And for this reason the very alimentary
substance is called useful excrement, in relation to the parts expelling it,
because whatever is expelled or cast out, is in a common speech usually termed
Excrement.

Private expulsion is caused by heat and siccity.

But official, partly by those qualities, partly by transverse fibers.

There is no cause of admiration in any one, why attraction, retention, and
expulsion, being actions widely differing, should be performed by the same
qualities, viz. calidity and siccity; for this does peculiarly evidence, that
we must needs acknowledge an higher cause of actions then the temper, which is
only the instrument of the form: So an Artist by one and the same instrument
operates variously, though it is undeniable, that diverse degrees of heat and
dryness are requisite to diverse actions which yet fall not under our knowledge.

But the transverse fibers are very commodious for official expulsion, because
especially by their contraction they crone up the part, and compression is the
cause of expulsion.

A COROLLARY.
Many hold the Number of faculties and functions attending on nutrition to be
imperfect and deficient, because Galen and other Authors enlarge this catalogue
with many Additions, but how many functions soever are found, we must multiply
the faculties which are their causes to equalize them in number.

First, Therefore Galen serves up two courses of appetency in the ventricle,
not Animal, only perceptible to the sense, and named hunger: but also natural;
by which through a natural appetite we desire convenient Aliment; this appetite
no part of the body wants.

Secondly, Galen adds to the before rehearsed qualities the secretive and
distributive, for in the first of not. fac. when he had informed us that the
concoctive was in the veins and parts, he further insists, that a secretive
faculty is necessary, which might segregate things superfluous and useless from
the useful, and expel them: And in the 5. of causes of symptoms, he recites
symptoms contingent by some error in secretion, and distribution, the Jaundies
proceeding from a defect in secretion, Atrophy from vitiated distribution.

Thirdly, Apposition and assimilation differ from the rest before mentioned,
therefore their number must be multiplied.

To the first I answer, That appetency is not really distinct from attraction,
but the difference only consists in the nicety of understanding, for this
virtue is implanted not to attract promiscuously, but with choice, viz. of that
which bears a friendly compliance with the parts.

To the second I answer, That distribution and secretion are not distinct, but
rather mixed faculties, consequential to the operations of the other. For the
distribution of the Aliment thorough the whole body is effected by the other
parts expelling it, in which humors are copious, and others attracting which
want humor as Galen himself attests, and so it depends partly from the faculty
attractive, partly from the expulsive. So also secretion is usually caused,
when the retentive faculty of the parts keeps that which is of use, and the
expulsive expells that which is useless.

To the third I answer, That apposition and assimilation proceed not from any
peculiar faculty, but only are various degrees of concoction, so that through
its mediums it is in progress from the first motion of its alteration to the
perfection of assimilation.

But the reason why Galen proposes them all in proper and distinct terms, is
for the clearer understanding them, not that they are really distinct from the
other actions.

CHAP. IV. Of the Auctive faculty, and of Accretion.
The Auctive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which the body upon
conversion of aliment into its substance, fills up its dimensions, and to
arrives a due proportion, convenient for the exercise of actions.

Hence Auction or Accretion is an extension of the body into every dimension,
viz. long, broad, profound.

HEnce arises that distinction of Natural from Artificial Accretion, for those
things which are augmented or extended by Art, lose so much of their longitude
as they acquire in latitude, and the contrary. But true accretion is in this
manner differenced from pinguefaction, because pinguefaction extends not it
self to all dimensions, but most to profundity. It is also distinguished from
the Accretion of stones and metals, which is by opposition, not by an
intrinsecal dilatation of the parts, from aliment converted by nutrition, for
auction deviates not from nutrition, but the parts receive augmentation from
the same matter that they receive nutrition.

Yet though Accretion proceeds in the same course as Nutrition, it is really
distinct from it.

This auctive faculty is of such necessary alliance to the nutritive, that
without the assistance of it, it cannot be complete; upon which ground many
have been moved to assert them one and the same faculty, therefore the auctive
enjoys no singularity of action different from the nutritive, but when so
much is acquired by the prepared aliment, as was carried away by quotidian
effluxions, then the body is said to be simply nourished, but when the income
is greater, then it is augmented and increased: But addition or diminution
change not the species of the action; therefore the auctive faculty differs not
from the nutritive, having one and the same object, viz. nutriment.

But yet we may for certain conclude, that these two faculties are set at a
large distance; for proof of which there are many arguments: For first, they
agree not in their proposed end, for the end of the nutritive is the restoring
of the parts wasted, but of the auctive an acquisition of due proportion.
Secondly, they differ in form, for the form of nutrition is the union of the
aliment, but of accretion a motion of extention. Thirdly, they are distinct in
the manner of their mutation, for in nutrition there happens no local mutation
of the body, but that which is augmented changes place, for it fills up more
room. Fourthly, they are differenced in consideration of time, for nutrition is
at all times, but accretion has a determinate time of duration.

But that accretion proceeds not from the copiousness of aliment, viz. after
nutrition performed, will in this convincingly appear, because experience shows
that they grow and fill, who use but little nutrition, as is evident in boys
and youths diseased, who though they be very lean, are yet continually growing,
because at such age the auctive faculty is most efficacious, and so potent,
that it plunders the nutritive it self of aliment, conveying it chiefly to the
solid parts, viz. the bones, by the extension of which the whole body is
extended, therefore the aliment by virtue of the auctive faculty is carried to
these parts, and the carnous parts are defrauded of their due nutriment: Hence
those that are in growth, appear lean: On the contrary we find many fat, and
well stuffed, and fed with high delicacies, which yet arrive not to a due or
decent procerity of body.

But though to the auctive and nutritive faculties the same object is proposed,
viz. nutriment, yet they use this object in diverse relations. For the nutritive
uses it as it tends simply to the conservation of the substance of the part.
But the auctive as it is directed to heighten the substance to a just magnitude
and quantity. For though the substance acquired by nutrition, have quantity, it
being impossible for a material substance to be destitute of quantity: yet
nutrition regards not the substance as it has quantity, but as it is a
substance; but accretion is related to it, not as a substance, but as having
quantity. So, for example, as the blood is incarnated, so far goes nutrition,
respecting only the substance of the flesh, but as blood is changed into a
greater proportion of flesh, here enters accretion, regarding not the substance
of the flesh, but only its quantity.

The end of accretion is not commensurated by life, but accretion is most
usually extended to twenty five, or thirty.

Nature has measured out a certain proportion to every living body, therefore
a living body is so long in a tendency to augmentation, as it is in attaining
to this determination of time. But when it is augmented to a complete
magnitude, in obedience to the command of Nature, it stops there, and makes no
further progress. Besides, because accretion immediately depends upon the
extension of the solid parts, according to the three dimensions, the sequel
will be, that a body does so long increase, as the parts thereof may in this
manner be extended. But now in the course of our life, the solid parts are so
hardened and dried, through the continual resolution of primigenious moisture,
occasioned by the action of native heat, that they will no longer yield to
extension.

But though the auctive faculty after the limitation aforesaid, operates no
more, yet we must not assert it corrupted or idle, as some fancyed; it being
not necessary that the faculties of the soul should be always secondly actual,
and in operation; for in our apprehension generation and local motion is not
ever actual, and therefore also there is no necessity of a continual growth,
but the faculties, upon their arrival to their appointed end, repose
themselves. So the auctive rests upon the assecution of its end, viz. the due
stature of magnitude. After that it is obstructed in its operation, having no
fit subject, viz. a body not disposed to an aptitude for extension. The cause
therefore sprouts into two branches, one taken from the end, the other from the
subject.

A COROLLARY.
Here is obvious a Problem worthy our knowledge, Why all men are not advanced
to an equality of magnitude, but some are taller, others of shorter stature? I
answer, That the cause of this is threefold. The first drawn from the various
disposition of bodies, for the more moist and hot they are, the fitter they are
for extension, and grow more, and in less time than cold and dry bodies, whose
parts submit not so easily to extension. The second proceeds from nutrition,
for the more perfectly and copiously a body is nourished, it is of a better and
more speedy growth; and the more imperfectly and sparingly it has been
supplied with nutriment, it grows the less and the slower. The third cause is
the similitude of the Parents, for tall Parents generate tall Sons; short,
short ones: because the seed transfers the idea and conditions of all the
parts, from the Parents upon the Children.

CHAP. V. Of the Generative faculty, and of Generation.
The Generative faculty is that virtue of the Soul, by which a man produces a
thing like to himself, for the perpetual conservation of his species.

Hence Generation is a production of something like the producer.

GEneration, according to the Philosophers, is twofold, Univocal, and
Equivocal. That is termed Univocal, when every thing generates something
resembling it self, such is the generation of all perfect animals. Equivocal is
when things of a various and dissenting nature are generated, such is the
generation of imperfect animals, whose womb is putrefaction: Therefore
univocal generation is principally applicable to perfect animals: Hence Mules
and Eunuchs are not fit for generation. By this it appears that the name of
Generation is not used in so large a sense by the Physicians as by
Philosophers, who call all introduction of form into matter, Generation; but
here it is taken only for the production of a like thing, which is also called
procreation.

To the Generative faculty two other are subservient, the alterative and
conformative.

The Alterative is that which alters and changes the subject matter of
generation.

Seed is the subject matter of generation, which is incompatible with the
nature of various parts, unless all its qualities, as well first as second, be
variously changed; for this cause the soul is endowed with a peculiar faculty,
which may execute this duty, which is therefore called alterative, or
immutative.

The Conformative is that which graphically delineates and effigurates the
whole body, and all its parts.

The Conformative faculty entertains the seminal matter altered and prepared,
and out of it commensurates all the parts of the body, and assigns to every of
them a due magnitude, figure, site, connection, and all other things
commodiously, which are requisite for the convenient exercitation of every
peculiar action.

A COROLLARY.
All other relations to the Generative faculty, are more largely disputed in
the succeeding Section, which treats of the Procreation of Man.

CHAP. VI. Of the Vital faculty.
The Vital faculty is that virtue of the Soul, by which the vital spirits are
generated in the heart, and life is preserved in the whole body.
THE Spirits plainly demonstrate that there is in the Soul a peculiar faculty
distinct from the rest, which from the fountain of the heart copiously flow
into the Arteries, but every spirit is the instrument of some faculty. But this
faculty generates Vital spirits in the heart, which spirits are the subjects of
the influent heat, which two communicate themselves to every part of the body,
the heat whereof with the implanted spirit they preserve. But life necessarily
depending upon implanted heat, the conservation of it will be the conservation
of life; hence this faculty is significantly termed Vital, or the preservative
of life. And so life is an action depending upon this faculty as an effect upon
its cause.

The Vital faculty is attended by two servants, Pulse, and Respiration.

It is ignorantly asserted by some, that the Pulse is the chief of Vital
actions, and immediately to depend upon the Vital faculty: for life, as we
before affirmed, immediately depends upon that, but the pulse is only a
subservient action to it, caused by a pulsifick faculty, whose virtue is only
to cause systole and diastole in the heart, by which means it performs its duty
to the Vital faculty.

Pulse is a function of the heart and Arteries, composed of Systole and
Diastole with some interposition of rest, caused by the pulsifick faculty of
the heart, to further the generation of the Vital spirits, and effect the
distribution of them thorough the whole body.

The Pulse of the heart and Arteries is composed of three parts, viz. diastole,
systole and the intercession of a pause. By Diastole the heart and Arteries are
impregnate. When the heart dilates it self, it attracts the Air from the
Lungs by the help of the Arteria Venosa, and the blood from the Vena Cava, that
from the commistion of them in the left closet of the heart, the spirits may be
generated, but the Arteries being strtech'd to a dilatation, attract the
spirits from the heart, and are tumid with them, as also the external Air,
entertained by those orifices which are terminated in the skin; and in this
manner is transpiration caused, which by this intromission of external air
fixes the internal heat to a due temperament, and cherishes it, for all heat is
preserved by a moderate compliance of cold, according to Hippocrates.

By Systole or contraction, the heart by the assistance of the Arteria venosa,
purges out at the Lungs, all the fuliginous excrements left in the generation
of spirits. For the Arteries by an insensible transpiration drive out the
fuliginous vapors contained in them, and send the spirits more copiously to the
parts.

Lastly, there mediate between the systole and diastole and intercessive quiet,
because a transition from one contrary to another cannot be effected but by a
medium.

A doubt may be moved, whether the spirit and blood contained in the heart
moves upon its coarctation: I Answer, that there are two doors in the heart,
one in the right corner, another in the left; which are dilated, when the heart
is contracted, and are so filled, viz. the right with blood contained in the
right cavity; but the left with spirits contained in the left.

Three things are requisite to cause pulsation; Faculty, Instrument and Use.

The first necessary is a pulsifick faculty, which is the primary and principal
agent; Secondly, instruments disposed to pulsation, viz. the Heart and
Arteries, moved by that faculty. Thirdly, use and necessity forcing the faculty
to action, viz. the generation of spirits, and conservation of native heat.

Respiration is an action, partly Animal, partly Natural; by which the Air is
ushered in thorough the mouth to the Lungs; by the distention of the breast,
and by the contraction of the same, the smoaky vapors are excluded for the
conservation of Native heat, and the generation of Vital spirit.

The parts of Respiration and of Pulsation are three, Inspiration, expiration,
and immediate quiet. By inspiration the breast is dilated by the muscles,
destined to this office, and in compliance with the dilatation of the breast,
the lungs are also dilated, lest there should happen a vacuity in that cavity;
and the lungs are filled with air, as bellows, the inspiration of which air
tempers the violent heat of the heart, and thence the vital spirits are
generated, as is before urged. But by expiration the breast and lungs are
contracted, which by their contraction turn out of doors the hot air and
fuliginous vapors issuing from the heart.

The concurrence of three things is necessary for expiration, Faculty,
Instrument, and Use.

First, Animal faculty concurs, moving the muscles of the breast, as also the
natural implanted faculty causing motion in the lungs, that they might be
helpful to the heart.

Secondly, There is a concurrence of instruments as all the parts designed for
Respiration. And Lastly, use or necessity of Respiration, for the ventilation
of the heat in the heart.

A COROLLARY.
It is much disputed, whether Respiration be purely Animal, or mixed, viz.
partly Natural, partly Animal? Which being ingeniously disputed by Laurentius
question 20. book the ninth, I refer the Reader to him.

CHAP. VII. Of the Animal faculty and function, and first of the Principal
faculties.
The Animal faculty is that virtue of the soul, which moves a man to the
exercise of sense, Auction, and other principal functions of the mind.

The principal are three, Imagination, Ratiocination, and Memory.

Imagination is that action of the Soul, by which the species of every object
offered to the external senses is made perceptible, and distinctly discerned.

EVery sense enjoys its proper and peculiar object, (as shall after appear)
whose species it entertains in its proper organ, without passing judgment of
it, for this is the prerogative of the Imagination only, to which the spirits
presents the species, conveyed by the nerves from the brain to the instruments
of the senses. The brain therefore being the Court of the principal faculties,
while the objects of diverse senses promiscuously resort to it, they are first
represented, and distinguished in the imagination, which the peculiar senses
are not able to perform; for instance, the whiteness of milk is only
represented to the sight, but not the sweetness of it, on the contrary the
sweetness is represented to the taste, not the whiteness: But they are both
together perceptible to imagination, which rightly distinguishes to what sense
they be related. Besides imagination apprehends not only things present, as the
senses, but things absent also, and represents them to the mind, composing many
things never existent, yet in Analogy to those which are apparent to the senses.

The Philosophers divide those operations of the mind, which we consenting to
Galen include under the notion of imagination, into two species, viz. into the
common sense, and into fantasy or imagination; commanding (as it were) the
common sense to welcome only the species of present objects, but the
imagination to propose to it self things absent, as if they were really
present, as also things not in being, and impossibilities. But seeing that they
differ only in the method of their operation, it is not necessary, that they
should depend upon faculties differing in species.

Ratiocination is that action of the soul, by which a man discourses,
understands and reasons.

This is appropriate to man, the others being enjoyed also by brutes. But this
receives the species of things from the imagination, dividing and compounding
them, and unravelling their nature, by the help of discourse, distinguishing
good from bad, truth from falsity, drawing out of them many things,
incomprehensible by sense, which yet our mind knows to be certainly true. This
is the head of all sciences, which by the efficacious virtue of this faculty
are usually learned and taught.

Memory is that operation of the soul, which retains and preserves the received
species of things.

The species of things when they are once hedged in to the mind, are there long
detained, so that after a large space of time, when they have been entertained
by the senses, they are represented to the mind and imagination, This caused
the invention of a third faculty distinct from the rest, which might preserve
all those species, as a treasury, out of which they may be fetched as occasion
serves.

The Philosophers create another operation different from the memory, viz.
reminiscency, which summons up those things that are run away from the memory,
rallying them together by the help of those which are yet retained. But yet we
are inclinable to assert with Galen, that reminiscency is an operation of the
memory reflecting upon it self. For it is not, as some conceive, the only
business of the memory to retain the species: (for by this means it would be a
virtue not knowing, but only lodging the species) but it is the office of the
memory to record things, as they are transacted, and so reminiscence is a
progressive motion, not a differing action of the memory,

A COROLLARY.
A notable question is usually debated among Physicians, whether the principal
faculties are locally distinguished in the brain, in which for satisfaction I
refer you to Laurentius, by whom, quest. 2. book 10. it is admirably well
handled.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sleeping and Waking.
To the internal functions of the Brain, are referred Sleeping and Waking: we
must therefore now treat of them.
ALL the Philosophers refer Sleeping and Waking to the common sense.
Positively asserting sleep to be the cessation of the common and exterior
senses; but watching to be the action and exercitation of them: Hence when we
comprehend the common sense under imagination, when also dreams (of which we
shall after treat) may be circled into imagination strictly accepted, therefore
this place will be convenient for this Treatise.

But Sleep is a quietation or cessation of the internal and external senses,
appointed for the recreation of the body.

Watch is nothing else, but the free exercise of the same senses.

By the Interior senses we chiefly understand that internal action, by the help
of which the species are received, which by the external senses are conducted
to the imagination: for that operation sleeps with us, but not the action of
imagination, ratiocination, or memory; which are not seldom exercised in
sleep. Nay the senses themselves do not wholly compose themselves to cessation;
for in sleep we receive violent objects, as noyses, ratlings, and such like;
and so, though sleep be called a privation, and watching an habit, yet it is no
total privation, but such an one which easily gives way to a retreat from it
self to the habit, and by this means it comes short of the essence of true
privation.

The next and immediate cause of sleep is the locking up of the spirits, and
prohibition of their influence into the instruments of sense and motion.

But the influence of the spirits is blocked up by swarms of vapors
suffocating the brain, which barricadoe the passages thereof.

The cause of natural and quiet sleep is a gentle, and as it were roride
vapor, exhaling from the aliments into the brain, stopping up the ventricles
and passages of it, for the retention of the spirits and quietation of animal
actions. But that sleep is induced by such like vapors mounting into the brain,
it is evident, because the copiousness of meat and drink, wine especially,
casts us into a long and deep sleep, but these send up many vapors into the
brain. But they who are very sober, and fast, sleep little, by reason of the
paucity of vapors making to the brain, which are soon dissipated; for the sleep
cease when the native heat has dispersed those vapors.

For those things stop the influence of the spirits, which either much
dissipate or dull them, or any other way fix them.

The principal cause of sleep prohibiting the influx of the spirits, is the
plenty of vapors randezvouzing in the brain. Yet there may be afforded many
other causes, producing the same with less efficacy, or at least not so
naturally; for instance, when the animal spirits are so tired by the labor of
the day, more serious thoughts of the mind, studies and cares, so that all
their forces rallyed together will not be able to effect an ordinary influx,
but nature retains them, and the influent heat, to repair the loss of the
spirits; So also cold things taken or applied, intercept and solidate the
spirits, as it were to a congelation. And the spirits do not seldom make a
stop at such things as delight the mind, as pleasant Songs, the allusion of
bubbling waters, an intermission of cogitations, security of the mind, and such
like.

Lastly, the end of sleep is the instauration of the animal strength, and of
the whole body.

The chief design of sleep is to restore the animal powers to their vigor,
because they being over-wrought by a tedious and various sensation, are by the
help of sleep enlivened, and the spirits exhausted by watching are strengthened,
the members wearied with motion return to their former nature and functions.
Secondarily, also sleep conduces to the better effecting of natural actions,
which by animal operations are in watching in a manner hindered: For in the time
we repose our selves to sleep, the heat retires to the inner parts, which is
advantageous to concoction, and now new matter is afforded for generation of
spirits, the excrements are mitigated, diminished, and better concocted.

CHAP. IX. Of Dreams.
A Dream is a glancing apparition of some sensible thing, represented to an
animal in the time of sleep.
WHile an animal wakes, and exercises the external senses, representations from
sensible objects are conveyed to the brain, that there being imprinted, by the
virtue of the animal spirits, they might be preserved. When therefore this
animal sleeps, and releases to his external senses, then these representations,
unless the animal spirits be obscured and obliterated with some dregs or
disturbance of violent motion, do again present themselves, and appear in
sleep: This is the cause that the animal judges it self really to know by the
outward senses those things which are objected only in shadow.

Dreams usually visit us in the morning, because then after perfect digestion
the animal spirit is more pure, the crass vapors being resolved and dispelled
by native heat; now therefore the species of things are presented, and stated
before the imagination more clearly, and perfectly; for as in troubled waters
we perceive either none, or a very uncomely effigies, so the brain muddied with
such plenty of vapors, gives place to the effigiating of no dreams, or of very
confused and broken ones.

But Dreams are either supernatural or natural.

Supernatural are divine or diabolical.

It Is here impertinent to treat of these, belonging rather to Metaphysicians or
Theologers, to whom we concede the honor of this exposition.

The Natural proceed either from the impress left of images cut out and shaped
in the day, or from a certain temper of body.

Most dreams are hatched by the images of those actions in which we have been
in the day frequent: for the impression of them upon the animal spirits being
fresh, they stick the closer, and are the more easy rubbed over by our busy
nocturnall imagination.

They also many times are composed from the various disposition and temperament
of bodies. To men sanguine, the appearance of red colors, banquets, musical
harmony, nuptial festivals, basiations, venery, gardens, and such like
voluptuous fooleries, are usually represented in sleep: To bilious men, yellow
colors, wranglings, war, homicide, firing, flying, and the like: To pituitious
men, white colors, waters, navigations, swimming, drowning, fishes, and such
like. To melancholicks, black colors, darkness, dead bodies, graves, and
diabolical apparitions.

Yet observe, That the influence of the stars does not seldom concur with a
disposition of the body to effect dreams, and these chiefly afford matter of
Exposition.

CHAP. X. Of the less principal Faculties.
The less principal Faculties are two, the one causing sensation, the other
motion.

The Sensitive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which external objects
upon the intercession of a fit medium are received in their proper organs.

The action of this faculty is called sense, or sensation.

FOUR things are requisite to effect Sensation: First, an orderly disposed
instrument: Secondly, a proportionate object: Thirdly, a medium, which
multiplyeth the species, from the sensible thing: Fourthly, a convenient
distance between the object and the sense, that it may be rightly perceived.

The species of it are five; Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Touching.

Seeing is a sense, by the help of which a man with his eyes perceives a
visible object through a transparent medium actually illuminated.

Hearing is a sense by which a man perceives with his ears an audible object,
through a sonorous medium, that is, a medium fitted for the conducting of sound.

Smelling is a sense by which a man perceives at his nostrils an object of
smell, by a fit medium.

Taste is a sense by which a man perceives with his tongue the object of Taste,
by a disposed medium.

Touch is a sense by which a man with any carnous and nervous part of his body
perceives a tangible object, by a prepared medium.

The motive faculty is that virtue of the soul, by which a man in his own
strength performs local motion.

All these less principal faculties and functions are so exactly declared in
Natural Philosophy, that we think it needless to allow them room for exposition.

The seventh Section of Physiology. Of the Procreation of MAN.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Seed of both Sexes.
Two Sexes are requisite to the Procreation of Man, viz. male and female; by
whose mutual congress the prolifical seed is effused by both, from which being
received in the cavity of the womb, the first Sciography of the offspring is
delineated.

Man's seed is a humid and spiritous substance, well wrought in the testicles,
from the aliment left of the third concoction, containing potentially the form
of man, concurring not only virtually but materially to the production of the
parts of the infant.

IT is an assertion commonly obtruded by many, That seed is generated by blood
alone, operated in the Liver: grounding upon this, because they find the
conducting Spermatick vessels tumified with blood, as other veins, and because
that overmuch coition causes an effluxion of blood. But this matter being to
bear the force and impresse of the whole body, so that we commonly attribute
the similitude of Children to their Parents to this; we think the assertion
more proper, that it is derived from every part, from the aliment gleaned from
the third concoction, which being not much changed by the parts, there is no
cause of admiration, that it retains the idea of blood. Yet it cannot be
supposed that every little particle comprehensible rather by thought, then
sense, should afford this matter, but all the similar parts, which are called
the sensible Elements of our body, but from the principal especially, which can
supply us with those vivifying spirits, which represent the idea, and character
of the whole.

But to that objection, that the blood issues by tedious venery: I answer, That
the seminal nature not yet elaborated in the testicles resembles blood, being
made out of it, somewhat changed in the parts, and before obtaining elaboration
in them.

In the seed there are two parts, Spirit and Thickness.

The seed by the help of spirits is impostumate and frothy, it swells, because
the spirits are much in motion and stirring: it is frothy, because by the same
spirits as by air it becomes tumid, and by their motion is agitated. But in
this spiritous matter resides the formative faculty, by which a man engenders
according to his own similitude. But the thickness is the humid and watery
substance, which is manifestly evident when the spirits have bid adue to the
seed, for then it loses its spumosity, and whiteness, and that humid
substance is the matter of all the solid parts, and their first step to a being.

The efficient cause of generation is brooded in the spiritous part, but the
material in the incrassated part.

This affords cause of objection to the Philosophers, that one and the same
thing cannot be agent and patient, therefore both causes cannot be placed in
the seed. To which I oppose, That the assertion of this objection would hold
good, if the substance of the seed were wholly Homogeneous, but it being
composed of diverse parts, it will not be inconvenient, that it should execute
diverse offices: for as it is spiritous, it acts upon, and informs that more
humid and crasse substance applied to it for its matter, and as it were its
subject, as experience points out to us, in the seeds of Plants, and in Eggs:
in which seeds of plants after they have derived heat from the earth, or the
eggs from the incubation of the Hen the prolifical spirit is raised, which
acting upon the matter of the same seeds or eggs, endeavors and perfects the
conformation of the parts. In artificials the efficient or Artist enters not
into the thing made, or the work, because his business lies in the external
parts: But Nature situate in the very marrow of every thing, perfects both
internal and external, and penetrates the whole substance of its work, dwelling
upon it, as in its proper mansion: This clears the doubt, and demonstrates,
that the efficient and the matter for generation of the embryo, find both room
in the seed.

But though the seed by it self perfects the generation of the infant, yet it
is not actually, but only potentially animate.

Some have been of opinion that the seed is actually animate, and has that
form, which afterward must inform the whole fabric furnished with
instruments. But we suppose that the seed of man does only potentially contain
the form of man. For the soul of man being extrinsecally adventitious, we
cannot affirm, that the seed comprehends the humane soul only potentially, as
it has an aptitude to induce those dispositions which are requisite for the
entertainment of a more noble form: So neither in other living creatures must
we imagine the seed to be actually animate, but potentially only, because it
has that conformative power contained in the spirit, by which it generates
according to its own likeness, when the seed is laid in a convenient place, and
has subject matter. But it is no absurdity to affirm such a power given to the
form of seed, there being found in many inanimate things, as in load-stones,
rubarb, and the like, many and notable faculties, which have not the advantage
of any influence from a soul. Yet this point of doctrine is very intricate, and
notably fenced with difficulties, which Sennertus shows us in his Philosophical
Hypomnema's. Corruption therefore seiseth on the form of the seed upon the
first arrival of the soul to the body, now fashioned and prepared to welcome
this guest: which is said to live the life of a plant, so long as it is simply
nourished, but when the organs of sense and motion are complete, it lives an
animal or sensitive life; and lastly, proceeds to the operations of a rational
soul, when it has acquired a well tempered brain, and disposition of spirits.

A COROLLARY.
There has been a long-started controversy between Physicians and
Peripateticks, whether women afford prolifical seed: For all the Physicians
after Hippocrates obtrude the affirmative: for the defense of which they appeal
to the common experience of women, who relate, that in that coition by which
they conceived, they sent out something causing more pleasure. Which also the
contrivance of feminine parts will serve to confirm, Nature having placed in
them very large testicles for the elaboration of the seed, plenty of which
being whitish and well concocted is often found in them in dissection. Hence we
may conclude that there is no third thing proceeding from the commixtion of
male and female seed, which is fit for the generation of the Child. But the
Peripatericks in obedience to their grand Master Aristotle, suppose that the
seed of women is termed seed by analogy only, and homonymie, concurring not to
the generation of the fetus, but only by provoking to coition, and useful to
moisten the sides of the womb; which assertion they seem to make impregnable,
by the fortifications of strong reasons:

First, If a woman had prolifical seed, she might generate without obliging man
to a copulation; for she would have the seed and menstruous blood the only two
necessaries to generation of the Child.

Secondly, One being by it self cannot be the result of two actual beings, but
only accidentally aggregate. Therefore out of two seeds the fetus cannot be
produced.

To which objections, and others of the same nature, I answer, Both seeds, as
well of male as female, though they be prolifical, are not sufficient by
themselves to generate the fetus, but a due commixtion of both is requisite in
the womb, by which the delineation of the Embryo is perfected: And so out of
more complete beings proceeds not one being by it self; but yet out of diverse
incomplete beings one complete is produced, is an opinion subject to no
absurdity.

CHAP. II. Of Menstruous blood.
There is not only a concurrence of the seed, but of the Menstruous blood also
to the generation of the fetus, which is another principle only material, not
efficient as seed.
THE Mothers blood harbors none, or very few spirits, therefore it has no
efficient virtue, but only supplies matter, out of which all the carnous parts
are compounded, as the spermatick of the seed. And this blood is called
menstruous, because in well affected women, which are neither with child, nor
give suck, it flows out every month.

And the menstruous blood is an excrement issuing from the last aliment of the
carnous parts, which at certain times, and observed limitations, is in a small
quantity purged out of the womb, for the generation and nutrition of the fetus.

Hence it appears that menstruous blood is an excrement, and useful as to its
substance, being converted into the parts of the fetus, and the nutrition of
them. And this blood is usually in women plentifully, because of the weakness
of their heat, which cannot digest all the blood made in the liver, as also
because of their soft and moist temper, which breeds plenty of humors: Hence it
is, that that blood exceeding in quantity is returned into the bigger veins,
from the flesh now filled, and as it were satisfied, and by them is thrust out
by the veins of the womb.

The time for the expurgation of this blood is twofold, universal and
particular.

The universal is from twelve or fourteen years of age to fifty or fifty five.

Before the twelfth or fourteenth year the vessels of women are narrow, and the
heat almost extinct by the plenty of humors, cannot expel the relics; and
before that age great plenty of the blood is spent in the augmentation of the
body. But after the twelfth or fourteenth year heat begins to move in a
vigorous luster, the vessels are enlarged, the breasts swell, the body by a
pleasant tickling is insinuated into lust, and the genitals are fenced with new
down. But on the other side, after fifty or fifty five, the effluxions of
menstruous blood cease, because the heat being weakened is not able any more to
generate such plenty of blood as may leave some relics; of which if there be
any, it cannot commodiously drive them away.

The particular time is limited by the space of a month, and that by the space
of three or four days.

This evacuation of the menstruous blood returns usually every month, which
all attribute to the motion of the Moon, Emperess of the humors: and experience
informs us, that this purgation is commonly contingent to the more youthful
about a new Moon, but to the ancient about full Moon: This caused that common
piece of Poetry, The Moon when old she fills the round,
Old Women's purgaments abound;
But when her horns begin to grow,
From Women young purgations flow.


A COROLLARY.
Hence is moved a notable question, Whether menstruous blood be of a noxious
quality? The accurate decision of which see in Laurentius, Quest. 8. Book 8. of
his Anatomy.

CHAP. III. Of Conception.
Conception is then said to be, when the seed of both sexes are coupled and
cherished in the cavity of the womb, and their formative, virtue is become
actual.
MAle and female, while (for posterity sake) they condescend to venereous
copulation, send forth their seed together, and at the same time; the male into
the neck of the womb, the female into her proper closet of the womb; which
womb has an admirable propriety of attracting the seed of the male, wherefore
it greedily embraces it, as soon as it is conveyed out from the man's yard, and
entertains it in its proper receptacle. And there these two seeds embrace one
another to an exquisite unition and permixtion, and are straightly retained by
the womb it self, so that the whole body of the womb by constriction is
corrugated, and its internal orifice close shut up, so that it will not admit
the least title. Then these seeds are cherished by the heat of the womb,
refocillating their heat and spirit, and that divine plastic virtue is made
actual, whence the fetus begins to receive delineation.

The signs of Conception are chiefly these; First, A slight trembling of the
whole body soon after Coition. For then the womb is contracted, which
contraction is the cause of this trembling. Secondly, The Retention of the
Seed, and Dryness of the womb. If after Coition the seed fall not away, it is a
sign of conception. Thirdly, The exact shutting close of the bone of the womb.
Fourthly, The subsistence of the months. Fifthly, The swelling, pain, and
hardness of the breasts. Sixthly, The appetite of Venery enfeebled. Seventhly,
Nauseating of Meat.
CHAP. IV. Of the Delineation, and perfection of every Part.
The first Rudiments of the Spermatick parts, begin to appear the seventh day
after conception.
THE formative virtue being excited by the heat of the womb, invests the whole
matter of the seed in two tunicles, formed out of the seed it self, and these
tunicles are called Chorion and Amnios, the uses of which Anatomists discover.
But the other matter of the seed is changed into the Spermatick parts, whose
first lineaments are figured to an appearence the seventh day: For if the
geniture cast out after the seventh day, be thrown into the water, there will
appear in it three bubbles, which are the Rudiments of the three principal
parts, and filaments almost infinite, which are the strings of the other
spermatick parts.

But all the Spermatick parts are in Males complete in thirty days, in Females
at forty.

Males being hotter and dryer are the sooner fashioned, for the weaker heat of
Females concocts more slowly, and the greater the humidity is the longer time
it requires to be condensed to a consistency of the solid parts.

But the Carnous parts in Males are perfect the third month, in Female the
fourth, which do then begin to move.

After the conformation of all the spermatick parts, they are bedewed with an
influence from the menstruous blood which over-flowes all their intermediate
parts, from whence the formative virtue produces all the carnous parts; which
are then finished when the fetus begins to move: for this is a sign that the
muscles causing motion are now perfect.

CHAP. V. Of the Parturition.
Parturition is the exclusion of the fetus after it is perfected and finished
in the womb.
WHen the fetus has arrived to its full conformation, nutrition and accretion
in the womb, not receiving sufficient aliment, and being made vigorous by a
greater heat, such as for ventilation, wants the inspiration of the air; it
begins to thrust for room, and by kicking forces its way through those
membranes in which it lies invelop'd, and distends the womb, which upon their
irritation endeavors to rid it self of this troublesome burden; this causes a
double motion, one of the Child, laboring its liberty, the other of the
womb, endeavoring to enfranchise it. But the Parturition is natural, when the
infant runs headlong, and turns this part first out of doors, but the rest are
preternatural.

But the times in which Parturition may happen are, the seventh, the ninth, the
tenth, and the eleventh month.

We omit the eighth, because the fetus does perpetually in the seventh month
bestir it self a little, and if it be strong enough it breaks open door, and
out it goes; but if weaker, it remains still prisoner, but so weakened with
that foyl, that it wants the space of two months to repair its strength so
broken. If therefore it break forth the seventh month, it is so spent by those
new struglings, that death is the necessary consequence thereof. Astrologers
ascribe the cause of this to the unhappy influence of Saturn, whom the eighth
month they invest in chief authority; of which opinion, and others relating to
the diverse seasons of Parturition, advise with Laurentius, Quest. 19. Book 8.
of his Anatomy.

CHAP. VI. Of the likeness of Children to their Parents.
Physicians divide similitude into three parts; of the Species, of the Sex, of
the Individuum.

Similitude of the species is when the thing generated is of the same species
with the thing generating.

SO man generates a man, a dog a dog, and so forth.

Similitude of the sex is, when the thing begotten is of the same sex with
either parent.

So the male resembles the father in regard of the sex, but the female the
mother.

But that likeness of sex depends on the predominating of the Masculine or
Feminine seed.

Hippocrates contends, that the seed falling from the right parts, either of
male or female, is the strongest and most apt for generation of males: Hence,
if that masculine seed flowing from the right be predominant, the issue will be
male; but if the feminine bred in the left, be more plentiful, the issue will
be female.

The similitude of the individuum is, when the issue represents in the frame of
his body some other individuum of the same species.

So the Child is stamped with the effigies sometimes of his Father, sometimes
of his Mother, sometimes his Grandfather, sometimes of some other person.

And this similitude depends not only upon the formative virtue implanted on
the seed, but sometimes also on imagination.

The formative virtue fashioning all the parts of the body, and effigiating
them into a form, which is implanted in the seed, with which it was signed by
all the parts of the parents, it is necessarily consequent, that as to its form
it should bear a similitude to them; to the Father, upon the strength of the
paternal; to the Mother, upon the predominancy of the maternal seed. But
because some faculty of the Grandfathers, or Great-grandfathers, lies occult
in the seed of the parents stamped on their parts, it happens sometimes that
this image is rubbed over in their posterity, which is the cause of their
assimilation between them, their Grandfathers, or other alliances. Hence some
are of opinion that this virtue lives to the fourth generation.

Lastly, the strength of imagination is very prevalent in causing similitude:
For a woman, if in the time of conception she settles her imagination on the
effigies of some thing, brings forth a spawn of the like resemblance. So a
certain woman having the picture of an Aethiope in her chamber, brought forth
an issue wholly black. So many pregnant women when they earnestly long for
something, mark their issue with the effigies of it, for such extravagancy of
desire disturbs imagination, and imprints on the spirits the shape of the thing
so desired, which spirits easily brand the tender infant with that mark.

The Second Book of MEDICINAL INSTITUTIONS, CONTAINING PATHOLOGY.
Introductions to Pathology.
In Pathology is considered Man's body deviating from Nature, and fallen into a
state of Disease.
NATURE is twofold, according to the Philosophers, universal, and particular.
The laws of universal nature require generation, corruption, and various
alteration, to be strictly observed in bodies, which are therefore obedient to
the dictates of this universal nature; but particular nature, viz. humane, has
enacted laws proper to the constitution of her own Republic, differing from
the laws of universal nature, which if they be cancelled, a man is then thought
to decline from nature, viz. particular nature. So a certain harmony of first
qualities constitute Man's body, together with a due conformation and adunation
of the parts; in which, when there happens any distraction, a body becomes
preternatural, as shall be at large expounded in the following Treatise.
Observe, that some (in the front of whom marches Fernelius) distinguish things
preternatural from those which are contrary to nature; so that that is
preternatural, which though it be illegal in its aberration from the rule of
nature, yet it offers no violence to it, as pimples to the face, and the color
contracted from the heat of the Sun: But that is contrary to nature which
violently opposes it, and manifestly mutilates its actions. But these two are
commonly confounded by Physicians, and used for one and the same.

The state of man's body is threefold; healthy, unhealthy, and neutral.

The Philosophers disavow this division, and affirm, that there intercedes no
medium between disease and health: But the Physicians term that unhealthy, or
morbous state, when some actions of the body are manifestly out of tune;
healthy when they persist in a symmetry; but neutral, when they are neither
manifestly vitiated, nor altogether whole; such a disposition is evidently
apparent in those which are in a tendency to, or in a recovery from a Disease;
for it was necessary to induce these three constitutions into the Art of
Medicine, for two causes chiefly: The first is drawn from Medical operations,
and the manner of diet to be instituted to every one; for cure is necessary for
the sick, conservation for the healthy; but to bodies neuters, if they incline
to disease, preservation; to the recovery from a disease, refection or
restoration. The second cause is taken from the decretory days, which are not
to be computed from the beginning of every weakening of health, but from that
time in which the sick person has suffered manifest and notable impediments in
his actions, so that he is necessitated to rest; which could not be so
distinguished, unless a neutrality of state were distinguished from
insalubrity. Yet the difference between Philosophers and Physicians is not so
wide that it abhors reconciliation; which may be made, if we say, That the
Philosophers Discourse of Disease and Health in a wider sense, as also Galen
sometimes takes them, so that in this latitude they comprehend the state of
neutrality: The Physicians close nearer, and use them more strictly, as the use
of Art requires. For the more copious explication of these three states, I
refer you to Galen in his Ars Parva.

We must now by course treat of the state of insalubrity, by which means are
three considerations: 1 Disease. 2 The Cause of the Disease. 3 The Symptoms.

All that Treatise discourses of that disposition of the body which is termed
Disease. For, that we may attain a perfect knowledge of it, the first
proposition must be of its nature, then we must make a search into all its
differences, next the causes which produce those Diseases are to be enquired
into; and lastly, the effects produced by them will require our contemplation,
for the effects of Diseases the Physicians call Symptoms. By this means all
Pathology is commonly divided into three Sections; in the first of which, the
nature of the Disease, and its differences; in the second, the causes of
Diseases; in the third, the symptoms of Diseases, are by explication made
obvious. But because the consideration of the Crisis is not any where so
appositely placed, as in Pathology, being defined by a mutation made in the
Disease, therefore we have resolved to add to our Pathology a fourth Section,
comprehending the whole doctrine of the Crisis, and Critical days, and this we
will advance to the second place: So that the first shall handle the nature and
differences of a Disease; the second, the changes contingent in Diseases, of
which the chief is the Crisis; the third, the causes of Diseases; and the
fourth, the symptoms.

The first Section of PATHOLOGY.
Of the nature and differences of a Disease.
The First CHAPTER. Of the nature of a Disease.
A Disease is a disposition of a body preternatural, primarily and by it self
injuring the actions.
GALEN in his first Book of the Method of Healing, and in his Book of the
Differences of Diseases, in a well-contrived and clear method, has omitted
nothing discoverable in the nature of a Disease, whom in this place we propose
for our pattern. First then, we deliberate of action it self, which if it be
hurt in man's body, we say it is sick; but if whole, and unhurt, we say it is in
health. I call that action hurt, which manifestly and sensibly appears such;
for small harms, and imperceptible by the sense, are excluded from this place.
Moreover, action being a motion, and having no permanent essence, only so long
in being as it is doing and performing; therefore it implies a necessity of a
constant and permanent cause: But this cause is a corporeal instrument, which
exercises the action, as the Eye sees, the Stomach concocteth. But because
one and the same instrument does not always exercise in the same manner its
operations, but sometimes unhurt, and according to nature, sometimes hurt, and
beside nature, it will necessarily follow that the constitution and disposition
thereof is various: Hence, if it be disposed according to nature, the body will
also be naturally disposed, and exercise actions conformable to nature: If
therefore the body be in health, when being naturally disposed, it produces
perfect actions; it will be diseased, when it being disposed beside nature, it
exerts actions imperfect, and so this detriment of actions will depend upon
this preternatural disposition. This definition therefore perfectly opens the
intricacie of a Disease, and is complete, bearing in his bulk a genus, a
subject, a cause, and an effect; the genus is the disposition, which being not
circumscribed by the limits of any difference, is predicated not only of a
Disease, cause of Disease, and symptoms thereof, but of health also; the
subject is man's body; the cause effecting the Disease is the discomposure of
the symmetry of the parts, or an excess overflowing the proper and natural
constitution, which by that term [Preternatural] is demonstrated. Lastly, the
immediate effect of a Disease is an ingredient also of the definition, which is
the detriment of actions, which perpetually attending the Disease, and being
obvious to our senses, discovers the secrecy of it, deceiving otherwise the
quickest glance of sense.

This definition being laid as a foundation, the superstructed theorems will
illustrate the nature of a Disease.

Disease is placed in the predicament of quality, and the first species
thereof.

The first species of quality is habit and disposition; for though we called
Disease by the name of disposition, which is a flitting quality, and easily
deserting the subject, according to Aristotle; yet here we stretch it to
adequate a little wider sense, that it may comprehend habit also, and so that
whole first species of quality.

But some may object, That Disease should be placed in diverse predicaments: for
magnitude increased seems to be aptly referred to quantity, the stone and
maw-wormes to substance, and so of the rest; but all these Galen himself
calls Diseases. To this I answer, That all diseases are formally placed in
the predicament of quality, but may fundamentally be reduced to others, as by
those nearer causes, which are contained under other predicaments (of which
sort are the stone, maw-worms, magnitude increased, number exceeding or
deficient, and such like, which are as it were the foundations of diseases) a
certain disposition is introduced, constituting the true form of disease, but
the predicament only respects the form.

For those things which are placed under other predicaments, as the stone,
maw-worms, etc. are by Galen and others, for perspicuity sake, called diseases,
as also for the insufficiency of names, by which those dispositions may be
signified: and because it was satisfactory to the Physician intending curation
to understand the nature of that thing, which being taken away the whole
preternatural disposition and detriment of the functions would be taken away
also, not that to the accuratness of Philosophical inspection they would appear
true diseases, but rather causes, which often accompany us, without any evident
hurt of the functions; and the stone, maw-worms, and the like, cannot injure us
before they be abetted some by disposition in our bodies as obstuctrion, or
divulsion.

It may again be objected, That the fit place for disease is in the predicament
of relation, which is gathered out of Galens words in the beginning of his book
of the difference of diseases, where he says, That health is a kind of
symmetry, disease an ametry, but symmetry and ametry speak nothing but
relation, which Aristotle also seems evidently to confirm, 7. of his Physics
Chap. 3. where he teaches that disease and health are relations. To that I
answer, That though disease be termed ametry or immoderateness, this proves it
not to be a relation; for as deformity is a kind of disproportion of the parts,
yet handsomness and deformity are true qualities: So Disease is a disproportion
of the heat, cold, moisture, or dryness, or of the parts; yet it is no
relation, but a certain quality or disposition, by means of which the whole
body is disaffected. Yet if a confession must be extorted, that there is found
in Diseases some relation, that we may pay due obedience to the dictates of
Aristotle, we say, that this is caused, as those qualities, viz. health and
disease, are mutually compared, according to their access to, or recess from
mediocrity; such a relation is found between extreme colors, and between
virtue and vice, which no man will assert to be simple relations, which may be
accidental to subjects, without any mutation of them.

Every disease has a permanence in the part, and permanence is of the essence
of disease.

Disease is defined by a Diathesis or disposition, which term signifies to us a
certain position of its essence or parts, or constancy in the body, by which it
is distinguished from a simple affection, called a patible quality, and is the
third species of quality. And this constancy is called permanency, viz. a
disposition so stamped upon the part, that its essence is different and
separate from the cause producing it, an independent on it: and those things
which have a permanency, are by Physicians termed things made, or in fact, but
those which have no permanency esse in fieri.

But it may be objected, That an ephemeral fever, and other slighter affects,
and some also more dangerous, as the epilepsie and apoplexy, have but a small
duration of time in the body, and so they may seem to have no permanency. I
answer, Permanency looks to two relations, either to time, which signifies
duration, and so it is not of the essence of disease, because the duration of
many diseases is but short; or it may be referred to the existence fixed and
stable, which signifies a certain position of the essence and parts which all
diseases have in the body, though the time of some be soon determined. Again,
it is objected, Diseases are by consent in a possibility, and owe their
existence to the communication of simple humors or vapors, which ceasing, they
also cease: But these are by Galen numbered amongst true diseases, therefore all
diseases have not a permanence. I answer, That diseases by consent cannot last
long, but that it will follow that from their causes an idiopathy should be
introduced in the part; which though it be small, has always something of the
fact sufficient to constitute a true disease: But if the sympathicall affect be
yet so small, that it has no consistency in the part, nor requires any
peculiar cure, but dies by the taking away of the primary disease, then Galen
himself excludes it from the true nature of a Disease.

It is again objected, That diseases by the general suffrages of all
Physicians, have four times which are in a perpetual flux, viz. beginning,
augmentation, state, and declination: Diseases therefore being continually in
motion, can have no permanency. I answer, The ages and times of diseases
respect their motion and various constitutions, but not their generation and
essence, which persists fixed and constant; as the nature of man is preserved
in the same state, though in him variety of ages toules on variety of change;
so diseases now made, and generated, run on their time, in which they are
variously affected.

Lastly, some argue thus, To have permanency, and to be in fact, falls under
the same understanding with Physicians, as is before intimated: But of all
Fevers the Hectic only is in fact, for this condition affords it a
distinction from the rest, which are said to be only in a tendency: Therefore
the other Fevers have no permanency. I answer, In all diseases there is
something which makes them such, from which they produce their generation; but
the morbifick cause, viz. the putrid humor, perpetually acts in fevers, and
multiplyeth that morbous quality, therefore they are said to be in a
possibility, till they arrive to an Hectic, viz. when the cause rests from
action, by reason of an equal intemperateness introduced, and then they are
simply called in fact; but the rest partly in fact, partly in a possible
tendency thereto.

The necessary consequence of every disease is action by it self, and
immediately hurt.

Diseases are not seldom occult from the senses, yet all of them are
understood by symptoms, which are their effects, and most of all by labefacted
action, which immediately and by it self depends upon disease, and so
essentially, that if we assert action hurt, we necessarily imply a disease, on
which it has dependence.

But it may be objected, That action is often hurt immediately, by the very
morbifick causes; for aliment too copiously burdensome to the ventricle is
hurtful to concoction, without the interposing of a disease: Therefore all
action hurt depends noton a disease.

I answer, That the coction of the ventricle is not therefore hurt, because it
cannot concoct a great plenty of aliment; for it being requisite that there
should be a certain proportion between the Agent and Patient, for the right
exercise of action, if the Aliment be too copious, or of quality troublesome,
the action of the ventricle is not hurt, though it cannot master it, as it is
not troubled, though it cannot concoct Iron. This defect therefore depends on
the disproportion of the object.

It is again thus objected, Some symptoms may primarily and by themselves hurt
action, as the quality changed in the eye, viz. the yellow color of the cornea
tunica of men troubled with the Jaundies, caused by the effusion of yellow
choler into it, which immediately produces sight; for they can discern no
color but their own; but no disease can be impeached of such treason against
the eye. Therefore that color which is the symptom, does immediately injure
action. I Answer, in the eye peculiarly a preternatural color may be termed a
disease, for the eye in its natural constitution, ought to be without any
color, that it may be the fitter for the reception of the species of external
objects pure and inconfused, and their various colors: for that color of the
eye may be referred to diseases in number, because the number of qualities,
which ought naturally to be in the eye, is increased. The same may be held of
an extraneous taste in the tongue, and sound in the ear, which are impediments
to the due perception of taste, and sound; hence it appears, that in these
peculiar instruments of sense, peculiarly constituted, we may admit a peculiar
kind of disease.

Here arises lastly cause of objection, That in Sympathetick affects the
actions of the parts are hurt without the violence of any disease, for if a
disease were in the sympathizing parts, we should endeavor remedy for the
which is not done, neither when the action of the nerves is hurt by the
obstruction of the brain, can we impute a disease to the nerves, but only to
the brain. I oppose to this, That Therapeutick Physicians number not the
sympathetical affects with the diseases, because we apply no remedies to them;
but if we consider more seriously, we shall find they may be referred to some
genus of disease, viz. the influence of animal spirits into the nerves is
blocked up by the obstruction of the brain, by the defect of which, motion and
sense decay: but this defect may be reckoned among diseases, in the number of
deficients, and so we may hold of many others.

CHAP. II. Of the Kinds and Differences of Diseases.
Hitherto of the Nature of disease, it follows now, that we discourse of the
Differences thereof.
GAlen confounds the genus, species, and differences of diseases, in 2. of his
method, and uses them for one and the same, for he is not precise in their
strict, and logical consideration, though either of them may be truly
predicated in a diverse respect, viz. in relation to the disease it self, which
is the principal genus, they must be called species or differences, in relation
to the subordinate species, into which they are subdivided, they are honored
with the Title of genus.

But the differences of diseases are some essential, some accidental.

The Essential are taken from the very essence of the disease, and are
otherwise called specifical, because out of them the genus and species are
constituted: But they are three, viz. similar, organical, and common.

The whole essence of accidents depends upon subjects, therefore their
essential differences must be derived from the differences of their subjects;
but the subjects of diseases are the parts of our body, which are properly
called such, viz. which cohere to the whole mass, and partake of life in
common: for although by Hippocrates the parts be divided into the containing,
the contained, and those that cause motion; where by the containing, he
understands the living parts designed for the exercise of actions; by the
contained, the humors; by those causing motion, the spirits: there the name of
part is tentered to the widest sense, for nor humors nor spirits can be the
subjects of diseases, nor do they communicate of life, but they are rather the
causes of diseases, when they are extravagant in quality or quantity. Therefore
seeing those living parts branch out into two differences, viz. similar and
organical, diseases also shall be divided into similar and organical: but
because in both the forementioned parts, there is required another common
disposition, besides their due temper and conformation, that they may behave
themselves according to the rule of nature, viz. a natural continuity or union
of these parts, the corruption of which is the generation of another species of
disease, termed Common.

CHAP. III. Of the species of a similar disease.
Every similar disease is called Intemperancy.
THE similar Parts are composed of Elements only, and their actions are
executed by the symmetry of the four first qualities, and the allaying them to
a due fixation of temper. For the similar Parts, as similar, are void of any
action, nutrition excepted, by reason of which they retain convenient aliment
when it is attracted, concoct it, and thrust out superfluities, all which are
in them performed by the temper alone. As long therefore as a due temper is
preserved in the similar parts, they regulate themselves according to nature:
But when they are intemperate, they are in a morbous condition, and so every
disease affecting the similar parts, will be intemperateness.

But intemperateness breaks out into other differences, of which some are
essential, some accidental.

Again, the Essential are some simple, some compound; the simple are four; 1
Hot, 2 Cold, 3 Moist, 4 Dry.

The Compound are the same in number; 1 Hot and moist, 2 Hot and dry, 3 Cold
and moist, 4 Cold and dry.

These intemperatures are called morbous, when they swell to such an excess,
that they do manifestly hurt the actions, otherwise they confine themselves to
the prescripts of health; for instance, though a man of a bilious temper be
hotter and dryer than is convenient for the moderation of a fit temperament,
yet as long as in the exercise of his actions he is not irregular as to the
prescript of his innate temperament, he is not said intemperate to disease,
till transgressing the proper limitation of health, he falls, for example, into
a fever, or some other hot affect.

The accidental differences of intemperateness are taken from the cause, or
from the subject.

Though we have omitted the Treatise of the accidental differences of diseases,
till we put an end to this Section, yet because they do properly belong to
intemperateness alone, therefore it will not be inconvenient to bring them upon
this stage.

In respect of the cause one intemperateness is called Material, the other
Immaterial.

The Material intemperateness is that, which comes in the company of an
internal cause, viz. Humor, Vapor, or Wind, as it happens in humoural Fevers,
inflammations of the parts, and infinite others, and that Galen is termed
intemperateness with the affluxion of humors; but the immaterial which is also
called a naked intemperateness, is that which is produced by an exterior cause,
with the concurring help of the interior. This is not so frequent as the other,
and very seldom happens, yet it may be found in a Marasmus, a great
refrigeration of the parts being contracted in cold water, or by a very cold
Northwind, or in the Headache, contracted by violent heat, and the like.

In respect of the subject, one intemperateness is in the Habit, another in the
Habitude.

Intemperateness which is in Habit, or which has contracted habit, and is
thereby confirmed, is also called Hectic, which does so firmly inhere, that it
is indeleble, it is also said to be wholly consummate; of this kind are the
Hectic Fever, and the leprosy; but that which is in habitude, or disposition,
is only inchoate and still in its primordiums, or at least part produced, part
unproduced, and easily deleble, as vulgar Fevers, and other diseases without
difficulty curable.

In respect also of the subject, one intemperateness is Equal, the other
Unequal.

Equal intemperateness is that, which is equally diffused into all the parts of
our body; so an hectic Fever is an equal intemperateness, because all the
parts are overheated in the same degree. But Unequal intemperateness is that
which is not equally distributed to the parts of our body, so we call putrid
Fevers unequal diseases, because in them the solid parts are not plainly
heated, as the humors which heat has wholly penetrated; so the fevers termed
Epiala and Lypiria are called unequal intemperatures, because in the Epiala,
heat and cold are together felt all the body over, but in the Lypiria, the
exteriors are stiff with cold, the interiors parched with heat.

A COROLLARY, Concerning Similar Diseases.
It is in the front objected, that there is no possibility of a simple
intemperateness, because it would be either joined with the matter, or stand
apart from the matter; it is not with the matter, because such intemperateness
depends upon some humor, but every humor is doubly qualified; but the
immaterial proceeds from external causes; and they are the elements, every of
which has two qualities, or mixed bodies, which have also two qualities by the
predominant element. I answer, That upon a due contemperation of qualities, the
excess must be in one only, when there are two causes internal and external
joined, which agree in one quality, are contrary in another; as when a disease
is generated from blood and choler, the dryness of the choler is tempered by
the moistness of the blood, and there is no excess, but both joining the
forces of their heat, effect an hot intemperatenesse, the same is plain in
external causes; for if the air be temperate to an hot and moist temper, and
the aliments be cold, and moist, the coldness of them, with the heat of the
other, will cause contemperation, but the moistness of both will produce a
moist intemperatenesse. It is again objected, that there is no such thing as a
hot and moist intemperatenesse, because heat and moisture are the principles of
our life, and so they cannot be in conjunction diseased. Again, that heat must
be very intense, that it arrive to morbosity, but intense heat does powerfully
prey upon moisture, and soon summons in its mate siccity, and so a hot and
moist intemperatenesse cannot together subsist: so we may say of cold
intemperatenesse, which generating great crudities, brings humidity plentifully
into the body; hence it seems inconsistent with siccity. To these I answer,
That heat and moisture are convenient for the principles of our life, yet if
they do so far transgress, that the humors shaking off their allegiance to
nature, and not admitting ventilation, do necessarily putrify, which ushers in
preternatural heat, and that meeting with plenty of moisture, causes a hot and
moist intemperatenesse. Besides, excess of heat consumes indeed humidity, but
not so nimbly, and therefore that space of time is sufficient for the
generation of most violent diseases; as appears in bloody fevers, in which at
the beginning there is plenty of moisture, but upon their permanence, they call
in the auxiliaries of a dry intemperature. In the same manner, a cold and dry
intemperatenesse spends time before the acquisition of a moist, by crudities.
And though the effluxions of the excrements be copious, yet the solid parts
retain their dry intemperatenesse, as is seen in old men. The proposed
differences of diseases, and those alone Antiquity with a general consent
embraced, which have also found entertainment with almost all Neotericks,
excepting Fernelius, and some siders with him: For Fernelius has brought to
light two new kinds of diseases, one related to the matter, the other to the
form, or the whole substance. For, says he, three things being considered in
the similar parts, matter, form, and temperament, the natural constitution of
them being health, so the immoderatenesse of every of them will be disease. And
hence result three differences of diseases, viz. intemperatures, by the excess
of the first qualities; the immoderatenesse of the matter is, when a part
becomes softer or harder, looser or closer, thinner or more crasse, rarer or
denser; and the vitiating of the form is, when either by manifest diseases, as
by putrefaction; or by occult, as poisonous, contagious, and pestilent, the
whole symmetry of the body is disturbed.

Fernelius in his 1. Book of his Pathology, chap. 7. has only proposed this
his opinion, yet has strengthened it by a long disputation in his 2. of the
hidden causes of things, chap. 9. which because it is famous, being born up by
the authority of so learned a man, and has wracked the wits of many, we will
therefore enter the lists in a short dispute with him. The reasons then by
Fernelius alleged to confirm his opinion, may be comprehended in the following
discourse:

First, Diseases usually possess those by which the actions are performed: But
there are three things in a similar part, which execute the actions thereof,
viz. matter, form, and temperament, therefore this will be the place of
Disease.

Secondly, The same is confirmed by the various detriment of actions in one and
the same part; for the ventricle, as a similar part, is often infirm, by which
the concoction is weakened: but this infirmity is sometimes caused by
immoderate refrigerations, as by over much drinking of water, eating of
lettice, and the like; sometimes by relaxation, as by taking in hot oil, and
the like; and lastly, by extraneous and poisonous qualities, which invade the
strength of its form. Therefore there must be three distinct kinds of diseases.

Thirdly, this seems to be convincible from the remedies themselves: For there
are three kinds of remedies of Galen's own constitution, viz. some which alter
only in the first qualities; and these are applicable to the intemperatenesse
in diseases: but some, whose affects are astriction, relaxation, attenuation,
incrassation, and these heal diseases in the matter: Lastly, some there are
whose action proceeds from their whole substance, and an occult propriety, and
these are used to cure the diseases of the whole substance.

Fourthly, in a Gangrene, Leprosy, and malignant ulcers, the whole substance
of the parts is corrupted: Therefore that there are diseases of the whole
substance is undeniable.

But in our judgment those reasons are not so weighty, or of validity enough
to force us to a multiplication of the anciently confirmed differences of
similar diseases. We say therefore, that this opinion of Fernelius is not to be
entertained, and before we answer the objections brought, we will confute it as
follows.

First, Disease is an affection of the whole similar part, as such: Therefore
the matter and form cannot be said to be diseased, but the whole frame; for
intemperature alone is the proper affection of the whole similar part.

Secondly, All action of the similar part is natural: but all natural actions
are only four, attraction, retention, concoction, and expulsion, which depend
upon the temper only. Therefore there will be but one disease of a similar
part, viz. intemperateness.

Thirdly, All diseases have the force of action, viz. the action of hurting.
But in the matter there is no action, for it is a passive and potential
principle, therefore there is no disease of the matter.

Fourthly, If there were a disease of the form, the definition of a disease
given with the consent as well of all the ancients, as Neotericks, would be
erroneous, which they assert to be a disposition of the body: But the form is
incorporeal: Therefore not subject to disease.

Fifthly, If there were diseases of the form, infinite absurdities would
follow, viz. that the form may suffer by it self, may be generated and
corrupted, may be increased and diminished, may have a contrary, all which
Philosophy abhors as inconsistent.

Lastly, If the corruption of the form, or the whole substance, be a disease,
it must be considered, either in its end, and absolute, or in a tendency, and
not yet consummate. If absolute, it is nothing else but the abolition and total
destruction of the creature: If not yet perfect, but in motion to it, it will
be an alteration, only preparing way for corruption, and so a quality
constituted in intemperateness. And so this opinion of Fernelius is
convincingly refuted. To the reasons brought to fortify it, we give this
answer. To the first we say, That the concurrence of matter and form is not
requisite for the perfection of actions, but only for the constitution of the
compositum, for actions proceed from the composed, not the composing, but the
compositum operates according to the disposition found in it: And this
disposition in a similar part, is the temper only.

To the second, I answer, That the action of the ventricle is not purely
similar, but proceeds partly from the temper, partly from the conformation and
structure of it, for the alteration and coction of the aliments cannot rightly
be performed, unless they be duly contained and enclosed by the ventricle: But
this retention, or coarctation depends upon the ventricle, formed in this or
that manner. As often therefore as the ventricle is refrigerated, so that it
cannot concoct, there is an intemperateness, or a similar disease; but when it
is so relaxed, that it cannot contain, there is an organical disease: Lastly,
when the action of the ventricle is infirmed by venomous things, there is some
intemperatenesse, because the implanted temperament of that part is corrupted,
and that intemperatenesse is called malignant, or venomous, as shall after be
showed.

To the third I answer, That those second qualities do immediately depend upon
the first: so adstrictives are cold and dry, relaxatives hot and moist, and so
forth: But those which operate from the whole substance, perform it by occult
qualities, which are referred to the temper.

To the last I answer, That intemperatenesse is twofold, one vulgar, the other
malignant; as shall be showed in the Accidental differences; but the proposed
affections may easily be referred to malignant intemperatenesse.

CHAP. IV. Of the Species of an Organical Disease.
The species of an Organical disease are four: 1 In conformation, 2 In
magnitude, 3 In number, 4 In conjunction.
AS by the similar parts, similar actions, so by the organical parts, organical
actions are exercised, which that they may conform to nature, they require
four conditions, viz. due conformation, magnitude, number, and conjunction;
from which if there be a recesse, there will be an access of disease: Hence
arise as many differences in organical diseases.

The diseases of conformation have again three species; 1 In figure, 2 In
asperity and levity, 3 In passage and cavity.

Disease in the figure is, when the natural figure of the parts is so changed,
that the actions are thereby hurt.

The figure of the parts may many ways be changed, viz. when those which
Nature has beautified with straightness are incurvated, when the crooked are
straightned, others are turned, the round are distorted, and become square, and
so forth.

Disease in asperity and levity is, when the parts which are naturally of a
rough or rugged impoliteness, become smoother; or on the other side the
smoother become rougher.

For instance, when the ventricle and intestines being burdened with mucous
phlegm are troubled with Lienteria, this disease is in levity; but when the
Asperd arteria being exasperated by distillation from the brain, contracts
hoarsenesse, the disease lies in asperity.

Disease in the passage and cavity, is when the natural constitution of the
passages and cavities is destroyed.

Of this again there are three species; 1 Astriction, 2 Obstruction, 3
Dilatation.

Astriction is caused when a passage or cavity is crowded up by an external
cause, and becomes narrower.

So when the Aesophagus, and the Aspera arteria are pressed by the Quinsie, and
the bladder is forced together, by the burden of a great child locked up in
the womb, that disease arises which is called astriction.

Obstruction is produced, when some preternatural matter takes possession of
the internal cavities, and stops up the passages.

So the stone is bred in the bladder; when thick, viscid, and clammy matter,
blocking up the interior veins of the liver, milt, and other parts, and the
free passage of humors, and the like, causes an obstruction.

Dilatation proceeds from the amplitude and wideness of the cavities and
passages.

Dilatation is contrary to astriction and obstruction; we have an example of it
in the dilating the ball of the eye, and in the crooked veins, as also in the
anastomasis and diapedesis of the veins. For an Anastomasis is caused when the
orifices of the vessels are too much dilated; but diapedesis, when their
tunicles are too much relaxed and rarefied, that they easily yield to the
effluxion of the humors. To dilatation also is referred the excessive laxity of
the ventricle, so that it cannot conveniently embrace the Aliment, which
Fernelius unadvisedly placed with the diseases of the matter.

The diseases of magnitude are either in the Augmentation, or diminution
thereof.

Both are either in the whole body, or in some part of it; in the whole body,
magnitude is increased, or diminished, when the whole bulk is to extremity
increased or diminished.

Galen presents us with an example of increased magnitude in the whole body of
one Nicomachus Smyrnaeus, who by reason of his excessive grosseness could not
possibly move himself. Diminished magnitude is apparent in atrophy, and hectic
Fever, in which the whole body pines away with leaness.

Magnitude is increased or diminished in some part, when it exceeds, or recedes
from the dimensions allotted it by nature.

So a preternatural tumor in a part is magnitude increased: so also the defect
of a part in longitude, latitude, or profundity, as of the Tongue, Nose,
Finger, the testicles, or a notable smalness of some other part, is diminished
magnitude. For the occasion of this smalness, is either by generation for want
of matter; or after generation, and that is again twofold; by defect of
Aliment, whence arises the atrophy, and consumption of the part, or the
depriving the parts of their substance, as when a part of the nose, tongue, or
finger is cut off.

Diseases in number are, either in excess, or in defect of Number.

A definite number of the similar parts is necessary to constitute the
organical, and in the greater, and more composed, the concurrence of a certain
number of lesser organs and less composed is requisite. But by their excess
any way, or defect, they cause disease, which is termed a disease of number
increased, or diminished.

Number exceeding is either of those which are regulated by nature, or which
are in the latitude of their genus preternatural.

They are said to be according to nature, in respect of the substance from
which they derive their original, which substance is natural, and they only
err in this that they conduce not to the exercising of the functions of the
part; but hinder them, as a sixth finger, an excrescence of flesh in an ulcer,
and the like. But preternatural as to their whole genus are those, which are
composed of a substance wholly preternatural, as maw-worms, the stone, etc.
which are referred to diseases in number, as they are things of a preternatural
superaddition, vitiating the structure of the organ, and by its presence
hindering the functions thereof; otherwise if they injure not the actions, but
produce obstruction, or the like affection, they are taken rather for the
causes of disease, as we have before observed.

Number deficient, perpetually consists in natural things, or in the parts of
the body, contracted either from the womb it self, or after the desertion
thereof.

Disease in deficient number, contracted from the very birth, is so called,
when, for instance, any one is born mutilated either in the Foot, Hand, Eye,
Testicle, or any other part; but after birth, upon the amputation of some part,
as when the foot, or arm infected with a gangren is chopped off, the testicles
are fallen by a rupture, a rotten tooth is pulled out, and so of the rest.

Diseases in conjunction are twofold; in Situation and in Connection.

Diseases in Situation are, when the parts which ought to cohere, fall off from
their proper Station.

These diseases are obvious in a rupture, when the intestines or the cause
descends in the Scrotum, so in the falling of the Anus or the womb, and the
like.

Diseases in Connection are, when the parts which should cohere, stand at a
distance, or on the contrary, those which should separate, cohere.

Such affections appear in luxations, when the connection of the bones is
perverted and in imperforate parts, as also when the eye lids, or the lips, are
united, which should naturally be separated.

A COROLLARY, Concerning Organical Diseases.
It is first objected, That the number of organical diseases before a laid down
is incomplete, because their differences are not taken from all those things,
which are necessary for the performance of organical actions. But besides those
now mentioned, there are many others concurring: for the instrumentary parts,
want the influence of heat from the heart, viz. blood and well affected
spirits, whereas when they are hurt, or wanting, all the actions of the body
are out of tune, as appears in a syncope, trembling, starkness, etc. From them
therefore we may constitute another species of organical disease. I answer, in
the proper constitution of every part, the common instruments are to be
distinguished, which are necessary in all actions of the organick parts: for
they are not peculiarly considered in either, but as vagrants, and wanderers
are excluded from the number of the parts of the living body, or we may assert,
that the affections issuing from the vitiosity of them are not idiopathetick,
but ought only to be referred to the sympathy of the negative matter, or
faculty.

It is secondly objected, That besides the aforesaid conditions ingredient to
the constitution of organical parts, there is a symmetry of them requisite, for
if the foot, or the hand, which ought to be conflated of bones, nerves, and
ligaments, are wholly offeous, or camous, the structure of them is bad, though
they are rightly framed as before is said. I answer, if an organical part which
ought to be composed of many instruments, be conflated but of one, this is a
disease in the deficient number, nor need we make search after another diverse
genus.

It is lastly objected, That the actions of organical parts are offended, by
the qualities themselves, as well first as second: for example, the harder, or
softer, crasser or thinner parts, are made more unfit for sense or motion, as
Galen is of opinion, that the crassity of the brain is very noxious to
sharpness of wit, but the tenuity thereof very commodious, so the laxity of the
ventricle is inconvenient for concoction, the cornea tunica of the eye, being
too rare, or too thick hinders sight, and so of the rest: hence it appears that
these qualities also ought to be added to the number of organical diseases. I
answer, That diseases consequent upon the change of qualities, cannot be
attributed to the organical parts, as organical, but as they are compounded of
the similar parts, as their matter; for a due symmetry of the similar parts
must concur to the constitution of an instrumentary part; and the temperament
of the similars must be supposed to be as well in the first as in the second
qualities, therefore the disproportion of them must not be laid to the charge
of the organical part, though it injure the actions thereof, because it is
accidental; as an house falls, when the wood or stones are rotten, or
corrupted, though they are not formally related to the house.

This answer may again be thus opposed, That there is as much reason, those
second qualities, hardness, softness, and the rest, should be referred to the
diseases of the organical parts, as asperity, and laevity, which are also in
the number of the second qualities, and were by us reckoned amongst the
diseases of conformation. I answer, That the reason holds not the same; because
hardness, softness, and the rest, are not changed but upon the change of the
temper it self; but asperity and laevity, which are affections of the
superficies only, do so depend upon the formative faculty, that without any
diversity of temper, it produces some smooth and equal, some rough and
unequal; as appears in bones, which are most dry, and yet of a very even
superficies, and in the ventricle, whose external superficies is even the
internal, rough and rugged: and so of the rest.

CHAP. V. Of the Differences of the Common Disease, or solution of the
continuum.
The Differences of the common Disease, or solution of the continuum, are taken
from the cause, or the subject.

The causes from which the solution of the continuum happens are four: to the
first, things thin, and convenient for section are referred; to the second
things sharp, and fit for Erosion; to the third things heavy, hard, and dull,
to the fourth things fit for ruption, and divulsion.

The solution of the continuum which is caused by cutting things is called
Section.

UNder this are comprehended all solutions of the continuum, produced by the
incision of external causes, either with point, or edge in any part of the body.

The solution of the continuum proceeding from things sharp and eroding, is
termed Erosion.

Erosion is most usually produced in the parts of the body by internal causes,
as by sharp and biting juyces causing ulcers, it is produced also sometimes by
external application, or things actually burning, as by fire, hot iron; or
potentially, as caustic medicines, and the like.

The solution of the continuum caused by things heavy, hard, and dull, is
called contusion.

This solution of the continuum, is not usually manifest, but hidden: for in it
the parts are dashed together, and violently pressed, which compression causes
an occult solution of the continuum.

The solution of the continuum proceeding from things breaking and divulsive,
is called ruption or divulsion.

This is often seen in torture, in which the toes and the fingers are so
distracted that they are quite separated from the other parts; so by
overreaching the peritonaeum is usually burst, which is the cause of a
rupture. Sometimes also by an over-repletion of blood the tunicles of the veins
are divuls'd, whence flows an immoderate flux of blood.

In respect of the subject, or the parts of our body, diverse differences of the
solution of the continuum are constituted, and diverse names are imposed on
them. For incision made in the flesh is called a wound, but crosion an ulcer. A
transverse incision made in the bone is a fracture, a direct a fissure, but
erosion is called putrefaction. A transverse incision made in the veins,
arteries, nerves and gristles, retains the same name of incision, and a direct
of a fissure. The species of peculiar solution is puncture, chiefly attributed
to the nerves, but rupture to the membranes.

In all Chirurgical authors, those differences of solution are contained under
the term of Wounds, Ulcers, and Luxations.

CHAP. VI. Of the Accidental differences of diseases.
The Accidental differences of diseases are those which constitute not the
genus and species of diseases, but only clear the way to the understanding of
some of their proprieties.
THE Accidental differences proposed by Authors are almost infinite, of all
which it would be too tedious to institute a Discourse, and perhaps in our
judgment of small use. We shall therefore serve those to you here which are
more requisite to the use of Art, and more frequently occur in the Treatise
of Diseases.

But they are derived either from the essence of diseases or proprieties
attending it, or from the causes of them.

The essential differences of a disease flow from the very essence thereof, as
was before declared; but the accidental differences spring from some
proprieties associating with the essence of the disease, as also from the
causes and effects. But we will here offer those only which proceed from the
essence and causes, omitting the rest, as in themselves common to vulgar
capacities, and of little use.

The proprieties which are companions of the essence of diseases, are first,
Magnitude; secondly, Motion; thirdly, the manner; fourthly, the event.

1. In respect of magnitude, a disease is said to be great or little.

That disease is great, which is very intense, and is very prevalent in the
perturbation of our body. But that is termed little, which deviates but a
little from the natural constitution, and induces but a small infirmity on us.

Galen affirms that a disease is called great for three reasons: First, in
respect of the part, if it affects a principal part, or one necessary to the
conservation of life: Secondly, in respect of the causes, viz. if they be very
violent and furious: Thirdly, in respect of the symptoms, viz. if the body
being stormed by this fierceness and violence, be much oppressed.

2. In respect of motion, there are four times of diseases considerable, the
beginning, increase, state and declination. The beginning of a disease is when
it is constant to the same distemper with which it was at first produced,
without any notable access of augmentation. Increase is when the disease is
sensibly seen to increase. State is, when the disease is beyond augmentation,
and reserves the same violence, which was left at the highest pitch of
augmentation.

Lastly, declination is when the violence of a disease is evidently broken.

The division of the times of diseases, is by Galen not drawn only from the
essence of the disease it self, but also from the causes, and symptoms, viz.
when from the beginning they increase to higher inflammations, till they arrive
to a state, and in declination are mitigated; and chiefly from the excrements,
which are at first a very crudity, in increase present a kind of a rudiment of
coction, in their state give strong evidences of coction, and in their
declination show absolute concoction, and a change of excrements into better.

But the times of diseases are universal or particular.

The universal times are parts of the whole disease, considered from the
beginning to the end.

But the particular times are the parts of paroxismes, apparent in intermissive
diseases.

So the paroxismes of every disease have beginning, augmentation, and
declination, as the whole disease considered in its whole flux of time.

Observe that all diseases have not four times, but only healthy ones, for
deadly always kill before declination.

In motion the quantity and manner are considerable.

In respect of the quantity of motion, or duration, one disease is called long,
another short.

So a day-expiring fever is a short disease, because it is quickly at an end;
as dropsy long, because it persists a long time.

In respect also of the quantity of motion or duration, one disease is called
acute, another chronical.

Acute disease is that in which magnitude and brevity are companions.

Therefore it moves nimbly with vehemence and danger. The Chronical is commonly
opposed to this, though it be not totally contrary to it: For Chronical and
Long speak the same, and it is so called, only because it is of long
continuance, although it be usually great, as the palsy, dropsy, and the
like, to which the short ones are truly and properly opposed.

Observe, That some diseases are in respect of their proper essence Chronical,
in respect of their paroxisme Acute, as the Epilepsie, which is a disease very
long, and has paroxismes very acute.

Acute disease is threefold; the first peracute, the second acute simply, the
third acute by dilapsion or decidence.

The Peracute is again divided into extremely peracute and simply peracute.

Extremely peracute is that which is so vehement and swift in motion, that the
third or fourth day it ends either in health or in death.

Simply peracute, determines the seventh day.

But acute simply so called, is either exactly, or not exactly such.

Exactly such ends with the fourteenth day.

Not exactly such continues to the twentieth, or further.

Lastly, acute by decidence reaches the fortieth day; and after its arrival to
that, it is called a long and continuing disease.

And these are the differences hewn out from the quautity of motion: those
follow to be proposed, which result from the manner of motion.

In respect then of the manner of motion, some disease is called continual,
some intermissive.

Continual disease is, which troubles without cessation, and in its whole
duration is impatient of mitigation, by any intervening pause.

But intermissive is that, the fury of which in its career, is usually allayed
by perfect intermissions.

And so much of the Motion, now follows the manner of Disease.

3. In respect of the Manner, a disease is called gentle, or malignant.

A gentle disease is that which is very remiss, and induces no dangerous
symptoms.

But that is malignant, which comes accompanied with some malignant and
venomous quality, attended by dangerous symptoms.

Malignant is again threefold; the first venomous, the second pestilent, the
third contagious.

A venomous disease is that which is intimated with a quality that is a
desperate antagonist to our life, produced by assumption or application of
poison, or from noisome humors internally generated.

Pestilent disease is that which is malignantly and deleteriously qualified,
and is impartial to all.

Lastly, Contagious is that which rises to an high account in multiplication,
and usually infects many others with the same kind of disease.

So far of the Manner of disease, the Event thereof follows.

4. In respect of the Event; some disease is healthy, some deadly, some
dangerous.

Healthy disease is that which threatens the life with no danger.

Deadly disease is that which brings along with it assured destruction.

Lastly, Dangerous is that which hovers in a doubtful event, sometimes tending
to health; sometimes to death.

And these are the differences proceeding from those proprieties which are
concomitants to essence; those now which are derived from the causes, remain to
be proposed.

But those causes are either material or efficients, or helps, without the
advantage of which nothing could be produced.

To the Material we refer the subject, to the Efficient the humors, to those
without the help of which nothing could be, the place.

There are many other kinds of Causes which here we propose not, because we
have determined to spin the accidental differences of Diseases out of these
alone; as also neither to lay down all that may be picked out from them, but
only the most useful.

1. In respect of the subject, some disease is called Idiopathetick, some
Sympathetick.

The Idiopathetick is that which is primarily produced in the part by its
cause, and has in it a place of duration.

So a Pleurisy, Inflammation of the lungs, and Phthisis, and others, are
termed Idiopathetick.

Sympathetick is when the affect of one part idiopathetically diseased, is
communicated to another.

Yet the affection is so communicated to this compassionate part, that upon the
ablation of the former, viz. the Idiopathetick, the Sympathetick is also taken
away; otherwise, if it should remain by it self, it would become Idiopathetick,
and then Physicians term it Deuteropathetick, or secondary: But the primary is
called Protopathetick, because the affection owes its first production to that
part.

But a Sympathetick disease is usually generated by five causes. First, because
of vicinity. Secondly, because of the society of the genus. Thirdly, because of
the community of office. Fourthly, by reason of situation. Fifthly, by reason
of connection.

Because of vicinity the hand sympathizeth with the arm, the bone with the
neighboring flesh, the ventricle with the liver, the ribs with the lungs, the
lungs with the heart, and so on the contrary.

By reason of the society of the genus, the nervous parts sympathize with the
nervous, and the carnous with the carnous, as being constituted under the same
genus, and partaking of the same nature.

By community of office, the breasts with the womb, the bladder sympathizes
with the reins, because they are designed to the same employment in the body.

By reason of situation, the head is easily compassionative with the inferior
parts; as, the ventricle, liver, womb, and the like; as being in a direct
eminency to them, and so the vapors by them elevated, are with ease conveyed to
its reception. So also the ventricle and lungs, easily sympathize with the
head, as lying directly under it, and so easily entertaining the defluxions of
humors streaming from it.

By reason of connection, the nerves are compatible with the brain, the arteries
with the heart, the veins with the liver, and on the contrary, as bordering
upon them.

Again, all sympathetical disease is caused two ways, viz. positively or
privatively.

Positively, when any thing is conducted from one part to another.

So the vapors steaming from the ventricle to the brain, produce aches,
vertigoes, and such like sympathetical affections, which are termed positive.

Privatively, when there is no influence where there ought to be one.

So in the apoplexy, the sense and motion of the whole body decays, by the
non-influence of the animal faculty and spirits from the brain, caused by the
obstructions of the ventricles thereof. And so it is said to proceed from the
privation of matter or faculty.

2. In respect of the efficient causes, or the humors operating diseases, some
are called legitimate, some spurious.

The legitimate is, which is graved with that impress of Nature, which is
proper to its species, and the cause of whose usual production is whole and
sincere.

The spurious is that which neither retains its pure nature, nor has a sincere
cause to which it may acknowledge its production.

A tertian fever, excited by sincere choler, is called true and legitimate, as
also a quartan the effect of pure melancholy: But those fevers are called
bastard, spurious, and illegitimate, when they have a confusion of other humors
befides those now mentioned.

3. In respect of the place or region in which diseases are generated, some are
called endemical, some epidemical, some sporadical.

Endemical diseases are those which are peculiar to some Region, and are in it
commonly powerful.

They are otherwise called vernacular and gentilitious, because they are
always appendent to one Region, by reason of the air, aliments, etc. proper to
that Country. So the Inhabitants of the Alps are troubled with a Bronchocele,
the Spaniards are perplexed with strumous swellings, the Lusitanians pine away
with tabifical consumptions, and all these are judged Endemical diseases.

Epidemical diseases are those which in any Region rage among the popularity.

In this Endemical and Epidemical diseases are nearly related, that they seize
upon many, and spend their fury upon the popularity: But in this they differ,
that Endemical confine themselves always to the same Country, but Epidemical
are indifferent, and inclinable to forain invasions. The reason of which is
this, because Endemical proceed from the peculiar disposition of the air,
water, or diet of the Country: but Epidemical are caused by the air alone, not
infected by means of the place, but rather by the malignant influences of
superior bodies.

The Sporadical are they which neither commonly range abroad, nor particularize
themselves to any Region.

They are also termed dispersed, and are opposed to Endemical and Epidemical
diseases, because they are various, and driven by contingences, do sometimes
light here, sometimes there: So in this or any other Region, one is sick of a
pleurisy, another languishing by a continual or tertian fever, another
troubled with a catarrhe, nephretical pains, gout, dropsy, or any disease of
another nature, according to the various nature and constitution of individuals.

Thus much of the nature and differences of diseases, as well Essential as
Accidental; now it rests that we handle their Changes.

The second Section of PATHOLOGY. Of the Changes of Diseases, and chiefly of
the Crises.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Changes contingent in Diseases.
IN Diseases there are two mutations worth our notice, either when they
metamorphose into some other disease, or when they are absolutely and simply
dissolved, without a transmigration into any other.

The change of one disease into another is frequently seen, when the Apoplexy
makes a transition into a Palsy, a Tertian fever into a Quartan; a quartan,
the swelling of the liver or spleen, and many other affections turn their
stream, and run into the channel of a Dropsy.

Diseases are absolutely and simply dissolved, when without the intercession of
any other disease they are determined either by health or death.

But their end in health or death is double:

To wit, leisurely and by degrees, or suddenly and unawares.

When a disease is slowly and by little and little ended in death, it is called
a Marasmus; but when it is so ended in health, it is called simply Solution, by
the Greeks termed Lysis.

When it is hastily and suddenly ended, either by health or death, it is called
Crisis, which is commonly opposed to Lysis or solution, it being a frequent
expression with Authors, that all diseases are terminated by Crisis or Lysis.

CHAP. II. Of the nature of Crisis.
A Crisis is a sudden and unexpected change happening in a disease, to health
or to death.
HIppocrates and Galen use this term Crisis many ways; sometimes they intend
by Crisis nothing else but a secretion of humors, as Galen, Comment. on Aph.
13. Sect. 2. says, That a Crisis is caused by Nature separating the noxious
humors from the good, and preparing them for excretion. But sometimes by
Crisis they signify excretion it self, because the best Crisis is completed
by excretion. So Hippocrates in his Book of Art terms the excretion of a
corrupt bone a Crisis; or lastly, it is taken for a conflict, which upon the
imminency of a Crisis is usually waged between the disease and nature: But the
more frequent and usual acception of it is for judgment, which construction
has been from Galen's age to this, embraced by many; for Galen in his Comment.
on 1 Progn. witnesses that judication passed on diseases was derived from the
Courts of Judicature, and applied to the Art of Medicine, nor truly very
improperly: for though the things from whence these translations are taken, be
not altogether like, yet the judgment passed in diseases has some similitude
with forensical judgment: For in Courts of Judicature, in capital causes,
there is the person that brings the action, and the person guilty: The person
that brings the action maintains a conflict with the person guilty, and
constantly accuses him, produces witnesses, and menaceth death or punishment:
But if this accusation be falsely charged upon the person seemingly guilty, he
pleads boldly for himself, and retorts the punishment on him that brings the
action; but if he cannot stand in contradictory opposition to the accusation,
he is forced to give up and yield. All these things are transacted before a
Judge, who weighs them all, and at last on a certain time gives judgment of
the whole matter. In the same manner in the Crisis the disease represents him
that brings the action, nature the person guilty, the morbifick cause brings
nature into the Court, endeavoring to overthrow it; of this invasion the
symptoms are witnesses, which declare the whole progress of the contention.
But nature, which is as it were in the capacity of a guilty person, defends it
self stoutly against its adversary disease, whose resistance, if she be well
fortified, she baffles, and turns him off as an unjust Plaintiff, and thrusts
him out of Court; but if she want good supports, she must submit to the fury of
her Antagonist. All these things are points of accurate inspection to a
Physician; who after a serious pensitation of the strength of both parts, gives
sentence as a Judge, and designs that day of judgment in which either the
disease or nature shall be cast. From hence it is evident, that the comparison
of a Crisis with Judicature, is not wholly absurd and contemptible.

But to draw nearer to the very definition of a Crisis, it being defined by
mutation: it is requisite to be known that in all motion, according to the
Philosophers, there are many things considerable, the point from which, the
point to which, the medium through which motion is made, motion, the mover, and
the moveable: All these things are perpetually found in a Crisis. For the Mover
is Nature it self, performing coctions, separating humors, and at last
expelling them on the Critical day. The Moveable is the Morbifick cause, and
preternatural humors, to which only a Crisis is incident. The point from which
a Crisis is derived, is the augmentation of the disease, for a Crisis is in a
disease; and according to the various nature of a disease, the Crisis is more
slowly or swiftly exercised: for acute diseases are sooner judged of, long more
slowly.

The point in which the Crisis ends, is Health, or Death, or a state
neighboring upon them, or a transition into some other species of disease. But
the Medium thorough which, is all that interval of time extending from the
augmentation to the solution of the disease, in which nature elaborates
Concoction, Secretion, and Excretion.

But this motion of the Crisis is not simple, but doubly compound, of Local and
Alterative; and natural and violent. Local motion is caused in Crisis by reason
of the morbifical cause, moved and agitated by nature, and discussed by the
usnal ways. But Alterative motion is caused by reason of the patient body,
whether it be corruptive, as appears in a deadly Crisis, or perfective, as is
evident in an healthy Crisis. Secondly, this motion is natural in respect of
nature, the internal principle, and mover, effecting the Crisis primarily, and
by it self: but violent in respect of the skirmish, perturbation, and sudden
mutation. A Crisis therefore is oppositely termed mutation, and that swift, and
sudden, that it may thus be distinguished from coction, the contention and
secretion: as also from the slow and procrastinated solution of long affects;
hence this celerity affords a proper, and peculiar difference. But the residue
of the definition is so obvious by it self, that it needs no explication.

CHAP. III. Of the Differences of Crises.
Some Crisis is Perfect, some Imperfect.

The Perfect is that, which perfectly and wholly sets the sick person at
liberty from the disease: and it tends to Health or Death.

There are six conditions requisite to make up a perfect, and healthy Crisis.
For it must First, hold forth very good symptoms. Secondly, manifest ones.
Thirdly, it must happen on a critical day. Fourthly, it must be true. Fifthly,
secure. Sixthly, convenient for the disease, and nature of the sick person.

FIrst then a perfect and healthy Crisis, must present us with the token of
concoction upon the day of indication; for every critical day has its index,
viz. the fourth is the index of the seventh, the eleventh of the fourteenth,
the seventeenth of the twentieth. In these days, I say, the signs of
concoction must appear, that a perfect healthy Crisis may follow. Secondly, it
must be manifest, that is in conjunction with some notable evacuation, viz.
with excretion, or abscession. For those which are alleviated without manifest
excretion, do usually relapse (as Hippocrates in his Prognostickes) this is
confirmed by the authority of the same Hippocrates in many stories in his
Epidemicks, among which this most notorious one shall serve in stead of all the
rest. Sect. 7. Book. 3. Epid. Egr. 2. Hermocrates was rid of a fever the
fourteenth day, without sweat, on the seventeenth day the fever returns to him
again, on the twentieth it leaves him, without sweat, this unwelcome guest
presuming upon its former entertainment visits him again, on the twenty fourth,
at last on the twenty seventh he dies. For if the solution of a disease happen
without critical causes, it wants not its danger; and if it end with a notable
excretion or abscession, it is judged to be a Crisis presaging health. Thirdly,
it must happen on a critical day; for on those days nature, being admitted to
commodious operation, does usually cause a present and copious expulsion of
noxious humors, and contrive useful excretions; which if they fall on another
day, speak nature to be molested, and to operate tumultuously. Fourthly, it
must be true, and not leave behind any relics of the disease, which may
endanger a recidivation. Fifthly, it must be secure, that is easily tolerable
by the sick person, and without any dangerous symptoms. Lastly, such a Crisis
must agree with the species of the disease, and the nature of the sick person,
and suitable to his age, and temper. Acute diseases are usualliy judged by
excretion, long by abscession. A burning Fever is in a young man judged by the
flux of blood, in an old man by the flux of the belly.

A perfect deadly Crisis, has contrary conditions to the healthy.

These are easily made out by the forementioned conditions, if we turn those to
the contrary which are proposed to make up an healthy Crisis. But of these
amongst the rest the first is most considerable, that Crisis being most deadly
which is not ushered in by the precedent signs of concoction. For if upon no
appearance of concoction, there arise any perturbation, and evacuation of
humors, it is an undoubted signal, that nature by the abusive malignity of
humors is provoked to a distemper. Whence it is, that she runs too fast for the
gradual progress of coction to arrive in her company to a station, and then we
may confidently assert the Crisis is not safe: and the less, according to the
dangerous nature of the disease. For in an healthy disease, and a less
dangerous one it is formidable lest it should be undervalued in the judgment,
and afterward the disease should return with more troublesome and dangerous
symptoms, or continuing longer should be determined by death. For Coctions
(says Hippocrates) show the quickness of judgment, and the security of the
disease; but crude and inconcoct excretions purged by bad abscessions are signs
of pains, diuturnity, or acrisies, or death, or relapse. For these
inconveniences arise, when the Crisis can by no means be forejudged, whence it
appears that the conditions and customs of nature are wholly abolished, and
vanquished by the strength of the disease, nor that it can be expected, that
victory should return in the Crisis, because in the fight nature displayed no
ensigns of victory, which always happens in a mutual repugnancy, for he who
is likely to conquer his Antagonist, shows in every point of motion that he
has subjected his enemy, though he bring back the marks of repassion. But when
no sign of prevalence appears, it necessarily implies the destruction and
downfall of a faculty.

An imperfect Chrisis is that in which the disease is not perfectly judged, but
only partially, and leaves room for another Crisis to succeed.

And this is twofold, one to melioration, the other to detriment.

That tends to melioration which frees not the sick person wholly of the
disease, but causes an alacrity in bearing it.

That is detrimental which adds fuel to the disease, and makes it wore violent
and dangerous.

A COROLLARY.
The proposed differences of the Crisis are knotted with some difficulties
which are here to be resolved. For first, it may be proved by the following
arguments, that there is no perfect healthy or deadly crisis.

First, If there were a perfect healthy crisis, when that were consummate,
perfect health would be the sequel of it. But after a crisis health is in a
very languid and imperfect condition, and all the actions persisting weak and
infirm, are symptoms rather of a morbous constitution, than of health.

Secondly, There can be no transition from one extreme to another, without the
help of a medium. But a neutrality of state is the medium between disease and
health. Therefore in every crisis there will be a change to that natural state,
but not to perfect sanity.

Thirdly, They who are in a way of recovery, having escaped the danger of a
disease by a crisis, are in the same manner preserved as sick persons. But this
were inconsistent, if a crisis were perfect and healthy.

Fourthly, a deadly crisis also cannot be termed perfect, when death the
consequent of it, is a pure destruction, and contrary to perfection.

Fifthly, Every crisis is perfected by Nature, and all her actions perpetually
aim in a direct tendency at good. Therefore no crisis can be deadly.

To the first, second, and third, I answer, That crisis is called perfectly
healthy, after which no particle of morbifick matter is left in the body which
may give a resummons to a disease; but though sanity in its perfection be not
immediately succedaneous to the crisis, but only a neutral state of recovery,
yet this depends not upon preternatural matter, but only upon the languidness
and imbecility of the parts necessarily introduced by the violence of the now
departed disease. Therefore we may affirm, that at that time sanity is perfect,
at least in respect of the morbifical cause, which was wholly evacuated. And
this is a sufficient ground for a perfect healthy crisis.

To the fourth we answer, That in a deadly crisis there is a destruction as to
the individuum, and the body diseased, but this is no impediment to perfection
in respect of the crisis it self, which though it be destructively exercised,
yet when it is wholly finished it may be called as it were perfect.

To the fifth I answer, That Nature proposes always to it self the best end,
yet often errs in her collimation, when she is very infirm, and for want of
strength cannot take the mark, but is forced to a burdensome submission.

Secondly, Two stories related by Hippocrates may be objected against the first
condition of a perfect healthy crisis, the first of which we find, 1 Epid.
Sect. 3. where he reports that one Meto without any symptoms of concoction was
judged perfectly to health. The other may be read, 3 Epid. Sect. 3. where he
also affirms, that one Larissaea a Maid was perfectly judged without the signs
of concoction. But this objection may be enervated two ways:

For first, we say with Galen that those Histories are rare, and as to nature
extraordinary, therefore especially noted by Hippocrates. Galen also admires in
his comm. that no recidivation followed upon those crises, because they
appeared not according to the custom of nature, nor the ordinary rule of an
healthy crisis. We say secondly, That those crises were healthy, because in the
beginning there proceeded many evacuations, and those laudable enough, and many
followed the crisis; as by those Histories appears. Yet although they were as
it were symptomatical, because they came forth in the beginning without the
signs of coction, yet they are in some manner deemed to be critical, as being
caused by the force of oppressed nature, and swelling matter; or at least we
may call them mixed, viz. partly critical, partly symptomatical, which by
diminishing the morbifick matter, can effect, that the succeeding Crisis be
terminated in salubrity, especially when other evacuations followed it. For
after judgment Meto frequently bled at the nose, and the months of Larissaea
issued, which never appeared, and therefore no recidivation followed upon it.

It may also be objected, That nature can critically evacuate the noxious
humors while they are tumid, without the symptoms of coction, when it may be
lawful for a Physician by the precept of our divine Sire, to cause purgations,
when the matter swells without any expectation of concoction. To this it must be
answered, in the beginnings of diseases nature being oppressed by the swelling
matter, can cause only mixed evacuations, viz. partly critical, and partly
symptomatical, not perfect Crises through defect of concoction.

Thirdly, Against the fifth condition of an healthy Crisis, viz. that it must
be secure, that is, easily tolerable by the sick person, and without dangerous
symptoms, authority, reason, and experience may be opposed. For Hippocrates,
Aph. 13. Sect. 2. affirms, that a night troublesome and dangerous is the
forerunner of an approaching Crisis, and Galen chap. 7. Book 2. of Crises,
asserts, that diverse symptoms, and these most perilous, as perturbation,
deliration, difficult respiration, tossings, inequality of pulse, and critical
vacuations are its anteambuloes.

Lastly, A crisis cannot happen, but after a conflict of nature with the
disease; and this contention cannot be without the exacerbation of symptoms:
for nature and the diseases do mutually act and suffer, by which means the
body of the sick person is necessarily tortured: Lastly, experience teaches,
that no crisis (how healthy soever) can be exercised without vehemence of
symptoms; and great disturbance of the sick person. To these we answer, that
in a crisis many symptoms exert themselves, but they are not dangerous, for
where the strength is firm, and vigorous, the symptoms, which are always more
gentle in an healthy crisis, cannot infer any danger. For when they are very
vehement, they portend a deadly crisis, or at least an imperfect one, and
posting on to worse.

Fourthly, Against the last condition of an healthy crisis, viz. that it must
agree with the disease, and the nature of the party diseased, so that acute
diseases may be judged by excretions, long ones by abscessions. As Galen, chap.
7. book 3. of crises. Besides pestilent fevers, which are acute to extremity,
are eased by botches and carbuncles. Long diseases also are not only judged by
abscessions, but also by excretions. Nor do these Crises conform to the nature
of the sick person, for acute fevers in young men are terminated not only by
flux of blood, but also by sweat, urine, and flux of the belly, which happen
indiscriminate in old men. To all these it must be answered, That the condition
proposed is true, but not always and necessarily, but for the most part; for
nature has its ordinary motions, which sometimes changes according to the
various conditions and disposition of the matter, so that the matter which at
such age was usually evacuated by nature, by flux of blood, if it be not placed
in the inferior parts, is more conveniently sent away by urine, or the flux of
the belly.

CHAP. IV. Of the Signs of Crises.
There are three Orders of Critical Signs; some termed antecedent, some
concomitant, others subsequent.
THE Antecedent are again of two sorts, some prognosticating the time of
Crises, some the species of them. The time of an approaching Crisis is known
two ways; by the acuteness of the disease, and by the signs of concoction,
which are by us explicated, Sect. 5. Semiot. cha. 4. Those signs foreshow the
species of a Crisis, which give notice by what place a Crisis is to come, viz.
either by vomit, flux of the belly, sweats, urines, flux of the blood, months,
hemorrhoids, or abscession: which were all explained by us, Sect. 3. Semiot.
chap. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Signs concomitating the Crisis are those which appear in company with the
very species of the Crisis, demonstrating whether the Crisis it self now being
be good or bad, perfect or imperfect. And they are the very causes and critical
species, which are only two, excretion and abscession.

That excretion ought to be called healthy and good which is made conveniently;
but that it may be so, four things are requisite, a laudable quality, a
moderate quantity, an opportune time, and the manner of excretion familiar to
nature.

The quality of the excreted humor is laudable, if both the peccant and cocted
humor be evacuated. The quantity is moderate, which is neither defective but
sufficient, nor immoderate, for the exiguity of it is condemned and suspected,
such as dropping of blood, inconsiderable transpirations by sweat, small vomits;
the immoderate wants not its danger. The opportunity of time is the Critical
day, excretions happening on other days give cause of suspicion. The manner of
excretion is familiar to nature, if they be at first copious, and flow not out
slowly and by little; next, if they be thrust out through places conducible and
agreeable to the laws of nature.

But that evacuation may be made by convenient places, three things are
necessary: First, That the place be not more worthy than that in which the
disease resides: Next, That it be direct: Lastly, That it have open passages.

That the abscession may be legitimate, three things are to be noted, whither,
from whence, and for what cause. Whither signifies the part in which it dwells,
which must be an inferior one, ignoble, and remote from the affected part, and
capable of the whole morbifick matter, otherwise there will be danger of a
reflux. From whence, denotes the part from which, the right or left; for the
decumbency must be direct. For what cause, shows us the cause, by reason of
which this abscession is made; that is, whether from Nature, the disease being
concocted, or from the matter collecting it, and the crude humor yet troubling
it; for if there happen an abscession while the disease is crude, it will be
small, and not perfectly demonstrate the disease. All these are particularly by
us explained, Sect. 3. Semiot. chap. 2. when we make an inspection into the
signs, drawn from the excrements flowing by diverse parts of the body.

The consequent signs of a Crisis show whether it be perfect, and whether our
expectation will not be deluded, if we look for perfect health thereupon, or
whether it be imperfect, to a danger of recidivation. And these are taken from
the actions, excrements, and qualities of the body, in which if there be but a
small recess from a a natural state, the excretion was healthy; but if there be
a wide recoil, the crisis is imperfect, and there will be danger of
recidivation. These also will require explication in the last chapter of the
Prognostic part, in which are propounded the signs of imminent relapse in
those who are in way of recovery.

CHAP. V. Of the Critical days.
Those are called Critical days, in which Crise's usually happen.

Their differences are three; some are truly and perfectly Critical, some
indicative, some casually intervening.

The perfectly Critical are called principal or radical, because the Crise's
contingent on these days bear all the marks of a perfect Crisis: those are the
three Septenaries: viz. the seventh, the fourteenth, and the twentieth.

THese days more frequently produce frequent and healthy Crise's, because
Nature in them chiefly when she operates to purpose, and gets the day
absolutely against the power of the disease, she (like a stout virago)
challenges the morbifick cause to a single duel, which she routs out of the
field by convenient passages. But these are the three Septenaries, because
Nature delights in a Septenary number. For in the seventh month it quickens
the Embryo to life, in the seventh year of our age we show our teeth, at the
fourteenth the months flow, and every Septenary causes notable mutations in
Men: The first of these is the seventh, not only by a prerogative of order,
but also by a superiority of power and strength, as Galen witnesses, 1 Of
Decret. days, chap. 4. Comparing it with a King, admirable for clemency, who
pardons many, and secures them from punishment, who mitigates the punishment of
persons condemned; for most usually the Crise's happening on these days are
good and healthy. But if some be casually bad, they are not so pernicious as
another day would make them.

The second is the fourteenth, in which those diseases are judged, on which by
reason of the matter not yet well concocted, judgment could not be passed on
the seventh; but if an hasty Crisis happen before the fourteenth it is not
perfect, but is caused by the irritation of Nature, or the plenty or quality of
the matter. For Critical days being numbered by weeks, the fourteenth is the
end of the second week, which caused Hippocrates to term it uneven, as not
being considered from the first day of the disease, but from the first day of
the second week. By it also acute diseases are terminated, according to
Hippocrates, Aph. 23. Sect. 2, Acute diseases are judged in fourteen days:
Which he also confirms in Coac. Fourteen days judge of burning fevers,
sentencing either to death or to health. Yet many Histories delivered in his
Epidemicks seem to enervate the truth of this affertion; which stories are of
those, who having acute fevers were produced beyond the fourteenth day.
Herophon judged on the seventeenth, Philinius his Wife dyed on the twentieth;
Chaerion judged on the twentieth; but all these were troubled with acute
fevers. To which objection it must be answered, that Diseases truly acute
according to the vote of Galen and Hippocrates, are those which are swiftly,
continently, and vehemently rooted, nor do they attain to the title of acute,
till they begin to be vehement; though then some diseases he judged the
seventeenth, and the twentieth day, as to the beginning of the disease, yet
they are always judged on the fourteenth as to the vehemence thereof. For such
diseases as are judged the seventeenth or twentieth day, do not presume to be
violent and impetuous so soon as they drop from their causes, but after a
little pause. So those which began to be violent on the end of the fourth day,
though they were consummate on the seventeenth, yet doubtless they were judged
on the fourteenth after their violence; and those which appeared violent on the
seventh, judged on the twentieth, have a solution on the fourteenth of their
violence. Whence Galen in his Commentary on the mentioned Aphorism, says,
That no one was ever found, which was so swiftly moved from the beginning, that
it passed this boundary, which did not receive some mutation by the days
aforesaid. For though an acute disease end sometimes on the seventeenth, or
twentieth day, yet we have found it judged within its fourteenth, if we compute
from that day in which the disease begins to be more swift and vehement: Which
appears by Hippocrates his history of a young man in Meliboea, who fell to
deliration the tenth day, was quite mad the twentieth, and died the twenty
fourth: by which it is evident that he deceased on the fourteenth day of
vehemence, which began but on the tenth day of the disease. But though
Hippocrates calls some diseases acute, which are extended to the fortyeth or
sixtyeth day, yet they are not truly and properly acute, because they are not
vehement and impetuous, but slow in progress; and are therefore from their
decidence commonly called acute, whereas they are produced from acute diseases
judged by an imperfect Crisis, or proceed unequally, by reason of the unequal
change of remission and exacerbation.

The third of the principal days is the twentieth, which is the seventh from
the fourteenth, the fourteenth being here numbered, for it is the last of the
second week, and the first of the third, as Hippocrates informs us, Aph. 24.
Sect. 2. where chiefly observing the indicative days, he says, The
seventeenth day is worth Contemplation, because it is the fourth from the
fourteenth: Whence we must necessarily infer, that the twentieth is the
seventh from the fourteenth.

The same thing Hippocrates confirms in many stories in his Epidemicks, as in
that of Chaerion, in the wife of Philinus, and in the daughter of Euryanax, who
were judged the twentieth day. But in others judged after the twentieth, there
happened Crise's in the fourths and sevenths by computation from the twentieth.
So Abderitana a Maid was judged the twenty fourth, Anaxion the thirty fourth.

But yet we may oppose to this tenet, that the same Hippocrates, Aphorism. 36.
Sect. 4. omitting the twentieth, reckons the twenty first amongst the Decretory
days; for, says he, sweats are good for decumbents in fevers, which are
evaporated on the third, the fifth, seventh, ninth, eleventh, fourteenth,
seventeenth, and one and twentieth days. The same he confirms in 1 Epid. in
the book of Decretory days, in which he sets down the twenty first, omitting
the twentyeth.

To unravel this difficulty we must answer, That the Crise's contingent in the
third week, most frequently take up part in the twentieth and twenty first, so
that something Hippocrates might well refer the Crisis to the twenty first.
Yet it were more rational to call that the Critical day, in which the Crisis
begins, then that in which it ends.

The indicative days, which are called contemplable and Messengers, are those
which denuntiate the drawing near of the Crisis on the septenaries: and they
are in number three, the fourth, the eleventh, and the fourteenth.

They are called Contemplable because by the Contemplation of them we foresee
the approach of a Crisis, and for this cause they are therefore called
messengers, and more frequently indicative, because they show and foretell the
day designed for the coming of the Crisis; and that by the signs of concoction,
appearing chiefly in the Urine: whence Hippocrates in his Prognostics and
Aphorisms averres, That Urine issuing the fourth day which has white
hypostasis smooth and equal do Prognostic a solution of the disease on the
seventh day. But of the principal days every one has its index: viz. the
fourth is the index of the seventh, the eleventh of the fourteenth, the
seventeenth of the twentieth. But those days are also reckoned among the
Critical, as not being simply indicative, but because in them Crise's do not
seldom happen, though less perfect ones.

Of these therefore the fourth day is the first, which primarily, by it self
and of its own nature is the index of the seventh, as Galen has diligently
observed, chap. 11. book 2. of the decretory days, where he instructs us
that that Crisis, appears the fourth day by its antecedent signs of concoction,
which without the objection of an impediment will happen the seventh day. For
many things may stop the motion of nature not in the seventh alone, but in
every Critical day, viz. either as to the sick person himself, or the
Physician, the attendants, who are incident to many errors: So that if on the
seventh day the Physician prescribe a purgative, if the sick person, or the
attendants be disobedient, and pervert the right use both of remedies, and not
natural things. But the fourth day is to be placed among the decretories, for
it discovers diseases peracute to extremity, as Hippocrates witnesses in his
prognostickes, for, says he, The most gentle Fevers, and those that are
confirmed by the securest signs, end the fourth day or sooner; but the most
malignant, and those which are attended by dreadful symptoms, kill the fourth
day or sooner. So in his Epidemicks, Pericles on the fourth day with the
breaking forth of an universal sweat, died by a most acute Fever. Calvus
Lariseus, had a pain in his right thigh, on the fourth days he dyed very
suddenly and acutely. Yet these Crise's are very rare, which happen on the
fourth day, for they more frequently fall out on the third or fifth, because
the exacerbations of acute diseases are caused on odd days. But on the same
days the diseases, from whence these exacerbations proceed, are discovered, as
Hippocrates taught in Epid. and hence Galen averres, that he observed but only
once a Crisis on the fourth day, but Archigenes twice.

The second of the Indicatives is the Eleventh, which yet does not so perfectly
demonstrate the fourteenth, as the fourth does the seventh. For as the strength
of the days perfectly judging is by degrees diminished; so is the virtue of
the indicatives also, whereas the speedier the Crises arrive to perfection,
they show the greater predominancy of nature over the morbifick cause, and by
how much the longer they are protracted, they show a greater insufficiency, or
at least obstinacy of the matter, and therefore judgment cannot be so
infallibly; and orderly passed on them; but the eleventh day does not only act
an index, but a judge; but not so perfectly, and frequently, as the truly
Critical: and many examples are presented to us by Hippocrates in his
Epidemicks, of those, which have been judged the eleventh day, and Galen chap.
7. book 1. of decretory days, relates that one autumn, he observed that all
were judged the eleventh day.

The third of the Indicatives is the seventeenth, which does not so surely
foreshew, as the fourth, and eleventh, but judges much more powerfully, and is
by Galen and other Authors reckoned among the more strong Criticals. Yet
Archigenes and others, which number the days whole, and so the one and
twentieth, not the twentieth, make it a true Critical day, and admit the
eighteenth for an index, not the seventeenth, whom Galen encounters with a
large refutation, 2. of decretory days, chap. 4.

The intervening days, which are also called leap-dayes, irrepent, or
provocatory days, which are annumerated to the principals, and fall between the
indicatives, endeavoring imperfect Crises, are the third, fifth, ninth,
thirteenth, and nineteenth days.

They are called Provocatory, because they sometimes tempt nature to excretion,
whence a Crisis happens some times in them, but an imperfect one, because it
proceeds from the unseasonable and inconvenient irritation of nature. Every
week has its intercident days. For the first has two, the third and the
fifth; the second has also two, the ninth and the thirteenth; But the third
has but one, viz. the nineteenth. But these days are in some manner Critical,
because odd. And acute diseases are heightened to an exacerbation in odd
days, and in those exacerbations Crises usually happen, because then nature is
provoked to excretion. Yet these Crises which are caused by irritation are
imperfect, as is before shown.

But the other days which are neither principal, nor indicative, nor
intercident, are called vacant and Medicinal days, and they are, the sixth,
the eighth, the tenth, the twelfth, the sixteenth, and the eighteenth.

They are termed Vacant, because they neither judge, nor discover, nor provoke,
nor any are in manner Critical: and if a crisis happens in them, it is bad. But
they are called Medicinal, because in them all kinds of Physic, and so
purgatives may be with safety administered, which Hippocrates teaches in a
clause worthy our observation, in his fourth of diseases. Whosoever, says he,
being aggrieved by a continual Fever, use a cathartick on the even days, are
never purged enough. But they who use a purgative on the odd days, are
overmuch purged, and many have thereupon dyed. They may also be in some sort
called decretory, not simply, but with adjection, that they are bad
decretories, for they are never nuntio's of health, but discover badly,
treacherously and dangerously: because the Crisis happening in those days,
proceed simply from the malignity of the disease, not from the conquest, or at
least the irritation of nature, as happens in provocatories. The most malignant
of these is the sixth, which Galen names a Tyrant, purely contrary to the
seventh, by him named King. Therefore what crises soever fall on the sixth day
are to be deemed most dangerous. An emanation of sweat on the sixth day, is
very bad, as Hippocrates in Coac. and in his Aphorisms, the Jaundies is the
sixth day deadly. But in the Epidemicks there are found many histories to this
purpose, as of the Wife of Dromeada, Hermocrates, Philiscus, and many others,
who were unhappy in the contingencies of crises on the sixth day. But it may be
objected, out of Sect. 3. book 3. of Epidem. That Larissaea a Maid was judged
to health on the sixth day. We Answer with Galen, that this causally is very
rare, and beyond the custom of nature, for this crisis happened neither on a
Critical day, nor were there any precedent symptoms of concoction, as before
was mentioned. But the cause of this healthy crisis is to be ascribed to the
rare, and extraordinary struggling of nature, which endeavored a triple
evacuation in this Maid, viz. by the monthly purgations, by large flux of
blood, and a torrent of sweat. The same judgment will hold of the rest even
days to the twentieth. Although some Neotericks have fansyed, that sanguin
diseases are judged on the even days, because they are moved on the same; yet
this is seldom seen, both for that in acute fevers, which are caused by
blood, the blood does easily degenerate into choler, or at least the
putredinous part of it, or for that crises do not simply follow exacerbations,
but much rather a superior cause, which shall be more largely declared, in the
chap. of causes.

The Critical days are also numbered from the twentieth to the fortieth by
septenaries, the twenty seventh, the thirty fourth, and the fortieth. From the
fortieth to the hundred and twentieth by vicenaries, the sixtieth, eightieth,
hundredth, hundred and twentieth, but after this the strength of the Critical
days is spent, and then Crises are said to happen by months and years.

The chief, and more ordinary Critical days are those, which usually happen in
acute diseases; But these acute diseases if they begin with violence are judged
the fourteenth day, or sooner, but if they begin not to move swiftly, and
vehemently, before the end of the first week, they are extended to the
twentieth, which by this means terminates acute diseases. But those diseases
which reach beyond the twentieth, are called acute by decidence, and in these
Crises happen, but not frequently, and so they are numbered not as before by
quaternaries, but by septenaries to the fortieth, in which their strength is
decayed, and the days are numbered by vicenaries only to the hundred and
twentieth, in which also Hippocrates relates contin gencies of both healthy,
and deadly Crises, 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Where we read Heropytus was perfectly, and
healthfully judged on the hundred and twentieth day. Pacius in Thasis, died on
the hundred and twentieth. Beyond that time the virtue of Critical days
reaches not, but afterward the Crises, or rather the changes of the body
happen in months, or years, as Hippocrates witnesses, Aph. 18. Sect. 3. Many
diseases, says he, in children are judged, some in forty days, some in seven
Months, some in seven Years, some upon their arrival to puberty.

The Computation of Critical days must be made from that hour, in which the
sick person perceives a manifest lesion of his actions.

We cannot compute the Critical days, unless we certainly state the beginning
of the whole disease, which must be deduced from the very hour in which the
person sicken'd, for from that to the like hour of the day following, is
reckoned the first day, and the other consequently. But it is very difficult to
state this hour, and many errors are often committed in it; whereas vulgar
Physicians compute the beginning of the disease from the hour of taking bed,
which may indeed hit right in delicate and effeminate men who upon the lightest
touch of pain, presently keep their bed, but in men more strong and accustomed
to labor, it is very fallible, whereas they by the assuefaction bear the
disease, but now creeping on, nor yet troublesome, for many days; nor retain
to their bed, till they are supplanted by the oppressive violence of the
disease. Therefore the true computation must be instituted from that very hour,
in which we perceive a sensible lesion of actions in the party diseased, viz.
by which, he could not dine or sup, or according to his custom walk, or
perform other usual offices: in short from that time in which he began to be
feverish, if it be a primary, not a symptomatical fever. But because a fever
is seldom known by the sick person, or his assistants, therefore the Physician
by the relation of symptoms, and their first invasion easily deduceth the
fever it self from the beginning. But there is one true sign often occurring
in the beginning of a fever, viz. that acute diseases do often invade us with
coldness and shaking. If therefore the sick person relate to the Physician that
in the beginning of his sickness he perceived a chilness and trembling such an
hour, that hour will be truly the beginning of the disease, from which the
Critical days are to be computed.

In a Woman in labor, troubled with an acute fever, if the birth be natural,
the computation of the Critical days must be from the fever, not from the
birth; but if the birth be preternatural, the computation is to be made from
the birth, not from the Fever.

This Theoreme includes a very difficult question, and much intricate, as being
opposed by no less authority then of Hippocrates himself, and fortified on both
parts with very sinewy difficulties of reason. Hippocrates 3. Progn. Aph. 12.
says, In like manner judgment is passed in Women from the birth. And Galen in
his comment on that place, confirms the opinion by these words: Let the
beginning of reckoning be made, not from that day in which they were feverish,
but from that in which they brought forth; in some therefore they begin about
the second, or third day after parturition, from which many number the future
judgment: but erroniously, for the numeration of days is to be instituted,
from that in which they brought forth. Which precept Hippocrates has also
brought into his practice, 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 10, 11, 12. and Sect. 3. of
the same book Aegr. 14. In which place he tells us stories of many women in
parturition troubled with an acute disease, in whom the days were computed from
the very day of birth. This may be reestablished by a very pregnan treason; For
it seems the beginning of the disease is to be contemporary with the first
motion of the humor: But the humor begins to be moved in the day of bringing
forth, for then begins nature to struggle, and then the humors are agitated,
therefore from this agitation of humors the computation must be made. But on
the contrary the same Hippocrates 1. Epid. Aegr. 4. In the Wife of Philinus,
which on the fourteenth day after delivery, was taken sick of a fever, reckons
the days from the day of the fever, not of the birth. So Aegr. 5. following.
In the Wife of Epicrates, which begun to be feverish the second day after
parturition, he institutes his computation from the fever, not from
parturition. As also Aegr. 11. of the same book in the Wife of Dromeada, which
on the second day after delivery, was taken with a Cold, and acute Fever, he
makes the same computation from the day of the fever, not of delivery, This
opinion also is compared with strong fortifications of reason. For if the
computation ought in any reason to be made from the day of delivery, it would
be chiefly this, because of the motion of the matter in parturition: but this
motion is not a sufficient cause: for though the matter be never so much moved
occasionally before the fever; yet nevertheless the computation begins from
the fever it self, not from the motion. So in a violent exercitation of the
body, causing a fever, the computation must not be deduced from the
exercitation, in which the commotion of humors was made, but only from the
subsequent fever. This controversy is determined in the proposed Theoreme. For
Birth is natural or preternatural. And these are differenced by the gravity and
levity of symptoms, and principally by expurgation, which in natural birth
proceeds in due order: in preternatural is suppressed. If therefore the birth
be natural, a woman within the time of expurgation cannot, unless by reason of
some procatarctick cause, be taken with a fever, as being duly purged from all
excrements. But if the birth be preternatural, it is evident that it invests it
self in the nature of the disease, offending very many operations. And so, the
fever succeeding this morbous birth, is deemed to depend upon the birth it
self, and so falls under the notion of a symptomatical fever; and the
computation of the days which ought to be made from the original of the
disease, must be made from the morbous birth. This Hipp. observed in his Aegr.
above propounded: for the Women there mentioned Hist. 10.11. and 12. Sect. 2.
book 3. Epid. had a preternatural birth, for the two first, were abortive; but
the third was delivered with much pain. As also she mentioned in hist. 14.
Sect. 3. brought forth with great difficulty, and without much purgation.
Therefore in these four Hippocrates makes his computation from the day of
birth, but in the others related in hist. 4.5. and 11. book 2. the birth was
natural; for the Wife of Philinus brought forth a Female, with purgation
according to nature, passing thorough the rest with ease. The Wife of Epicrates
was delivered of a Daughter, and all other things did orderly proceed. The Wife
of Dromeada brought forth a Daughter also, with all other things according to
order. Therefore Hippocrates institutes his computation in them from the day of
the fever, not of the birth. But against this decision of the controversy we
have another in arms, viz. Amatus Lusitanus, an Author otherwise very grave in
his Schol. curat. 34. Cent. 1. Truly, says he, this answer of Hipp. is not
satisfactory to the mind and of no moment; and this he endeavors to
demonstrate out of Hist. 2. Sect. 3. Book 3. Epid. which is concerning a woman
in Thasus, which having brought forth a Daughter without purgation, was the
third day taken with an acute dreadful fever; and Amatus is of opinion, that
in her, computation was made from the day of the fever, whereas it is not
evident that the birth was preternatural, though without purgation. But that
this computation was made from the day of the fever, he collects from the
following words of Hippocrates, which are contained in the History: But after
she had been shaken with cold, continual fevers, etc. That from this (says
he) the Reader might understand the computation to be made from the third day
after birth. But by this good man's leave we must tell him that his
interpretation of Hippocrates is bad, out of whose words nothing can be
gathered but this, that from the third day of delivery a continual fever
followed, and the symptoms the concomitants thereof. And if we traverse the
whole History, it will evidently appear that computation was made from the day
of the birth, not of the fever, as Valesius, and Mercurialis, learned
Interpreters of the Epidemicks, confidently assert. And so the proposed
distinction containing the division of the question, will be agreeable to the
mind of Hippocrates. But there intervenes yet one scruple, viz. Why Hippocrates
3 Progn. absolutely proposing as it were a general rule, teaches simply to
compute from the day of birth? We must answer, That Hippocrates in his Books of
Epid. observed various experiments, and many cases, as they happened, from
which he afterward composed rules and canons, contained in his Prognostics
and Aphorisms, as Galen informs, Book 1. of Decretory days, chap. 3. And the
Canons are drawn from the most frequent contingencies; but it is usual, that a
fever immediately succeeding upon parturition, depends upon the error of the
birth, therefore for the most part computation is to be made from the birth.
But it is seldom found, that when the birth is natural, a fever should arise,
which at that time cannot proceed from any thing but a procatarctick and
external cause.

In Head wounds, and any other, the computation of the Critical days must be
made from the day of the wound, not of the fever.

The same reason holds in a wound as in preternatural birth: for the fever
succeeding it is symptomatical, but the wound is the primary disease, from
which the number of critical days must be deduced.

In relapses, the computation of the critical days must be instituted, from
the beginning of the disease, not the relapse.

Recidivation is caused by the relics of the precedent disease, which were
not wholly evacuated, and therefore is taken for the same disease, the matter
being the same; in which indeed there happens a remission of the fever between
the root of it and the relapse, but not a true intermission, as appears by the
symptoms observed by Hippocrates, when he says, If any thing of that which is
effused, be left within, it inclines to relapse, thirst left within,
exsiccation of the mouth, and insuavity, by the same reason as all the rest are
signs of the imperfect solution of a disease. Therefore because he that is
surprised with a relapse, is not yet fully freed from those accidents, the
computation must be one, for that the solution of the former affection was not
total, but partial only. So Hipp. in Epid. perpetually numbers the days from
the precedent disease, never from the relapse, as appears in the Histories of
Hermocrates, Anaxion, Herophon, Cleanactis Wife to Epicrates, and others.

CHAP. VI. Of the causes of a Crisis, and Critical days.
A Crisis is a kind of a compound, comprehending Conturbation, Evacuation, and
sudden mutation to health.

Conturbation is a plenty of critical symptoms, arising from the agitation of
morbisick matter. But this agitation proceeds, either from an external cause,
such as of the Heavens, and the motions and influences of the stars: or from an
internal, as from nature her self.

HOw the influences of the Stars effect critical motions, shall be after
explained. But now nature in a critical conturbation agitates the morbifick
humors because they being separated from the laudable and gentle matter:
provoke nature more, which upon this irritation is excited to expulsion, for
though those humors be concocted, yet they are not wholly reduced to
gentleness; and therefore by molesting nature with their acrimony and some
malignant quality, they cause her to ease her self of this trouble by
excretionr.

The cause of Evacuation is the expulsive faculty, which excited either by the
copiousness or the quality of the matter, critically expels all molestations.

The expulsive faculty is one of those, which are termed natural subservient,
performing its duty by the help of native heat, and spirits, as also by the
fibers implanted in every part.

But why Crisis or critical evacuation happens in the septenary and quaternary
days, rather then at other times, depends upon the motion of the Moon as its
principal cause.

The cause of a Crisis, and the cause of critical days are to be
distinguished, as things differing in the whole latitude of the genus. For the
cause of a Crisis is the expulsive faculty, thrusting out that which is
troublesome. But when we enquire after the causes of critical days, we observe
not what expels the vicious humors out of the body, but why the expulsive
faculty does not use indifferently all, but some solemn days, on which it
expels these troublesome things more frequently, and easily: but this depends
upon the motion of the Moon effecting these motions by her various aspects.

The Moon is very predominant over these inferior bodies, especially over
humid ones, causing in them notable mutations, chiefly in conjunctions,
appositions and quadratures, in which Crises usually happen.

What changes the Moon causes by her various aspects in this inferior world,
and how by this means the winds and tempests are changed, how seed thrives, how
crabs and shel fish are sometimes full, sometimes empty, is well enough known
to Mariners, Husbandmen, and ordinary Women. But the chief subjects of this
domineering Planet are humid bodies; whence it is no cause of wonder, that it
should have so much authority over the humors of our bodies, that it can move
them on certain days, and by that excite a Crisis. This it most commonly does
in its aspects, by whose Arithmetic the critical days are numbered: for the
first aspect of the Moon is the Sextile, or left hexangle happening on the
fourth day. The second, quadrate or the left tetrangle, on the seventh day. The
third called the left triangle, on the eleventh. The fourth called opposite, or
diametral, on the fourteenth day. The fifth, the right triangle, on the
seventeenth day. The sixth, the tetrangle, or right quadrate, on the twentieth
day. The seventh, the sextile or right hexangle, on the four and twentieth
day. The eighth in conjunction, on the seven and twentieth day. But these days
are extended to some latitude, as we shall hereafter inform; it will suffice
here to note, that the Aspects of the Moon and the Critical days have the same
computation, which was proposed in the precedent Chap.

The Motions of Critical days depend not on the Aspects which the Moon has
with the Sun, but from those which she has with the Signs of the Zodiac, and
that place in heaven, in which it was in the beginning of the Disease.

If the Crises were moved by the appearances of the Moon with the Sun, there
would be no order observable in Critical days, because all sick persons,
whatever day they began to be sick, would on the same day be subject to a
crisis; for instance, in the beginning of a full Moon, when she opposes the
Sun; or in new Moon, when conjunction is caused, or in the quaternions.
Therefore we must think that the crises depend not on such aspects; but rather
from the aspects of the Moon to that Sign, and to that place of the Zodiac,
in which it was in the beginning of the disease, and so on the seventh day of
the disease the Moon is in a quadrate aspect to that place, and on the
fourteenth in an opposite, and so of the rest.

The computation of Critical days is not to be instituted according to the
Synodical Month, which is also called the Month of Conjunction, nor according
to the Month of Apparition or Illumination, nor according to the Medicinal
Month, but according to the Periodical Month, or the Month of Peragration.

The Synodical Month is that time which intervenes between two conjunctions of
the Sun and Moon, consisting of twenty nine days and thirteen hours, and so
three weeks constitute not twenty, but two and twenty days and three hours:
therefore according to this Month the computation of the Critical days cannot
be made. The Month of Illumination or Apparition, is the interval from the
first sight of the new Moon disappearing to that day, and it is in space twenty
six days and twelve hours; nor can computation be made according to this
Month, because three weeks amount to only nineteen days and twelve hours.
The Periodical Month, or Month of Peragration, is that time in which the Moon
posts thorough the whole Zodiac, and returns to the same point she left, and
this is extended to twenty seven days and eight hours, and so three weeks will
make up twenty days and twelve hours. This also Galen would not admit to
constitute the order of Critical days, therefore he invented a new Month,
which he called Medicinal, compounded of the Periodical, and the Month of
Illumination, which two being united, make fifty three days and twenty hours,
which account halfed makes twenty six days and twenty two hours, and this half
constitutes Galen's Medicinal Month, three weeks of which make twenty days
and four hours: But this Month of Galen's, all, both Physicians and
Astrologers reject and contemn as fictitious, portentous, and deviating from
truth, whose reasons for brevity sake we omit, because they are vulgarly known.
It will be satisfactory to inform you, that the Decretory days are to be taken
from the true motion of the Moon, which constitutes the Month of Peragration,
and by which the forenamed aspects are constituted. But that Month of
Peragration as is before mentioned, consists of twenty seven days and eight
hours; and if it be divided into four weeks, the first will be ended by six
days and twenty hours, the second by thirteen days and sixteen hours; the
third by twenty days and twelve hours. Nor is that Periodical Month to be
neglected, for that reason which forced Galen's invention to forge the
Medicinal Month, but is rather the more to be accepted of, because it affords
us a reason why the twentieth and one and twentieth days are numbered among the
Critical ones. For though the twentieth more frequently judge, yet the one and
twentieth is not wholly to be rejected. And for this cause Archigenes and
Diocles, whom we find by the testimony of Galen himself, Book 1. of Decretory
days, chap. 2. very exact in the operations of Art, numbered the one and
twentieth among the Critical days. But this is the reason why both of them are
Critical days, because both of them concur to complete the third week, whose
last day borrowes twelve hours from the twentieth, and as many from the one and
twentieth. But yet Crises more frequently happen on the twentieth, because upon
the determination of the acute disease, Nature as weary of a longer trouble,
encounters the disease in the first dawning of the Critical day, and endeavors
a crisis. But this beginning of the Critical day is in the middle of the
twentieth, as the end thereof falls in the middle or twelfth hour of the one
and twentieth. It is also observable, that the motion of the Moon is sometimes
slower, sometimes swifter, and according to the swiftness of it the crisis
happens sooner, but according to its slow progress the crisis appears later,
and therefore a certain number of hours cannot be assigned, in which the crisis
may happen, but in a wide conjecture the seventh, the fourteenth, and the
twentieth days are to be noted. As Hippocrates seemed to signify in 6 Epid.
where to the number of the days he has added that preposition about, viz.
about the twentieth, about the fortieth, and so forth. Besides, the crisis does
not always begin and end the same day, but is sometimes extended to more
days, and perturbation begins on the twentieth, but the crisis ends on the one
and twentieth: But the whole continuance of time in perturbation, conflict, and
excretion, is usually termed the time of the crisis.

Besides the principal cause, which is the motion of the Moon, we must
acknowledge two other causes of the Critical days less principal, viz. the
motion and disposition of humors, as also the nature of the sick party.

Although the virtue of the Moon be most available in constituting of Critical
days, yet by it self it is insufficient, otherwise in all sick persons the
same Crises would happen in the same number of days; But the thing runs
otherwise, whereas some are subject to a Crisis on the seventh, some on the
fourteenth, some on other days, to some good, to some bad. There are therefore
other causes to which this diversity is to be attributed. For first the motion,
and disposition of humors is the cause that a Crisis sometimes falls out
sooner, sometimes later, sometimes also on the intercident or indicative days;
for the humors upon concoction performed sooner, or later, and upon their
acquisition of a favorable or malignant quality, sooner, or later excite
nature: As also, if they are moved on this or that day from whence arise
exacerbations of fevers, in which most usually Crises happen, as Hipp. in 1.
Epid. Acute diseases, says he, are judged on the day of their exacerbation.
Lastly, The nature of the sick body, which as before is said, is the principal
cause of the whole Crisis, or Critical excretion, and is also the less
principal cause of the critical days, for as it is strong, or infirm it
concocts sooner or slower the morbifick matter, and the quickness, or slowness
of the Crisis depends upon slow or quick concoction, so when the morbifick
matter is not concocted on the seventh day, the Crisis is deferred to the
fourteenth, or the twentieth. For the Moon moves the humors every critical day,
and excites nature to excretion; but this motion is frustrate, for nature
leaves excretion unattempted, unless she finds matter prepared and disposed for
evacuation, except this sometimes happen by extreme irritation, by reason of
the malignity of the matter, which nature sometimes, though it be yet crude,
lays out the utmost of her strength to expel: but this Crisis is unhappy,
because it transgresses the ordinary laws of nature. And this is enough to be
said of the causes of Crises and critical days.

The Third Section of PATHOLOGY. Of the Causes of Diseases.
The First CHAPTER. Of the Nature of the Morbifick Cause.
That is the Cause of a Disease, which any way conduces to it.
THis definition or rather explication of the morbifick cause is most general,
which could not be any other, to comprize all the causes, considered in
Medicine: for all those things which confer any thing whatsoever to the
generation of the disease, either by themselves, or by accident, mediately, or
immediately are called by their name of Causes; as also all those things which
are advantageous to the Disease either by conservation, or augmentation, or by
any other means, as shall hereafter appear in the differences.

All the causes of diseases are referred to the efficient.

The Philosopher rallies all the causes of things under four heads, viz. the
Formal, Material, Efficient, and Final; to the series of which all morbifick
causes are to be referred. Yet here we cannot trace the four genus's of these
causes: for that first the formal cause is nothing else, but the proper essence
of every thing, but we have at large explained the nature and essence of
diseases before. Next there is no material cause in diseases, for disease being
an accident needs no matter, out of which it should be produced, but in which
it should exsist, which is nothing else, but the subject thereof, or the parts
of our body: As for the final cause, though the lesion of actions may be termed
as it were such, yet this is by accident, as it follows the generation of the
disease, but diseases by themselves and properly have no final cause, as
neither all those things which are constituted in a kind of imperfection;
therefore the efficient cause remains only considerable in this discourse,
which is here taken by the Philosopher not only for that from which the effect
is first produced, but in a wider signification, as appears by our description,
for all that which is in any manner conducible to the generation of the disease.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Causes.
The cause of a disease is either by it self, or by accident.

The cause by it self is when by its own proper, and implanted strength,
without the intervening help of any thing else, it produces a Disease.

But the cause by accident is, when any thing else is summoned, as auxiliary to
the production of a morbous disposition.

SO cold water sprinkled upon our body, by it self and naturally causes a
chilness; but by accident, upon the densation of the skin, and contraction of
the vapors within, it heats. So Scammony, being an extreme hot Medicine, by it
self overheats the bowels; but by its powerful expurgation of choler, and hot
humors, by accident it refrigerates, and cures a fever.

And there are causes of diseases; some principal, some helping, some without
which nothing could be.

The principal cause is that which either gave the first motion to the effect,
or is able alone to excite it.

The helping cause is that which produces not the effect alone, but is
auxiliary to the principal.

The cause without which nothing could be, is that which neither causes the
affection it self, nor performs any thing else; but without it nothing can be
transacted.

The Gout is exemplary in all these three causes: for the cold constitution of
the air, and the copiousness of excrementitious humors, is the principal cause
of a defluxion into the joints; the auxiliary cause is the tenuity of the
humors; but the cause without which nothing could be, is the infirmity of the
joints, and laxity of the passages.

There is also one cause of a disease remote, the other nigh.

The remote is that between which and the disease, others intercede.

The near cause is that to which the disease owes its immediate production.

The proposed differences of causes are of frequent use in the Art of Medicine,
but the succeeding are most frequent, and of great validity in the explication
of all diseases; therefore in them we shall act the curious Scrutinists.

The causes of diseases are some external, some internal.

The external causes are those which either outwardly applied, or differing
from the constitution of our body, usually cause diseases.

The term of external seems not very convenient, because sleep, waking, and the
passions of the mind are comprehended under it, which yet seems to be contained
among internal things; yet because it has found much acceptance with
Physicians, therefore we also reject it not, averring those causes to be
external, because many of them are outwardly applied, as, the air, meat, drink,
etc. But the rest, as sleep, waking, and the passions of the mind, are so
manifest, that they are granted without any dispute for external positions;
Celsus therefore calls them evident by a very apposite term. Others call them
procatarctick, precedent, and primitive, because from them the first original
of diseases flows.

But of them some are necessary, some are unnecessary.

The necessary are those which do necessarily affect us, and inevitably light
upon us.

Yet though they necessarily affect us, they do not necessarily introduce
diseases, but they are neutrals, fluttering in an indifferency between health
and disease; for by the orderly use of them health is preserved, but by the
abuse, and immoderateness of them it is destroyed.

But they are six; 1 Air, 2 Meat and drink, 3 Motion and rest, 4 Excretions and
Retentions, 5 Sleeping and Waking, 6 The Passions of the mind.

They are vulgarly called the six not-natural things, because by themselves
they are neither agreeable to, nor disconsonant from the nature of man's body,
but are made hurtful or useful according to the mode of well or bad using them.
They are peculiarly handled in that part of Medicine which treats of Diet,
therefore we omit the discourse of them.

The unnecessary are they which happen fortuitly, and not concurring to the
ordinary use of life.

All fortuite things are comprehended under these, as the strokes of swords, or
stones, the bitings of wild beasts, etc.

The internal causes are those which lurk within our body imperceptible to
sense, and discoverable only by an artificial conjecture.

So the humors, spirits, excrements, flatulency, vapors, particles of the parts
themselves, and whatsoever is contained in them, or agnate to them, are circled
into the nature of internal morbifick causes.

But they are either antecedent or concomitant.

The antecedent cause is that which is before the concomitant, and moves it,
and by the mediation of it effects a disease.

So in continual fevers the antecedent cause is the matter fitted for
putrefaction, the concomitant, which actually putrefies: So in swellings caused
by humors, the flowing humor is accounted the antecedent cause, the flux the
concomitant.

The Concomitant cause is that which immediately and by it self produces the
disease.

Examples of this are after proposed in the explication of the antecedent. But
it is observable, that external causes are sometimes concomitant, as the sword,
which immediately makes the wound, and therefore all the causes are not seldom
divided into procatarctick, antecedent, and concomitant, omitting the
consideration of internal and external.

The concomitant cause is again simply concomitant, or containing.

Simply concomitant is that, which if it be, the disease is; but if it be taken
away, the disease remains.

So supposing the action wounding, the wound is supposed; but taking away the
action, that remains.

Continent cause is that which being supposed, a disease is supposed, and being
taken away that follows.

So supposing the stone, or some other matter causing obstruction, we must
suppose obstruction, which if we take away, obstruction removes also. So taking
away a sixth finger, making an excess in number, the error depending on that is
taken away.

Hence it appears that all diseases have not a containing cause, but some
only, but all the rest have necessarily a concomitant cause.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes of Similar Diseases.
Thus far of the Causes of Diseases in their genus, it follows that we handle
them in their species.

Five causes of a hot intemperature are alleged: 1 Motion, 2 Putridity, 3 The
vicinity of an hot thing, 4 Constipation, 5 Meat and Drink over-hot; as Galen
chapter 2. Book 2. of the Causes of Diseases.

First, Motion heats the body by attenuating and violently hurrying the spirits.
MOtion does not only heat things animate, but inanimate also, as Aristotle 2
of Meteors, chapter 3. inanimate things by rarefaction, because that disposition is
previous to heat, by which it effected the last preparation of the matter, for
production of heat potentially out of it. But animals do more easily get heat
by motion, not only by reason of that attenuation, but also because the spirits
and heat which are actually in them, are diffused thorough the whole body, and
thrust out to the superficies thereof. Whence if motion be immoderate, it
produces an hot intemperature. To motion are also referred anger, watching,
and all other things, able to move the humors and spirts.

Secondly, putridity heats the body by external heat, which is always
introduced in its company.

Putridity is defined by Aristotle, The corruption of native heat in every
humid body by external heat. But it is necessary that this heat should be very
intense, that it may corrupt the native heat; whence in our bodies it will
easily produce a hot distemper.

Thirdly, The vicinity of hot things heats the body by a Physical and
Mathematical contact.

So by fire or Summer sun the body is heated by a Physical contact, by things
hot applied, as plasters, baths, etc. and by a Mathematical contrary.

Fourthly, constipation causes a hot distemper by accident, by reason of
obstructed transpiration.

This is chiefly produced by swiming in alluminous water, by the application of
emplastick and obdurating medicines, and other things increasing heat by
antiperistasis, while they hinder the dissipation thereof.

Fifthly, hot aliments heat the body by producing in it hot humors.

As, the use of onyons, garleek, spices, and such like.

The causes of a cold distemper are six: 1 Vicinity of cold bodies. 2 The
quality and quantity of things assumed. 3 Constipation. 4 Rarity. 5 Overmuch
idleness. 6 Immoderate motion. As Galen chapter 3. Book 2. of the Causes of
Diseases.

First, the body is refrigerated by external cold, meeting with the concurrence
of a fit disposition, etc. in the Patient.

So in Winter a body is often congealed by overmuch cold: So bathing in cold
water cools the whole body.

Secondly, the excess, defect, and incomplying quality of aliments, can induce
a cold distemper.

Excess of aliment chokes the native heat, whence arises a cold distemper; so
an epile psie or apoplexy is the result of frequent drunkenness.

The defect of aliment causes the dissipation of heat in the parts, as having
not food sufficient for its conservation.

Whatsoever is assumed naturally too cold, as lettice, poppy, mandrakes, and
the like, do very much cool the body by themselves.

Thirdly, much constipation chokes the heat, whence proceeds a cold distemper.

Slight constipation causes an hot distemper, by hindering the dissipation of
heat; but much and immoderate constipatio^ causes a contrary affection by
suffocating heat.

Fourthly, rarity dissipates and resolves heat, whence by accident it induces
cold.

Fifthly, idleness refrigerates the body, for that the native heat languisheth
for want of exercise. Sixthly, the native heat is dissipated by immoderate
motion, whence by accident it refrigerates.

Of a dry temperature the causes are two: 1 Alteration. 2 Resolution.

First, those things dry by alteration, which have strength enough to exiccate
the body.

So drying aliments and medicines, and a dry constitution of the air, do dry
the body.

Secondly, those things dry the body by resolution, which cause a greater
dissipation of the humidity of our body, than can be counterpoised by
restoration.

So violent exercitation, the embraces of overheated air, immoderate watches,
resolves the humidity of the body. So humidity is dissipated by the hindrance
of due reparation, which is caused by care, and anxiety, hunger, or food
affording small nutriment, such as is very excrementous and astringent, because
it hinders the distribution of nutritive humor thorough the members.

Humid intemperatures are ascribed to two causes: 1 Alteration, 2 Retention of
humid things.

First, those things introduce a moist intemperature by alteration, which are
very prevalent in moistning the body.

So the immoderate use of moist meats, copious tippling of water, a moist
constitution of the air, a bathing in warm water, and such like, the usual
product of which is a moist distemper.

Secondly, a moist distemper is said to be introduced by retention of things
humid, when some customary evacuation is suppressed.

Amongst the usual evacuations are numbered not those only which are sensibly
made, but those also which are made insensibly, viz. by insensible
transpiration.

And these are the causes of simple distempers.

But the causes of compounded distempers may easily be gathered from those
before named, viz. by joining all the causes which the two peccant qualities
are able to produce.

But the immediate causes of compounded tempers are principally peccant humors;
and these distempers are like the peccant humor; for choler causes the hot and
dry, phlegm the cold and moist, and so of the rest.

But those humors become copious in the parts two ways: 1 By fluxion, 2 By
congestion.

Fluxion is caused two ways: viz. when either the humors are expelled by the
mission of the parts, or when they are attracted by the reception of them.

In fluxion which is caused by expulsion two conditions are requisite, viz.
first, the strength of the part expelling; secondly, the imbecility of the part
receiving.

So the liver by its strength expels preternatural humors to the groin, or the
skin (parts naturally infirm) producing in them swellings, itch, and other
affections.

In fluxion caused by attraction, two conditions principally concur, viz. the
heat, or pain of the attractive part.

Attraction is proper to heat, therefore the hot parts are prevalent in
attraction: but being sensible of pain they seek help, therefore they attract
the humors, and spirits to their rescue, which after by reason of their
copiousness they cannot keep in good order, which is the cause of diverse
affections.

Secondly, by congestion the humors become copious in the parts, in default of
the nutrition of them.

So when in some part the aliment is not well assimilated, or the expulsion of
excrements generated in assimilation, then superfluities abound in it by
congestion.

CHAP. IV. Of the Causes of Organical diseases.
The natural shape of the parts is perverted either in the first generation or
after it.

In the first generation, when the formative virtue is unable to fashion all
the parts aright, which is caused upon three grounds. 1 By reason of the
imbecility of the formative virtue. 2 By the defect in matter. 3 By an
hereditary disposition.

First, the parts are ill-shaped by default of the formative virtue; when a
man's parents are of a very infirm nature.

Secondly, by default of the matter, viz. when it is peccant in quantity or
quality.

It is peccant in quantity, when it is too copious or deficient.

It is peccant in quality, when it is too dry or moist, etc.

Thirdly, by an hereditary disposition, when a Man's parents are ill-shaped.

And so in the first generation diseases are caused in the shape.

After the first generation they are contingent, in, or after the birth.

In the birth, by preposterous commotion, or inconvenient eduction.

For instance, when an infant starting from the womb, puts forth his foot,
arm, or sides, while by his own bulk, or the narrowness of the womb, it
endeavors its exit too much, or is unskilfully handled by an ignorant Midwife.

After birth the shape of the parts is deformed by many external and internal
causes.

External causes mishaping a man, are when the infant being yet tender is not
conveniently entertained in swathings, or is rashly crushed any other way: as
also, if any member broken or dislocated, fall not into the hands of a good
Artist in Surgery; or if they being well restored by the error of the
patient distorted to a relapse; or disordered by a fall, stroke, or too much
motion and agitation.

But by internal causes the shape is unfashioned, when the humors are rallied
copiously in the parts, as is evident in preternatural tumors, in the face of
Lepers, in the belly of hydropical men, and such like.

Astriction, obstruction and dilatation, are produced by a multitude of causes,
which coarctate, obstruct or dilate the passages or cavities, which to number
to a particularity is a task almost impossible.

Asperity and levity is produced by many causes internal or external.

For instance, bones wounded, broken, or eroded, loose their natural laevity;
the inner part of the aspera arteria is unequal, and causes an hoarse and
inharmonical voice, being drenched with too much humor, dry, deterse, or
ulcerated, which reason also will hold good in the rest. But in parts naturally
rough, and rugged, laevity is caused by viscid and glutinous humors, adhering
to the uncertunicles, as in a Lieuteria; so also things wounding, and eroding
by accident, when a skar is induced on a cured ulcer, by which that internal
superficies is more smoothed, and less fit to contain.

Magnitude is increased in the body by too much plenty of blood and fat.

Magnitude is increased in a part, either by affluxion of laudable blood, or
vicious humors collected by fluxion or congestion.

So in some women the caul grows very fat, by reason of the plentiful
affluxion of blood, and enlarges to such a bulk, that by compression of the
orifice of the womb it induces sterility. So vicious humors cause various
kinds of swellings.

Magnitude in the whole body is diminished for want of aliment.

As in a Pthisis, Marasmus, and notable leanness.

Magnitude is diminished in a part, when it does not take in convenient
aliment, or cannot dispose of it.

The number of the parts is increased in birth, or after birth. In birth by the
redundancy of seminal matter.

As when six fingers or three testicles are generated.

After birth, by vicious matter.

As appears in warts, or a pterygium, etc.

The number is diminished in birth, by defect of matter; after birth by all
those things which are able to amputate or destroy any part.

The situation of the parts is changed, either by default of them, or the parts
containing them, or the ligaments connecting them.

The situation of the parts is changed by default of the parts themselves, by
their overmuch crassity or gravity.

So the caul or intestines being too crass, or too fat, are by their own
weight of overburdened to a rupture, or else they dilate the peritonaeum, and
fall down into the scrotum.

The situation is changed by default of the parts containing, when they being
broken or loosened cannot duly execute their office.

So when the peritonaeum is by any means broken or loosened, it cannot keep the
parts in it contained in their proper station.

The situation is changed by default of the ligaments, when they are too loose
or infirm; so that they cannot retain the parts to the connexed in their
natural place.

So the womb, the intestinum rectum, and other parts do usually fall by too
much extension, or the weakness of their ligaments.

The connection of the parts is destroyed by many internal and external causes.

In the joyntings peculiarly the connection is changed by three causes: 1 By
defect of an entertaining room, viz. an hollowness. 2 By defect of a bone to be
entertained, 3 Of a ligament containing and making firm the articulation.

First, there is a defect in the place entering, when either the cavity
receiving is too broad or superficiary, or when the ridges are taken away, or
the brims hurt.

Secondly, in the bone entertained there is a defect, when it is bigger or less
than is convenient, or any other way out of shape.

Thirdly, there is a defect in the ligaments, when they are too loose or
infirm.

From all these causes luxations are usually produced; to which may be added
violent and innordinate motions.

CHAP. V. Of the Causes of common diseases.
THE Causes of common diseases were proposed in the recital of their
differences, because they are thence derived; therefore lest the repetition of
them should be vain, we refer to the fifth chap. of the first Section.

CHAP. VI. Of the Causes of the Accidental differences of diseases.
THE same causes which usually concur to the production of Similar, Organical,
and common diseases, are also the causes of Accidental differences, as they are
fraught with various conditions, viz. if they be intense or remiss, light or
obstinate, gentle or malignant, or any other way affected, they cause diseases
great or small, acute or chronical, gentle or malignant, and such like.

The fourth Section of PATHOLOGY.
Of the Nature, Differences, and Causes of Symptoms.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Symptoms.
A Symptom is a preternatural affection following the Disease, as the effect
of its cause, and not being able to subsist without it.
THIS term affection is here taken in a signification somewhat more large than
in the definition of a disease; whereas not all symptoms have a permanency or
position of parts in their subject, but most part of them have a positive
essence in a tendency to being; for actions either whole, or not well hanging
together, consist in the motion of the parts, and are perpetually in a tendency
to perfection. Excretion and retention is proper to them so long as they are in
that progress, if we consider them in the mood of their formality. But the
simple or patible qualities are sometimes fixed and permanent. We also allege,
that symtomes follow the disease, because (as we said) they are by it effected;
but the effect is the attendant of its cause, whence it also appears that it is
different from its cause, for that the cause of diseases precedes, but the
symptom follows. But for the more clear understanding of the nature of
symptoms, the succeeding Theorems are proposed.

Every symptom depends mediately or immediately on a disease.

The chief symptom is injured action, immediately depending on a disease,
which is able to produce another in excretions and retentions, and that to
induce a change of qualities, which yet depend upon the disease as their true
cause, some mediately, some immediately, as is before mentioned.

The symptoms may arrogate to themselves the honor of causes, never of
diseases.

So nutrition hurt is the cause of the consumption of the parts, and leanness:
So excrements imprisoned in the body, cause fevers, obstructions, humors, and
such like; and so the symptoms become the causes of diseases, but never
presume to take the nature of a disease, as being unable by themselves to
injure the actions. For though some diseases be called symptomatical, because
they are consequents of others; as a fever, which follows a pleurisy, or any
other inflammation, which is in it self a true disease, yet in respect of the
disease on which it depends it is called a symptom. Yet certain it is, that
those diseases are improperly termed symptoms, because they follow other
diseases as symptoms, but yet they are not the immoderate production of them,
but mediate by some true symptoms (for as by humor, or vapor) which are the
after-causes of diseases.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Symptoms.
There are three kinds of Symptoms, action-hurt, default in excrements, and
quality changed.
ACtion-hurt is the chief and principal symptom, which immediately follows
the disease, and from which the rest are generated and depend. Default in
excretions follow the lesson of natural actions, by which the aliments are ill
affected, corrupted, or tainted with some evil quality; or lastly, are
naturalized to a contrariety infestious to the body: But by Excretions we here
understand, not only true excrements, but also all those which preternaturally
issue out of the body, as sand, the excrements of the parts themselves, etc.
But quality changed follows the beforementioned symptoms, and under it are
contained all patible qualities perceptible by sense, and inherent in the body
it self, or in any part thereof, as colors, smell, taste, and the like, which
in their proper place shall more at large be explained.

CHAP. III. Of the Differences of Action-hurt.
The differences of Action-hurt are taken either from the differences of
laesions, or from the divisions of the actions themselves.

The differences of laesions cause a triple difference of hurt-action: 1 Action
abolished, 2 Dimished, 3 Depraved.

1 Action abolished is that which is impossible by any means to be restored.

AS sight in blindness, and hearing in deafness, are said to be be abolished,
because they cannot by any means be exercised. Yet there is action called
abolished as to the judgment of the sense, as motion and sense in an apoplexy,
and in a suffocation of the womb.

Action diminished, is that which is infirm, and scarce exercised, and requires
more time for perfection, or never arrives to a just proportion thereof.

So the weak concoction of the ventricle, or function of any other part,
imperfectly exercised, is said to be diminished.

Depraved action is so called, either when it is corrupted, or not exercised as
it ought to be.

Action is termed corrupt when it changes its object into another quality, as
when the ventricle changes the aliment into nidorous juices, as porraceous
choler, or matter, wholly putrid. It is not exercised as it ought to be, in
cold palpitation, hiccough, etc. because in these affections the parts are
unduely agitated, or too violently provoked by a preternatural object.

From the differences of action, Action hurt is threefold; 1. Animal. 2. Vital.
3. Natural.

These branch out again into as many differences as in Physiology are proposed
of animal, vital, and natural actions.

The animal actions are in Phisiology divided into Sensitive, Motive and
Principal. The Sensitive actions are five, Sight, Hearing, Taste, Smell and
Touch. All these as before is declared are subject to abolition, deminution,
and depravation. The Sight is abolished in blindness, diminished in obtusion,
and dullness, depraved in hallucination. The Hearing is abolished in deafness,
diminished in slowness of hearing, depraved in the tinckling of the ears; and
thus it is easy to conjecture of the symptoms of other Senses. Motion is
abolished in the palsy, diminished in stupidity, depraved in convulsions,
trembling, cold, etc. So the principal actions, ratiocination and memory are
abolished in a carus and apoplexy, diminished in fondness and lethargy,
depraved in phrensy and madness.

The Vital actions consist in the Pulses, which also are frequently abolished,
diminished or depraved.

Lastly the natural actions, concoction, retention, attraction, and expulsion
are accompanied with as many symptoms. The Concoction of the ventricle is
abolished in inconcoction, diminished in slow concoction, and depraved in bad
concoction. So we must judge of the other differences of actions, all which
suffer under as many differences of laesions, of which many are not yet
particularized by proper terms.

A COROLLARY, Concerning the Differences of hurt Actions.
In the number of hurt actions is reckoned that which is termed a preternatural
auction, such as a canine appetency, great thirst, etc. But it is dubious to
what species it should be referred? The vulgar answer is, that it is contained
under the notion of depraved action, because it is amist, and perversely
exercised, which is the condition of depraved action: but it is objected, that
if this opinion hold, that diminished action should also be placed under
depraved, since action increased and diminished stand in a direct contrariety,
and therefore ought to be placed under the same genus. It is answered, That in
matter of diseases and symptoms it is not a Physicians business to consider
the trifles of Logical contrarieties, but only those diversities by which our
bodies are preternaturally affected: and so action increased standing in a wide
distance from action diminished, as well in respect of the cause, as of the
manner of operation, when as we said it is amiste and perversely exercised, it
is in right reason contained under depraved action, and distinguished in the
whole genus from action diminished in a Medicinal consideration.

CHAP. IV. Of the Differences of Excrements.
Excrements may be peccant four ways; 1. In Substance. 2. In Quantity. 3. In
Quality. 4. In the manner of Excretion.

First they are peccant in Substance, when they have a Substance quite
different from that of vulgar Excrements.

AND they are said to be preternatural in the wide extension of their whole
genus.

And they are twofold, either wholly aliens, or consisting of natural things.

The stone, maw-worms, etc. are mere strangers to nature. Excrements consist of
natural things, when the blood, fat, a part of the flesh, or some such thing,
is driven out as an excrement, which ought by all means to be retained.

Secondly, Excrements are peccant in Quantity, by reason of excess or defect.

When either their effluxion is too copious, as in a Diarrhaea, Dysenteria,
Diabete, plentiful sweat, and profuse issuing of blood; or when they are more
sparingly than is convenient, or not at all evacuated, as in a constipation of
the belly, suppression of Urine, etc.

Thirdly, the Excrements are peccant in Quality, either in the First, Second,
or Third.

In the First, when they are too Hot, too Cold, too Moist, or too Dry.

In the Second, when they are thin, or thick, or soft, viscid, or spumous.

In the Third, when they have a strange color, Smell, or Taste.

Fourthly, they are peccant in the manner of excretion, when they are not
expelled in due time, or not thorough the usual parts; or when they are too
soon, or too slowly evacuated.

CHAP. V. Of the Differences of changed Quality.
The Qualities of the body changed, are first, second, or third.
BUT they that may deserve the name of symptoms, must depend on some disease.

The first Qualities are heat, cold, moisture, and dryness.

The second are, Hardness, Softness, Gravity, Levity, Rarity, Density, Laevity,
Asperity, and the rest.

The third are Colors, Smells, Tastes, Sounds.

A COROLLARY, Concerning the changed Qualities.
Among the changed qualities we place, Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness, which
were before referred to the similar diseases, which knits a knot, difficult of
resolution, which we thus untye, by averring, that slight distempers which are
only in a way to perfection, and have no permanence in the part, cannot be
reckoned among diseases, but are rather termed symptoms, and changed
qualities, which by the vicinity or sympathy of some parts, a morbous distemper
being raised, are generated and preserved.

Next asperity and laevity are here with the changed qualities, which were
referred to organical diseases. To this it is answered, that asperity and
laevity, if they be very remarkable, so that they manifestly injure the actions
of those parts, wherein they reside, are true diseases, but if they be so
slight, that they are not at all troublesome to the actions, and yet are
produced from a preternatural cause, as an humid or dry distemper, it is a
convincing evidence that they are true symptoms.

CHAP. VI. Of the Causes of Symptoms in the genus.
E^^^ Symptom depends upon some disease, as its proper cause.
THIS is chiefly demonstrated in hurt-action, which is the immediate effect of
a disease, as appears by its definition. Besides, it is undoubtedly true, that
the changed qualities do proceed from the first qualities, which constitute the
temperament, which when it conforms to nature, cannot produce qualities changed
according to nature, which it is evident do perpetually flow from the
distemper. Lastly, seeing there happens no default in the excrements, unless
the concoctive, expulsive, or retentive faculties be vitiated, it is very
certain that this proceeds perpetually from some disease.

But the causes of symptoms in their species, and the history of all diseases
are exactly proposed in particular Pathology, chap. 7. We will here illustrate
only by some examples, for the better knowledge.

CHAP. VII. Of the Causes of Injured actions.
The animal actions are usually hurt by various differences of distempers,
organical diseases, and solutions of the continuum.
SO by the cold and moist distemper of the brain in excess the animal actions
are abolished; as appears in folly and forgetfulness, and by a more remiss
distemper they are diminished, as in fatuity and stupidity, as also they are
depraved by an hot distemper, sometimes simple, sometimes in conjunction with
siccity, as in a frenzy and madness. Those actions are also sometimes
offended by organical diseases, as by obstructions and various tumors, and by
solutions of the continuum, as by notable wounds in the head.

The vital actions consisting in the palsies are abolished, depraved, or
diminished by an hot and cold distemper principally by obstruction and solution
of the continuum, according to the various intension or remission of causes.

So in fevers the pulse is depraved, abolished in a syncope, and diminished in
a lipothymy.

The private natural actions are hurt only by similar diseases, but the
official by organical also.

The private natural actions related to nutrition, viz. the attractive,
retentive, and expulsive, are perfected by the temper only, therefore
distemper only can hurt them; but the official want the various conformation
of those parts, by which they are exercised; they therefore are hurt by
organical diseases also. So the action of the ventricle, liver, or any other
instrument, is sometimes perverted by an Erysipelas, a Phlegmon, and other
preternatural tumors; and hence the concoction is depraved or diminished. So
also official attraction is hurt, when by a carnous swelling, or any other
tumor arising in the throat, the way is blocked up against food, or else the
attraction of it to the ventricle is very difficult. Retention likewise is
hindered by the same causes, as also by the copiousness of flatulency. And
lastly, expulsion is hindered by the narrowness and obstruction of the passages,
or also when it is too much provoked and accelerated by dilatation or
vellication of the part.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Causes of Symptoms which are in Excrements.
The errors in Excrements depend perpetually upon diseases, but most usually by
the mediation of the detriments of actions: In this manner:

Too great a quantity of excrement depends either upon the weak retentive or
expulsive faculty (of the part by which excretion is made) provoked by some
vicious quality, or exceeding quantity of humor.

SO a Diarrhaea is caused by sharp and bilious humors, as also by the
overflowing of some humor.

A vacuation also of the excrements too plentiful, is caused by defect in the
part containing, by reason of which it is disabled to contain.

This happens when the orifices of the vessels are open or eroded by an
internal or external cause, or only debilitated, as appears in excretion of
blood, caused by the anastomosis, diabrosis, or diapeidisis of the veins.

The quantity of excrements is diminished, either when they are sparingly
generated, or when the retentive faculty is too strong, the expulsive too weak,
or when the passages are narrow and obstructed.

The excrements are sparingly generated either by paucity, crassity or dryness
of aliments; or by contrary vacuations, which do usually hinder the customary
ones, or by too much resolution of the whole body.

The reason of other causes is obvious.

CHAP. IX. Of the Causes of changed quality.
The Symptoms which consist in the first qualities, are caused by the
distemper of neighboring or sympathizing parts, as is said.

But those which are related to the second qualities, depend upon the various
vitiosity of humors, or distemper of the parts.

SO hardness is produced by dryness, tension, and congelation; softness by
humidity, and so forth.

Lastly, as to the third qualities these are the causes.

Color is changed in the part, either by distemper, or by some humor lodged
under its superficies.

So by a hot distemper the parts are red, by a cold one pale; so Choler
diffused thorough the body causes the yellow color of men jaundised.

Vitiated smells arise from the putridity of the humors, or of the parts:
Strange tastes by the excrements touching upon the tongue: Preternatural sounds,
by flatulency enclosed in some part, according to the various agitation
thereof, the narrowness or largeness of the parts, and strength or weakness of
the elevating heat.

These seem to be fitly referred to the qualities of excrements, which yet are
so distinguished, that those qualities which are referred to this kind of
simple affection, ought to be in and depend upon the parts themselves; but
those which are referred to the kinds of excretions, ought to be in the
excrements as their proper subjects, and to depend upon them alone, as their
quality, quantity, and substance.

The third Book of MEDICINAL INSTITUTIONS: Containing the Semeiotick part.
The Preface.
A Physician ought always in the legitimate and rational cure of preternatural
affections, to observe this method: First, he must act the industrious
Scrutinist, in enquiring after the nature and causes of the proposed disease,
and the situation or the part affected. Secondly, he must make a diligent
search, whether the cure be not desperate, and the disease incurable; that
hence we may gather, that remedies fit for the acquisition of health are to be
applied, if our Art upon serious inspection promise a recovery; or if the
prevalent disease delude our skill to a despair; forthwith to abstain from
administering any thing, lest those applications which have procured health to
any, should be undervalued to a disesteem.

The institutions therefore of those signs are necessary, by which we reap
this advantage, that thereby we are enabled to a knowledge of the present
dispositions of the body, and to a presage of future events. We shall dissect
this whole Semeiotical Treatise into three Sections, the first of them shall
handle the Signs in their genus. The second shall treat of the Diagnostick
Signs. And the third of the Prognostic Signs.

The first Section.
Of the nature of Signs in their genus.
CHAP. I. Of the nature and definition of a Sign.
A Sign is by Physicians defined, That which being obvious to the senses,
signifies something lurking in ambush within the veil of our body.
IN which definition it is observable, that the name of Sign is used here in a
wider sense than we find it in Aristotle. For he instructs us to call those
only Signs which are derived from effects. But we in this notion comprehend
all those things which cannot give us any intelligence, how affairs are
transacted in the little world of our body; which Signs are to be circled into
a certain genus, or to randezvouz at the general fountainhead of Signs, after
we have in short delivered some common differences of them.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Signs.
All Medicinal Signs are by Galen (in his Ars Parva) divided into healthy,
unhealthy, and neutral.
ON healthy Signs we shall not long insist, because a state of salubrity is
easily known by the good temper of the body, the due conformation and union of
the parts, and by the result thereof, the integrity of all actions; unhealthy
Signs also are clear enough by the contrariety. But a neutrality of
disposition, like a medium interceding between salubrity and insalubrity, will
easily be evident upon knowledge of the extremes.

But we must chiefly apply this discourse to unhealthy Signs.

And they are divided into Pathognomonical, viz. signifying passion, or
conventional and concomitants.

The Pathognomonical, or those that signify passion, are they which
perpetually associate themselves with a disease, entering with it, und departing
with it, being diminished or increased according to the magnitude of the
disease, and follow the proper essence of the disease.

So in the Pleurisy, a pungitive pain of the side, difficulty of spiration, a
rough bloody spittle, and an assiduous fever, are called Pathognomonical
signs.

The Conventional or concomitants are those which do not necessarily cohere to
diseases, nor are signs of their essence, but of other accidental
contingencies, as the magnitude, manner, or event of diseases.

And in this respect they are threefold: Some discovering coction and crudity;
some health and death; some lastly, a crisis and solution of the disease.

But these signs of a disease do appear for the most part not from, but soon
after the beginning of the disease. And in this respect they are called (...),
that is, afterappearances; or also (...), that is, after-productions; though
Authors do not seldom distinguish these two terms.

Again, some of the Signs do inform us of the present state of the body,
called Diagnostick or Demonstrative; others presage the future, and are called
Prognostic; others lastly discover things past, and are called Anamnestick or
Commemorative.

But because the state past is recalled to memory, either for the better
knowledge of present dispositions, or that we may be forearmed to grapple with
their future events, therefore it is fit that the Commemorative signs should
be comprehended under the Diagnostick and Prognostic.

CHAP. III. Of the General Originals of signs, from whence they are all
derived.
THat we may draw forth all Medical signs by the clue of an easy method, we
must lay down some general heads, to which all the signs of any thing proposed
may be summoned in, and from whence they may again be artificially deduced.

Whereas therefore the essence and nature of every thing being any way enquired
into, discovers to us, not only what the thing is in it self, but many other
things also belonging to it, the first genus of signs shall be taken from the
nature of the thing in which we act. Next, seeing there are two paths which
guide us to the knowledge of any thing, one by somewhat preceding, that is the
cause, and the other by somewhat succeeding, and that is the effect, it will be
necessary that we propose two other genus of signs, one derived from the
causes; the other from the effects.

There are then three general heads of signs, viz. The Essence, Causes, and
Effects.

Essence here is stretched to a large and Medical sense, comprehending not only
the form of the thing it self, but also the genus, differences, parts, and
proprieties whether essential or accidental.

Under the term of Causes are touched all those kinds of Causes, which are in
Physic considerable.

The term effects includes a variety, conformable to the variety of causes.

All which heads of signs shall be by parcells anatomized in the particular
inquiry into signs, as their use shall require.

But we must here observe, First, that signs cannot be deduced from all the
heads, to instruct us in every particular thing. For the essence of a thing
does not seldom involve it self in a mantle of obscurity, and lies
imperceptible to our apprehensions: and the causes sometimes afford us no exact
indication, other times the effects are confused. But by the proposed heads of
signs, some footsteps always discoverable, by which if we track the thing,
Medicine will according to her ability evidently demonstrate it: so that
sometimes we derive necessary signs from the effects alone, sometimes from the
causes, sometimes from the essence, sometimes from two together, and lastly,
sometimes from all, which exercitation it self will easily discover.

Observe, Secondly, That most commonly we descry more and more infallible signs
from the effects, then from the two other heads.

Observe Thirdly, That of the proposed signs as to indication, some are of
more, some of less efficacy, but yet by rallying up all, we draw a conclusive
demonstration of the thing which we enquire after.

Observe Fourthly, That we must perfectly understand the nature, causes, and
effects of all those things which are in our body, or contingent to it, that we
may not err in deducing signs from the proposed head. And we must be so well
furnished with the precepts of Physiology and Pathology, that we may not here
be destitute to show them as often as occasion of use shall require. Otherwise
these Semeiotical instructions, though they be labored out to a prolixity, will
all be but as waste paper.

The Second Section of the SEMEIOTICAL Parts: Of the Diagnostick signs.
The First CHAPTER. Of the signs of bilious Humor predominant in the whole body.
THE knowledge of the temperament and humor predominant in the whole body is
necessary for the understanding the species of the affection, and the
productive cause thereof. Therefore before we discourse of them, we must first
propose the signs of humor predominant in the body, beginning with Choler.

But it is first observable, that there are only two heads, from which we take
the signs of humors, viz. the causes, and effects, for the essence in this case
gives no light.

That therefore we may lance the skulls of these heads and see what they
contain, we must orderly run thorough their genus, and species: at least all
those, which may be useful in directing us to the knowledge of humors; which
that they might not be burdensome to memory are digested into the following
Tables.

To this refer the Table noted with the letter A.

By the observation of this order, we shall descry Choler predominant in the
body by the indication of

The Material Causes.
The Quality of Aliments. Feeding on hot and dry meats, drinking noble wine,
old, or new, which are easily convertible into Choler.

Quantity. Order. Defect of aliment, as famine, food very small and sparing.

Sweet things eaten after a meal, because by long coction they convert into
Choler, as experience instructs us, that after some space of time they grow
bitter by artificial coction.

Use of hot Medicaments, as Spices, etc. which degenerate to Choler.

Medicaments. Retentions. Customary evacuation of choler thorough the belly, by
Urines, Vomits, or Sweats, flowing either voluntarily, or driven out by
Medicines, suppressed or intermitted.

The Efficient Causes.
Parts. An hot and dry temper of the ventricle, liver and heart. Because these
parts are able to disseminate an Affection thorough the whole body.

Descent. Parents of a bilious temper.

Age. Youthfulness, that space chiefly which intervenes between eighteen, and
thirty five.

Sex. Virile sex, for they are accounted more bilious, as women more pituitous.

Region. A Region hot and dry.

Time. Summer season.

Aliment. Meat and drink of a calefactory and exsiccating quality as onyons,
garlic, all salt, and peppered things, which by overheating the liver, cause a
copious generation of choler.

Exercitation. A laborious life, toiled with much exercise.

Venery. An over-vehement motion to venery, which sets the whole body on fire.

Watching. Too much watching by which the blood and spirits are inflamed.

Passions of the mind. Anger, cares, and violent commotions of the mind.

They are helped by things cold and moist; offended by things hot and dry; and
fasting.

The Effects.
Animal Actions.
Ingenuity. A sharp and witty, ready and quick of fancy.

Passions of the mind. Teastiness, rage, boldness, jactation, desire of revenge.

Sleep and Watching. Very little sleep, and slight, and much watching.

Dreams. Dreams of fires, flames, contentions and tumults.

Senses. Lively, acute, quick, and expedite senses, chiefly hearing, to which
siccity is very advantageous.

Swift and nimble, but soon tired motions.

Vital Actions.
A great, frequent, and hard pulse.

Natural Actions.
Appetency. Want of appetite, and nauseating of meat, in summer especially.

Appetite to cold things.

A difficult toleration of hunger.

Thirst. Much thirsting, and frequent drinking.

Quick and speedy accretion, and timely Age, because the radical moisture is
soon consumed.

A forward propensity to venery, by reason of the acrimony of the seed.

Venery. A speedy wearisomeness in venery: because the spirits of bilious men
are very dissipable by reason of their tenuity.

The Passions.
Bilious men have a propensity which disposes them for diseases, as burning
fevers, and tertians, phrensy, and pleurisy; to bilious vomits, Diarrhaea's,
Erysipela's, blisters, and pimples in the face, etc.

Excrements.
By the mouth. Vomiting of humor thin, pale, or yellow, and bitter; or a bitter
taste in the tongue.

The ears. Copious excrements of the ears, and very yellow.

Belly. Feculency very yellow.

Bladder. Urine thin and yellow, or also red, and flammeous.

The Purgations of the womb, somewhat yellow, or orange color.

The Habit of the body.
Skin first quality. A skin to the touch hot and dry, the heat of it sharp, and
biting especially in the hands.

Second. A skin hard and rough.

The color of the skin, principally of the face, and eyes, pale, and yellowish.

Hairs. Thinness of hair, by reason of the rarity of pores, which permits an
effluxion of hairy matter.

Quantity. Quality. Yellow hair resembling choler, and somewhat black by too
much expulsion, sometimes also curled; by reason of the dryness which turns the
hairround: and bilious men become bald by reason of the siccity of the skin,
and consumption of the matter of hairs.

Passion. The hair soon growing, and soon falling.

The Latitude of the vessels. For dilatation is proper to heat: and the veins
in the eyes apparent.

Flesh. A slender and lean habitude of body.

CHAP. II. Of the Signs of pituitous humor predominant in the body.
Phlegm predominant in the body is discovered by

The material Causes.
Quality of Aliments. A customary feeding on meats cold and moist, as fruits,
herbs, fish, meats made of milk, drinking of water, etc. for they are
transmuted into phlegm.

Quantity. Too great a quantity of Aliment, overwhelming the native heat, and
generating crudities.

Time. Meats taken soon after sleep, or before sleep, before the concoction of
the former.

Medicaments. Too long use of cold and moist medicaments, which as aliments
degenerate into phlegm.

Retentions. The omission of a natural assuefaction to evacuate phlegm by vomit,
or secesse, or of an artificial custom, by exercitation, or use of both
waters, stews or purging, or diuretic Medicines, by the intermission of which
phlegm is copiously generated.

The efficient Causes.
Parts. A cold and moist temper of the ventricle, liver, heart, and brain.

Descent. Parentage of a pituitous temper.

Age. Old age, which in defect of heat, accumulates much phlegm; as also
childish age, by reason of gluttony, and unwary institution of diet.

Sex. Female sex.

Region. A Country cold and moist, abounding in pooles and marshes, or
drenched with great rivers, exposed to the fury of North winds, snowes, and
showers; and those that lie to the North, this is the cause that most Germans
are pituitous.

Time. Winter season.

Meat and drink. Meat and drink of a refrigerating and irrigating quality, as
lettice, purslane, and summer fruit, and drinking of water, which by cooling
the ventricle and liver, cause them to produce plenty of phlegm.

Quiet. An idle and sedentary life.

Sleep. Much and profound sleep, especially after meat.

Passions. A life void of care, study, or anxiety, or one much troubled with
them, because they, by dissipating the native heat, refrigerate the body.

By the use of things hot and dry they are helped, and by things moist and cold
they are hurt.

The Effects.
Animal Actions.
Principal. Imagination good enough, and an easy apprehension of things, but a
speedy forgetfulness, because on humid things impression is easily made, and as
easily obliterated.

A drowsy and dull mind, a slow and heavy wit.

Remiss anger, and easily appeased.

Sleep. A great propensity to sleep.

Dreams. Dreams of cold, waters, rains, snowes, drownings, rivers, pooles, seas
and white things.

Sense. A dullness of the senses.

Motion. A slowness, but continuance of motion, because the spirits being
somewhat thick, are not soon dissolved.

Vital Actions.
Pulse. A small, slow, and soft pulse.

Natural Actions.
Hunger. A dejected appetency, and this reason Hipp. gives, that old men can
easily tolerate hunger.

Thirst. None or very little thirst.

Accretion. Slow growth, because the heat being weak requires much time to
subdue the forces of moisture.

Venery. Slowness to venery.

The moderate use of which is advantageous to them, as reinforcing the heat,
which thereupon concocts the phlegm, and reduces the body to a better temper:
but by the too frequent use thereof the body is too much cooled.

The Passions.
They are better in health in clear weather, in cold, and rainy worse.

They are subject to cold diseases, as catarrhes, dropsies, pituitous
distempers, lethargies, palsies, and the like.

The Excrements.
By mouth and nostrils. The excretion of humor thick, white, and insipid
conveyed thorough the nostrils and mouth.

The belly. Mucous and whitish feculency.

Bladder. White or pale Urine, and that thin, if there be obstructions,
otherwise muddy, and thick with plentiful sediments.

Womb. The flowings of the womb in women white.

The Habit of the body.
Skin first. A skin to the touch cold: feet chiefly and hands very cold in
winter.

Qualities second. A soft and smooth skin.

Third. The color of the same white.

Hair. Hair soft and smooth, and from the beginning thin.

Second quality. Yellow hair, because phlegm by longer coction is so colored.

Third figure. Direct hairs, because the skin being void of dryness, the
passages in it are easy, thorough which the excrements may freely pass.

Passions. Hairs of slow growth, but never disrobed by baldness.

Vessels. The narrowness of the vessels and no veins appearing in the eyes.

Flesh. A soft habit of body, and fat, yet not carnous.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of Blood predominant in the body.
The blood predominant in the body is evident by

The Material Causes.
The use of meats of good juice and easy concoction, such as new bread, very
white, and well baked, soft boiled eggs, young flesh and of good nourishment,
especially that of Hens, Partridges, Pheasants, Calfes, Kids, etc. clear
fountain water, generous wine, healthfully tempered.

Retentions. Suppressions of usual vacuations, as of issuing of blood in the
younger, of the Hemorroids in the more aged, or the months in women.

The Efficient Causes.
Parts. An hot and moist temper of the heart and liver.

Descent. Sanguin parents.

Age. The Age from Childhood to Puberty.

Region. A Country perflated by meridional, and Southerly winds.

Time. Spring Time.

Exercise. Idleness, or but little exercise, which creates an appetite, without
any resolution of the body.

Venery. Unfrequent use of Venery.

Sleep. Sweet, and moderate sleep.

Passions. A Life free from care, exhilarated with joy, and mirth, and
affluences of delights.

The large emission, and voluntary profusion of blood is commodious for such,
and the discarding of all such things as may any way diminish the copiousness
thereof.

The Effects.
Animal Actions.
Imagination. A happy imagination and comprehension of things, because moisture
readily receives an impression.

Ratiocination. A dullness and stolidity of mind, profuse laughter, impudence,
incontinence in very sanguin complexions: In others mirth, and hilarity of the
mind, with easy and free discourse; and a great inclination to love.

Memory. A memory somewhat weak.

Sleep. Profound sleep, yet less than in persons pituitous.

Dreams. Dreams of red things, of mirth, pleasantness, marriages, gardens,
musical notes, Kings, Princes, and Nobles.

Motion. Moderate motion, but heavy, and soon tired.

Vital Actions.
Pulse. A great Pulse, slow, and full.

Natural Actions.
Hunger. A mediocrity of appetite, unless the humors abound, which breed
satiety.

Thirst. Mediocrity also of thirst.

Venery. Inclination to venery, but not so much as in persons bilious.

An easy toleration of venery, by reason of the copiousness of seminal matter.

Passions.
An easy falling into continual fevers, flegmons and little inflammations,
etc.

Excrements.
Thorough diverse parts. Frequent, and copious excretions of blood, expelled
thorough the nose, womb, and Hemorroides.

The Bladder. Copious Urine of a laudable color, and consistence, and
sometimes replenished with a multitude of contained in it.

Belly. Feculency ruddy, and of an indifferent consistence.

The Habit of the body.
Qualities. A skin hot and soft to the perception of the Touch.

Second. A florid and ruddy color of the face.

Third hair. An indifferent plenty of hair, of a yellowish color, and a
speedy generation of them.

Vessels. Indifferent largness of the vessels.

A carnous, and well compact habit of the body.

A COROLLARY.
A true Plethorick, void of all Cacochymie, is discovered most usually by the
same signs, if we add an extension of the vessels, and voluntary lassitude.

CHAP. IV. Of the signs of Melancholy predominant in the body.
THE redundancy of Melancholic humor in the body, is demonstrated by the
following signs.

The Material Causes.
Aliments. Use of too crass and hard aliment, of a terrene substance, such as
brown and branny bread, black and thick wine, troubled and muddy water, pulse,
old cheese, beef, hares, pork, marish-fowle, especially salted, or hardened in
the smoke, great fishes hard and salt, cabbages, parsnipes, etc.

Retentions. The customary evacuation of Melancholy retained spontaneously or
artificially by the Hemorroides, the belly, the crooked veins, or the Itch, etc.

The Efficient Causes.
Parts. A cold and dry temper of the liver and heart, with the infirmity, or
obstruction of the milt, by reason of which it is disabled to attract
Melancholic humor, and conveniently to expel it.

Descent. Melancholic Parentage,

Age. Consistency of age, from the forty to sixty.

Region. A County whose air is of an unequal constitution.

Time. Autumn season.

Watching. Immoderate watching, because it dryes the body, and dissolves native
heat.

Passions. A Life agitated with studies, cares, anxieties, and grief.

Helpful and hurtful. They are pleasured by things hot, and cold, as also by
temperate; injured by things cold and dry, as vinegar.

Effects.
Animal Actions.
Imagination. Fear and sadness which without any manifest cause possesses men
very Melancholic. But they who are Melancholic by a light adustion of the
blood; are cunning, wary, prudent, constant, and ingenious.

Atrabilary persons in whom melancholy is adust, are haters and betrayers.

Melancholic persons are difficulty provoked to anger, and difficultly
appeased.

A difficult apprehension of things.

Memory. Memory firm by reason of Siccity.

Watching. Much watching, troubled and interrupted sleep.

Dreams. Dreams of black and horrid things; of carcases, sepulchers, devils,
etc.

Sense. A dullness of the senses, an unconstant, sad, and horrid aspect.

Motion. A slow, heavy, and composed motion.

Vital actions.
Pulse. A slow and hard pulse.

Natural actions.
Hunger. Insatiable voracity by reason of the acidity of melancholy, which
excites an appetency, even when it is dejected.

Thirst. Small thirst by reason of abundance of spittle and wheyish humor,
being plentiful in melancholic men.

Expulsion. Acid belchings, excited by crudities, abounding in melancholic men.

Accretion. Slow accretion and quick age.

Venery. They are not easily excited to venery, and by the use thereof are very
much injured, yet those Melancholicks are more forward to it which are very
flatulent; neither is venery so hurtful to them, because they send not forth so
much seed, being by flatulency excited to coition.

Passions.
A frequent invasion of Melancholic diseases, such as the Quartane, swelling
of the Milt, and hardness; the Leprosy, loathsome scabs, corrupt blood, and
the hemorrhoids, etc.

Excrements.
Frequent vomiting of Melancholic humor.

By mouth. Customary spitting, and copious ejection of water; whence
Melancholicks are termed Spitters.

Belly. The belly for the most part dry, and constipated, and blackish
dejections.

Hemorrhoids. Excretion of black blood through the hemorrhoids.

Bladder. Urine thin and white, sometimes thick and pale.

The habit of the body.
Skin, first, second, third. A skin to the touch cold, dry, hard, and rough.

A dark, leaden, or blackish color of the face.

Hairs. Many hard, rough, thick, black, slow of growth, and soon hoary hairs.

Vessels. Narrow veins.

Flesh. A slender and lean habit.

Thus much of the Signs of humors predominant in the whole body.

A COROLLARY.
By tracing in this method after the footsteps of these Signs, we shall find
out the temper of every part, by applying them in the same manner to those
parts, and by contemplating chiefly their actions and excrements.

A Table of the Signs of the part affected.
The Signs of the part affected are taken either from The Essence which with
Physicians is either The Temper, which consists in qualities. The first, which
are Calidity Frigidity Humidity Siccity.
The second, which are Hardness Softness.

Magnitude Increased Diminished.
Situation. Figure.
Causes External Internal.
Effects, which are Actions Animal The principal Imagination Ratiocination
Memory.
Less principal Sense Common to which refer Sleeping Watching.
Private Seeing Hearing Smelling Tassing Touching under which pain, which is
Purgitive Tensive Gravative Pulsative.


Motion.

The vital known by pulse Natural, which are Nutrition, whose servants are
Attraction Retention Concoction Expulsion.
Generation.

Excrements in which is considered The substance, which is either Of the
essence of the part. Naturally contained in the p. Preternaturally contained.
First Heat Cold Moisture Dryness.
Second Tenuity Crassity Viscidity Spumosity.
Third Color Taste.
The Quantity, Manner of Excretion, Order.
Quality changed in- Color, Taste, Sound.


CHAP. V. Of the signs of the Affected part.
HAving duly enquired into the natural, we come now to search out the
preternatural disposition of the body. First then we will make a diligent
inspection, for the better discovery of the signs of the part affected: Next
the species of the affection possessing that part, and lastly the causes on
which it depends. The signs of the part affected may be derived from three
heads, the Essence, the Causes, and the Effects; a Catalogue of which is
proposed in the Table marked with the letter, B.

Therefore according to that Series the affected part is discovered by.

The essence. First quality. By the Temper of the part; for if we perceive it
hot, moist, or dry in excess, we shall judge it to be preternaturally affected.

Second. By hardness and softness, if for instance, in Hypochondriacks we
perceive hardness and retinency, we shall judge the parts subjected, the liver,
or milt to be obstructed, or inflamed: so too much softness in any part is a
sign that the part is affected with some tumid distemper.

Magnitude increased. A preternatural swelling, whether external, perceptible
to the sight, or internal, sensible to the touch, such as the tumors of the
ventricle, liver, milt, bladder, etc.

Diminished. A great consumption and atrophy of the parts.

Situation. The situation of the part, which in this case is very considerable;
for if we know by anatomical inspection, what place is proper to every part in
our body, we shall easily conjecture by the humor, distemper, or some other
sensible affection possessing that place, that that part is diseased.

Figure. The figure mutually distinguishes the parts situated in the same
place, so a tumor in the right Hypochondrium shaped like the Moon, shows that
the bunchey part of the liver is affected; but being of a long figure, and more
external, it evidenceth to us, that the straight muscles of the abdomen are
affected.

External Causes.
External Causes also discover something; for instance, if any one has taken
Cantharides, and conjecture that his bladder is affected, because they have a
peculiar virtue to alter the bladder, if any one be affected after converse in
the Sun, we judge that his head aches, because the sun does usually affect that
part rather than any of the rest; if the affection be produced by the
immoderate use of venery, we say the spiritous substance, and nervous parts are
ill, because venery is an enemy to these parts.

Internal causes.
We may number the affections themselves among external causes; as where any
one is troubled with a Tertian, this speaks the liver affected; a Quotidian,
the ventricle; a Quartan, the milt, because these parts are the randezvouz of
their causes.

Observe, That when we in practice search for the part affected, we must not
trace it by its essence and causes, but from its actions, excrements, and
changed qualities, the signs are first to be deduced, and after from the
essence and causes thereof.

The Effects, Actions.
Animal. The laesion of an action shows the part on which it depends to be
affected; for instance,

Principal. Deliration, watching, abolition of sense and motion, signify the
brain affected.

Sense private. Laesion of a particular sense, as of sight or hearing, shows
that the instrument thereof is affected.

Pain pungitive, tensive. A pungitive pain shows the membrane affected chiefly
by sharp and eroding matter, but a tensive pain is often caused in the
membranes by flatulency, and in the veins by over-repletion.

Gravative. A gravative pain signifies the parenchyma of any of the bowels to
be affected, for all parenchyma's have a dull sense. So when the stone presses
the the substance of the reins, it causes a gravative pain, but when it crowns
the head of the ureter, a pungitive. So likewise in the pleurisy, when the
matter seiseth on rib-surrounding membrane, it raises a pungitive pain; but
when it makes a transition to the lungs, the pain is changed to gravative.

Pulsatory. The pulsatory pain shows an artery or some adjacent part to be
affected; therefore in all the inflammation of the parts wherein the artery is
lodged there is caused a pungitive pain.

Excrements.
But those excretions which are conveyed thorough several parts of the body, do
usually discover the part affected, in this manner.

Of the essence of the part. A cartilaginous substance expelled by cough,
speaks an affection in the aspera arteria, or the concavities of the lungs; but
a minute part of fungous flesh excreted, shows the lungs themselves to be
affected, but a crass substance proceeds from crass parts.

Naturally contained. If meat, or urine, or dregs be expelled by a wound, we
know that the ventricle, bladder, or intestines are wounded.

Preternaturally contained. If small stones or sand be excreted by urine, the
reins or the bladder are affected. Maw-worms expelled by the mouth or the gut,
show the intestines affected.

Quality of excrements. Air too hot sent forth by expiration, discovers the
heart or lungs to be hot; but too cold, shows the heart to be much
refrigerated, and next neighbor to death.

First, second, third. The blood too hot, too thin, and too yellow, and issuing
as it were by leaps, shows an artery wounded.

Tenuity and color. Small dejections of the belly, and red like the water in
which raw flesh has been washed, show an infirmity in the liver.

Spumosity and manner. Spumous excretions expelled by coughing, show the lungs
affected. They whose excrements in the effluxions of their belly are spumous,
have a defluxion of phlegm out of their head, Aph. 30. Sect. 7. For phlegm
flowing from the brain mingled in the intestines with flatulencies is become
spumous.

Taste. Acid belching shows the ventricle to be replenished with crudities.

Quantity. If a great quantity of blood be expelled in coughing, the vessels of
the lungs are affected, those which are in the aspera arteria being too narrow
for a plentiful effusion of blood. The excretion of blood in urine, if it be
not much, may be conjectured to proceed from the bladder; if much, from the
reins, or superior parts, where it is more copious.

Manner. Excrements rejected by spitting, signify the mouth; by sneesing, the
jaws; by coughing, the lungs, or the aspera arteria; by vomiting, the ventricle
affected.

Order. If white corruption usher out urine, there is an ulcer in the yard it
self; if it issue after urine, there is one in the bladder or reins. In a
dysenteria, if such corruption or pure blood flow out before the feculency, it
is credible that the intestinum rectum is rather ulcerated than the rest: but
if after it, or much confused with it, it shows the superior or middle
intestines to be affected.

Qualities changed.
The qualities changed do sometimes discover the part affected; for instance,
whatever part of the body is possessed by heat or cold, there is a disease.
Aph. 39. Sect. 4.

Color. A leaden or pale color thorough the whole body, shows the liver to be
refrigerated; an orange color, the bladder of the gall to be obstructed;
blackish, the milt to be so affected. A lasting red in the cheeks, and of a
deep grain, shows an inflammation in the lungs.

Taste. A bitter taste in the tongue signifies the ventricle replete with
choler. But a salt taste shows the defluxions of salt phlegm from the brain.

Sound. A tinckling and hissing of the ears whispers an affection there.

A rumbling in the belly speaks the intestines troubled with flatulency.

CHAP. VI. Of the signs of a part primarily diseased, or by consent.
IN all preternatural dispositions it happens for the most part that they
confine not themselves to the narrow limits of one part, but overspread many,
because that which is at first affected, infects by sympathy those parts that
have any commerce with it; where a Physician must be very accurate in
distinguishing sympathetical from idiopathetical affections. For the better
performance of this, we must derive the signs from the mentioned heads, of
which some give occasion only of a slight conjecture, but some of better
assurance; but our united collection of all together is infallible.

The heads therefore of these signs may be taken out of the following table
marked with the letter C.

C. A Table of the signs showing a part primarily, or by sympathy affected.
The signs showing a part to be primarily, or by consent affected, are drawn
either from -- The Essence to which is referred -- The temper in the qualities,
First, heat. cold. moisture. dryness.
Second, hardness. softness. thinness. thickness.

Vicinity. Kind. Office. Connection.
The Causes, which are either Helpful. Hurtful.
The Effects or symptoms, in which is considered Magnitude. Time. Order.
Duration.


The linkes of this chain of signs will be unlocked by the following theorems
illustrated with examples.

The Essence.
The hotter parts are more compassionative to a sympathy then colder: First
qualities.
because they easily attract the noxious humors and vapors: so the heart and
liver do more easily sympathize with the other parts, then the ventricle,
bladder, or womb, etc.

Parts thin and soft do more easily sympathize, Second qualities.
then thick and hard, because they easily receive the noxious causes, and do
not make resistance. So the skin by reason of its rarity easily receives the
humors flowing from the inner parts; so the lungs are often attempted by the
defluxions of humors from the head.

Neighboring parts incline to sympathy more then remote ones. Vicinity.
So the hand communicates a sense of its evils to the arm, the bones to the
adjacent flesh, the ventricle to the liver, the pleura to the lungs, the lungs
to the heart, and so round.

Parts placed under the same genus, Genus.
and possessing the same nature, are easily excited to a mutual compassion. So
the nervous parts sympathize with the nervous, the carnous parts with the
carnous.

The whole body sympathizeth with those parts which are public officers in the
body. Office.
So when the brain, heart, or liver is affected, the whole body is ill.

Those parts which execute the same office in the body, do mutually sympathize;
so the breast with the womb, the bladder with the reins.

Those parts which are directly superior or inferior to others, Situation.
easily receive their affections. So the head easily receives the vapors
ascending from the inferior parts, and the lungs the humors descending from
the head.

Parts united by connection are mutually compassionate. Connection.
So the affections of the nerves are communicated to the brain; of the
arteries, to the heart; of the veins, to the liver; and so on the contrary.

The Causes.
Secondly, from causes helpful and hurtful the signs of a part sympathetically
diseased are taken, of which the following theorem is constituted; If two parts
being together diseased by helpful or hurtful things approximated to one, one
of them is advantaged, or injured; that to which the helpful or hurtful are
applied is primarily affected, but the other by consent. So remedies being
applied to the ventricle, if the pain of the head cease, or is remitted, the
head is affected by sympathy.

The Effects.
The Effects also or symptoms are very efficacious in demonstrating this, as
appears by the following theorem.

Of many parts diseased together, Magnitude.
that which has greater symptoms is the primarily affected part, but the rest
by consent.

Of many parts together affected, that is first diseased, in which the
symptoms first appeared. So when the ventricle is diseased, if a pain of the
head afterward arise, this pain is symptomatical.

In the exacerbation of affections, that part is primarily diseased, in which
the exacerbations of the symptoms begin.

Idiopathetical affections are continual without any intermission; but
sympathetical admit usually of a respit: so deliration caused by a fever
ordinarily cease upon the mitigation thereof, but being produced by the
inflammation of the brain, it continues impatient of any restraint or
mitigation.

Here insert the Table folio 131.

A Table describing the Species of the Signs of Affections.
The signs showing the species of affections are taken either from -- The
Essence, in respect of which a disease is either Similar, or a temper -- Simple
-- Hot. Cold. Moist. Dry.
Compounded Hot moist. Hot dry. Cold moist. Cold dry.

Organical, which is either in -- Conformation, which is either in Figure.
Passage and Cavity -- Adstriction. Obstruction. Dilatation.
Asperity and Levity.
Magnitude Increased. Diminished.
Number Exceeding. Deficient.
Situation, which is either in Position. Connection.

Common, or the solution of the continuum in -- The flesh Wound. Ulcer.
Contusion.
The bone Fracture. Fissure. Putrefaction.
The nerve -- Puncture. Section.
The veins and arteries -- Ruption. Anastomosis. Diapedesis. Erosion.
The membranes Rupture.
The skin Excoriation.


The Causes discovering the disease -- Similar, such are All those Causes which
discover humor predominant in a body; to which add the periods of humors.
Organical and common, and those are Materirial -- By which Aliments.
Medicaments.
In which Peculiar disposition of the parts.

Efficient -- Natural The various temper of the per^^^ Hereditary disposition.
Not natural Exercitation. Venery.



Effects or symtomes, which are either -- Actions hurt Animal -- The principal
Diverse kinds of deliration.
Less principal Sense Common Immoderate sleep. Immoderate watching.
Private The five natural senses Abolished. Diminished. Depraved under which,
pain Pulsator Stupid. Eroding



Motion Abolished. Depraved. Diminished.


Vital, hence the pulse is -- Great. Small. Frequent. Rare.
Natural -- Nutrition whose retinue is -- Attraction to which Hunger. Thirst.
Retention. Concoction. Expulsion.
Generation.

Excrements ejected by Themouth. in which is considered Substance. Nose. in
which is considered Quality. Belly. in which is considered Quantity. Bladder.
in which is considered Manner of extion. Womb. in which is considered
Qualities changed.



CHAP. VII. Of the signs of the Species of a disease.
THe signs discovering the species of affections, are almost of like learning
with the signs of the part affected: but for clearer instruction sake, we will
handle them severally, to avoid confusion in that Treatise.

These signs therefore may be taken from three heads, viz. from the Essence of
the disease it self, from the causes producing it, and the effects thereof, or
the symptoms flowing from it.

All which are orderly set forth in the following Table.

To this the Table noted with the Letter D is related.

But the series of them is shortly demonstrated in the following theorems.

The Essence.
The Essence of a disease is nothing else but the disease it self; and
therefore if our senses will sufficiently discover to us a distemper residing
in any part, or some species of an organical disease, or the solution of the
continuum, we shall not need any other signs to evidence it.

The Causes.
The causes of Similars. All the Causes signifying the humors predominant in
the body, may also hint to us the Species of a disease; for those which produce
choler do usually also generate hot and dry diseases; those which produce
phlegm, cold and moist, and so of the rest; and these in respect of similar
diseases may be taken from the former table marked with the Letter A.

To which yet the periods of humors shall be added, in this manner.

The humors which are moved every third day, are signs of a tertian: Those
that are moved every day, of a quotidian; those moved every fourth day, of a
quartan fever.

Causes of organical and common. But those Causes by which organical, or common
diseases are discoverable, are such like.

Aliments and medicaments. Use of aliments and medicines of force to bind the
inner passages and cavities, breed a suspicion that the disease was produced in
astriction.

Incrassating aliments and medicines do usually generate many obstructions.

Aliments and medicines very detergent do usually produce asperities in the
tongue, oesophagus, aspera arteria, ventricle, and intestines.

Aliments fat and oleaginous generate levity in the intestines, and Lienteria's.

Medicines sharp and eroding erode and exulcerate the internal parts.

Disposition of the part. The Liver and Milt are oftentimes troubled with
obstructions; if therefore these parts be affected, we shall shrewdly suspect
obstructions.

The Aspera arteria is often exasperated or levigated by fluxions; therefore if
that be affected, we may conjecture of asperity or levity. Worms are commonly
produced in the intestines, therefore upon an affection of the intestines we
may call them in question.

Temper of the parts. They that have a ventricle cold and a liver hot, are
subject to obstructions, because the liver attracts crude aliments, by which
obstructions are generated.

They who have a cold ventricle and hot reins, do usually harbor stones in
their reins, because phlegm generated in a cold ventricle, is by the heat of
the reins indurated, and converted into a stone.

Descent. The issue of lienous, nephiritical and podagrical parents are
inclined to such diseases.

Exercise presently after a meal causes obstructions, because it throws down
the aliments from the ventricle, before they be concocted.

Venery. Immoderate Venery causes a calculous disposition, because it
debilitates the reins.

EFFECTS.
Animal Actions.
A deliration with rage speaks an hot distemper of the brain.

Principal. A deliration with fear or sadness, and fatuity, shows a cold
distemper of the brain.

Sleep. Immoderate sleep signifies a cold and moist distemper of the brain.

Watching. Immoderate watchings signify an hot and dry distemper of the brain.

Sense and motion. A total abolition of sense and motion, such as appears in an
Apoplexy, shows a total obstruction of the ventricles of the brain.

The Motion of all the parts depraved, such as is seen in an Epilepsie, shows
the ventricles of the brain half obstructed.

The privation of motion in any part, signifies an obstruction, resolution, or
incision of the nerves retaining to that part.

Pain. A pulsatory pain is a sign of inflammation in the part aggrieved.

A stupid pain shows a cold distemper.

A sharp and eroding pain discovers exulceration.

Vital Actions.
A great and frequent pulse shows an hot distemper; a small and rare one, a
cold distemper.

Natural Actions.
Attraction. A dejected appetency, and great thirst, shows a hot distemper.

A great appetency, and small thirst, argues a cold distemper.

Expulsion. Nidorous belching shows a hot distemper; but acid, a cold.

Frequent vomiting and excretion of feculencies hindered, shows an obstruction
lurking in the intestines.

Generation. The appetite to coition being lost, signifies a cold distemper.

A vehement desire of coition, with a perpetual and painful erection, shows an
inflammatory affection.

Excrements.
By the mouth. Blood copiously expelled by coughing through the mouth, shows a
ruption of the vessel, but a small quantity permixt with purulent matter, an
exulceration.

Belly. Fragments ejected through the belly show exulceration in the intestines.

Bladder. Urine having red and sandy sediments, is a sign of the stone, or of
an hot distemper of the reins scorching the humors.

Heart. Small sweats and frequent interludes of shaking signify an Empyema, 10
Coat. 1. By the acrimony of the corruption the internal parts are vellicated,
which is the cause of trembling; but the small sweats proceed from the
debilitated faculty.

Substance. Aliments excreted in the same manner as they are taken, show a
Lienteria; drink if it be expelled unchanged by urine, signifies a Diabete.

Yellow Choler excreted in the beginning of a paroxysme, signifies a Tertian
Fever.

Manner. Blood copiously flowing through the nostrils in the beginning of a
Fever, signifies a synochical one.

Blood flowing abundantly from any part signifies a ruption, or anastomosis of
the veins; but softly sweating out, a diapedesis.

Quality changed.
Redness in a deep grain in any part, speaks a phlegnumous inflammation; so
redness in the cheeks signifies a peripneumony.

A Yellow color shows an Erisipelatous affection; so in an exquisite pleurisy
the eyes do often appear as it were delineated in yellow colors; so the
Jaundise does not seldom succeed bilious Fevers.

A yellow color of the whole body without a Fever, shows an obstruction in
the bladder of the gall.

The skin of the whole body preternaturally drawn in a blackish color,
signifies an obstruction in the milt.

CHAP. VIII. Of the signs of a great, and a small disease.
A Physician who undertakes the cures of diseases, is not sufficiently
furnished for it by the bare knowledge of their essential differences by their
proper signs; for the accidental differences also are to be diligently
inquired after, that we may pass a certain judgment of them. We will therefore
propose signs of the chiefest of them; viz. of those which are of near
necessity to the practice of the Art; in respect of which every disease is
called great or small, gentle or malignant, acute or slow, and so forth. That
disease is termed great, which is very intense, and oppresses our body with
much violence. The signs of which are taken from the three heads aforesaid;
for we judge that disease great, which being great in its Essence, was produced
by great and intense causes, and has great and vehement symptoms; all which
for clearer instruction are in order to be handled, as is described in the
following Table noted with the Letter E.

E. A Table of the signs showing a disease to be great or small.
The signs of a great or small disease are taken either from -- The Essence.
The causes Efficient External. Internal. Helpful and hurtful.
Material or subject.
Effects or symptoms, which are either -- Actions Animal. Vital. Natural.
Excrements. Qualities changed.


That we may therefore in proposing the signs of a great disease, conform to
this Table, we shall institute the following theorems.

The Essence.
Great distempers, or inflammations, great tumors, great obstructions, great
wounds or ulcers extended to the full dimensions, long, broad, and deep, show
great diseases.

The Causes.
External. Whatsoever external Causes are very prevalent in affecting our body,
do usually produce and discover great diseases. So long and violent exercise
used in a very hot air, does excite a great Fever.

Internal. Those humors which are nested in our body, and which are the
ordinary causes of most diseases, if they extremely err in quantity or
quality, they cause and foreshew great diseases. So the blood copiously
abounding, or very hot, either choler copious, sharp, or putrified, are signs
of a great disease.

Helpful and hurtful. Those diseases, to which there are none or few remedies
profitably, many noxiously applied, are accounted great.

Those diseases which outrage the dignity of the principal or the publicly
officious parts, are in respect of them judged great, if they be but
accompanied with any other sign of magnitude. So a wound, though of it self
inconsiderable, if it be inflicted on the Heart, Liver, Lungs, or other the
like parts, is counted great in respect of the part affected, as also because
it produces great symptoms.

EFFECTS.
Animal Actions.
Whatsoever disease introduces a deliration, profound sleeping, immoderate
watching, privation of sense or motion, or a very vehement pain, discovers a
great disease.

Vital Actions.
Whenever we perceive in any sick person a great, frequent, and difficult
respiration; a great, frequent, or else very small pulse, we may safely
pronounce him troubled with a great disease.

Natural Actions.
A small appetite, or thirst; or on the contrary, an insatiable appetite and
ever quaffing thirst; inconcoction; or a long flux of the belly, and
suppression of urine, or a tedious and copious profusion thereof, signify a
great disease.

Excrements.
A superfluous quantity of excrements, or a total suppression of them, or a bad
color, or a most fetid smell, or substance very remote from their natural one,
are signs of a great disease.

Qualities changed.
A Color of the body very red, yellow, or pale; a taste bitter in the tongue,
the color thereof black, and much dryness, declare a great disease.

A Corollary.
By these signs before mentioned we may easily discern what diseases they are
which deserve the name of small diseases, viz. all those in which the mentioned
signs are not found.

CHAP. IX. Of the signs of a gentle, and malignant disease.
WE term those malignant diseases, which are attended by some malignant and
venomous quality; and their signs may be derived from the same heads.

All which shall be in the following Table marked with the Letter F orderly
proposed.

F. Of the signs of a gentle and malignant disease.
The signs showing the benignity or the malignity of a disease are drawn from
either -- The Essence. The Causes, which are either Material Out of which
Aliments. Medicaments.
In which The disposition of the parts.

Efficient External Necessary. [Aire. Not-necessary. [Venery. Fortuit. [Wounds.
Internal Blood. Phlegm. Diverse species of choler.
Helpful and hurtful.

Effects, which are either Actions Animal. Vital. Natural.
Excrements ejected by Vomit. The belly. Urine. Habit.
Qualities changed, and proper accidents.


Therefore to follow the series of this Table, we propose the succeeding
Theorems.

The Essence.
Some diseases are naturally always malignant, as a Cancer, Leprosy, the
Venereal disease, a Carbuncle, the Plague; others always gentle unless they
light upon a pestilent constitution, as a Tertian ephemeral simple synochical
Fever, and the like.

The material causes.
Usual feeding on meats of a bad juice, or corrupt; drinking of marish, muddy,
or corrupt waters, do frequently produce malignant diseases.

Medicines venomous, and of a deleterious quality, generate malignant diseases.

In bodies of bad juice and ill affected, malignant diseases are most commonly
generated.

The efficient causes.
A pestilent and corrupt air does usually produce malignant diseases: Coition
with an impure harlot, whose sole issue is a malignant disease.

Wounds inflicted with intoxicated swords, or the bitings of venomous
creatures, do produce and show venomous affections.

Blood and phlegm produce gentle diseases, but choler black, porraceous,
eruginous, and sometimes yellow, causes malignant diseases.

Whatever sick person is not sustained by healthful causes, whether proceeding
from nature, as spontaneous vacuations; or from art, by due administrations of
remedies, but is advantaged by these applications only which are of a
preservative virtue against poison, and injured by almost all the rest; that
person is molested with a malignant disease.

THE EFFECTS.
Animal actions.
A deliration and great perturbation of the mind, watching, disturbance,
without a vehement Fever, are signs of a malignant disease.

Vital actions.
A sudden debilitation of the pulses, and the strength, a Deliquium and
syncope, discover a malignant disease.

Natural actions.
Great thirst without a vehement Fever, or the appetite to meat and drink
abolished, signifies a malignant disease.

If by vomit, the belly, or urine, exerements pale, black, eruginous, or
tainted with some alien quality remote from the natural be expelled, this shows
a malignant disease.

In a notable Fever, attended by ill-look't symptoms, if the urine be like
that of healthy persons, it shows a malignant disease. For by such urine it
does evidently appear, that the disease scorns to own for a parent vulgar
putridity, but is generated by a more intense, profound, occult, or malignant
quality which appears not with the urine. Small and frequent sweats flowing in
the forehead and neck only, show a malignant disease.

Qualities changed.
A place color in the face, or other parts, in Fevers signify the malignity
of them.

A black color in the tongue, not accompanied with thirst, demonstrates a
malignant disease.

Proper Accidents.
Those who in Fevers are infested with Wheals, diverse Pimples, Carbuncles,
Botches in their armpits and groins, impostumated ebullitions behind the ears,
and such like, are malignantly diseased.

Ulcers smooth all round, are malignant. Aph. 4. Sect. 6.

A corollary.
Those diseases are accounted gentle, in which the foresaid signs of malignity
are not discoverable.

CHAP. X. Of the Signs of an acute, and Chronical disease.
DIseases of short continuance and swift motion, which also have magnitude
accompanying brevity, are called acute and vehement, to which the Physicians
commonly oppose Chronical, though they stand not in diametral contrariety to
them; for Chronical or long diseases are so called, only for that they are of
continuance, though sometimes also they are great; such as the palsy, the
Dropsy, and the like; to which those are truly and properly opposed, which are
termed short simply, as an Ephemeral Fever.

The signs therefore of acute diseases shall be drawn from the precedent heads,
according to the order of the following Table marked with the Letter G.

G. The signs showing an acute, or Chronical disease, are taken either from
The Essence, or species of the disease. The internal causes, or humors
producing the disease. The Effects or symptoms, which are either -- Actions
Animal. Vital. Natural.
Excrements ejected by The Belly. The Bladder.
Qualities changed.



But the series of this Table will more evidently appear by the following
Theorems.

The Essence.
All the inflammations of the interior parts, burning and continual Fevers,
are in their proper nature always acute. So when we see any one troubled with
the Frenzy, Pleurisy, or such like affection, we say they are sick of an
acute disease.

The Causes.
Whatever diseases are produced by blood, yellow, or black choler, are usually
acute; and so the knowledge of the humor effecting the disease easily conducts
us to such skill, that we know whether it fall into the number of the acute ones.

THE EFFECTS.
Animal Actions.
A deliration, abolition of sense and motion, or any part afflicted with very
vehement pain, show an acute disease.

Natural Actions.
A great thirst, large fluxes of the belly, or total suppression of the
evacuations of the belly and urine, signify an acute disease.

Excrements.
The excrements of the belly very yellow, porraceous, eruginous, pale, or
black, discover an acute disease.

Red, green, or eruginous urines show the like.

Qualities changed.
The countenance of the sick person engrained in red, heat overspread in the
whole body, a bitter taste in, and blackness discoloring the tongue, signify
an acute disease.

A Corollary.
The signs of the differences of acute diseases are described chap. 4. Sect.
3. of prognostic signs.

But Chronical diseases are easily known by the absence of the mentioned
signs, and presence of the contrary, so that repetition of them here will be
useless.

CHAP. XI. Of the signs of morbifick causes; and first, Of the signs of
preternatural choler.
DIseases are most generally the spawn of various humors unconformable to
nature: but those humors do usually breed diseases, which are predominant in
the whole, or in any part of the body; and so if we do accurately know this
factious humor, we shall easily arrive to the cause of the disease. We must
therefore recall the signs of these domineering humors from the first Chapters
of this Section; and because the humors there fall under our consideration, as
they are constituted in their natural state, we therefore proposed only four
first differences of humors: but now some others offer themselves, which are
wholly preternatural; these we shall in short propose, neither will it be
impertinent to enquire after some other causes of diseases produced by humors,
lest this Treatise should be any way defective.

To begin therefore with choler; we termed that natural, which was died with
yellow, or pale, though it be often disobedient to nature, and produces many
diseases: yet it always presents the same signs, if to that which is
preternatural, and somewhat putredinous, we add this only, viz. that it is
moved every third day, as manifestly appears in the paroxysmes of a Tertian
Fever.

But there are other species of choler which are perpetually preternatural, and
as often as they visit the body, they usually produce diseases: and they are
vitelline, porraceous, erguinous, glasteous, and black.

The vitelline owes its production to the yellow, with the midwifery of
preternatural heat, which by dissipating the thinner parts incrassates that, so
that in consistence and color it dissembles the yolk of an egg.

This is not discovered by any other signs then the yellow, except only that
the color of the excrements do dissemble that yolk color, or that that yolk
matter is in diseases expelled by vomit or secess.

Porraceous, eruginous, and glasteous are generated two ways, one by depraved
aliments, and of a vicious juice, such are, Onyons, Leeks, Watercresses, and
the like: The other by vitelline choler parched by vehement heat; by virtue of
which it is painted in various colors, according to the various degrees of
exustion; for the porraceous is generated by less adustion, the eruginous by
greater, the glasteous by more intense; for as the color more emulates black,
it argues the greater adustion.

The signs therefore of these species of choler will be all those which
discover yellow choler, and much more intense, and besides them these two
chiefly; viz. long use of the aforementioned bad aliments, and excretions
infected with those colors.

Black choler is produced from the foregoing species of choler, by a more
scorching exustion: It is known by the mentioned causes parching and burning
the humors, and especially by the effects. For when it is expelled in
excretion, it is known by its black color, and insufferable acrimony; it
exulcerates the parts by which it passes, and being diffused on the earth, it
ferments it.

Some accidents also are fathered upon it as the issues thereof, as cancrous
tumors, malignant scabs, noisome ulcers, and the like; black choler is also
sometimes the product of putrified melancholy, but it is somewhat more mild
then the former, producing the same, but less vehement symptoms.

A Corollary.
Blood varies into no species but when it deviates from a natural condition,
and is too much altered by heat, and so changed into diverse species of
melancholy; so also scorched or putrified melancholy degenerates into black
choler; all which need no further scrutiny.

CHAP. XII. Of the signs of preternatural Phlegm.
NAtural phlegm is usually called sweet, or insipid, yet from this exceeding in
quantity, motion, or any other manner transgressing the bounds chalk't out by
nature, many affections are generated.

Some of the species of it are perpetually preternatural, and those are salt,
vitreous, gypseous.

Salt phlegm is produced two ways according to Galen in his book of the
differences of Fevers, Chap. 6. one out of putrefaction, the other by the salt
serous humidity. But it is known by these signs, viz. by long use of salt
diet, great thirst, a Dysenteria, with pituitous excrements, noisome scabs, much
itching, and chiefly by a salt raste caused by a Catarrhe flowing into the
mouth.

But the vitreous phlegm is only gathered in the intestines, and by reason of
its intense coldness it is accounted very biting, so that it often produces
colic pains, which are by their mark distinguished from them which are
produced by flatulencies, viz. because vitreous phlegm generates fixed pain, and
perferating like an awgre; but wandering and unsettled pains are generated by
flatulencies.

Gypseous, lastly, is that phlegm which is indurated almost to stone, and
appears in the gravel, and nodosities of gouty persons, or is also sometimes
expelled by main force from the lungs like hail.

CHAP. XIII. Of the signs of serum abounding.
THe serous humor produces many, and these not contemptible affections; such
as distillations into diverse parts, dropsies, and the like; therefore we will
in short propose the signs thereof, drawn from two heads, viz. the causes and
effects, according to the following Table marked with the Leter H.

H. The signs of the serous humor a -- bounding, in the body are taken from --
The Causes, which are either -- Material Assumed Meat. Drink.
Excreted and retained.
Efficient -- Natural The various disposition of parents.
Preternatural Various diseases.


The Effects, which are either Excrements. Proper accidents.



By conforming to this order, the serous humor abounding in the body will be
discovered by the following Theorems.

The material Causes.
Frequent use of moist diet, as of summer fruits, and herbs, causes a full
stream of watery humors, and breeds a suspicion that they are like a torrent in
the body.

Large and frequent tippling of water, is abundantly advantageous for the
copious generation of this humor.

The usual evacuation of urine suppressed, or intermission of sweats, signifies
that this humor is copiously cumulated in the body.

The efficient causes.
A cold and moist temper of the ventricle and liver, does produce serous humors
plentifully.

Those who are by temper melancholic abound with this humor.

The obstructions of the liver, milt, and reins, causes abundance of this
humor in the body, because it has no free effluxion, the customary passages
being blockt up.

THE EFFECTS.
Excrements.
Frequent sweats, and irrigations of the whole body, signify plenty of this
humor.

They who abound with it do expel much water by spittle.

They whose blood let forth by phlebotomy, is converted for the most part into
this humor, may assert by the demonstration of this sign that the whole mass
of blood is infected,

Accidents.
They who being lean have a tumid abdomen, are well furnished with this serous
humor.

CHAP. XIV. Of the signs of flatulency.
FLatulencies are copiously generated from crude and crass matter passed over
by weak heat. The signs of them are drawn from two heads, viz. the causes and
effects; the series of which the following Table will declare noted with the
Letter I.

I.
The signs showing flatulencies are taken either from The Causes External
[Aliments. Internal [Temper of body.
Effects which are either Actionsanimal hurt, consisting either in -- Sense
Common [Dreams. Private, in respect of Touching. Hearing.

Motion depraved.
Excrements. Qualities.


By observing the series of this Table, we may propose these Theorems.

Chestnuts, Turnips, Rapes, Beans, Pease, and almost all sorts of pulse, produce
copious flatulencies.

They whose milt is obstructed, or who are of a melancholic temper, do very
much abound with flatulencies.

Dreams of light things, and of quick motion, signify flatulencies to abound
in the body.

Attensive and moveable pain, without any sense of gravity, is excited by wind.

The ears are turned to a tinckling by the eruption of flatulencies through
them.

A palpitation and concussion of the parts, and oscitation and retching, show
plenty of wind.

Belching, and the alarm of the belly the engineer of flatulencies, discovers
them to be in the body.

A croking and rumbling of the belly, as also the sound caused by percussion of
a swelling abdomen, demonstrates plenty of flatulencies.

CHAP. XV. Of the signs of the times of diseases.
THe times of diseases are by Galen termed sometimes the parts of diseases,
sometimes the ages of them, sometimes the motions of the morbifick cause.

Hence it appears that the instruction of them must accompany the diagnosticks
of preternatural things; which is easily spun out of the mentioned heads, as by
the succeeding Theorems shall appear.

Those diseases whose nature is intelligible by sense, their times also are
easily distinguished by it. So we know a Fever to be beginning, when we
perceive the heat diffused through the whole body to run in the same course it
begun in, without any remarkable increase to higher inflammations. But to be
then in augmentation, when the heat does evidently grow more intense. And we
know it to be then in station, when the heat remits not any of that vehemence
which was left at its highest degree; and lastly to decline, when the hot
distemper is in a way of mitigation.

In the beginnings of diseases the injury of the actions is less considerable;
in the augmentation, worse; in the station worst of all, and continues long so;
but lastly in declination they are reduced to a betterment.

Excrements wholly crude, having not any appearance of coction, signify a
beginning disease: but when we see some glimmerings of coction in them, the
disease hastens to an increase; and when we find very great signs of coction,
the disease is stated.

And lastly, absolute concoction, and melioration of the excrements, signify a
declination.

THE THIRD SECTION OF THE SEMEIOTICAL PART OF THE PROGNOSTICAL SIGNS.
CHAP. I. Of the signs discovering when a disease will be long or short.
THE brevity and longitude of diseases are evidenced by many signs, which in
the same method are derived from the same heads; as appears in the succeding
Table noted with the Letter K.

K. The signs of the longitude and brevity of a disease, are taken either from
The Essence, to which are referred the accessions of diseases, in which is
considered -- Magnitude. Motion. Time. Manner of the solution thereof.
The Causes Efficient, which are either Not natural Country. Season of the
year. The condition of life past.
Preternatural, or varioushumors, in which is considered -- Quality. Quantity.

Material or subject in which is considered -- Age. Temper. Various disposition
of parts.

The effects, which are either Actions Excrements, in which are considered
Concoctions and in them -- The time of their appearance. Increase. Duration.
Qualities First Calidity. Frigidity.
Second Tenuity. Crassity.
Third Color. Smell. Taste.

The quantity of excretion. The manner of excretion. The place by which
excretion is made, in which is considered -- Aptitude. Rectitude. Latitude.
The time in which it is done. The Contents of them.
The qualities of the body, which are either -- First, Calidity. Frigidity.
Second, Tenuity. Crassity.
Third, [Colour.




In conformity to this Table, we shall constitute the following Theorems.

The Essence.
Hot diseases are always of less continuance, if they have not contracted an
habit; but cold ones longer.

In diseases which are supplied by accessions, the longer they are, they
foretell the permanence of the disease, the shorter they are, the shortness
thereof.

Those accessions of diseases which are soon perfected, signify the speedy
expiration of the disease, according to Galen, Book 3. of Crises, chap. 4.
because that vehement motion is the motion of an approaching Crisis.

Those accessions which like abortives come before their time an hour or two,
signify that the disease prepares for a speedy departure.

For this anticipation is caused by the tenuity and mobility of the matter; yet
we must note, that this anticipation, that it may signify the brevity of a
disease, must not be orderly, viz. to anticipate every day in the same space of
time, viz. one or two hours, for this order signifies the stability of the
disease, and the obstinacy of the morbifick matter. But the time of
anticipations must be unequal, that by it the infirmity of the matter may
appear, and that it is no uneasy task for nature to be victorious.

Accessions returning slowly are signs of the diuturnity of the disease.

For hence it is evident that the morbifick matter is incrassated to a
contumacy: But yet this is sometimes caused by the diminution of the same
matter, when it is by degrees consumed; which is easily perceptible by the
remission of symptoms, and the less troublesome toleration of the sick person.

Of those who have accessions, what ever hour the Fever departs, if it on the
next day return on the same, difficult judgment will be passed. Aph. 30. Sect.
4.

For when paroxysmes do constantly observe the same returns, they signify the
firmness and stability of the matter, that it cannot be mastered but by long
conflict: because order in all things denotes a fixtness, and power of causes,
and so a difficult solution. So we are instructed by daily experience, that the
paroxysmes of quartan Fevers do most commonly return on the same hours, for
that they are established upon the foundation of a firm and strong cause,
whence also proceeds their contumacy and diuturnity.

A paroxysme also implies a difficulty, not only if it always happen the same
hour, but also if it anticipate or retard on even hours continually, and in the
same proportion.

As if a paroxysme happen this day at one, the next at two, the third day at
three of the clock: for in these there is order no less then in the precedent,
which order perpetually depends upon the fixtness and stubbornness of the
matter.

Those diseases whose exacerbations return every third day, are shorter then
those which return every day; but those are the longest which have recourse
every fourth day.

For a tertian Fever, because generated by choler, viz. thinner humor, is more
easily dissolved. But a quotidian is generated by phlegm, which in respect of
its crassity and stubbornness is related as a medium to choler and melancholy.
But though double tertians have daily paroxysmes, yet by reason of the
copiousness of the matter, which much more abounds in them then in a simple
tertian, they are usually longer.

Those diseases which have their paroxysmes about noone, are shorter then those
which have them in the morning.

The longest of all are those which have their exacerbations about evening, or
in the night.

For the four humors use to be moved in the four parts of the day, viz. the
blood in the morning, the choler at noon, the melancholy about evening, the
phlegm in the night. Whereas therefore the hour of exacerbation in continual
Fevers, shows the predominancy of the humor, the same also may denote to us
the longitude, or brevity of the disease, which depends upon the nature of the
humor.

Those diseases whose solution is caused by excretion, are sooner finished then
when it is caused by abscession.

Because the thin humors are evacuated by excretion, the thick by abscession.

The Causes.
The Country, season of the year, antecedent condition of life, all hot, show
diseases to be short; all cold, long.

Diseases caused by blood, yellow choler, and thin and exiguous humor, are
shorter; but those produced by melancholy, black choler, or any thick and
copious humor, are longer.

In youth diseases are most commonly short, in old age long, in others
indifferent.

Those who are of an hot temper are affected with short, those of a cold temper
with long diseases

In well-affected bodies sickness is shorter, in ill-affected longer.

In the harder and thicker parts diseases are more lasting, as also in the
softer and looser parts, but shorter in those which are of an indifferent
consistency.

EFFECTS.
Actions.
Much Laesion of Actions signifies the longitude of a disease.

Because that such a wide recess from the natural state cannot be reconciled
but in a long time.

Excrements.
As much time as intercedes from the beginning of the disease to the manifest
signs of coction, so much time also is spent in the total solution of the
disease.

According to the legitimate constitution of diseases, the beginning of a
disease is equal to the two subsequent times, but the beginning of augmentation
is computed from that day in which the signs of concoction manifestly begin to
exert themselves. Of this event many examples are found in Hippocrates, as the
1. Epid. chap. 3. aegr. 3. where he says that one was judged on the
seventeenth day, who had manifest signs of coction on the ninth, and book 1.
chap. 3. The wife of Epicrates was judged on the twenty seventh, having these
manifest signs of coction on the fourteenth; and Cleanactides on the fortieth
had manifest signs of coction, and was freed on the eighteenth day, and 3.
Epid. 3. Anaxion began on the seventeenth to void his concoctions, and on the
thirty fourth day was freed from a Fever, and Pleurisy. And Epiphanius
Ferdinandes reports that many examples of this thing fell within the compass of
his experience, hist. 86.

In diseases in which coctions appear in the excrements from the beginning,
they are signs of brevity, but when they are slow in coming forth, they
signify longitude.

The contions of excrements appearing on the indicative day, denote the brevity
of the disease, but appearing on any other day, they show the longitude.

Those diseases in which the excrements suffer some grand change, and much
increase of coction, are accounted shorter; but long, if they be small, and
made by degrees.

Diseases in which coctions continue long, are quickly finished, but slowly, if
after appearance they with draw again.

Hot excrements sent from any part signify the brevity of the disease, but cold
ones the longitude thereof.

Thin excrements signify the brevity, crass the longitude of a desease: yet if
they become crass after coction, they are signs of brevity.

But note that this holds not always, because in some diseases the tenuity of
excrements is more laudable, but in others the crassity so.

Thin and discolored urine signifies the longitude of a disease.

Urine very thin, and having none, or very thin sediments, amd changing
sometimes into better, sometimes into worse, signifies the diuturnity of a
disease.

Excrements of one color denote the shortness, but of diverse colors, the
continuance of a disease. For they show variety of dispositions, which are with
more difficulty conquerable.

A very noisome stink proceeding from the excrements signifies the diuturnity
of the disease, because they fall off from the natural state.

In distillations a very salt humor flowing from the head, shows a long
distillation, because that proceeds from a very grievous distemper.

Excrements few, and expelled by degrees, discover the longitude of a disease;
many, and copiously sent forth, the brevity thereof.

Excretions which are stopped in their beginning, as when sweats retreat, they
are messengers if not of death, yet at least of a long continuing disease.

Excrements expelled with a great noise, signify the longitude of the disease.

So spittle excluded by a troublesome cough, because it argues much difficulty,
speaks longitude.

All those diseases whose solution is by abscession, are longer; by excretion,
shorter.

Excretions driven out through convenient places, and fit for the expurgation
of the parts, cause a short disease.

So the head is purged by the nostrils and palate; the inferior parts of the
belly by the guts and bladder.

Parts are more easily purged by direct passages, and effect a shorter disease.

So the inflammation of the liver is easily allayed by issuing of blood through
the right nostril, but not through the left.

Excretions made through larger passages sooner dispatch a disease then those
made through narrower.

So the solution of the affections of the head is more speedily caused by the
palate and nostrils, then by the ears. So fevers are sooner ended by help of
the belly then of the bladder.

Excretions in acute diseases on the critical day show the shortness of a
disease; but on another day, the continuance thereof.

Bubbles inflated on the surface of urine, signify a renal, and long disease.
Aph. 34. sect. 7.

For bubbles, as Galen in his comm. a verrs, are caused when the humor is
distended by a flatuous spirit: and this contingency is more frequent when the
humor is any thing tenacious; for then the bubbles themselves are firm, and
difficultly soluble. When therefore flatuous spirits are conveyed forth with
the urine, it shows the reins to be troubled with a cold affection, which
musters up the flatuous spirits, and so causes a long sickness. For all cold
things are difficultly soluble, and hardly admit of coction, and so are of long
continuance.

When the sediments of the urine of men feverish resemble course meal, they
portend a long sickness. Aph. 31. sect. 7.

For they signify that a fever is caused by thick humors, which require much
time for concoction and edomation. So in Hipp. 3 Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 3. one
who lay sick in Dealces garden of a great fever, voided thin urine, having a
small enaeorema like course meal, and was judged the fortieth day. But this
opinion is to be taken in this sense, that such urine should signify the
longitude of the disease, if it be probable that the sick person may escape it:
for it is sometimes deadly, and by it many are snacht away with death, before
any longer protraction of sickness, as may be seen in Hipp. book. 1. Epid.
aegr. 2. where Silenus who dwelled in Platamon, was neighbor to the sons of
Euacles, by weariness, and drinking, and unseasonable exercitations, was taken
with a great fever, on the tenth day he expelled by urine copiously something
thick, separating, subsiding, farinacious matter; his extreme parts were cold;
on the eleventh day he dyed. We must therefore affirm with Galen, that such
like sediment signifies either death, or continuance of the disease.

First qualities. When mutations run through the whole body, if the body be
refrigerated, or again heated; or if one heat spring out of another, this
signifies the duration of a disease. Aph. 40. Sect. 4.

For by these vicissitudes it appears that various humors abound in the body,
which cause various dispositions. But nature wants much time to unburden it
self of many dispositions.

Cold sweats signify with an acute fever death, with a more gentle one
longitude of the disease. Aph. 37. Sect. 4.

For cold sweats, as Galen in his comm. affirms, proceed from some cold part,
and cold humor; but they properly coming from the skin it self, it is
consequent, that the skin should in cold sweats be refrigerated, and contain in
it, or the parts subjected to it, cold humors. But when putrefaction of acute
feavrs resides in the bigger vessels, it sometimes happens that a great
inflammation being in the inner parts, it preyes upon the native heat seated in
the skin and the parts under it: and so when those are together with the humors
in them contained, refrigerated, it is not to be admired if they infrigidate
the sweats conveyed through them, though caused by very frequent humors
imprisoned within. Cold sweat then in acute fevers is a sign of death,
because it shows that the native heat is too weak to lord it over these cold
humors, and must therefore submit to their pleasure. But in more gentle fevers
it signifies longitude, because by reason of the exiguity thereof, it does not
so enervate the strength, as to lay it naked to the invasion of death; yet
plenty of cold humors cannot under a long space be concocted and subdued.

The second. A very great extenuation of the whole body signifies a long
disease.

If a person troubled with no inconsiderable seaver, remains in the same
plight of body, without extenuation, this denotes a long disease. Aph. 28.
Sect. 2.

For permanence and non-extenuation depends upon the density of the skin and
crasseness of the humors, and it therefore signifies a long disease.

The body very pale, or of an orange color, denotes duration of a disease.

For this color shows a wide recess from natural state, which cannot be
retrograde but in a long time.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of a disease tending to health, or death.
THat is called an healthy disease which endangers not the life; but that a
deadly one, which threatens death to the sick party. The prognostic signs of
them are derived from three heads, The Essence, Causes, and Effects, according
to the following table marked with the Letter L.

L.
The signs of an healthy and deadly disease are taken either from its Essence,
in respect of which it is either Similar. Organical. Common.
and these either Simple. Complicate.
The Causes, which are either Efficient, or various humors. Material, or the
subject. Helpful or hurtful.
The effects, which are either Actions Animal Principal. Less principal, which
are either Senses Internal Sleep. Watching. Dreams. External Seeing. Hearing.
touching etc

Motion, to which is referred A voluntary commotion of the members. Lying down.
Trembling. Convulsion. Stiffness and shaking. Sternutation.


Vital, to which refer -- Respiration. Pulse.
Natural, to which belong -- Attraction, to which Hunger. Thirst.
Expulsion, to which [The Hicough.

Excrements ejected by -- The eyes. Ears. Nostrils. Mouth. Belly. Bladder, to
which referurine Liquor Contents and in these Substance Quantity Quality.
Manner of excretion.
Sweats. Abscesse and pimples.
Qualities First Calidity. Frigidity.
Second Hardness. Softness.
Third Color. Smell. Taste. Sound.

Proper accidents chiefly considered in -- The eyes. Ears. Nostrils. Teeth.
Temples. Lips. Tongue. Jaws. Hypochondriums.





By observing the series of which Table, the following Theorems will discover
an healthy or deadly disease.

The Essence.
A day-expiring Fever, and all true intermitting Fevers are healthy, and
bring no danger.

The Solution of a strong Apoplexy is impossible, of a slight one difficult.
Aph. 42. Sect. 2.

That is called a strong Apoplexy, which introduces a total privation of sense
and motion, together with a great laesion of respiration: But a slight one is
that in which there is no such loss of sense and motion, or so violent an
injury of respiration.

In a strong one the brain is so oppressed, that it cannot by any means free it
self from it; nor in a slight one neither, without much struggling: so that
always if a solution is made, it degenerates into the Palsy, by reason of the
weakness of nature, unable any longer to expel the morbifick matter.

Those who are taken with a Tetanus, die within four days, but if they escape
in them, they recover.

A Tetanus, according to Galen in his comm. is a disease compounded of an
emprosthotonus and an opisthotonus, in which the body is so stiff and
unmovable, that the breast alone can hardly be moved. It being therefore such
a violent disease, it kills a man in the first quaternion, which if he escapes,
it is a sign that the fury of the disease is remitted, otherwise it were
intolerable.

Those who frequently and strongly swoune, without the appearance of any
manifest cause, dye suddenly. Aph. 41. Sect. 2.

For this signifies a great infirmity, or oppression of vital strength, by
which nature is soon overthrown.

Almost every dropsy is in its own nature deadly.

Because the temper of the liver being vehemently injured, is irreparable.

All Fevers continual, and burning, as also the inflammations of internal
parts, as Phrensies, Quinsies, Pleurisies, peripneumonies, hepatitides, and the
like, are naturally dangerow.

Yet they are not wholly mortal, but according to the various condition of the
sick person, they end sometimes in health, sometimes in death. Nor can a
Physician under pain of convincible ignorance, give sentence of health or death
on the beginnings of these affections, but the critical days are to be
expected, which do commodiously discover unto us whether the disease incline to
death or health.

Upon cessation of a Fever into a dangerous disease without any evident cause,
death not health is to be expected.

Whatever Fevers not intermitting on the third day grow stronger, are more
dangerous. But those which pause sometimes, signify no danger. Aph. 43. Sect.
4.

Continual Fevers either always keep one station, or are increased or
diminished. Those which are increased and exacerbated, are worse then those
which are not exacerbated, because the evil in exacerbation is made much worse,
and more troublesome to the sick person. But they are exacerbated either every
day, or every third day. But those which are exacerbated every third day are
more dangerous, for that they are caused by bilious and so more hot juyces, to
which it is proper to be moved every third day. Of this kind are burning
Fevers, and semitertians, which are usually most dangerous.

But those Fevers which intermit are not dangerous, because as Galen in his
comm. asserts, they proceed not from any inflammation, nor malignant
putrefaction, for neither of these acquiesceth without a Fever. Yet it is
known by experience, at least in these regions, that intermitting tertians have
been fraught with much malignity, which in a third or fourth paroxysme did kill
the sick parties. We must say therefore that this opinion is of them which do
most commonly but not perpetually happen; or we may answer to the defensive
argument of Hippocrates and Galen, that these intermitting tertians have no
perfect apyrexy, and there always lies hid some obscure sparkles of a Fever
raked up in the embers of intermission.

They who by an asthma, or cough, are distorted to gibbosity, dye before their
puberty. Aph. 46. Sect. 6.

For the heart and lungs being augmented, by which they become
disproportionable to their place, this crookedness hindering the amplification
of the breast, it happens that the augmenting bowels cannot be long crowded up
in too narrow a lodging, so that sherly after gibbosity it introduces death:
not that we may draw a consequence from this, that the sick persons presently
dye, but that they fall far short of that diuturnity of life, to which
otherwise they might attain.

A Dropsy accompanying or succeeding a Fever, is usually deadly. as Hipp. 2.
progn.

Because it ends not the Fever, but signifies the exolution of the native heat.

Intermitting quartans converted into continuals are for the most part deadly.

For they show that the humors are incinerated, which is almost irreparable.

A Pleurisy or peripneumony succeeding an Asthma is deadly.

Because when the cavities of the lungs are filled with pituitous humor, and
the lungs are debilitated, there can be no anacatharsis; and respiration is so
hindered by both affections, that the sick person must of necessity dye, But yet
if an anacatharsis be easily made, and the other symptoms be not too vehement,
he may be recovered.

A Peripneumony after a Pleurifie is bad. Aph. 11. Sect. 7.

This opinion grounds upon a general axiom proposed by Hippocrates in his book
of diseases, viz. that the adjunction of one disease to another is a bad sign.
But a worse, when a disease adjoined is worse then the former; worst of all,
when it happens upon a delumbation of strength. A peripneumony therefore being
more detrimental then a Pleurisy, and when it succeeds that, the strength
being much broken by the rude oppression of the antecedent disease, it is
usually extraordinary bad, and often deadly. Therefore when Hippocrates in his
Aph. in less dangerous cases uses the term bad, in more perilous deadly, he
should certainly have used the term deadly here; so that Galen may not without
cause doubt, whether that word bad was by Hippocrates there placed, being by
his testimony not found in some books.

The venereal disease is with much difficulty curable in a Leper.

Because by drying remedies, such as sudoriferous, the Leprosy is much
exacerbated, and made far worse.

The causes.
Efficient. Diseases caused by blood are healthy, unless they acquire malignity
and much putrefaction.

Vitelline, porraceous, eruginous, and black choler, do introduce deadly
diseases.

Material. In bodies of a well disposed and laudable temper, healthy diseases
are most commonly generated.

The bladder, or brain, or heart, or midriffe, or any of the thinner
intestines, or ventricle, or liver being torn, it is deadly. Aph. 18. Sect. 6.

Hippocrates calls those parts torn which are much and deeply wounded. So the
whole tunicle of the bladder divided to the interior space, cannot be united;
nor such a wound, viz. great and deep, in the nervous parts of the midriffe, or
in the thin intestines. But in the ventricle it is sometimes, as Galen will
have it, but seldom cured. The reason of this is because the bladder is
nervous, thin, and bloudless, whence it is that wounds in the neck thereof are
curable, because that is carnous. But the wounds of the Liver by reason of the
copious profusion of blood are deadly, if so be the veins thereof be
dissected; otherwise wounds which have touched only the outward superficies of
the liver are curable. So the wounds of the brain, if they be not very deep,
are within the compass of skill; but if they touch upon the ventricles, they are
deadly.

Helpful and hurtful. Those diseases which deny all benefit of remedies, are
accounted deadly; and on the contrary, those that embrace many as profitable,
are healthy.

EFFECTS.
Animal Actions.
To be ones self, and well disposed to things offered, is good, but the
contrary bad. Aph. 33. Sect. 2.

Principal. For when the mind is sound, it is a sign that the brain is well,
and the membranes thereof, as also the spinalis medulla, and the whole stock of
nerves, and those especially which are nearest neighbors to the brain it self:
so when a sick person is not offended at meat and drink, and other things which
are offered to him, this speaks the ventricle, liver, and other natural parts
to be in indifferent good plight.

Deliration. Now on the contrary, if the sick person be in any kind of
deliration, or be beside his accustomed senses, it is always a bad sign. So
in Hippocrates 1. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 1. Philiscus the third day was in a
total deliration, on the sixth day he dyed. Again, aegr. 2 of the same Sect.
Silenus the second day was troubled with some deliration; the third he slept
not at night, he could not refrain from much talk, laughing, and singing; on
the eleventh day he dyed. So also aegr. 4. of the same Section. In Thasus the
wife of Philinus, when she had brought forth a girl, purgation being made
according to nature, and otherwise being in good state on the fourteenth after
her delivery, a great Fever took her with a trembling; the sixth day at night
she was extasied to a great deliration, and again returned to her senses: on
the eighth she talked much, and rose; on the tenth she had little use of her
senses: on the eleventh she slept, remembered all, but did quickly fall to her
deliration again: on the fourteenth she had palpitations all her body over,
talked much, understood little, but again soon relapsed to a deliration.

But about the seventeenth she was speechless, on the twentieth she dyed. And
so aegr. 8. of the same Section. A great Fever after supper seized upon
Erasinus, who dwelled upon the river Boota, he passed the night with trouble,
the first day quietly, the night molestiously. On the second day there was a
total exacerbation, deliration at night. The third day was troublesome to him,
with much deliration. The fifth morning he returned to himself, and understood
every thing, but at noon he raved much, could not contain himself; his external
parts cold, and somewhat pale, his urine stopped. About sunset he dyed. The
like chances may be seen in aegr. 12. of the same sect. 1. and aegr. 13. Sect.
3. book 3. Yet we cannot infer from these examples that deliration is
necessarily deadly to all sick persons; for Hippocrates in the beforementioned
Aph. says only, that it is bad, that is, that it endangers life, though many
do frequently escape this danger, as is evident in the same Hipp. in 1. Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 3. Where Herophon being taken with an acute Fever, on the fifth
day was beside his senses, on the sixth in a deliration; at night he sweated,
was cold, his deliration remained, on the seventh he was foolish, at night he
returned to his senses, slept; on the ninth day he sweated, was judged, and
intermitted.

On the fifth day after he relapsed, was judged the seventeenth, neither did he
rave: in this recidivation and in aegr. 5. of the same section: where the Wife
of Epicrates, which lay in at the house of Archegetes, the second day after her
delivery was taken with an acute fever: on the sixth with delirations; on the
seventh a total exacerbation: sleepless, she raved; on the sixteenth at night
troublesome exacerbations, she slept not, she raved. On the eightenth she was
thirsty, her tongue scorched, she slept not, she was in a very great
deliration: she was perfectly judged from her fever on the eightieth day. We
may find such like stories, book. 3. Epid. Sect. 1. aegr. 3. and Sect. 3. aegr.
7. And therefore though a deliration be always ominous, yet by it we cannot
confidently assert the death of the sick party, unless this join with other bad
and deadly signs in a destructive conspiracy; as shall more clearly appear
by the following theorems.

When in a fever not intermitting difficulty of spiration and deliration are
companions, this is deadly. Aph. 50. Sect. 4.

Both these symptoms proceed sometimes from the laesion of the brain; then
the spirits appear big, as hipp. in his progn. says, and as it were at a
great distance, that is big and thin. But the difficulty of spiration proceeds
from the affection of the spirital parts, as a Pleurisy, peripneumony, and the
like. But all these are very dangerous.

A deliration succeeding upon effusion of blood, obstruction in the guts;
Pleurisy, or peripneumony, is bad. Aph. 9, 10, 11, 12. Sect. 7.

When it follows an effusion of blood, it is caused by emptiness, which is
very dangerous, when it so much debilitates the principal parts. But in other
affections when the brain is sick for company, this signifies a very strong
and dangerous affection.

If any sick person do any thing unaccustomed, it is very bad. 1. Coac. Aph. 50.

For this shows that the mind is not sound; and is a species of deliration.

An harsh answer given by a sober man, and a gentle one returned by an angry
man; garrulity in a person not talkative, and taciturnity in a pratler, is bad.
Hipp. in Prorrhet.

For this denotes a great subversion of judgment.

To lament or weep unvoluntarily is a species of deliration, and portends the
danger of death.

For this signifies the supremacy of atribilary humor. So in Hipp. 1 Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 2. Silenus among the other symptoms which are there recited,
grieved very much the eighth day, and dyed the eleventh.

Deliration appearing about the beginning of a disease is more dangerous.

For this denotes the vehemence of the disease, who at the first encounter,
nature being yet a strong antagonist, exerts such symptoms.

Deliration accompanied with remarkable oblivion, idleness and stupidity, is a
sign of destruction. 2. Prorrhet.

For the refrigeration of the brain is the cause that they know not their
familiars, nor remember any transactions. But this refrigeration which
follows heat is destructive. But if the sick person upon this grow stiff and
cold, death is judged the inevitable attendant thereof, as Galen 2 Prorrhet.

Deliration busied about things necessary, is very bad; and if it thence
increase, deadly. 1 Coac. Aph. 103.

As if any sick person be averse to meat and drink, he is much endangered as in
1 Epid. Sect. 1. aegr. 2. does appear; where one the tenth day denied drink,
dyed on the eleventh.

Deliration accompanied with laughter is more safe; but with study, more
dangerous. Aph. 53. Sect. 6.

A phrensy with laughter is caused by blood; but with meditation and fury, by
choler: And both are dangrous; but that which proceeds from blood, much less.
Yet we must not presently assert health upon a deliration appearing with mirth;
for a phrensy caused by blood even in it self is not without danger, and upon
permanence of the disease that blood is scorched, and naturalizeth it self into
black choler, which is evident by the consequent symptoms, and by laughter
converted into fury and sadness; as we may find in 1. Epid. Sect. 1 aegr. 2
where Silenus on the second day of his disease was a little foolish, on the
third he could not abstain from much talk, laughter, singing: on the eighth he
was much grieved. Now therefore that humor which on the third day retained the
nature of blood, and caused laughter and singing, was on the eight day
converted into a trabilary humor, by which sadness with grief is caused. And
therefore on the eleventh he died. We may then assert that fondness with mirth
promises some security, if it continue through the whole course of the disease.

They who run beside themselves with silence, being not speechless, are
dangerously affected. Book 1. Coac. Aph. 79.

For this melancholic ecstasy is produced from the atrabilary humor fixed in
the brain, and often succeeds fury, causing instead of clamors, silence; for
jactation, quiet; for watching, comatous and dead sleeps. So in 3. Epid. Sect.
2. aegr. 6. The daughter of Eurianax being sick of a great Fever with which
she died, in the whole course of the disease, says Hippocrates, she abhorred
all meat; not thirsty, silent, speaking nothing, sadness and despair presently
possessed her. So also Sect. 3. of the same book, In Thasus, an horrid Fever,
acute by sadness, took the wise of Dealces lying in the plain, but in the
beginning she was covered, and to the end always silent, she handled, pulled,
scratched, gathered the flocks, then issued tears, then proceeded laughter; on
the ninth day she talked much, and was again silent, on the twentieth day she
died. She had to the end spirit big and rare; alike insensible to all things,
always covered, either very talkative, or silent to the end; Frenzy.

In a Frenzy a sudden repentance, the acute Fever remaining, without any
antecedent Crisis, signifies the approaching of death.

For it sometimes happens that phrenitical persons do so repent, that they
admonish the standers by of very grave and serious things, and foresee future
events which may happen to them; and suddenly upon this dye, viz. the native
heat of the brain being now destroyed, and struggling its last, as a Candle
when it is almost extinct seems to flame more.

In fondness the abolition of memory is mortal.

This is manifest when the sick person calls for a chamberpot, and after
forgets to exclude his urine; or demanding water, drinks not when the cup is
offered, or does but only taste it.

Of delirations these are accounted less evil, which are gentle and slight, and
which hold not the sick person perpetually, but are of a short duration, and
with good, or at least not deadly signs.

Such fondness does most frequently happen in the paroxysmes, or exacerbations
of bilious Fevers, in which the choler being stirred and exagitated transmits
vapors to the brain, exciting a fondness; which yet are easily and speedily
dispelled, nor do endanger life at all, unless they appear with other deadly
signs. But this fondness must be gentle and slight, for those that are joined
with fierceness, though they be slight, are usually bad. As Hipp. affirms, 1.
Prorrhet. aph. 25. desipience efferated in a short time, is like wildness. And
Galen, explaining the same sentence; When you see any one desipient with
ferocity, though it be soon allayed, know that his mind is not thus injured by
the Fever, but there lurkes a phrenitical affection, which being afterward
augmented seems to be wildness.

A frenzy succeeding a lethargy is healthy, because it signifies that the
matter is concocted.

A fondness happening on a critical day, with full strength, and other good
signs, is not dangerous.

For this denotes an imminent Crisis, which usually brings the disease to a
solution. So in Hipp. 3. Epid. in a morose woman, the convulsions rested the
third day, a Coma and inclination to sleep; again watching roused her, she
could not contain, raved much, was taken with an acute Fever; on the same
night copious and hot sweat issued out of the whole body, she slept free from
her fever, and came to her right understanding.

Sleep and watching. If either sleep or watching be excessive, it is bad.

For this signifies a recess from the natural state, and a morbous disposition
in the principal part, which is always bad.

In any disease, if sleep and waking keep their customary vicissitudes which
they did in the health of the person now sick, it is good.

For it seems impossible for a man to dye of any disease, who has a laudable
and unchanged intercourse of sleep and waking.

Wakings in the augmentation or state of a disease, appearing with the signs
of concoction, are good.

For they signify the appropinquation of a Crisis, whose forerunners are
watchings, and other symptoms caused by critical perturbations, which yet upon
the appearance of the signs of concoction are not to be feared, as being the
antesignanes of an healthy Crisis.

Immoderate watchings are more dangerous in young men; but in old, immoderate
sleep.

Because the recess from the natural state is the greater: for young men do
naturally sleep more, because their moisture is more copious; but old men being
more dry are naturally more vigilant.

Those sick persons which can neither sleep night nor day are in much danger.
Hipp. 2. progn.

For those continual watchings show a very great, hot and dry distemper of the
brain, and very much debilitate the strength, multiply crudities by the
resolution of native heat, and at last cause fondness and convulsions.

Dead sleep in an acute Fever is pernicious.

So in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 1. aegr. 2. Hermocrates was taken with a great
fever, and after many symptoms began on the eleventh day to fall into a dead
sleep, which persisted, and he dyed the twenty seventh day. But the reason why
a comatous affection is in acute diseases so pernicious, may be learnt out of
Galens-Commentary upon the mentioned History, where he argues thus; It remains
therefore that some notable refrigeration of the brain, or imbecility of some
faculty laid Hermocrates in a deep sleep the eleventh day; but which soever of
them two it be, it is extremely dangerous, for we have shown that those colds
are incurable which succeed hot and dry diseases. But that which is caused by
infirmity speaks a propinquity of destruction: but when this dead sleep
succeeds long watchings, it is more pernicious, for it signifies a total
extinction of native heat; so when phrenitical persons become comatous, they
have one foot in the grave.

That disease in which sleep causes trouble is mortal; but where it is
advantageous, not mortal. Aph. 1. Sect. 2.

We must not think that every trouble after sleep is deadly: for if it be a
light one, as when sick persons raised from sleep are more anxious and unquiet,
this indeed is bad, but not upon necessity deadly: but if after sleep there
appear any dangerous symptoms, as fondness, convulsion, weakness, cold of the
extreme parts, and the like, then there is cause to think it a deadly affection.

When sleep allayes a fondness, it is good. Aph. 2. Sect. 2.

For this signifies that the heat and acrimony of the vapors and humors causing
fondness is mitigated by sleep, and reduced to some mediocrity.

Those to whom upon a fit of cold, a nocturnal exacerbation brings a vacancy of
sleep, are dangerously affected. Book 1. Coac. Aph. 20.

For this signifies a retreat of the matter to the brain.

Whosoever is stupefied in a troublesome Fever, and affected as it were with a
catoche, is very badly diseased. 1. Coac. Aph. 47.

As we said before that a Coma in acute Fevers is dangerous, so a Catoche much
more, which is caused by a transmigration of the more dry matter into the brain
and nerves; hence the nerves are bound, and therefore they who are troubled
with this affection, stand at the same pitch, and remain stupid though their
eyes be open and inconnivent; and so they differ from Comatous persons, whose
eyes are always shut.

Excitations from sleep with fear and turbulency, are dangerous.

For they signify copiousness of atribilary humor, which produces such like
passions.

If in sleep, when the eyelids hang, any thing of the white part of the eye
appear, which is neither caused by a flux of the belly, nor fasting, nor has
it been usual for the sick party to sleep so, it is a bad sign, and very
deadly. Gal. in 1. progn.

For this signifies the extinction of the faculty moving the eyelids.

Dreams. Dreams in a Phrensy remembered, are good signs. 1. Coac. Aph. 91.

There is nothing more to be desired in a phrenitical man, then that he fall
asleep, and sleep sweetly. But dreams are signs of sweet sleep.

But those not turbulent ones and tumultuous, but gentle and quiet, which are
afterward remembered by the sick persons; for this is a sign that they are come
to themselves again, and that the brain enjoyes again its formerly moderate
temper.

In those who are dangeroussly sick, dreams of dead men, graves, and priests,
denote immimennt death.

In dying persons the soul sometimes is before sensible of her separation from
the body, and represents it to the body by dreams, veiled in the species of
those things which can signify death.

The sight. Eyes dim, or abhorring the light, in acute diseases threaten
death.

For this speaks a great dissipation of the spirits.

In a not intermitting fever if the sick person see not, or hear not, his body
being now debilitated, death is at hand. Aph. 49. Sect. 4.

For this denotes a very great debility of the sensible virtue, and very much
exolution of the spirits.

Hearing. Deafness proceeding from a Critical perturbation, and accompanied
with other decretory signs, is usually healthy.

Those decretory signs which ought to attend surdity, that it may be called
healthy, are principally those signs of concoction which usually appear in
excrements, and are perpetually good. So 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 7. There is a
story of Abderitana a maid, which from the eighth to the seventeenth, on which
a copious effluxion of blood was conveyed through her nostrills, was affected
with deafness, which persevering the following days also, denoted the first
Crisis imperfect, and showed another to come for the resolution of the disease,
which after a second eruption of blood, sweat, and transition of the humor to
her feet, on the twentieth day followed. By which evacuations the disease not
being wholly taken away, her deafness on the four and twentieth day returned in
company of other symptoms, which was a nuntio of a completely perfect Crisis
on the twenty seventh day, which will more clearly appear by the words of the
story it self. On the seventh day, says he, proceeded thin, but well colored
urine; as to the excrements of the belly, they were not troublesome: on the
eighth day she was deaf, taken with an acute Fever, waking, anxious,
trembling, in her own mind, voiding the like urine: on the ninth in the same
condition, and the days following the deafness so persevered: on the
seventeenth large effluxions issued out of the nose, little of the deafness
remitted; on the days following surdity, and fondness seized her: on the
twentieth a pain of the feet, deafness, and fondness took her; some blood
issued out at her nose, she sweated without a Fever: on the twenty fourth the
Fever visites her again, surdity again, the pain of her feet remained, with an
alienation of mind; on the twenty seventh she sweated much, without a Fever,
her deafness departed, the pain of her feet remained, but in the rest she was
perfectly judged.

Deafness succeeding an acute and turbulent disease is shrewdly bad. 1 Coac.
cha. 3. Aph. 2.

As surdity in conjunction with good signs is good, so with bad it is usually
bad: if therefore the disease be acute and turbulent, that is, joined with
fondness, and other dangerous symptoms, deafness following upon it threatens
death. So in Hipp. book. 3. Epid. Sect. 7. aegr. 2. Hermocrates was taken with
a great fever, and began to be pained in his head, and loins, a soft tension
of the hypochondrium; but his tongue at the beginning scorcht; deafness
presently followed, want of sleep, not very thirsty, his urine thick, red, and
separating, subsided not, yet excrements not a few scorcht were expelled by the
belly. On the fifth day his urine thin, had an Enaeorema, did not subside; at
night he raved, the seven and twentieth day he dyed. And his surdity persisted
with him to the end. So again Aegr. 4. of the same section, Philestes in Thasus
vomited bilious matter, a little yellow first, after much eruginous; but the
excrements proceeded from his belly in the night with trouble: on the second
day he was deaf; on the fifth in the morning he dyed. Yet it is observable,
that surdity also joined with bad signs is not perpetually deadly, but
dangerous only, and with it some escape. As appears in the same Hipp. in 1
Epid. Sect. 1 aegr. 3. where Herophon was troubled with an acute fever, had
effluxions from the belly, such as in a tenesmus at the beginning. Afterward
issued thin, bilious, and subcontinuous excrements, sleep was wanting. The
urine was black and thin. On the fifth day, he became in the morning deaf, with
a total exacerbation, his milt swelled, a contension in hypochondrium, he
excluded by the belly some few; black excrements, and was out of his senses: on
the ninth day he sweated, was judged, intermitted: on the fifth day following
he relapsed, his milt was presently tumefied, he taken with an acute fever,
and deafness again. But the third day after this recidivation his milt was
assuaged, his deafness diminished, his legs pained, at night he sweated; on
the seventeenth day he was judged, neither was he idle in his recidivation.

If after a Phrensy, or other grievous disease of the head, deafness succeeds
upon the cessation, or alleviation of the first disease, the faculty being not
debilitated, it is a good sign.

For this is caused by the departure of the matter from the internal to the
external parts of the brain, and then as the result of this we may expect
impostumations.

An humming and sound of the ears in acute fevers is deadly. 1. Coac. cha. 3.
Aph. 5.

A tinckling of the ears, and other sorts of sounds perceptible to sick
persons, in acute diseases show a very difficult and dangerous disease, because
they are produced from thick flatulencies, which proceed from thick matter; and
this matter being contumaciously rebellious, nor subjugable in the short
duration of an acute disease, it follows that nature by this burdensome
oppression must first fall, and so the sick person die.

Smelling and tasting. If the meat, drink, and medicines offered seem putrid,
and of an ill savor, it is bad.

For this signifies that humors very putrid and unsavory are copious in the
body, whereas smelling and tasting are vitiated by vapors exhaling from various
putrid humors, to the tongue, nose, or brain; and that smell or taste which is
within keeps out any other external, according to the Philosophers position,
and hinders its reception. This is the cause that when the nose and tongue are
infected by putrid vapors elevated from the inferior parts, all things then
smelled or tasted seem putrid.

Touch. Pains possessing the ignoble and far remote parts from the bowels,
and long exercising them, the signs of concoction appearing, and those chiefly
which begin on a decretory day, are healthy.

For they hint to us that nature does exonerate the principal members, and
excommunicate from its commerce the noxious humors.

But the ignoble and far remote parts from the bowels are the groin, the
legs, the knees, the thighs and feet, as also the arms and hands. But we
must observe by such like pains, that diseases are not alwaie^ ^erfectly
judged, but sometimes imperfectly, so that afterward a recidivation may
succeed. But diseases are perfectly discussed, when evacuations convenient for
such like pains succeed; for instance, by sweats, effluxions of the belly, and
the like, which may exhaust all the morbifick matter; but if no evacuations
follow such pains, or insuficient ones, the solution of the disease is
imperfect, and obnoxious to recidivation, because that the whole morbifick
cause can by no means be hedged into an ignoble part: it is therefore necessary
that the disease should be finished by other evacuations, as appears in Hipp.
3. Sect. 3. aegr. 9. Where Heropytus affected with a great and contumacious
disease, after diverse symptoms, and flux of blood too, which indeed did
diminish, but could not operate a solution of the disease, he was troubled with
pains in his inferior parts, and lastly he was totally freed by the effluxions
of the belly. Hippocrates words are these; On the fortieth day blood was
copiously effused out of his nose, and he was better in his senses, he was
indeed deaf, but little: the Fevers remitted, blood flowed on the following
days, often and in small quantities. But about the sixteenth day the
effluxions of blood ceased, but he was notably pained on his right hip, and his
Fever was intense, and not long after he felt pains in all his inferior
parts: but it happened that either the Fever was augmented, and much surdity,
or that that was remitted and assuaged, but the pains of the inferior parts
about the hips heightened. But about the hundredth day his belly was much
molested with many bilious excrements, and many such did proceed in no little
time; then followed a dysenteria with pain (...) a convenient state of the
other members. Finally his fever left him, his deafness cease, on the hundredth
day he was perfectly judged. So also Aegr. 7. of the same Section, on the
seventeenth day copious effluxions proceeded from the nose of Abderitana a
maid; on the twentieth she was pained in her feet, taken with deafness and
fondness, some blood issued from her nose, she sweated, without a Fever; on
the four and twentieth the Fever returned, and surdity again, the pain of her
feet persisted, then came an alienation of mind: on the seven and twentieth day
she sweated much, without a Fever, the pain of her feet remained, but in the
rest she was perfectly judged.

Pains descending from the superior to the inferior parts, are healthy.

For they show that the morbifick matter is conveyed away from the principal to
the more ignoble parts, according to the mind of Hipp. 3. Prorrhet. Pains,
says, he, if they run down to the lower parts, are easily drawn from them; and
it is confirmed by the story of Herophon, which is reported in 7. Epid. Sect.
7. aegr. 3. This man's milt in the fifth day swelled with a tension of his
hypochondrium: on the eighth the humor of his milt was mitigated, he was pained
in his groin; first his milt swelled according to rectitude; after he was
pained in both knees, he passed the night away easily; his urine was of a
better color, having a small subsidence: on the ninth day he sweated, was
judged, intermitted: on the fifth day after relapsed, and his milt presently
swelled, his acute fever and surdity returned again; but on the third day
after this recidivation his milt was assuaged, his deafness diminished, his
legs pained, he sweated at night, and the seventeenth day was judged.

Vehement and continual pains of the head in an acute Fever joined with any
other dangerous signs, are deadly: 3. progn.

For when those pains are violent and continual, it is plain that they are not
caused by vapors ascending from the inferior parts, nor by any critical
perturbation, but by a very hot distemper stamped upon the meninges, tension and
gravity being in them produced by that morbifick matter which is lodged in the
brain it self, which if it generate an acute Fever, is bilious and sharp, and
very troublesome to the part; and such on one is signified, if with pains, and
an acute Fever, other bad and dangerous sig^es appear, as watchings, fondness,
difficulty of spiration, urine thin, or confused, and the like, which according
to their number show the danger of the disease.

The pains of the head succeeding Critical sweats, presage for the most part
death.

Pains in the neck in the begininng or amgmentation of a disease are bad.

For they signify plenty of humors abounding in the postern part of the head,
and that part thereof is diffused into the spinalis medulla, or the membranes
thereof, which cannot be dissolved, or concocted by nature. So in 1. Epid. aegr
2. Silenus soon after the beginning of his disease had a pain in his loins, and
gravity in his head, a contension of his neck; on the twentieth day he dyed. So
again 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 4. A person phrenitical, whose head and neck the
first day were troubled with a painful gravity, the fourth day dyed. In
Cyzicum, a woman which brought forth ten daughters, whose delivery was
difficult, without much purgation, was first taken with an horrid and acute
fever, troubled with an heaviness of the head, and neck attended with pain, on
the seventeenth day she dyed. Yet it is to be noted, that by this sign we
cannot absolutely affirm death, because some do with it escape, as appears in
1. Epid. Sect. 7. aegr. 5. Where on the second day Epicrates his wife was
afflicted with a pain of her head, neck, and loins, and was troubled with many
and dangerous signs to the eightieth day, in which she was perfectly judged.
And aegr. 14. of the same section, Melidia, who was sick by the Temple of Juno,
had a great pain in her head, neck, and breast, accompanied with other
symptoms, and on the eleventh day she was perfectly judged. When therefore
this sign appears in the beginning of a disease, we may confidently aver by it
a very troublesome and dangerous disease, on which the sick person will either
dye, or be very dangerously ill, as appears by the recited stories of these who
have escaped, yet with shrewd symptoms, and much danger of life.

An acute pain of the ears in a continual Fever, is dangerous.

For it is an hazard if aman fall not into a desipiency, and dye, Hipp. 3.
progn: this sign being accounted fallacious by Hippocrates himself, we must
accurately distinguish. The dura meninx is neighbor to the auditory passage,
so that the disease of one has an easy way of transmigration into the other;
but they do so differ, as that if upon the affection of the brain a pain
surprise the mentioned passage, it will not be a sign of fondness or death,
but a guard and fence against them both; for this shows that the morbifick
matter is transferred from the internal to the external parts. But if in an
acute fever a pain arise without any affection of the brain, it is a sign
that the humors by that part assayl the brain, which will by that effect a
Phrensy, and next death; most of all if it be vehement and difficult. But such
a disease (as Hipp. informs us in the quoted place) dispatcheth young men on
the seventh day, or sooner; but old men much slower, for Fevers, and fondness
more seldom happen to them, and so their ears will admit of suppuration. But
at this age recidivation happening kills many: but young men dye before their
ears can be suppurated; and if white matter be excluded at the ear of a young
man, there is hopes of his life, if any other good sign happen.

The pain of the iaws in an acute Fever is perilous Hipp. in Coac.

This pain of the jaws often happens in malignant and pestilent Fevers, and is
one of the demonstrative signs of that affection; and it is caused either by a
thin and malignant defluxion from the brain breaking in upon the jaws; or by
malignant vapors sent up by the inferior parts, and vellicating those parts.

A pain seated in the breast with a numness, is pernicious; and if an acute
Fever surprise persons so pained, they die cruelly. 2. Prorrnet. text. 36.

For they signify plenty of bilious humor effused into the breast, which
causes both the pain and the acute Fever, if a numness, and as it were an
exolution of the whole body be adjoined; for this shows the destruction of the
animal faculty, the brain being by sympathy dangerously affected.

Convulsions in acute Fevers, and strong pains about the bowels, are bad. Aph.
66. Sect. 4.

As in acute Fevers convulsions are caused by an hot and dry distemper
exsiccating and distending the nerves; so in the same disease pains in the guts
proceed from the vehemence and siccity of the inflammation, and the stronger
these pains are, the more they declare the magnitude of the cause, and by
consequence of the danger. For pains in the bowels are caused either by
inflammation, or erysipelas, or strong obstruction, or abscess: but of these
Hipp. discourses not in this aph. Though their danger be no whit less, but
they do not necessarily infer convulsions, and we treat here of primary
Fevers, not of symptoms, which attend on the mentioned affections: of these
pains we have an example 1. Epid. Sect. 1. aegr. 11. Where the wife of Dromeada
being troubled with an a cute Fever, on the first day began to be pained in
her Hypochondrium. On the third day about noon she was extremely cold, was
taken with an acute Fever, like urine, the pain of her Hypochondrium, but on
the sixth day she died.

The beginnings of diseases arising from the pain of the back, are difficult.
1. Coac. cha. 12. Aph. 5.

For in Fevers the pains and heaviness of the loins are commonly produced by
the weight of the peccant matter, creeping into the vena cava, which borders
upon the back and loins; and when this matter is inflamed it excites pains and
burnings in the loins, which speak a dangerous disease, as well by reason of
the plenty and acrimony of the morbifick matter, as for that the morbifick
matter may by these inlets easily invade the principal parts. To this add, that
heat communicated to the Liver and the parts thereabout, by reason of vicinity
produces various symptoms-

The pains of the ignoble parts appearing in the beginning, or with other
unlucky signs, are deadly.

As we said before that such like pains were healthy, when they happen on a
critical day accompanied with the signs of concoction, as signifying that
nature does unload in the ignoble parts; so on the contrary, if they happen in
the beginning, in which no healthy expulsion can be by nature made, or at other
times also with other bad signs, they threaten the danger of death. So in
Hipp. 1. Coac. Aph. 13. The pains of the hands and feet are horrid, and any
hope of alleviating the pains of the knees is desperate.

This opinion is confirmed by a convincing history, which may be found 3. Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 5. In Larissa, Calvus was suddenly taken with a pain on his
right thigh, and applications of remedies availed nothing; the pain persisted
to the third day, and he died on the fourth.

Pains beginning first in a remote part, and afterward surprisng the bowels,
are bad.

For they show the transition of the humors to the noble parts, which Hipp. 3.
progn. confirms. Pains, siaith he, which with an acute fever besiege the
loins and the inferior parts, if they assayl the bowels, and leave their
inferior dwellings, they are very destructive. And 1. Coac. cha. 1. Aph. 13.
And the inrode of a pain from the thigh upward is terrible. And Aph. 76. of the
same chapter; The sharpness of pain, if for a little time fixed in the throat,
it remove higher, causes danger of death.

Pains of the ignoble parts, which without any manifest cause do soon vanish
and hide themselves, are dangerous.

They are said to withdraw themselves without any manifest cause, when they do
abruptly break off without the help of a Physician, evacuation, or abscession.
For they either signify the mind affected, and so insensible of the pain; or
the translation of the matter to the interior parts, or the corruption of that
part in which sense is destroyed. So in the mentioned history of Calvus, the
pain of his thigh disappeared the third day, by reason of the transmigration of
the matter to the brain; or else by reason of his fondness he was not sensible
of the pain. These are the words of Hippocrates, On the third day the pain of
his thigh ceased, but an alienation and perturbation of his mind followed, with
much jactation: on the fourth day about noon he died.

Motion. In any disease, if the sick person can easily rise and lift himself
up, and turn himself from side to side, it is a good sign; on the contrary, if
he cannot without difficulty move himself, it is a bad one.

As the soundness of any function denotes the levity of a disease, so among the
animal functions, if that which belongs to voluntary motion be not hurt, we
have the greater hopes; and on the contrary, if it be much detrimented, so that
the sick persons can hardly move themselves, it is usually dangerous.

Much jactation of the body, anxiety and unquietness in an acute fever, is
bad.

For this denotes the ferocity and turgency of the humors, which being thin and
very moveable, and vehemently agitated in the body, it is an hazard if they
sally not out upon the principal parts, and produce some pernicious affection.
So in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 12. A woman presently upon the beginning of
her disease was thirsty and anxious. On the seventh day she was extreme cold,
an acute fever seized her, with thirst, and much jactation. On the eighth day
she was again hot about noon, thirsty, comatous, and anxious. On the fourteenth
she dyed.

Lying down. That method of lying down is best which every one in health
observes. Hipp. book. 3. Coac. tract. 1. Aph. 9.

But this decumbency which is like that of healthy persons is by Hipp. 1.
prognost. described in these words; A sick person must ly on his right or left
side with his arms, neck, legs somewhat bended, and the rest of his body
lying easily. For by this situation of the body all the parts rest, and all the
muscles are relaxed, respiration more free, and sleep more pleasant. If then a
sick person taken with an acute disease observe to ly down in this manner, it
is a notable sign of a vigorous faculty, which supports cheerfully, and with
no difficulty, and easily governs the body.

The heaviness of the whole body, hands and feet, is dangerous. Hipp. 3. Coac.
tract. 1. Aph. 3.

The gravity of the whole body is discovered by this, that the sick person can
hardly move himself in his bed, and turn upon his sides, and when he is moved
by assistants, he represents a leaden bulk and burden. But the heaviness of the
hands and feet appears by this, that the sick party can hardly lift up his hand
to take meat and drink, or exercise any other thing; or if when they be so
difficultly lifted up, they tremble, or if by being lifted up by the Physician,
they fall down again like a stone. But the heaviness of the feet is
discoverable, when they be extended without any reflection to the end of the
bed. All these are signs of a much debilitated and almost expiring faculty.

To ly on the back with the hands, legs, and neck extended, is bad. Hipp. 3.
Coac. tract. 1. Aph 10. and 1. progn. text. 2.

For this argues a great infirmity in the animal faculty, which cannot confine
the body to any other situation. But this supinity is caused when the body is
overburdened by its own weight, as appears in men dying, which do always thus
ly: and it is more confirmed by the extension of the members, which proceeds
from their gravity.

If the sick person cannot contain himself, but often fall down to the place of
his feet, it is mortal. Hipp. book 3. Coac. tract. 1. aph. 11.

For this signifies the animal faculty almost extinct, so that it cannot govern
nor sustain the weight of the body, but it is forced down by its own gravity to
the lower parts.

If one troubled with an acute disease sleep gaping, it is mortal. Hipp. 1.
progn. text. 20. and 3. Coac. tract. 1. aph. 12.

For this gaping is caused either by reason of the infirmity and exolution of
the faculty moving the jaw bone, or by a great inflammation of the heart, and
other parts, whence vapors are effused in such plenty, that for their continual
exclusion the sick persons are forced to ly gaping. But this is principally
caused in sleep, because then the heat of the inner parts is intended, which
sends up a greater plenty of streams. But if the sick person does not only
persist gaping in his sleep, but be in the same posture when he is waking, it
is much more dangerous. Yet observe, that some by assuefaction even in health
do sleep gaping: which if the Physician knows, he cannot from thence take
occasion of a prognostic.

To lie upon the belly, for one with whom it is not customary so to sleep, is
bad. Hipp. 2. Prorrhet. text. 9. and 3. Coac. tract. 1. aph. 13.

For this preposterous decumbency shows either a fondness, or error in
understanding, or a dangerous affection possessing the parts of the belly.

If a sick person be taken lying with his feet naked, and not very hot, as also
with his hands, neck, and legs thrown unequally and naked, it is dangerous; for
this denotes anguish. Hipp. 3. Coac. tract. 3. aph. 14.

When sick persons in the greatest rigor of a feverish exacerbation, being
very hot all over their body, do lay naked their body and members to cool, this
gives no occasion of judging danger. But if upon no compelling necessity, and
when their body is temperate enough, they strip their parts, and toss their
whole body to and fro, this is very dangerous.

For this, as Hipp. averres, signifies an Alysmus or anxietude: which Alysmus
is grounded upon two causes, one a proritation and biting of the stomach,
caused by the sharpness of humor with heat; the other is the oppression of the
faculty by the heaviness of the body, so that no collocation is in that anxiety
pleasing. The signs of both causes are syllogistical: of the first,
nauscation, and appetite to vomiting; of the second, frequent jactation
impatient of a pause with out nauscation. But the principal cause of jactation
is the faculty languishing and oppressed; and the cause of denudation of the
body is a burning fever and lypyria.

It is pernicious also to tumble to the bed side, and first to put out the
feet, then to raise up the body, and without cohibition either to fall out or
rise.

For this denotes an obscure fondness, and is so dangerous, that Hollerius in
his comm. to the Coac. praenat. ashrmes that he never knew any other recover
upon these signs.

Those sick persons which desire to be erect, and sit in the vigor of an acute
disease, and chiefly in a peripneumony, are in danger. Hipp. 3. Coac. tract. 1.
aph. 16.

For this either threatens an imminent phrensy, by reason of which they are so
unruly, and tumble inconsiderately without any advantage; or it shows a great
inflammation of the heart, which by this means they desire to allay by a more
free inspiration of air; or lastly, it denotes a great oppression of the
spiritual parts, possessed by much inflammation, so that respiration can hardly
be exercised with erection of the body.

Those sick persons which toss their hands about idly, snatch at strawes, and
pick the wool from their clothes, or pull motes from the walls, and gather the
bedclothes as a burden, are mortally affected. Hipp. 1. progn. text. 23.

For these are symptoms of imagination offended, and signs of a very deadly
phrensy. So in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 15. In Thasus, the wife of Dealces
was covered from the beginning, and remained silent to the end; she scrabled
with her hands, pulled, scracht, and gathered the wool; on the twenty first
day she dyed. But here arises a doubt how Hipp. terms these deadly symptoms,
when Galen 4. of affected places. cha. 1. reports of himself, that being sick
of a burning Fever he gathered strawes, and pulled the wool, and then he
admonished his friends to take care lest he should fall into a phrensy, yet
from this disease he himself recovered. We must answer, that such symptoms are
caused in a true phrensy, the brain being essentially affected, or by sympathy,
by the elevation of vapors to it, which do usually generate a Paraphrenitis: if
it happen in the first way it is deadly, if in the second, not; though it show
greater future evil.

Those persons who are broken and extenuated with a disease, if they fall a
trembling, they are in danger. Hipp. 3. Coac. tract. 2. cha. 4. aph. 63.

Trembling. Trembling, according to Galen in his book of trembling, cold
palpitation, and convulsion, is caused by the imbecility of the animal faculty.

And this infirmity is by oppression, or exolution. That weakness which is
produced by oppression, though it threaten danger, yet it is not deadly,
because that oppression which proceeds from the multitude of humors may be
expelled by evacuations: but tremblings which happen in the beginning of a
disease are most commonly caused by oppression, and are not always deadly, as
appears by the example of Pythion in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. aegr. 1. who from the
beginning of his disease had a trembling in his hands, yet he escaped. But when
a trembling happens in the progress of a disease, the sick person being now
weak and extenuated, this without doubt does proceed from exolution, and
therefore denotes death at hand.

It is better that a Fever should succeed convulsion, then convulsion a
Fever. Aph. 26. Sect. 2.

Convulsion. Convulsion, according to the mind of Hipp. is either caused by
repletion or inainition. When therefore it happens that any person in health is
suddenly convulsed, it is necessary that this convulsion should be caused by
repletion, for then the nerves are stuffed with cold and glutinous humors which
introduce convulsions: a Fever therefore coming upon those does for the most
part heat, extenuate, digest, and so resolve the convulsions. But if a
convulsion happen in Fevers, they are most ordinarily caused by inanition, and
dryness, produced by a burning and scorching Fever; which is a very great, and
almost incurable evil, because long time will be required to remove the siccity
of the nerves; but the sharpness of the disease will admit of no
procrastination, but soon dissolves the strength, and produces destruction.

Those Convulsions which appear in the beginnings of acute diseases, are less
dangerous then those that happen in the state of them.

All Convulsions which succeed Fevers are not deadly, but sometimes less
dangerous, if they happen in the beginning; for they then signify a multitude
of humors, by which the nervous parts are stretched and convulsed. And they use
to be far less dangerous if they remain not long, because then they are not
produced from a fixed cause, and they show that the morbifick matter has
removed from the stock of the veins into the bulk of the body, by the
concussion and violent commotion of the body, evident in a Convulsion. So in
Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 11. In Thasus, a woman being froward with grief
occasionally caused, could not sleep, and abhorred meats, was thirsty and
anxious: in the beginning of the night she talked much, was sick in mind,
troubled with a small Fever; in the morning with many Convulsions, talked
obscenely, disturbed with many, great, continual pains: on the second day she
was in the same condition, slept not, had a more acute Fever. On the third day
her Convulsions left her, she fell into drowsiness, and sound sleep, and again
waking she leapt up; being unable to contain her self she talked much, was
taken with an acute Fever, and the same night she sweated much, in a heat all
over, without a Fever, she slept, understood every thing, and was judged.
About which time her months issued copiously.

We may gather by this story, that her Convulsion appearing in the beginning
was caused by repletion, not from the authority of Galen only, in his
commentary on this place, where heaffirmes that this woman's months were
surppressed, but also by those evacuations by which she was freed, viz. by
copious and universal sweats, and by the plentiful effluxion of her months,
according to the common axiom, diseases caused by repletion are cured by
inanition. But if a convulsion appear in the state of a disease, it is more
dangerous, for it is either generated by siccity introduced by a feverish
adustion, or by the transition of the morbisick humor to the nervous parts.

Those which are caused by dryness are wholly pernicious and deadly; but those
which are produced by permutation are sometimes curable, as those which proceed
from the bitings of the orifice of the ventricle, and in hysterical women, and
those which happen critically. Yet they are usually difficult, and very
dangerous, as appears by the stories proposed by Hipp. in Epid. For in 1 Epid.
Sect. 1. aegr. 4. In Thasus, the wife of Philinus being taken with an acute
fcaver, after diverse symptoms was on the eighth day extreme cold, much
convulst with pain; on the ninth convulst: on the eleventh she in her
convulsions expelled urine very copiously. But about the seventeenth day she
was speechless, on the twentieth she dyed. So Aegr. 8. of the same Section,
Erasinus died on the fifth day about sunset of a pernicious disease. And to
him, says Hippocrates, about his death happened many convulsions with sweat.
So Aegr. 11. of the same Section, the Wife of Dromeada, after diverse symptoms,
on the sixth day in the morning she was stiff cold, but speedily again heated,
she sweated all over, was cold in her extreme parts, was fond; respiration big
and rare, soon after convulsions began from her head, and she died suddenly.

Lastly, 3. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 4. In Thasus, Philestes being taken with a
very acute fever, was convulst on the fourth day, on the fifth in the morning
he died.

In acute fevers, convulsions and strong pains about the bowels are bad. Aph.
66. Sect. 4.

It is before noted in the exposition of Aph. 26. Sect. 2. that a convulsion in
an acute fever is bad. But if strong pains of the bowels come in company with
it, it is without doubt very dangerous; for these pains are caused either by
great inflammations in those parts, or by an hot and dry distemper produced by
a burning fever, which must be very great that it may be able to cause such
pains, and so it threatens death to the sick person; as is evident by the
stories of the wife of Philius Erasinus, and the wife of Dromeada before
proposed, for they did not only suffer convulsions, but also hypochondriacal
pains; and so died.

Convulsions in phrenitical persons signify that death is near.

Galen. 12. Meth. last chap. affirms that his experience could never inform him
of any one so convulst that was recovered, nor ever heard he such a thing by
the report of any other. For this convulsion proceeds from the siccity of the
nerves, occasioned by the inflammation of the brain, which is therefore
incurable.

Convulsions in children are less dangerous then in those that have arrived to
a full age.

Because as Galen relates in his comm. on 3. Aphor. children do more abound
with crude humors, which cause a convulsion by repletion, which is less
dangerous then that which proceeds from inanition, with which those that are
full grown are more frequently molested; and likewise the nervous parts in
children are infirm, and so convulst by a smaller cause.

Those who are taken with a Tetanus, die within four days, in which if they
escape, they may be cured. Aph. 6. Sect. 5.

A Tetanus is caused by an emprosthotonos, that is, a tension to the interiors,
and an opisthotonos, that is a tension to the posteriors; for in it the
convulsion of the opposite muscles is equal, which do therefore so vehemently
afflict nature that she cannot long endure those pains, chiefly when the whole
body, and especially the neck is stiff with cold; for then besides those
horrid pains which quickly dissolve the strength, the diaphragma is also
affected by sympathy, whereas the nerves produced to the diaphragma make out
from the fourth vertebra of the neck, and so the neck being convulst
respiration is hardened, and the persons so affected die by suffocation within
four days. But if they escape them upon the mitigation and dissolution of the
disease by judication, which happens in extremely acute diseases on the fourth
day, they are freed from this dangerous disease. Convulsion upon a wound is
deadly. Aph. 2. Sect. 5. The succession of a convulsion to a wound proceeds
from four causes. First, when the wound happens to fall upon the great veins
and arteries, upon which a large flux of blood follows, which causes a
convulsion and swouning; but death is not always the effect of this convulsion
and Syncope. Secondly, when the wound is inflicted upon the stock of nerves, by
reason of which that convulsion of the nervous parts follows which is called
Spasmus. Thirdly, when there is an inflammation in the wound, which being
extended to the nerves becomes a convulsion. Fourthly, when the ulcer is not
well purged, or closed before its time, or when the orifice of the wound is too
narrow, as in the pricking of a nerve; for then the sharp putrefaction being
retained vellicates the nerves, and excites a convulsion. But this convulsion
is deadly, because it insinuates by sympathy into the brain, the nerves being
vehemently affected; and because putrid feculency retained in the wound is
sometimes transmitted into the noble parts. And this Convulsion, says Galen in
his comm. on this Aph. is deadly, not as implying a necessary consequence of
death, but as very often introducing it. Which Hippocrates himself seemed to
acknowledge, who in his Coac. progn. proposing the same opinion, in the place
of deadly inserts dangerous.

Convulsion or an hiccough after much profusion of blood is bad. Aph. 3. Sect.
5.

Convulsion follows an immoderate loss of blood, either when the veins and
arteries are robbed of that due proportion of blood which they should contain,
and being empty are contracted, and being contracted contract the nerves; or
because the veins exhausted attract from the neighboring parts, demanding
mutual courtesy, and so being dried with long profusion of blood, seek aliment
from the nerves, which forces the exsiccated and contracted nerves to a
convulst retirement to the fountain head, as it were to derive help from it; or
else because the veins and arteries being immoderately exhausted, hurry away
not only the blood but all the spirits from the extreme parts, whence the
nerves are suddenly refrigerated; hence arises an extremporary, not a long
convulsion, not proceeding from a preternatural cause, but rather produced by
the action of nature, and endeavoring to hinder the detriment of this
inanition: therefore we said before that a convulsion upon a flux of blood was
not always deadly, though dangerous, because no convulsions caused by
inanition wants danger.

Convulsion or an hiccough upon a superpurgation is bad. Aph. 4. Sect. 5.

In superpurgation not only the useless but the useful humors are evacuated,
therefore the convulsion which succeeds it is by inanition, and therefore
dangerous. So Aph. 1. of the same Section. Convulsion upon hellebore is deadly,
because of the immoderate purgation which succeeds the assumption of hellebore.

Convulsion and desipience after watching is bad. Aph. 18. Sect. 7.

Watching, says Galen in his comm. is one of those things which do most
evacuate and dry, and so cause a convulsion by siccity: and besides, because by
long watchings the blood is made more bilious, and by consequence more fit for
the stimulation of the nervous parts.

Cold. Those fevers in which are daily colds have a daily solution. Aph. 63.
Sect. 4.

It holds not only true in quotidian, but in tertian and quartan recourses,
that fevers are resolved by a precedent coldness; and hence we collect that
there is no danger in coldness of intermitting fevers, and that it gives no
cause of fear.

Coldness in continual fevers happening on a critical day with the precedent
signs of concoction, and a remarkable evacuation following, is healthy.

Good evacuations following such colds are copious sweats, vomits, dejection of
the belly, or flux of blood, by which fevers are either wholly taken away, or
much remitted, of which Hippocrates Aph. 58. Sect. 4.

A solution of a burning fever is caused by supervening coldness.

Which is thus to be understood, viz. if it happen with the mentioned
conditions. So in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 5. Cherion Demenetus his guest,
was taken after a drinking match with a great fever, on the third day with an
acute fever, trembling of his head, and most of all his lower lip; a while
after he was cold, convulst, was fond in all, passed the night with trouble; on
the fourth he had some quiet, slept a little, talked. On the fifth day he was
troubled, all exacerbated, he was fond, passed the night with molestation,
slept not. On the sixth day in the same condition. On the seventh day he was
extreme cold, taken with an acute Fever, sweated all over, was judged; this
man all along had bilious dejections few and sincere from his belly; thin
urine, well-colored, having a cloudy enaeorema. About the eighth day his urine
was better, and more colored, having a white small sediment; he was in his
senses, without a Fever, he intermitted. But about the fourteenth day an acute
Fever surprised him, and he sweated. On the sixteenth he vomited bilious
matter, yellow, and somewhat copiously. On the seventeenth he was extreme cold,
and seized by an acute Fever, he sweated, was without a Fever, and was
judged: his urine after his relapse and Crisis was of a better color, having
sediment; neither was he fond in his recidivations: on the eighteenth he was a
little hot, thirsted, had thin urine, cloudy enaeorema, was somewhat disipient:
About the nineteenth he was without a Fever, was pained in his neck, had
sediment in his urine, on the twentieth was perfectly judged. In this sick
person cold first happened on the third day to no purpose, as well because that
day is seldom decretory, as for that there appeared not any signs of
concoction, neither followed there any excretion; and so all the before
proposed conditions of good cold were wanting; but the cold happening on the
seventh day was healthy, because it appeared on a critical day with the
precedent signs of concoction: for his urine was indeed thin, and of a good
color, having a cloudy enaeorema, with copious evacuation, for he sweated all
over; therefore on the eighth day which followed the Crisis, he was without a
Fever, yet the disease was not wholly taken away, but very much diminished:
for we said before, that by such colds Fevers were either taken away, or very
much diminished; and the morbifick cause being not wholly driven away by the
mentioned sweats, he relapsed, which on the seventh day a cold again followed,
in company with the aforesaid conditions, viz: sweats, and concocted urine:
therefore his Fevers left him again, and he was on the twentieth day perfectly
judged. That is also observable in this history which is remarked by Hipp. in
both colds, which happened on the seventh and the seventeenth day that the
Fever was much inflamed, for in both places he says, he was cold, and, taken
with an acute Fever; whereas in all Critical cold the more the body is heated,
the better and more perfect judication follows, for this declares nature
strong, and to operate powerfully the exclusion of the morbifick matter.

Colds, after which the body is not at all or very little heated, are bad.

For they signify nature to be in a languishing condition, and unable to make
head against the morbifick cause, whence Hipp. in 1. Prorrhet: refrigeration
not resuming heat after coldness is bad. For that as Galen in his comm. writes,
denotes an extinction of heat. Which Hipp. also observed, in 3. Epid. Sect. 2.
aegr. 12. Where a woman on the seventh day was extreme cold, was taken with an
acute Fever, much thirst, jactation, about evening sweated all over cold, her
extreme parts were refrigerated, she was no more hot, and again at night was
extreme cold; on the seventh day she was not reinvested with heat: on the
fourteenth day she dyed.

If a coma succeed a coldness or trembling falling on a Critical day, death is
to be expected.

Coldness happening not on a Critical day, or that which none or a bad
evacuation follows, is pernicious.

So in the woman mentioned coldness often appeared, even on not Critical days
without any excretion, or cold sweat, which is a bad evacuation; so again
History the eleventh. Section 1. book 1. Epid. The wife of Dromeada was extreme
cold on the third day with an universal but a cold sweat; on the sixth again
she was extreme cold with an universal sweat, yet coldness of the extreme
parts, fondness, convulsions followed it, and she died the same day, because
that coldness happened not on a critical day, but on the sixth day, which by
Galen is termed tyrant; so that Hipp. deservedly said, Aph. 29. Sect. 4. If
coldness happen the sixth day to febricitating persons, an hard judgment
follows. Yet it may be objected, that Larissea, a maid whose history we find
in 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 12. was on the sixth day, upon a coldness which was
seconded by a copious flux of blood, and universal hot sweat, perfectly judged;
To which we must answer with Galen in the comment. that this is one of those
rare examples in which Hipp. observed judication to be sometimes made on even
days, which so rarely falls within the compass of example, that it will no way
disorder the common method of good Crises. To this add, that her months then
first flowing from her were very advantageous for the solution of the disease.

If coldness do happen, without the intermission of the Fever, the sick person
being now infirm, it is deadly. Aph. 46. Sect. 4.

Galen in his comment. says, that it signifies not the same to say if it
shall happen, and if it do happen; for the word shall happen, denotes one
assault of cold, do happen, many: therefore upon cold happening once we may
sometimes presage good, sometimes bad, as appears by the precedent theorems;
but for cold to happen often without any deficiency of the Fever, being
otherwise not good, is in infirmity more pernicious; for if any evacuation
follow the coldness which causes no intermission, both conduce to a man's
dissolution, as well because by reason of imbecility the body cannot bear the
agitation of the cold, as because the strength is by evacuation dissolved; but
if coldness alone happen without the attendance of evacuation, it is both ways
bad; for as a bad cause it tries the strength of a man, and is a bad sign,
showing his imbecility, which did usually evacuate the noxious humors in
colds, but now it is not able.

Coldness often coming in a long disease, or rather shakings without any order
or type, signify an internal suppuration. Hipp. in Coac. Or they may signify
plenty of depraved humors, by which sharp vapors are usually elevated. See
Hipp. 1 Coac. Apn. 10.13.16.

Shakings frequently appearing in the beginning of acute Fevers are bad.

For they show a very great pravity of humors, vellicating the sensible parts,
and the infirmity of nature spending her labor in vain to move the humors.
Such shakings do usually appear in the beginning of malignant and pestilent
Fevers.

Frequent tremblings of the loins, with a quick return of heat, are dangerous;
for it signifies a painful suppression of urine, and for it to sweat out there
is perilous. 1. Coac. Aph. 18.

For it signifies an inflammation of the spinalis medulla, or the membranes
thereof, which parts by the violence of preternatural heat are scorched, and by
the want of native heat they are refrigerated, as it happens in a sudden and
frequent mutation of the parts into both. This also is not seldom found in an
Empyema; but the suppression of urine follows, because by frequent cold the
native heat of the bladder is extinguished, and so its expulsive faculty
destroyed, and sense of irritation lost.

Shaking after sweat is not good. Aph. 4. Sect. 7.

Iudicatories which judge not are bad; so sweat breaking forth on a Critical
day, if it be not beneficial to the sickperson, but shaking followed it, is a
bad sign; for it shows that either the useful humors only were evacuated by
sweat, and the useless and copious keep their station; or that a part only of
these depraved humors was evacuated by sweat, but the rest dwell within, and
vellicate the sensible parts, and so cause shaking. It is therefore evident
that either nature is so weak that she cannot rid her self of the morbifick
matter, or the humors so strong that they give nature the foil.

Sternutation. It is observed that if a sick man sneese only once, that he
will yield up to the ferocity of the disease; but if he sneese twice, the
disease will lose the day, and he recover. But the contrary is noted in women,
if any of them dangerously sick sneese twice, this is destructive and exitial;
if the sneese be once, it is an healthy sign. Forest. obser. 487. distillations
of the head, and sneesings precedent or subsequent in the diseases of the
lungs, are bad. But in other, even exitial diseases, sneesings raise hopes of
solution. Hipp. 2. progn. chap. 16.

In a phthisis, pleurisy, and peripneumony, by that concussion of the brain
sneesing, the parts of the breast are lacerated and violently torn, which
increases much the inflammation, and so there is no vacuation of the morbifick
matter. But in other diseases the morbifick cause may be dissipated and
dispelled by the strength of nature sallying upon it by that violent motion;
therefore sneesing signifies that nature resumes strength, and is excited to
expulsion, whence we may conjecture that it is the beginning of a recovery.
Galen in his comment on this place affirms, that sternutation without rheum in
the declination of a disease, or after the sickness is past, is always a good
sign, though the sickness be pernicious.

Sternutation happening to a woman in hysterical fits, or when she brings forth
with difficulty, is good.

Sneesing is very commodious in hysterical suffocations, dissicult labor, and
retention of secundines, both as a sign and as a cause; as a sign, because it
shows that nature is mindful of her proper motions, and that being before
dulled, she is now excited and revived, because she casts out some superfluity;
as a cause, for that by vehement concussion and fervor it partly rouses up
nature, partly causes excretion of those things which adhere to the parts of
the body.

Vital actions. Good and easy respiration conduces much to health in acute
diseases. Hipp. 1. progn.

Respiration. For as Galen instructs us in his com. good respiration signifies
that the breast, heart, lungs, ribs, midriffe, and all the parts subservient to
spiration are in good case. And when they are so, we need fear no danger from
an acute discase, unless it be malignant and pestilent. For such fevers do
often as it were surprise us by an ambuscado, so that we cannot be sensible of
any injury offered to respiration, though in their progress they are deadly
affections.

When in a not intermitting Fever difficulty of spiration and desipiency
happen, it is a deadly sign. Aph. 50. Sect. 4.

Because the two grand Patrons of life, the heart and brain are vehemently
hurt, and sympathize to destruction: but both passions, viz. desipience, and
difficulty of spiration, must last long that they may be called mortal; for
both sometimes do happen healthfully in a critical perturbation.

Great and unfrequent respiration in an acute Fever is very bad.

For this shows a fondness either present or imminent; for the mind being
employed in entertaining the multitude of species represented in fondness,
transfers another way the faculty, moving the muscles of the breast, so that
there passes no respiration, unless upon the inforcement of absolute
necessity, which causes it to be unfrequent; but the magnitude thereof does
satisfy for the rarity. So it falls out by the same reason that melancholicks
and lovers have not seldom such great and unfrequent respiration, because being
fixed in deep meditations they forget to breath. But the danger of this great
and rare respiration in acute diseases may be gathered out of Hipp. 1. Epid.
Sect. 1. Aegr. 2. Where Silenus, who died on the eleventh day, had to the end
respiration great and rare. So Aegr. 11. of the same Section. The wife of
Dromeada on the first day had an hypochondriacal pain, horrid, unquiet; on the
following days sne slept not, her respiration was rare, great, and quickly
drawn: again, on the sixth day in the morning she was extreme cold, and
speedily grew hot again, sweated all over, her extreme parts were cold, she was
fond, her respiration great and rare; soon after convulsions began from her
head, and she suddenly died.

Great and frequent respiration is dangerous.

For this denotes a great inflammation, and putrefaction next neighbor to the
heart, and the adjacent parts, which wanting much ventilation, causes great
and frequent respiration.

Small and frequent respiration is dangerous.

For this signifies, by the testimony of Hipp. in his Epid. the pain of some
instrument, so as the animal faculty, in commiseration of the pain, will not
suffer those parts which are above the diaphragma to be much dilated, that the
pain may be the less, and the motions violated. It therefore causes small
respiration. But because this small respiration cannot afford sufficient
ventilation to the kindled inflammation, neither is therefore forced to make up
that which is detracted from magnitude. But this pain causing such respiration,
is produced by inflammation, abscesse, ulcer, or copious and crude humors, all
which threaten danger.

In fevers, offending breath is bad, for it signifies a convulsion. Aph. 68.
Sect. 4.

By offending breath he understands interrupted or intercise breath, which
breaks off abruptly in the middle of respiration. And this may happen as well
in inspiration, and is by Hipp. termed double, intro-revocation, as it were
superinspiration, which frequently happens in crying children; as also in
expiration, but more seldom, and it is called by Hipp. offending spirit, when
it is conveyed to the exterior parts. This aphorism is to be understood of
both, viz. that it signifies in fevers a convulsion; because the muscles and
nerves prepared for convulsion do so move the breast, which disposition being
increased, and over-spreading more parts, a manifest convulsion seiseth on the
man.

In acute passions accompanying a Fever luctuous sighings are bad. Aph. 54.
Sect. 6.

This aphorism is in this like the former, because that by sighing we
understand that interrupt and reduplicate respiration which was before
explained. But now this respiration is most commonly worse and deadly, when it
is luctuous, that is, when it is sent forth with some kind of lamentation and
groaning; for it signifies a kind of a dolorous disposition, or rather plenty of
atrabilary humor, which inducing a kind of sadness, does force such a groaning
to proceed from sick persons, though unwilling.

Nocturnal dyspnaea in a Chronical disease threatens a dropsy. Plater.

Respiration proceeding most through the nose, in which the gristles of the
nostrils are moved, is pernicious.

For this signifies a total infirmity of strength; for the disease having now
made a large progress, and the diaphragma being insufficient for respiration,
the intercostall muscles come in as aiders, and if neither these also be
sufficient, those cartilagoes are by nature diducted, endeavoring to attract
more air: but this endeavor is frustrated no less then hiation in dying
persons.

Cold spiration in acute diseases denotes the proximity of death.

For this shows an extinction of innate heat, and the consumption of
primigenious moisture by some incendiary heat.

A great, vehement, and equal pulse is usually in any disease healthy.

Pulse. For this signifies the strength of the vital faculty, by which the rest
are sustained, so that the morbifick cause may easily be subdued.

An inconstant, unequal, and languid pulse denounces a sad event.

For this signifies a great plenty of depraved humors, which by disturbing
nature, cause this inequality of pulse. To which if an infirmity of the
strength be added, which is collected by that languid pulse, it cannot shake
off this heavy burden.

A small and frequent pulse, such as a soft and mutilated one, is deadly.

For this signifies a creeping defect, and soon after ruinous collapsion of the
strength.

Intermitting, or internident pulse is pernicious.

Gal. 2. of praesag. by pulse affirms, that with an intermitting pulse many
old men and children do escape; but that his experience could never inform him
of the escape of any young man; and the reason of this is, because in young men
it declares a wide recess from a state of salubrity, for they by reason of the
validity of their strength fall not into such affections but by a potent cause,
which is so insuperable that it forces a sick person to submission. But old
men and children are affected by a smaller cause, yet superable with more ease:
yet experience seems to be antagonist to the opinion of Galen, there being very
few Physicians who have not known some young men escaping upon such
intermission of pulse. But lest the authority of Galen should be violated, we
thus defend it, saying, that the intermitting pulse is caused two ways, either
when it intermits equally, so that between two intermissions, the number of
pulsations is perpetually the same; and this intermitting pulse is always
deadly, of which Galens opinion is to be understood: or when it does unequally
intermit, and then the sick persons may escape. An equal intermitting pulse
denotes the constancy of the morbifick cause, and its supereminency over nature.

Pulses in Fevers like the pulses of persons in health are dangerous.

For they signify a malignant and pestilent fever, in which they usually
happen, as Galen by experience taught 3. of presag. by pulses, and according to
his mind such pulses proceed from this, that in such fevers, especially more
malignant ones, either the substance of the heart is too much heated, and the
humors therein contained too cold; or on the contrary, the substance of the
heart is too cold, and the humors too hot; which contrarieties compose the
pulse to a kind of symmetrical order. Or truly we may say, that in the
beginning chiefly of a malignant and pestilent fever, the pulses do appear
almost connatural, because the heart is rather affected by the poison, then an
hot distemper, which causes these notable mutations in the pulse: though in
the progress of a disease the pulse does usually appear frequent, small, weak,
and diverse.

A Corollary.
Natural actions. It may here suffice to take notice of the chief and in
practice more frequent differences of pulses. The rest may be found in Galen
treated at large in his books of presaging by pulse.

A good and laudable appetency in diseases is healthy.

That appetency is to be counted good and laudable which comes nighest to the
appetency of persons in health, and is most like it, which according to the
mind of Hipp. is best. Aph. 33. Sect. 2. To be in any disease of a sound mind,
and well disposed to things offered, is good. For hence we collect that the
natural faculty, and the parts subservient to it, the ventricle especially, is
well disposed.

Appetency wholly dejected in a disease is very dangerous.

For this shows a great deviation from natural state, and is caused, as Galen
in comment. on 3. Epid. teaches us, either from depraved and malignant humors,
gathered about the orifice of the ventricle, or from the extinction of the
faculty it self, whose duty it is to know the want of aliment, and so
consequently to desire it. So Hipp. in 1. Epid. of pining persons dying in the
fury of an epidemical disease, says, That they nauseated all meat, and
thirsted not. So likewise Galen in his comm. on 3. Epid. affirms that he has
seen many assailed by a pestilent disease, who refused all meat, and died; yet
some, as he averrs, stronger persons, forced themselves to an assumption of
meat offered, survived. So in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 2. Hermocrates, who
on the twenty seventh day dyed, all the time of his disease was averse to meat,
nor had appetite to any thing, and on his last day he could not taste any thing.
And Sect. 2. of the same book. aegr. 6. The daughter of Eurianax all the time
abhorred meat, nor desired any thing; not thirsty, nor did she drink any thing
considerable; and of this disease she did not much survive the twelfth day.

In a long disease abhorrency of meat, with sincere dejections, is bad. Hipp.
Aph. 6. Sect. 7.

Loathing of meat being by it self a bad sign in long diseases, (for in those
who are like to escape the danger of such diseases a contrary affection does
usually happen, viz. an earnest appetency of meat) if sincere dejections follow
it, they give cause of a far worse presage: whereas by sincere dejections Hipp.
understands those which are not mixed with watrish humidity, when the humor
alone is dejected, destitute of its serum, whether it be bilious or
melancholic: for such dejections demonstrate that all the native humidity is
scorched by feverish heat.

In long diseases of the intestines, abhorrency of meat is bad, and in company
with a fever worse.

A dysenteria is caused by sharp humors exulcerating the intestines, first
gleaning away the outermost superficies, but in progress of times causing more
deep and putrid ulcers, in which time chiefly the ventricle also sympathizing
with them, does not well perform concoction: which compassion more and more
creeping upon the superior parts, when the mouth of the ventricle is also
affected, then sick persons are offended with meat. They do indeed from the
beginning sometimes loath meat, because of bad humors flowing from the liver,
by which the intestines are abraded, especially when these humors have obtained
a bilious nature, for the overflowing part of them is conveyed to the mouth of
the ventricle. But if this chance to fall out in long diseases of the
intestines, it signifies that the ventricle is as it were mortified by
compassion, in which, appetency, the necessary business of life, is wholly
lost. But if a fever accompanied with inappetency succeed the pain of the
intestines, it is caused by one of these two, either putridity about the
ulcers, or great inflammation; both of which is very exitious.

An intense hunger, boulimia, in diseases is bad.

For this depraved appetite is either the consequent of notable evacuations,
which the sick persons does in vain endeavor to make up by these great
repletions; or of the acrimony of immense heat, which like a furnace consumes
the suel of aliments, and reduces them as it were to ashes, as may be noted in
many lean hecticks; in whom also this boulimia often happens, by reason of the
notable obstruction of the mesaraick veins, hindering the passage of the chyle
to the liver whence none, or very small nutrition is made, because that chylous
matter finding its way through the liver blocked up, is corrupted in the
intestines, and expelled by the belly, whence it is that such hectickes have a
perpetual and immedicable flux of the belly. The parts therefore being abridged
from these cates, always attract aliment from the liver, and the liver from
the ventricle; which attraction causes always this divulsion in the
ventricle, and chiefly in the upper orifice thereof, whence hunger necessarily
ensues. Or also that intense appetite depends upon the acid humors settled on
the orifice of the ventricle, which perpetually vellicate that part, being more
exquisitly sensible. Therefore this immense hunger, as it is rare, and
portentous in diseases, so it can denounce no good, as Aph. 4. Sect. 2.

Neither satiety, nor hunger, nor any thing else exceeding the prescript of
nature, is good. For this over-repletion always causes very bad excrements,
which are collected in sick persons, as Aph. 17. Sect. 2. Where meat is
preternaturally ingested, it causes a disease. And Aph. 8. and 31. Sect. 2.
Eaters who profit not by it are in a bad condition.

Appetency depraved, which is called a pica, or malacia, is in chronical
diseases bad.

Such appetite, which wanders to absurd and aliene things, is familiar to women
with child, by reason of the suppression of their months, which collects a
multitude of depraved excrements, and causes a reflux of them to the
ventricle; and in these it is not very dangerous, because all those excrements
in parturition are purged: but in chronical diseases it is very bad, as well in
respect of the cause as the sign; for while they glut themselves with these
cacochymous meats, the morbifick causes are multiplied; and it denotes a
destruction of the temper of the parts and humors, by reason of which they
desire things like them. Hippocrates therefore wisely observed, Aph. 31. Sect.
2. that if the sick person had an earnest appetite to meat something bad, we
should sometimes give way to such desire, but with such moderation, that by
reason of the quality or quantity it may not aggravate the disease.

Thirst. Thirst quenched in acute diseases upon no reason, is bad. Hipp. 1.
prorrhet.

For if there be no cause effecting this sedation of thirst, as a pituitous
defluxion from the head irrigating the ventricle, it either signifies an
extinction of native heat, or error of mind. For they who thirst, and rest
insensible of it, are no less sick in mind, then they who are pained and feel
it not. This theorem is confirmed by the before proposed stories in the
explication of dejected appetency.

An inexhausted thirst which can be satisfied with no drink, is bad.

For this shows a great dyscrasy, and very intense scorching of the internal
parts, or consumption of the primigenious moisture; so in Hippan 1. Epid. Sect.
3. aegr. Philiscus was among other symptoms very thirsty, and dyed on the
sixth day. So likewise 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 3. Pythion in the whole course
of his disease was troubled with very great thirst, and on the tenth day dyed.

A very depraved thirst, hankering after absurd liquors, and such as are not
fit to be drunk, is bad.

There are some sick persons found, who are not refreshed by water, syrup,
tempered wine, or any such usual liquour, but desire strong drink, disagreeing
both with the disease, and their nature; for instance, if they desire to drink
vinegar, juice of limmons, acquavitae, or any other liquor not convenient to
drink. And they who are thus affected are in very great danger of their life,
because nature is now so far run beyond her bounds, that she cannot again
retire to a convenient state.

If any in a troublesome Fever have an hiccough, the disease is very bad. 1.
Coac. Aph. 47.

For this hiccough is caused by sharp and malignant humors vellicating the
interior tunicle of the stomach, and stimulating the expulsive faculty thereof;
and Valesius says that he never saw any person saved, whom being extenuated,
and taken with a burning or malignant Fever, an hiccough surprised. So in
Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 12. a woman on the twelfth day was troubled
frequently with hiccoughes, and on the fourteenth dyed. Platerus observed, that
an hiccough succeeding a burning Fever, and persevering, is usually deaths
nuntio: and in a semitertian Fever he experienced it to be not deadly. But he
observed it also to be deadly in a dysenteria.

An hiccough and redness of the eyes after vomiting is bad. Aph. 3. Sect. 7.
These two signs if in acute diseases they succeed vomiting, and last for some
time, are accounted deadly, because they denounce an inflammation of the brain
or ventricle; which inflammation may not only be the cause of the hiccough it
self, and redness of the eyes, but of vomiting also; for if vomit were caused
by sharp humors biting the mouth of the ventricle, and the tunicles thereof,
those humors being expelled by vomiting, the hiccough and redness would cease;
nor would any sharp vapor be conveyed to the eyes after vomiting, which should
paint them in red. But when vomiting is not only unprofitable, but also
introduces an hiccough, and redness of the eyes, it is infallibly true that
those three, vomit, hiccough, and redness of the eyes, do depend upon the
inflammation of the brain or ventricle. For the brain being inflamed squeezes
out the blood through the small veins of the eyes by reason of the copiousness
of it, and effuseth it into the outermost tunicle of the eye which is called
adnate; whence proceeds the redness of the eyes; with which the ventricle
sympathizing by the nerves, which from the sixth conjugation make to the mouth
thereof, is easily impelled to a vomit, and hiccough. The ventricle also
inflamed induces vomiting, and after vomiting an hiccough, and with an
hiccough, a redness of the eyes, by a concourse of blood too hot to the eyes,
caused by a compassionative disposition which these parts one bear to another;
which easily appears in the beginning of suffusions, and apparitions of images
before the eyes, happening most usually upon the viliation of the ventricle.
Whence Hipp. in his book of the places in man well, said that the eyes were
much injured by vomiting. We have an example of this hiccough succeeding vomit
in the mentioned history of the woman, in whom it is probable that an
inflammation of the ventricle was caused by the affluxion of depraved humors to
that part: for on the eighth day she vomited bilious, thin, yellowish matter;
on the ninth thin, bilious; on the eleventh virulent, bilious, soon after she
was extreme cold, her extreme parts were cold; at evening she sweated, was
cold, vomited much, passed the night with disquiet; on the twelfth she vomited
much black, stinking matter; she passed it unquietly, with frequent hiccough,
and thirst: on the fourteenth day she dyed.

Hiccough upon an inflammation of the liver is bad. Aph. 17. Sect. 7.

An hiccough then succeeds an inflammation of the liver, as Gal. in his
comment. on this aphorism affirms, when the inflammation is made worse and
increased: for then a great inflammation in the liver is so far heightened, that
it does vehemently oppress the superior parts of the ventricle, so that
induces an hiccough; upon copiousness of matter also sometimes an inflammation
or an erysipelas is produced in the ventricle; nevertheless a biting is caused
by it imbibed by the tunicles of the ventricle.

Belching. In laevities of the intestines, an acid ructation proceeding which
before was not, is a good sign. Aph. 1. Sect. 6.

A lienteria is most commonly caused by a cold distemper of the ventricle, by
which the coction thereof is abolished, that the aliments are speedily
excreted, before either their color, smell, or any other quality is changed.
But if in such a lienteria long contracted, an acid ructation succeeds, which
before was not, it will be a good sign: for it hence appears, that the
distemper begins to be restored, and native heat again excited, which by such a
lienteria was so debilitated that it could not so much as attempt a mutation of
the aliment. For though an acid ructation shows a notable refrigeration of the
ventricle, yet to discharge some flatulencies, though acid ones, shows less
refrigeration, then to send out none.

Excrements through the eyes. If a sick persons eyes in Fevers or other
diseases drop tears voluntarily, it is not absurd; but if not voluntarily, it
is more absurd. Aph. 51. Sect. 4.

Those are called voluntary tears, which spring from some manifest and external
cause, as sadness, grief, and sometimes joy, which are not dangerous. But
involuntary ones are either caused by inflammation of the eyes, or sharp
fluxions into them, and these also are void of danger; or they proceed from a
Critical perturbation, and do chiefly presage a Crisis by flux of blood, which
also threaten no danger, and are known to be such by the precedent signs of
concoction, and absence of bad symptoms: or lastly, they arise from the
resolution of the retentive virtue, which is in the corner, and other parts of
the eye, and these are exitious, which Hipp. in this aphorism mentions; and
they are distinguished from the rest by the cavity, and extenuation of the
eyes, and other symptoms which are their necessary train.

By the ears. In a troublesome affection of the head, if purulent matter flow
out of the ears, there is a solution.

This theorem is spun from Hipp. Aph. 10. Sect. 6. When the head is disturbed
with pain or sounds, purulent matter, or water, or blood flowing through the
ears, or mouth, or nostrills, causes a solution of the disease. For these are
the ordinary conveyances and passages, by which the brain does usually unburden
it self. But the chief and most troublesome affection of the brain is
inflammation, which if it proceed to suppuration, and purulent matter be
evacuated by the ears, which in this case is the more ordinary way, the
consequent is the solution of the disease.

In children copious humidities issuing through the ears are healthy.

Such humidities are frequent in children, according to the experience of Hipp.
Aph. 24. Sect. 3. and they are healthy, because in that age the brain being
very moist, and abounding with excrements, purges it self healthfully not by
the ears only, but by other passages also.

The feculencies of the ears, which are naturally yellow and bitter, if they
sweeten, or change color it is very bad. Hipp. 6. Epid. Galen in his comment.
affirms this to happen by the colliquation of the brain in acute Fevers; or
we may say, that upon much debilitation of the native heat, these watrish
humidities stream forth, which were contained in the brain, and being confused
with those dregs they change the taste and color of them.

Through the nostrills. Blood flowing well and copiously through the nostrills
on a Critical day is healthy.

For then this evacuation is caused by the good operation of nature expelling
the morbifick cause: but we must diligently observe, how the signs of
concoction proceeded, and whether there be any malignity lurking in the
disease: because in malignant diseases such fluxes of blood are not seldom
unprofitable.

Fluxes of blood too copious and vehement are very bad; for they cause
convulsion.

For it sometimes happens, that nature oppressed with the copiousness of blood,
and moved to excretion, becomes irregular, and effects a supercrisis, which
Physicians are often forced to restrain.

Flux of blood in the beginning of a disease is bad.

Because in the beginning of a disease no evacuation can be Critical, but is
merely symptomatical: yet it is not therefore deadly, but only useless, and
not commodious to the sick person: as it happened to Pericles, in 3. Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 6. out of whose left nostril on the third day blood flowed;
afterward his Fever was very intense, and persevered to the fourth day, in
which by copious sweat he was judged.

A flux of blood happening in a direct line to the part affected, is good; but
on the contrary, bad.

In the inflammation of the liver a Critical flux of blood is healthy, but with
this caution, that evacuation be made through the right nostril; for if it
proceed through the left, it will not regulate it self to that rectitude so
much applauded by Hippocrates, and it will show that nature upon a perturbation
operates preposterously. So in the inflammation of the milt the blood must flow
through the left, not the right nostril.

Few drops of blood distilling through the nostrills are bad.

For they signify the imbecility of nature, and malignity of the disease: for
all excretions in acute diseases which are inchoate only and not perfected,
are very much disliked by Hippo. because the security is greater in those
Fevers in which nature expells nothing, then in which it makes few and useless
excretions; for then this argues that she is industriously laboring coction.
To this add, that if no drop appear, the benignity of the matter is declared,
which is unable to provoke nature before the time. So in Hipp. 1. Epid. aegr. 1
Phyliscus on the fifth day had few drops distilling from his nostrils, and on
the sixth day he died. And Aegr. 11. of the same Sect. on the fourth day some
few distillations issued from the nostrils of the wife of Dromeada, and on the
sixth day she died. Yet upon this sign we cannot positively assert death; for
in 3. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 2. He who lay in Dealces garden, had on the second
day some few sincere effluxions of blood from his left nostril, and again on
the fourth few and sincere distillations out of the same nostril, and on the
fourtieth day he was judged. Yet he struggled with a very dangerous disease, as
appears through the whole relation of the story, therefore this distillation of
blood, if it portend not death, yet it shows very great danger of life, if it
be accompanied by other bad symptoms. For this also is to be noted, viz. that
a small excretion of blood appearing in an indicative day, without dangerous
signs antecedent or consequent, is so far from being dangerous, that it rather
denounces that a Crisis will come the same way, as happened to Meton, in 1.
Epid. Sect. 1. aegr. 7. who on the fourth day without the precedence of any
dangerous symptoms, had twice a small effluxion of blood out of the right
nostril; on the fifth one larger out of his left, sincere; he sweated, and was
judged, and fell to a recidivation; he escaped upon the copious and frequent
profluxion of blood.

By the mouth, spetting and sneezing. Spettle white, even, smooth, not very
thin, or crass, of a ready and easy excretion, and without any pain or much
coughing, is healthy.

For it denotes that nature overpowers the morbifick matter, and laudably
concocts, and sufficiently expels it being concocted. For the mentioned
qualities appearing in spettle are signs of very good concoction.

Spettle soon appearing in the beginning of a disease of the breast or lungs,
is good. Aph. 12. Sect. 1.

For this discovers a rudiment of concoction, which if it proceed soon after
the beginning of the disease, there is hope of a speedy solution.

Spettle lightly red by the permistion of blood and phlegm, is healthy.

This spettle is expelled in a pleurisy, when nature changes the morbifick
matter; for it does by degrees extenuate it to liquation, and so the ways
being freed, by which the vapor should exhale, the thinner part and most
acceeding to vapor, steals through the rarity of the pores into the internal
and neighboring spaces, and is confused with phlegm, whence upon coughing, and
exclusion of spettle, the default of coction appears; and hence Gal. comment.
in 6. Epid. terms these most gentle pleurifies.

Yellow spettle mixed with some blood in the inflammations of the breast or
lungs, expelled in the first invasion of the disease, is healthy and very
commodious; but when the disease has proceeded to the seventh day, or made a
larger progress, it is less secure. Hipp. in Coac. and prognost.

In inflammations produced by choler and blood, such spettle usually happens;
which if it appear upon the beginning of the disease, it shows that nature does
partly unburden herself, whence proceeds a looseness in the part, and remission
of pain, and so the beginning of sanation. But if this spettle appear after the
disease has made some progress, on the seventh, or eleventh day only, it is a
sign of less security; because the faculties requisite to cause an
anacatharsis are oppressed by the disease, so that we cannot conceive hopes of
a laudable operation: as also because the morbifick matter is more rebellious,
the more thin and obedient part of which could not be thrust forth in the first
days: and again, for that by a delayed hesitation in the part, it has
insinuated it self to a settlement in the substance thereof, so that it cannot
without more difficulty be removed.

All spettle is bad which does not allay pain. Hipp. 2. progn.

All evacuations are to be judged good or bad as they redound to the benefit of
the person: if therefore the pain be not mitigated by anacatharsis, it is
undoubtedly bad: for either the matter immediately producing the disease is not
ejected; or if any part of it be evacuated, it is supplied by new which hinders
the diminution of the disease.

A small quantity of spettle, though concocted, if it be not expelled
conformably to the disease, is bad.

Because no small quantity is Critical, and cannot cause any remission; this
spettle therefore is in a peripneumony dangerous, according to Hippocrates in
Coac. such as Hipp. observed 7. Epid. in the wife of Euxenus, who died of that
disease.

To spet nothing at all in a pleurifie, or peripneumony, after some progress of
the disease, is exitious.

Though nothing be expelled in the beginning of the disease, it is not so
dangerous; but in the augmentation, or state, if there appear no spettle, it
signifies the disease to be very crude, and shows the inflammation to be
contumacious, and of difficult concoction. Hence Hippocrates in Coac. averred
with good cause, that dry pleurifies, in which nothing was expelled by spettle,
were most dangerous: and Gal. 2. of Crisis chap. 10. When, says he, a passion
is exquisitely narrow, and confines as it were to it self the whole streams of
fluxes, then it causes deadly diseases. And in his book, of the times of the
whole disease he affirms, that to spet nothing at all, with great pain, and
difficulty of spiration, is destructive.

If spettle after appearance be suppressed, and the lungs being full boil up
in the throat, causing a rattling and ebullition, it is deadly.

For this either signifies a very high inflammation, which by scorching the
spettle reduces it to such a viscidity that it cannot be expectorated; but
adhering to the cavities of the lungs, and obstructing them induces a
suffocation: or it shows an exolution of strength, which cannot produce an
anacatharsis; whence it is, that all those that dye of a pleurisy or
peripneumony, when they stand at the brinks of the grave, are subject to such a
rattling. Such a rattling Hipp. observed 7. Epid. in Menon, of whom he says, His
arteries did leap with rattling; and of the wife of Theodorus, A kind of shrill
asperity of the artery and breast, a noise and fluctuarion of purulent matter:
and of the wife of Polycrates, within about the artery and jaws there was an
hissing, or according to interpreters, an unpleasant asperity. In which, and
many other persons in the same book recited, this symptom was to be imputed
partly to the weakness of nature, partly to the copiousness and clamminess of
purulent matter, phlegm, or some other humor. This being perpetually bad, and
very much to be feared, yet it is extremely pernicious after the beginning of
the disease, upon the languidness of strength: for it discovers that nature is
so infirm, that she is not able to expel any thing, and so is suffocated; which
also other desperate signs will evidence, which will be the necessary
concomitants of it. But in the beginning it sometimes happens, that by reason
of the copiousness and clamminess of the humor it boyles in the throat, which
humor being afterward concocted, and purged by spettle, that ebullition
cease. But that this is not pernicious will appear, for that there are other
good signs without the company of any pernicious one, as happened in
Pisistratus, of whom says Hipp. he had a rattling in his jaws, but he bore the
disease well, was of asound mind, remiss heat, and excretion and the rattling
came forth together. Lastly, in the paroxysmes of asthmatical persons, such a
rattling, and that very intense, does usually happen with an hissing, without
any danger: which is diligently to be observed, lest we err in prognostication.

White spettle and merely pituitous in a pleurisy and peripneumony is bad.

Such spettle may deceive unwary Physicians, as much resembling that spettle
which is excreted in a natural state, and so in its first appearance seems to
promise health. Yet it is very bad, because it shows no expurgation of the
humor which causes inflammation, and so demonstrates the disease to be very
crude, and extremely pernicious. Which Hipp. observed 7. Epid. in the wife of
Euxenus, who dyed of a pleurisy; for she by spettle expelled a small quantity of
matter white and thin.

Spettle yellow, pale, or ruddy, appearing in healthy persons, whether it be
bitter or sweet, show the appropinquation of a Phthisis, and from thence death.

For such colors signify choler lurking in the lungs, which in the spettle
has lost much of its amaritude, by the permistion of phlegm, by the sweetness
of which the acrimony of the choler is assuaged. In which Physicians may easily
err and be deceived, who are ignorant of the bilious humor lurking in the
lungs; because that spettle, though it appear yellow, pale, or ruddy, they
observe not whether it be sharp or bitter. Yet in those sick persons, the lungs
being consumed, spettle bloody or purulent is after expelled, and so they pine
away. Of these Galen speaks 4. of affected places, cha. 9. in a context worthy
notice, and so much conducing to this thing, that his words may deservedly be
transferred to this place. One, says he, suddenly spet forth humor in color
much resembling liquid choler, viz. communicating of yellow and pale, and
tainted with no acrimony, and so did daily send forth by spettle a greater
quantity of it; afterward upon the surprisal of a slight Fever, he begin to
pine, so that he expelled purulent matter by excreation. After in some space of
time, viz. of four months, he cast out small quantity of blood with purulent
matter, and so was more wasted with an acute Fever, and often and again spet
more, so that the spettle increased to a great quantity: the Fever therefore
more increasing, and the strength being debilitated, he dyed like those who
pine. Again I saw another troubled with the same disease six months, and
another longer. The first seemed in the beginning to be not very badly
affected, but afterward dangerously. But when we saw the other, we presently
upon the beginning of the disease knowing the evil, endeavored by a present
medicine to afford help; and much more to the third. But though we took much
pains to free both, yet no one could preserve either of these; for being now
approximated to death, they spet forth putrid parts of their lungs. Thus Galen;
but it affords cause of wonder, that upon the appearance of yellow or pale
spettle, vacant of any sharp, bitter, or salt taste, men should be reduced to
pining. But this is caused, for that by the mixtion of pituitous humor the taste
in such spettle is rather occult then the heat; which phlegm is contained in
the pipes of the lungs, and is there mingled with choler, but choler so sharp
and copious is gathered in the lungs, that by it they consume, putrify, and
pine away.

After spetting of blood follows spetting of purulent matter; after spetting of
that, pining; but upon suppression of spetting the sick persons die. Aph. 15.
and 16. Sect. 7.

Spetting of purulent matter is not the necessary sequel of spetting blood: for
blood often flows from the brains, gums, and throat without any detriment. So
neither does spetting purulent matter by the law of necessity attend that
spetting of blood which happens in a pleurifie and peripneumony; but this
aphorism is to be understood of that spetting of blood only which proceeds
from the lungs, by the erosion of that part, or the ruption of some vein
dispersed through the substance thereof: for spetting of purulent matter,
pining, and death, are the necessary consequents of this spetting of blood. But
this spettle for that it degenerates into purulent spettle, is distinguished
from the before mentioned, because in it the spumous and very florid blood is
by cough expelled; all which conditions are not found in the other.

Green, eruginous, pale, black, sincere, or stinking spettle is bad.

The green, eruginous, signify an high inflammation of heat, and plenty of
eruginous choler. The pale is caused either by black choler, or extinction of
heat. Black proceeds from the same causes, but much more powerful: for both a
greater adustion, and refrigeration, or extinction of he at produces out of
paleness blackness. That spettle is termed sincere which proceeds from one
humor, pure, and impermixt, and destitute of its serum, which serum is by heat
consumed. The setid signifies a great putridity overspreading the spirital
parts: That therefore al these kinds of spettle are very bad, the causes now
recited do sufficiently convince.

Spettle very crass, viscid, and glutinous, is in a pleurifie or peripneumony
bad.

Because it discovers a great inflammation and heat raked up within, which
incrassates that matter, and makes it viscid, so that it cannot easily be
purged, and not without a molestious cough, and troublesome excreation, which
is more detrimental then beneficial.

Viscid and glutinous spettle, with hoarsness, is very bad. 1. Coac. chapter 16.

Spettle simply viscid and glutinous is bad, as appeared by the precedent
theorem: but if this spettle induce hoarsness, it shows that acrimony is joined
with viscidity, which by exasperating the artery causes hoarsness. The worse
therefore the matter is the worse affects it produces: and so whatever
pleuritical and peripneumonical persons expel such spettle with hoarsness, they
are affected with a deadly disease. But in others free from such affections,
such spettle with hoarsness, glutinous, and salsuginous. presage aphthisis.

Round spettle, or like hail in form, is exitious.

For first round spettle is necessarily crass and viscid, and so, as we
observed, vicious: yea it argues incoctible matter, which by a combustion being
made too crass and viscid, is shaped into such a form. Therefore whatever
pleuritical or peripneumonical persons eject such spettle, do soon after die. So
likewise without a disease such spettle demonstrates a phthisis, by the
testimony of Galen, comm. in 6. Epid. Where he relates, that he saw in some
persons free from any Fever, such spettle, who in a long time seemed not to be
affected, yet all of them after pined away with a phthisis: but that spettle
which resembles the corns of hail, because it is round, is of a more solid
confistence, and proceeds from a greater heat of the lungs, and so is a more
certain demonstration of a phthisis. So Gal. 4. of affected places, cha. 9.
shows the danger of this spettle in a remarkable story, in these words. Besides
I have observed another such like affection in the lungs: one troubled with a
long cough, and spetting a small quantity of clammy purulent matter, expelled a
fragment not unlike a little corn of hail, and bringing it to me showed me it;
and again not long after he brought another; whence he did conjecture that that
clammy humor which he before usually spet forth was dried and indurated to such
a substance. I therefore gave him a medicine in his drink, which is helpful to
asthmatical persons, and so it happened that he expelled lesser hail, after a
longer interval then heretofore; nor could the affection in many years after be
so mitigated but that at last he died. But this for the most part did in
magnitude equalize vetches, though sometimes they seemed lesser, sometimes
bigger. And so we have seen others to spet the like, who yet have lived many
years after, some of which flied upon some other cause; others by the affection
of their spiritual instruments, though they sent forth no blood.

Froth. Persons choked, lying in a deliquium, yet not dead, cannot be revived,
if froth appear about their mouth. Aph. 43. Sect. 2.

Froth owes its production either to vehement heat exciting many vapors, and
mingling them with the saliva, as may be seen in things put to the fire, which
boil, and by ebullition send forth a spume; or it is caused by violent motion,
which in the same manner confuseth flatulency with the watery substance; as is
evident in the white of an egg upon long agitation, and in the sea by the
vehement commotion of wind. They therefore who are inflamed by vehement anger,
running, or violent exercitation, may have froth in their mouth without any
danger, because it proceeds from a procatarctick cause. So likewise epileptical
persons about the end of accession eject froth at their mouth, by reason of
that violent and convulsory motion which by exagitation attenuates and
dissolves that pituitous matter contained in the brain, by which the paroxysme
was excited; therefore there is no danger in that neither, because it is the
consequence of the exclusion of morbifick matter. But in those who are choked,
whether by hanging, or drowning, or a troublesome quinsie, or apoplexy, froth
appearing in the mouth is a very bad sign, and denotes a proximity of death;
for it signifies the last struggling of nature, endeavoring by main strength
to exclude the vapors contained in the lungs, with which it also forces out
some of the proper humidity of the lungs, and mingles it with the mentioned
vapors.

By vomit. Vomit mingled with yellow choler and phlegm, which is neither very
crass nor very copious, and has those two humors exquisitely mingled, is good.

Substance. For such vomit is not only laudable in respect of substance, but
of quantity and quality also. For of all excrementitious humors phlegm and
yellow choler are most gentle; but if being of an indifferent quantity and
consistence, and well tempered together, they be expelled by vomit, this vomit
is complete in ^ll the conditions requisite to make a vomit good.

Bilious or pituitous vomits breaking forth in a critical day are good.

Vomits composed of both humors are not only good, but those also which
pro^eed from either apart, if it be the humor which caused the disease of the
sick person. So in bilious fevers, critical effluxions of choler, or pituitous
of phlegm, cause a solution of the disease, or at least promise very great
hopes of health.

A spontaneous vomiting surprising one long troubled with a profluxion of the
belly, is the solution of the disease. Aph. 15. Sect. 6.

For the morbifick matter is revulsed into the contrary part, and this
revulsion signifies a refreshing of nature, and resumption of strength. For as
a Physician labors the retreat of those things which flow into any part; so
nature, when she begins to prevail causes this recoile; as when upon surdity
she causes bilious dejections, so upon a flux of the belly she converts to
vomiting. For when the intestines are troubled with a fluxion, it shows the
power of nature, if she can turn the stream of this ill affected influxion into
another part.

If blood is conveyed upward, whatever it be, it is bad. Aph. 25. Sect. 4.

Blood ejected by vomit issues from the ventricle, or liver, and discovers
apertion, ruption, or erosion of some vein in those parts; such vomiting
therefore is counted bad. And this Hipp. in his Aph. mentions; as also he
speaks of blood expelled by a cough, which is raised from the breast or lungs.
Yet note, that some times bloody vomiting is good and healthy, if it be
critically performed, though this happens very seldom; yet Galen averres it,
7. Meth. chap. 11.3. of cause of sympt. chap. 2. and 5. of affected places
chap. 7. and we have seen sometimes a pleurisy in a strong young man to have
been perfectly and healthfully judged by vomiting blood on the seventh day. We
also saw another who after a tedious sickness, being as it were pained with
difficulty of spiration, upon a sudden emission of black blood by copious
vomits was freed. This aphorism therefore must be understood with this
distinction, viz. that the persevering and often repeated vomiting of blood is
bad: but if it happen once, and return again, and if the solution of any
disease follow it, it is undoubtedly good.

Quantity. Small and troublesome vomit in an acute fever is bad.

For it is not convenient that any thing decretory should be sparingly
expelled; but such vacuations signify either such a plenty of matter that
nature cannot bear it, but expels some of it symptomatically; or the
imbecility of nature, in vain endeavoring to remove superfluities.

Quality. Vomits variously colored, composed of many humors, are bad.

For they signify that various humors are lodged in the body, which cause
nature the more trouble, by how much more difficult it is to grapple with
diverse antagonists. For if it be a very uneasy task to encounter diverse kinds
of aliments, how much more difficult and dangerous will it be to attempt to
concoct and subdue various humors deviating from the prescripts of nature?
especially in acute diseases, in which the time for skirmish is short, which
should be very long that we might conceive greater hopes of the victory of
nature.

Porraceous, eruginous, pale, black, or stinking vomit is deadly.

For such vomit signifies that porraceous, eruginous, or black choler are
predominant in the body. But all these species of choler do usually produce
malignant and deadly diseases: but if a stink be joined to them, they signify
a notable corruption of humors, which will soon poison nature. We find an
example of eruginous vomit in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. aegr. 4. where Philistes on
the first day vomited bilious matter, in quantity small, yellow at first,
afterward much eruginous matter: on the fifth day in the morning he dyed. As
also Sect. 3. of the same book. aegr. 4. where a phrenitical person on the
first day vomited much eruginous thin matter, on the fourth he dyed: of black
vomit we have an example in 1. Epid. aegr. (...). one who on the eighth day
about evening vomited a little black, bilious matter, and on the eleventh dyed.
Yet it may be objected that this sign is dubious, because the wife of
Epicrates, as we read 1. Epid. aegr. 5. on the twentieth day vomited a little
bilious, black matter, and was perfectly judged without a Fever on the eighth.
We must answer, that that disease was so dangerous, and attended by such
desperate symptoms, that it was a wonder how the sick party should escape,
when it had held her eighty days. But it sometimes happens that some even most
deadly diseases are beyond all hope of the Physician brought to an happy
conclusion, which yet do not debilitate the judgments of art, which imply a
common, though not always a necessary consequence. Besides this it is worth
animadversion, that such depraved humors are sometimes Critically expelled,
though this be a rare accident. Lastly, of stinking vomit with a train of other
bad qualities, we have an instance in 3 Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 12. Where a woman
on the eighth and ninth day vomited a little bilious matter, on the eleventh
virulent and bilious, on the twelfth and thirteenth much black, stinking
matter: on the fourteenth she dyed.

Sincere and impermixt vomits are in acute Fevers bad. 10. Prorrhet.

For sincere humor is not crude only, but also incoctile, as excluding as well
the act as the power of coction. Hipp. terms every humor void of mixtion, or
all fervid and crude excrement not tempered with its serum, impermixt. Whose
generation proceeds from the vitiosity of some part, or from heat and febrile
inflammation, the aquous and serous part being exhausted; therefore in an acute
Fever it shows that a great inflammation is fuelled within, and most commonly
by nature invincible.

In any disease if black choler be upward or downward evacuated, it is deadly.
Aph. 22. Sect. 4.

Such excretion is deadly as a sign, and as a cause; for no excretion in the
cradle of a disease can be healthful, and evacuation of any humor is bad before
the signs of concoction. For this demonstrates that the cause is very biting
and troublesome, or that the faculty is wholly languid when the economy of
nature is thus disturbed, which concocts first, then segregates, and parts the
useful from the useless, lastly expels. But when the peccant matter in this
manner disturbing nature is very bad, we must think the sick person is deadly
affected. But if in the progress of the disease black choler be expelled, the
evacuation of it may be sometimes good, viz. if the signs of concoction appear
with it.

They who are extenuated by acute or long diseases, or wounds, or by any other
means, if they evacuate black choler, or as it were black blood through their
inferiors, they die the day following. Aph. 23. Sect. 4.

Extenuation signifies great debility, such dejection denotes a great disease,
which soon destroys the sick person so very infirm. When therefore such an
evacuation happens to persons so extenuated, it signifies that nature now quite
enfeebled cannot any longer contain those humors, but sets them at liberty, and
excludes them through the inferiors.

Sincere dejections in acute diseases are very bad.

Hipp. termed those sincere dejections (as Galen says in Aph. 6. Sect. 7)
which are not mixed with aquous humidity, when the humor alone which is
evacuated is dejected, whether it be bilious, or melancholic, or whether it
represent the color of a leek, or be that choler which is termed eruginous.
For such dejections demonstrate that all the native humidity is scorched by
febrile heat: which very much endangers the life. So in Hipp. 1. Epid. aegr. 2.
Silenus on the first day expelled much bilious, sincere, spumous, deep colored
matter, on the fifth his dejections were sincere, bilious, smooth, fat; on the
eleventh he died. Such dejections also happened in the daughter of Euryanax,
Parius, Pithon, and others who were affected with deadly diseases.

Fat and viscous dejections are deadly.

Fat dejections in acute diseases are caused, according to Gal. comm. in text.
22. hock 2. prorrh. as often as the fat is melted by fiery heat. But when they
are viscous also, they signify not only a colliquation of the fat, but also
of the solid parts of the body, whence they necessarily pine. But because fat
and viscid dejections are sometimes generated by fat and clammy aliments, as
also by phlegm made viscid by much heat, they are so to be distinguished; that
those which proceed from aliment or phlegm are more copious, and stink not; but
those caused by colliquation are few, and very fetid, and as Galen will have
it, stink is the chief sign of colliquation. These fat dejections therefore
signify a great inflammation, and certain destruction, if they be attended
with any bad signs, and the more if the disease be great and vehement; as in a
more gentle disease they presage diuturnity instead of destruction, such as
Hipp. observed in him who dwelt in Dealces garden, of whom he says, that on
the sixth day his dejections were black, fat, spumous, viscous and fetid, who
was not judged before the fourtieth day. But they proceeded not from the
colliquation of the solid parts, but from fat and viscid numors putrified, for
they were many. But these which are caused upon the pining of the solid
substance of the parts are wholly exitial, such as Hipp. observed in Silenus;
as we noted in the precedent Theorem.

Spumous dejections in acute Fevers are bad.

For they denote either an inflammation of heat, by which the boiling
excrements contract a spume, as we see in a kettle by the force of heat; or
that flatuous spirits are mingled with humor, as appears in the forth of the
sea upon an insurrection of winds: but both is bad, because the one argues a
melting heat, the other an unequal perturbation. Yet they are worse which
denote a melting inflammation of heat, and they are known by an acute fever,
and expulsion of spumous excrements somewhat hot, as also because they are
sincere. Of these we may read in 2. Prorrhet. A spumous efflorescence in
bilious and sincere dejections is bad. But those which proceed from the
commixtion of flatuous spirit are also bad, because they declare a crudity in
the excrements.

In acute diseases, if things assumed be cast forth unaltered, it is deadly.

Such a lienteria shows that the natural functions in the ventricle are
abolished by the very great exolution of native heat, which denounces the
proximity of death, as appears in Hipp. in 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Aegr. 15. in the
wife of Dealces, to whom on the seventeenth day happened a turbulent irritation
in her belly, after her very drink flowed from her, and on the twentieth day
she died.

Worms. In the beginning of a disease if worms creep forth it is bad, either
alive or dead, chiefly if they come unattended with feculency.

For alive they signify a very great crudity, or penury of aliment; and dead,
they denote great putridity by which they are killed.

Worms in the declination of a disease, expelled with excrements, and upon
appearance of concoction, is good.

For this shows that nature has power over the excrements.

Quantity. Dejections of the belly in any disease too copious are bad. But if
when they be expelled the belly do something swell and increase, they are very
bad.

Too copious a flux of the belly does much resolve the strength and debilitate
nature, as Hipp. mentions in 2. progn. But if there be an universal and
frequent dejection, it imminently endangers a defection of life: which he also
confirms in Coac. prenot. in these words: A liquid dejection, and flowing out
copiously, and at once,

Here insert Table marked solio 183.

A Table containing all those heads from which the signs of humors predominant
in the body are derived.
The signs which discover the humor predominant in the body are taken either
from The Causes, which are either Material Things assumed Aliments, in which is
considered Quality. Quantity. Order. Time.
Medicines.
Excretions and retentions.
Efficient Natural Various temper of hereditary disposition The ventricle.
Liver. Heart. Brain.
Age. Sex.
Not-natural Air, to which refer Region. Time of year.
Meat and drink. Motion, to which refer Exercitation. Venery.
Quiet. Sleep. Watching. Passions of the mind.
Helpful and hurtful.

Effects, in which are considered Actions Animal Principal Imagination to which
refer the Various disposition of fancy. Various passions of the mind.
Ratiocination. Memory.
Less principal Sense Common Sleep. Watching. Dreams.
Private (The five natural senses.
Motion.

Vital, whence the pulse Great. Small. Frequent. Slow. Soft. Hard, etc.
Natural Nutrition, with her servants Attraction, to which Hunger. Thirst.
Retention. Concoction. Expulsion.
Accretion either in Quantity Great. Small.
Time Quick. Slow.

Generation, whence An appetite to venery. Aversion from it. Hurt by it.
Benefit thereof.


Passions. Excrements excluded by Mouth. Ears. Nostrils. Belly. Bladder. Womb.
Habit of body
and in them is considered Consistence. Color. Taste. Smell.
Habit, in which are considered The skin with its qualities First Calidity.
Frigidity. Humidity. Siccity.
Second Hardness. Softness. Roughness. Smoothness.
Third (Color.
Parts arising from the skin, viz. hairs, and in them Quantity Continual
Longitude. Brevity.
Discrete Multitude. Pancity.

Quality Patible Second Hardness. Softness. Roughness. Smoothness. Thinness.
Thickness.
Third (Color.
Figure Rectitude. Curvitude.

Passion Rise. Increase. Fall.

Partssubiect to the skin, and in them Vessels, in which Narrowness. Latitude.
Flesh, and in it Gracility. Obesity. Carnosity.






and by degrees, is bad: for one introduces wakings; the other exolution. But
if to a copious dejection a swelling belly be added, it signifies a great
exolution of native heat, whence many crudities and flatulencies are generated,
whereby the belly swells.

A very small looseness, or such a one as stops as soon as it begins, is evil.

For we have shown in another place that all evacuations that proceed in a
little quantity, are of small moment, both because they do not suffice to take
away the cause of the disease, as also because they signify either a great
multitude of humors oppressing the strength of nature, or else a great weakness
of nature it self. Besides, if a looseness do stop as soon asit begins, it shows
that the evil humors which began their course through the guts, are turned
another way, where they may do more mischief. Of these speaks Hippocrates in
these words in 7. Epid. The bellies though by chance they were loosened, yet
presently were perniciously bound up. Hence it proceeds, that those fluxes and
dysenteries which are suddenly stopped, are wont very much to endanger the life
of the patient.

The Quality. A watery looseness which begins with an acute disease, and tarries
with it, is evil.

For it signifies an abundance of the matter causing the disease, or the
malignant quality thereof, which forces nature to such an immature, and
unseasonable flux. Thus Hippocrates speaks in 3. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr. 8. of a
young man whose belly flowed the first day with much choleric and thin matter:
the second day sollowed a greater flux of matter more indigested, and the
seventh day he dyed. Aegr. 10. the same Sect. he speaks of a woman whose belly
flowed the first day with much thin and crude matter: the second day with much
more of the same, and the seventh day she dyed: her belly remaining moist with
much thin and undigested matter all the while.

A looseness of the belly happening to one taken with a pleurisy, or a
peripneumony, or inflammation of the lungs, is an evil symptom. Aph. 1. Sect.
6.

For when the organs serving for respiration are vehemently afflicted, the
liver and the stomach are thereby also strongly affected: so that they being
weakened there follows a looseness of the belly, which for that reason uses to
be mortal. Therefore to make good this symptom, the pleurisy or inflammation
of the lungs ought to be exceeding vehement; which Hippocrates seems to
intimate, as Galen observes in his Comment upon this Aphorism, who does not
simply say that a looseness is evil in a Pleurisy, or inflammation of the
lungs, but adds the words, being vehemently taken with; as if he should have
said, that a looseness of the belly seizing upon a person detained and vexed
with such diseases, was an evil symptom. Because a looseness of the belly
happens to such men through a weakness of the liver, that is not able to draw
the nourishment to it, nor to turn it into blood, the stomach also oftentimes
corrupting the said n ourishment; but in a moderate pleurisy, or inflammation
of the lungs when a loosneses does happen, it may profit much by way of
evacuation, specially if the disease be so gentle, that there is no great fear
of any danger, also if there do appear certain signs of concoction both in the
urine and spettle. Sometimes also at the beginning of a pleurisy or
inflammation of the lungs, the foresaid matter diverts it self to the guts, and
causes a wholesome and seasonable flux.

For one that is troubled with an Opthalmia to have a looseness is a good sign.
Aph. 17. Sect. 6.

By such a flux of the belly in this case the humor is drawn down to the most
distant opposite parts, and from the upper parts to the lower; which is
therefore of all things the most efficacious and profitable.

The liquid excrements of the belly growing thick in the progress of the
disease, betoken well.

All concoction is perfected by thickening, and those things which are
concocted become more thick; and therefore excrements which at first being thin
and liquid, do afterward grow thick by degrees, do show that nature is strong
that performs her work so well.

White fluxes appearing in any disease are evil.

For the fluxes of white matter are caused by undigested meats, as white bread,
milk, Ptissan, or unhusked Barley, Rice, Almonds, and such like: or as Galen
teaches in 2 Progn. when the choler can by no means come to the intestines;
which happens either through an obstruction of that pipe which conveyes it from
the bladder of the Gall to the Guts, as comes to pass in the yellow jaundise;
or because that the Choler is drawn upward with the blood by the heat of the
head which is inflamed: or lastly, those white fluxes are caused by a melting
of some soft and new made fat. But these are few, slimie, and of an evil
savor. However they happen, unless it be those that take the white color from
the color of the meat, in acute diseases they are not a little to be
condemned, but most of all those which happen when the brain is inflamed: of
which Hippocrates in Prorrhet. In those who are phrenetick a white flux is
naught, because all the choler is then drawn up into the brain. Moreover, in
choleric fevers white fluxes are evil, because the excrements ought to answer
to the cause of the disease, and therefore they signify either an obstruction
of the pipe through which the choler passes to the guts; which obstruction for
the most part is mortal to such as are not in fevers; of which Hippocrates
speaks in Coac. Persons troubled with the Kings evil, whose feculencies flow
forth in a great quantity dye, and in them a white flux proceeds: Or it
signifies an inflammation of the brain, and the upper unequal part of the Liver,
which draws all the choler to them. Lastly, we have shown that little, slimy,
and ill-smelling fluxes are evil, because they denote a mischievous
colliquation or melting of the fat.

Vitelline, eruginous, green, pale, black, variously colored, or very
ill-savoured fluxes are evil. 2. progn.

All these fluxes are evil for the same reasons which we have above rehearsed.
Yet sometimes they may be cast forth critically and advantageously, if in the
urine there do appear the signs of concoction; as you may see in Hippocrates,
in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 14. where Melidia, who lay sick in the Temple of
Juno, was first taken with a strong pain of the head, neck, and breast,
presently followed an acute fever; the sixth day she became comatous, troubled
and dismayed, new raving fits, with a redness in her cheek, and some
deliration; the seventh she sweat, the fever remitted, her pains remained, and
the fever returned. Her sleep was little, her urine well colored, but thin to
the end. The fluxes of her belly choleric, acrimonious, very little, and those
black, and ill smelling: a smooth and white sediment was in her urine; she
sweat, and upon the eleventh day the crisis was perfectly made.

The manner of excretion. Liquid excrements of the belly with pain, and a
dysenteria, or a laborious and frequent dejection, are evil.

For they signify a very great sharpness of the humors, which gripes,
pricks, and gnaws the guts exceedingly. Which Hippocrates observes in 1 Epid.
in many who have died of malignant seavers; of which he says, Their bellies
were loosened, and they often let forth little matter, but choleric, sincere,
thin, watery, and full of acrimony: a little after; These diseases which
afflicted these persons were dysenteries, tenesmus, lienteries, and fluxes of
the belly: which he also observed in 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 6. of the daughter
of Euryanax, who the twelfth day was troubled with a flux of choleric, little,
clear, thin, and sharp matter, molesting her by frequent evacuation, of which
she died. Notwithstanding sometimes difficult diseases are judged by a
dysenteria, as Hippocrates has taught, Aph. 48. Sect. 6. A Difficulty of the
guts happening to the splenetick is good, if the dysentery do not remain long;
for otherwise it is of ill consequence, according to the 43. Apho. of the same
Section. Those splenetick persons who are taken with a difficulty in the guts,
if it remain long, they are troubled with water between the skin, and a
smoothness of the guts, and so dye. Other diseases are also terminated by a
dysenterical flux, as you may see in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 10. where
Hippocrates thus writes of Clazomeniw; about the one and thirtieth day happened
a flux of many watery and dysenterical humors, and the fourtieth day he
recovered. But these fluxes when they are signs of health are unaccompanied
with any pernicious symptoms: but for the most part eruption of blood,
abundant sweating or some other good sign happens with them.

A liquid flux which imperceptibly flows from the body, is very dangerous.

For either it signifies a depravation of the senses, and madness, or a
dissolution of the natural heat, which is presently followed by an abolishment
of the senses.

A flux of the belly which may be easily endured, and which gives any ease to
the patient, is good.

For it shows that nature does expel the noxious humors, and that a
dissolution of the disease is nigh at hand.

By the bladder] That urine is the best which is of a moderate substance,
answering the quantity of drink taken, of a color inclining either to red or
yellow, with a white sediment, smooth and equal. Gal. 1. de Cris. chap. 12.

That all the vices of urine may be the more easily discerned, it will be
requisite in the first place to set forth all the conditions of a good and
sound urine, that this Theorem may be a rule, whereto to reduce all those that
follow. Therefore a good urine ought to be of a middling substance, that is,
neither too thick nor too thin, of a color inclining to red or yellow; for
some urines are more, others less colored, and yet well concocted, which uses
to proceed from the several dispositions of bodies, that is to say, from the
temper of the liver and other principal entrails, as also from the age, sex,
diet, and manner of living of several persons. For hotter bodies have urine
more colored, and cold ones more pale. Young men have urines thinnes and
higher colored then those of children, children have thicker, and old men
thinner and less colored. The urines of women are thicker then those of men,
and less colored, with much sediment. And those that indulge to their
appetites make water with much raw sediment, and those that suffer hunger,
watching and labor, make water of a higher color, with less sediment. On the
other side, those that live at ease have urines less colored with much
sediment. But in well tempered bodies that urine will be best, which, a Galen
teaches, inclines a little to the color of saffron; and those other
differences that come nearest to this are to be accounted best: but in diseases
it suffices to prognosticate a recovery, if that the urine enjoy as near as may
be those properties which it had when the patient was in health: and therefore
it would avail much to have observed the urine when the patient was in health,
that you may thereby know how much it is fallen from its natural condition.
Lastly, the sediment ought to be white, smooth, and even; which Hippocrates
confirms, 2. progn. text. 26. and he adds, that this sediment ought to remain
all the while till perfect judgment be made of the disease: for if it do
intermit, and that sometimes the water be made without any sediment, it
portends that the disease will be longer and less safe. But here it is to be
noted, that Hippocrates in the forecited place only looks at the sediment by
which the concoction may be judged of; not at the substance or color, for that
varies in every individual. And for that also because a urine which has an
excellent sediment and a excellent color, must of necessity have a middling
substance, therefore that sediment which settles at the bottom of the
chamberpot, white, smooth, and equal, like well concocted purulency, is a sign
of perfect concoction. That enaeorema which appears hanging in the middle of
the urinal or chamberpot, is less commendable, and signifies a more imperfect
concoction. But the cloud that swims at the top of the urine, deserves yet a
less commendation. Although as Galen teaches in 3. Epid. both that which
appears in the middle, as also the cloud, so they be good, are sometimes
sufficient for the foretelling of health; which Hippocrates does expressly say,
Aph. 71. Sect. 4. Where the judgment of the disease is made the seventh day,
there appears in the urine of such persons a little red cloud on the fourth
day. But says Galen in his commentaries, not only the appearing of a red
cloud not seen before signifies judication, but also of a white cloud much
more; but that which hangs in the middle being white, equal, and consistent, is
better then either of them.

The liquidness of urine, and its qualities.] Thin urines, of a good color, in
acute diseases are wholesome.

Of these speaks Galen Comment. in 1. Epid. in these words; certain therefore
it is, that thin urines, if so be they are of a good color, by reason of the
goodness of the color, do promise health, but whereas they were thin, they
required only time for concoction. It Is true these urines do portend health,
but not suddenly ensuing; which Hippocrates observed in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr.
6. in a patient named Cleonactides. This man upon the sixtieth day made a thin
water, but of a good color: on the eightieth day a perfect judgment was made
of the disease. Also Aegr. 10. of the same section. Clazomenius from the
beginning of his disease unto the sixteenth day made a thin water, but of a
good color, with much dispersed matter hanging in the middle thereof, without
any settlement, and the fourtieth day he recovered. So the 3. Epid. Sect. 9.
Aegr. 5. Chaerion made a thin water, but of a good color to the end, having a
kind of clammy enaeorema hanging in the middle, and on the twentieth day
perfect judgment was made.

Urines thin, white, and watery, in a difficult disease are pernicious.

For either these urines do show the choleric matter to be carried up into the
head, whence arises frenzy and madness, of which Hipp. Aph. 17. Sect. 4.
Where the urine appears white and perspicuous, it is dangerous, especially if
it come from such as are in a Frenzy. But Galen says in his comment. That he
never saw any phrenitick person saved who made such water. Or they signify
very great crudities, which portend either death or a long disease, for nature
requires a long time to expel that extreme cruditie. And therefore if the
Fever be not very vehement and acute, and the strength of the body not wasted,
the health of the person is many times recovered, though it be a good while
first. But in a vehement disease, and where the strength is decayed, such
urines are altogether pernicious. But those urines do principally denote
destruction, which come after the beginning of the disease, and continue long,
such as were those that appeared in a certain woman, who on the eleventh day
made thin and watery urines, which continued so to the fourtieth day; but if
after the judgment of the disease be made, those urines do still continue, it
is a certain sign of relapse. In other diseases, as intermitting Fevers, or
gentle and diuturnal, a thin urine denotes great obstructions of the milt,
liver, mesentery, and other like parts, through which the urine being streined
becomes so thin and watery.

Those urines which are thick, full of humors, little in quantity, not without
a Fever, if they come thin from such persons in good quantity, it is helpful,
But these chiefly are such which have a sediment at the beginning, or presently
after.

By thick urines are to be understood such urines as either are very crass, or
are always troubled or muddy; by grumous urines, such as have many clods or
lumps in them. Such urines are made at the beginning of Fevers proceeding from
phlegm: for thickness comes from the multitude of thick humors; the lumps in
urine are caused by certain bits of phlegm dried by the heat of the Fever:
these urines are then made in little quantity, because nature is then employed
to retain it: but when the humor is concocted the urine appears thinner, that
perturbation ceasing, and it comes forth in greater quantity, because nature
now endeavors an evacuation; and by how much the more plentifully it is
evacuated, by so much the more it helps, as in all critical evacuations.
Therefore in this place that is called thin urine, not which is so indeed, for
that avails not; but that whose muddy distemper is taken away by concoction:
These are chiefly made in seasers proceeding from phlegm, in which the urines
are wont at the beginning to have a certain deceitful sediment, which is not
made by concoction, but by the descending downward of raw humors.

That urine which comes from the body thick, muddy, and troubled, but becomes
afterward of it self clear and limpid, is good.

For it portends the victory of nature separating things hererogeneous, and
expelling that which is injurious to her, and that so much the more, if after
this separation the thicker part settle in the bottom white, smooth, and equal.

Urine which at first comes forth clear, but after some time becomes muddy, is
good.

For it signifies that nature has begun a concoction, and made a notable
entrance in it.

A thick muddy urine, which so remains, that being put to the fire will not
clear up, is evil.

For such urine, as Galen teaches in Aph. 70. Sect. 1. if the strength of the
body be accordingly, shows that the disease will be long; if the strength be
diminished it portends the death of the patient: for it is caused by a
multitude of thick and crude humors, with which much wind being mixed, the
urine is thereby agitated and troubled; so that if the strength be wasted,
there is great danger lest it be suffocated by the abundance of such humors;
but if there be strength remaining, much time is required to discuss those
humors. There is an example of this urine in Hipp. 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 4.
in the wife of Philinus, who made much water the eleventh day with convulsions,
which seldom bring along with them white or thick urine, as in those waters
which settle, when being set aside for a good while, they persisted muddy
without settling; the color and thickness of the urine being like that of
cattle; on the twentieth day she died. Also Aegr. 11. of the same Section, in
the wife of Dromeada; the second day she made a thick white and troubled urine,
like to those which have a settlement, when after they have been set aside for
some time they become muddy; yet her urine settled not; on the sixth day she
died: so also in Hermocrates, and in another that in a hot sit eat and drank
largely, the same troubled and unsettled urines were observed.

Urines that come forth muddy, and remain so with an evil smell, are very evil.

For they signify a Gangrene in the bladder or the parts adjoining.

Red urine, or yellow and thin, and so continuing long, is evil.

For it shows an extraordinary heat and inflaming disposition in the liver, or
stomach, or midriffe, by which no concoction but rather an adustion or
scorching of the humors is caused. And therefore such a kind of urine
persevering, if the body be weak, portends death; but if the body be in
strength, it signifies a prolongation of the disease, or a diversion of the
humor into the lower parts.

Black urines appearing in an acute disease are pernicious.

For they signify an extraordinary scorching up of the humors, causing them to
degenerate into melancholy, which produces deadly affections; as may be seen in
Philiscus, 1. Epid. Sect. 3. Aegr. 1. whose urine coming forth on the third and
fifth day, was black, he dyed the sixth. Also in Erasinus, Aegr. 8. of the same
sect. who dyed the fifth day. This man, says Hipp. had a Fever through his
whole body, with sweating, and elevation of the Hypochondrium, a stretching
with pain: he made black water, having a round enaeorema without any
settlement. Also in Pythian, 3. Epid. Sect 3. Aegr. 3. who the third and fourth
day made black water, and the tenth day dyed. But if these black urines are
also thin, they are so much the worse, because they signify a greater crudity;
hence Hipp. in 1. Epid. Thin, black, urine and made in a little quantity, which
appeared at the beginning of burning Fevers, was one of the signs by which
they were wont to portend certain death: but whether they come forth in a great
or small quantity, these black and thin urines are always mortal: as also
those which appearing at first black turn afterward into thin and watery. Which
is confirmed by the story of Silenus in 1. Epid. when his urine had continued
black unto the fourth day, in the fifth day it began to come forth thin and
transparent. And Hist. 2. Sect. 3. Lib. 3. of a woman that lay sick at the cold
water, and dyed the eightieth day. On the eleventh day she made much thin and
black water, and on the twentieth much watery urine. Which Galen observed in his
comm. viz. that black urines turned into watery are mortal. Lastly, worst of all
are the black urines with a black sediment, of which Galen 1. de Cris. Cap. 12.
thus discourses; worst of all is that urine which is totally black, so that I
have seen no man escape that ever made such water: yet it is less pernicious if
the sediment be only black; and still less dangerous, if only that which is in
the middle be black; and much less it is to be feared, if the cloud appears
only of that color. Yet here it is to be noted, that black urines are not
always evil; For first, in melancholy persons such urines may be critically
made. As Galen in comment. in 3. Epid. Sect. 3. text. 74. relates, that he knew
a certain woman who was much helped by the evacuation of such waters. Secondly,
in splenetick persons black urines may be safely voided, that is when the
spleen empties it self through those parts, as happened to Herophon in 1. Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 3. who being oppressed with an acute Fever, from the beginning
to the fifth day made black and thin water; the fifth day his milt swelled, the
eighth day the swelling ceased, his urine was more colored, and had a little
settlement: the seventeenth, the disease had a prosperous judgment. Thirdly,
urines of this nature being joined with an efflux of blood from the nose are
less dangerous, because the thinner and hotter parts of the blood wherein the
danger lay, is voided by bleeding, as you may see in 1. Epid. Sect. 3. Aegr. 7.
where Meto being taken with a Fever, the fourth day there flowed out of his
right nostril a little blood twice; his urine was blackish, having a blackish
matter hanging in the middle, dispersed, without settlement; the fifth day
clear blood flowed more copiously out of the left nostril, he sweat, was
judged. After the Crisis he was walking, and talked idle, making thin and
blackish water, he slept and came to himself his fit returned not, but he bled
often, and that after the Crisis. Fourthly, black urine appearing upon a
suppression of the months, when they flow copiously, they cause a solution of
the disease, as for example, in 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Aegr. 11. where mention is
made of a woman, of whom judgment was made the third day of that made thin and
black water, but at the time of the Crisis, her courses descended very
plentifully.

The Quality. Much urine and well concocted upon the decretory day, are good.

For they show that the matter causing the disease is overcome by nature, and
is conveniently expelled through the proper places. Such urines Hipp. observed
in Nicodemus, of whom he says; that on the twenty fourth day he made much
white water, wherein was much sediment, and was judged with sweating: and of
Pericles the same Hipp. speaks, that the third day the Fever was assuaged,
much concocted urine appearing, in which was much sediment; then also he says
that Chaerion was saved by making much bilious urine.

Much urine, thin and watery, without any contents in it, profit nothing, are
evil.

For they proceed from a multitude of excrementitious and crude humors, or from
a hot distemper of the kidneys, which is thought to cause a diabete: or from a
colliquation of the whole body, whence proceeds a great dissolution of the
natural heat. So 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 12. a certain woman on the eighth day
made much water without any profit or amendment, and the fourteenth day died.

Little urine and thin, not answering to the quantity of drink taken in any
disease, are evil.

For it shows a weakness of the separating and expulsive faculty, or an intense
heat parching up the moisture of the body; as appeared in the wife of Dromeada,
and in the youth of Metibza, and in the daughter of Euryanactes, and in the
woman that lay ill at the house of Pisamenus, and in her that lay ill at the
house of Pantimedes; all which persons made thin and little water, and soon
afterward died.

Stoppage of the urine in acute diseases is pernicious.

For the suppression of urine in acute diseases, as Galen. teaches in his
comment in 3. Epid. is caused either by a fiery heat consuming the serous
humors of the blood; or by an extinction of the natural functions; as happened
to Silenus, whose urine stopped the fixth day, the seventh day he made no
water, and the eleventh day he dyed. Also in a woman that lay sick of a quinsie
in the house of Ositon at Cizicum, and a youth of Morlibia, whose urine stopped
a little before their death. But that is the worst suppression of the urine
that follows a coldness of the body, as Hipp. teaches 1. Coac. Sect. 1. Aph.
5. after coldness pernicious is that suppression of the urine that precedes a
coldness of the body, because it signifies a critical evacuation, which will be
accomplished, especially by sweating. So on the other side, it is worst of all
when it follows that coldness, because it shows that the action of the bladder
is totally destroyed, and that the heat thereof is extinguished by that
perfrigeration.

The contents, the urine. Urines that have either sediment or matter hanging in
the middle, nor cloud, are evil.

Those urines wanting content are evil, if it be not caused by famine, labor,
or watching, or a nephritical disposition of the reins, or that the bodies were
not very choleric. For they signify great crudity of humors, or concoction of
them, or weakness of the bowels, or inflammation of them, or else vehement
obstructions.

Urines that have little sediment are evil.

They indeed are less evil then those that have no contents, because they
proceed from the same, though from lesser causes: of these speaks Hipp. in 1.
Epid. Thin urine and unconcocted, discolored, and little, or having thickness,
and few sediments, are evil.

The sediments that appear like meal are evil, those that appear like slates
are worse, but those that seem like bran are worst of all. Hipp. 2. prog.

These kind of settlements, according to Galen. 1. of Crit. chap. 12. are
caused by an immense heat melting and burning the fat, and the very substance
of the flesh. But when this burning heat preys upon the solid parts, first it
assails the more soft and newly substantiated fat, afterward the more solid;
and when all the fat is melted and consumed, then it falls upon the more tender
and newly compacted flesh, after that upon the more solid flesh, and lastly
upon the most solid parts themselves. By the new fat thus melted by the heat of
the Fever, are caused oily urines. But by the more solid fat being melted, as
also from the flesh raggedly dissolved, and likewise from thick blood parched
are caused those sediments resembling meal, as Galen teaches in comment of
this Prognostic. From the solid parts unequally dissolved proceed those
sediments which are like slates, as also those resembling bran, when the heat
is more intense; whence it plainly appears, that the slaty sediments are worse
then the mealie ones, and the brannie sediments worse then the slaty: how
pernicious those sediments are will appear by the judgment of Galen, of that
resembling meal which is not so bad as the rest; in Com. in Aph. 31. Sect. 7.
he thus writes; such urines are mortal, as also is said in the Prognost. and
many are killed in a short time of sickness, and who ever of them escape they
have a long time of sickness, the disposition requiring a great concoction
where such water is made. So Hipp. in 1. Epid. Aegr. 2. also declares. His
urine was copious, the sediment was thick, a white sediment like thick flour
white, his extreme parts were cold, and on the eleventh day he dyed. But in 3.
Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 3. he says of the man that lay in the garden of Dealces,
his urines were thin, variously colored, having various sediments like thick
flour. This man he relates to have been judged on the fourtieth day. It is
therefore manifest by these examples, that whoever they be that void urine like
to a thicker sort of meal, if they may be saved, yet it is long before they
escape. But whoever they are that are thus mortally affected, they perish
immediately: Those are floury urines in which the sediment appears at the
bottom of the urine like purulency, and they are very dangerous, as I have
often experienced.

A shattered and unequal sediment in the urine is naught.

For it signifies crudity, which if it remain in the same condition, so that
the sediment do not change for the better, in the progress of the disease, it
shows that nature cannot overcome the matter causing the disease; but if it do
daily mend, there is hopes of solution, though it may be something long first.

A thin sediment in the beginning of a disease, which in the progress of the
malady thickens daily by degrees, is good.

For it shows that nature endeavored a concoction at the beginning, and does
daily labor to bring its work to perfection.

A thick sediment appearing in any time of the disease is evil.

Those sediments are caused by thick and crude humors, which being mixed with
the urine, separate themselves from the water, and by reason of the heaviness
sink down to the bottom of the chamberpot. Now because those thick and crude
humors are very hard to be overcome by nature, therefore they do threaten much
danger, especially if the strength of the body be decayed; but if there be any
strength of nature, they do only signify a prolongation of the disease: these
crude and thick humors settling at the bottom of the chamberpot may deceive a
young Physician, who may perhaps think them to be a good and true settlement;
and therefore they are to be exactly distinguished from them. And first, those
crude and thick humors usually appear at the beginning of a disease, but the
good and true settlement never till the declination thereof. And it happens
that after the beginning of the disease that thin and crude humor being
attenuated, there appears no more settlement in the bottom, but only in the
place thereof a cloud or matter hanging in the middle thereof, which as the
concoction proceeds, falls down daily from the upper part of the chamberpot to
the lower parts; which is the true sign of concoction when the cloud changes
into that matter which hangs in the middle of the pot, and is called Enaeorema;
and the Enaeorema into the fediment: but on the other side, when the settlement
changes into the Enaeorema or cloud, that sediment was not laudable, but a
crude and thick humor which was afterward attenuated by concoction. Secondly,
this crude humor does not stick close together, neither is it altogether smooth
and equal, but slimie and over thick. But the laudable sediment is smooth,
equal, and moderately thick. Lastly, this crude humor is heavier, and resides
altogether to the bottom of the chamberpot; but a good sediment does not close
but rather rest on the bottom, being a little raised from it, and as it were
gathered into a kind of globe, which the crude humor does not do, but remains a
little more diffused and scattered. When any one seems rid of a disease, yet
makes discolored waters, with a sediment very white like snow, he dies of a
relapse, as Dr. Pachecus observes.

Black or blew sediments in urine are worst of all.

And that for the reasons which were told before where we treated of black
urine.

A shattered, unequal and black matter hanging in the middle, is bad.

A sediment endued with these qualities has been showed before to be evil; all
other things contained in the urine are bad for the same reasons, though less
evil then a sediment.

A little cloud at the top of the urine appearing in the form of a circle is
evil in acute diseases.

For it signifies an approaching Frenzy, and after that death.

Oily urines, wherein do swim little fat things like cobwebs, are evil. Hipp.
2. progn.

For it shows a mighty heat that melts the fat which is in the reins and the
whole body. Now how you may know whether this colliquation proceed from
thereins or from the whole body, Hippocrates teaches Aph. 35. Sect. 7. in these
words; Those who have a close fat swimming on the top of their urine, have an
acute evil in their veins. By an acute evil he means a hot distemper, which
causes as it were little heaps of fat in the water; for there is a great
quantity of fat heaped up about the reins, and from thence there is a short and
quick way for the coming forth of the urine, so that that which is melted
sticks not much by the way. Therefore if the fat come forth in lumps, it
proceeds from an acute evil in the veins; but if not in lumps, but like
cobwebs, it shows a consumption of the fat through the whole body. Of this oily
urine there is an example in Hippocrates, 1 Epid. Aegr 11. in the wife of
Dromeada, from whom on the fourth day there came thin and oily urine, on the
fifth day the same, but the sixth day she dyed. Also in 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Aegr.
1. in the son of Parion, who the seventh day voided oily water; and on the
hundred and twentieth day dyed: and doubtless those urines persevered a good
while, which Hipp. seems to intimate in these words; Urines continuing to the
end are evil. So Aegr. 16. of the same sect. A young man of Moelibea from the
beginning of his disease made oily water, the twentyfourth day he dyed: now
although these oily urines are extremely bad, yet the floury, slaty, and branny
urines are much worse, as we have showed above.

The manner of excretion. Urines that come from the patient either unknown, or
not remembered, are dangerous.

This opinion is set down in Hipp. in 1. Prorrh. text. 28. in these words; The
making of water is dangerous to parties not remembering it. For either it shows
that the brain is much distempered, and that the patient is affected with a
great frenzy, or that the strength of the natural parts is extinct, so that
they cannot exercise their function any longer.

Urines in malignant and pestilent Fevers in substance, color, and contents
like the urine of sound people, is pernicious.

This Hippocrates seems to intimate in Coac. where he says, Urines concocted
suddenly and without reason for it, are evil; and what ever appears contained
in the urine not concocted according to nature, is worse. Malignant and
pestilent diseases proceed from a certain venomous quality which particularly
wageth war with the spirits and heart it self, the soundness of which parts may
be soon destroyed by such a potent enemy, though the rest of the body be in a
good posture; or else urines of this nature apparently commendable in acute
diseases, and full of evil symptoms, do show that the choler with which the
urines are colored, has invaded either the brain, or some other bowel; and
that none of the hurtful humors come forth with the urine, which is extremely
pernicious.

Be not deceived, though the bladder, or reins affected with any disease send
forth bad urine; for such a symptom concerns not the whole body, but only
those parts. Hipp. 2. prog.

This is hence discerned; for if the urine be full of evil contents, and yet be
well concocted, it shows that the evil proceeds only from some particular
affection of the reins or bladder; for were it the product of a burning Fever
the urine would not be well concocted. This is intimated by Hippocrates Aph.
76. Sect. 4. That water which being thick has in it little pieces of flesh, as
it were certain hairs, proceeds from the reins. And. Aph. 77. of the same sect.
Where a thick urine comes forth with a certain branny sediment, the bladder of
such persons is scabed. In these Aphorisms by thick urine Hippocrates means
well concocted, as Galen testifies in his comm. which is a peculiar symptom
that the things contained in the urine proceed from the reins and bladder.

Of sweating.] Sweatings which break forth with manifest signs of concoction
upon the critical day, chilness going before from the whole body being hot;
copious, dropping, and with vapors, and by which Fever is either perfectly
dissolved, or much diminished, are good.

It seemed fit here to reckon up all the properties of a good sweat, that it
may be the better understood, as also that all the differences of bad sweats
may the better be known by being compared with this rule. There are seven
properties required to make a sweat commendable, of which the first is taken
out of Galen 2. of Crit. cha. 1. that the signs of concoction ought to appear
before the eruption of sweat. For concoctions, as says Hipp. 1. Epid. do show
the celerity of the Crisis, and the security of health. But crudities and
inconcoctions turning into evil abscessions signify pains, length of the
disease a crisis, death, or relapses. The second condition is, that good sweats
should break forth upon the critical day; which Hipp. testifies Aph. 56. Sect.
4. sweats if they begin with Fevers are good, and breaking forth upon the 3,
5, 7, 9, 11, 14, 17, 20, 21, 27, 31, and 34. For these sweats make judgment of
the disease, but those that do not come forth at such times signify pain,
length of the disease, and relapses: By the way we must observe upon this
Aphorism that which Galen diligently inquires into in Comment. why the fourth
day was in it omitted, when as it is the first judicatory day. But to this he
answers, that this day was either omitted by Hipp. himself, or by the man that
first transcribed the book. For, says he, if Hipp. did altogether pass it by,
my opinion is, that he did it for this cause, because that very many acute
diseases which are judged by sweating receive a better judgment the third and
fifth then upon the fourth day; for they are rare that are judged upon the
fourth day: and this I have found by experience, who have made diligent search
why Hippocrates omitted the fourth day; Then, says he, this comes to pass
because acute disea^es are moved upon the odd days, and upon the same days
Crisis does usually happen on which the disease is exasperated. And so upon the
third and fifth day the Crisis happens rather then the fourth day, because
those diseases that are moved upon the even days, are more slowly judged. The
third condition is, that good sweats do follow some critical coldness. For when
nature expels out of the urines the thin and acute humors, and thrust them
forth into the outside of the body, the sensible parts by which those humors
pass being by them bitten, she causes a trembling, with refrigeration of the
extreme parts: but if nature be strong enough, the heat breaking forth, an
acute and great Fever follows this trembling and refrigeration, by the heat of
which the humors being attenuated, they are resolved into a copious sweat.
Whence Hipp. Aph. 58. Sect. 4. If a chilness come upon one sick with a burning
Fever, it causes a solution. And so 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 5. speaking of
Cherion, he says, in the seventeenth day a coldness came upon him, an acute
fever, he sweated without the Fever, was judged. The fourth condition of
sweats is, that the sweats should be copious and warm, and proceeding from the
whole body. For then they speak the faculty strong that diffuses warmth over
the whole body, and digests the superfluous humors into sweat, resolving them
through all parts equally; which when it is much weakened, or affected with a
malignant disease, it attempts without success: for sweats are unequally
evacuated, when they come forth more in one place and less in another, or
sometimes not at all: many examples of this kind of sweat Hipp. declares in
Epid. as in Pericles, of whom he says sweat, The fourth day; brake forth over
the whole body warm and in good quantity, without a Fever, he was judged, and
it never returned. And of Nicodemus says he, a sweat flowed out over his whole
body in good quantity and warm, the Fever left him, the Crisis was made. And
of a melancholy woman; About night, much sweatand warm brake out all over the
whole body, she was freed from her Fever, she slept. And of a Larissean
virgin, she shook, and presently she sweat in great quantity, and warm without
a Fever, and judged. The fifth condition is, that the sweat should come by
dropps and with a stream, which Hipp. 1. prog. Cap. 8. declares. That shows
that nature is oppressed with bad humors, and strongly expels them to the
outside of the skin. The sixth and last condition is, that by that sweat the
disease should be taken away, or at least should be diminished. Therefore Hipp.
in Epid. reckoning up the best sorts of sweat, that do wholly take away the
disease, often repeats, free from Fever, or the Fever ceased; or the Crisis
was made without the Fever. As to those in whom the disease was only
diminished, he relates the story of one that lay sick in the garden of Dealces,
of whom he says; The seventeenth day his extreme parts were cold, he was
covered, had an acute Fever, his whole body sweat, he was eased, came better
to his senses yet the Fever departed not; the twentieth day he slept, he came
absolutely to his senses, he sweat, the Fever lest him, and his thirst also
which returned again. Neither was the Crisis perfectly made, till he was taken
with a frequent flegmy looseness, together with much sweat over all the body.

Much sweat appearing in an acute fever, and not diminishing it, is evil.

The quantity. For it shows a multitude of humors which nature is hardly able
to overcome, and that not to be done but in a long time, which cannot be
granted in acute diseases. Therefore there is great danger left nature should
be overcome before she can perfect the concoction. Whence Hipp. Aph. 42. Sect.
4. Much cold or hot sweats flowing always, the cold signifies a more vehement,
the hot a more slack disease. Because, as Galen says, in comment. both
signify an abundance of humors, the cold of cold humors, which is worse; the
hot of hot humors, which is less dangerous, then the former. For these neither
cause a solution nor diminution of the Fever, and proceed when the disease is
raw, and therefore they show a prolongation thereof at least, or pains and
relapses.

Continual sweatings, whether they be moderate, or in great measure in an acute
disease, are evil.

For they signify a weakness of nature, which cannot retain the humors until
they can be prepared by concoction for an expulsion. And therefore they who
continually sweat, though it be moderately, if they espape, yet are they long
sick. But they that sweat very much and often, it is certain they cannot hold out
long. To this may be added, that whatsoever sweats remain for many days, are
symptomatical; for those that are critical are at an end in the space of one
day.

Every little sweat, but especially that which appears about the head and neck,
is evil.

For little sweat, or dewiness always happenss through a very great weakness,
so that the strength of nature is not able to contain the humors that are about
the skin; as you may perceive in a swouning fit, where a small dewy sweat
moistens the head, neck, and breast; as also such a kind of sweat appears often
in dying people, which is vulgarly called diaphoretick. So in Hippocrates 1.
Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 1. Silenus sweat a little about the head, and the eleventh
day dyed: so in the 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 11. a woman which after abortion
was taken with a great Fever, sweat on the fourth day a little cold sweat
about the head, and the seventh day she dyed.

Sweating that as soon as it breaks forth stopps again, is evil.

For it shows that nature endeavors to expel the humor, but is not able to
perform its work.

Little sweating, and an often coming and going of cold, is deadly. 1. Coac.
Aph. 1.

Hippocrates says, that this small sweating with frequent chilness signifies
an Empyema; And certainly the humors contained in the vessels cannot produce
these effects; when as these kind of sweats appear only in the head and
breast, but rather an Empyema being generated, the parts of the breast are
moved by the acrimony of the purulency, whence proceeds that light cold, which
is followed by a small sweat, through the weakness of the natural faculty, by
which the nourishing juice of the body is destroyed.

Cold sweats with an acute Fever signify death; with a milder disease a
prolongation thereof. Aph. 37. Sect. 4.

In putrid fevers, the humors putrify, sometimes in the vessels only,
sometimes in the whole body; whereby noxious humors are contained both in the
substance of the parts, in the skin, and also in the whole habit of the body:
both which happening together, that both the humors do putrify in the vessels,
and that the natural heat is extinguished, or near to an extinction, then the
evacuations of these parts are sensibly cold. But nothing hinders but that the
heat which is caused by putrefaction in the vessels, may be violent to
extremity, and therefore it is a deadly symptom, showing that there are a
multitude of humors abounding in the body of that person, that are so cold that
they can neither be warmed by the natural heat, nor by the heat of the Fever.
Therefore if there happen cold sweats in an acute Fever, they foretell death;
seeing that the multitude of cold and crude humors cannot in so little a time
be concocted, the natural heat being very weak. But if they happen in a more
gentle Fever, they do not foretell death, but a prolongation of the disease,
because the strength is not so much weakened by a mild Fever, and in it time
is protracted, so that nature may be able to concoct that multitude of humors:
this is the doctrine of Galen in comm. on this Aphorisine. Notwithstanding cold
sweats proceed from an extraordinary inflammation, or a simple dissolution of
the natural heat; For when there is any extraordinary inflammation in any of
the internal parts, all the heat of the external parts is drawn inward, so that
the outward parts remain altogether cold. And so it comes to pass, that when
that internal heat causes a great evapouration, those vapors are condensed
upon the skin, and are turned into sweat, and that a cold one also; being
cooled by the coldness of the skin, as is wont to happen in the Fever called
lipyria. Also in dying people the natural heat being very much wasted, it is
forced through the small quantity thereof to retire and collect it self about
the heart and interior parts, whence all the external parts are left cold. But
this heat being shut up, causes still some evapouration which congeals all into
sweat, and that likewise cold, by reason of the mentioned coldness of the
external parts: but which of these two ways soever these kind of sweats do
happen, they are without all question mortal. Many examples of cold sweat are
declared by Hipp. in Epid. which clearly demonstrate the truth of this
prognostic; viz. in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. Philiscus the fifth day sweat
cold, the sixth day died: and Aegr. 2. of the same Sect. Silenus the eighth day
had a cold sweat over his whole body, and the eleventh day died. Also 3. Epid.
Sect. 2. Aegr. 11. a woman which after an abortion was taken with a violent
Fever, the fourth day had a little cold sweat about her head, and died the
seventh day: and Aegr. 12. of the same Sect. A woman that had a cold sweat over
her whole body the seventh day, died the fourteenth.

Stinking sweats in an acute disease are most dangerous.

For they show an extraordinary putrefaction of the humors, which destroys the
natural constitution of the body.

The manner of excretion. If between the intervals of sweating a coldness or
shaking do often come and go, it is very bad.

For that new endeavor of nature shows a great disturbance thereof, which is
not able conveniently to perfect its intended evacuation, but still endeavors
afresh to the great danger both of strength and life; whence Hipp. Aph. 4.
Sect. 7. a shaking after sweat is not good.

Sweat that comes not kindly forth, but appears in the skin like grains of
milet, is an evil sign.

This kind of sweat uses only to appear in the neck and head by swounings, or
other weakenings of the strength, which cannot send forth sweat copiously but
in a little quantity only, which is formed into little balls like grains of
milet.

The time. Sweat that happens not upon the Critical day is evil.

For they are symptomatical, and caused by the force of the disease; for those
sweats that are made by the motion of nature working in due order happen only
upon the critical days. So in Hipp. 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 11. the wife of
Dromeada sweat all over the sixth day, and dyed the same day. And 3. Epid.
Sect. 3. aegr. 3. Pythion sweat much the tenth day, and dyed the same day.

Sweats appearing in the beginning of a disease are evil.

Because in the beginning all things are crude, and nothing can be healthfully
voided, unless it be first well concocted. And therefore this is a general rule
concerning all sorts of evacuations, which can never be healthy in the
beginning of a disease; so Philiscus sweat the first day, the third day about
evening came an acute Fever with sweat; the fixth day he dyed: so the wife of
Dremeada sweat all over the third day, and dyed the sixth. And that phrenetick
person whose history is related in the third Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 4. The first
day he sweat much all over, and second day he sweat, and the fourth day dyed.
By way of ulcer. Whatever abscessions appear after signs of concoction, and
directly from the affected parts, and in a place remote from it, steep, and
capacious, and not exquisitely sensible, and which come quickly to a
suppuration, are healthful; those which happen contrary, are dangerous. The
places most fit to receive abscessions are the thighs, legs, arms, groins,
armholes, and joints; for they are remote from the internal parts, or at least
fit to receive their excrements, and capacious enough, and endued with natural
heat, so that the matter contained in them may easily be concocted, but if they
are in the region of the belly they are dangerous.

What ever abscessions come forth when they are small and come far out, jutting
forth from the external parts, rising up to a sharp head, are good; but
whatever ulcers are big, plain, and without a sharp head, are evil; as also
those that turn inward, as likewise those that break within.

Those are best that communicate nothing to the internal parts, but thrust
themselves outward much, causing little pain, and not changing the color of
the skin. Hipp. 2. progn. chap. 12.

The good or evil quality of abscessions is discerned by a threefold
difference, that is, of the place where they break forth, of the figure which
they retain, and the place into which they break. As to the first; By how much
the more an abscession tends to the external parts, by so much the better it is
as a symptom, because it shows the strength of the expulsive faculty; and as a
cause, for that it less offends the interior parts. As to the figure, those
which are small, says Hippocrates, are best (which is not to be understood
simply of the quantity of the whole abscession, the bigness whereof ought to
answer the quantity of the matter, but of the largeness at the bottom, viz.
that those which have least circumference at the bottom are best) then also
those which come out farthest, and rise to a sharp head; for they signify a
strength of the expulsive faculty: but those that are large at the bottom and
less sharp, for contrary reasons are very bad. As to the breaking of them,
those are the best of all that break outward, for so the abscession is more fit
to be cured, and it is more commodious for the matter to break outward then to
fall down upon the internal members. Lastly, those are the best that
communicate no pain, inflammation, or other evil disposition to the internal
parts, being in themselves also not much painful, and causing little change in
the natural color of the skin, because they show that the parts about the
ulcer are in good temper, so that they help forward the cure thereof.

Every abscession which comes to suppuration, if it send forth commendable
matter is a sign of health, if not, dangerous.

It has been said before, that the best sort of matter ought to be white,
smooth, and equal, and not stinking, and that which has contrary qualities is
evil, for it shows rather a putrefaction of the matter then a true concoction.

If the patient be not eased by the appearance of an ulcer in any part, but
that the same symptoms remain, it is mortal.

For it shows that the ulcer proceeds rather from a settling of the matter in
that part, then a critical expulsion, which always gives ease to the sick
person.

An ulcer appearing at the beginning of a disease, is worst of all.

For no evacuation can be profitable while the disease is crude; but in
abscessions this must be peculiarly observed, that those diseases are for the
most part mortal and pestilent at the beginning whereof they do happen, whence
they do presage very great danger of life.

Ulcers appearing greater or less then they ought to be are evil.

Those that are less can not receive a sufficient portion of the putrid matter,
by which the disease may be either dissolved or diminished, and are therefore
unprofitable. The greater denote too great a quantity of the matter causing the
disease, so that it is to be feared that nature may sink under her burden; as
also lest besides the skin and the muscles, some inward or principal or
necessary part should be overcharged.

Those ulcers that after they have appeared retire back again, are deadly.

For they show that nature is in a languishing condition endeavoring an
evacuation, but not able to perform its work, through an extraordinary
weakness. Only this must be understood, that this retirement must not be
caused by any other evacuation provided by art or nature.

Those which rise to the ears with pain, are pestiferous. 2. Coac. cha. 4.

For all those kind of ulcers called Parotides, by the best of Physicians have
always been suspected, by reason of the narrowness of the place, which is not
capacious enough to receive all the matter; as also by reason of the nearness
of the brain, to which there may be a reflux of the morbifical matter. But if
these ulcers are very painful they are the more dangerous, for they fignifie a
multitude of humors that extend the part, and so cause the pain. But if a flux
of the belly follow the eruption of these ulcers, or that urine be copious, the
patient often recovers; as happened to Clazomenius in 1. Epid. Sect. 2. aegr.
10. who had a swelling with pain near both his ears on the seventeenth day: on
the twenty seventh day those swellings increased more, yet neither stayed, nor
broke: on the thirty first day a flux of the belly took him, voiding much
watery, dysenterical matter; he made thick water, the swellings about his ears
fell, and on the two and fourtieth day he recovered.

Ulcers on the ears appearing with crude urine, are evil.

For they show that nature is not able to suppurate the morbifical matter, and
to disperse it to convenient evacuation.

Ulcers near the ears that happen when the strength is decayed, are deadly.

For then has nature chiefly want of strength to expel the morbifical matter,
and to soften the suppuration of the ulcers, so that if they cannot answer
nature in this, there is no hope of safety.

Those ulcers near the ears which come not to suppuration are evil, unless they
are followed by a copious bleeding at the nose, or a great flux, or that the
patient void thick and concocted urine.

Yet every flux does not dissipate these kind of ulcers, for in a pestilent
Fever being accompanied with these Parotides, it does many times kill the
patient; but it is necessary that the flux of the belly be critical and
laudable, as is manifest from the above mentioned signs concerning looseness.
Hence Hipp. in Coac. If the hypochondrium be long afflicted, and the excrement
of the belly of a bad smell, then ulcers near the ears are mortal.

Ulcers near the ears of a moderate bigness, without pain, the strength of
nature being not wasted, breaking out upon a critical day, the signs of
concoction preceding, are good.

Though these ulcers near the ears are for the most part much suspected, as is
said before, yet sometimes they break out with much advantage, that is, if they
appear with the above mentioned properties, for they show that nature has
vanquished the cause of the disease. So in Clazomenius, of whom we have before
spoken, his urines through the whole course of the disease were thin but well
colored and on the seventeenth day, which is critical, there appeared ulcers
near his ears.

By blisters] Blisters appearing at the beginning of acute diseases over the
whole body, or some parts thereof, are dangerous.

These blisters use to appear for the most part in malignant and pestilent
diseases, being the symptoms of them, and threaten great danger, but most
especially if they break out at the beginning of a disease: for it shows a more
vehement malignity that stirs up nature before any concoction, to the expulsion
of sharp and venomous matter, which is the cause of these pimples. Whence Hipp.
in Coac. In those persons upon whose bodies wheals do break out in Fevers all
over, it is a deadly sign unless a purulent ulcer succeed them: and in another
place, those who have red and round pimples about their joints upon the skin,
and a chilness besides, in such persons redness and blackness arises about the
belly and groins, and they die; which Hipp. confirms in 1 Epid. by the example
of Silenus, upon whose skin on the eighth day there arose little, red, round
pimples like pox, and the eleventh day he died. And although those pox and
pimples which break out in children seem to be of this nature, yet they break
out much to the health of the party affected, if it be caused by a simple
ebullition and motion of nature, separating the pure from the impure. But when
they proceed from a contagious distemper in the air, then are they very
dangerous, making many times great slaughters among children.

Pimples that are very red, or chiefly black; or blew, are pernicious.

Being very red they signify an intense heat in the humor, as appeared in
Silenus; being black or blew they signify an adustion of the humor, and a very
great malignity, so that sometimes they obtain the nature of carbuncles. So in
the small pox and measils, where ever black or blew pimples appear, the party
affected dies.

The first qualities of the body. That heat in Fevers is best which is
temperate, gentle, equal in all parts, with some moisture, and most like the
natural heat, with an equal softness of the whole body. First, That benign heat
is distinguished from the fiery heat by the moisture that accompanies it, for
the other is usually dry. Secondly, by the equal softness of the whole body it
is distinguished from the heat that uses to be in malignant Fevers, which most
commonly deceives the Physicians: for it is mild and gentle, most like the
natural heat, the more intense heat being shut in, and not liberally diffused
abroad. Wherefore to this good heat of the body there ought to be an equal
softness joined, as Hipp. teaches 2. prog. it is best for the whole body to be
equally hot and soft: for an equal softness of the body distinguishes the good
heat from the others that are bad: and so the mild and gentle heat which is
found in a malignant Fever may easily be discerned by the unequal softness of
the body, the hypochondriacal parts being commonly hard and extended. Or at
least that heat will not be equal through the whole body when as the extreme
parts will be found less warm, and above the belly a more intense heat. Thus a
temperate heat equally diffused through the whole body, with an equal softness,
is always a good sign; for it cannot be that a body endued with that heat and
softness can be dangerously ill; for that does certainly demonstrate that the
bowels are without inflammation, obstructions, or notable putrefaction.

An inflamed face with sweat in an acute Fever is evil. 2. Prorrh. text. 33.

For that intense heat signifies an internal inflammation of the brain, the
sweat also shows the said part to be vehemently afflicted, whereas Hipp.
testifies in his Aphorisms, where sweat is there a disease is.

In Fevers a great heat about the belly, and a griping at the mouth of the
stomach is evil. Aph. 65. Sect. 4.

For it shows a great inflammation, or much choler, and that very acrimonious
and boiling in the stomach, or putrefying, which gives a suspicion of an inward
crysipelas.

In acute diseases coldness of the extreme parts is evil. Aph. 1. Sect. 7.

For that refrigeration of the extreme parts is caused in acute diseases,
either by reason of an internal inflammation, whose heat is so vehement, that
it draws all the blood to it like a cupping-glass, so that the bowels of
persons so affected are burnt up, but the extreme parts are cold, because of a
defect of blood which is all retreated to the bowels, which Hipp. confirms
Aph. 48. Sect. 4. In Fevers that intermit not, if the extreme parts be cold,
and the internal parts be burnt up and dried, it is mortal. But those fevers
wherein the extreme parts are hot and the inward parts cold, which are named
Lipyriae, and are caused chiefly through an inflammation of the nervous parts,
as the ventricle, gutts, and are always mortal, and kill the patient in a few
days. Otherwise this refrigeration of the extreme parts is caused through a
dissolution of the natural heat, the relickes of which are very little, bring
chiefly collected in the heart and principal bowels, so that it cannot extend
it self to the exterior parts; and therefore those who are in that manner
cold, are very weak, neither do they receive warmth again, but are approaching
to death; which Hipp. testifies in Prorrhet. As often as the patient finds
himself cold after the cold fit of a Fever, and does not again wax warm, he is
in an evil condition. This is confirmed in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 1. where
Philiscus the fifth day had all his extreme parts cold, which did no more
afterward wax warm, the sixth day he dyed: So aegr. 1. of the same sect.
Silenus the sixth day had all his extreme parts cold and blew, the seventh day
they recovered not warmth again, and the eleventh he dyed. So aegr. 8. of the
same sect. Erasinus the fifth day about noon had all his extreme parts cold and
somewhat blew, and the same day about sunset he dyed. Also. 3. Epid. Sect. 2.
aegr. 11. The woman which after an abortion was taken with a Fever had all her
extreme parts cold from the fourth day to the seventh, in which day she dyed;
yet sometimes that coldness of the extreme parts not lasting, nor often
returning, uses to be good, for it shows that the Crisis is at hand, at which
time the heat is called back to the internal parts to expel the cause of the
disease; as happened to him that lay sick in the garden of Dealces, 3. Epid.
Sect. 1. Aegr. 3. who the seventeenth day had all his extreme parts cold,
afterward an acute Fever, and a sweat over his whole body, and recovered.

Coldness of the nostrills continuing all the time of the disease, in little
children is mortal.

Coldness of the tongue continuing some few days is mortal, as was observed in
three sick persons, in whom no other extraordinary symptoms appeared, but a
certain languishing of the strength.

Those who are often hot and cold by turns, are in danger. 2. Prorrh. text. 32.

For thereby is fignified an abundance of the morbifick cause, and the
malignant quality thereof, against which nature enters the lists in vain,
whence follows a dissolution of the natural heat, and at length death it self.
As. Hipp. notes in 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Aegr. 12. where a woman was troubled with
a shaking cold fit, the seventh day had an acute Fever, about evening her
extreme parts waxed cold, she waxed warm no more, at night she had a shaking
fit again, but yet her extreme parts waxed not warm, the tenth day they
received warmth, on the eleventh they grew cold again, on the fourteenth she
dyed: and so 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Pythion the second day had a refrigeration of
the extreme parts, after some time they waxed warm again, on the third day they
grew a little cold again, the fourth day they grew cold, and after that warm
again. on the eighth day he had a coldness in the morning, at evening he waxed
warm again: on the tenth he was very cold, had an acute Fever, much sweat, and
dyed.

The second, Hardness. The skin of the face and other parts being hard, rough
and squallid, show evil.

For in acute diseases it denotes a great dryness caused by the heat of the
Fever; but in diuturnal Fevers it shows a great consumption of the natural
moisture, as in Hecticks. So 3. Epid. Sect. 3. aegr. 15. in the wife of
Dealces, on the seventeenth day she had a dry stretching of the skin, and the
one and twentieth day, dyed. And aegr. 16. of the same sect. in the young man
of Moelibea, on the tenth day his skin was dry, and stretched out, and the
twenty fourth day he dyed.

An extraordinary softnes of skin in any disease is evil.

For in acute diseases it signifies an extraordinary putrefaction which causes
the parts of the body to flag, as appears in corpse killed with a pestilent
fever. In chronical diseases it shows an abundance of phlegm dispersed over
the whole body, as happens in a leucophlegmatia or dropsy arising from white
phlegm.

An intense redness of the face with sadness is evil. 2. Prorrh.

The color, redness of the face, simply considered is not evil, for it shows
sometimes the near approaching of the Crisis by a flux of blood; as Galen by
this sign foretold of a Roman youth in presence of other Physicians. But then
the signs also of concoction ought to appear; but if while the disease is raw,
the face appear very red, there is much fear of an inflammation, and especially
of the head and brain; for by this sign it is apparent that the blood is
carried up into the head, and there inflames it; which causes sadness to
precede the frenzy, because that blood being burnt up by excessive heat turns
to the nature of choler, as Galen teaches in his comm. in these words; When
therefore the color of the face appears fresh, and the patient is very sad,
there seems to be a certain hot affection in the brain, which burns up the
blood, and for that cause, as is demonstrated, begets black choler.

Intense and as it were erysipelatous redness appearing in the head and feet in
acute diseases, with good signs are good, with evil, bad.

If they appear with good signs, they show that nature is very strong, and
able to expel the noxious humors to the ignoble parts, whence that is to be
esteemed a laudable change which the ease of the patient necessarily follows
but; if they appear with evil signs, and the sick person be no whit alleviated
it is to be thought that the humors are stirred up by access of new forces,
viz. by a multiplication of that phlegmonous quality which oppresses the
entralls.

An extraordinary paleness, chiefly in the face, is evil.

For it shows either a violent withdrawing of the heat to the inner parts, or
an extinction thereof, or want of blood; which is the reason that that color
appears in the carcasses of deceased persons.

A blackness and blewness of the whole body, face, or extreme parts, is evil.

For it is caused through an extinction of the heat in those parts, as Hipp.
teaches. 2 prog. if the body be in such a condition that the nails and fingers
are blew, death is presently to be expected. But that blewness is always
accompanied with a coldness of the extreme parts, as you may see in the
examples of Philiscus, Silenus, and others, for the coldness of the extreme
parts above recited.

Black and blew flesh on a bone diseased is bad. Hipp. Aph. 2. Sect. 7.

By a diseased bone Hippocrates means that which is affected with a wound,
ulcer, or rotenness. Now the flesh grows black and blew in wounds or ulcers,
either through the extinction of the heat, some gangrene or syderation, by
reason of the greatness of inflammation, or through some bruise. And therefore
when the flesh of a corrupt or violated bone looks black and blew not caused by
any bruise or syderation, it is a certain sign of putrefaction, which
extinguishes the natural heat; and therefore that bone is to be cut off, or
otherwise taken away.

To change color often in acute diseases is evil.

We say that bodies do then change their color when from their proper native
color, they turn to pale, white, or yellow, rusty, green, leaden or black. But
this often changing of color shows that nature is very much oppressed, and
that there is a great redundancy of evil humors.

If the jaundise happen to the patient in a Fever before the seventh day, it
is evil; but if on the seventh, or ninth, or eleventh, or fourteenth, it is
good, unless the right hypochondrium grow hard. Aph. 62. and 64. Sect. 4.

These words of Hippocrates are not so superficially to be understood, when as
many have been known to be sick of the jaundise before the seventh day, and yet
have recovered. It is therefore to be understood that by before the seventh day
is meant, before the concoction of the matter causing the disease, which if it
be preceded by the yellow jaundise, is evil, as Hipp. says, because such a
motion is symptomatical; but if the matter causing the disease be concocted and
vanquished before the seventh day, nature then driving it to the skin, which
begets the jaundise, it betokens the health of the patient; which Hipp.
confirms in his fourth book concerning the diet of sick persons. In a choleric
fever, says he, the jaundise coming with a coldness before the seventh day,
dissolves the disease; but if it come unseasonably without that cold, it is
mortal. Yet we must know that Hipp. spoke therefore of the seventh day, as
being the first prefixed time of a good and wholesome jaundise; because it
seldom comes to pass, that the matter of choleric fevers is concocted before
the seventh day, at what time nature expels it to the skin, and causes the
jaundise: whence it appears that the choler is thicker then to be voided by
sweat. Therefore Hipp. in this Aph. speaks of that as most often happens,
though it may sometimes otherwise come to pass. But a jaundise which comes in
the seventh, ninth, eleventh, or fourteenth, being critical days, is good,
because it follows a good concoction, if there be no hardness in the right
hypochondrium. For that hardness discovers an humor in the liver, which
streightens the vessels that serve for the expurgation of the choler, or else
obstructs them, which causes an overflowing of the choleric humor into the
habit of the body. But if there be no swelling in the liver, the jaundise is
made by the expulsion of the choler causing the fever into the habit of the
body. To this sign these that follow are to be added, that in a critical
jaundise, the urines be not so colored as to die the linen cloths that are
dipped therein of a yellow color, neither does there appear any white dregs, as
in a morbous jaundise; as also that thereby the fever is quite dissolved, or
at least much impaired.

The smell. A vehement stink exhaling from the body of the patient is evil.

For it signifies a great corruption of humors, which exhales and sends forth
stinking vapors from all parts.

When in acute diseases the patient smells unwonted sents, there being nothing
that may give any such sent at hand, as the smell of fish, dirt, butter, or
such like; if there be also other evil symptoms, death is near, as Avicen
testifies.

Noise. A rattling or snorting in acute diseases, which the patient does make
both sleeping and waking as he draws breath, is mortal. Rattling or snorting
breath is caused when the sick person is sensible of a kind of ebullition,
boiling, or noise in his throat like to that of snorting. This uses to appear
in all that die of an acute disease, for one or two days before they depart,
especially in such as die of a pleurisy or peripneumony; for it shows that the
expulsive faculty is altogether extinguished, that it is not able to drive the
excrements from the windpipe, and the jaws. Therefore whatever sick person in
the increasing of the disease is subject to such a snorting, he is next
neighbor to death. But sometimes this snorting happens at the beginning of
diseases, viz. of the pleurisy, peripneumony, and rheumatick fever, by reason
of the deflux of humors to the windpipe and lungs: and then it is not
necessarily mortal, because in the progress of the disease, that humor may be
expelled and dissipated, as in those that are troubled with Asthmas, in whom
this snorting is usual without danger of life. And because this snorting or
rattling appearing in the beginning of the diseases is sometimes mortal,
sometimes not, it is to be understood, that that which is least dangerous
decreases as the disease increases, and at length, ends for altogether, the
humor being either expelled by cough, or dissolved by the heat of the fever:
but that which is mortal continues obstinately, and increases by little and
little; which shows that nature is oppressed by the multitude of humors, and
cannot expel them, but the patient must be suffocated by them.

Where the meat descends into the stomach with a noise as if it were cast into
a well, it is an evil sign.

For it shows that the fibers of the Oesophagus are resolved that they cannot
contain the descending nourishment, and as it were hand it to the stomach, as
is done in the natural swallowing of the meat.

A murmuring noise in the hypochondrium, breaking forth chiefly with dung,
urine, and wind, dissolves the pains and swellings in the hypochondriums, if
they be new and without phlegm. And if it do not come forth, yet it helps much,
if it fall down to the lower parts. 2. prog.

Tumors of the Hypochondriums which are often joined with acute diseases, if
they be new and without a phlegmone (a phlegmone is discovered by the heat and
beating of the part) then are they produced by wind. They show some contumacy
if they have a firm and fixed pain: but it is a very great sign of health, when
the patient breaks and voids wind upward or downward, in belching, his stool,
with or without dejection of excrement, and with his urine. When windcoms forth
with urine it is known by the froth swimming at the top thereof; although the
wind do not break forth, yet if it fall downward with a noise, it is a good
sign, and indeed it is the beginning of health, because the heat of the
members begins to dissipate the wind, and the members are not so extended but
are constrained to expel the wind, which is the first beginning of the victory.

Proper accidents. In the face. A cadaverous face is deadly, yet that least
which comes to be so through great watchings and looseness. And such a kind of
corruption arising for those causes comes to an end in one day. 2. Coac. c. 5.

This face which Hipp. calls cadaverous, as it is like that which appears in
dead carcasses and those persons who ly at the point of death, is vulgarly
called Hippocrates face, because it is so exactly and as it were with a pencil
by him described 2 Coac. and 1 prog. in these words. His countenance was of
this nature, his eyes hollow, his nose sharp, his temples fallen, his ears cold
and contracted, the skin of his forehead hard, stretched, and dried, the color
thereof pale or black, blew or leaden; all which things proceed from most
pernicious causes: for the parts of the face are either truly lean, the
substance thereof being consumed; or else it has a seeming leanness, caused by
a withdrawing of the spirits and blood. For they give a lively and fresh color
to every part, and a moderate moisture, which falls away when these are
withdrawn; then also there is an external cold, that presses down the several
parts, causing a greater extenuation. The heat which is most intense and
malignant causes a consumption of the flesh. But the withdrawing the spirits
and blood from the several parts is caused by the great weakness of the natural
heat, that it cannot recruit it self again; or by reason of the great fire
within, which draws the blood and spirits to it like a cupping-glass. And
therefore all those great causes of extenuation which appear in the face, are
very bad, and those particles which Hipp. has reckoned up are most capable of
extenuation. For the eyes are very fat and full of spirits, which causes them
to swell and hang out; if therefore that fat be consumed, and the spirits be
exhausted, the eyes fall down, leaving the places which they did possess for
the most part empty, which makes the eyes hollow. In the nose the end or point
only somewhat thick, for the other parts are bones, gristles, and skin without
flesh. In the tip thereof only are certain thin and fleshy fibers produced
from the muscles that move the cheeks; and therefore in that part of the nose
does chiefly appear the extenuation caused by the disease; the hollowness of
the temples are full of very moist muscles, which is the cause that greyness
begins usually at the temples, which moisture is quickly diminished by the
above mentioned causes. The cars are not without reason cooled though the
weakness or retreat of the natural heat, both because they are extreme parts
and remote from the fountain of heat, and also because they are without flesh,
being only composed of gristle and skin; the tips of them also are contracted,
and the skin of the forehead stretched dry and hard, by reason of the drought
caused by consumption of the moist parts; as skins which being dried are
contracted and shriveled up together. The pale color, black or blew, proceeds
from the withdrawing or exolution of natural heat and spirits, whence these
refrigerated parts receive that color. In the last place take notice, that
this death resembling face that shows it self by the abovementioned signs, is
most pernicious if it be produced by the internal causes before described; for
if it pro ceed from procatarctical causes it is less dangerous, as Hipp. notes
in this theorem, where he reckons only watching and looseness of the belly; but
we may add to that other procatarctical causes, as the effect of nourishment,
sadness, and fears. And it may be easily discerned whether it depend on these
outward causes, for then the symptom lasts but one day, and presently the
patient returns to his former state.

In the eyes. You must well consider how the eye is affected when the patient
sleeps; for if there do appear any thing white under the eyelids being half
shut, if it proceed neither from physic, nor any looseness of the belly, it is an
evil sign, and very mortal. Aph. 52. Sect. 6.

When the sick person sleeps with his eyes half shut, so that you may perceive
underneath a certain whiteness, it shows a very great weakness of the animal
faculty; for if the eyes, the closing of which is the easiest work of the
faculty, be shut in sleeping, it sign fies a very great impoverishment of the
animal spirits. Therefore it is a deadly sign, if such a resolution be
produced by the strength of the disease; but if it proceed from any evacuation,
either natural or procured by art, or any outward cause, by reason that that
may be repaired again, this half shutting of the eyes is not so dangerous.
Hipp. also adds another caution in 1. prog. That is, if the sick person were
not wont to sleep in that manner; for it is usual with some to sleep with their
eyes half open. This symptom is of great use in acute diseases of the head,
whether with or without a fever, because the eyes are next the brain, and as
it were joined to them, and so consequently most certainly declare the
affections thereof: but in other diseases they denounce not danger so surely.
For children that are troubled with the worms do frequently sleep with their
eyes open, and are easily recovered. This affection proceeds not always from
an impairing of the strength, but sometimes from a convulsion of the muscles
moving the eyes, as Galen teaches in his Comm. on this Aphorism.

If in an acute disease one eye grows less then the other, it is mortal. Hipp.
1. progn.

For it is caused by a weakness of the faculty governing the eye, which now
begins to desert its office; but it would be much worse to see both the eyes
extenuated, by reason of the weakness of the same faculty. But this extenuation
begins to appear in one of the eyes, for seldom it is that both eyes are in
the same condition. For so a consumption that is about to afflict the whole
body uses to begin to take its rise from one or two members, and thence to
creep to the rest, and thence to the rest, as they are more or less prone to
receive it. Yet you must observe whether this extenuation proceed from any
particular disease in the eye, and not from a weakness of the faculty, then it
speaks no danger at all.

If in acute diseases the white of the eye appear red, it is evil. Hipp. 1. progn.

For it shows either blood or choler translated to the brain, whence an
inflammation and frenzy the product thereof is to be expected, which threaten
much danger to life. For the tunicle that constitutes the white of the eye
arising from the membranes of the brain, the inflammation of them is easily
communicated to the tunicle.

If in an acute disease the veins of the eyes appear black or blew, it is a
mortal sign. 1. prog.

For either it signifies that adust and atrabilary humors abound in the brain,
or else an extinction of the natural heat, which has caused the blood to lose
its native color, and to acquire concretion.

If the eyes are perverted in an acute disease, it is evil. 1. prog.

The eyes are said to be perverted when they move out of order and decorum,
that is, either more upward then they ought, or more downward, or more to one
side then the other; as also if one move upward and the other downward, or if
one be drawn to one corner, and the other to the other. Which distortions of
the eyes are caused by the convulsions of the muscles that move the eyes, as
comes to pass in a fit of the epilepsie, though there they are not dangerous.

But convulsions happening in acute diseases are very pernicious; eyes dark,
muddy, galled, and not shining, are evil.

For the cause of these evils comes from a defect and extinction of the animal
spirits, which are clear, and cause a shining in the eyes; also from an
extraordinary dryness of the tunicles that compose the eye, but more especially
of the corneous tunicle, as Galen teaches 1. of the cause of symptoms. and 10.
of the use of the parts.

In the eyebrows, nostrils, and lips. If the eyebrow be distorted, or black
and blew, or pale, or the lips or nose, with any other bad symptoms, know,
death is at hand. For it is a mortal sign when the lips hang loose, and are
cold and white. Hipp. 1 prog.

Of the same opinion is Hipp. Aph. 49. Sect. 4. in these words. In a Fever
that intermitts not, if the lip or eyelid or eyebrow, or the nose be distorted,
and the sick person do neither see nor hear, the body being already weak, death
is near. For all this is caused by the convulsion of the muscles moving these
parts, which in acute diseases are mortal, as has been shown. Now the eyebrows
become pale, or black and blew, through an extinction of the natural moisture.
The hanging and looseness, coldness, whiteness of the lips do also show a
weakness of the moving faculty, and an extinction of the natural heat.

The nostrils dilated more then ordinary in an acute disease portend danger.

For they signify a great weakness of the animal faculty, which not being able
to dilate the breast sufficiently, to temper the extraordinary heat, endeavors
to compensate that defect by widening the nostrils to let the air in more
freely.

In the teeth. To make a noise and great with the teeth in fevers where it
has not been a custom from their youth, portends frenzy and death. 2. prog.

This very rule Hipp. repeats in 2. prorrhet. in these words; to make a noise
with the teeth is pernicious, where it was not used in time of health. But
Galen in 2. prog. To make a noise with the teeth, says he, where it has not
been before a custom, is a sign of future madness; but if the patient at the
same time be mad, and make a noise with his teeth, believe him not to be far
from death.

This noise of the teeth is caused by the convulsions of the muscles moving the
jaw bones, or a weakness of the moving faculty; which soever it is, in acute
diseases it signifies a great distemper of the brain, to which it is very likely
that madness will succeed, when as madness is nothing but a distemper of that
faculty which is predominant in the brain, which increasing, death must follow
of necessties. But madness uses to succeed that noise of the teeth that makes
a great sound, sooner then that which causes but alittle sound. For that may be
through a weakness that may bring death without madness: but the other is by
convulsions, which proceed from malignant vapors, such as arise from black
choler invading the brain and nervous parts.

Those who in fevers have a sliminess and blackness about their teeth are in
danger.

For it shows abundance of crude and thick humors, and a mighty heat of the
fever which dryes and burns up those crude and thick humors.

In the tongue. A black tongue with dryness, roughness, clefts, and burning, is
mortal.

For all these proceed from a very hot and burning fever, through the force of
which the tongue grows very dry, and receiving those adust vapors that rise
from the heat of the bowels, it becomes like a chimney all sooted with
blackness. From aless heat proceeds dryness and roughness, but from a more
vehement proceed the clefts, as when the earth parched by the heat of summer,
revolts into chinks and divisions. The tongue burnt and scorched at first,
shows an inflammation of some one of the bowels, which is perceived by the
pain, hardness, swelling, and heat of the Hypochondriums.

A trembling tongue in acute diseases is mortal.

For it signifies aweakness of the animal faculty, and a high distemper of the
brain, and therefore in mad people about to die the tongue is seen to tremble in
this manner. Which Galen makes very apparent in 1. Prorrhet. text. 19. in these
words. Therefore a trembling in the tongue happens from a weakness in the
animal faculty proceeding from a dry distemper. The dryness of the muscles
thereof, jointly affected with the head, succeeded by convulsions, as the voice
trembles through the weakness contracted from the imbecility of these parts.
But all these foresaid symptoms which proceed from a more intense dryness of
the head, portend a disturbance of the mind.

In the jaws. When the jaws are exulcerated with a Fever, it is an evil sign;
and if there happen any other of these symptoms which we have said to be evil,
then conclude the person is in danger. Hipp. 2. prog.

The jaws are wont to be exulcerated, either by a sharp distillation flowing
from the head, or when the whole body is full of ill humors, in a burning and
pestilent fever; Whereby it happens to most of those who ly sick of the pox or
leprosy, that their jaws are exulcerated. But in acute diseases, of which we
now only discourse, for the most part the seat of the evil is in the breast or
Hypochondriums. Now the jaws lying in the way that leads from the lungs and
from the stomach, they receive all the vapors that ascend from those places,
which if they be sharp, they exulcerate them. And therefore in those kind of
fevers, these places ought to be observed as much as the tongue; for it shows
the vehemence of the fever in the same manner: for as in a burning Fever the
tongue becomes dry, and divided into many clefts, if it be vehement; so
likewise ulcers in the jaws are caused if the Physician in the heat of the
Fever be not the more diligent in the use of those things that allay thirst.
Now if the Physician omit not those helps, and the jaws become ulcerated, it is
a sign of more violent heat. And therefore well said Hip. that it was evil, yet
not so evil as to be a symptom of death without other signs For it may be
that by reason of some distillation accompanying the Fever, that the jaws may
be exulcerated, which is not so evil, as that death may be presaged from this
only sign: but if the exulceration of the jaws proceed from any great
distemper of the inferior parts, it is very dangerous; but then also there must
of necessity be many other evil signs joined with it. And therefore you must
observe the other signs, and if any of them be evil, you may then foretell
death. Valesius gives a great commendation of this symptom; I, says he, can
testify, that this sign is to be valued, and that I have seen many in whom
the fever has seemed slack, yet have they dyed with this distemper. That
which is worst is when it brings a loathing, so that they can take nothing
down, detesting the very drink it self, though they be almost parched up: in
this distemper I have conceived that all the internal parts from the throat to
the very stomach have been exulcerated. Thus far Valesius. But we have a
thousand times seen those exulcerations and inflammations of the jaws in those
pestilent fevers that were so popular some few years ago, and infected
chiefly the kings camp. They appeared for the most part at the beginning of the
disease, so that they were vulgarly accounted the pathognomical symptom of
that disease. Whence it is to be conjectured, that they are generated by an
evil and malignant humor.

In the Hypochondriums. Those Hypochondriums are best that are without pain,
soft and equal, both on the right and left side. 1. prog.

By the Hypochondriums are meant all that region which is between the midrif
and the navel, in which the liver, stomach, and spleen are contained. The
handling of this part is not to be despised by the Physician in diseases, for
it makes much for prognostication. And indeed the Physician should every day
diligently feel the Hypochondriums, in imitation of Hippocrates, who was wont
to use it much, in 1. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 8. where he says, that Silenus the
third day had a distension of the Hypochondriums, by which he intimates that he
had felt it the former days. And therefore the Physicians ought to be very
diligent daily to know the state of the Hypochondriums, there being the seat of
the natural faculty, viz. of the natural bowels, where all the power of life
and death is seated, and in which as in a Theater all the duels of nature and
the disease are fought, which ought to be accurately observed by the Physician.
Therefore in acute diseases, for the Hypochondriums to be in a good condition,
affords no contemptible hopes of a good event; for it is impossible that any of
those parts should be distempered, and the Hypochondriums be soft and without
pain. Then ought there to be an equality both on the right and left side, which
equality ought to be in all the accidents, as heat, softness, and bulk; for
such are the Hypochondriums that appear in healthy men.

A burning Hypochondrium, or painful, or extended, or having the right parts
unequally affected with the left, is a sign of no gentle disease. Hipp. 2.
Coac. and 1. prog.

A burning Hypochondrium, and abounding with much heat, is caused by the
multitude of hot humors putrefying in that place. Pain and distension are
produced from the same causes filling the parts, and producing an evil
distemper in them; or else dryness is introduced by the overmuch heat which
causes the distension. They are said to be unequally affected on either side,
when they are here hotter, there colder, here harder, there softer, here
smoother, there rougher, here more, there less distended, here painful, there
without pain; all which things show that some of those parts and inflamed, and
ill affected, which happens often in acute fevers.

The Hypochondriums to be drawn upward, there being no signs of an approaching
Crisis by bleeding, is evil, the critical bleeding being nigh.

It happens sometimes that the Hypocnoudriums are drawn upwards by the flowing
up of the humors, by the force of the liver contracting it self, and shaking
them off, which happens notwithstanding without pain, and endures but a small
while, there being other signs of a future bleeding; But if this revulsion of
the Hypochondriums stay long without any signs of future bleeding, it is
mortal; for it is caused by an inflammation, or exsiccation proceeding from the
feverish heat of the midrif or the membrane that covers the ribs, which parts
being contracted and shriveld up draw with it the peritoneum and the
Hypochondria, which are to knit to them. The certain symptom of this accident
is a shrill voice, which before was big; for the change proceeds from the
contraction of the Diaphragma; whence Hipp. in Coac. They who have a shrill
voice have their Hypochondriums drawn and shriveld upward.

A hard and painful swelling in the Hypochondrium is very bad, if it be all
over the Hypochondrium; but if it be in one part, it is less dangerous, being
in the left. Hipp. 1. prog.

A hard and painful swelling proceeding from an inflammation portends very
great danger, if it possess the whole Hypochondrium; if the right side only,
less; if the left, least of all: the reason of this is evident; fort is most
pernicious to have all the bowels inflamed at once in an acute disease. Now the
liver being placed in the right part; in the left, the spleen; it is most certain
that this vehement affection is less dangerous in the spleen then in the liver,
which is the more noble bowel.

Aswelling in the legs appearing about evening, and dissipated in the morning,
with good signs is good, with evil signs evil.

This swelling of the legs happens often in those that are recovering; But if
the signs of recovery appear not, but other evil signs, it threatens a
dropsy, or some other evil disposition of the liver: for it has sometimes
appeared when there has been an ulcer in the liver.

CHAP. III. Of the manner how a disease will end, whether by Crisis, or by a
leasurable dissolution.
ALL diseases come to an end either by Crisis, or by a leasurely dissolution.

Those are ended by Crisis that are reckoned among the chronical diseases, or
which have no magnitude.

The signs that distinguish a great and acute disease or a chronical and small
one, are the same, and denote whether the disease will end by Crisis, or by
leasurely dissolution; which were hand led in the discourse of symptoms, and
to be fetched thence.

CHAP. IV. Of the time when the disease will end, wherein the day and hour of
the Crisis is foretold.
THe time of the Crisis is known chiefly two ways, by the acuteness of the
disease, and the signs of concoction, which shall be made plain in the
following theorems.

The difference of acute diseases. Diseases simply acute use to be judged upon
the fourteenth day; peracute ones upon the seventh day; and those that are most
peracute on the fourth day.

These differences of acute diseases we shall know by the vehemence and
quickness of the symptoms: for if presently on the first day the symptoms
increase, gaining strength and violence, the disease will be most or extremely
peracute, and will be judged the fourth day. But if they gain strength and
violence the first quaternary, and not presently on the first day, that will be
a peracute disease, and will be judged the seventh day. But if the vehemence of
the symptom appear upon the second quaternary, and in the beginning of it, the
Crisis will be expected the fourteenth day. If after the seventh day the
violence begin to rage, judgment will be made on the twentieth or twenty one.

Here it is to be noted, that those Crises do not seldom prevent the days of
judgment, or retard them, according to the fluidness or obstinacy of the
matter, and are perfected on judicatory days, which also are somewhat
judicatory: and thus may these be known; when the vehemence of the disease
either begins either a little too soon or too late; as for example, when the
violence begins in the beginning of the second quaternary, that is on the fifth
day, the Crisis will be looked for on the fourteenth. But if it begin on the
sixth or seventh, expect the Crisis upon the seventeenth day. But there is
required in this a very diligent exercise perfected by the use of art.

If signs of concoction appear in the first day of the disease, the disease
will be judged the fourth day; if on the fourth, then the Crisis will come upon
the seventh. If on the seventh, judgment will be made on the eleventh: If on
the eleventh, the day of Crisis will be the fourteenth; and so of the other
days, computing the quaternaries or septenaries according to the nature of the
disease.

The signs of concoctions are to be seen in another place; of which the chief
in fevers is the sediment of the urine. Note here that in observing the signs
of concoction you must take along with you the vehemence of the symptoms, that
you may thence make a certain prognostication.

But the approach of the Crisis is easily known from the perturbation that
precedes it; for when the combat between nature and the disease begins, then
the symptoms are chiefly exasperated. Which Hipp. intimates Aph 13. Sect. 2.
where the Crisis is made, the night before the access of it is troublesome.

Lastly, the hour of the Crisis may hence be artificially presaged; suppose
that every Crisis is made in the height and vigor of the disease, when
therefore we know when the disease is at the height, we may easily perceive the
hour of the Crisis. Again, if the disease use to have any fits or
exasperations, we first note the hour of their coming, and the time of their
stay, and at what hour the vigor and height of that fit prevails most; for it
being certain that the Crisis comes in the heat and vigor of the disease, and
exasperation thereof, those being diligently found out, not only the day, but
the very hour of the approaching Crisis may be foretold.

CHAP. V. Of the place where the Crisis will appear; and first of the signs of
the Crisis approaching by vomit.
EVery critical evacuation is made by vomit, by flux of the belly, by sweat, by
urine, bleeding, in months, hemorrhoids, or abscessions, the signs of which
being fetched from the mentioned heads shall be declared in the following
theorems; beginning with vomiting.

Actions and visions. Dark apparitions presented to the eyes foretell an
approaching vomit.

For they show that the matter causing the disease is heaped up in the stomach,
which sends up vapors in great plenty to the head, that causes those dark
visions.

A sharp and pricking pain in the head foretells vomiting.

For that pain being excited by the foresaid vapors, they with their acrimony
bite the filmes of the brain.

A griping at the mouth of the stomach foreshews vomiting.

Motion. For it is caused by the foresaid vapors pricking those parts.

A stifness and coldness of the Hypochondriums fortels a speedy vomiting.

For it is caused by the said vapors gnawing those parts.

A trembling of the lower lip shows approaching vomit.

For it is caused by a sympathy of the inner tunicle of the stomach with the
mouth and palate.

Frequent spitting shows immediate vomiting.

Excrements. For they proceed from the sympathy of the mentioned tunicle, and
the compression of the stomach, which sets it self in that manner to its work.

A Corollary.
Note that most commonly after critical vomiting there follows a looseness,
which puts an end to the disease, and scowres away the relics thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the signs of the Crisis by looseness.
THe Crisis which is made by looseness has not very plain and manifest signs,
yet may it be known partly by the signs which shall be set down, and partly
also by the want of those signs which usually show other Crises. For the
knowledge whereof observe these following theorems.

Those who are troubled with frequent belching, followed by much wind coming
from the belly with a great noise and a kind of swelling thereof, must expect a
sudden looseness.

For all these show a translation of the matter that causes the disease into
the guts.

Pain of the loins with other signs joined to it, foretell a sudden looseness.

For when the noxious humor is carried through the mesaraical veins into the
intestines, it communicates a pain to the loins by the continuity of the
mesenterium that draws its original from the ligaments that knit together the
joints of the loins.

Those whose Hypochondriums being lifted up have a murmuring sound with a pain
in the loins, will have a looseness, unless statulencies break forth with a
great quantity of urine: but this is only in fevers. Aph. 73. Sect. 4.

When the region of the Hypochondriums swells and makes a noise, it is a sign
that the humor and wind does abound in that place: to which if a pain in the
loins succeed, that humor and wind creeps downward; which causes a looseness,
or at least an cruption of wind from the seat, unless that humor be voided by
urine.

A Corollary.
Note that a better conjecture may be made, if the belly were open all the time
of the disease, or appeared more loose on the indicative day then at any other
time.

CHAP. VII. Of the signs of an approaching Crisis by sweat.
ACute diseases are more frequently judged by sweat then by any other
evacuation. And therefore we shall be more exact in searching out the signs of
sweat, of which the following table will afford an easy knowledge, being noted
with the letter M.

The signs that show the approaching Crisis by sweat, are taken either from the
Essence. Causes which are either Efficient External The air. Internal Humors.
Material The body of the patient.

Effects, which are either Actions Animal Coldness. Vital Pulse. Natural
Suppression of urine.
Excrements. Change of the qualities.



From the observation of the series of this table we shall propound these
theorems following.

The essence. Most acute diseases are judged most commonly by sweat.

For that proceeds from a choleric humor, hot and thin, easily expelled
through the habit of the body.

The efficient causes, the air. In a hot and moist constitution of the air
diseases are terminated most commonly by sweat.

For by a hot and moist temper of the air the pores and passages of the body
are loosened and opened, and the humors are renderd more fluid; so that they
are more easily purged forth by sweat.

The humors. Whatever diseases are produced from a hot and thin humor, are
judged by sweat.

So choleric fevers are judged for the most part by sweat, because the
thinness and heat of the humor is more easily expelled by nature by that way of
evacuation.

The material cause; the body of patient. Whoever in their sickness have a soft
and loose skin, have their diseases more easily judged by sweating.

Effects; the animal actions. Coldness. Whether that looseness and softness of
the skin proceed from the natural disposition of the body, or the constitution
of the air, they avail much to perfect the Crisis by sweating.

A coldness or shaking in continual Fevers show that the Crisis will be
performed by sweat.

For those humors being thin when they are carried by the veins to the habit,
with their sharpness they bite the membranous parts of the body, and so cause a
shaking.

Vital. Pulse. Asoft and fluctuating pulse in fevers, foretells sweat to be
near at hand.

For when the more thin parts of the urine endeavor a passage through the
body, they moisten and soften the arteries, which causes a moist and
fluctuating pulse, which is the forerunner of sweat.

Natural. Suppression of urine. Suppression of urine in fevers shows the
Crisis near at hand by sweat.

For when the matter of sweat and urine are the same, viz. the serous humor,
while they are carried to the habit of the body, it follows consequently that
the urine must be suppressed, or be much lessened in quantity.

The excrements. If a hot vapor be perceived to arise from the body of the
sick patient, or a slight kind of dew, it shows the approach of the Crisis by
sweat.

If contrary to custom, the external parts of the body of the sick person grow
hot, or the face grow red, it shows the Crisis is approaching by sweat.

These two last signs show that nature endeavors a passage to the habit of
the body, by which she may expel the noxious and preternatural humors.

CHAP. VIII. Of the signs of future Crisis by Urine.
THe signs of future Crisis by urine are very few, yet they may be known
partly by some particular and positive signs, partly by the absence of others;
For if the signs do appear which do demonstrate in general the approach of the
Crisis, and that there be no symptoms of vomit, flux, bleeding, or sweat, then
may you conjecture that it will come to pass by urine.

But those signs which do particularly demonstrate the coming thereof are set
down in this order; which are notwithstanding to be collected together, that we
may thence have some certainty to make a judgment.

They are these.

A cold constitution.

Old age.

Thickness of the skin.

Frequent pissing, or a greater quantity of urine appearing upon the
symptomatical day.

A heat or itching in the extreme parts of the privities.

A heaviness in the Hypochondrium.

The three first signs concern the impediments which are in the external parts
of the body, which hinder the serous humor from purging forth by sweat.

But when the same matter which flows out by sweat, may also be easily purged
out by urine, there being a stoppage in the passages for sweat, we may
conjecture that the excretion will be by urine. The three last signs show that
the humors do descend to the passages of the urine.

CHAP. IX. Of the signs of future Crisis by bleeding.
THe following rules foreshew the approach of bleeding.

The Essence. Inflammation of the hypocondriums are for the most part allayed
by bleeding.

And in this manner of solution does all the hope of safety consist, which if
it happen not, death may be presaged.

The assisting causes. Bleeding uses more frequently to happen until the twenty
fifth year, then after that time, in a sanguine or choleric constitution, in
the spring season, and at the time of southern winds.

The Effects. From the effects, which are taken either from the impairing of
the actions, or the excrements, or the change of qualities, proceed these
signs of future bleeding.

Dreams and images of red things.

A frequent pain of the head and neck.

Heaviness in the temples, and a great pulse in their arteries.

Tingling or sounding in the ears.

Dimness of the eyes, and a kind of lightning before them.

Redness of them and almost of all the face.

An aversion to the light.

Involuntary tears.

Itching of the nose.

A drop of blood upon the symptomatical day.

Difficulty of breathing.

A stretching of the Hypochondriums without pain.

When the blood begins to be carried up to the head, it begets phantasms or
appearances of red things, both by dreams, and in awaking: As happened to a
Roman youth of whom Galen makes mention. For he laboring with an acute
disease, thought that he saw a red Serpent running about the roof of his
chamber, which caused him suddenly to leap out of his bed; from whence Galen
foretold bleeding, and forbid the letting blood, which other Physicians had
prescribed. Pain in the head and neck proceeds from the same translation of the
blood to the upper parts, which by griping and distending the membranes begets
pain; the arteries beat through the extraordinary motion of the temples, being
oppressed and straightened by the fullness of the veins. Tingling of the ears is
caused by the ascending of the vapors in great plenty to the head. Dimness of
the sight proceeds from certain thick and copious vapors which arising to the
upper parts stop the passages, whence it comes to pass that they shuting out
the animal spirits, the sight is dulled. That kind of lightning which hovereth
before the eyes is nothing else but certain little thin and ragged bodies of
several colors contained between the chrystalline and carneous Tunicle,
produced from the vapors carried upward, which though they are within, yet
deceive the sight as if they were without, when as the eye used to external
objects, judges that to be without which is within. A redness of the face and
eyes is caused by the blood gathered in more abundance to those parts. The
aversion from light proceeds from this, that the eyes being already distended
with plenty of humors, are more distended by the light; because light scatters
the spirits, which causes a dilatation of the eye, and thence pain, which that
the sick person may avoid, he shuns the light. Involuntary tears are caused by
a repletion of the eyes and parts adjacent, which being distended beyond
measure, press the kernels containing the humors, which causes tears. Itching
of the nose is caused by the ascent of the vapors, which tickle the nose. A
drop of blood appearing on a symptomatical day, as the fourth or seventh, shows
that the bleeding will be on the day of the Crisis, that is on the seventh or
fourteenth, because nature begins to drive the humor to those parts upon those
days. Difficulty of breathing is caused by the blood, which when it is carried
to the upper parts causes a compression of the diaphragma. The tension of the
hypochondriums is caused by reason that the blood begins to stir in its
fountain, and in the roots of the veins; but that distention continues not, and
is without pain; so is difficulty of breathing: for should they continue
obstinately and long, they would rather portend an inflammation of the Liver.

CHAP. X. Of the signs of future Crisis by the months and hemorrhoids.
AFuture flux of the months and Hemorrhoids is known by the same signs; yet
here lies the difference, for if they appear in a woman wont to have monthly
purgations, the flux comes through the womb. But if in a man accustomed to the
Hemorrhoids, then we may imagine that the Crisis will be by the Hemorrhoids. But
the signs common to either evacuation are these.

A pain and heaviness in the loins, and heat thereof.

A pain and distention in the hypogastrion.

A distemper at the mouth of the stomach.

When the blood descends to the lower parts, filling and stretching vena cava,
it causes a pain, heaviness, and heat in them; because the vena cava descending
rests upon the loins, from which place very great branches thereof are carried
to the hypogastrium, which cause a pain and stretching in those parts. Whence
also proceeds a disturbance at the mouth of the stomach, because of the great
sympathy and agreement of the parts above the loins and hypogastrium with the
stomach.

CHAP. XI. Of the signs of an ulcer.
THe following aphorisms do briefly declare when an ulcer will break out in
any disease.

Such as are detained with long Fevers, have long swellings, and pains do
arise in their joints. Aph. 44. Sect. 4.

Those fevers are said to be long, which last above forty days; and are
caused by a thick, cold and contumacious matter; and therefore because that
matter cannot easily be evacuated by excretory cause, nature often expels it to
the weaker parts, and there begets an ulcer.

Those who void crude and thin urine for a long time, if other symptoms
promise life, an abscession is to be expected in the parts below the midrif.
Hipp. 2. prog.

It has been said before that the signs of crudity remaining for a long time,
if the strength be impaired, portend death, because it is to be feared that the
patient cannot hold out till the matter be concocted. But if the strength of
the body is in a good condition, and other signs do promise a recovery, it is
to be hoped that the patient may be cured, not by a perfect solution, but by
permutation or abscession.

When the urine stops with a coldness, in such as are very sleepy it is a
hopeful sign of ulcers near the ears. Hipp. Coac.

For that sleepiness shows a great oppression of the brain, at which time
coldness coming on produces either an ulcer or a great convulsion.

Those who are sick of a Fever, having a weariness and faintness upon them,
may expect an ulcer in their joints, or about their jaws.

For a voluntary faintness in fevers proceeds from an abundance of thick and
crude humors, and those fevers are most difficultly judged, and their
judication is commonly by the breaking forth of an ulcer.

If on the patients recovery any part be distempered, it is a sign that some
ulcer will break out there.

Not only the pain which afflicts any part at the declining of the disease,
but also all the symptoms that show a weakness in the part, are signs of an
ulcer thereabout.

Note from Hipp. Aph. 74. Sect. 4. that while the signs of an approaching ulcer
appear, if the urine be copious, thick, and white, it takes away all fear of an
abscession, and that more certainly and speedily, if there happen a bleeding
together with this kind of urine.

CHAP. XII. Of the signs of those things which will happen to one already
sick, or falling into a disease; and first of the signs of approaching madness.
MAny things usually fall out in diseases besides the Crisis, as vehement
symptoms, the changing of one disease into another; all which things if they
can be foreseen by the Physician, gain him a very honorable esteem, and are of
a special utility to the patient. Therefore we shall endeavor to lay down
their symptoms, according to the foresaid method, beginning from the signs of
approaching madness, which are known by these rules.

Animal actions. Principal. Forgetfulness presently happening in acute diseases
foretells a frenzy.

For it shows that the brain is affected, and that the matter causing the
discase is hurried up thither from the lower parts.

Less principal. Sleep and waking. Troubled and tumultuous sleeps foretell
deliration.

This Hipp. taught in Coac. in these words. Turbulent and furious wakings out
of sleep bring madness. For they show the brain to be very much affected, and
unsettled from its natural condition.

Continual watching brings madness. Hipp. 2. prog.

For both of these affections are produced from the same cause, viz. from a hot
and dry distemper of the brain; as Galen teaches in 4 of presage by pulse. A
more remiss distemper causes watchfulness, and a more intense one madness.

The hearing. A thingling and sound in the ears, or deafness, often precedes
madness, especially if it appear with urine that has matter lifted up and
hanging in it. Hipp. 1. prorrhet.

For these things do show that the noxious matter is carried up to the brain,
which excites madness.

The sense of smelling too exquisite denounces madness.

For it shows an unwonted dryness of the brain, and an attenuation of the
spirits, which disposes the brain to madness. Feeling vehement and continual
pain of the head in acute fevers portends madness, especially when it is
observed most in the ears, or which is joined with revulsions of the midrif;
for it signifies that the humors are copiously carried up to the brain, and do
vehemently distemper it.

Pain of the side, which with choleric spittle vanishes away without any
manifest cause, is a sign of madness.

For it shows a translation of the choleric humor from the side to the brain.

Pains in the legs hasten madness, and that as well at other times, as
especially if there is a bad enaeorema in the urine. Hipp. in Coac.

There is so great a sympathy of the legs with the principal parts, that as in
a rupture of the heel, there do happen peracute trembling, sobbing fevers
which last but little, hot and mortal; so in the pain of the legs, which is
caused by a malignant humor, there is a fever stirred up in the heart, and
madness in the brain, the pestilent humors easily invading the brain. Now
although these pains not only of the legs but also of the thighs, back, and
other ignoble parts do portend madness, yet they perform it more certainly, if
soon after appearance they withdraw again, for they signify a translation of
the morbifick matter to the brain, as you may see in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 3.
Aegr. 5. where Calvus on a sudden had a pain in his right thigh, and no
remedies prevailed; The first day he had a burning and acute fever, and the
pain increased; the third day the pain ceased, and a madness with much tumbling
and tossing ensued: the fourth day about noon be dyed in a venement fit.

Vital affections. A vehement and unfrequent drawing of the breath shows
madness.

A vehement and rare drawing of breath is proper to mad people. Hipp. 1. prog.
24. For they having need of respiration by reason of the heat of the fever,
and forgetting to breath through the violence of the madness, it comes to pass
that they seldom breath, and the frequency thereof is made up by the magnitude
of breathing: this is the opinion of Galen in his book of the difficulty of
breathing, chap. 3. where he shows that a respiration of this sort is proper to
mad people: and chap. 10. of the same book, he says that Philiscus and Silenus
had no other causes of such respiration but madness: of Philiscus and Silenus
speaks Hipp. in Epid. Sect. 1. Hist. 12. both of them at the first were
troubled with a rare and vehement breathing, which was succeeded by a manifest
madness in the progress of the disease.

Excrements. White and clear urines in acute diseases are manifest signs of
madness.

For they signify that the choler that wont to be poured out with the urine,
and to give a color to it, is transferred to the brain.

Qualities changed. If in an acute disease the white of the eye appear red, it
portends a phreasie.

For it signifies that the membranes of the brain are inflamed, which
inflammation is easily communicated to the adnate tunicle, which proceeds from
them.

Proper accidents. If there be a pulse in the Hypochondrium, it signifies
disturbance, or madness; but in this case observe the eye of the patient, for
if there be a frequent motion of looking, raving is to be expected. When an
artery beats strongly in such a place where it wonts not to be perceived, it
shows a hot distemper, and that there is much hot wind carried through the
arteries, which when it assaults the brain, it causes madness; for those things
that pass through the arteries find an easy way of dispatch through to the
brain, through the jugular veins and the carotides, which are admitted into the
very ventricle thereof. But when deliration is joined with madness, there is in
the mind a disturbance, and much variety of imaginations, which causes the
patient to move his eyes variously, as it were looking after those things which
he has framed in his fancy.

CHAP. XIII. Of the signs of approaching convulsions.
EFFects. Principal actions. When causeless fear and sadness ensues after cold,
a convulsion is not far off. Hipp. in Coac.

Fear and sadness are caused by a contraction and retreating of the spirits to
their fountain, being oppressed with an abundance of melancholic humor, which
makes them to be joined with cold, and so that humor affecting the brain stirs
up convulsions, unless the matter be evacuated by Hemorrhoids, varicles, or
flowing of the months.

Very fierce ravings end in convulsions. Hipp. in Coac.

Less principal actions. For they are caused by a hot and dry distemper of the
brain, which affects the roots of the nerves, bringing a convulsion that
proceeds from dryness along with it.

Sleep and waking. When upon a coldness a nocturnal fit succeeds, causing want
of sleep, joined with fatuity, if sometimes urine break forth in time of
sleeping, a convulsion ensues. Hipp. in Coac.

All these symptoms signify a running up of the matter to the brain, which
threatens a convulsion.

An extraordinary and lasting pain of the head, the belly being bound,
threatens a convulsion.

For it shows that the matter causing the disease is fixed in the head, which
being carried to the beginning of the nerves causes a convulsion.

Feeling. Deep and heavy pains in the arms and neck portend a convulsion.

For they proceed from an oppression of the hinder parts of the brain, and a
diffusion of the humor into the marrow of the backbone, or the membranes
thereof, through the abundance of the matter, or malign quality thereof, which
extends it self to the arms through the back, because that nature cannot
dissolve or concoct the morbifick matter.

Excrements. Urine. A suppression of the urine with coldness is evil; for it
brings a convulsion, as well at other times, as also if a heavy sleep do
precede. Hipp. in Coac.

A convulsion easily ensues those symptomatical coldnesses with a suppression
of urine, because they show a running up of the humors to the brain, and
original of the nerves; and that so much the more if the patient be at the same
time sleepy, which is a most evident sign of an affected brain.

Urine which flows from the patient in sleep not according to custom,
threatens a convulsion.

For it shows that the muscle shutting up the neck of the bladder is grown
weak, the motion whereof proceeds from the nerve, whose first original is out
of order; unless that part be affected with some peculiar disease.

CHAP. XIV. Of the signs of a future relapse.
A Future relapse in persons recovering is manifested by the following rules.

The essence. Malignant and evil disposed diseases do not seldom relapse.

For they do very much weaken nature so that it scarcely can procure it self a
perfect freedom from the morbifick cause, but that there must remain some
relics of the disease which will produce a relapse.

Diseases by how much the longer they endure, by so much the more they are
liable to a relapse; and by how much the more acute they are, by so much the
less they return.

Continual diseases proceed from a more thick and cold matter, which is the
more difficultly concocted and evacuated. But acute diseases proceed from a
more thin matter, which is more easily prepared and evacuated.

When the fever slackens upon a day which is not critical, it will return.

For as the critical days have a great influence upon the disease as to the
curing thereof, because then nature does commodiously expel the morbifick
humors; so those dissolutions which do happen on a not critical day, are
always treacherous, because they agree not with the laws of nature orderly
performing her work.

The internal causes. Diseases that arise from black choler, with various,
mixed, slimy, thick and stubborn humors, are wont to relapse.

For it shows that the humors are rebellious, and cannot be perfectly
vanquished by nature, which causes relapses.

Diseases which arise from blood, sweet phlegm, or pale choler, or other humors
which have no malignant quality, and are simple, and which neither oppress the
patient with their quantity, nor are thick or slimy, do not threaten any
relapse.

Because that nature easily frees it self from the trouble of these humors,
which are not at all stubborn.

External. Those diseases that happen in the spring, winter, or at the
beginning of the summer, seldom relapse; but those diseases which come in
Autumn are most liable to relapse.

For in the winter and spring the native heat is most potent, and does most
emcaciously dissolve the noxious humors; but in Autumn is more weak and
languid, by reason of the faintness induced by the heat of the foregoing
summer, and therefore it is the more difficult wholly to expel the morbifick
cause.

The subject. Those persons who have a good constitution of body, and are once
recovered of a disease, never suffer relapse; but persons of a bad constitution
often fall into it.

For in those the strength of the parts easily dissolves the morbifick cause;
but in these weak nature does imperfectly expel the humor.

Helpful and hurtful. Those that cannot regain perfect health, being helped but
by few things, and hurt by many, are in danger of a relapse.

For this signifies that the relics of the morbifick cause do lurk in the
body, whence proceed relapses.

Effects. If the actions, excrements, and qualities of persons recovering
differ much from the natural constitution, and return not to their former
condition, a relapse is to be feated; in those whose fevers cease without the
signs of concoction, a recidivation is to be feared. Hipp. 2. prog.

The noxious humors cannot be conveniently expelled unless they be first
concocted; and therefore although the fever cease, if the signs of crudity
appear, they show that the morbifick matter is still retained within, and will
cause a relapse.

If after the Crisis is made the patient for a long time void thin water, and
very little colored, it is a sign of a relapse.

For it shows a weakness of nature, which does not perfect its concoction duly
and in order, whence arise new and fresh excrements by which we may expect a
relapse.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF Physical Institutions, WHICH IS THE HYGIASTICK PART OR
TREATISE OF THE CONSERVATION OF HEALTH.
The Proem.
THe end of Physic is twofold, viz. the conservation of health which is
already enjoyed, and recovery of that which is lost.

In the Hygiastick part is handled the former, the latter in the Therapeutical.

That which contains the conservation of present health consists in the
administration of six things not natural.

Those are Air, meat and drink, motion and rest, sleeping and waking,
excretions and retentions, and the passions of the mind.

They are called not natural, as being between natural and preternatural. For
those things are properly and absolutely natural which are ingredients to the
constitution of a living body, and are treated of in Physiology: but these are
said to be not natural, because the right and true use of them preserves the
health, and then they are referred to natural causes; but the preposterous and
unlawful use of them produces diseases, and then they are preternatural, and
the causes of almost all diseases, as is declared in Pathology. But there are
some of them that are contained in the rank of things truly natural, as motion
of the body, passions of the mind, as the functions do proceed from their
faculties; but being considered as the use of them affects the body, they are
called not natural.

They are also said to be necessary, because we cannot want nor be without
their efficacy, but they do continually and necessarily affect our bodies.

It may be objected, that there are many other things that do alter our bodies,
which for this cause are to be numbered among those things which are not
natural, as the heaven, water, fire, earth, and the country, or place of
abode; and therefore their number must be multiplied. I answer, That the
heaven, fire, earth, and country, are reduced to air, because they act not on
us but by the mediation of air; water may be referred to drink, if it be
assumed, but if it be applied as in a bath, and lotions, we deny it to be a
necessary, for that we may easily want it, and therefore it is to be rased out
of the catalogue of things not natural.

Therefore all this book shall treat wholly of the explication of the six
things not natural, wherein shall be shown how to make use of them for the
conservation of health, and to defend the body as long as may be against the
assaults of diseases: we will begin with meat and drink, because they are of
most consequence, and therein are most things do offer themselves to
consideration.

CHAP. I. Of meat, drink, or of the matter of our nourishment.
NOurishment is that which being changed by the natural heat, may be converted
into the substance of our bodies, and nourish it.

It differs from a medicine, in this, that a medicine is defined by Galen 1.
simpl. to be a thing that cannot alter the substance of our body, nor as such
be changed into it.

Yet there is a certain medium between these two, partaking of both natures,
which may both nourish and alter, and it is called a medicinal nourishment.

But there are several sorts of nourishments, which are taken out of several
things, all which things notwithstanding are contained under the several sorts
of plants and animals.

All sublunary things which are used in Physic are comprehended under a
threefold head, as plants, animals, and minerals. Now every mixed thing endued
with a nourishing faculty, must of necessity have had life; whereby minerals
are excluded out of the number of things that nourish.

In the use of them are to be considered the substance, quantity, quality,
order, time, and hour of taking them; the preparation, custom delectation, age,
and time of the year. Of which we shall treat severally, and as a consequence
relate the qualities and faculties of those meats and sawces which are chief
and most in use: and at length discourse the use and substance of things
potable.

CHAP. II. Of the substance of aliments.
BY the substance of the nourishments we understand the form and matter whereof
they are composed.

Under the word form we comprehend that propriety of the whole substance by
which the nourishment is made fit to be converted into the substance of our
bodies. Whence it is vulgarly said that the meat does nourish us by reason of
the likeness of substance it has with our bodies.

Hence meats are said to be of good or evil juice, much or little nourishing,
according to the analogy which they hold with the substance of our bodies, or
according to their purity, or mixed composure of the heterogeneous parts.

To the matter hardness softness, thinness, thickness, heaviness, lightness,
crassity, tenuity, clamminess, and friability, are related; which although they
be contained in the rank of second qualities, yet because they are inherent to
the matter, and are therefore called material qualities (as proceeding from the
various mixture of moisture with dryness) they are referred to substance, or
mood of substance.

Therefore as to the substance, those are said to be good and wholesome
nourishments which beget good and wholesome juice, and few excrements, and
which are of a midling substance, as being neither over hard, thick, or close,
nor oversoft, thin, or fine. Of which sort is bread made of the purest flour of
wheat, new, well baked, and leavened; mutton, kids flesh, veal, capons, hens,
pullets, chickens, partridges, and other mountain birds; and other things which
shall be more copiously reckoned up hereafter.

Meats of evil juice, hard to be concocted, of bad nourishment, and begetting
many excrements, are those which have a hard, thick, heavy, close substance, as
bread of bran, beef, goats, stags flesh, pulse, old cheese, and the like.

But these good or evil nourishments are not to be esteemed generally wholesome
or unwholesome to all men, but according to their various nature, way of life,
and exercise; those are more convenient for some, these for others: so those
who have a stronger heat, such nourishments of hard digestion, as ox-flesh,
stags, hares, smoked meats, and the like, are more easily concocted. And on the
contrary, meats of an easy digestion, as lamb, veal, soft eggs, fresh fish,
and the like, are by them most difficultly concocted, as being rather corrupted
and scorched up by the strong heat of their stomachs; for as they are easily
altered, so they are easily vitiated and corrupted. But the other which are
commonly thought to be hardly concocted, as they are difficultly altered, so
they are scarcely reduced to a worse condition.

We have the examples of this in those things which are concocted outwardly,
viz. honey, which is naturally most sweet, but if it boil beyond a fit time, it
contracts a bitterness. On the contrary, beef and pork being long boiled are
more savoury. Honey also is noxious to young men, because it is scorched up by
the heat of the stomach, and turned into choler. But it is wholesome for aged
men. because it receives a fit concoction by the moderate heat of the stomach.
For the same reason contrymen, labouring-men, porters, mariners, and others
exercised at hard labourious trades are not so kindly nourished with kids
flesh, veal, pullets, pigeons, and soft eggs; not only because the stronger
heat of their stomachs so soon consumes and dissipates those aliments, but
because it does also over-concoct and corrupt them. On the contrary, they are
more conveniently nourished with pulse, coleworts, cheese, beef, and such like.

CHAP. III. Of the quantity of aliments.
THe quantity of aliments ought to be very moderate, only as much as may
suffice for the nourishment of the body, and refreshing the strength thereof.
So that if the true limits be far exceeded, it produces various diseases, and
shortens life.

But as the multitude of meats begets many diseases, so a sparing diet, which
is vulgarly called soberness and frugality, serves to prevent and cure many
diseases, and makes life long.

The chief order of diet consists in the moderate quantity thereof. For
although the aliments should be a little faulty in the substance, quality, and
other conditions thereof, yet if they be taken in a small quantity and well
concocted, they nourish well. And therefore in the first place, we must take
notice of the quantity, which most commonly is received in the excess. This is
hence apparent that most diseases are cured by blood letting, purging, and
other evacuations, by which the superfluous multitude of humors is to be taken
away, which proceeds from an abundance of meat assumed. Hence soberness and
sparing diet is called the parent of health and long life. Whence Hipp. 1.
Epid. Sect. 4. Aph. 10. He that studies his health must not over fill himself
with meat, nor be idle and lazy: and again, Aph. 17. Sect. 1. where a man eats
more meat then is sufficient for nature, he brings himself to diseases. Plato
discovers an intemperate City by this sign that it maintains many Physicians.
Hence proceeds the Proverb, Intemperance is the nurse of Physicians: As also
that other, gluttony kills more then the sword. But Galen says thus, Our
ancestors were less troubled with diseases because they lived more frugally.
And Seneca says, that the luxury and gluttony of his age called Hippocrates
liar, who affirmed that eunuchs and women were not troubled with pains of the
gout. Aristotle in his Problems says that it is most wholesome to diminish the
quantity of meat, and to increase labor. Diogenes the Cynick was wont to say,
that it was a foolish thing to beg that from the Gods which is in our power;
while we pray to God for health, and presently fall to glutting our selves with
meat and drink. To all these we may add the authority of holy Scripture, in
Ecclesiastes, Be not greedy in thy banquets, and give not thy self over to
meat; for in much meat there is sickness, and greediness will turn to choler.
Many have died through fullness, but he that is temperate lengthens his life.

This also may be made evident by clear examples. S. Paul the first hermit, as
S. Ierom records in his life, lived to a hundred and fifteen years, of which he
lived one hundred in the wilderness, for the first forty years eating nothing
but dates, and drinking water; for the rest of his time, after the dates failed
him, upon half a loaf which a crow brought him every day.

S. Anthony, as Athanasius testifies, lived a hundred and five years, of which
ninety he spent in the desert, receiving no other sustenance but only bread
and water, with which in his old age he now and then eat some herbs. Arsenius
the tutor to Arcadius the Emperor, lived a hundred and twenty years, fifty
five of which he spent in the desert, with a wonderful temperance and
abstinency. In our age Ludovicus Carnarus, a noble Venetian, having been very
unhealthy to the thirty fifth year of his age, though he used many medicines,
in vain striving with many diseases at length by the advice of a certain
Physician he began to oppose his diseases by diet, diminishing by little and
little the quantity of his meat and drink till he came to fourteen ounces of
meat, and bread, or the like, and sixteen ounces of drink in a day; to which
order of diet accustoming himself, he by this temperance prolonged his life,
being free from diseases, and vigorous to above one hundred years. As himself
testifies in a book of the profit of a sober life, written by him in the
Italian tongue, and translated after both into Latin and French. From which we
gather, that sparing diet does not only extraordinarily avail to keep and
preserve health in a good condition, but also to expel durable and pertinacious
humors. For after the natural heat has concocted that small quantity of
nourishment, then it works upon the superfluous humors, digesting and
dissipating them, causing them insensibly to exhale through the passages of the
body, which renders the body pure and free from morbifical causes. Now while a
man persists in this course of diet, the body is made free from diseases, at
least in respect of internal causes. Which if it be endangered by external
causes, the harm is less considerable, because the body being free from
superfluities is better able to make resistance. And therefore we see in great
alterations of seasons, viz. when from a southern, hot and moist constitution
of the air, a swift and sudden alteration is made into the north, being cold
and dry, that many are troubled with Catarrhs, Pleurisies, or peripneumonies,
in whose bodies was hoorded up much matter for diseases; but others are not
troubled whose bodies are void of superfluous humors. And if sometimes such
persons through the vehemence of external causes be hurried to any disease,
they recover so much the sooner, by reason that the internal cause moved by the
external is of no great force, which is therefore the more easily vanquished
and resolved.

Furthermore, if this exact diet do not altogether take away the disease, yet
it very much impairs the vehemence, thereof and makes it more tolerable, so
that the patient may live long enough to struggle with the disease. And thus
daily experience informs us many live long with an ulcer in their lungs, with a
scirrhus in their liver or spleen, with the stone in their reins or bladder;
which Aristotle testifies in his Problems, saying, that there was a certain
Philosopher in his time, by name Herodicus, who was in a consumption, yet by
well dieting himself lived to a hundred years.

It is commonly objected, that many live to a very great age that are very
liberal in their diet. To this we answer, that those are very few, and endued
with an extraordinary strength and good temper of body, who if they should live
soberly would produce their lives to a much longer age, and be better disposed
to the actions of the mind. For of necessity those that live intemperately must
abound with ill humors, and be often assailed with diseases, nor can long
intend the high and difficult functions of the mind without manifest impairing
of their health. For in those persons the strength of nature and the spirits is
wholly enslaved to the concoction of the nourishment, from which if it be
violently drawn by the studious labors of the mind, the concoction cannot be
good; whence follow many diseases and crudities, because they require much
exercise, or physic to purge the body; and so though they seem to live long in
their body, yet their minds and ingenuities seem already interred, being
unable to hold out long in the performance of those noble functions, the
greatest part of their time being to be spent in drudging for the body. Add to
this, that though it may happen that such as are endued with a strong nature
may live long with such profuse diet, yet we find no examples that weaker
constitutions using the same diet, would ever live to old age. But on the
contrary, if they live temperately they may live longer then such as indulge
themselves to intemperancy, though of stronger nature.

But this moderate and necessary quantity of meat cannot be prescribed by any
general rule, the diversity of times, ages, and tempers, causing much
alteration in that particular.

In this theorem is shown that the example of Ludovicus Cornarus above
mentioned is not to be followed by all men, for there are many men whose
natural heat is strong and vigorous, which would be much damnifyed by such a
sparing diet. For Hipp. writes in 1. book Aph. 5. that a diet too strict and
sparing is more dangerous then that which exceeds a little; for it is an easier
thing to have remedies against the plenty of humors, then to repair the natural
moisture, and the wasting of the solid parts by aliments. A threefold order of
diet is instituted by Hipp. and Galen; sparing, which diminishes the strength;
moderate, which preserves it; and full, which increases it. Sparing diet is not
convenient for healthful people, but only for the sick. For as meat is health
to the healthy; so it is a disease to diseased persons: and by how much the
more you nourish unsound bodies, by so much the more you hurt them. In healthy
people the strength of nature is to be preserved or increased with nourishment,
not to be broken; which cannot be in sick persons, because a moderate diet
preserving the health in healthy people, diminishes it in those that are sick,
by increasing the disease; because by how much the more you feed it, by so much
the more you hurt the body of the patient. And therefore so exact a diet as was
observed by Cornarus is not convenient for all men, but only to such as are
sickly, and whose natural heat is weak, and not able to concoct much meat, and
also to such whose bodies are full of humors, for hunger dries up the body; as
also lastly to those that use little exercise, leading a sedentary life, being
addicted to contemplation, and the tough labors of the mind. Yet there are
certain rules which may be set down, by which every man may prescribe to
himself a certain and convenient diet at all times.

The first theorem is, That a man in health must never eat to satisfy, but
rise from the table while his appetite is still quick.

This rule answers to the before cited Aph. of Hipp. do not clog your self with
meat. For in healthy persons the appetite will be lively till the stomach be
very much filled; which repletion is very hurtful, as we have said before.

The second Theorem is, If you ordinarily take so much meat, til you find a
kind of drowsiness, heaviness, and weariness, when as you were before nimble
and cheerful, it is a sign you have exceeded your accustomed measure, and that
you must diminish the quantity of your meat till you find no more of those
inconveniences.

The third Theorem is, If after meals you be unfit for the actions of the mind,
as study, meditation or contemplation, and other functions of the mind and
body, then it is apparent you have exceeded your due proportion.

The fourth theorem is taken from Hipp. 3. Of diet, where he proposes the
signs of repletion, which proceeds from too great a quantity of meat eaten,
and is therefore to be diminished; nay if it do so much exceed, that it
threaten a disease, seeing that sparing diet does consume the superflous humors
but very gently, the fullness must be taken away by evacuations.

The signs of repletion propounded by Hipp. are here to be briefly set down,
being reduced into order according to the method of our semeiotical discourse,
that they may be the better understood. They are these; pain and heaviness in
the head, long and troubled sleeps, troublesome dreams, when a man imagins
himself to be fighting, sleep in the daytime, chiefly after meals, laziness of
the whole body, weariness, and pain either in the whole, or in any part
thereof, want or decrease of appetite, crudities in the stomach, sour or
inodorous belches, and hard binding of the belly, or more then was wont to be,
frequent distillations, the nose stopped after supper, yet with little or no
excrement proceeding thence, in the morning much excrement at the nose, and
much spitting, uncustomary abundance of wind, looseness of the body proceeding
sometimes from the meat corrupted, sometimes from a dysentery.

The fifth theorem is, That you must not immediately change from a full course
of diet to an exact and sparing one, but you must do it by degrees, physically
diminishing it by moderate with drawing from the wonted quantity, until you
come to such a proportion, as does no more offend, neither the body, nor the
functions of the mind.

This theorem is confirmed by Hipp. in the 51. Aph. 2. To evacuate or fill much
and suddenly, to cool, heat, or any other way to move the body is dangerous.
For every excess is an enemy to nature, but that which is done by degrees is
safe, as at other times, so when you pass from one thing to another.

To the discrete quantity belongs the variety of meats, which is very
prejudical to health. For the nature of several meats being various, it follows
that some are sooner some more slowly digested, which causes an evil
concoction; For if the meats more easily concocted are after perfect concoction
detained in the stomach, they presently corrupt; but if as soon as they are
concocted, they are thrust down to the intestines, they carry along with them
the other meats not fully concocted, which is the cause of many crudities.

This theorem is to be understood of several sorts of meat much differing in
their nature and temper. For it is no inconvenience to eat at the same meal
chickens, partridge, pullets, and other such kind of delicates; but if you
present to the stomach an olio of flesh, fish, herbs, fruit, and such kind of
heterogeneous diet, there follows thence an evil concoction. Hipp. lib. de
flat. Things unlike move disturbance, for some are sooner, others slower,
others hard to be concocted. Seneca says elegantly, several sorts of meat
defile, but nourish not.

CHAP. IV. Of the quality of meats.
MEats in relation to their quality are either temperate or intemperate.

Those are said to be temperate where no manifest quality is predominant, and
they are convenient for all sorts of persons, especially for men well tempered.
Of this kind are bread and flesh, which are euchymous or of good juice. And
these are simply called aliments.

Intemperate are those which alter the body by some manifest quality, and are
called Physical aliments.

But those Physical aliments alter our bodies by heating, loosing, moistening,
drying, obstructing, opening, loosing or binding the belly, increasing milk or
seed.

Those which manifestly heat are wine, pepper, and other spices, onions,
garlic, looks, watercresses, hyssop, mint, parsley, and all salt things, the
same also dry. These things which cool are barley or rye bread, vinegar,
lettice, pursland, sorrel, gourds, cucumers, melons, and summer-fruits, all
which do of themselves, moisten, except vinegar. The thick nourishments above
rehearsed do obstruct, and therest of the same nature; which are therefore to
be avoided by all men, because most disease; proceed from obstruction. Those
things which open obstructions are the aforesaid spices, smallage, parsley,
capers, asparagus, the wild parship, sea-fennel, red vetches, and many other
things; those things which increase seed and milk are to be taken out of the
Physical compositions and simples; for there will be found among them many more
things endued with the same faculties besides those already related only for
example sake.

CHAP. V. Of the order of Aliments.
IF you rightly observe the last Theorem propounded in the second chapter, that
is, to shun variety of differing meats at the same meal as hurtful; there will
be no need of this chapter: but because the intemperance of men will not sulmit
to such strict laws of diet, we are forced to set down precepts how to diminish
the harm that comes thereby.

Therefore the common and general rule concerning the order of diet is, that
thin, liquid, easily to be concocted, loosening meats, and which easily
descend, should be first taken; and those which are more thick and solid, of
difficult concoction and binding, last.

This rule is taken from Galen in l. 2. de Alim. facult. c. 2. and 3. of the
manner of diet in acute diseases. And it is also much confirmed by reason. For
those which are quickly concocted, as moist and liquid things, more easily pass
from the stomach, and if they be retained after concoction they putrify. Also
after they are concocted, and thrust down to the gut called Duodenum, they give
place to those things which are not yet concocted, to fall down to the bottom
of the stomach, where they may be better concocted. But although this doctrine
be very much received, yet some have endeavored to prove the contrary, because
that the meats solid and of hard digestion want a greater heat which is at the
bottom of the stomach, being more fleshy, and therefore being put first in they
will be concocted in the same space of time as those which are of more easy
concoction, lying at the top of the stomach where there is less heat. But there
is not so much difference in the heat of the lower and upper part of the
stomach, that in one meats of easy, in the other meats of hard digestion
should be in the same time concocted. It is rather to be affirmed, that the
nourishment does not keep the same seat in the stomach all the time of the
concoction as it had when it descended, but by concoction it is mixed together,
it being the property of heat to congegate things of like nature. And
experience tells us, that an uniform chyle in all parts alike is begot out of
the whole nourishment. Add also to this, that the drink which is powered down at
several times at dinner and supper, is exactly mixed with the meat, and the
like is also to be said of broths and other such like liquid meats. Therefore
this rule as to the ordering of diet is of no great value. But it is much
better not to indulge to this variety of meat, when one sort of meat, or
several of the same nature, are orderly concocted together; there being no
danger of crudities, if they be used and eaten moderately. But this is to be
affirmed, that moist and loosening meats being first taken, do loosen the
tunicles of the stomach, and soften the belly, but things that are astringent
do streighten them, if they be taken in the first place.

At the beginning of the meal, some broth, or morsel of flesh, or some other
nourishment actually hot is to be taken; but let a man never drink first.

To this rule is repugnant the common verse of the Salern school.

If danger thou wilt avoid, and no pain feel,

Be sure to take a cup before thy meal.

But this is not to be understood of water and wine, for otherwise it were
wholly to be rejected; but of liquid nourishment: in which sense also Hipp.
uses the word drink. Aph. 11.2. Sect. where he says, it is easier to be filled
with drink then meat. By drink he there means liquid nourishment which is to be
drank, such as is given to people in fevers, which in another place he calls
moist diet; for they are more easily concocted, and dissipated, and
consequently fill the body sooner. But the ordinary drink composed of water and
wine being drank first, is carried raw to the veins, especially being fasting,
and strikes the nerves; and most of all if you drink wine. For to drink water
before meals, especially where people have hot stomachs, and in the summer
time, is not inconvenient, for that water is quickly drank up by the dry liver,
whence it receives a cool refreshing.

Neither does the custom of the ancients alleged by some impugn this rule at
all, which is reported by Atheneus book 4 Deipnosoph. that formerly there were
set before the guests twenty silver cups, which being emptied, the bread and
meat was presently brought in. He in the quoted place, describing the frugality
of Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians, says, that there was given but one cup
to the guests before supper. With the Latins also this custom was observed,
as Pliny says l. 12. c. 22. that in Tiberius Claudius his reign, above forty
years before, it was an institution to drink fasting; and that the wine was
usually brought in before the meat: but it was a pernicious custom, and to be
condemned, as being used no where but in profuse and intemperate banquetings,
nor admitted into the company of sober men; which Pliny intimates, saying, that
this custom was introduced by external and forregin arts, and prescriptions of
Physicians that would commend themselves by bringing in novelties. It is
disapproved by Plutarch l. 8. sympos. quest. 9. where he reckons these
carowsings before meat among the causes of diseases. The ancients, says he,
drank not so much as water before meat; now before they eat, full of wine, with
a moistened and hot stomach they fall to their meat. It is most wholesome to
take solid meats before drink, till thirst be stirred up, and those actually
hot, lest they offend the heat of the stomach; and that they may be as it were
a firm foundation for the rest of the meat.

But to conclude, the meat with drink is not inconvenient.

It is a thing of no great moment whether you eat or drink last; but this is to
be noted, that you must not drink too great a quantity, for it makes a
fluctuation in the stomach; but if after the conclusion of the meal, you find
any kind of thirst, it will not be a miss to drink. Celsus is of opinion, that
it is good to drink a draught of cold water after meals; which is not contrary
to reason, seeing that it lightly binds up the orifice of the stomach by its
coldness, and gathers the heat close together by antiperistasis, binding the
ascent of vapors; for experience teaches that the rank steam of some meats, as
of onions, garlike, old cheese, and the like, is kept from the head by a
draught of cold water after meals.

CHAP. VI. Of the time and hour of eating.
THe time and hour of eating depends altogether upon custom; for if one have
accustomed himself to eat twice or thrice in a day, and at certain hours, and
finds himself well with it, he may continue so doing till he find any occasion
to alter his mind.

There can be no certain rule set down concerning the hour and time of eating,
but first you must take it from custom, which has such an influence upon
nature, that at the hour of eating the hungry stomach will be an exact
remembrancer to healthy persons. But after that hour their appetite will grow
faint, and their hunger leave them.

But the hour of dinner and supper coming, it is necessary that the appetite
should be very quick, to show that the meat last eaten be thoroughly concocted.
For otherwise it will be necessary to omit that hour, and to eat nothing or
very little.

The intent of this rule, that you do not eat again until the meat already in
the stomach be very well concocted, and fallen down to the guts; for then the
appetite is reinforced, and concoction is afterward very well made. But if you
eat again before the former meat be thoroughly concocted, the concoction is
spoiled, and it is the cause of many crudities. But this only concerns those
who on some extraordinary occasion, as at some banquet, have eaten too largely;
but then it would be very necessary to abstain from the next meal, or to be
content with one draught of drink, and a very small portion of meat. For if it
should happen that in the ordinary custom of eating, the appetite should be
lively at the accustomed hour, and that there were other signs of inconcoction
of the former meal, it is to be suspected that too great a quantity of meat was
taken, which ought to be diminished.

But there being a certain time of eating to be fixed to the greater number of
men, we judge that it is most convenient to eat twice a day. For more frequent
eating begets crudity. And a longer abstinence weakens the body, and draws down
humors to the stomach, which may cause many bad affections.

The greatest part of men are contented with a dinner and a supper, many
notwithstanding add a breakfast, and others a bever also; which is most used by
children and old men; by children, because as Hipp. teaches, they have much
natural heat, and consequently have need of much nourishment: by aged men,
because having but a weak heat, they ought to eat but little at a time for the
easier concoction, that the body may be sufficiently nourished. But long
fasting is naught, especially for such as are troubled with bitter choler,
because the stomach being empty is filled with choleric humors, which cause
pains of the heart, bilious colicks, and other diseases. But in other men, an
empty stomach, not having matter to concoct, draws what it finds from the
adjoining places, and so fills it self with ill humors, whence proceed many
diseases: and therefore after much fasting it is better to take away somewhat
every meal from the quantity of meat, then to use long fasting.

A supper in some persons that are healthy, and in the flower of their youth,
ought either to be equal, or larger then the dinner; but in all others more
sparing.

There is no question in the whole art of physic more controverted, then
whether supper ought to be larger then dinner, or the contrary; which ushers in
another difficult question, whether concoction be soonest perfected in the day
or the night, asleep, or waking: for they do both muster up their arguments
with equal force.

And that the supper ought to be the larger is proved out of Hipp. 3. of diet,
where he teaches to eat but once a day in the winter, unless you have a very
dry belly. If that cannot be done, he bids us eat but a small dinner, whence it is
easily gathered, by that one meal which Hipp. prescribes in the winter, he
means a supper.

Celsus following Hipp. In the winter, says he, men ought to eat but once in a
day, unless the belly be very much bound. And after that he adds; If a man
dine, some small matter were most convenient, and that dry, without flesh or
drink.

Galen 7. Meth. c. 6. expressly says, that supper ought to be greater then the
dinner, and gives this reason, that after supper comes rest and sleep, and
longer time, double to that which is between dinner and supper. From these
words of Galen a threefold reason may be gathered.

First, in rest the body is not moved, nor tossed up and down, so that the meat
may lie aptly in the stomach, not fluctuating nor stirred from place to place;
which helps concoction, because concoction requires rest.

Secondly, in sleep, the animal spirits keeping holiday, the vital and natural
become more strong and lively, which much helps forward the concoction.

Thirdly, the time being double between dinner and supper, the nourishment also
ought to be double.

Fourthly, to these reasons Galen adds the example of the wrestlers, who eat
much flesh at supper, but at dinner only bread. To Galens the following
reasons may be added.

Fifthly, the coldness of the night promotes concoction. For this like the
winter renders the stomach and belly more strong, driving the heat inward,
whereby to perfect the concoction.

Sixthly, it is proved that in sleep the heat runs to the center, by the
authority of Hipp. 1. Epid. Sect. 4. who says, that a man waking is hotter
about the exterior parts, and colder about the inner parts: but in those that
sleep it is quite contrary; which appears also by the pulse, and breath, which
are stronger sleeping then waking.

On the contrary, that dinner ought to be larger is proved by the following
reasons and authorities. The authorities are taken from Actuarius and Avicen,
who advise to divide our meat into three parts, two whereof must be eaten at
dinner, and the third at supper. To which may be added the verses of the Salern
school, which are in English thus; At supper if you fill with meat,
Your stomach, your pain will be great;
If you desire a quiet night,
Make a supper short and light.


Their authorities are settled upon strong reasons.

First, between dinner and supper there are but seven or eight hours at most,
between supper and dinner about sixteen. But if sleep were advantageous for
concoction, it would be perfected about the middle of the night, and hunger
would immediately succeed. But on the contrary, when a man rises out of his bed
in the morning he is less hungry then before supper; which makes it clear, that
concoction is more slowly performed in sleep then in waking.

Secondly, sleep after dinner, in those that are not accustomed to it, causes
the appetite not to be so quick at the hour of supper, and a sensible
oppression of the stomach by meat, which shows that concoction is most
imperfect in sleep. For if sleep helped concoction, it would be alike
profitable to all.

Thirdly, those that wake are most hungry; whence Hipp. 6. Epid. Sect. 4. Aph.
20. calls it greedy watchfulness. So those that watch beyond their custom till
late at night, sooner perceive hunger: so those that press out wine and oil,
because they are perpetually awake, they eat much and often.

Fourthly, if sleep did promote concoction, a man ought then to sleep presently
after meals, because the meat being then more solid requires the greatest heat
of the stomach, and because the first hours work is hardest; but this is all
performed waking, otherwise the stomach would be much oppressed.

Fifthly, those who have a weak stomach, and a bad digesttion are more
disturbed by night after the first sleep, then by day in the afternoon; which
argues that in sleep concoction is difficult.

Sixthly, Celsus advises that in the long days it is better to sleep at noon
before meat, for no other reason doubtless, but because sleep retards
concoction.

Seventhly, in sleep the heat runs to its fountains, but the other parts are
left destitute, more then in waking; and when a man is awake the heat is more
equally diffused through the whole body, and therefore there is less heat in
the stomach when a man sleeps then when he wakes.

Eighthly, in the daytime the heat of the sun advantageth concoction. For the
sun, as Arist. affirms 2. Phys. 2. is the fountain of life. And therefore
concoction in the day has a double heat, which that which is done by night
wants.

Ninthly, the situation of the stomach in those that are awake makes more to
the furtherance of concoction, because an upright posture causes the meat to
descend more easily to the bottom of the stomach, which is more fleshy; but in
those that ly, it only touches the sides thereof, so that the mouth of the
stomach cannot shut as it should do. And therefore sleeping at noon hurts less
in a posture of sitting then lying.

Tenthly, the phlegm which in the daytime is expelled at the nostrilles and
throat, in the night flows down into the stomach, and retards the concoction,
which inconvenience molests not those that wake.

Lastly, experience confirms this for a truth; for there are very few men who
will not ingenuously confess that they find themselves better after a light
then great supper. And Cardan testifies, that he did ask many men that lived
to a hundred years, who told him that they used very slender suppers. To these
we may add the example of Telephus the Grammarian, related by Galen, 5. of
preserving health, who lived almost to a hundred years. His words are these; He
eat raw honey mixed with rice pottage about the third hour of the day, about the
seventeenth he dined, using salads first, then river fish, or birds. In the
evening he contented himself only with bread sopped in wine.

We therefore convicted by the force of these latter reasons, and much more by
daily experience, do believe that suppers ought to be more sparing then
dinners; yet we grant, as in the theorems is mentioned, that those who are in
perfect health, and have a strong stomach, may either eat as much or more at
supper then at dinner, so that the whole quantity of both meals do not exceed
moderation; for they have a good concoction both night and day. And here may be
repeated the sentence of Celsus, that a man in perfect health need not ty
himself to any laws: Nay if a man of a weaker constitution uses but little
aliment, and take a less quantity at dinner, he may doubtless make a better
meal at supper. Whereby the whole quantity of meat which is taken in one day
may suffice for the nourishment of the whole body. But if we consider the
custom of men now a days, who eat their fill at dinner, certainly they would
be very much oppressed should they eat largly at supper. And then the mentioned
verses of the Salern school are verified.

But this rule is chiefly to be understood of those who are subject to fluxes
and catarrhs; for by night the flegmy humor flows from the brain into the
stomach, and disturbs the concoction. On the contrary, if you eat but little
meat at supper, the pituitous humor is consumed by the natural heat, and is not
so easily increased again, as in those that sup largly, because from the
abundance of meat many vapors do arise from the stomach to the head. And those
that are so affected after a light supper sleep quietly: but if they eat large
suppers, their sleep is unquietly and interrupted, so that the greatest part of
them are forced to eat but moderately, and some to abstain altogether from
eating at night. Hence it was wisely said by Manardus, Epist. 4. l. 6. a light
supper is profitable for the eyes and head.

But that this truth may be more clear, we must give some satisfaction as to
the authorities and reasons brought to the contrary.

And first to the authorities of Hipp. Celsus, and Galen, we oppose, that it is
true, we are by them satisfied, that it was the custom of the ancients to eat
little at dinner, much at supper: nevertheless because they eat very little at
dinner, they had more reason to eat largly at supper. And indeed that meal
taken at supper had need of more time for concoction then if taken at dinner.
But in our times when dinners are so large, we cannot imitate the ancients at
supper. And without doubt the ancients had done better if what they did eat at
supper they had eaten at dinner, and if that which they took at dinner they had
taken at supper. To this may be added that their hour of supper was not the
same with ours; for the Romans using to dine but sparingly, and eating a little
in the morning, did sup three hours before sunset, so that they had almost
digested their meat before they went to sleep.

But to the first reason alleged in opposition to this opinion we answer, that
all sort of rest is not so convenient to help forward concoction, when as a
soft and gentle motion after meals causes the meat to descend to the bottom
ofthe stomach, and stirs up the natural heat, that it may the better intend its
work. Hence the vulgar verse, After supper stand a while.
Or else walk a mile.


To the second we say, that the vital spirits indeed are more strong in sleep,
but that they do not flow into the stomach and other parts in that abundance,
as when a man wakes; for in sleep they retire to their fountains, but when a
man wakes they are diffused abroad.

To the third we answer, that the double space of time coming between dinner and
supper, would require a double proportion of nourishment if the digestion were
equally made in both meals. But because the digestion is not so soon dispatched
after supper, as we have shown, that longer time was necessary.

To the fourth we say, that the constitution of wrestlers is not commended by
Galen, 1. Aph. 3. and in lib. of good habit of body in suas. to arts, nay he
says that they are short lived, and full of diseases. To restore and fatten
the body, meat eaten at supper does more avail, but it produces diseases from
the plenty of humors that proceed from that course of diet. And therefore
persons recovering from a disease are more refreshed by a larger supper, but
they are in greater danger of a relapse.

To the fifth and sixth we say, that in sleep the heat draws to the center, and
retires to its fountains, viz. the heart and liver. Hence better concoctions
are made in the veins and arteries; whence, there is nothing more profitable
then sleep to concoct evil humors in continual fevers, and there is nothing
which more hinders the concoction of them then waking continually. Hence
drunkards are said to sleep away their surfits fullness of crudity which are
caused in the veins by an over-repletion of drink. But there is a far different
reason for the concoction in the stomach, which proceeds more imperfectly when
nature is intent upon the distribution of meats already concocted, as also on
the digestion of the evil humors; from which work it is not a little distracted
by the concoction of the meats in the stomach, especially if there be any
quantity.

The most seasonable hour of dining is about two or three hours before noon,
which is much wholesomer then either at noon, or after.

By dining at a seasonable hour we gain two things. First, a longer time till
supper, that the first concoction may be perfected. Secondly, because it is
then colder which is most to be aimed at in summer) which coldness helps
concoction. Thirdly, for that a man is stronger, because nearer the hour of his
last preceding, sleep, which produced many new spirits, which render the whole
body more strong, and cheerful; and we see every where that those who take
their meat in best season live longest, and that those who dine later, are more
diseased, and of a shorter life.

CHAP. VII. Of the preparation of the nourishment.
SOme meats require an artificial preparation to fit them for the nourishment
of the body; and others are sufficiently prepared by nature, that we may take
them just as nature presents them to us: of the first sort are flesh, and fish,
and the like; of the latter, all ripe fruits.

The preparation of meats is performed by coction, which is threefold, boiling,
rosting, frying, or broyling,

Boiling is twofold, either when things are boiled in water, and then they
retain the name of boiling, so that flesh in this manner prepared is called
boiled; or else when they sees them in their own liquor over a gentle fire,
and then they are called pottage-meats.

Celsus writes, that pottage-meats do nourish more then roasted, and those more
then fried. But we add, that boiled meats nourish least of all, because they
lose much of their nourishing juice in the pottage.

Yet boiling is more praised as to the common use, because that which is lost
in the flesh is found in the broth. Then also flesh grows softer by boiling, so
that it is more easily dissolved and concocted in the stomach.

Roasting of mutton is the better, if first the flesh be beaten with a wooden
pestle, as is customary with cooks; for so it becomes more tender, and loose,
and more easy to be penetrated by the heat of the fire.

The other preparations of meat serving to the preservation of health, shall be
proposed in their particular descriptions. But those which are for delight and
luxury must be referred to the art of cookery.

CHAP. VIII. Of custom, and delight in the use of meats.
MEats to which a man accustomes himself, though they are not so good, yet are
more profitable then unwonted diet.

This theorem is confirmed by Hipp. 50. Sect. 2. where he says, that those
things to which a man is accustomed by long time, though worse, yet are less
troublesome then things to which a man is unaccustomed.

For custom is a second nature, seeing that meats used a long time do alter
nature, and render it of the same likeness. By nature we understand the temper
of the body, which becomes like the nourishment to which it is long accustomed.
Now the force of this custom is proved by many examples in many authors. One
only shall suffice us; related by Solenander. Phys. Couns. Sect. 5. Coun. 15.
of a certain countryman, who being brought to the hospital could be cured by no
remedies: at length as he was about to dye the Physician asked him what kind of
diet he had formerly used; He made answer, that he was very much averse to that
meat and drink, and syrups, and soft bed which they then used him to, whereas
before he had not slept for nineteen years in a bed; and for his diet had used
altogether onions, and cheese, and such like, and had slept in the open air
only upon straw. The Physician permitted him one night to sleep in straw, and
to eat onions and salt, and to drink cold water; and although he thought this
would the sooner kill him, yet contrary to the opinion of all men, the next day
he found him sitting at the fire.

Use and custom is to be observed not only in the substance, bt also in the
quality and quantity of meat, and time of eating.

This rule also is borrowed from Hipp. Aph. 17. Sect. 1. It is to be
considered, says he, who ought to eat twice or oncea day, and where to give
more or less; for much way is to be giving to the time, country, custom, and
age.

When meats to which the body is accustomed, being bad, do upon any occasion
hurt the body, they are to be changed, and others which are better must be
used, so it be done by degrees; for every sudden alteration is dangerous.

For many causes do manifest that the change of diet is sometimes necessary, as
when by such or such diet it appears that the diseases are cherished and
increased: sometimes age coming on is not able to concoct such meats as were
easily digested in youth; therefore if it seem necessary for any cause to
change the course of diet, it must be done by a little and a little; which
Hipp. teaches Aph. 51. Sect. 1. to empty or fill much and suddenly, to heat, or
cool, or to make any other kind of subitaneous alteration in the body is
dangerous, for every excess is hurtful to nature; but that which is done by
degrees is safe, as at other times, so when we proceed from one thing to
another. This may be confirmed by many examples, but especially by the example
of Dionysius Tyrant of Sicily, who was much given to luxury and drunkenness.
Who being besieged, and compelled by necessity, finding that he must leave his
wonted custom of drinking, suddenly left it off; which when he had done a
little while, he fell into a consumption, neither could he recover till he fell
to his accustomed manner of drinking again. Though had he left that custom by
degrees, he could have received no damage at all.

Those meats are first to be preferred which are most pleasing to a man, though
they be not altogether so good as those which he does any way loath. This Hipp.
expressly teaches Aph. 38. Sect. 2. Meat and drink, though it be not so good,
yet if it be more pleasing, is to be preferred before that which is not so,
though it be better in quality. For when the meat is acceptable to the palate,
it is more welcome to the stomach, and the stomach more quickly and readily
concocts it. On the contrary, it rejects that which is not so acceptable, so
that it neither receives it with greediness, nor concocts it with expedition.
Under the protection of this Aphorism many flattering Physicians do shelter
themselves, who to gratify their patients deny them nothing that they covet.
But they err shamefully, and are condemned by Galen l. 12. method. c. 1. As,
says he, he shows himself to be cruel, that takes awaythe life of the patient
with the disease, so he that perpetually indulges to the palate of the patient,
regarding his pleasure, not his health, is a flatterer. And 1. meth. c. 1. he
inveighs much against those flatterers. Those that give cold water if the
patient require it, who wash when they bid, who give wine and snow when they
demand it, like obedient slaves, contrary to those ancient Physicians who were
the true sons of Aesculapius, who governed their patients as captains do their
soldiers, or Kings their subjects; and would not obey like Getes, Phrygian and
Thracian slaves. Therefore that there may be a certain proportion set down for
these things which may be given to sick people, Hipp. is to be consulted, who
thus speaks 6. Epid. Sect. 4.

These are the things wherein the patient may be gratified, and that the meat
and drink may be purely tempered, that what they see may be acceptable, and
what they feel soft, but that they may do no harm, or such as may be easily
repaired; as the giving them cold water where need requires, and the like:
where these words are particularly to be noted, which may not do any harm, or
such as may be easily repaired; for if those things which the patient requires
will do any considerable mischief, they are utterly to be rejected.

CHAP. IX. Of meat convenient for every age.
THe diet for children ought to incline to cold and moist, and therefore wine
is hurtful.

The bodies of children being endued with much heat, have need of cooling diet;
Hence wine is dangerous for them, because it increases heat, and fills the head
full of vapors, for which reason Galen forbids it them in his. 1. lib. of
preserving health c. 9. and Plato 2. of laws teaches, that children ought not
to drink wine till they come to be twelve years of age. That moist meat is most
convenient for them Hipp. teaches Aph. 16. Sect. 1. moist diet is convenient
for feverish persons, but most convenient for children. And reason persuades
the same; for the body all this age being in its prime of growing, the increase
thereof is not to be hindered by drying meats; besides that the substance of
children easily dissolves, and therefore is to be repaired with moist
nourishment, which is easily concocted and distributed.

A greater quantity of meat is to be given to them then to others, by reason of
the plenty of their heat, and the growth of their bodies.

This Hipp. confirms Aph. 14. Sect. 1. Those that are growing are full of
natural heat, and therefore want much nourishment, otherwise their bodies would
be consumed.

The reason of this Aphorism is, because the body being soft and tender, the
substance thereof is consumed by the great heat, which must be repaired by
store of nourishment.

By youths and young men a midling diet both as to the quantity and the quality
is to be used.

Youths and young men have a more moderate temper, and therefore to be
nourished with temperate diet, viz. such as has a moderate proportion of the
first qualities. The quantity of them also ought to be moderate, that is, less
then in children, and more then is used in other ages.

Young men, because they are extremely hot and dry, are to use contrary diet,
that is, cold and moist.

Although the diet prescribed to young men ought to be like the diet of
children in relation to the qualities, yet as to the substance it must be
different; whereas the moist nourishment prescribed to children ought actually
and potentially to be that is liquid for the most part, or such as may be
supped, or at least to be soft and of easy digestion. But young men require
meats more solid, and hard to be concocted, as salads, fruits, and the like,
which may be digested by their stronger stomachs. Wine is very hurtful for
them, especially if it be pure; for as Plato says, it renders them furious;
and it precipitates them to wrath and lust, according to the opinion of Galen.
Old men require a hot and moist diet, because their bodies are cold and dry.
Among those things which are hot and moist wine is very agreeable to old men,
and is therefore called old men's milk, for it cherishes their weak heat,
repairs their strength, and concocts the crudities wherewith they do abound,
consumes and dryes up the excrementitious moistures, and evacuates them by
urine, it expells sadness and induces mirth; and therefore it is elegantly said
by Plato in his 2. de Leg. that God gave wine to men as a healthful remedy
against the austerity of old age, that they might seem to wax young again, and
forget sadness, making the hard constitution of man tender, as iron put into
fire grows more tractable and soft. Yet beware to take too great a quantity
thereof, for so it will consume the natural moisture, and beget catarrhs. That
wine is to be chosen which is strong, thin, fragrant, of a good savor, midling
age, and yellowish color. Thick wines are naught for old men for they cause
obstructions, bind the belly, and do not provoke urine, like the former.
Hydromel is also profitable for old men to the prolonging of life, as Pliny
declares l. 22. Hist. Not. c. 24. of Pollio a Roman, who lived above a hundred
years, and being asked by Augustus by what means he had preserved that vigor
of mind and body, he made this short answer, within by wine, said he, and honey,
without by oil. Raw honey (so it be very good as that of Nacor) is very
profitable for old men, eaten with bread at breakfast or supper.

The quantity of meat ought to be less for old men then for any other age. For
the heat of old men is weak, not being able to concoct much meat. This Hipp.
teaches Aph. 14 Sect. 1. In old men there is little natural heat, and therefore
they require something to cherish it, for it is extinguished by many things.
For as Galen says in com. though the flame of the lamp be nourished by oil,
yet if a man should pour too much, it would be extinguished by its own
nourishment: so in old men the natural heat has some things that nourish it,
yet if it be clogged with too many of those things, it is in danger to be
extinguished; as if a man should heap a great pile of wood upon a little spark
of fire.

CHAP. X. Of diet convenient for every season of the year.
IN the winter a more copious, hot and dry diet is to be observed then at other
seasons: (See Gal. in comment.) But for drink it must be more sparing, and wine
more pure. It is requisite the nourishment should be more hot and dry, that it
may the better resist the coldness and moistness of the winter air, and that
the phlegm which gathers in the winter season may be better consumed. It ought
to be more copious, because the natural heat is most vigorous in winter, as
Hipp. teaches, Aph. 15. Sect. 1. The regions of the belly are most hot in the
winter, and spring, and the sleeps longer; and therefore for that season the
nourishment ought to be more copious. For then the natural heat being most
vigorous requires most nourishment.

But the drink ought to be more sparing, because then the body abounds most
with humors, and it ought to be the stronger, to correct the inconveniences
that proceed by the coldness of the season.

In the spring diet ought to be more moderate both in quantity and quality, yet
more hot and copious then in the summer, but less then in the winter. Whereas
the spring is the most temperate of all the seasons of the year, therefore it
requires the most temperate nourishments, and most moderate as to their
quantity. Notwithstanding because the regions of the belly are very hot also in
the spring, as Hipp. teaches in the forecited Aph. therefore the quantity of
meat ought to be greater then at other seasons except the winter. Nevertheless
it is to be noted that the beginning of the spring retains something of the
nature of the winter; but still as the spring goes forward, the diet is to be
changed, that it may come to be more cold, moist, and less in quantity, which
is most convenient for the approaching summer.

In the summer cold and moist diet is most convenient, and a small quantity
thereof, but with a greater measure of drink.

The heat which the summer brings upon our bodies is to be corrected with
cooling and moistening diet. Which seems to be the intent of nature it self,
which then produces plenty of fruits and salads. Now the natural heat being at
that time more weak, little nourishment is to be taken, that it may be the
better concocted.

In Autumn a little fuller, hotter, and drier diet is to be used then in the
summer, though less at the beginning which is nearer to summer, then at the
latter end, which requires a more winter-like diet.

It has been said before that the alteration of diet is to be made by degrees,
that nature may the better endure it, which is to be observed in Autumn as well
as at other seasons.

CHAP. XI. Of Bread.
THat Bread which is most convenient for nourishment and for the health of the
body, is to be made of the purest meal of wheat, leavened, well baked, and full
of eyes, moderately seasoned, but new, though more, so stale as twenty four
hours will make it.

After we have set down the general rules concerning the use of meats, now we
shall set down some more particular and more necessary observations which
regard those meats which are more principally in use; omitting the rest which
would make the work tedious, and may as well be found in those Authors who have
writ particularly of the faculties of meats.

Beginning therefore with Bread, which is the first foundation of nourishment,
we say that it ought to be made of the purest wheat-meal. For of all grain
which is fit for Bread, wheat is most to be valued: of which there are many
sorts, but that sort which is best for Bread is well known to every Country,
and even among the vulgar. Matthiolus upon Dioscorides gives these Characters
of the best Wheat, viz. that it should be hard to break, thick, heavy, of the
color of gold, clear and smooth, of three months age, ripe, clean, and that
grew in a fat soil.

Of the pure meal of such wheat Bread is to be made, cleansed from all branny
matter, and is called the flour of meal.

This bread is that which nourishes most of any other, though that which has
bran mixed among it, loosens the belly more, by reason that the bran has an
abstersive faculty; And for that cause, some who are much bound, do mix bran
with the meal to keep the belly more soluble: Others add a little Rice, which
by reason that it is more moist, keeps the belly more laxative.

The best Bread ought to be leavened, because by that the viscous and tough
paste is attenuated, and (as Plato says in Timeus) altered into an airy
substance, and makes it swell to a greater bigness, whereby the Bread becomes
light and full of eyes, which are other properties of good Bread. But that
Bread which wants leaven, or has not enough, is hard of digestion, oppresses
the stomach, and begets terrible obstructions. Neither is the opinion of Celsus
any hinderance to this, who says l. 2. c. 28. that leavened bread is most
liable to corruption, but that unleavened bread is least subject to putrefie in
the body, for that opinion is rejected by Ronseus, Bruyerinus, Merculius, and
Silvaticus, as false and erroneous. Yet it may be excused, if we add one word
to the sentence, saying that Bread too much leavened, easily corrupts the body,
but not that which is not overmuch leavened. Though perhaps that was not the
intention of the Author. And indeed I know not how he can be excused, when as
in the same Chapter he reckons honey among those things which are easily
corrupted, when as honey is incorruptible, and being mingled with those things
which are corruptible, keeps them from corruption; as in horary fruits, which
being preserved with honey, cannot putrefie. Therefore Mercurialis, a Critical
Judge of Authors, who also has set forth an elegant censure of the Books of
Hippocrates; boldly passes his judgment upon Cornelius Celsus, saying that he
was no Physician; I shall repeat his own words, Tom. 4. consult. med. consil.
10. written to Bernardinus Castellanus, where he says thus, That place of
Celsus concerning unleavened Bread, was always by me suspected, whom we may
conjecture to have been no Physician, by that which Pliny a later writer has
left written, who says, that there was no Roman until his times, that
practiced the art of Physic: and for that cause they committed many errors in
things that concerned the practice of the Art: for experience teaches, that
leaven rightly used, makes the Bread lighter, and therefore of more easy
digestion, and less troublesome to the stomach; and if there were nothing else
to confirm it, yet the general custom and consent of all Nations were enough
to show that leavened Bread, for healths sake, is much better then that which
is unleavened.

The Bread ought also to be well baked; for if it be ill baked, it oppresses
the stomach, and is of hard digestion, which Avicen teaches, Canon. 2. Tract.
2. saying that ill-bak'd Bread nourishes much, but if any private and sedentary
person use it, he will be presently troubled with obstructions.

It ought to be seasoned with a little salt, for salt like leaven attenuates
the thick and slimy substance thereof, and makes it less liable to beget
obstructions. Yet the quantity thereof ought to be moderate, for if the Bread
be too salt, it dries overmuch.

It ought to be new and not above 24. hours old, for stale Bread is hard and
dry, and of a hard digestion, oppresses the stomach, and binds the body: but
that which is too new and newly drawn out of the oven, retains a clamminesse,
so that it swells and obstructs the bowels. Besides, if it be hot from the oven,
it retains a fiery heat, which troubles the spirits and hurts the natural heat,
as Arnoldus Villanova writes in his book of those things which prolong youth.

The crum is more fit for nourishment, for the crust dries too much, and begets
adust and melancholy humors.

This rule is confirmed by the common verse of the Salern School.

Beware how thou eatest crust,
For it produces choler adust.
But notwithstanding they who have moist stomachs may use it, so that it be not
burnt. Chiefly after meals, it is profitable to all men, for it binds up the
mouth of the stomach, and helps concoction.

All fullness is evil, but especially of Bread.

Although Bread nourishes more then any other thing, yet if it be eaten in too
a great quantity, it brings great harm to the body: for it has a clammy
substance, which is the reason that it nourishes so much, and therefore if it
be taken in too great a quantity, it cannot be well concocted, and consequently
not well attenuated in the stomach, so that it sticks in the veins of the
Mesenterion, and is the cause of very great obstructions. Which Avicen teaches
in Can. 3. l. 1. Doct. 2. c. 7. speaking to this purpose; the impediment of
Bread when the stomach does not concoct it, is very great; that of flesh is not
so much: for it lies long and burdensome in the stomach, and not being
sufficiently concocted, falls down and obstructs the Liver, and mesaraick veins.
But Flesh has a greater likeness to the body of man, so that it is the less
dangerous, and the obstruction not so great, which it causes, and sooner
recoverable; the members more quickly drinking in the juice of the flesh, then
that of the bread, by reason of the near resemblance between them.

CHAP. XII. Of Barley, Rice, Oats, Beans, Pease, Vetches, and Lentiles.
Barley is cold and dry in the first degree: yet the outward husk is dryer then
the inner mealy part, they have both an abstersive quality, though the husk
has more of that quality.

Sometimes Bread is made thereof, which is colder, and affords a less firm and
stable nourishment.

There are also made Barley Broths of peeled Barley, boiled in water, adding
thereto bruised Almonds and Sugar.

It is boiled sometimes with a piece of a neck of Mutton, which is afterward
streined and drunk, putting to it sometimes a little Sugar.

These Barley Broths are good for hot and dry constitutions, refreshing lean
people and such as are troubled with the Consumption, tempering the acrimony of
the humors, and refreshing and fatning the body.

Here we set down things that are only proper for people in health, for things
proper for the sick belong not to this place, and therefore we refer the Ptisan
of the Ancients to the Diet of sick persons.

Rice is temperate in the first qualities, a little inclining to hot and dry,
it nourishes much boiled with milk and porrage, though it be harder of
digestion, and affords a thicker nourishment.

Therefore it agrees best with young men and such as labor; and the frequent
use thereof by reason of the thickness of the substance begets obstructions,
because of the thickning, and binding faculty which it has; it is very good
for such as are subject to bloody Flixes, Lasks, Dysenteries, and other
affections proceeding from a defluxion of thin humors.

Oats serve not only for provender for horses, but also for meat for men. For
there is made a drink of peeled Oats boiled in water, adding thereto a little
Sugar, and Almond milk, which is lighter then Barly-water, and therefore more
easily concocted; it moves urine, because of the thinness of the substance, as
also by reason of its temper, which inclines to heat.

Beans are used either dry, and that by the vulgar sort, and people of mean
degree, or green, which is accounted among the more delicate dishes, or boiled
in pottage, or fried in a pan.

However they are prepared, they are of ill digestion, and hardly distributed;
they increase thick and flatulent humors, they swell up the belly, and beget a
difficulty of breathing, and withal bind the belly: they obstruct the Liver,
Spleen and Meseraick Veins; they send many vapors to the head, so that they
hurt the eyes, and cause turbulent dreams, being of a cold and dry temper; yet
the green are moistest.

Although Beans are reckoned among the worst sorts of nourishment, yet they
afford excellent medicines; which although it be not our intention here to
reckon up, where we only discourse of the matter of nourishment, yet we shall
here contrary to the method of our Theorems, briefly touch upon them, as being
most useful, and which we have known by certain and daily experience.

And first there is a water drawn from the new shales of Beans most profitable
for such as are troubled with the Stone; for it cleanses the reins, and hinders
the generation of the stone, if the patient drink thereof in a morning, at
several times two or three ounces thereof. It is very profitable for such are
troubled with a hot distemper of the veins, because it is cold and moist; when
as all other nephretick medicines are extremely heating.

Of the dried shells of Beans, and the stalks burnt are made a sort of Ashes,
which being boiled in water of Pellitory of the wall to a kind of lie, and
taken for some mornings to the quantity of five or six ounces, with an ounce of
syrup of Maidenhair, like a julep, cures efficaciously all contumacious and
stubborn Gonorrhoea's. The same is most excellent against the stone hanging in
the ureters, causing there very great pains; for it removes it presently. The
same effect is performed by a salt drawn from the said ashes, and given to the
weight of a dram in water of Pellitory of the wall.

Outwardly also Bean-meal is applied with very great success in many
affections, especially in inflammations of the testicles, which often proceed
from an ill cured Gonorrhoea. Most Surgeons, who are oftener consulted by
ignorant patients in venereal diseases then the Physicians, observing an
extraordinary hardness of the inflamed testicles, presently apply mollifying
Cataplasms, which increase the inflammation, when as that soft and spongy part,
by these dissolving Plasters are made more fit to receive the flux of the
matter. Therefore those tumors are to be cured with astringent and discussing
medicines, to which purpose a Cataplasm made of Bean-meal, boiled in Oxycratum,
extraordinarily conduces. This plaster is to be often changed and renewed,
because it suddenly dries up, by reason of the want of fat ingredients which
are mingled in all other Cataplasms. Though they are not here convenient,
because they inflame the part. Yet there may be added to this Cataplasm, that
the sudden drying thereof may be hindered, a little simple Oxymel, which has a
faculty both to discuss and bind.

Pease are to be preferred before all other pulse, being in the middle between
things of good, and bad juice, things easy to digest, and hard to concoct, as
Gal. testifies 1 de Alim. facult. cap. 21. and endued with no excessive
quality, and so coming near to a middle temper. Yet cold and dry is a little
predominant: they are prepared diverse ways, both green and dry.

They are more easily concocted being shal'd, and strained after they are
boiled; for the shales are of hard digestion, evil juice and astringent. The
dry are preferred before the green, being less windy, and of easiest
digestion; but either of them, as as all other Pulse, are hurtful to
melancholic persons, and such as abound with thick humors and obstructions.

Chiches have a thicker substance then Pease, and are of a harder concoction,
both within the without the body; for they ask longer time of boiling ere they
grow soft, neither does any water boil them so tender, as rain or the purest
and thinnest fountain water.

Nevertheless there is made of them an excellent Broth which has a cleansing
opening faculty, and which provokes both urine and the flowers, for which uses
the blackest are most commended, which are therefore called medicines amongst
the vulgar.

Our Country women make a kind of Broth to provoke the flowers, of black
Chiches, roots of Petroseline and Saffron, which they give for three days
together, the evacuation being begun, or near beginning.

Lentiles are the worst of all Pulses, being of a cold and dry temper, hard of
digestion, and begetting a melancholy juice, they breed obstructions, hurt the
sight, excite tumultuous dreams, hurt the head, nerves, and lungs, bind the
belly, stop the urine and the Courses: which proceeds from their thick and
binding substance.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pot Herbs most in use, and their faculties.
LEttice, as Galen says, begets the best blood of all Pot Herbs, but little,
being cold and moist, it provokes sleep, increases milk, loosens the belly,
cools the heat of the stomach, represses the acrimony of all the humors, it
agrees best with choleric, sanguin and young people, especially in the summer.
It is eaten raw in Salads; as also boiled in broth, it agrees best with those
who have a weak stomach. The often use thereof weakens the sight, as
Dioscorides says.

Many relate that the juice of Lettice drunk to the weight of three or four
ounces, kills like other poisons. Yet should so much Lettice be eaten as would
yield the same quantity of juice, it would do no hurt. The reason of which is
twofold, the first is because that whole Lettice remains longer in the stomach,
so that the coldness is corrected by the long concoction thereof, but the
juice quickly pierces to the vitals, the second is because that Lettice is
amended by the mixture of salt, oil, and vinegar, and sometimes sugar also.

Colewort, as Galen says 3. simpl. cap. 15. has a double substance, juicy and
earthy; the one hot in the first degree, and nitrous, the second, cold and dry.
The nitrous juice is sharp and abstersive, and therefore moves the belly; but
the body of it is thick, dry, earthy, astringent, and for that cause binds the
belly. The thinner part of the juice is drawn out by the first boiling of the
Cabbage, and therefore that first broth moves the belly, the third and second
does not so. Cabbage gives little nourishment, and breeds not good humors like
Lettice, but rank and vicious.

The ill juice thereof is seen first by the decoction thereof, which smells
rank, especially that which has the heads cut off. Besides, Cabbage putrefying
in gardens yields a most noisome smell.

Cabbage eaten before other meats, drives away drunkenness; and taken after
meat, repels the violent vapors of wine.

This virtue of Cabbage to expel drunkenness, proceeds from the antipathy
which is between that and the Vine. For Vines will not grow in the same soil
with Cabbage.

But it is of hard concoction, and breeds thick and melancholy humors. It
exhales much, and by sending up thick vapors to the brain, it disquiets the
mind and disturbs the sleep.

It has a certain agreement with the Lungs, and therefore the use thereof is
the less troublesome to those who are troubled with diseases in the Lungs.

But red Cabbage is reckoned among the herbs fit for wounds.

That Cabbage is good for the diseases of the Lungs, the medicines do manifest
which are made of them. The Pharmacopaea's do commend a looch made of the
stalks. We have seen admirable effects thereof in Asthma's and other diseases
of the Lungs made with the juice of red stalks reduced into the form of a Julep
with Sugar. Old Ulcers are healed by a fomentation of the water of Catapults,
and afterward by applying a leaf of red Cabbage moistened in the said water.
Water of Catapults is made of the roots of Birthwort, Gentian, Radishes, and
Wormseed, of each one ounce, boiled in three pintes of White Wind to the
consumption of half: afterward dissolving in it four ounces of Sugar.

Beets come near the nature of Cabbage: for the juice thereof is ended with a
nitrous quality, abstersive and something sharp, which causes it to loosen the
belly, so that it inclines to a hot and dry temper. But the earthy part thereof
is cold and dry, and binding.

It is a diet common to Country people and poor folks, whence Martial calls
Beets the dinner of smiths: but their likeness to Coleworts, as also their
loosening or binding faculty, by reason of the diversity of their substances,
we may gather from the two verses, the first whereof is concerning Beets.

Beets nourish little, I must tell ye,
They do both bind and loose the belly.
The other concerning Coleworts or Cabbage, comes from the Salern School.

Of Cabbage this for certain we do find,
The broth does loosen, but the substance bind.
Spinach is moist and cold in the first degree. The substance thereof is watery
and almost insipid. Therefore it descends quickly and loosens the belly. It
cleanses the breast, smooths the rough artery, and heals a cough: it nourishes
little, breeds much serous humor, and wind, it begets a nauseatenesse, unless
seasoned with spice.

Endive cools, opens and cleanses, and therefore is most used among all herbs
both raw and boiled. It is good for a hot, weak and obstructed Liver, it helps
a weak and choleric stomach. It purifies the blood, heals the itch, allayes
thirst and heat in the stomach, it begets an appetite, and is good for those
that are troubled with the Jaundise.

Succory has the same virtues that Endive, but much more efficacious by reason
of its bitterness, for which cause it opens more, cleanses, and is more
pleasing to the stomach.

Sorrel is cold and dry in the second degree, it cuts, opens, moderately
binds, nourishes little, helps the hot distemper of the bowels, allayes
thirst, excites the appetite, tempers the acrimony of choler, clears the heart,
and resists poison.

Berage in the active qualities is temperate, in the passive moist in the first
degree, it purifies the blood, resists the melancholy humor, and cleanses the
heart.

Purslain is cold in the third degree, moist in the second, it nourishes
little, it cools and thickens the blood, it tempers the heat and acrimony of
the blood, allays thirst, excites the appetite, kills worms, duls the sight,
cools venery, which is common to all refrigerating plants, if a man use them
plentifully.

Parsley is hot and dry in the third degree; it opens, provokes urine and the
flowers, dispels wind, and therefore is good for those that are troubled with
the stone.

Rocket is hot and dry in the third degree, and therefore is not eaten alone,
but mixed with other herbs which are cooling, and are correctives to it, it
helps concoction, and moves lust, if it be taken in any quantity.

Nasturtium, Watercresses agree with Rocket both as to the temper and quality,
they open, attenuate, cut, expel gravel, and therefore good for the bloader and
reins.

The garden and watery sort are used in salads; both of them are good for
splenetick people, and are reckoned among the remedies against the Scurvy, and
as some think they do not give place to Scurvy grass.

Pimpernel cools moderately, binds and dries. It is used in salads, it has a
good savor and smell, it is cordial and induces mirth, and therefore is
steeped in Wine.

In Physic there is great use of Pimpernel, so that it is prescribedin Juleps
and Apozems very frequently, especially in malign Fevers. By reason of its
binding faculty, it is used in all Fluxes of the belly and of the blood: a
light decoction thereof used in common drink, cures the dysentery. The water of
Pimpernel distilled is used to cure Ulcers of the Lungs, Conserve of Roses
being first dissolved in it, and so streined. The powder thereof used often is
also exceeding profitable.

CHAP. XIV. Of Roots fit to eat.
RApes and Turnips are of the same nature, they are moderately dry, and
moisten.

They are eaten boiled with flesh, or else alone with oil or butter, they
afford little nourishment, they breed a thick juice, they beget inflammations
because they are windy, they increase milk and seed, they excite lust, move the
urine, they assuage inflammations of the Chaps and Lungs, they temper the
melancholy humor, and are therefore by Crato commended against a Quartan.

Parsnips are hot and dry in the second degree; they afford thick and
melancholy nourishment, and are of hard digestion; they excite lust, are
diuretic, and move the courses.

Radishes are hot in the third and dry in the second degree. Yet there is some
difference between them. For those that are most biting are the hottest, the
sweet ones more temperate: they afford little and bad nourishment, and are
rather a sauce then nourishment. For they are used as a sauce for meat, and an
incitement to the appetite.

They are of hard digestion, beget wind, and unsavory belchings; cause pain
in the head, filling it with vapors, they provoke urine and the flowers, they
break the gravel. And by opening, cutting, attenuating, are good for the
splenetick, but they hurt the eyes by reason of their sharp and biting humors.
The Salern School adds that the resist poison.

Garlic is hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, for outwardly it
exulcerates the skin, but it is weaker being boiled then raw, and moves urine,
excites the flowers, begets wind, and hurts the eyes; it helps the concoction
of the stomach, if it labor with a cold distemper, if you swallow some whole
cloves in a morning like pills.

It opens the obstructions of the bowels, cuts thick and clammy humors, and
cleanses them; it purifies the lungs, and makes the voice clear; it kills worms,
and resists poison, so that it is called the Country-man's Treacle.

Galen l. 3. de temper. c. 3. makes enquiry why Garlic, Onions, and Mustard,
being put on the skin do ulcerate it, but being eaten do not at all gnaw the
inward parts. He answers, because they are concocted in the stomach, and other
parts, and do not remain in the same place, but are dispersed through the body,
and because they are mixed with many and several meats, which is the chief
reason.

Onions are hot and dry in the fourth degree, for they are sharp and biting,
yet there is some difference according to the more or the less of their chief
qualities, as we have said of Radishes; and among these differences, the long
one is more sharp then the round one, the red then the white, the dry then the
green, the raw then the boiled; they afford little and bad nourishment, they
breed flatulous spirits, and with long use, pain in the head; they cause
troublesome dreams, they hurt the eyes and the gums by reason of their
sharpness; they cut, attenuate, open, and move urine.

Though the Onion give bad nourishment, yet is it an excellent medicine, and
conduces much to the cure of many diseases. And first, Onions roasted in the
cinders eaten with butter, are good for those that are troubled with coughs and
Asthma's. This they do being boiled in brothers. Being dipped in vinegar and
eaten in a morning, they prevail against the stone. The water thereof distilled
in Mary's Bath; which sugared, does miracles in the same affections. If they be
cut into round pellets and steeped in water all night, the water given to
children, kills the worms. Outwardly applied, they provoke urine. For this
purpose there is a cake made of sliced Onions fried in a pan with eggs, to be
applied to the hairy parts to provoke the stopped urine. Or else the little
skins are put into a little bag and boiled in Wine, and applied to the same
part. They will be more effectual, if the place be first anointed with oil of
Scorpions.

Onions made hollow and filled with bitter Almonds, and roasted in the cinders,
and then pressed, give such a liquor as provokes the flux of the Haemorrhoids,
if the seat be anointed therewith.

They being roasted in the cinders and bruised in a marble mortar with a wooden
pestle, adding an equal proportion of new butter, assuage the pain of the
Haemorrhoids, and soften and discuss the swelling tumors of those parts.

Leeks are of the same nature, temper and faculties with Onions; but weaker. By
Hipp. they are commended to be good to help conception, not only taken
inwardly, but also outwardly applied by fomentations and Cataplasms.

This proceeds from their abstersive faculty, by which they purge the womb from
slimie humors which hinder the retention and operation of the seed.

CHAP. XV. Of Fruits fit to eat.
ALL Apples are cold and moist, yet they differ in their several kinds
according to the more or the less. For those that are sour are colder, and
bind the belly; but the sweet are more temperate and loosen the belly.

Raw they are of hard digestion, baked not so; they are cordial, especially
those that have an odorous smell, and are good against melancholy.

The virtues of Apples against melancholy diseases may be seen by the syrups
sold at shops, purposely for such diseases: as syrup of Apples of King Sapor:
syrup of odoriferous Apples: as also in magisterial syrups which are prescribed
for the said diseases: juice of sweet smelling Apples is never omitted. The
power which they have to loosen the belly is known by this, because baked
Apples are many times prescribed to those that are bound, an hour before meat.

Of Pears as of Apples there are several sorts and several tempers. For those
which are insipid are cold and moist.

Sour, hard and sharp Pears, cold and dry; the sweet ones incline to heat, all
of them have a binding faculty, but the sour and sharp ones a greater, the
sweet ones less, least of all those which are insipid; baked they are best,
and fittest for the stomach.

Quinces are of an earthy nature, they bind, cool and dry in the second
degree, they cure vomiting and loosnesse, they cheer the heart and give it
strength, they resist poison, and help concoction eaten at the end of a meal,
because they shut the mouth of the stomach.

New Damsens cool and moisten, they soften the belly, but nourish little: they
are easily corrupted, so that they breed putrid Fevers, Diarrhaea's and
Dysenteries, eaten in too great a quantity, especially if they be not very
ripe. They are not to be eaten by those who have cold, moist and weak stomachs;
as also by old men and phlegmatic constitutions. They are convenient for young
choleric and sanguine constitutions in the summer time. Being dried they are
more wholesome for the stomach, and are not so easily corrupted, they loosen the
belly being boiled in water with sugar.

Peaches are cold and moist in the second degree, they breed evil and soon
putrefied juice. And therefore Galen admonishes 2. de Alim. fac. c. 19. that
they are not to be eaten after other meats; for says he, they corrupt swimming
at the top of the stomach, and therefore they are to be eaten before any other
meats, for so they may pass quickly away, preparing the way for other meats,
whereas being eaten last, they corrupt the other meat also: their evil quality
is corrected with wine and salt: some boil them upon hot coals like Apples,
and sprinkle sugar on them, which is the best way to correct them.

The precept of Galen concerning Peaches, that they should be eaten before
other meat, may be referred to all sorts of fruit, which are cold and moist and
easily putrefi'd; for being kept long in the stomach they putrefie, and
swimming at the top of the other meats, corrupt them also.

Apricocks are much of the same temper with Peaches, but less moist, but
exceed them in goodness, as Galen witnesses, neither so suddenly growing sour
nor putrefying so soon. But they are sweeter and more grateful to the stomach,
which for that reason does more suddenly concoct them.

Cherries are much of the nature of Damsens, both in respect of their temper
and virtues, yet there is no small difference as to their several kinds: those
which are sour are colder, and less subject to putrefaction, the sweet ones
more corruptible.

Green Figs, in their active qualities are temperate, in their passive moist:
they breed juice good enough, if they be fully ripe. But if they be not fully
ripe (which is known by their sending milk out of the stalk when they are
gathered) then they breed an evil and corrosive juice, whence arise putrid
Fevers and Dysenteries; they easily descend into the belly, and taken before
meat they loosen the belly and cleanse it.

Dry Figs are hot in the first degree, endued with an attenuating and
abstersive faculty; they corroborate the body, loosen the belly, cleanse the
reins, help the cold diseases of the lungs, and open the obstructions of the
liver and spleen; being eaten in too great a quantity they provoke thirst,
because they are hot; they breed impure blood, and subject to putrefaction; so
that the often eating of them produces lice and scabs.

Some authors report that they resist poison, and Pliny declares that
Mithridates carried always about him an Antidote which was made of Figs,
Walnuts, leaves of Rue, and Salt. Quintus Serenus sets down the dose of the
ingredients 20 leaves of Rue, Salt 1 grain, 2 Nuts, and 2 Figs.

Grapes are the chief of all Antumnal fruits, as Gal. testifies 2 de Al. fac.
c. 9. because they nourish more then other fruits, and contain least evil
juice; so that they be fully ripe. That they nourish well is seen by those that
keep vineyards; for they having kept them not above two months, and feeding
only upon Figs and Grapes grow very fat. But the flesh which it begets, is
less firm and solid then that which is produced from flesh.

The goodness of Grapes is not the same in all Countr^^^ those that grow in
cold places, and come not to perfect maturity, are (...) sharp, and hurtful to
health. On the contrary, those which grow (...) ^ountreys have a grateful
sweetness, refresh the body and moisten it (...). They are convenient for
children, by reason of the great likeness of (...) ^emper, for they are hot
and moist. We have seen some children la^^^ (...) with Hectic Fevers and in
Consumptions, recovered merely by eatin^ (...), which they eat in all their
meals with bread. But take heed that the^ (...), and if they be given to those
that are very weak, let the skins be (...), lest they should oppress the
stomach. Newly cropped from the Vine the^ (...) hot, and retain a fierinesse from
the beams of the sun; but if they be ke^^ (...) two or three days, they grow
colder. Grapes that are hung up are reckon (...) long the cooling meats.

Raisins of the Sun are (...) fit to breed choler as all sweet things are: for
cold and temperate things nour^^ ^ell. Of these, those are the best which are
covered with a thinskin, and have most nourishment, they loosen and cleanse the
belly, but not so much as dry Figs, but they are better for the stomach; and
profit the reins, breast and bladder. Galen does write that the whole substance
of a Raisin of the Sun resembles that of the liver.

This sympathy which they have with the liver, was the occasion of making the
Electuary of Raisins, called also the Electuary of Wine, most convenient for
the strengthening of the Liver, and therefore much commended in the Dropsy. We
have seen some children recovered from a Dropsy by the use of this Electuary
simply prepared. Raisins were boiled in White Wind to the consumption of the
Wine, and strained through a hair sive; then were they boiled again to the
thickness of Marmaled: this they used every meal, with some particular purges.

There are much used in Germany and other places, laxative Raisins, very
convenient for those that are bound, and for children that cannot endure the
taste of other medicines. The description whereof is in the Imperial
Pharmacopaea, after this manner.

of Sena of Alexandria iiij. of the best Cinnamon, Ginger, an. iiij. Endivewater
and White Wind an. iiij. Infuse them for 6 or 8 hours, let them boil and press
them gently. To this decoction, after straining, add of white Sugar iiij. boil
them to the thickness of a Syrup, then put in of the lesser Raisins picked xij.
Then boil them according to art to a just measure.

Sweet Almonds are moderately hot, having a fat and oily nature: they
attenuate, cleanse, move urine, free the Lungs from obstruction, and soften the
roughness of the Lights. They nourish abundantly, and breed good juice, but
thick: they increase seed, provoke sleep, because they are full of vapors and
hard of digestion, through the thickness of their substance. They are prepared
many ways for the palate, by Cooks, Bakers, and Comfitmakers.

Pine-nuts come near the nature of Almonds: they are hot and moist, and breed
ill juice, and are of hard concoction, they increase milk and seed, and provoke
venery; they cleanse, moisten, refresh and pinguefie, so that they are wholesome
for such as are troubled with Coughs, Ptisick, and Consumption.

Filberds come near the temper of Pine-apples and Almonds, but they are of
harder digestion, and oppress the stomach, eaten in too great a quantity they
swim at the top of the stomach, causing wind and pains of the head. They are
good for those that are nephritick, being eaten before meat, and preserve them
from the stone.

Walnuts are hot and dry, they nourish little, are of hard digestion, hurt the
stomach, encyease choler, cause pain of the head, and are hurtful to the Lungs;
they expel the wor^s, being preserved with Sugar when they are green, the
rind first taken off; they corr^barate the stomach, they resist poison being
dry, as before we have said in our discourse of Figs.

The (...) School teaches, that they are to be eaten after fish; the reason of
which (...) because that fish are cold and moist, beget phlegm, and are easily
putrefied, (...) in a weak, cold and moist stomach. Some also which live in
muddy and ^^^ding waters are dangerous: but dry nuts heat and dry, expel
putrefaction, and (...) the malignant quality.

Chestnuts in (...) active qualities are temperate, inclining to heat, in their
passive, dry; they give a nourishment copious enough, but of hard digestion,
produce a thick juice and excite wi^d: they bind the belly. Boiled with fennel
they are less windy, then roasted, which do much well the stomach, yet they may
be corrected many ways, which the Cooks best know.

Melons are cold and moist, they quench thirst, move urine, are easily
putrefied, and being corrupted, come near the nature of poison, whence proceeds
a choleric disease and malign Fever.

Their evil quality is corrected, if they be eaten with much salt, and eaten in
a little quantity before meals, that they may be the better digested, and
sooner descend to the guts; if Wine be drank after them and meat of good juice
follow in the same meal.

Some say that Wine after Melons is naught, because it carries their evil
juice sooner to the innermost parts of the body, where it does more harm. But
that may be, if the Wine be weak, watery, and less potent, or drank in a small
quantity, but if it be generous Wine, drank in good quantity, it corrects the
fault of the Melons, causing a good concoction thereof, so that the juice of
them being carried to the veins, loses its evil quality.

Cucumers are cold and moist almost in the third degree, they afford ill juice
to the body and easily putrefi'd, whence in Malignant Fevers they afford
matter for Diarrhoea's and Dysenteries.

The Gourd or Pumpion is cold and moist in the second degree, it nourishes
little, begets bad juice, yet more wholesome then that of Cucumers; it is used
most commodiously in Broths in hot seasons, for it cools and moistens, and
tempers the heat of the choler.

Artichokes are hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, they increase
wind, excite venery, and cause heaviness in the head. The French men make this
meat to be of an evil juice, and especially when it grows a little hard. For
then it has choleric juice in greater quantity, and a more woody substance.
So that the substance increases melancholy humors, and the juice thereof
choleric and a dust.

CHAP. XVI. Of Animals fit for nourishment, and first of Flesh in general.
THE Flesh of Animals is very different, not only as to the several kinds, but
also as to the same species, in reference to the age, country, food, habit,
gelding, sex, and preparation.

The Flesh of young living creatures, especially of those newly born, is slimy,
soft, moist, and excrementitious, especially where they are most moist by
nature; yet it is sooner concocted, and makes the belly soluble.

The Flesh of those that are old is hard, dry, nervous, hard of digestion,
giving little and bad nourishment.

But the Flesh of those that are of a midling age, is of a midling constitution.

Those which feed in moist and moorish places, have moist flesh, and full of
superfluities; but they that feed on dry places and mountains, are void of
excrements, more easy of digestion, and apter to nourish.

The Flesh of wild beasts is less excrementitious and dryer then that of tame
ones, whose flesh is more moist and excrementitious.

Lean and extenuated Flesh is hard and dry, hard of digestion, and giving
little nourishment; but those which are fat and full of grease, and over moist,
hurtful to the stomach, breeding nauseatenesse, if the fat be excessive. But if
it be neither too lean nor too fat, for goodness of substance and sweetness
of taste, it is to be preferred above the rest.

Those creatures which feed in places where there are good pastures, are
sweeter and more nourishing. So the Sheep which in our thickets feed upon
thyme, lavander, rosemary, and other aromatical plants, have much sweeter flesh
then those that feed in mountains, where those plants are not. So mountain
Partridges are less sweet then those that feed in the low woods.

The Flesh of gelt beasts is more tender, sweet and of an easier digestion: as
appears in Wethers, Oxen, Barrow-hogs, and Capons.

The flesh of the male is to be preferred before the flesh of the female,
because the males are hotter and dryer, and more laborious, and less burdened
with excrements, as appears in Oxen and Wethers.

Boiled Flesh is moister and sooner descends.

Roasted Flesh the dryer, because the fat and moisture is consumed by the fire;
fried it is more dry, and acrimonious; being seasoned with salt and spices,
they are yet hotter and dryer.

Concerning Flesh roasted and boiled, there is a doubt moved by Aristotle, Prob.
54. sect. 1. where he affirms, that roasted. Flesh is moister then boiled. Which
seems repugnant both to sense it self, and to the Theoreme set down. Yet the
question is resolved by saying, that roasted Flesh has more of its own proper
and natural moisture, but boiled has more adventitious, which is sucked in
while it lies in the water; being dryer, by reason that their proper moisture
goes out all into the broth: which is the reason that they nourish less then
roasted meats, if they be eaten apart and without their liquor.

Boiled Flesh is best for those who are yet growing, and therefore of a hot
temper, as also to those who are sick of hot and dry diseases; and that chiefly
in hot and dry Countries and seasons of the year. But roasted meats are most
convenient for those who are of a cold and moist temper, who are loose, and
subject to cold and moist diseases.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Flesh of four-footed Beasts.
THE Flesh of Wethers in our Country is the best and most in use, and most
convenient for every age, complexion, and time. It Is temperate or at least
moderately hot and moist. That is best either to roast or boil, which is of
Wethers of one or two years old, nourished in pure air and good pasture.

Flesh of Ewes is of an evil juice, excrementitious, hard of digestion, by
reason of its slimy and clammy substance, and frequent breeding.

The flesh of Lambs is moist, phlegmatic, and mucous, and for that cause not to
be used in the judgment of Galen, l. de vict. atten. c. 8. which is to be
understood of Lambs newly dropped from the Ewe; not of those which are grown, for
they give good nourishment, and are of easy digestion. Hence the flesh of them
is most convenient for those which are of a tender and delicate constitution,
and who exercise little. Besides there is a difference in the Countries where
they grow, For at Paris Lamb is much valued, with us Kids flesh is preferred
before it.

The flesh of Kids is moister then that of Lambs, and therefore to be preferred
especially with us; it nourishes moderately, generates a thin and moist blood,
loosens the belly, and is better roasted then boiled.

The flesh of Oxen is hot and moist, being absolutely considered, because all
flesh is of that temper, as being made of hot and moist blood. Comparatively
though in respect of other creatures, it is hard and dry, of hard digestion and
binds the belly; it generates a dryer and melancholy blood, it affords a firm
nourishment if it be well concocted, and therefore profitable for strong bodies
and those that use much exercise.

Veal in its active qualities is temperate, in the passive moist, of a good
juice, easy concoction, and fit for both healthy and sick people. But it is
more convenient for those that live soft and sedentary lives, and for such as
are of a tender constitution, then to Porters, Mariners, or Ditchers, and
others who undergo hard labors, for whom Beef is more convenient.

Hogs flesh in the active qualities is temperate, in the passive moist: Galen
affirms it to be most like the flesh of men, and that it nourishes above all
meats; it has a thick and clammy juice, and therefore affords a firm and
durable nourishment which is not easily dissipated.

The flesh of Pigs is very moist, mucous and phlegmatic, more excrementitious
then the former, and moister; so that it nourishes less. The nourishment which
it gives is easily distributed by reason of the thinness of the substance.

The flesh of Hares is dry, hard, and thick, the parent of melancholy blood,
which is to be understood of the old ones; for the flesh of Leverets is very
delicate, and equally esteemed with Partridge for daintiness: those to be
preferred which are not above 2, 3, or 4 months old.

Rabbets come next the nature of Hares, though here the difference lies between
them, that Rabbets are best which are of midling age. The older are dry and
hard, those which are too young, called sucking Rabbets are overmoist and
excrementitious. The wild ones are preferred before those which are tame, as
being less moist and excrementitious. The tame ones which are brought up at
home, are fatter indeed, and more fleshy, but much inferior in taste and
wholsomenesse to the wild ones; they taste of the pasture where they feed; and
therefore if they eat Cabbage, as sometimes they do, they taste abominably. If
they eat wheat, they grow very fat, and afford a delicate nourishment. The
wild ones which in our thickets are fed with Thyme, Lavender, Origan, and
other aromatical herbs, afford a pleasant and wholesome nourishment.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Entrails and extreme parts of Beasts.
THe substance of the Liver considered in the generation thereof, affords a
thick nourishment, and of hard digestion and fit to increase obstructions. Yet
there is great difference in respect of the several sorts of creatures, from
whence they are taken. For the Livers of Hens, Capons, Geese, Chickens, and
Pullets, are excellently good. But concerning the Livers of four footed Beasts,
those of Kids, Calves, and Hogs, yield an indifferent good nourishment.

The Spleen produces a melancholy juice, and affords a very depraved
nourishment: which is hard to be concocted and distributed. The Reins are of a
hard concoction by reason of the solidity of the substance, wherewith they are
endued; they breed a thick juice and evil, by reason of the various and
excrementitious humors which continually oppress them.

The Heart has a kind of fibrous flesh, solid and hard, and therefore is of a
hard digestion, slowly distributed, and generating an evil juice; yet if it be
well concocted, it affords not a little nourishment, and that not evil.

The Lungs are of an easier digestion then the Liver and Spleen, because they
are softer and looser, yet not inferior to the Liver, as to nourishment.

All Kernels have this common among them, that in meat they appear sweet,
tender, and short; they give a thick nourishment; and if the beast be sound,
very good, and being well concocted in the stomach, they nourish as much as
musculous flesh. Not well digested, they breed phlegmatic and raw juice; this
is chiefly to be understood of the Kernels of the breast; for of other Kernels,
those which are soft generate flegmy blood, but those which are hard, raw blood.

The tongue of Calves, Kids, Lambs, Hogs, and Sheep are of easy digestion, and
breed laudable juice. Neats Tongue is thicker, but more fit for nourishment,
and not dried.

The Brains afford a phlegmatic diet, of a thick juice, hard to be concocted,
slowly descending, it banes the appetite, and causes nauseousnesse.

Fat and Grease are of little nourishment, and rather sauce for our meat then
nourishment. They loosen the tunicles of the stomach, and spoil the retention
thereof; and therefore they breed nauseousnesse, and dull the appetite. In
choleric bodies they turn into choler, and are of hard digestion.

The substance of the Stomach is filmy, and therefore cold, hard, dry, and
glutinous. It is of a hard digestion, generates phlegm, begets obstructions, and
is the cause of many diseases. Soft and Sedentary men must abstain from it; it
being only fit for Potters, Ploughmen, and Mariners.

The same reason serves for the Guts, because they are of like nature; but the
Guts of younger creatures, as of Lambs and Kids, are of an easier substance and
concoction.

The Feet and other extreme parts of four-footed Beasts consisting of
membranes, ligaments, nerves, veins, arteries and gristles, are cold and dry,
clammy, viscous; of little nourishment, and hard digestion. We except the
extreme parts of young and sucking Animals, as before where we spoke of the
Stomach and Guts.

CHAP. XIX. Of the nourishment contained in the parts of four-footed Beasts.
THE Blood is hot and moist, hard of digestion, and breeds many excrements. For
although while it is contained in the veins, it easily turns into the substance
of the body; yet after it is drawn out of them and has lost its spirit and
vigor, it congrals and hardens into an evil substance.

Marrow is hot and moist, it gives good nourishment, if it be well concocted;
taken in too great a quantity, it loosens the stomach, and begets a
nauseousnesse.

Milk in the active qualities is temperate, inclining to cold; in the passive,
moist; by reason of the fat and watery substance, thickning through its caseous
or cheesie quality; and abstersive in respect of its serous quality; asswaging
in respect of its butyrous quality.

That is best, which is white, clear, pure and sincere, sweet, voy'd of all
acrimony, sowrenesse, bitterness, and saltness, rendering a sweet, but little
sent.

For its substance moderate, neither over thick or caseous, nor over thin and
serous, not fluid, but sticking to the nail, if it be dropped thereon new, and
milked from one that is well fed and in good pasture.

Milk thus qualified is of all nourishments the best, it is easily concocted
and presently turned into blood; it nourishes sufficiently, and fattens, but it
swells the stomach and guts. But for all this, it must be used only by those
whose bodies are in health and free from superfluities. In cold stomachs it
turns sour, in choleric at begets adust smell. But bad Milk is most
pernicious, and is so far from breeding good juice, that it breeds very bad
humors in the bodies of those that use it.

The bad effects of vicious Milk Galen shows in l. 3. de Alim. fac. c. 15. by
the example of nurses, who in times of famine used wild herbs, and their
children sucking their Milk, became full of ulcers and other diseases. As also
by the example of Goats fed with Scammony and Tithymal, whose Milk purges.

Of all the sorts of Milk fit for the diet of healthy people, Cowes Milk is the
thickest and fattest; for it has most of the caseous substance, and least of
the serous. So that it loosens the belly less, and nourishes more. It is more
difficultly concocted, more slowly curdled, slower to descend, and more hard to
be distributed, and more liable to breed obstructions. Goats Milk is of a
midling substance, as also Ewes Milk, which is thicker then that of Goats, for
it has more of cheese and less whey; and therefore loosens less, and binds
the more. Asses Milk is thinnest, and most wheyie. But that concerns the cure
more then the preservation of health.

Butter is hot and moist in the first degree, and almost of the same nature as
oil of ripe Olives, as Avicen witnesses. But is more moist, then hot; stale
Butter is hotter and thinner; new, almost temperate in the active qualities. It
nourishes, loosens, fattens, and is good against the cough. The too much use of
it loosens the retention of the stomach, takes away the appetite, and begets a
nauseousnesse; and therefore to be avoided by those who are subject to
loosnesse, as also by men of hot complexions, who burn it and turn it into
choler; it is to be eaten first, for it speedily descends into the paunch and
makes way for the other meat; but if it be eaten last, it loosens the stomach,
and hinders the orifice from embracing the meat and closing up.

Cream of milk is like butter, and agrees with it in virtues and qualities:
they differ in this, that Butter is made by art, and Cream swims up of its own
accord.

Cowes milk abounds chiefly with it, by reason it has much fat; it loosens the
stomach, swims above the meat, and throws down the nourishment before it be
concocted, sends vapors to the head, and begets a thick juice.

Being boiled it has a substance like new Cheese, and breeds thick juice, the
wheyie part being extracted by the fire, it hurts the stomach less then new
pressed cheese: it is good against hot defluxions, allayes thirst, provokes
sleep; but it is hurtful to a cold stomach and diseases of the nerves. Being
old and hardened, it is of a hard digestion; it breeds thirst, nourishes
little, it binds the belly, and begets wind.

All Cheese has not the same nature and temper, but according to the variety
of the creatures from which it is taken, and according to the age, smell,
taste, and other circumstances thereof.

Cheese from Cows, nourishes more, but is hard of concoction, Cheese of Ews
milk has a thicker substance, but is more easily concocted, it nourishes
less, but affords a better nourishment then the former. Cheese of Goats milk
is worse, and more hardly concocted by reason of its acrimony.

Old Cheese is hot because of the acrimony, and sometimes putrefaction which it
contracts, through the mixture of salt or runnet, when it is made; and by how
much the older it is, by so much the sharper it is, and by consequence hotter
and dryer; and as Avicen says, hot in the third degree. Hence by reason of its
heat and dryness, it is of hard digestion, and apt to increase the stone,
especially if it be too much salted. It is therefore to be avoided, because as
Avicen says, together with Galen and Dioscorides, it is of a difficult
concoction and distribution, binds the belly, and turns into klack choler; but
taken in a little quantity after other meats, it helps concoction, though of it
self it be of hard digestion.

While it is New, and soft, it is cold and moist, more windy then hard and dry,
because of the moisture, but less provoking thirst, and less binding; it
nourishes well and breeds fat, useful to the stomach, it is easily distributed
into the members, being not of such a hard and evil juice, as old Cheese; yet
it is of hard digestion, and causes the stone and other distempers.

That which stinks is worst of all, but that which smells well, is wholsomer.
Being sharp and salt, it is hot and dry, causes thirst, and evil juice: that
which is sour is of an evil juice, and cold. That which is sweet and fat, is
moderately hot, nourishes more, and is of a better juice.

Fat Cheese and full of butter, is better; that which is lean and without
butter, is far worse.

CHAP. XX. Of nourishment from Birds.
THE flesh of Hens in the active qualities is temperate, in the passive moist,
of easy digestion, of good juice, and full of nourishment. Avicen writes that
it increases the wit and understanding, that it clears the voice, and increases
seed; all which things are to be understood of those which are of a middle age,
moderately fat; for old Hens are condemned, as being hard, nervous, lean, and
only fit for hatching.

The flesh of Capons and Cock-pullets, is of the same nature and temper with
the flesh of Hens that are young, but with this difference, that those pullets
have a thinner substance and nourish less, and therefore not fit for laboring
bodies.

Young Pigeons are reckoned among the most laudable nourishments, they are of
an easy digestion, they breed a juice neither thick nor thin, but midling
between both.

Turkeys do not give place to Capons nor Hens if they be young and killed two
or three days before: for if they be old and new killed, they have a hard
flesh, and more difficult to digest.

The flesh of Geese is hot and moist, hard of digestion, and full of
Excrements. And the older they are, so much the harder, tougher, and unfit for
nourishment; obstructive they are, and full of evil juice; but those which are
of a middle age and well fatted, are better and tenderer; and in many places
reckoned for dainties.

Goslins are unwholesome, containing a slimy and excrementitious nourishment.

Of Birds, Partridges are the chiefest, without which the most sumptuous
banquets lose their grace and splendor, their flesh is very toothsome,
especially being young, and hung up a little after they are killed; they
increase good blood, and that in great plenty, and void of excrements; they
increase the memory, and multiply seed, exciting lust. And Cardanus affirms
that the long use of Partridge cures the Pox, the whole mass of blood and all
the body being renewed by them.

Ring-doves, Turtles, Quails, Thrushes, Blackbirds, Larks, and other mountain
birds obtain the next place to Partridges; they breed excellent juice, nourish
well, and have very little excrement.

About the Quail there is some controversy. For Galen, Pliny, and Avicen
relate that those who eat Quails often, are subject to cramps, the cause of
which by Pliny is said to be because that Quails do feed much upon black
Hellebore. Avicen adds, that they have an occult quality that causes the
cramp. Others deny this opinion, the chief of which party is Averroes,
affirming that the flesh of Quails is most wholesome, and that it generates
good blood; which is most consentaneous to reason: for there are few countries
in which Hellebore is so plentiful; those Birds feeding most upon the best
herbs and corn. Neither does experience teach us that those who eat Quails,
are troubled with the Epilepsie. Add to this, that by the benefit of God they
were granted to the Israelites in the desert, which would not have been, but
that they afforded singular good nourishment. And although there did arise from
thence heavy diseases among the israelites, yet that proceeded from the abuse
of that meat which they gourmandized, so that they could not sufficiently
concoct it: whence came crudities and putrefaction.

But this is a general rule concerning the flesh both of Beasts and Birds, that
they differ much according to their age, place of breeding and manner of
dressing. When as the flesh of those that are young and growing, is much better
then of those that are old and declining; but as the flesh of those that are in
the prime of their age obtains a midling nature: so the flesh of those that are
new born, is mucous, moist and full of excrement.

Roasted and fried in a frying pan, it is dryer: boiled, it is moyster; but
those creatures that live in moist and moorish places, have a more moist and
excrementitious flesh, and harder of digestion; those that feed upon mountains,
have dryer flesh, more easily concocted, and void of excrement.

There are Eggs which come from several creatures; but Hens Eggs are most in
use: they consist of a twofold substance, of a different temper; the yolk, and
the white; the yolk is moderately hot and moist, it affords excellent
nourishment, it sympathizes with the blood, and is therefore soonest turned
thereinto. And therefore vulgarly it is said to generate as much blood as it
weighs, so void of excrement it is. The white is cold and moderately dry, as
Galen witnesses.

Those are the best Eggs, which are white, long and new; for Eggs of one days
laying, are called golden, of two, silver; and of three, iron.

Rear Eggs, that being moderately boiled in water, tremble in the hand, are
fittest of all for the nourishment of the body, as Galen testifies, and nourish
more then Eggs more boiled.

Eggs boiled in the shell so long till they may be supt off, nourish less then
those that tremble by reason of the thinness of the substance: they pass
easily away and and loosen the belly gently.

Eaten fasting, they clear the voice, facilitate the birth, allay coughing, and
resist the poison of the pestilence. Both those that may be supt, and those
that tremble, for sickly people, old folks, infants, and such as are troubled
with the Ptisick, Bleeding, or any other notable evacuation, are very
profitable.

Eggs hardened with long boiling, are of hard concoction, they beget a thick
juice, and bind the belly. Roasted in the cinders they harden more, and are of
a worse and thicker nourishment: they endure a greater force of the fire, and
lose more of their natural moisture, then hardened by boiling.

Fried Eggs are worst of all, they are of a hard concoction, they pass slowly,
they beget a thick and ill juice, and corrupt the humors also that are mixed
with them; which is to be understood of Eggs fried to an extraordinary
hardness.

There is a kind of Cheese-cake made of Eggs dressed in a pan, with a good
quantity of butter, which is very wholesome: which may be also said of Eggs
beaten together in a platter, to a moderate thickness with butter-milk, and
sugar added to them afterward, for they are easily concocted, and nourish very
much.

CHAP. XXI. Of Fish.
FIsh in general are of a cold and moist temper, though others more, others
less; and as to their substance they vary much, some being of an easy, some
of a hard digestion, and very excrementitious.

Fish that live in filthy, muddy, stinking waters, are most unwholesome. For
those are very much condemned that breed in puddles, lakes, small streams, and
muddy; or in rivers defiled with the excrements of Cities.

Those Fish are best approved of, that breed in gravelly waters, which are very
clear, for they are more easily concocted, and they increase blood which is
neither too thick, nor too thin.

Fish that are scaly, and have a substance that crumbles easily, are more
wholesome, then those which have no scales. For they have a dryer substance, but
the others a more slimy, moist, and glutinous matter.

Fish that live in the deep sea are better then those which are tossed up and
down by the waves in the shallow places, and rendered more dry by the continual
beating of the sea: those that live near the shore are most impure, because the
sea is there less agitated, and consequently more muddy and less wholesome.

From these general rules it will be very easy to distinguish the nature,
wholsomenesse or unwholsomenesse of the several sorts of Fish; that it will be
needless to make any further discourse thereof.

CHAP. XXII. Of Sauces.
CInnamon is hot in the third degree, dry in the second. It provokes urine, and
the flowers, quickens the sight, attenuates, cuts, digests, and helps
concoction, dissipates wind, corroborates the parts, and binds gently.

Cloves are hot and dry in the third degree: they are appropriated to the
brain, heart, stomach, and womb. They strengthen the brain, consume the matter
of distillations, quicken the understanding, strengthen the memory, correct the
cold and moist distemper of the brain, and are profitable against diseases
which do thence proceed. They comfort the vital spirits, expel the cramp,
forward the concoction of the stomach, take away nauseousnesse, and dispell
wind; they recreate the womb, and assuage the distempers thereof; they quicken
the sight, and excite venery.

Ginger is hot in the third degree, and moist in the first, and is presently
rotten by reason of its moisture. It strengthens the stomach, dispels wind,
and cures the want of appetite caused by cold humors.

Pepper is hot and dry in the third degree: the long Pepper is less dry, so
that it is sooner rotten. The white is sharper and hotter then the black; it
helps the concoction of the stomach, moves the appetite, dispels wind, is good
against the cough and affections of the breast; it facilitates the birth, and
dispels dimnesse from the sight.

Nutmeg is hot and dry in the second degree; and therefore strengthens the
stomach; it dispels wind, sweetens the breath, suppresses loosnesse, helps
concoction, and is good in cold affections of the brain, nerves, and womb.

Saffron is hot in the second degree and dry in the first, it binds gently,
helps concoction, moves urine, excites venery, has a cordial virtue, resists
poison and putrefaction, it wonderfully helps those that are troubled with
Coughs, Asthma's Phthisick, and Pleurisies; it brings an excellent color into
the face, opening the obstructions of the Liver, and helping concoction, if it
be moderately used: it brings down the birth, flowers, and secundines. But the
too much use and smelling thereof hurts the head, for it fills it; it troubles
the mind, and attenuates the spirits and disperseth them, so that being taken
in too great a quantity it hastens death.

We knew a woman, that to bring down her flowers, used such an abundance of
Saffron, which caused her flowers to come down in so great a quantity, as that
she dyed in three days.

Dodoneus says, it is so extraordinary a medicine in affections of the Lungs,
that it has brought back life to those who have been at the point of death by
reason of the Phthisick, being taken to the quantity of a scruple or half a
scruple in sweet Wine. Being taken also in the same manner, he says, it takes
away the heavy pains that precede a Fever.

Mustard corrects the cold and moist distemper of the stomach, cleanses it from
phlegm, helps concoction, and revives the appetite.

Salt is hot in the second degree, dry in the third, it cleanses, digests,
binds, thickens, drives away putrefaction, excites the appetite, helps the
concoction of the stomach, loosens the belly, and makes most meats savoury. But
used in too great a quantity, it begets the Stone, the Itch, Scabs, and Scurfe;
it increases the Scurvy, as appears by those who feed much on salt fish and
flesh; it weakens the sight, diminishes the seed, and is hurtful to choleric
and melancholy people.

Meats much seasoned with Salt being often used, have the same ill qualities,
and besides that, they are harder and more difficult to digest, because their
natural moisture is consumed, which causes their substance to grow thick and
hard, and the less capable of concoction.

New and sweet Oil pressed out of ripe Olives, is moderately hot and moist, it
mollifies, loosens, asswages, tempers all acrimony, kills worms, and resists
poison.

Sugar is hot and dry in the first degree; it expels putrefaction, cleanses,
and therefore helps the stomach, because it carries away the phlegm thereof: but
if the stomach be full of choler it is hurtful, by reason that it soon turns
into choler. It is good for the reins and bladder by cleansing them from gravel
and slimy phlegm, it cleanses the breast, loosens the belly, nourishes very
much; but the too often use thereof begets obstructions, as all sweet things,
which the Liver speedily draws to it self, and with it the other meats before
they are concocted; it hurts the teeth, for it blacks and rots them; and
therefore after eating thereof, the mouth is to be washed.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Honey.
Honey is hot and dry in the second degree: yet there is some difference in
respect of the places where the Bees gather it. That is hotter and dryer which
is made in hotter places, stored with Thyme, Lavender, Rosemary, and other
Aromatical herbs: but in cold Countries where these herbs are not, it is less
hot. In general that which is yellow is hotter then the white. And our senses
do tell us, that some is more sweet then others; some sharper, and consequently
of greater force and virtues. It cleanses, loosens, provokes urine, heals the
cough, and resists rottenness. So that horary fruits if they be preserved in
Honey, though there be nothing that rots sooner, keeps unputrefied for many
years. It is good for old folks, and people of moist tempers, and in the winter
time; hurtful to young choleric stomachs, and in the summer. It is good
against the Stone, Asthma's, and other affections of the Lungs. It nourishes
little, it refreshes the strength of body and mind, recreates the senses, and
makes them more acute.

We thought good to explain the nature and virtues of Honey in a particular
Chapter, both because of the excellency thereof, as also because it is not so
much to be reckoned among sauces, as meats themselves. And lastly, because
Galen writes, that the nature of Honey is different from that of Plants and
Animals.

The excellency thereof is confirmed by many authorities and examples. For
Pliny calls Honey divine Nectar. And again, in imitation of Aristeus, he
says that Honey is none of the meanest advantages to humane life. But that it
was in very much use among the Ancients, and availed much to the preservation
of health, there are many Histories to confirm. Pythagoras (so says Laertius)
lived frugally contented many times with nothing but Honey, and lived to the
90th year; and he affirmed that those might live without diseases, who used
much Honey. Athenaeus relates that the diet of the Pythagoreans was bread and
Honey. Gal. 5. de san. tuend. c. 4. relates the story of Antiochus a Physician,
and Telephus a Grammarian, of which the first was wont to eat every day at the
third hour bread and Honey, seldom raw, oftenest boiled, and with other diet
set down there, he exceeded fourscore years. The last for his breakfast eat raw
Honey with Rice boiled in water, and lived above 100. years. Plin. l. 12. c. 24.
relates of Pollion, who exceeded 100 years, that when the Emperor asked him how
he did to prolong his days to that age, answered, by using Oil without, and
Honey within; which he learnt from Democritus, who being asked how a man might
live in health, answered, If he oil his outside, and use Honey inwardly.

The same Democritus being in his old age weary of his life, endeavored to end
his days by abstaining from nourishment. But at the feast of Ceres, the women
importuning him not to sadden the house at such a time of general mirth, he
caused a vessel of Honey to be brought him, and merely by the vapor thereof
sustained his life for some days. Atheneus writes, that the Cyrntans who
inhabited Corsica, were therefore long lived because they fed much upon Honey,
of which there was great plenty in that place. Lastly, the excellency of Honey
is confirmed by the testimony of sacred Scripture, where speaking of John the
Baptist, it says, He shall eat Honey and Butter, that he may know to choose the
good and reject the evil. For good humors being generated by Honey, and out of
good humors good spirits, which are the causes of all the actions of the body
and brain, it follows that the use thereof increases the wit and understanding;
the operation whereof consists in perfect knowing.

The nature of Honey is secret enough, it being uncertain under what head and
order of things to reduce it: Galen having also written that the nature thereof
is different from all plants and animals: and Authors differ much about this
matter, some saying that it proceeds simply and purely from the air, and that
it is gathered by the Bees for food, and carried into their hives; other
affirming that it is collected by the Bees from the juice of plants. The first
opinion is held by Aristotle, Galen, and diverse others: and experience tells us
that in Countries abounding with Honey in the spring time and in the morning,
the leaves are to be seen all covered with a dew falling down from the air.
Therefore Honey is a certain airy and fat dew proceeding from certain fat
vapors ascending from the earth, and condensed in the air, which is gathered
by the Bees from off the flowers and leaves of plants, and reserved in their
hives for food. Yet there remains a doubt, whether any Honey can be generated
from the juice of flowers, when as it is without doubt that wax is made by the
Bees out of the juice of herbs: which having so great a likeness with Honey, it
is not unlikely that Honey is generated out of the same juices, when there is no
dew: this is most certain, that Honey has a resemblance with the virtues of
those plants out of which it is collected. So that which is gathered from
Thyme, smells of Thyme; that which is made in Sardinia where there is plenty of
Wormwood, is bitter: in Pontus, it is poison, because of the abundance of
Rhododendron which grows there. But the virtues of the plants may be easily
communicated to the Honey, while it lies and sticks to them.

That Honey is the best which is of a yellow color, sweet savor, having
neither the taste nor smell of the flowers, yet pleasant to the palate. Yet the
white Honey, such as is that of Narbon and Attica, is more excellent for
nourishment, by reason that it is the more temperate; yet the yellow is to be
preferred in medicines. But all Honey is the nourishment of medicines, because
it does not only perfectly nourish, as being most perfect and incorruptible and
free from excrements, but also because it warms the body, cleanses the stomach
and guts from the phlegm that sticks to them, and loosens the belly, and affords
not a few other benefits to the body.

Honey gathered in the Spring, is better then that gathered in Autumn, as being
taken from new wax, and generated from new plants. Summer Honey is worse then
that which is gathered in the Spring, because it is more sharp and hot. The
winter Honey is worst of all, for it evaporates from the wax and grows thick.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Drink, and the matter fit for Drink.
PVre water is cold and moist, that is best which is clear, limpid, without any
muddinesse, or matter swimming in it, without any taste or smell, thin and
smooth, which runs speedily through the Hypochondrium, and is presently
distributed through the body; soon hot and soon cold. To these marks of good
water, may be added two more, viz. Take two linen rags of the same weight, and
moisten them in two several sorts of water, and then dry them in the sun, if
one be dried before the other, that water is the best: when they are both dry
weigh them again, and if one be lighter then the other, that water is the best.

As to the places whence water is taken; fountain water is to be preferred, so
it have the above named qualities; for if it want them, it is to be rejected.
Hip. li. de loc. Aer. and aq. sets down other properties, that it should flow
toward the Eastern Sun, especially in the summer. That it should glide through
clean ground, neither muddy nor clayie, but through sand and gravel; and which
is hot in the winter and cold in the summer. For that shows that it flows from
the deep bowels of the earth, which by Antiperistasis, are hot in the winter
and cold in the summer. Those that rise against the Northern or Southern Sun
are worse, as being raw, and heavy, and passing slowly through the body.

Rain water next to fountain water is counted best, and by some preferred
before it, if it have its due properties, which are these; that it be brought
in earthen pipes into a covered cistern; if it pass through a gravelly place;
if it fall in the spring time in gentle showers and not in storms; if it be
kept in a very clean cistern, and that it wash down along with it no filth from
the tiles.

We have given the first place to fountain water, according to the opinion of
Hip. Galen, and Avicen. But there are many reasons, why rainwater is to be
preferred before it. And first Celsus l. 2. c. 18. The lightest Water is Rain,
next Fountain, next River, next Well, next Snow, next Icie-water, the more
heavy is Lakewater, the heaviest of all is Puddle-water. Aetius Tetrabib. l.
1. sermon. 3. c. 165. Rainwater, says he, is the lightest of all and is most
quickly changed. Hip. l. de Aer. loc. and aq. praises rainwater, as being
light, sweet, clear and thin; for that it being the lightest and thinnest part
is drawn up by the Sun.

Vitruv. l. 8. c. 9. The Water, says he, which is collected from showers, has
more wholesome virtues, because it is drawn up from the most clear and subtle
fountains, and then strein'd by the motion of the air, it descends melting in
showers upon the earth. Averroes in Cant. says, that rainwater is the best;
and more excellent then river or fountain water. These authorities are backed
also by experience, for rainwater being weighed, proves lightest, cools and
heats quickly, oppresses not the Hypochondrium, but passes suddenly through the
body, having neither in color, smell, nor taste any manifest quality. The
thinness of it appears in this, that pulse are sooner boiled in it then in
fountain water. Besides all sorts of plants do show the wholsomnesse of
rainwater; which are better nourished with rain then with any artificial
watring. Nay as Pliny affirms, reeds that grow in puddles, will not come to
maturity nor increase without rain. And Aristotle 8. l. de. hist. Animal. that
the fish themselves which live continually in the water, do not live nor
engender well in dry years. You will say that the humors dissolved into
vapors and carried up by their levity to the stars, do borrow from them a
certain vivifick virtue; which it afterward imparts to the things below.

It may be objected that snow and hail are of the same matter with rain, yet
the water which they melt into is rejected by all. Paulus answers, that snow
and icie water is of all the most pernicious, because all the thin parts are
pressed out by the congelation.

Secondly, It may be objected out of Galen, that rainwater suddenly putrefies,
and has an astringent quality. But Paulus answers in these words, Let no man
imagine putrefying water to be the worst, when the proclivity which it has to
alteration proceeds from its virtue, not from its vice. And Galen himself, 1 de
fac. Alim. says, that those things which are easily concocted are easily
corrupted; and on the contrary those things which are hard of digestion are
slow to corrupt. As to the binding quality, there is an answer given by Avicen,
who says that rainwater therefore seems binding, because it is presently
distributed and passes presently to the urinary passages. Hence it happens
that the excrements not being well moistened, through their dryness beget
astriction: for of it self rainwater cannot bind, when as it is so thin and
airy; for those things that bind are of a terrene substance.

By this which has been said it appears that rainwater seems to be preferred.

Yet with the consent of most approved Authors, we do prefer the fountain,
because if it have the conditions before mentioned, it remains in the same
state, and is not altered by external causes. On the contrary rainwater
requires so many properties which depend on outward things, that it is
difficult for them all to concur; so that if any one of them be wanting, it
necessarily loses of its perfection; that is, if it fall from tiles not well
washed, or be kept in foul cisterns, or be not filled up in a convenient time.

Now there is a doubt, when is the fittest time to receive this rain water,
since there are not a few that do affirm from Hipp. that water preserved in the
summer time, and descending with thunder, is to be preferred by reason that it
is the most thin and light. But notwithstanding such water by reason of its
thinness and lightness, has a certain prerogative, yet because in the summer
time various exhalations do arise out of the earth, which retain something of
the nature of minerals, and are mingled with the vapors, that cause rain,
therefore those waters are not so commendable: which is hence manifest, because
they do suddenly putrefie, and worms are often bred therein. For lightning and
thunder arise from sulphurous exhalations which do many times infect the air
with their smell. Besides in the summer time the waters of lakes, puddles, and
ditches, contract a putrefaction, and the vapors that rise from them, are part
of the matter of rain, which is therefore vicious and easily corruptible. For
these reasons we prefer that water which is preserved in the spring when the
lakes, pools, and ditches are full of water, and that pure through the plenty
of rain which fell in the winter. Besides it would be impossible to preserve
for the whole year water enough in the summer, when there falls but little rain,
and that not lasting many hours. And experience teaches us this, at Monspeliers
where they use much rainwater, and preserve it in the spring and winter, that
that is best which has all the properties above mentioned, especially for the
boiling of pulse, whereby they grow extremely soft, when as in other waters
they retain a hardness, though for a longer time boiled.

Well-water is thick and heavy, so that it sticks in the bowels and begets
obstructions; yet there is a great difference between well-waters, so that some
do contend in goodness with the fountain, that is, if they have the following
properties; if they have fountains of good water near them, for you may then
imagine that they borrow their waters thence. 2. If they be drawn out of deep
wells; for such are hot in the winter, and cold in the summer, and less liable
to external injuries. 3. If the sun do freely come at them; For the light of
the sun does purify them, and communicates to them a certain vital spirit. 4.
If they be often moved and exhausted, for by that they are made thin and
putrefie less. 5. If they be well and often made clean. 6. If they are remote
from privies and dunghils; whence they may derive any evil quality. Those which
have contrary qualities, are to be accounted noxious. For those which are not
deep unless they arrive from some fountain, are liable to all external
injuries, they freez in winter, are hot in summer, like standing pools. If they
be shut up under roofs, they are deprived of the light of the sun, and are
defiled with a slimy muck. If they be unmoved they grow thick, remain raw,
contract putrefaction, offend the stomach, pass difficultly, and hurt the
bowels. If they are near dunghils and privies, they become tainted with an ill
smell and savor.

River-waters contend with well waters for goodness, and are sometimes to be
preferred before them, sometimes not so well to be esteemed of. But there is
great variety in river waters, for those are best which are sweet and clear,
and drawn out of swift and rapid streams, and which flow in good grounds and in
a temperate region; but those are bad which are drawn out of still, muddy and
troubled rivers, or out of great and running streams which receive the filth of
sinks, kitchings, and privies.

Hence rivers that run by the walls of great cities, have much filthiness in
them, and generate many diseases, unless this caution be used, that the places
destined for the drawing of water, be there only where no filth or excrement is
cast in. For otherwise, if the water which runs by a City be used, it is very
unwholesome. This caution also is to be observed in the use of river-water, that
it be kept in cisterns for some days, for it settles and all the terrestrial
and muddy parts sink down to the bottom.

The water of standing pools and lakes is the worst of all, for by reason they
have but little motion, they soon putrefie, they are thick, raw, and sometimes
pestilent and malignant.

Snow water also and ice-water are very bad, for while they are congealed by
the cold, the more thin parts exhale forth, besides they have an extraordinary
coldness that hurts the stomach: which is to be also understood of snow and
ice-water preposterously used; for though young and strong men do not presently
perceive the mischief, as they grow old they find it, and it brings them into
various diseases of the joints, bowels and nervous parts.

With us it is in this age now in fashion to drink snow and ice-water to cool
themselves, and not a few refrigerate their wine therewith. Which custom is
much disputed about, not only among the Physicians, but also among the vulgar;
some praising, other condemning it. Since therefore we have so fit an occasion
to speak our opinion, we shall accordingly set down our judgment therein.
First in the Theorem, we have already condemned the drinking of water cold with
snow, but with this addition, if it be preposterously used, which must be
accurately explained: for first of all that sort of drink is so cold being
generally considered, that it seems to be absolutely condemned, according to
the opinion of Hipp. Aph. 51. sect. 1. to empty or fill much, or suddenly to
heat or cool, or any other way to disturb the body, is dangerous: for every
excess is an enemy to nature; but what is done by degrees is safe. Therefore
when the body in the heat of summer is extraordinarily hot, to cool it suddenly
with that icy drink, seems very dangerous: the effect of this danger may be
confirmed by the many examples of those who by using this drink, have fell into
terrible diseases, not a few of which we have seen and cured. On the other side
they are infinite who extol this drink to the skies, confirming their opinion
both by reason and experience.

The first reason is taken hence, that our natural heat uses violently to be
opposed and extinguished, by two great enemies, the cold extinguishing, and the
heat dissipating; which makes our bodies in the vehement heat of summer to be
languid and faint, the hot air as it were inflaming the parts of our body, and
dissolving their heat; which dissolution cannot be hindered but by the taking
and applying of refrigerating things. And therefore as in all ages, baths, and
swimming in cold water have been conveniently used to temper this heat of the
body, so also cold drink inwardly taken, produces the same effects.

Secondly, drink is necessary to restore the natural moisture, which is
continually consumed and dissipated by the natural heat; but drink, as being
moist, performs that work: yet if heat were joined with this moisture, it would
forward the resolution of the moisture; and therefore generally men desire cold
drink in the very winter time, to temper that internal heat, and stop the
resolution. But it is much more necessary in the summer time, when there is a
great dissipation of the moisture through the intense heat of the bowels.

Lastly, the coldest drink used in the summer, is best, as appears by the
testimony of many men who affirm, that they have been freed from many diseases
by drinking water cold with ice or snow. Also in Spain and Italy, from the time
that this drink came in use, malign and pestilent Fevers are less common in
the summer then formerly.

But our opinion is this. First there is no doubt but that drink moderately
cold is most convenient for all men. And therefore it has been an old custom
for men to preserve their Wine in cellars under ground, for their use in
summer, and to draw water out of the deepest wells if they be good, and to mix
them in their Wine; if not good, to cool their Wine in the wells themselves.
And we can teach them to make their Wine more cold that way, if they put down
the pots of Wine into the well so low as the nose thereof do not touch the
water, for the air which is near the water is more cold, and pierces the
bottles sooner then the water it self. But for drink cooled with ice and snow,
which has a more intense and freezing coldness; there is more difficulty in
that. Therefore as to that the above mentioned Aphorism of Hipp. is of great
force, to cool or heat much and suddenly, is dangerous. To the resolving of
which doubt, we say that in a country and season very hot, it may be used by
young men of a strong nature, hot temper, and free from ill humors. For then
the bowels require such things as are strong and forcible, especially where
they have been used to such drink, with much exercise. But to others who are
aged, or very young, and have weak entrails, of a phlegmatic or melancholy
temper, and full of excrementitious humors, living an idle life, and
accustoming themselves to little exercise, and much venery, it is most
dangerous. Seeing therefore there are so many circumstances required to make
this drink useful, and those found in so few men, it is better to abstain from
it, and to use drink cooled after the same manner as I have related, which is
most convenient for the preservation of health.

But because the custom of cooling Wine with ice is now so much in fashion,
that many are forced to drink it at banquets wanting other drink, whence I have
seen many very much to suffer; We have thought it worth the while to invent a
way to make it less dangerous. And therefore we give this precept, that before
they drink they eat good store of meat, and those hot, salted and peppered, by
which the stomach being heated, may be able the better to resist the vehement
coldness of the drink. Next, let him drink but little, and that but little
mingled. And to satisfy thirst, recompense the smalnesse of the quantity by
often drinking; for so the harm of that cold drink may be pretty well avoided.
The same caution they may observe who are of a hotter temper, who in the dog
days are very fiery, and subject to burning Fevers, and therefore drink this
sort of drink, hoping thereby great benefit, that they do not use it for some
few days, but in a little quantity and often drinking.

Wine generally considered, in the active qualities is hot, in the passive dry.
It cherishes our heat, strengthens the heart, increases the spirits, refreshes
the strength, purges choler by urine, and forwards the expulsion of all the
excrements.

By Wine generally considered, we mean, that which principally deserves to be
called Wine, and which grows in hot or temperate Countries, and is pressed out
of ripe grapes, and rightly made in the tub: yet there is so much difference,
that some is hot and dry in the third degree, some in the second, and some in
the fourth degree. But that which is pressed from unripe grapes, which is sour
and sharp, deserves not the name of Wine.

But concerning the passive qualities of Wine, great difficulty arises, by
reason that both authorities and reasons differ therein.

For first, Aristot. 17. Prob. sect. 3. says expressly that Wine is hot and
moist.

Secondly, Gal. 3. de cause. pulls. c. ult. affirms that Wine speedily nourishes
by reason of its moisture, and that so much the more because it is hot.

Thirdly, Gal. 1. de san tuen. c. 11. forbids Wine to children for many causes,
but especially because it moistens them too much, and fills them with vapors:
and in the same place he writes that Wine moistens what ever is immoderately
and extraordinarily dry.

Fourthly, Gal. 5. de san. tuen. c. 5. says that Wine is most fit for old men,
not only because of the weak heat which then they have, but because of its
moisture.

Fifthly, Plato 2. de leg. says that Dionysius gave Wine to men as a remedy
against the hardness of old age, that they might seem to wax young again;
their bodies being softened in Wine as iron in fire.

Sixthly, Hipp. of diet. That black sweet Wines, and thin sweet Wines do
moisten.

Seventhly, The juice of ripe grapes of which Wine is made is hot and moist.
Hipp. 2. de diaeta.

Eighthly, Wine is most grateful to humane nature which is hot and moist.

Ninthly, Wine is good for melancholy people, who require moistening: whence
the proverb, As long as they are moistened, so long they are cured.

On the contrary, that Wine is dry, seems proved by the following reasons and
authorities.

First, Gal. 8. simpl. de vin. That heat and dryness are equally proportioned
in it.

Secondly, Paulus Aegineta l. 7. c. 3. confirms this opinion of Galen.

Thirdly, Aetius tetrab. sec. c. de vin. says old Wine is hot in the third
degree.

Fourthly, l. 2. Synops. c. 15. he says, Wine is dry in the second degree. And
c. 16. in the third degree, if it be very old.

Fifthly, Wine contains much spirit, being of a fiery nature and easily
inflamed.

Sixthly, It is good for phlegmatic, and being immoderately drunk, it provokes
thirst, and parches the bowels, whence a red color and pimples in the face of
drunkards.

Seventhly, It is most useful for the cure of ulcers, as Gal. teaches, 4. meth.
c. 5. but ulcers are cured by cleansing and drying.

For the decision of this controversy there is a double distinction to be
observed, the one as to moisture, the other as to the Wine.

The moisture is twofold, actual, and potential; and both these natural or
artificial.

Wine is either unripe, sour and imperfect, or ripe and perfectly concocted.
Then secondly, it is either new or old, and both these either strong or small.

These things premised, we say that Wine is actually moist, when as every fluid
substance is actually moist. Potentially it is dry if it be ripe, generous, and
not too new, as we have set down in the Theoreme.

But that which is crude and acid, very new, as also sweet, is more
predominantly moist. For being raw, it abounds with a phlegmatic watery
moisture, rather natural then accidental: being new, it abounds with much
moisture, that is consumed by fermentation in the tub.

Having thus premised these distinctions, we shall let alone the authorities
and reasons brought for the dryness thereof, and only answer to those that are
brought for the moisture thereof.

To the first we say, That Aristotle calls Wine actually moist, not potentially.

To the second we answer, That Galen considers Wine as it nourishes, in which
respect it is moist actually, and by reason of that actual humidity, it is
easily distributed and changed; whence we say that it speedily nourishes.

To the third we reply, That Galen forbids children to drink Wine, not that it
does potentially, but actually moisten them; for it heats and fills the head
with vapors, and so causes many diseases, but chiefly convulsions.

To the fourth we answer, That Galen commends Wine to old men, not that it
moistens, but because it refreshes their weak heat, and evacuates by urine the
serous humors, wherewith they abound.

To the fifth we answer, That Plato when he says that Wine is a remedy against
old age, understands not the hardness of the body, but the mind; for he
says, that they ought to drink Wine to make them young again, and to comfort
and cheer their spirits; for the affection of the mind, like iron moistened in
the fire, being once softened grows more flexible.

To the sixth we say, That the authority of Hipp. is not contrary to our
opinion, who in the decision of the controversy, have affirmed that
sowre-sweet Wine is predominantly moist.

To the seventh we affirm that Hipp. speaks of new Wine, which he calls the
juice of ripe Grapes; and that we confess is predominantly moist.

To the eighth we make answer, That Wine is pleasing to our nature, because it
nourishes speedily, and recreates the spirits, which effects are not hindered by
the drying quality, which is very moderate, and not much differing from humane
nature.

To the ninth we answer, That it is good for melancholy persons, not as it
moistens, but as it recreates the spirits, comforts the heart, and excites
gladness.

But there are several differences of Wine, that are taken from the nature,
savor, smell, color, and age; which differ also much in their faculties and
virtues.

As to the proper nature of Wines; some Wine is called Oligoforon, because it
indures little mixture of water, other Wines are stronger, and endure a greater
mixture, and by how much the stronger, so much the hotter and dryer it is.

As to the taste, sweet Wines nourish well, and are covetously sucked in by the
bowels. Yet they are thicker and beget obstructions, swell the Hypochondriums,
increasing wind through their thickness, and being easily turned into choler.
They are good for the lungs, neither are they over hot, neither do they afflict
the head, or the nerves: which are related by Hip. 2. de rat. vict. in acute
diseases, text. 2.

Austere and sharp Wines are of a weak color, they stay long in the belly,
neither do they easily pierce the veins, or fall down through the urinary
passages; they are bad in affection of the Lungs: they are good in fluxes of
the belly, as having a binding quality.

As to the smell, odoriferous and fragrant Wines are most commended, they
restore the strength, refresh the spirits, are good for old men, only they fill
the head and the nerves, and therefore they are bad for those that are troubled
with Catarrhs and other affections of the head.

From the color, a certain judgment cannot be made of the virtues, for some
white Wines are less watery and strong, others more watery and small; generally
the white Wines heat more then the brown and yellow: among the brown Wines the
most generous are Rhenish, Cretan, and Muscatell; Of the red some are more,
some less strong. But for the most part, those that have a deep red, and come
nearest to a blackness, so much the less generous they are; and by how much
the thicker they are, by so much they obstruct the more. But thin Wines open
the passages, provoke sweat and urine, though they nourish less then the thick.

As to the age, new Wines, which as yet keep the taste of the must, are more
watery and weaker then is convenient for Wine; they are excrementitious and of
a hard concoction: they do not sufficiently forward the distribution of the
nourishment, but keep it long in the belly, and swell the Hypochondriums, they
cause heavy dreams, obstruct the bowels, and beget the stone, especially those
which are sweet, thick, troubled, and not well cleansed, still retaining the
nature of the Must.

Old Wines which were at first strong, are more sharp and heady, and they heat
more then ordinary: they hurt the head and nerves, easily intoxicate, and
attenuate the body by daily use, and they are hurtful to hot tempers, unless
they be well mixed ere they be drank. Yet in some cold Regions, Wines that are
austere and sharp are better and more wholesome after the second or third year,
and by a longer concoction they lose their austerity.

Wines of a middle age, are most convenient for the diet of sound and unhealthy
persons; especially if they be well settled and purged; for the heat of the Wine
puts it self out in longer time, being less potent in new, more in middle age,
and most of all in old Wines.

But although that there are various sorts of Wine, which are more convenient
for various tempers and natures; yet generally the properties of the best Wine
and most convenient for all sorts of men, is that which has a taste between
sweet and sharp, fragrant to the smell, and a little yellowish, neither too
thick, nor thin, yet more thin then thick; nor too strong, nor too small, but
of a middle age.

APPENDIX.
Many other sorts of drink are used in other Countries, through the scarsity of
Wine, as Ale, Cider and Perry, etc. which we leave to be examined by those in
whose Countries they grow. There are also many other sorts of drink vulgarly
used, and prescribed by Physicians for the cure of diseases, as Ptisans made of
Licorice, Ebony, Hartshorn, and several roots, and flowers; and also drinks
made of China, Sarsaparilla, Sanders, Box, Rhubarb, Hydromel, and infinite
others which we omit, minding only the drinks of persons in health.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Air.
THE Air which is most wholesome for all men, and fittest for their health,
ought in its first qualities to be temperate, pure, clean, thin, open and free,
without any ill vapors, moistness or corruption, but winow'd with gentle and
soft breathing winds, and for the most part serene.

That is unwholesome which is infected with the vapors of standing pools and
lakes, or receives a pestilent air from any vault, or from the jakes of a great
City, from slaughter-houses, or leather-dressers yards, or stinking dunghils.
That which is near any lake or great river, is full of mists and dampnesse,
that which is in a valley begirt with mountains, has no wind.

The air affects our bodies two ways, either as it incompasses them, or as it
insinuates it self into the pores and breathing holes of the body; or as it is
drawn by the Lungs. Either way it has a very great force to affect and alter
our bodies: while it communicates all its qualities to the spirits, and by the
spirits to the several parts of our bodies: which if it be wholesome for the
body, it very much conduces to the preservation of health, but if they be
averse from the temper and constitution thereof, it causes many diseases. Gal.
1. de san. tuen. says it is most wholesome for every body to draw the best air
into the Lungs, that pure spirits may be thereby generated; as it is most
pestilent, to live in a bad air. And Columella 1. de re Rust. c. 3. says that
in buying ground, the wholesomnesse of the air is first to be looked at. For no
sound man ought to lay out his money in a pestilent air, though never so
fruitful a soil, when the enjoyment thereof is so hazardous. And therefore a
temperate air both for heat and cold is to be sought, almost begirt with a
hill, which neither freezes with continual frost in the winter, nor too much
evaperates in the summer, nor at the top of a hill subject to all wind and
weather.

An exquisitely tempered air, as it were in the middle between hot and cold,
moist and dry, fits a contrary constitution best. So it is better for those of
a hot temper to live in a moist air, and for those that are of a colder temper,
to live in a hot air: those that are dry love a moist, those that are moist
love a dry air.

But when every one cannot find out an air fit and proper for his
constitution, we must supply by art, what nature denies. Thus a hot air is to
be cooled, a cold air heated; a moist to be dried, a dry air moistened.

If for a hot body we want a cold air, which is not such either through the
situation of the Country or house, it must be brought to a coldness by often
watering, by the use of cold flowers and plants, by opening windows to the
north, that the wind may cool the house. If the air be cold, it must be heated
with good fires, all the crannies and inlets of the house must be stopped up to
hinder the approach of the cold; or else to live in a stove, as the Germans and
all the northern people do. A moist air must be dried by suffumigations and
fires; a dry air by irrigations of waters must be moistened.

A hot air renders the body hot, melts the humors, attenuates and dissolves
them, weakens the natural strength, if the heat be immoderate, weakens
concoction and makes life short.

Aristotle would have the Lybians, and those that inhabit the sun burnt parts
of Lybia, to be short lived because the sundries up their natural heat, and
hastens age through the dryness of the body.

A cold air cools the body, thickens, binds and helps concoction, increases
plenty of urine, causes Catarrhs and other diseases of the head, if the cold
be intense.

The heat being driven inward by the force of the ambient air, is more strong
and vigorous. Therefore Hipp. says, that the belly is hotter in winter, by
which heat concoction is the sooner performed. Cold air increases urine by
reason that the pores of the body being shut, the humors that were to expire,
being kept within, condense, and are carried to the passages of the urine; and
therefore the matter of sweat and urine is the same: so that the sweat flowing
out, there is less plenty of urine; and the sweat being stopped, there comes
forth a greater plenty of urine. So common experience teaches that in winter
time, and when the North wind blows, men do piss in greater quantity. But in
the summer time and when the South winds blow, in a far less quantity: but if
the cold be intense, it causes catarrhs through the coldness of the brain,
cold being very hurtful to the brain, as Hipp. teaches in Aph.

A moist air softens the skin, moistens the body, increases excrements, makes
it slow and heavy, brings a dullness upon the wit.

A dry air dries the body, diminishes the excrements, makes the body nimble,
and the senses quick.

A troublesome cloudy air, fills the body full of ill humors and impure
spirits, increases phlegm in the phlegmatic.

Daily experience teaches that in moorish plashy places, or near great rivers,
or which have a thick and troubled air through any other cause, putrid and
malignant Fevers are most common.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the seasons of the year.
TO the air are referred the seasons of the year, because of the great variety
in them.

Astrologers have divided the year into four equal parts: So that the Spring
should begin, the Sun entering into Aries, and end when he leaves Gemini. The
Summer from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Virgo, Autumn from the
beginning of Libra to the end of Sagittarius, and Winter from the beginning of
Capricorn to the end of Pisces.

But the Physicians and diverse people, measure the seasons of the year by the
temper of the air, and as the air in some places is naturally more hot, in
others colder, there the summer, there the winter is longer. So Hipp. defines
the winter in Thasus where he lived, 3. de diaet. From the setting of the
Pleiades or the beginning of November, to the vernal Equinoctial; the Spring
from the vernal Equinox to the rising of the Pleiades, or the 7. day of May;
the Summer, from the rising of the Pleiades, to the rising of Arcturus, or the
middle of September; Autumn from the rising of Arcturus to the setting of the
Pleiades. By which computation, four months and ten days are allowed the
Winter, and as many to the Summer, but two months only and some days to the
Spring, and hardly two months to Autumn. In the Northern Countries the cold is
most fierce in the Equinox, that the Winter season may be said to last five
months and more.

Prosper Alpinus l. 1. de med. Egypt. c. 7. writes that the air is remperate
in Egypt, and that the Spring flourishes in January and February, that the
Summer begins in March, and lasts to the end of August; that Autumn is in
September and October; and that the Winter lasts only November and December:
therefore from the temper of the air the times of the year according to the
doctrine of the Physicians, are to be defined by the following Theorems.

The Spring is the most temperate of all the seasons of the year, and is in the
middle between the first qualities, neither being over cold and moist as in the
Winter, nor over hot and dry as in the Summer.

Hipp. in his Book of Humane Nature, says, that the Spring is hot and moist,
which is to be understood in comparison of other seasons; for in respect of the
Winter, it may be said to be hot, in respect of Summer, cold: but considered in
it self without any other relation, it may be said to be temperate. Which Galen
shows in his first Book of Temperaments, by common experience. For seeing that
we do not freeze as in Winter, the Spring keeping its natural constitution, nor
are oppressed with heat as in the Summer, nor abound with humors, nor are
tormented with drought, nor feel any manifest excess of these qualities, we
must necessarily judge the spring to be temperate. But this moderate temper is
not to be found through the whole course of the Spring, for at the beginning it
resembles Winter, and at the end it is like Summer.

The Spring is the most wholesome season of the year, according to Hipp. Aph.
9. sect. 3.

The Spring approaching, our bodies which were bound in Winter, begin to be
loose and rarifi'd; the blood increases, the spirits revive, and all things
seem glad for the dissolution of Winters frost. Neither is it absurd to say
that many diseases are bred in Winter; since the Spring naturally brings
health, not diseases, and if it find the body in good estate, so preserves it.
But if there be an an abundance of humors collected in the Winter, in the
Spring they are melted and stirred, and sometimes putrefie, which causes
various sorts of diseases. And the Spring by accident, not of its own proper
nature is said to beget diseases.

You will object again, that the Spring is hot and moist according to Hipp. but
a hot and moist constitution is unwholesome, and most liable to breed diseases
that spring from putrefaction. Therefore the Spring cannot be said to be most
wholesome.

We answer, that that is in the excess of heat and (...) but where the heat
exceeds the cold, and the moisture exceeds the dryness moderately, that temper
is most wholesome and most agreeing with humane nature, which inclines to heat
and moisture. Besides, life consists in hot and moist, and must be preserved by
things of that temper.

The summer is hot and dry, it renders the body hot, dry, faint, thirsty, and
weak, it attenuates and burns the humors, it increases choler, which is the
cause of the abundance of choleric Fevers at that time.

Autumn is cold and dry, fruitful of diseases, because of the inequality of its
tempers: for in the morning it is cold, at noon very hot, and lastly at evening
it is cold again. The body is condensed at that time, and the humors hindered
from flowing, being forced to the interior parts by the coldness of the air,
whence arise many diseases very dangerous, by reason of the black choler which
abounds in the body in Autumn.

The Winter is cold and moist, it strengthens the body and makes it more lively
and full of natural heat, and causes long sleeps through the tediousness of
the nights, it procreates phlegm, and makes the body liable to obstructions.

CHAP. XXVII. Of motion and rest.
MOtion and exercise are a principal means for the preservation of health,
above all other things except temperance.

Here the common sentence of Hipp. may be fitly repeated, l. 6. Epid. The way
to preserve health is not to glut the stomach with meat, and to be laborious in
exercise. Galen in many places chiefly commends exercise, but in one place
chiefly where he prefers it before temperance in diet: in lib. de suc. bon. and
vit. c. 2. Unless a man exercise sufficiently, he cannot preserve himself from
diseases by any temperance in diet; unless he do recompense the want of
exercise by requisite purgation, or letting of blood. But if he use a through
exercise, though he sometimes exceed in diet, yet he shall continue without
diseases. But Aristot. Prob. 47. sect. 1. questioning why it is good to
diminish his diet and increase his labor, Because, says he, the superfluity
of humors causes diseases, which show themselves chiefly, when either a man
exceeds in diet, or is wanting in exercise.

Motion and exercise excite the natural heat, increase and stir up the spirits,
so that the body becomes more strong, less liable to external injuries, and
fitter to undertake all actions.

Concoction is perfected better by the increase of heat, and the stirring and
exagitation of the spirits causes a more plentiful transpiration, the defect
whereof is the cause of almost all diseases.

But there are many sorts of motion and exercise, as walking, running, leaping,
riding, gestation, and infinite others: of which, some exercise the body more,
some less; others the whole body, others but some parts.

Galen commends the play with the little ball chiefly, as that which exercises
the whole body; running and walking exercise the thighs particularly; by
handling arms and rowing, the arms and superior parts are exercised; by
singing, hollowing, and loud reading, the voice and breast, by riding the
stomach.

The most used, and most commodious kind of exercise, is moderate walking
through green and pleasant places under a clear and serene sky. But they that
are soon weary of walking through infirmity, or cannot walk free enough, may
more conveniently ride on horseback.

Moderate walking exercises almost the whole body, causes an appetite, excites
the natural heat, strengthens the body, and helps toward the evacuation of the
excrements.

To make exercise profitable for the body, two things are to be observed; time,
and measure.

The fit time is before meat, chiefly before dinner.

Exercise is more convenient before meat, because the former meal being
concocted, the relics of the excrements are evacuated by exercise and
dissipated: and so the body is the better disposed to concoct and receive new
nourishment. Whence Galen 1. de san. tuen. c. 2. bids him that has not
concocted rest altogether. But exercise after dinner is worst of all, for it
carries the crude humors into the veins, obstructs the liver, oppresses the
head, and causes many diseases. For this cause Scholars are often troubled with
the Itch, because they exercise after dinner, which carries the meat out of the
stomach before due concoction, and fills it full of crude humors, which
vehement exercise carries to the skin, where they turn to scabs. The same
happens to those that exercise when the body is in an ill temper and full of
vicious humors: which produces scabs and ulcers. As teaches Hipp. 6. Epid.
sect. 5. If he labor unpurg'd scabs will break forth. Exercise before dinner
is better then before supper, because in the morning the stomach is empty, and
the concoction better perfected, by reason of the greater space of time between
dinner and supper: on the contrary, the meat eaten at dinner is not so well
digested.

Yet a gentle walking after meat, is useful as that which recals the heat, and
hastens not away the meat, but causes it to descend to the bottom of the
stomach, where it is more quickly concocted, and helps the distribution of the
meat also when it is concocted.

The measure of exercise is appointed by Galen, 2. de san. tuen. c. ult. which
may be referred to four heads. 1. To continue exercise till the body swell. 2.
Till it appear fresh and lively. 3. Till a weariness come upon it. 4. Till a
moderate sweat or hot vapor break forth: any of which appearing, then desist
from exercise.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Sleep and Watchings.
SLeep is absolutely necessary for the preservation of health, and if it be
moderate it helps concoction, refreshes and restores the strength lost in the
time of watching, moistens the inner parts of the body, and is conducible to
old men.

All the good which comes to men from sleep, is to be ascribed to the
retraction of the heat to the inner parts. For the heat increased in the bowels
generates copious spirits, and restores them that were lost in the time of
watching: which helps the concoction in the liver, and several other parts; and
forwards the expulsion of the excrements: and because that weakness of the
body, which comes by watching, proceeds from a loss of spirits, those being
restored, weariness then leaves a man. But by concoction plenty of the
nourishing humor is afforded to the internal parts, which moistens them very
much, as Hipp. taught 6. Epid. Exercise is meat to the joints, sleep is
nourishment to the bowels. Lastly, it conduces much to old men, because there
is nothing more which heats and moistens their cold and dry bodies, and so it
restores the moist substance being lost. Whence that of Homer cited by Galen,
de san. tu. As soon as he has bathed and eaten, let him sleep, for his age
requires.

Immoderate sleep loosens the members, causes an ill color and habit of body,
makes the head heavy, filling it full of vapors and humors, duls the natural
heat, and renders all the parts of the body more unapt to exercise.

This proceeds from an over long retention of the excrements, which are caused
by immoderate sleep; for it is most true, that fleep hinders all evacuations but
sweat; so that after concoction perfected, if the excrements which ought to be
presently after evacuated, are kept in the body, it makes it subject to all the
above mentioned inconveniences.

In going to sleep, three things are to be regarded, the time, space, and
manner of lying.

The most convenient time for sleep is the night, an hour or two after supper,
a gentle walk preceding, that the meat may the better descend.

The night is fittest for sleep through the moisture and tranquillity thereof,
and it affords time long enough to finish concoction, so that it is not
necessary to break sleep for business sake, as falls out in day-naps.

Sleep at noon is very hurtful, especially to those that have not used it.

For the time wherein a man sleeps by day, suffices not to finish concoction.
Hence it comes to pass that they who sleep after dinner, being raised out
their sleep, because of an interrupted concoction, feel a heaviness in their
stomach, belch sour belches, are filled with wind, and have no appetite at
supper. Besides sleep by day, filling the brain with overmuch moisture, begets
Catarrhs and other diseases of the head; for it fills the brain with moisture,
which is done sufficiently in the night time, so that there is no reason to
oppress the head in the day time with moisture, but rather by waking to dry up
that moisture, which for the most part is excessive.

But if any one by reason of their labor in the morning, or a weakness of the
body, as in sickly people, become weary, as also not having slept the night
before, he may sleep then in the after noon without danger.

Nay an afternoon-nap may be profitable, if very short, which may only serve to
recall the heat to the internal parts, for the better perfecting concoction.

For if it last not long, it cannot fill the head with vapors, and yet it
recreates the strength, and rather dissipates the vapors in the brain then
gathers it, the heat being for a small while drawn inward.

Also in long and hot days, sleep in the afternoon is lawful to those that do
use it.

For the nights being short and oft-times unquiet, it is lawful to sleep at
noon, especially to those that have used it, that the want of sleep in the
night may be recompensed by sleeping after dinner. Beside, that the spirits
which the heat dissolves, are restored by sleeping. But such sleep profits them
most that are used to it; as among the Italians, who all the summer sleep in
the afternoon and receive great benefit thereby.

As often as a man indulges to that afternoons sleep, it ought to be very long
or very short.

Why it ought to be very short, the reason is given before; why very long, is
because if the sleep be interrupted before full concoction, the concoction is
disturbed, which causes many diseases.

Yet sleep at noon hurts less if it be taken with the body upright and not
lying down; for so the vapors have a freer passage to ascend.

Neither must a man sleep presently after dinner, but after a short space and
some gentle walking, that the meat may descend to the bottom of the stomach.

The space appointed for sleep, is taken from the perfection of the concoction
in the stomach and liver; and that from the concoction of the urine, and
cheerfulness of the body.

Now some having a quicker, some a slower digestion, those ought to sleep
less, these more.

So gluttons, men full of humors, phlegmatic women, and those that have weak
stomachs require longer sleep, because they need a greater retraction of the
heat: A shorter sleep suffices fat, temperate, thick, and well concocting
persons. Lastly, a moderate sleep must be used by those that are sound and in
good temper, which is commonly allowed to be for seven or eight hours space.

The manner of lying in the bed ought to be with the head highest, on either
side, but first on the right, then on the left; lying on the belly helps
concoction, but it hurts the sight; lying on the back hinders the evacuation of
the excrements, being very dangerous for those that are subject to the Stone.

A more erected manner of lying, makes the head freer from excrements: lying on
the right side causes the meat to descend to the bottom of the stomach, and is
easier for respiration, lying on the left, forwards concoction through the
nearness of the liver to the stomach.

To this Aristotle adds, that a man must not lie straight, but with his limbs
gathered up, for the warmth of the belly.

Moderate watchings quicken the senses, diffuse spirit and heat into all the
parts of the body, help the distribution of the nourishment, and further the
evacuation of the excrements. But immoderate watching consumes and dissipates
the spirits, dries up the body, but chiefly the brain, increases choler,
inflames, and is the cause oft-times of hot diseases. Sometimes also of
coldness, the heat being dissipated and consumed.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Excretions and Retentions.
TO Excretions and Retentions are referred the excrements of the belly, urine,
insensible transpiration, the flowers and seed; which if they come forth
seasonably preserve health, but being retained beyond their time, beget several
diseases.

The excrements of the belly, if they do not come forth in due time, binder
concoction, deprave the appetite, and beget nauseousnesse, putrid vapors
arising from the retained excrements to the stomach, that cause colic pains,
the wind being hindered from coming forth, together with giddiness and
headache, the fumes arising to the head.

But coming naturally forth, they are soft, of a middle substance, of a brown
color, yet not stinking very much; the quantity corresponding with the
quantity of things received.

Natural urine is of a moderate substance, of a brown color, either with or
without a sediment, white, smooth, and corresponding in quantity to the liquor
taken in.

Insensible transpiration, if it be prohibited, by a stoppage of the external
pores, by the ambient cold, or of the internal, by the bad humors retained,
causes very great diseases, as Pleuresies, Peripneumonies, putrid Fevers, etc.
but being according to nature, it preserves the body in health.

Here we must observe what Sanctorius has said of insensible transpiration, l.
de stat. Med. where he affirms that more excrements are voided by insensible
transpiration, then by all other evacuations taken together, which no
Physicians till then ever knew; yet this he says he has found by the
experience of thirty years, in several bodies exactly weighed both before and
after meat, and after voiding of their excrements; which are all to be seen in
the Author, or in Sennertus in his Theory of putrid Fevers.

The flux of the Flowers ought to be moderate according to the temper and
custom of the woman, observing certain intervals, and certain periods.

Otherwise being suppressed, or immederately flowing, they are the cause of
many diseases.

To the excretion of seed, is referred the use of Venery, which if it be
moderate offends not the health, though a man may want it without hurt; as
experience teaches in Monks and Batchelors. For in those the seminal matter is
transmitted to several parts, and consumed in the nourishment of them; but the
seminal parts dry, and are made incapable of their function.

The immoderate use of Venery hurts men more then women, dissolves the spirits,
refrigerates the body, weakens the brain, eyes, nerves, stomach and joints,
duls the senses, and begets crudities and stinking breath.

The fittest age for Venery is youth and middle age, it is hurtful to others,
especially old men, and men of dry and weak constitutions.

Such intervals are to be observed, as Galen teaches, that a man may seem more
light and nimble then before.

The Spring is a fitter time for Venery then the Winter, Autumn less, and
least of all the Summer: at which time it is better to abstain.

As to the parts of the day, Venery is most useful in the morning, or after a
man's first sleep; the concoction perfected, and not after meat.

It Is most hurtful after hard drinking, strong exercises, in time of famine, or
after long evacuations.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Passions of the Mind.
THE Passions of the Mind have a great influence upon the whole constitution
of the body; so that not only extreme sickness, but death also sometimes
happens from the immoderate excess of them; being moderate, they preserve
health.

He therefore that labors to preserve his health, ought to seek tranquillity
of mind, and resist vehement passion. For so the body is preserved in its
natural state, and the passions cause no change in it.

But because it is impossible to be free from all the passions, a man must
labor to resist them with all his force, and to bridle their violence. Now the
effects of these passions or of the chief of them, we shall briefly lay down.

Moderate joy chiefly conduces of all the other affections to the preservation
of health; for by that the heat, spirits and blood are diffused to the whole
body: exciting the vigor of the faculties, nourishing and moistening the habit
thereof, and gracing it with a lively color. Hence that of the Wise man, A
cheerful heart makes age youthful. But immoderate joy dissipates the substance
of the spirits, dissolves the strength of the vital faculties, whence proceed
convulsions and sudden death oft-times, especially in old people, women, and
weak constitutions.

Sadness weakens the natural heat, cools and dries the body, makes the face
pale, lessens the pulse, and by a straightning of the heart often times causes
Fevers, hindering the dilation thereof, whence arises putrefaction in the
humors. Avicen. l. de vir. Cor. c. 6. says that two things do proceed from
sadness, a weakness of the natural faculty, through an extinction of the
heat, and a thickning of the spirits and humors through cold, which increases
the melancholy humor.

Fear calls the heat suddenly to the heart, which causes the outward parts to
wax pale, cold, and tremble, the teeth to chatter, an interrupted speech, and
decay of the strength; sometimes it loosens the belly, and causes an ejection
of urine, a weakness and resolution of the muscles; death sometimes ensues,
abundance of blood being called to the heart, by which it is oppressed, and the
vital faculty extinguished.

Anger vehemently stirs the heat and spirits, increases and quickens the pulse,
whets the choler and increases quotidian and putrefi'd Fevers. If it be too
outrageous, it overcomes the reason and moves it from its seat. It profits cold
natures, for it excites the weaker heat and enlivens it.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF PHYSICAL INSTITUTIONS: CONTAINING The Cure of Diseases.
THE PREFACE.
THE fifth part of Physic, containing the Cure of Diseases, is divided into
two principal parts.

The first part contains the general Method of curing, and proposes all the
Rules necessary for the cure of diseases.

The second Discourses of the Materials necessary to fulfill those Rules.

Therefore this fifth Book shall contain the general Method of Curing, and the
second shall set down the Physicians Rules and Materials.

The first part of the Cure of Diseases.
Of the general Method of Curing.

THE PROEME.
THE Method of Curing, is by Authors said to be twofold, General and
Particular. The general Method is that which delilivers the common Precepts
which are for the curing of all sorts of Diseases; and shows what Remedies are
proper for similar, what for organick, and what for common Diseases. The
particular Method shows how every Species of diseases is to be cured, happening
to every part from the head to the foot: which Method is observed in their
works which they call Practick. And this universal cure of particular Diseases
depends upon the common Precepts, which are set down in the general Method: and
is nothing else but a practice of the general Method upon all the several
Species of Diseases, and the several parts of the body. Now because the
dogmatical Method of Physic proceeds always by way of Indication, therefore
this our Tractate shall comprehend four Sections; The first shall be of the
Method of Curing, and their several Indications. The second, of the Indications
from Causes. The third, of the Indications from Diseases. And the last, of
Indications from the Strength. And so there shall remain no Precept touching
the cure of Diseases which shall remain unfolded.

SECTION, I. Of the Method of Curing, and the Indications.
CHAP. I. What is the Method of Curing, what is Curation, and what are the
conditions of it.
THE Method of Curing, is that part of Physic, whereby helps are found by
Indications, to restore the lost health.

Curation is the change of the present vicious habit of the body into its
natural habit.

Now the cure of a Disease ought to be speedily, safely, and with as much
delight as may be to the Patient.

Between the Method of curing and the Cure of diseases there is little
difference. The Method of curing being nothing but a rational way which the
Physician observes in the cure of diseases. And by this method of curing which
proceeds by Indication, the Dogmatical Physicians are distinguished from
others. Because these go by Indications only, as their proper instruments, and
the others not. Now in all cures the forementioned conditions are to be
observed, upon which, as upon the most sure foundations, the true and rational
method of curing ought to lean. Therefore curation ought to proceed safely, if
it may expel the disease, as much as can be without fear of a relapse, doing
none, or as little harm as possible to the patient, using remedies known by
long custom and experience. It ought to be done speedily, yet not omitting any
thing that ought to be done; using remedies effectual and equal to the disease,
or more forcible if need require. Then it must be done with delight, using
among those remedies which are for the expelling the disease, those in the
first place which are most grateful to the palate, and which may be used with
less trouble to the patient: as Hipp. teaches, the cure is first to be
attempted by diet; then by Pharmaceutical remedies, before we come to iron and
fire. Then that the accidents following the disease, as thirst, pain,
watchings, may be gently allayed and asswag'd.

CHAP. II. Of Indications and their differences.
INdication is an apprehension of the thing helping, together with an
apprehension of the thing hurting, which together with the thing indicating,
comes without any experience or ratiocination, G. l. de opt. sect. c. 11.

Indication is called by the Greeks (...), which signifies, a finding out, or
demonstration, and so is used in the method of Physic; signifying a
demonstration of the remedies. For the Indications declare the nature of the
things indicated, showing and as it were pointing them with the finger to be
useful for cure. Galen defines Indication, 2. Metho. c. 7. an insinuation of
the form of acting; which is an explication of the word, as it were shadowing
out the nature thereof. That is more perfect which is taken from the Theorem in
the same Galen, l. 1. de opt. sect. wherein Galen first propounds the
convenient Genus; while he says that it is a certain apprehension or notion,
ingraffed into the Physician and Patient by nature, out of a sense of the thing
ill affecting, and a desire to expel it. Then he adds a proper difference,
while he would have this notion proceed, from the known nature of the thing
hurting, to the perception of the helping remedy, i.e. from the knowledge of
the preternatural effect, for whose sake follows the knowledge of the helping
remedy. Lastly, Indication comes without experience or ratiocination, because
where first the nature of the thing affecting is made manifest, there from a
certain inbred principle is judged the nature of the remedy: thus perceiving
cold, we inquire for things that heat: we pull out a needle that is run into
the flesh, and such other things we do without discourse. Here it is to be
observed, the preternatural things do not show and declare those remedies of
themselves, for so they would forward their own destruction; but by accident,
for by bringing trouble upon the Patient, they insinuate an expulsion of
themselves, and by a certain common knowledge, the use of that which is
contrary to them.

To this it may be objected, That if the invention of remedies consist in a
certain kind of knowledge and inbred principle, it will follow, that fools and
idiots will differ nothing from skilful Artificers; and that they are as
skilful in Physic, as the Physicians themselves. To which it is answered, that
there is a very great difference, not in the first and most general Indications
which consist in the taking away of the thing which is preternatural, and the
use of the contrary, for they are common to all; but in the special
Indications, to perfect which it is necessary to know the kinds of remedies
and medicinal materials, and also to distinguish rightly of diseases, their
symptoms and causes; as also to be experienced in knowing, the form, quality,
quantity, place, time, and manner of giving remedies, in all which Reason is
required, and various experience among the Physicians. From whence we conclude,
that although Indication primarily and generally, is known without reasoning,
yet secondarily and specially it needs it very much; so that not a few famous
Authors have referred Indication to the third operation of the mind, which is
the art of syllogizing.

This Indication may be divided into four parts.

First, one sort of Indication, concerns preservation, the other curing.

Indication that concerns preservation, regards natural things, which are
preserved by their like.

Indication, that concerns curation, regards preternatural things, which are
taken away by their contraries.

Secondly, Indication is generical, subaltern, and specifical.

Generical, is that which the common general nature of the thing indicating
does afford.

Subaltern, is that which the subalternate nature of the thing indicating
suggests.

Specific, which the particular nature of the thing indicating shows.

In this series of Indications, all the practice of Dogmatical Physic
consists; which he that insists upon, is said to follow a method; proceeding
from a generical Indication, by the subalternate, to the specifical and
determinate, as Galen teaches, 2 Meth. c. 7. He that goes about to make a
method, he must begin from the first Indications, and from them to those which
are next, and thence to those which are next to them. And he that goes forward
must not stop till he come to the end; which is to find out remedies for every
disease. Examples of the method of the series of Indications may be taken from
all diseases. For example, Suppose a cold distemper of the stomach in the
second degree, is to be cured. First, here is the disease, whence proceeds the
most general Indication that it is to be taken away. Secondly, there is the
disease of distemper, whence proceeds the subaltern Indication, that it is to
be altered. The third is the cold distemper which also comprehends a subaltern
Indication, that it is to be heated. And lastly, there is a cold distemper in
the second degree, which produces the specifical Indication, that the remedy
must be heating in the second degree. Beyond this Art goes not, neither does
Method descend beneath the lowest species.

Thirdly, Indication is either artificial or inartificial.

Inartificial, is that which is commonly known to Artists, and to the vulgar.

This inartificial Indication is the same with that which we have above named
Generical, as Galen teaches, 3. Meth. c. 7. Indication, says he, which is
taken from a disease, is as it were the beginning, from which the way of curing
promotes it self, yet no portion of the Physical Art it self, or certainly not
much nor proper to it, but which is common to the common people.

Artificial Indication, is that which is not known to all, but only to Artists,
and requires great skill to find it out.

As generical Indications are inartificial, so subaltern are more artificial
and much more specifical, because they are more difficult, and require greater
skill to find them out; and therefore proper to the method of curing.

Fourthly, Indication is either profitable or unprofitable.

That Indication is profitable which declares such a remedy, whose matter is
such, as that it can of it self take away the effects of the disease.

Unprofitable Indication is that which shows such a remedy whose matter is not
found to be such, as that of it self it can take away the disease.

Some preternatural effects do show profitable Indications; others
unprofitable. As for example, in a hot and cold distemper, Indication is
profitable, because there are many remedies that can effect the cure. But an
obstruction, that shows only that it must be opened, affords an unprofitable
Indication; because there is no medicine that can of it self open an
obstruction. But the opening of an obstruction looks at other things, as
incision, attenuation, abstersion and evacuation of the peccant matter.

CHAP. III. Of the things that Indicate.
THE thing that Indicates is a certain agent remaining in the body, which by
its proper nature and essence declares a certain help; and that the thing
indicated, as is required, ought to be directed to it, that the lost health may
be restored.

This definition comprehends only the curing Indicate, not that whose end is to
preserve the health, but of that which is to restore it.

There are four conditions of the thing truly indicating.

First, That it should be a certain Agent, and affect the body.

So a disease because it affects the body, by destroying and corrupting it, is
a thing that indicates, and calls for a removal of it self.

The second condition is, that the thing indicating remain in the body.

For as it points out the removal of it self, by remedies which are used to the
body, so it ought to inhere in the same body.

The third is, that the thing indicating, should be known to the understanding.

It is explained thus: For what ever indicates, brings us into the knowledge of
another thing, as of the thing indicated, or of the remedy; but that which is
not known cannot insinuate the knowledge of another thing. Therefore says Gal.
3. Meth. c. 6. and in other places, that those things which act by an occult
quality, and therefore are not known to the understanding, are to be excluded
from the method of curing, which is perfected by Indications.

The fourth condition is, that the thing indicating should indicate one thing,
as one thing is indicated only by one thing.

This Axiom is delivered by Gal. 11. Meth. and l. de opt. sect. and the reason
thereof is, because the Indicant always declares its contrary, by which it is
taken away; now there can be but one thing contrary to another: but mark the
effect, that which is called one, is often compounded; and therefore as it is
compounded it may indicate more things: or as Galen speaks 9. Meth. c. 12. That
which is simple, has a simple Indication; that which is not simple, has not a
simple Indication. Mark also, that to have one Indicant, is to be generical,
subaltern, and specifical; so that having a diverse nature, it may indicate
several things: by its Generical essence, a Generical; by its Subaltern, a
Subaltern; by its Specifical, a Specifical remedy.

But the true and proper Indicants are two, the Disease, and the Cause of the
Disease.

The Indicant is a thing beside nature, which is to be taken away by contrary
remedies: But remedies are to be applied to the morbifical cause, and to the
disease it self. First to the Cause, seeing that as Galen teaches, 7. Meth. c.
12. it is impossible that any affection should be cured, the efficient cause
remaining. But although Galen affirm, that preservation is properly due to the
causes; which has made some to call the Cause, the preserving Indicant; This
is notwithstanding to be understood of the avoiding of future and imminent
causes, not of those which actually produce diseases in us: in the curing and
taking away of which the whole force of curation lies. For no man ever cured a
Fever proceeding from putrefaction, till the putrefaction was taken away. If
thou would therefore talk with Galen, let this be only a Preserving cure,
when the other may be termed simply a Precaution in a condition healthy, or
valetudinary. Curation must be also applied to the disease; for that being let
alone, the disease stays; and indeed sometimes a bare distemper by it self,
without the presence of any cause remains very long, as in a hectic Fever.
Then again in most diseases the Indication which proceeds from the effects of
the disease, is contrary to that which the cause it self affords; as in a
quotidian Fever, which as to its proper nature would be refrigerated; but as
to the cause which is phlegm, requires things that heat. Moreover, from the
definition of an Indicant above related, it manifestly appears, that those are
in an error, who reckon the strength of the body among the true Indicants,
whereas every Therapeutick Indicant, requires a taking away of it self; but the
strength is always to be preserved; and therefore more fitly to be numbered
among the Coindicants, when they are considered in the disease; although in a
healthy estate, and in that part of Physic which is called Hygieine, the
strength does properly and truly indicate, because all Indication considered in
that part respects conservation. Therefore in a word we may conclude, that the
strength of the body in the preserving part of Physic, is a true Indicant; in
the curing part, a Coindicant.

A symptom notwithstanding cannot be numbered among the Indicants.

Though Indications are taken from supernatural things, yet they are
comprehended in three things; as they contain the disease, the cause of the
disease, and the symptom. Yet all Indications are taken only from the disease,
and the cause of the disease. For the symptom borrows its essence and
existency so dependingly from the disease, that the one taken away, the other
presently vanishes. And though there be a certain mitigation due to the
Symptom, which is subalternate to Curation: yet that does not happen as it is
a symptom; but as it obtains the reason of the cause, and by its presence may
prolong or increase the disease. So bleeding is to be stopped, because it may
be the cause either of a cold distemper, or of death it self; water is to be
taken from Hydropical persons, because it increases the distemper of the Liver.
So pain is to be allaied in a wound or inflammation, because it increases the
violence of the Flux, and weakens the natural strength.

CHAP. IV. Of Coindicants, Contraindicants, and Correpugnants.
COindicants, are those things which do not properly show the use of the
remedy, but increases the efficacy of Indication, that endeavors to persuade
it, or to render it more easy.

Those things are natural, or not natural.

To natural things are referred the strength, temperament, age, sex, custom
and manner of living, also the part affected and its substance, the
temperament, action, figure, situation, connection, dull or exquisite sense.

To things unnatural are referred these six things, the air, meat and drink,
motion and rest, sleep and watching, excrements and retentions, and the
passions of the mind.

To the Air is referred the house, country, season of the year, day, hour,
winds, quarter of the Moon, and the various positions of the stars.

As the true and proper Indications are taken from things preternatural, so
Coindications are fetched from things natural and not natural; because though
remedies do not primarily indicate, yet secondarily they do: and without a
diligent observation, there cannot be a right use of them. Therefore Galen in
his Books of Method, calls those things which are truly Coindicant, simply
Indicant, though with a larger acception of the word; which is diligently to be
observed, lest the reading of Galen should breed confusion. First therefore the
true and natural indication of things natural, is conservation: but because
nature cures diseases, using remedies as instruments, and reduces them from
power into act; therefore the strength of it is to be considered; that by that
the force of the remedy may be conjectured at. Thus if a violent disease
require a violent remedy, and that the strength is in a very good condition,
and can bear the force of the remedy; then the strength is said to condicate.
So a hot temper in a hot disease coindicates cooling remedies, and
contrariwise. But then the disease which is most distant from the natural
state, wants vehement remedies, but that which goes less from the natural
state, and is pretty near the nature and temper of the Patient, is to be cured
with easier remedies.

The same things, Age, Sex, Custom, peculiar temper and manner of living are
wont to perform: which set forth the particular condition of the strength and
temperament. Then after consideration of the whole, some consideration is also
to be had of the part affected, which very powerfully coindicates in the use of
the remedy, in observing the substance, temperament, figure, situation,
connection, action, and exquisite or dull sense thereof, according to which
variety the use of the remedy is to be changed. Lastly, things not natural
coindicate, because their several conditions change the use of the remedy; so
hot air in a hot disease, coindicates a cooling remedy; and shows it must be
more violently applied, then if the disease had happened, the air being colder
and more temperate; although the air coindicates more then any other thing not
natural.

Contra-indicants, are those which are opposed truly and diametrically to
Indicants.

The name it self shows that Contra-indicants are contrary to Indicants: now
being that contraries are to be placed under the same Genus, and that true and
primary Indicants, are things not natural; therefore Contra-indicants are also
preternatural things which are opposed to Indicants. As when one disease is
opposite to another, or one cause to another; or when the disease is opposite
to the cause, or the cause to the disease, and points out a contrary remedy: so
a hot distemper of the liver requires cooling things, to this a cold distemper
of the stomach does contraindicate, both being in the same individual: so a
quotidian Fever, of it self requires cooling things, but the cause
contra-indicates, which is a phlegmatic humor, and requires hot remedies.

Correpugnants are those which are opposite to Coindicants.

As true Indicants are said to be primary Indicants, and Coindicants secondary
Indicants: so true Contraindicants, are said to be primary Contra-indicants;
and Correpugnants are said to be secondary Contraindicants.

Now these Correpugnants are the same in kind with Coindicants, that is,
things natural, and not natural; but only as they resist the remedy indicated
by such a disease, or the cause thereof, and dissuade the use thereof. As when
bloodletting or purging is indicated by the Morbifick cause, but the strength
is too weak, for then the strength is said to be correpugnant, or to
contra-indicate by a secondary contraindication. So also a putrid Fever
indicates purgation in the dog-daies, as to the cause, but the hot air resists,
or is correpugnant; and so it is to be said of others. Here it is to be noted,
that the name of Correpugnancy is seldom in use among authors, but the word
Contra-indication is still used with the addition of primary and secondary.

CHAP. V. Of the things Indicated.
THE thing Indicated is that which is shown to follow from the nature of the
thing indicating, that by the efficacy thereof a preternatural indisposition
may be taken away.

Hence it appears that the thing indicated is nothing else but the remedy;
which Gal. l. de constit. art. med. c. 4. says to be whatever helps the body
to reduce it being ill affected to its natural state; for it is called by
several other names both by Galen and other authors; for it is called, the
thing profitable, the thing required, remedy, succor, intention, scope; though
the word Scope is used also in another sense, as when Galen sets down the
greatness of the disease, and the strength of the body, as the scope of
bloodletting; for when Scope signifies Indication; and indeed the thing
indicating is usually called the first scope, and the thing indicated, the
second scope.

The consideration of every thing indicated, belongs to the Genus or kind of
the remedy, and the right administration thereof.

To the Genus of the remedy belongs the first scope, which inquires what is to
be done.

To the right administration of the remedy belong the four scopes, which
enquire how much is to be done, in what manner, when and where.

What is to be done, or the Genus of the remedy is taken from the Essence of
the thing indicating, or the thing preternatural.

So a cold disease indicates heating, a hot refrigeration, repletion
evacuation, solution of the continuum, that the flesh is to be closed, and so
of the rest.

By the Genus of the remedy, we do not only understand the chief Genus, but
also the subalternate and the specifical Genus, that remedies may be found to
satisfy the generical subalternate, and specifical Indications which were
explained in the 2. Chap. As for example, a Fever in respect of its chief
Genus, which is a preternatural effect, calls for a remedy to remove the Fever;
in respect of his subalternate Genus which is the preternatural heat, it
indicates a cold remedy. And in respect of his specifical Genus, which is the
hot distemper in the second degree, it intimates a cold remedy in the second
degree; whence it is easy to gather, that the quality and degrees of the
remedy belong to the Genus thereof, though they are by some badly
distinguished, and the degree of the remedy erroneously referred to the
quantity thereof. That is also to be rejected which is delivered by some; and
indeed by Galen himself, that the Genus of the remedy is judged from the name,
dignity, quality, action, substance, situation of the part, strength of the
Patient, and such like. For as is said before, one thing is indicated but by
one thing, and every thing that indicates is preternatural, but the nature of
the part, action, etc. are preternatural things, and therefore according to the
foundation above laid, those do only coindicate, or are correpugnant; and that
we may bring the mind of Galen to an exact rule, we must say that he names
coindicating things there not as true and proper indicating things, but as
things indicating secondarily, for which reason they are diligently to be
observed, as mainly conducing to curation. So the liver, heart, and other parts
which are more excellent, do not bear vehement remedies, and resist the use of
them; so those parts which are of a cold nature, while they labor with a hot
affection, desire remedies that cool very much, when in the same affection they
recede farther from the natural temper then those things which are hot. In the
same manner those things which are endu'd with an exquisite sense, sustain not
such painful medicines as the affection requires; also those diseases which are
deep in the body and far from the external superficies, require stronger
remedies, then the affection it self naturally requires, and the internal parts
do not admit such things as have either a corroding or venomous quality, which
their affections do require, though the external parts can bear them.

How much is to be done, signifies the quantity or dose of the remedy, which is
judged by the greatness of the disease, or by the depravement of the natural
habit, more or less.

The quantity of the remedy also is taken for the degree and vehemence of the
remedy; but with those that are more exact the whole dose is only referred to
the quantity, when the degree is referred to the Genus of the remedy, as is
said in the former Theorem. But as the disease recedes more or less from the
natural state of the body, a greater or less dose is to be exhibited, for in a
greater quantity there is a greater quality; and so in a greater excess, a
greater dose is to be prescribed, that it may exceed the disease. Things also
indicating in a secondary manner, conduce much to determine the quantity of the
remedy, which do not truly indicate, but coindicate, and are repugnant. So the
natural temper of the part indicates the quantity of the remedy, according to
the excess of the distemper: so the parts which are seated within the body,
require a greater dose of physic, that the faculty thereof may be the more
easily carried to the part affected; so an Erysipelas in the thumb requires a
greater dose of Oxycratium, then one in the thigh or arm; so an inflammation of
many internal parts, requires a greater quantity of cooling physic, which may
suffice to allay the heat.

In what manner, or the way of applying remedies, signifies nothing else but
whether those remedies are to be applied once or twice, seldom or often; now
this is indicated from the manner of the preternatural affection.

So when a disease afflicts continually and vehemently, medicines are to be
applied suddenly and fast. If the cause of the disease swell, and there be an
Orgasmus, if the matter be fluid and apt to run, if it be well concocted, then
it requires a sudden evacuation; but if it flows slowly and by intervals, and
threatens rather a long continuance through crudity then any danger; then with
things that alter and purge, the matter is to be altered and evacuated.

To indicate the manner of using, the secondary Indicants do not a little
conduce, as far as they do coindicate, or are correpugnant.

So strength of nature easily assents to a strong remedy; but a weak habit must
have gentle mutations, by intervals; so the thin and soft substance of the
parts, or which has a more exquisite sense, cannot so well endure the force of
a violent remedy, as the solid, thick, and less sensible. Also a remote
situation of the parts requires the remedy should be used often, that it may at
length penetrate to the part, without any prejudice to parts that lie between.
In a noble part also a man must proceed warily, and by degrees, lest by the
sudden alteration of the part, the body should sustain greater harm.

When it is to be done, is the convenient time and fit occasion for the
administration of remedies.

This is double, general or particular.

The general time is one of the four times of the disease, the beginning,
increasing, height, and declination.

So Gal. l. de opt. sect. c. 37. teaches at what time cold water is to be
administered, whether in the beginning, increase, height, or declination. So in
the beginning of inflammations, the practicks teach us, that in the beginning,
repelling medicines are to be applied; in the increase, resolving joined with
repelling; and so of the rest.

The particular time for administering a remedy, is the second hour of the day.

So Galen in the same place teaches, in what day and at what hour of the day
cold water is to be used: so a purging medicine is to be used the sixth day, or
some such like in the morning.

Under the time is reduced, the order of the remedies, though some erroneously
distinguish order from time, and so constitute another scope in respect of
that.

In a simple or compounded affection, if more remedies are to be used, as it
most commonly happens; we must observe at what time every one is to be used;
and this regards order; as for example, In respect of the Fever, cold water is
to be drank; in respect of the cause, a vein is to be opened. Now while there
is a fit time to be prescribed for both these, the order is also constituted,
which is to be observed in performing them.

The time, occasion, and order of remedies, is indicated by the presence of the
most urgent Indicant.

When and as often as the disease requires, we must always endeavor against
it; and therefore the presence of the disease or the morbifical cause, shows
the time and occasion of applying remedies; but when more do urge at once, we
must resist the most violent. But in the usurpation of these there is always a
regard to be had of the Coindicants, and Contra-indicants. For though the
presence of the affection persuades the using of a remedy, yet the strength and
nature of every particular patient, may prohibit something or other.

Where it is to be done, shows in what place, and through what place the
remedies are to be administered, and is indicated by the place of the Indicant.

If the disease or the cause of the disease possess the whole body, remedy
must be used to the whole body; if it oppress only one part, remedies must be
applied to that part only; if the external parts be affected, the remedies must
be applied outward, if the internal parts be affected, they are to be taken
inward; and if the remedy reach both ways to the part affected, it may be used
both ways.

To show the place also of the remedy the Coindicants do not a little conduce,
and especially the forming of the parts, the situation and connection.

So the Ventricle is purged by vomit and stool, the hollow part of the Liver by
dejection or loosnesse, the unequal part by provocation of urine chiefly. To the
guis we apply remedies through the fundament.

In the same manner Correpugnants are to be considered, which prohibit the use
of the remedy.

For example, the inflamed orifice of the stomach might be externally
refrigerated, if the nearness of the Diaphragma did not hinder it; and so also
the outward calefaction of it, when it is cooled, is hindered by the lappet of
the Liver which lies upon it.

CHAP. VI. Of the first and most general principle of Curation.
ALL methods of curing, are taken from this first and most general principle,
Contraries are cured by contraries.

Although there is no disputing of principles, they being to be granted for
true and unquestionable, as Galen teaches of this principle of Curation: that
in Physic it is as certain that contraries are cured by contraries, as in
Mathematics, that twice two are four; and that this principle is not only bred
in men by nature, but also in beast.

Yet there are some objections which at first sight do seem to question the
truth thereof.

1. Tetanus is a cold disease, yet is cured by cold water; pain, is eased by
pain; vomit, by vomit; loosnesse, by loosnesse.

2. All contraries are made more intense by the approach of contraries; as if a
man put his hand to the fire when it is num'd with cold, it is more tormented;
also if a man put his burnt finger into cold water, it torments him more then
if he should hold it to the fire, or dip it in Aqua vitae.

3. Purging medicines are proper remedies against peccant humors, yet they
purge those humors by a familiarity, not a contrariety which they have with
those humors.

4. Nature uses to cure both hot and cold diseases, with which it can be at no
contrariety.

5. Diseases have no contrariety of number, magnitude, or figure, by which they
may be taken away.

To satisfy these Objections, we must say that the word Contrariety has a
larger signification with the Physicians then with the Philosophers; being not
only with them considered as to the form, but as to the effect and operation.

For what ever can remove a thing which is besides nature, or induce a contrary
effect, whether it be by it self or by accident, is named contrary. So Rhubarb
is contrary to choler, as it purges it forth; so Iron and fire is contrary to
superfluous flesh, because it takes it away; which being thus premised, it will
be easy to answer these objections.

To the first we say that the Tetane is cured by the effusion of cold water by
accident, the heat being increased by Antiperistasis in the interior parts;
pain is taken away accidentally by pain, while the new pain draws to it self
the cause of the new pain; vomit is cured by vomit, loosnesse by loosnesse, the
cause being evacuated which occasioned them.

To the second we say, That the contention of contraries is troublesome to
nature, if it be sudden and vehement, but if it be moderate and convenient, it
is very agreeable; so the hand benumbed with cold, being held to the fire, is
tormented, because there is too sudden a contention of contraries; but being
put into lukewarm water, or wrapped in warm linen, it come to it self: so the
finger being burnt, and held to the fire, or dipped in Aqua vitae is eased, in
respect of the cause, for the hot things draw forth the fire fixed in the part
which the water drove farther in.

To the third I answer, That though purging remedies are of a familiar
substance with the peccant humors, yet they may effectively be said to be
contrary, because they purge them and draw them out of the body.

To the fourth I answer, That nature is contrary to all diseases, by reason
that it concocts and expels the cause of them.

To the fifth we say, That those things are effectively contrary to number,
magnitude and figure, which do take away or alter them, as iron, fire,
ligatures, and the like.

Those contraries as much as may be, ought to be equal among themselves.

That equality is indicated from the nature of the disease and the morbifical
cause, which indicate a sudden removal thereof. But the strength, part
affected, and time of the disease, and other circumstances, are equally
repugnant to them. Therefore in the Theorem is added this particle, as much as
may be; because the equality of contraries is not absolutely necessary to
curation, but only to the more commodious curation, if the rest agree.

The equality of the remedy in respect of the disease, is doubly considered;
either according to the degree, copiousnesse, or magnitude.

An equal remedy as to the degree, is that which has the same recesse from the
mean as the disease. Thus a cold remedy in the second degree is equal to a
disease hot in the second.

An equal remedy according to the magnitude and copiousnesse, is that which
besides the degree of its quantity being exhibited, once, twice or more times,
may purge out the disease.

In this sense a moderate and vehement remedy may be said to obtain an equality
against any disease; when as being vehement, once or twice taken, being
moderate, oftener used, it avails to remove the disease.

Moreover, equality in degree, is so either actually and really, or else in
respect only of the operation.

Thus in similar diseases, there is granted a degree of contrariety existing in
act, as a hot remedy in the second degree used to a cold disease in the second
degree. But in diseases as to the form of the part, magnitude, or number, the
remedies are said to be equal according to the operation which they make
appear, in restoring the form, magnitude, or number of parts.

By that which we have above said, may all the objections be easily resolved,
which wont to be brought against the contrariety of qualities, of which the
chief are these.

1. Hipp. 6. Epid. says contraries must be used by degrees, and with
intermission.

2. Galen forbids efficacious and violent remedies at the beginning, commanding
us to begin with the weakest at first.

3. The efficacy of cold is less then that of heat; the efficacy of moisture
less then that of drought, and therefore are not to be opposed in an equal
degree.

4. To hot and cold diseases in the fourth degrees, must not be exhibited
remedies hot and cold in the fourth degree, for they are poison.

5. If all diseases were cured by equal contraries, the proportion of the agent
should be equal in all things to that which suffers, and so the same
suddenness of alteration, and so all sick people would be cured in the same
time.

6. Reduction according to Galen ought to be made in sound bodies by equal
contraries; and in sick persons, those which are most strong ought to be used,
because the disease ought sooner to be removed then the natural temper.

Lastly, Paulus at the beginning of l. 4. Rightly says he in my opinion has
Aretaeus the Cappadocian delivered to memory, that the forces of the diseases
ought to be stronger then the diseases, and that therefore Leprosy is never
cured, because there is no Physic strong enough against it.

To the first we say that Hipp. exhibits contraries by degrees; and Galen
admonishes us to begin with weak things, in regard of the circumstances, lest
the strength should be impaired; or in regard of the Contra-indicants, lest the
crude matter should be agitated in vain, the disease it self perhaps requiring
equal things.

To the third we say, That though the force of cold be less then that of heat,
and that of moisture more then that of drought, yet because we regard equality
in the last limit of the action, therefore they shall not be accounted less
equal, if they can reduce the excess of the disease to a moderation.

To the fourth I answer, That poisons are also used in Physic, if the nature
of the disease require, and that they be rightly prepared.

To the fifth I answer, That the time of cure is not equal in all diseases,
because it is not lawful in all diseases to use equal contraries, by reason of
the various disposition of the subject and circumstances; and though the use of
them should be admitted, speediness of cure is not requisite in all diseases,
by reason of the great variety of accidents more in one disease then in another.

To the sixth we say, That though reduction ought to be made by equal
contraries, yet they work not with the same efficacy as in the cure of a
disease; which being in the disposition, is more equally removed by contrary
equals, then the temperament, which is in the habit, and therefore more hardly
corrupted.

Lastly, to the authority of Paulus and Aretaeus we say, That remedies equal to
the disease in regard of the intention, are more strong in regard of the
effect, for nature helps them and fights with them against the disease.

CHAP. VII. Of the invention of Remedies.
REmedies fit for the cure of the disease are found out by a threefold way: by
Reason, Experience, and Collection of likelihoods.

By Reason remedies are invented through indications, when the disease and the
nature of the disease is known to us.

So we say that a Fever indicates things that are refrigerate, because we know
the nature of it to be hot and hurtful to us, which requires things contrary,
and a removal thereof.

By Experience Remedies are found out, when by many examples it is observed,
that some remedies are good against some diseases, though the cause of that
effect be not known.

Galen writes that Physic leans upon two pillars, Reason and Experience, which
is not to be understood of that rude experience which Empiricks and simple
people use so rashly in all diseases; but that only which concerns those
diseases and those remedies whose nature and cause is unknown; as Antidotes
against poison and venomous diseases, are known by experience, but without
reason.

By Collection of likelihoods, remedies are found out when such remedies are
applied to an unknown disease, as cure diseases of the like nature.

So in the French disease, when it first began and was unknown, those remedies
which were used in Leprosies and foul scabs, were not unfitly used for that
also.

SECTION, II. Of Indications from the Cause.
CHAP. I. Of Evacuations in general, and their differences.
IN the most orderly cure of a disease, first the morbifical cause is to be
removed, then the disease, if it remain after the removal of the cause.

To the most lawful curation is opposed a disorderly and extraordinary, which
we are fain sometimes to make use of, when some urgent distemper is to be
removed before we take in hand to destroy the cause, or else some great
symptom is to be removed.

The morbifical cause is manifold, but the chiefest and most ordinary is the
humor, because humors breed diseases, more then any other thing.

The chief and most ordinary remedy against peccant humors is evacuation,
which is nothing else but an expulsion of the humor out of the body.

That is twofold, universal or particular.

The universal is that which draws the humor out of the whole body, and the
three regions thereof.

The first of the three regions of the body, is that which contains the
stomach, guts, Mesaraick vein, and the other branches of vena porta, the hollow
of the liver, the spleen and the sweetbread.

The second region comprehends the unequal part of the liver, all the hollow
vein and the great artery which accompanies it, and whatever falls between the
arm-holes and the hips.

The third region comprehends the muscles, membranes, bones, and the whole
substance of the body to the outward skin.

Besides those common Regions, there are many other which are called
particular; in which the excrements are kept, as the brain, lungs, reins, and
womb.

Universal evacuation is wont to be performed by opening a vein, loosening the
belly, vomit and sweat. For which soever of these first happens, as they do
very much evacuate one region, so consequently they do also evacuate the rest,
though much more sparingly.

Blood letting empties first the veins, and then the arteries joined to them by
Anastomosis, then the whole body and the bowels proceeding to the very roots of
the veins.

Scowring purges first the guts, stomach and bowels, and then the veins and
habit of the body.

Vomiting purges the stomach, bowels and greater veins, lastly the habit of the
body.

Evacuation by sweat, first purges the habit of the body, then the greater
veins and arteries, and lastly the bowels, and is a particular evacuation from
the innermost part of the body, bringing out the excrements from some peculiar
part.

Of this nature is the purging of the brain through the palate and nostrils, of
the breast by hawking, and of the bladder by urine.

All evacuation is either spontaneous or artificial.

Spontaneous, is that which comes from the body without the help of Physic.
And this is twofold, natural or symptomatical.

Natural, is when the vicious humors are expelled by the force of nature
rightly operating.

Symptomatical, is made either by the reason of the faculty, or the matter.

By reason of the Faculty, is when that being weak cannot retain and govern the
humors of the body, but suffers them to flow about without control.

By reason of the Matter, when the humor is peccant either in its quantity or
quality, so enrages it, that it is forced to expel it out of its vessels and
receptacles.

Being preternatural, they are both vain and of no use, because the benign and
wholesome humor breaks forth together with the pernicious, without any order or
rule.

Artificial evacuation, is that which is done by help of medicines.

And that is twofold, Universal, and Particular.

Universal, is that which brings out the humors out of the whole body.

Particular from one part only.

Again, Evacuation has a twofold end, Revulsion and Derivation.

Though for other ends Evacuations are oft-times commended, as shall afterward
appear; yet because Revulsion and Derivation are most in use, and have most
difficulties, therefore we shall explain them apart in the following Chapter;
together with particular Evacuation, because of the great affinity between them.

CHAP. II. Of Revulsion, Derivation, and particular Evacuation.
REvulsion, is an averting of the humor flowing into any part, to the opposite
and most distant parts; having a regard to the original of the flux, the
community and good condition of the vessels.

Evacuation of the humor regards it either as it is in motion, or in rest. To
the humor moving or flowing into any part, revulsion and derivation is
necessary; to the humor resting, evacuation. Revulsion ought to be made in the
remotest place from that part troubled with the flux, as Galen teaches, 13.
Meth. c. 11. and 2. Glaucon. c. 2. and the nature of Revulsion it self shows as
much; for we endeavor that that which is drawn back, may not return; which end
is more easily attained, if revulsion be made to the most opposite and remote
parts. Yet this is not simply and absolutely to be understood, but with
conditions supposed, which shall be set down in the following Theorems.

The opposition or contrariety of the parts required in Revulsion, has three
conditions.

The first condition is that revulsion be made to the original of the flux.

As often as the original of the flux is known, Revulsion is always to be
opposed to it, and the humors, and to be drawn back to it again. As for
example, if the Flux be from the liver to the womb, the vein of the right arm
is to be opened, that the humor may be reduced to the source and original of
the Flux.

The sentence of Galen seems to contradict this condition, in his book of
curing by Bloodletting, l. 6. where he would in an inflammation of the womb,
that the thigh should be let blood. To which we answer, that the lower veins
are to be cut in an inflammation of the womb not as to simple revulsion, in
which case it would be better to let blood in the superior parts, but for
derivation also as well as revulsion. By which answer other places of Galen are
made plain, where he teaches, that the parts below the reins being affected,
that it is better to cut the lower veins, that derivation and revulsion may be
both made together, when otherwise as to simple revulsion, in those affections
the upper veins only use to be opened.

The second condition is, that the communion of the vessels be regarded.

If the original of the Flux be known, it is enough to observe the first
condition, that the flux be drawn back to the part from whence it flows. But
when that part is not known, then the two latter conditions are to be observed
which concern the part receiving, that the communion of the vessels and the
right habit of the parts be observed. Those vessels are said to have a
communion which have a relation to the part affected. So in a flux of blood
from the nose, the veins in the arm are open, and not in the thigh; though
these are more distant from the part receiving, because they have a lesser
relation to the part. So Galen in 13. Meth. in a flegment of the liver, cuts
the inner vein of the arm, because it keeps correspondence with the liver by a
large and broad way. So also l. de tremor. If, says he, you cut the veins
which have no agreement with the part affected, you do that part no good, and
hurt the sound part by drawing from it that blood which it may want.

The third condition is, to observe the right direction of the vessels.

This condition is of most moment and chiefly to be observed in all revulsions:
for it is founded upon the near consent and relation which the parts of the
same side have one to another, which is confirmed by many experiments. The
right side of the womb is so much hotter then the left, that thereby the right
side forms males, the left females. The cause of this increase of heat is the
directnesse of the liver to that part; for the vicinity and community of the
vessels are not alike to both parts. A Palsy possesses an exact half of the
body, the other unhurt, and yet the humor falls down from the third and fourth
ventricle of the brain, in which there is no separation of the right from the
left. So the liver being inflamed, if blood break forth from the right nostril,
it cures it; if from the left only it avails not; there being but one vein
which comes from the liver to each nostril. If the left arm be open, the spleen
is evacuated, and the left side, which would not so fall out from the right
arm. Yet the left, if you look at the communion of the veins, draws not from
the right, but by the intervening of the the liver. And lastly, 6. Epid. Hip.
says that the permutations of diseases, Crisis and Apostems are made directly,
and in a straight line.

But why the direction of the vessels should avail so much, is hard to say,
though there are many opinions, among which to let go the rest, the most
probable is that which has been confirmed by certain very grave Authors; that
there are many channels that run through the whole length of the body, by which
there is a free passage upwards and downwards of every thing contained in the
body; which notwithstanding are not distributed through the sides. But those
channels, because they are not conspicuous to the sense, are confirmed by two
reasons besides the above mentioned experiments.

The first is taken from the end, seeing that nature being solicitous for the
conservation of individuals, constitutes them as it were of two parts, that so
the one suffering any mischance, the other may remain whole. Thus when by any
misfortune one eye, ear or arm perishes, by the other eye, ear or arm, life is
preserved; and so as it were two living creatures, the right and left being
joined into one, she has made their life more lasting.

The second reason is taken from the event. For an alteration is made suddenly
from the right foot to the right arm or shoulder, and contrary; as also the
right part of the head being affected, and the humor descending, the right
part of the neck swells soonest, so the humor stays there; or if it descend to
the breast, the right fide is repleted sooner then the left: or lastly, if the
humor descend to the inferior parts, it causes the gout in the right side
sooner then in the left. By the same reason the foot being afflicted in an
Epilepsie, some matter ascends to the head, which could not be, unless those
channels were granted, which as they are hidden in dead men, so are they
manifest in those that live, and through those the humors are carried straight
forward, ascending or descending find an easy way, if they be drawn,
expelled, or any other way moved up and down by the force of remedies.

By what we have said before, the opinion of the Arabians is easily confuted,
who make revulsions without observing that directnesse of the vessels to any
terms of contrariety; of which they make three sorts, from the upper parts to
the lower, from the fore parts to the hinder, from the right to the left.
Whence Avicen fen. 10. l. 3. tract. 5. c. 1. in a Pleuresie and other internal
inflammations, first causes a vein to be opened in the ankle of the same side:
secondly, the common vein in arm of the contrary side: and lastly, the inner
vein of the same side. Which doctrine is manifestly contrary to Hippocrates,
and the true method of curing. Besides this also the Arabians are defective in
numbering the Diameters or quarters of the body, when as they constitute only
three; for they should have joined a fourth, that is from internal to external:
which Galen proposes in his Book of Revulsion; and that is observed in a
Pleuresie, when a vein is cut in the same side; for then revulsion is made from
the interior parts to the exterior.

Revulsion is double, Universal and Particular.

Universal, is that which observes the whole body, and in that respects the
contrary terms whence the humors flow.

This is chiefly performed when the greater veins are cut, and the Liver as the
original of the fluxions is exhausted; and is therefore the most useful and
most secure; that when the original of the flux is not known, that Revulsion be
performed by the greater veins through the liver, for so the veins being
emptied, they retain the rest of the blood, and will not permit it to flow:
whence Galen first ad Glaucon. 14. would have the flux of inflammations drawn
back either from, either to the common vessel, or to the original of the flux.
So 2. Acut. c. 10. What ever vein is opened it empties the whole, because there
is but one conflux and passage of all things in the body. But with this
difference, that some veins exhaust some parts sooner then others.

Particular Revulsion which is also called local, is that which in one member
only respects the contrary terms and bound.

This is observed in the opening of less veins, which draw only from one part,
and simply deserves not the name of Revulsion, and is properly to be referred
to der vation, and therefore only retaining the name of Revulsion, that these
precepts may be consentaneous with the doctrine of Galen, who calls derivations
of this nature by the name of Revulsion. For explaining the 68. Aphor. of Hipp.
sect. 5. who so writes, The hinder part of the head being affected, a vein is
to be cut in the forchead; he says that Revulsion ought to be according to
longitude upward and downward, according to latitude in the right and left
hand, according to depth from the foreparts to the hinder; and that therefore
the hinder part of the head being affected, Revulsion ought to be made by
cutting a vein in the forehead; which is particular and local. Revulsion and in
a plethorick body ought not to be used but after universal Revulsion.

Derivation is an averting of the humor flowing to any part through the near
parts.

Because Derivation is like particular Revulsion, therefore from the
explication of the foregoing Theorem, the nature of Derivation is made plain
enough.

In Derivation, the communion of the vessels is perpetually to be observed.

Derivation in this differs from Revulsion, because that is made to the
opposite and distant parts, this to the near part; so in a fluxion that falls
down to the teeth and eyes, a vesicatory is applied behind the eyes for
derivation of the humor.

Particular Evacuation, is that which evacuates the humor out of any
particular place.

But this is to be done after Revulsion and Derivation.

The manner of it is twofold, Sensible or Insensible.

Sensible, is performed either by the passages made by nature for that purpose,
or by Iron, and Causticks.

So the Brain is evacuated through the nostrils and Palate, the Bladder through
the Ureter, the Lungs through the rough Artery, the Bladder through the Ureter,
that is to say, through natural channels. But the matter of Apostems and things
of that nature contained in a part which wants channels, we draw forth by
artificial opening.

Insensibly, it is performed through the pores and insensible passages of the
parts; and this is properly called Resolution.

So the matter contained in any part, breeding swellings and such like
affections, is resolved by fomentations, ointments, plasters, and such like
remedies, without any manifest evacuation.

In the right administration of Revulsion, Derivation, and particular
Evacuation, the following Theorems are to be observed.

When a flux urges very much, revulsion is to be used; but when it is almost
spent, derivation, then when the flux falls down no more but that the humor is
fixed in one place, particular evacuation.

When the matter that flows is venomous, it is not to be drawn back; but from
the beginning to be vacuated through the part receiving.

So in Carbuncles, malign Scabs, small Pox, pestilent and pockie Bubo's. It is
not lawful to cut a vein for revulsion, but only for simple evacuation, if the
body be very Plethorick.

Revulsion, Derivation, and particular Evacuation may be performed altogether
at one and the same time with one and the same evacuation.

Although Revulsion, Derivation, and particular evacuation seem in a manner
contrary; one being to be done to the distant, the other two to the near parts;
yet there may be many evacuations partaking of them all together. If the middle
distance, between the near and most remote part; as in a Pleuresie, when a vein
in the arm is opened, that which flows is drawn back, that which is near to
the receiving is derived, and that which is fixed in the narrow passages of the
part is evacuated. But these evacuations made together and at once are most
profitable, as may be collected out of a precept of Galen not known to the
common Physicians. 6. Epid. sect. 2. where he teaches, that a man must not
insist upon revulsories all the time of the flux, but the middle time is to be
interposed for the vacuation of the humor contained in the part. For so at
length the flux will cease, if the flowing matter be averted by distant
revulsions, and that by near evacuations the pain and heat of the part be taken
away, which are the causes of the flux. If therefore the humor flowing, it be
granted that by a moderately remote section of a vein, a man may both avert and
evacuate, no doubt but that is to be embraced. Which Galen observes in an
inflammation of the liver, and in other cases; as also is usually done in a
Pleuresie, as we have showed above. Lastly, out of Galen 13. Meth. c. 10. If a
flux only is to be cured, the most distant part is to be cut; if a repletion,
the nearest part. Hence it appears, that where they are both joined together,
there a moderate distance is to be observed.

But when Revulsion and Derivation are performed both at once from one vein,
that moderation is to be used, that the vacuation be not little, which being
only agitated increases the flux, rather then allay it by extraction of the
humor: and care must be taken, that the same day, if nature suffer, or at
farthest, the next day, that the same vein be opened again.

This is a most useful precept and of great moment in Physic, though many
regard it not to the great damage of their patients; for if at first the blood
be sparingly let out, and not in a sufficient quantity, it runs more vehemently
into the part. Then it being not lawful to exhaust the whole at the first
section, but only as to the change of color, according to Hippocrates, and
that the strength will not bear a greater, it remains that what the first
section only left the second should take away. And whereas the place affected
being emptied, it sucks blood from the near places and vitiates it, unless it
be taken away by the benefit of that second evacuation, it is unavoidable that
it should putrefie and breed a greater mischief.

The quantity of Revulsion and Derivation ought to answer the quantity of the
flux if the strength can bear it.

So when the flux is great, if derivation and revulsion is to be performed by
bloodletting; the blood must be taken away in that quantity that it may
exhaust all the matter of the flux, regard being had to the strength, that they
are able to bear a total evacuation. And here we may take notice of that
notorious precept of Hipp. 2. de vict. rat. in acu. text 10. where he teaches
the manner and limit of bleeding in inflammations, especially in Pleuresies,
that is to the alteration of color. For that change of color shows that the
blood comes from the very part affected, as Galen teaches in his comment. on
these words: Whatever blood, says he, is contained in flegmone, that changes
color through the abundance of heat, but the rest remains alike in all parts.
For that cause the blood which is diffused through the whole body being more
phlegmatic, will be more ruddie in that side which is oppressed with the
flegmone. But if the blood which is diffused through the whole body, be more
ruddy, it would be more adust and blackish in the side possessed with the
flegmone. Therefore change of color certainly signifies a translation of the
blood from the part affected. But a man must not always expect it, as Galen
observes there, by reason of the failing of the strength.

While the humor flows violently, the greater veins are to be opened, so the
nature of the place and situation of the parts permit it.

Because a quick and sudden Revulsion is made through the greater veins, and
for the most part Derivation also, which may resist the celerity of the flux.

CHAP. III. Of Letting Blood.
THE viciousness of the humors is twofold, in quantity, and quality. That is
called Plethora, this a Catochymia.

A Plethora indicates bloodletting; a Cacochymia, purging.

This Theorem includes a very great Controversy concerning the indications of
bloodletting, which has variously troubled the wits of Authors, and entangled
them in many difficulties: From which that we may the more easily disingage our
selves, we shall follow the principles laid in the former Section; where the
nature of things indicating and things indicated is rightly stated, and they
exactly distinguished from Coindicants and Correpugants.

First therefore it is to be supposed, that we do here take bloodletting for a
species of evacuation, and a remedy to evacuate the blood. Which being granted,
we say that bloodletting is indicated only by a Plethora or fullness, which
signifies a redundancy of blood, when as but one thing can be indicated by one
thing, and the thing indicated ought to be contrary to the thing indicating:
but to plenty of blood the diminution thereof is directly opposed, which Galen
acknowledges, while he teaches that bloodletting is indicated by the multitude
of blood, condition of the strength, and youthful age. But when l. de ven.
sect. and in many other places he sets down simply the foresaid indications of
bloodletting, that is the greatness of the disease, the good condition of the
strength, and vigorous age, adjoining them to plenitude, he does not give them
properly and strictly the name of Indications, as from that which follows
shall appear.

1. One thing is only indicated by one thing, as has been showed c. 3. sect.
1. therefore bloodletting cannot be indicated by three things.

2. Strength and age when they are referred to natural things, never can truly
indicate, but only coindicate, as is above demonstrated c. 4. sect. 1.

3. The greatness of the disease, the law of contrariety-being observed, which
ought to intercede between the indicant and the thing indicated, cannot
indicate any thing but the greatness of the remedy. And so purging being as
great a remedy as bloodletting, they are both equally indicated by a great
disease, but not bloodletting particularly. Which Galen seeing, 4. Meth. says
the greatness of the disease indicates now purgation, now bloodletting; by
which is shown, that the greatness of a disease is not a true indicant of
bloodletting, because it is not one thing, nor perpetual.

4. From the same law of contrariety, when bloodletting is a kind of
evacuation; and that there ought a contrariety to intercede between a great
disease and evacuation, but there being no contrariety, one thing cannot be
indicated by another. Neither will it suffice to say they are contraries by
accident, for true indicants ought to indicate of themselves a contrary remedy.

5. There are many great diseases, for which bloodletting is not convenient;
as a Hectic Fever, and whatever are caused by emptiness, and therefore the
magnitude of a disease is no true Indicant of bloodletting.

Therefore we say that Galen makes the magnitude of a disease to indicate
bloodletting, not that it properly and truly does so, which some late writers
endeavor to defend, but that it is a sign which shows a vehement distemper in
the blood, as often as the disease proceeds from thence, and that viciousness
of the blood requires bloodletting. Strength and age coindicate only, and are
said to indicate through a large acception of the word, as we have showed
above, that Coindicants are often by Galen termed Indicants. The magnitude of
the disease indicates bloodletting, conditionally that there is no other
remedy through the abundance of blood, for else the Plethora being absent, the
disease might be cured other ways, as by fasting, exercise, etc.

A Plethora, is either as to the Vessels or the Strength.

A Plethora as to the Vessels, is caused either when all the humors are
equally increased, and is simply called a Plethora; or else when the blood only
redounds superfluously, and is called a Plethora of blood: when another humor
exceeds the blood in quantity, and exceeds also all the other humors, they
also abounding above their just measure, it is called a Plethora of that
humor.

Lastly, when one humor exceeds all the rest, they being equally poys'd, it is
called a Cacochymia.

Cacochymia, is a vice in the quality, as the other is in the quantity; for
blood may be increased without a vice in the quality, though not other humors.

Plethora as to the Strength, is that which though it do not fill the vessels
extraordinarily, yet it oppresses the faculties of the body, especially the
natural, so that when it cannot be ruled by them it degenerates into
corruption.

Again of Plethora's, some are light, some heavy, some present, some future,
same common, some proper.

Bloodletting, is also convenient for Revulsion, Derivation, and to cool the
whole body, not of it self but by accident.

Bloodletting of it self draws out a multitude of humors contained in the
veins, but by accident it makes a revulsion, and derivation of the humors
flowing to some part. It refrigerates also the body by accident, by drawing
forth part of the hot humor, and giving a free transpiration to that which is
left.

From the foresaid Theorems may be easily gathered the solutions of all
arguments, which are brought by many to prove that bloodletting is not
indicated by a Plethora. For in those who have fallen from a high place, though
there be no manifest Plethora present, yet they breath a vein because there is
a Plethora as to the strength, for they being weakened by the fall, cannot rule
the humors which before nature kept well in order while the party was in
health; therefore is that bloodletting, for revulsion of the humors that
began to flow to the bruised parts. So in an immoderate flux of the blood,
breathing a vein is commended, not as it is an evacuation, but as it is a
revulsory medicine. So in putrid Fevers, a vein is opened to cool the body, or
because there is a Plethora as to the strength. For nature being delivered from
part of the burden by which she was oppressed, the more easily sustains and
tames with less difficulty that which is behind. Lastly, a light Plethora
which may be cured by exercise, wants not bloodletting; but that only which is
more heavy, and produces, or shortly will produce some great disease.

Among those things which vindicate bloodletting, the strength of the body
obtains the first place, which if it be firm and lusty, does well permit it,
but if it be faint and languid, will not allow thereof.

The Strength is comprehended under a threefold number of the faculties, but
especially in the vital faculty; for if from a big and equal pulse, and free
breathing, it appear undiminished and lusty, it permits bloodletting; but if
on the contrary it appear weak and faint by the pulse and manner of breathing,
it disswades bloodletting. Though the morbifick cause or the disease it self
do require this kind of remedy: or at most persuades it to be done sparingly,
and at at several intervals. But the faint strength is diligently to be
distinguished from the oppressed strength. The strength is oppressed by
internal causes, as obstruction, and abundance of humor, and then they are
relieved by evacuation. They are dissolved and dissipated by most evident
causes, as by the heat and malignant corruption. of the air, by labor,
watching, famine, or any immoderate vacuation, fierceness of pain, violence of
the disease, and diuturnity likewise, and other such like; and then refreshing
and renewing is rather to be used then evacuation. When the strength is faint
and oppressed, the pulse is equal, but with this difference, for at the
beginning of a disease when the strength is oppressed, the pulse is perceived
to be little and almost buried, but when they are faint and languishing in the
increase and vigor of the disease, with which the formentioned causes concur.

A vigorous age coindicates also bloodletting. Which is in the middle between
youth and old age, but childhood and old age allow not of it but in cases of
urgent necessity, and that with extreme caution used.

Age neither coindicates nor is correpugnant, unless in respect of the
strength, which in a child and old man are so weak, that they can hardly
sustain blood letting. For children have a soft, tender, and open body, which
of it self is continually wasted and dissolved. And as for old men they want
spirits and heat, and therefore Hip. 4. de vict. rat. in morb. acut. teaches
that a vigorous age where the disease is great, and the strength not impaired,
requires bloodletting: whhom Galen following, 21. Meth. c. 14. and ^. de cur.
rat. per view. sect. forbids to let blood before the 14. year, and after the 70.
which is to be understood of that more full evacuation used by the ancients;
for a moderate bloodletting which is but equal or inferior to the strength
and fullness of humor overy age can beat, if it be vigorous and lusty; for age
is not to be measured by number of years, but by the constitution of the
strength and habit of body. Which Celsus elegantly confirms l. 2. s. 10. The
Ancients, says he, judged, that the first and last age could not brook this
kind of remedy, and did persuade themselves, that a woman with child cured
this way, would prove abortive. But experience afterward showed that there was
no certainty in these things, and that there are other better observations by
which the Physician may inform his judgment. For it matters not what the age
be, nor what is born in the body, but what the strength is; and therefore a
strong child, a lusty old man, and a healthy woman with child, are safely
cured. So Rhasis in a decrepit old age oppressed with a violent Pleuresie let
blood: and Avenzour opened a vein in his child not above three years old, and
that with success. And daily we see that children of four or five years of age
are recovered from dangerous diseases by bloodletting.

The quantity of blood to be let, is judged by the greatness of the vice in
the blood; and so a great disease indicates the letting of much blood, a
moderate disease moderate bleeding, a little one little.

The quantity the strength of the patient coindicates, which if they are lusty,
then he may safely bleed as much as the disease requires; if weak, less; if
very weak, not at all.

In a great distemper of the blood, the ancients were wont to let the patient
bleed to swouning: which is not to be understood of those who are afraid of
bleeding, or if it happen through some other cause beside that extraordinary
bleeding; but when it happens only by reason of the evacuation; such a kind of
bloodletting as this they used in great inflammations, burning Fevers, and
extreme pains. And Galen affirms that he has found by experience, that if in
burning Fevers the patient bleed to swouning, that presently the whole habit
of the body is cooled, and the Fever extinguished: and that many by loosnesse
and sweating have been clearly restored to health. But this evacuation to
swouning in our time is little in use; and by the vulgar blemished by the name
of rashness. And therefore it is best to stop, and to draw as much blood as
would bring the patient to swoun at two or three times without any fear of
swouning, and less hurt to the natural strength.

Causes also external and internal coindicate the quantity of bleeding.

The internal causes, are the temperament, habit, and age.

A hot and moist temper endures more plentiful bleeding, then a cold and dry.

An extenuated, soft and slender habit of the body cannot endure a great
evacuation of blood; but on the contrary, a fleshy, thick, and firm.

A very fat habit of body very hardly sustains bleeding.

Though such a habit be not subject to dissolve, yet because it has narrow and
slender vens, which when they are emptied, the fat easily straightens, there is
danger lest it extinguish the natural heat, and therefore is prejudiced by
bleeding.

A youthful age endures more bleeding, then childehood or old age.

The external causes are the Country, season, posture of the heavens,
vacuation suppressed, or else immoderate custom of diet, manner of living, or
evacuating.

In a hot and dry Country men must bleed less.

Because such a Country consumes much of the natural heat, blood, and spirits,
whence the strength is consumed, and less quantity of blood is left in the
veins.

A cold and moist country, endures more bleeding, less that which is most
cold; but a temperate Country endures a larger then any.

A cold and moist temper of the air, keeps in the humors and the natural heat,
and dissolves them not, but in a very cold country the blood being as it were
congealed, hardly gives way to evacuation, then the internal parts if they
remain destitute of their heat, are in danger to be extinguished by the ambient
cold.

As to the seasons of the year, the Spring permits most bleeding, next Autumn,
then Winter, least of all Summer.

In the most hot and most cold posture of the heaven, the blood is to be
sparingly let forth, in a temperate more plentifully.

Any accustomed evacuation suppressed, requires a larger emission of blood.

A voluntary evacuation that takes not away the matter of the disease, does not
exclude bleeding, so the strength be not much impaired thereby; but in respect
of this, the blood is to be let out more sparingly, and the evacuation to be
suppressed, if it will more impair the strength.

Spontaneous evacuation, if it bring away the morbifick matter, if it do ease
the patient, and is able to void as much as you require, you must then leave it
to nature, if that be not able, you shall vacuate so much blood, as that both
evacuations joined together may be able to do the work.

They that live frugally and sparingly, either out of custom, or by reason of
some disease, are more sparingly to be let blood, then those that live more
intemperately.

Those that are accustomed to bleeding, bear it with less danger, then those
who are not accustomed to it.

In such diseases as require bleeding, there you must let blood at the
beginning. The time of letting blood is shown by the presence of those
Indicants, that require such a remedy: for in the beginning of a disease those
Indicants do chiefly concur, in respect of themselves, and of the strength
which then is more vigorous, also because nature in the progress of the
disease, being intent upon concoction and its contention with the disease, is
not to be called away from her work.

If the beginning of the disease be omitted, or that then sufficient quantity
of blood has not been taken away, it is to be let forth at other times, if the
signs of fullness and crudity still appear, and the strength can bear it, and
that other coindicants concur, or at least hinder not.

Among those things which forbid bleeding at the beginning of a disease and at
other times, crudity of the stomach is not the least, or the inconcoction of
the meat in the first vessels.

This precept is propounded by Galen, 9. Meth. c. 5. therefore unless the
distemper of the blood be very vehement, bloodletting is to be deferred, till
those humors be concocted, lest being drawn to the liver they should beget
obstructions, and should do more harm then bloodletting could do good.

In those diseases where there is either a certain remission or intermission,
Bloodletting may be used either ie the remission or intermission. In the fits
and exasperations of Fevers, there is the greatest conflict of nature with the
disease, at which time nothing is to be stirred, nor is the strength required
for the conflict to be weakened by bleeding, which is elegantly expressed by
Celsus c. 10. l. 2. in these words: If a vehement Fever urge, in the very
vehemence thereof to let blood, is to kill the man. When an affection urges
vehemently, a vein is to be opened at any hour, but in those that intermit, the
fittest time to let blood is the morning, two or three hours after Sunrising.

For then the meat eaten the day before is well concocted, and the strength is
more vigorous: also in the morning the blood is more full of power and is more
thin and apt to flow.

CHAP. IV. Of Purgation.
PUrgation, is an evacuation of the humors peccant in quality.

This definition is proposed by Galen, Comm. in 2. Aph. sect. 1. which that it
may be rightly understood, you must know, that by vice of the quality is not
meant a mere distemper; for to that alteration only were sufficient; but rather
a Cacochymie, or a redundancy of evil humors. Of this sort are all
excrementitious humors, which being mixed with the blood are contained in the
veins or without them: but those are of two sorts, others natural, others
preternatural. Natural, are those which are generated according to nature, as
sweet phlegm, choler, melancholy, and the serous humor; which if they are
generated in due proportion and quantity, need not any vacuation; but if they
abound in greater quantity, are to be purged out, but the excrementitious
humors which are preternatural, are those which are produced contrary to
nature; as yellow, green, eruginous, glasteous, and black choler; as also sharp
and salt phlegm; which humors when they ought by no means to be in the body,
the least quantity of them breeds a Cacochymia, and indicates purgation, if it
cannot be removed by diet, exercise, and lighter labors.

But to every species of the peccant humor there ought to be corresponding a
proper species of purging medicine. And so for phlegm, medicines that purge
phlegm; for choler, medicines purging choler; for melancholy, things that purge
melancholy; for the serous humor, things that purge aqueous and watery humors;
and for mixed humors, mixed medicines are to be used.

Purgation is coindicated by the strength, temperament, habit, age, sex, manner
of living of the patient, and by the state of the air.

In all purgation it is necessary that the strength of the patient should be
very lusty or moderate.

The strength is something impaired by purging; and therefore if it be very
much weakened, purging is not to be attempted.

Hot and dry bodies, as also cold, whether they be moister or dryer, endure
purgation very hardly; hot and moist, more easily.

Those which are endued with a hot and dry temperament, by purgation may be
easily heated, rarifi'd and dried; and also fall into convulsions, if the
purgation be overmuch. Cold and moist, and cold and dry, have a faint heat, and
little spirits, which are easily dissipated by purgation; but hot and moist
have a greater heat to resist the force of purging: a thin, tender and loose
habit is easily dissolved, but a fleshy and well compact tolerates purgation;
but a fat habit, not so well.

Fat people are diligently to be distinguished from fleshy, for although both
may endure purgation, yet much less the fat, because they are colder, and have
less spirits, and narrower vessels.

Boys and old men, require gentler medicines, in their middle age more
forcible.

Women with child, in the 4, 5, and 6 month upon urgent necessity and with
great caution may be purged.

This is to be taken from Hipp. Aph. 1. sect. 4. and it agrees with reason. For
when nature stirred up by the purging medicine, endeavors to expel the
excrementitious humors, and the disease it self; it shakes the womb, and
expels the birth, unless it stick very close; but if when she is with child
she is troubled with a disease that requires purgation, it must be used but
with mild and gentle remedies; and the more confidently in those months
wherein the birth is more strongly bound to the womb, which is in the 4, 5, and
6. month. For as Galen elegantly says, the adhering of the birth to the womb
is like the hanging of the fruit upon the trees. For the fruit at first is held
on with more tender stalks, and therefore more easily fall off when the wind
shakes them; but being grown bigger they are not so easily loosened from the
boughs: and again, when they are ripe they fall of of themselves. So the birth
at the first beginnings of its formation, and when it comes to perfection, are
more easily shaken forth, but in the middle time they cling faster to the womb.

The particular nature of the patient is diligently to be observed, for some
are purged easily and plentifully by weaker medicines; others are hardly moved
by stronger.

Those who are accustomed to purgations more easily endure them, but in those
who are seldom or never purged, we must proceed more cauriously.

In a hotter or colder air purgations are more difficult, in a temperate more
easy.

A hotter air weakens the strength and begets hot diseases, and therefore
admits not purging, which impairs the strength. Therefore says Hipp. Aph. 5.
sect. in the dog-daies and before them it is bad purging.

The cold condenses the humors, and stops up the passages, rendering the body
less fluid, which makes purging less successeful. Therefore Hipp. Aph. 47.
sect. 6. says that purging is better in the Spring then at any time of the
year.

The quantity of the purge is shown by the quantity of the vicious humor; for
it is all to be purged out, that the body may be freed. If the noxious humor
be not wholly taken away, the disease is not cured; or if it appear cured, it
is subject to a relapse. Therefore Hipp. Aph. 10. sect. 2. Those things which
are left in diseases, cause relapses: but if but a little portion of that
humor be left, by exquisite diet, by nature and the natural heat it may at
length perhaps be overcome.

A small Cacochymie may be drawn all away at one time, if the strength be
vigorous and the matter be concocted and thin; but if the strength be impaired,
both a small and great Cacochymie is to be drawn out by degrees.

This Theorem is confirmed by that of Hipp. Aph. 36. sect. 2. Those that eat
bad meat, if they purge, they lose their strength thereby. The reason is
because they abound with many and vicious humors, and have little good juice,
so that their weak strength is much wasted by a strong medicament; and then
that sink of ill humors being moved by the purging medicines, sends stinking
and ill vapors to the heart, stomach and brain, which do cause swounings,
giddiness, and other accidents: yet these humors are not to be left in the
body, but to be purged out by degrees and at several intervals of time, and by
Epicrasis without much agitation.

The most fit time for purgation, is at the height or declination of the
disease, in which the humors are concocted and prepared for evacuation.

This rule is founded on Hipp. Aph. 21. sect. 1. Physical cures belong to
concected, not to crude things. But in the declination of the disease, or at
least at the end of the height thereof they are perfectly concocted. This
Theorem is to be limited with this restriction, viz. if nature do not perform
evacuation of it self. For when the humors are critically evacuated, there
must be then no purgation, unless the crisis be imperfect. For then the
relics of the morbifical matter are to be drawn forth by medicines, lest they
breed a relapse.

At the beginning of diseases purgation is to be used, if the humor be too
superfluous and swell.

The humors are then said to swell, when they are agitated with violence, and
provoke and pain the body. But this swelling is proper to choleric humors,
which are hot, thin, and acrimonious, and most subject to breed acute diseases.
But thick and cold humors which generate long diseases, are not wont to swell
so much. If therefore such humors swell, it is lawful to purge them forth
before they are concocted; for it is to be feared that the strength may be
impaired by the agitation of the matter, and that the humors stirred up by
that violence may fall upon some principal part: but then those humors are
easily purged; although they be not concocted, because being thin and movable,
nature being also excited by them, and provoked by the purging medicines, lends
her helping hand to evacuate them her self. So that the patient receives more
good then harm by the purging away of those swelling humors, before they are
concocted. Whence, Hipp. Aph. 10. sect. 4. It is good to administer cure in
acute diseases, if the matter swell, the same day, for to delay longer in such
diseases is evil; but this is to be performed with caution and premeditation,
for the most part the matter swells not; as in Aph. 22. sect. 1. and as the same
Hipp. teaches in Aph. 24. sect. 1. In acute diseases and at the beginning
seldom use purgations, but with premeditation: for purgations by their heat,
and acrimony increase acute diseases, and acute diseases are sooner wasted by a
critical evacuation then by purging. But those Crises are not rashly to be
disturbed, but rather if there be any hope of them, abstain from purgation, and
means rather are to be considered of and prepared for that evacuation. The
strength also and other coindications are to be observed: as also the body it
self, if the passages thereof are open and free from obstructions, and that the
patient do not abound with a multitude of thick and crude humors, and also
that he be not oppressed with any inward inflammation, which would be worse by
purgation.

Humors that flow to the more noble parts, or those parts that have a relation
to the nobler parts, or that are about to flow thither, are to be purged away
in the beginning of a disease.

Some deep wounds, ulcers, inflammations and other tumors, headaches, and
other affections of other parts, if ill humors do abound in the body, no doubt
but purgation is very convenient, if there be nothing else to hinder it, that
the matter causing the affection may be diminished and called from that part,
which is used in ordinary practice, and confirmed by Galen, in his book of
curing by Phleb. c. 8. In those, says he, who have any part vehemently
afflicted, or by any other way has a flegmone growing on, if we suspect it
will be very great, we begin to cure it by evacuation, purges, or breathing a
vein, as we see which is more convenient then the other.

When the humors abound in quantity, and therefore cannot be well concocted,
part of them is to be purged away, that nature may the better deal with the
rest.

Because this kind of purgation diminishes the morbifical matter by taking
away some part thereof, therefore it is commonly called Minorative, which in
our times is for the most part used in all diseases.

Neither are the dangers objected by the enemies to minorative purgations
instituted in the beginnings of diseases very formidable: for they fear that
the matter being moved and not evacuated, may cast the patient into any evident
danger, and that the humors bad and good should be mingled together.

Which dangers are most easy to be avoided, if more gentle medicines,
according to common practice, be used, which purge the first region with little
or no commotion, and bring away the morbifick matter disposed to evacuation.
Now if these purgations were less used in the times of Galen and Hipp. which
are administered in the beginning of diseases, the reason was, because in those
times only vehement and malignant medicines were applied; those more mild and
gentle medicines, which to us are familiar, being not known to them, which may
be used without any trouble. Therefore Celsus in a Fever forbids purging,
because the purges of those times by their fiery heat and acrimony did increase
the heat of the Fever: And for that reason Hipp. in the summer did abhor these
medicines, as Aph. 5. l. 4. In the dog-daies or before, purgation is naught;
because the humors are burnt up at that time, and cannot brook the acrimony of
the purging remedies; and for the same reason we in our ages do avoid those hot
medicaments which are called diagridiate, in those hot seasons, and in Fevers;
but gentle ones which are a little hot, and for the most part temperate, nay
some of them cooling, both in continual Fevers and in their beginnings, in the
summer, and in the dogdaies, are by us used successefully. Notwithstanding it is
most certain that the ancients in the beginning of diseases permitted
purgation, especially in diseases not feverish, and in which there was not a
crudity of humors arising from putrefaction. As Galen 4. devict. rat. in morb.
acut. says that he has exhibited a Purge sometimes on the second, sometimes
on the fourth, sometimes on the fifth day. And again lib. de comp. med.
sometimes without concoction, or any other precedent preparation, he purges
both kinds of choler, and phlegm in an Alopecia, as also a little after in many
diseases of the head. Lastly, 13. Meth. he relates, that many who have had an
inflammation in the eyes have been in one day cured by purging through the lower
part of the belly.

In diseases that have exacerbations and paroxysms, it is more safe to give a
Purge in the day of remission or intermission.

For when the disease troubles less, the strength is more vigorous, and
endures the vehemence of the disease. Notwithstanding in the fit, evacuation is
made more readily, because then the humors are in motion, and as it were
swelling, and so more disposed to be carried away. And therefore Empericks are
wont to cure intermitting Fevers, by exhibiting medicaments that evacuate by
vomit or stool, or both. But because nature is much afflicted this way,
therefore a prudent Physician ought seldom, and with very great caution to try
such kind of curations.

To a free elective purgation, a temperate day, the South rather then the North
wind blowing, with a benevolent position of the stars, is most conducing to
health.

A Southern constitution of the air renders the body looser, and the humors
more fluid, which makes purgation more successeful. But that the stars are to
be observed in purging, the Astrologers do teach; and you may see all their
precepts numbered up together into one head by John Antonius Maginus, in his
Book of the lawful use of Astrology in Physic. And first you must observe not
to purge in a conjunction of the Moon and the Sun, nor in an opposition. For
although this precept with others of the Astrologers be derided, yet it is
observed, that at those times purging proceeds not so successefully, as at
others; and therefore in an elective purgation, it is better to avoid those
Aspects.

The place through which purgation is to be made is twofold, by vomit and
stool.

And it is discovered by the place and nature of the humor.

Humors residing in the stomach are commodiously purged away by vomit, as also
not seldom those which are contained in the spleen, hollow of the liver, and
in the pancreas. But those which reside in the lower parts, or parts remote
from the stomach, are purged away through the belly.

Evacuation by vomit, is most convenient for the humors contained in the
stomach, yet it is certain that the parts near the stomach, as the liver,
spleen, and pancreas are sometimes evacuated by vomit; so that sometimes most
obstinate humors breeding long diseases, are successefully evacuated this way
from those places, which cannot be eradicated by other remedies.

Thin, hot and choleric humors by vomit; phlegmatic, and melancholy, and
thick humors are more easily purged by stool.

Choleric humors fly upwards being light; phlegmatic and melancholy fall
downward, because they are heavy.

The place through which purgation ought to be made, is coindicated by the time
of the year, habit of the sick, nature and custom.

In the summer it is more convenient to purge upward, in the winter down.

This precept is set down by Hipp. Aph. 4. sect. 4. and the reason of it is,
because yellow choler, and hot humors abound in the summer; and are more
easily carried upwards; but in the winter the contrary happens. Neither is it
repugnant to this opinion which Hipp. observes li. de Salub. diat. that in the
six winter months vomiting is to be used; For that is explained by Galen to be
only understood of phlegm, which is collected in the stomach, for that is to be
purged away by vomit, but the rest of the body by stool.

Those who are of a slender habit, are more easily purged upward, but thick and
fleshy people downward.

This Theorem is taken from Aph. 6. and 7. sect. 4. and the reason is, because
lean people are more choleric, fleshy people more phlegmatic. Beside that
these through the weight of the caul and muscles of the abdomen, cannot vomit
but very laboriously and violently, and with much danger of breaking some
vessel in the breast.

Those who have a disposition prone and easy to vomit, by these vomiting may
be easily endured; but those that vomit difficultly must not be permitted to
vomit.

Those that are not prone to vomit, cannot be made to vomit but by very
vehement medicines, which endangers a ruption of some vein in the breast
through straining.

Those who are accustomed to vomit, may the more easily be purged by vomit; but
they who use it not, difficultly.

Vomiting was much used among the Ancients, for which cause they endured more
vehement vomitories. But in our times that custom is out of use; and therefore
the greater wariness is to be observed in giving vomits, and good heed must be
taken to know when vomiting may be used, when purging, and which is most
commodious. For nature her self has made a way through the guts, to the
ejection of excrements; and therefore has made them less noble, and indeed
the way is shorter and straighter from the whole body to the guts, then to the
stomach, and many more and greater veins are carried to the guts then to the
stomach.

CHAP. V. Of the preparation and concoctions of the Humors.
THE noxious humors before they be purged, are to be prepared and concocted.

The preparation of humors is made by art, concocted by nature.

Concoction, is the alteration of the substance into a better condition, which
is done by the force of heat.

In this conco^tion differs from alteration, that alteration changes the
qualities, and concoction the substance.

This is twofold, the one is called pepsis, the other pepasmos.

Pepsis is that true and proper concoction, which changes the nourishment into
the substance of our bodies.

Pepasmos, is when a vicious and putrid humor, which cannot be changed into
the substance of the body, is changed into something better and more convenient
to nature, as into purulent matter, or something like to it.

Tumors arising from blood are changed into true purulency, as also the
corruption which is generated in ulcers. But putrid humors which are contained
in the veins, are not converted into true matter, but into something else of a
like nature, an example whereof is seen in the sediment of Urine.

The preparation of humors which is made by art, respects either the humors
themselves, or the ways through which those humors are to be purged.

Hot humors are to be refrigerated, cold humors are to be heated, thick
humors are to be cut and attenuated, glutinous and clammy humors are to be
cleansed, thin ones to be thickened.

Though many imagine contrary to Avicen, that the humors the thinner they are,
are so much the more easily purged, and are never to be thickened; yet it is
more agreeable to reason, that they should be moderately thickened. For as
chafe is blown here and there by the wind, so says Avicen, the choleric
humor through its lightness, being agitated here and there, is not easily
brought away by medicaments, or expelled by nature, till it be moderately
thickened.

The way through which the humors are to be purged, must be made open and
free, and the stomach also to be without any nauseousnesse, lest it should be
averse to the medicament, and vomit it up again. The guts must be also emptied,
lest they resist the course of the humors, and the obstructions of the bowels
must be opened.

Any preparation which is made by art, and help of remedies, is used not only
to help purgation, but also to promote concoction of the morbisick humor.

Because the morbifick humor being weakened by the preparing remedies is more
easily overcome by our heat, and brought to a Pepasmos; therefore these
preparing medicaments, by the Physicians, though improperly are called
concocting, because they conduce to the alteration and concoction of the
morbisick humors.

CHAP. VI. Of Evacuation by Urine.
BY Urine are evacuated the serous and choleric humors, and the thinner phlegm
from the whole body.

Though in the ordinary works of nature a watery humor is only evacuated, as
the superfluity of drink; as also the gibbous part of the liver, reins,
bladder, and the vessels serving to them are purged more commodiously those
ways: Yet sometimes the whole body evacuates some thinner humors by those
passages, as we see in Crisis performed by Urine with good success. And
therefore the Physician must promote these evacuations with fit remedies.

In those diseases chiefly, whose matter is to be evacuated by degrees, and by
little and little evacuation is to be performed by Urine.

Diuretic medicines evacuate the body but by little and little, and therefore
they profit not such in diseases that want present evacuation.

When evacuation is performed by Urine, heed is to be taken, lest the humor
which is to be brought away be much and plentiful; for it is to be feared that
while the humor is compelled to the narrow passages, it should obstruct them
by its redundancy, and shut up the passages both to themselves and others.

Therefore the Physicians before they use Diuretics, bring away a good
quantity of the peccant humor by stool, and afterward evacuate the relics
by Urine.

If the reins, bladder, or other vessels destined to this use are inflamed, or
any such like way affected, vacuation by urine is not to be used.

Because it is against reason to bring the humors to the part affected and
weak.

CHAP. VII. Of Evacuation by Sweating.
BY Sweat may be purged forth, whatever thin humors or that are subject to be
made thin are contained in the habit of the body and veins; or may be brought
to those parts.

In this evacuation, nature and the operation of the Physician seems contrary.
For nature critically dissolves only acute diseases by sweat, but the Physician
endeavors the cure of chronical diseases by this evacuation. The reason is,
because sweat cannot be provoked by art without heating the body, which is most
dangerous in acute diseases; but in long and cold diseases it is profitable,
because thereby the phlegmatic humors fixed to the parts, are attenuated, and
by little and little brought away.

That evacuation which is made by sweat, the strength impaired, a hot temper
and choleric, and multitude of matter will not permit.

By the use of Sudorificks, the pores of the skin are opened to the great
damage of the spirits and strength. By the same sudorificks the body grows
hot, so that it is to be feared, lest the hot distemper should cast the patient
into a Fever, or Consumption. Lastly, while the matter is much, being agitated
all together, and vehemently attenuated, it is to be feared that it should fall
upon some principal part, or shut up the pores of the body, which causes
putrefaction, tumors, and other diseases. And therefore it is the best way
before the provocation of sweat, to diminish the morbifick matter with
universal purgation.

THE THIRD SECTION of the FIRST PART OF THERAPEVTICKS.
Of Indications from the Disease.
CHAP. I. Of Indications from a similar Disease.
EVery distemper is to be corrected by alteration, which is to be performed by
Contraries.

So a hot distemper points to a cooling Medicament, a cold distemper a heating
Medicament; a moist distemper, driers; a dry, moistners: so in compounded
distempers, hot and moist diseases, require cold and dry medicines; hot and dry,
cold and moist; cold and moist, hot and dry; cold and dry, hot and moist.

A more intense distemper and more remote from the natural temper of the body,
wants stronger medicines; a more remiss, and less remote from the natural
temper, requires more remiss medicines.

In correcting any distemper, the part affected must be accurately considered,
the remedies applied must be appropriate and specifical, having a peculiar
affinity with the disease, and agreement with nature.

So when the brain is to be heated, we must not apply indifferently any sort of
heating medicines, but those which are called Cephalic; to the breast, those
medicines that are fit for the breast; to the heart, Cordials; to the liver,
Hepaticks; to the spleen, Spleneticks; to the womb, Hysterical; and so
medicines appropriate to any part are to be used, endued with those first
qualities which the distemper of these parts requires.

CHAP. II. Of Indications from an Organical disease.
OF an organical disease, there are many sorts, viz. in conformation,
magnitude, number, and situation, whose several Indications are distinctly to
be propounded.

Diseases of conformation are in figure, in passage, cavity, roughness or
smoothness.

The figure is viciated, either in the womb, or after the birth.

That error which is contracted in the womb, may be omitted as incurable.

That which happens afterward, if it be of a long time, is hard to be cured; if
lately done, much more easily.

If the depravation of the figure be produced by an afflux of humors, or by
any other cause external or internal, by the removal of those causes, it will
be amended.

So the depravation of the figure, which in preternatural tumors, and the
faces of leprous persons, and such like appears, it is to be restored by the
revulsion, derivation, or evacuation of the humors causing those effects.

If the depravation of the figure happen without the afflux of humor; as in
those who have crooked legs, or bunch backs, or their ribs one higher then
another: In children it is to be amended by often stroking, then by lying on
the opposite side, and by swathing and pasteboards. In those that are more
grown, by softning medicines to be mollified, and then to be contained in its
due place by the means mentioned. But if disfiguration happen by some fracture,
or ill bred callosity, caused by the undue collocation of the member, the
callous part is to be cut away, that it may be made to grow more handsomely, if
it may be done without danger, that is, in a strong well disposed and temperate
body.

Diseases of the cavities and passages, are dilatation, astriction, and
obstruction, which are wont to be produced by innumerable causes, and according
to the variety of causes, they have many sorts of Indications, which cannot be
handled but in a particular method.

Roughness and smoothness that are preternatural, proceed from many causes,
both internal and external, wounding, gnawing, cleansing, drying, and the like,
the removal of which must be in a particular method.

Diseases in number, are only to be cured by nature, for that which is wanting
is either flesh, bone, or some other part which the Physician cannot add; yet
he may help the generation thereof removing the impediments which delay nature
in her work. As also when the members are lost which cannot be recovered be
nature, yet the Physician may suborne something in stead thereof, which may
supply in a manner the use thereof; as when an iron arm or a wooden leg is put
in the place of that which is lost.

Whatever exceed in number are presently to be cut away, so it may be done
without danger, and to the advantage of the patient, but as there is very great
variety in this this particular, so the way of cure is manifold, yet all is
performed by iron, fire, or medicament.

Magnitude increased, is to be cured by diminution, diminished by addition,
almost by the same instruments, by which number, increased or diminished its
usually cured.

When the parts lose their situation and natural connection, they are to be put
into their former place, by that method which is set down in the curing of
dislocations and burstings.

CHAP. III. Of Indication from a common Disease or solution of unity.
EVery solution of the Continuum requires an uniting, which is perfected by
nature, whose servant the Physician is, whose chief duty in that office is
contained under four heads.

1. That he be cautious that nothing fall into the part affected, that may
hinder conglutination.

2. That the extremes of the dissolved unity be rightly joined together.

3. That being joined, they may be rightly kept together.

4. To forward their uniting, and mutual adhering one to the other.

5. That the symptoms which may happen may be prevented and corrected.

The practice of which precepts is showed in the cure of wounds, ulcers, and
fractures.

THE FOURTH SECTION OF THERAPEVTICKS.
Of Indications from the Strength.
CHAP. I. What it is that Indicates and Coindicates Diet in sick People.
THE Strength in whatsoever state of the body indicate their own preservation.

But that conservation is perfected by diet, which as it is properly indicated
by the strength, so it is coindicated or prohibited by the disease, or the
morbifick cause.

As it is said before, A remedy as it is the instrument of curation, is
indicated by things preternatural, and coindicated by things natural: So now it
is certain, that nourishment as it is the instrument of conservation, is
indicated by things agreeable to nature, and coindicated by things averse to
nature.

But the strength is the faculties themselves, or rather the instruments of
them, that is, the vigor of heat, spirits, and the solid parts; which being
firm and vigorous, the strength is vigorous; and so on the contrary: since
therefore the conservation of the solid and spiritous parts, is by the benefit
of the nourishment, therefore the use of it, which is called Diet, is said to
preserve the strength. But the disease, or the morbifick cause does coindicate
or forbid the use of nourishment, as that may be increased or fomented by it;
or nature intent upon Pepsis, may be called away by Pepasmos; for when nature
is buried in the concoction of nourishment, she is drawn away from concocting
the morbifical humor, whence upon consideration of the disease, regard must be
had to the measure of dieting.

CHAP. II. What those things are that concern Diet.
IN every state of the body, Diet, or reason of dieting, consists in six things
not natural, but especially in diseases regard must be had to meat and drink.

Meat and drink, as they are the true objects of nourishment, so are they the
true instruments, which preserve the strength; but other things which are not
natural, are only the helping causes, which being well or ill disposed, produce
good or ill nourishment from the meat; for sleep and watching, if they are
excessive, hurt the heat and spirits, if they are within the limits of health,
they preserve them and forward concoction; immoderate sleep cools and moistens
the brain, so that the natural heat wastes, the animal spirits are sunk in
moisture, and the animal faculty is injured, with which the vital and natural
do easily sympathize. Over much watching dissipates the heat and spirits; but
moderate sleep, and moderate watching, preserve the heat and spirits, and so
forward concoction. So motion and rest, if moderate, excite the natural heat
and cherish it: repletion and emptiness also, being orderly, makes a very good
concoction. But passions of mind, if they be moderate, make the natural heat
vigorous, and a good concoction; but the excess of them dissipates the natural
heat and spirits, or choaks them. Lastly, the ambient Air, being temperate,
recreates all the functions of the body, but intemperate, very much prejudiceth
them, and hinders the cure of diseases.

CHAP. III. What are the kinds of Diet, and which are most suitable in Diseases.
DIet is threefold, full, moderate, and sparing.

Full, is that which not only preserves the present strength, but increases it.
And that is threefold, the one most simple, which is convenient for the sick,
according to Hipp. and consists of whole barly-broth; another fuller and
thicker, which consists of fish and eggs; the last fullest of all, which
consists of more solid flesh.

Sparing diet, is that which preserves the strength, though something impaired.
This is threefold, one simply so, which is by the juice of unhusked barley;
another sort thinner, which consists of water and honey; and the last most
sparing of all, which is mere fasting.

Moderate diet, is that which preserves the strength in the same condition, and
was heretofore by bread in pottage, or flesh of pullets.

Now a days the diet of sick people is very different, and never any thinner
prescribed then broths of pullets and chickens. The moderate consists of
ptisans, panada's, etc. And lastly, the fuller sort of diet consists in the use
of meats of good nourishment and solid, as partridge, capons, doves, and others
of the same nature.

The diet of sick persons is to be proportioned by comparing the strength with
the disease. For by how much the more nature is employed in the expelling of
the disease, so much the sparer diet is to be observed as the strength is able
to bear it, and the less work nature has to do, a more plentiful diet may be
offered.

In long diseases a moderate or full diet is requisite, and so much the fuller,
by how much the disease is longer.

For the strength is to be preserved that it may endure, and prevail in the
expelling of the whole disease, which because it may last long, it is not to be
diminished by sparing diet.

Acute diseases require a slender diet; and by how more acute the disease is,
so much the slenderer ought the diet to be.

In acute diseases, nature is employed in expelling the disease, and therefore
as little as may be to be disturbed by nourishment, and therefore a thin diet
is sufficient; which although it do a little impair the strength, yet it is
able to bear up the whole course of the disease which is very short.

If the strength is not so well known to the Physician, as to prescribe a just
diet, it is better to prescribe an over full then an over sparing diet.

This precept is taken from Hipp. Aph. 5. sect. 1. Through a slender diet the
Patient grows faint, which harms them more; for what error is committed, is
greater in a slender then a fuller diet: and therefore an exact diet is
dangerous to persons in health; for that by reason thereof, they bear errors in
diet worse. And therefore a very exact and slender diet is more dangerous then
the fuller diet. Yet Hipp. seems to contradict himself in this opinion, 2 de
rat. vict. in Acut. For the increase of nourishment, says he, less care is to
be taken, for it is better to diminish it. But this we may reconcile, by
saying, that in the first Hipp. speaks of the form of diet; which if it be more
sparing then is requisite, does more harm then that which is fuller; but in the
latter he speaks of the quantity, in which the same form being observed, it is
better for us to be more sparing.

CHAP. IV. Of the quantity of Diet.
THE quantity of Diet is threefold, high, indifferent, least of all; which may
be used in all sorts of diet, full, moderate, or sparing.

As in Medicaments, there is a threefold quantity or dose, viz. highest,
midling, and lowest, which are considered in more vehement, more mild, and
more indifferent ones, so is it in diet. And after the Physician has judged,
whether a thin, moderate or full diet be most convenient for the disease
proposed, then he ought to observe, whether they ought to be administered in the
highest, lowest, or midling quantity; which he may distinguish by the
acuteness of the disease, or the greater or lesser strife of nature with the
disease.

In the beginning of a disease the diet most requisite, is to be given in a
full dose.

For then nature contends not so much with the disease, nor is yet employed in
the concoction and evacuation thereof, and therefore can make use of more
nourishment.

In the increase of the disease, diet is to be given in a moderate quantity.

For then nature is employed in the concoction and evacuation of the morbifical
matter more then in the beginning.

In the height of the disease the slenderest diet is to be given.

For then the contention of nature with the disease is most vehement, and she
is very busy in the concoction and evacuation of the matter, and not to be
called away from her employment.

If the strength be impaired and the morbifical matter very oppressive, the
nourishment is to be given in a little quantity and often.

In respect of the cause which is very vehement, little nourishment is to be
given, lest the morbifick cause be increased. But in respect of the strength it
is requisite often to reiterate it, lest the strength be deficient; where there
is great prudence required in the Physician, who ought to observe all things
indicant and coindicant, or prohibiting, which Hipp. notes, Aph. 17. sect. 1.
Regard is to be had to whom we may give once or twice, more or less, and by
intervals, wherein some respect is to be had to age, country, and custom.

CHAP. V. Of the time of giving Victuals.
IN continual Diseases that are not differenced by accessions, or
exacerbations, Diet is to be given according to custom at that time chiefly at
which the patient was wont to eat before.

In diseases that have accession or exacerbations, nourishment is to be given
in the intermissions.

For when the force of the disease is most vehement in the fit, and the
contention of nature with the disease most fierce, then nature is not to be
burdened with aliment, nor to be diverted from its work to the concoction of
meat.

Besides, nourishment given at that time is not concocted but remains raw, and
is corrupted by the putrid matter which is agitated in the fit, whereby the
disease is increased, and evil symptoms generated.

When there is the greatest loss of strength, though in the fit, nourishment
is requisite to be given.

If a Fever proceed from a black and acrimonious humor kindled by the Sun, by
fasting or labor, and the patient be of a spare habit of body, of a hot and
dry temper, especially in the summer; nourishment is to be given either in the
fit or a little before.

For if such persons do abstain long from meat, it is to be feared, that the
Feavet may wax more furious, and that a Syncope, or Convulsion, or Hectic may
be generated. As Galen teaches, 10. Meth. c. 3.

THE SECOND PART OF THERAPEVTICKS.
Of the Physicians Instruments.
The PREFACE.
THE whole work of the Physician is perfected by three sorts Instruments, Diet,
Surgery, and Medicaments.

The vast company of remedies which the Physician uses either to the cure of
present, or preventing imminent diseases is comprehended under these three
Instruments. Of which, the first, prescribes the right order of Diet, according
to the legitimate use of the six not natural things. The second is concerning
those things which are performed by the hand of a skilful Artist in the body of
Man. The third comprehends all those sorts of Medicaments, by which noxious
humors are prepared and purged out, the distemper of the parts amended, and
their strength increased; and by which all other Indications of health are
brought to pass.

Of Diet and Surgery, for as much as belongs to Physical Institutions, we
have treated sufficiently in the General Method of Curing. It remains that we
diligently search into the Pharmaceutical part.

Pharmaceuticks, are that part of Medicine, which contains the faculties,
matter, virtues of Medicaments, with the manner of compounding them. Which that
they may be distinctly handled, this whole Tractate shall be distributed into
two Sections.

In the first, the matter, virtues, and uses of Medicaments shall be expounded.

In the second, shall be taught the manner of compounding them.

THE FIRST SECTION of the SECOND PART OF THERAPEVTICKS.
Of the Matter of Physic.
The PROEME.
A Medicament out of Gal. 1. de simpl. med. facult. c. 1. 3. is that which has
power to alter our bodies, and to reduce them from a preternatural estate to a
natural.

It differs from Poison and Nourishment; because nourishment is overcome by our
body, and changed into the substance of our body; but poison corrupts it.

And therefore a Medicament is as it were a medium between Nourishment and
Poison, which is neither overcome by our body, nor yet corrupts it, but only
alters and changes it.

All Medicaments are commonly divided into simple and compound.

Simple, are those which are suggested to us by Nature and have nothing of Art
mixed with them: and they are taken from three fountains, Plants, Animals, and
Minerals.

Compounds, are those which are composed of several simples mixed together, or
which by art are changed into another form.

Both of these are again twofold, internal, and external.

Internal, are those which are proper for the cure of internal affections.

That no one may be scrupulous of our reckoning these which are outwardly
applied in the Catalogue of interal medicines; let him understand that we do
here call not only those internal which are applied inwardly, but those which
are applied outwardly, so they serve for the cure of internal diseases: which
is done for the good of young Students, that to complete the same Indication,
they may find both the internal and external matter laid together.

Those are external, which serve only to cure external affections.

And therefore this first Section is to be divided into two parts.

The first lays down the matter of internal Medicaments.

The second contains the matter of external Medicaments.

THE FIRST PART of the FIRST SECTION, Of the Internal Matter of Physic.
The PREFACE.
IN the cure of internal Diseases, the principal Indications respect either the
morbifick causes, or the diseases, or the parts affected.

The morbifical causes are for the most part various humors, which as they are
peccant in several qualities, so they require several Medicaments endued with
contrary qualities. Thus cold humors require hot medicines; hot, refrigerating
ones; thin, incrassating; thick, attenuating; corrupt, purging, and so of the
rest.

Diseases sometimes remain after the taking away of the cause, and require a
peculiar curation by contrary remedies: as is fully explained in the general
Method of Curing.

Lastly, the parts require specifical medicines to corroborate and alter; as
Cephalicks, Thoraticks, Cordials, Stomachicals, Hepaticals; all which we shall
set down in their order.

Moreover all this matter is taken either out of plants, roots, woods, barks,
leaves, seeds, fruits, flowers, gums, resins, liquors, juices, or from whole
animals and their parts, as well living as not living, and excrementitious; and
lastly from Minerals which are earths concrete juices, stones, and metals, out
of all which several compounds are made in the shops, as waters, syrups,
conserves, powders, troches, confections, electuaries, pills, etc.

CHAP. I. Of Medicines cooling and attenuating Choler.
THE choleric humor as often as it produces any disease, requires cooling
medicines; but when it is thick and fixed to any part, then not only
refrigerating medicines, but also gently attenuating.

Refrigerating Medicines come in to use, as indication is taken from the
disease or the cause of the disease. Choler is hot and produces hot diseases,
so that refrigeration is necessary for both. Attenuating remedies are to be
used almost in all Fevers, especially those which proceed from a putrefaction
of the humors. For all putrefaction is caused by the hindrance of
transpiration, transpiration is hindered by obstruction, obstructions are
produced by the multitude and thickness of the humors.

Therefore as some putrid Fevers are caused by multitude of humors, so the
greatest part of them is accompanied with a thickness of the humors; which if
it be not so much especially in choler, as to obstruct the open passages, yet
it is sufficient to shut up the insensible pores of the internal parts: which
that they may be opened, the humor is to be prepared by at least gently
attenuating medicines. To this add, that sometimes choler is fixed to some
part, which that it may be removed, it is to be attenuated, and to that use
medicaments refrigerating and attenuating choler were destined; which though
they are cold, have a certain tenuity of substance, which they manifest by a
slight sharpness and bitterness, and by that they attenuate the humors.

The Series of these Medicaments is this.
Simples.
Roots of Sorrel, Grass, Succory, and sharp pointed Dock. Leaves of Endive,
Succory, Sorrel, Maidenhair, garden Endive, Lions tooth. Seeds, the four cold
greater seeds, seeds of Endive, Sorrel, Barley. Fruits, Apples, sour Plums,
sour Cherries. Flowers of Succory, especially mingled with flowers of Borrage,
Buglosse, and Violets, which though they have not an attenuating virtue, yet
because they cool, moisten and corroborate, therefore upon almost every
indication of refrigeration they are frequently prescribed, whether
attenuation, or incrassation be requisite.
Compounds.
Waters of Sorrel, Succory, Grass, Endive, Barley; which is made not by
distillation but by decoction only. Juices of Limons, Granates, Apples,
Vinegar, bitter Grapes. Syrups, of Limons, of Vinacre simple, of the juice of
Sorrel, of Maidenhair, Apples, of sour Granates, of Agresta, Oxysaccharum.
Conserves of the flowers of Succory, Sorrel leaves, Maidenhair, Cherries
preserved. Powders and Electuaries, cold Diamargarite; Diatriasantalion.
Chymicals, Spirit of Sulphur, Vitriol, sal Prunellae.
CHAP. II. Of Medicaments cooling and thickning choler.
SOmetimes Choler by its thinness breeds many incommodities, which are helped
by Medicaments that cool, and thicken, and curb the violence of the raging
humor.

Hot and thin choler in acute diseases, often causes an orgasmus, so that if
it be vehemently stirred, there is danger, lest it should fall upon some noble
part and hurt it. Otherwise being carried to the intestines, it breeds
Diarrhoea's, and sometimes being mixed with other humors, and being by them
made thin, it causes great fluxions, so that after part thereof is evacuated by
purgation, the residue must be incrassated, that the vehement motion of the
disease may be hindered: for which reason incrassating Medicaments are used,
which are necessarily cold, incrassation depending naturally on coldness.

But those incrassating Medicaments are these:

Simples.
Roots, of Marshmallows, and Plantane. Leaves, of Purslain, Plantain,
Mallows, Marsh-mallowes. Seeds, of Lettice, Purslain, white Poppy, Mallows,
Fleabane, Quinces. Fruits, Jujubes, Sebestens, Quinces. Flowers, of
Water-lilly, Poppy, Pine Tree, Violets, red Roses. Gums, Arabic, Tragacanth.
Animals, Ivory, Spodium, Hartshorn. Minerals, Terra Sigillata, bole Armenick.
Compounds.
Waters, of Lettice, Purslain, Poppy, Pine-apples, Water-lilly, Roses. Syrups,
of Violets, Jujubes, Poppy, Pine-blossems, dry Roses, white Poppy. Juices of
Quinces. Conserves, of Roses, Violets, flowers of Water Lillies, candid
Lettice, and preserved Quinces. Electuaries, Diatragacantum frigidum,
Diapenidion without species. Troches, of Spodium. Chymics, Laudanum opiaticum,
sal Prunellae.
Though sal Prunellae were reckoned among the things that attenuate, yet it
ought to be reckoned here, because that it suppresses the motion of the humors
by its cold nature, and by a wonderful quality produces as it were contrary
effects; for it incrassates thin and unconstant humors, and wonderfully
asswages their violence; which makes it very profitable in all effusions of
blood: it is also Diaphoretick, which makes it very profitable in Pleuresies,
Peripneumonies, and malign Fevers; it provokes urine, and is very much
advantageous for those that are troubled with the stone.

CHAP. III. Of Medicaments altering Phlegm.
EXcrementitious phlegm is cold and moist, thick, slimy and clammy, and
therefore the Medicaments which prepare it, must be of a heating, drying,
attenuating, cutting and cleansing faculty.

Phlegm cannot well be purged away by Catharticks, till it be first well
prepared with altering medicines, and be rendered fit for purgation. Therefore
the Medicaments destined to this use, as to their first qualities, heat and dry
the cold and moist humor, and as to the second, attenuate the thick, cut the
clammy, and cleanse the slimy ones, and so dispose it, that it may be more
tractable for purgation.

Note that salt phlegm does not want heating things so much, but rather
temperate, mixed with those cold things that can incrassate choler, especially
when the salt phlegm breeds Catarrhs.

The Medicaments altering phlegm are these:

Simples.
Roots, of Elecampane, Cyperus, Calamus Arcmaticus, Galingal, Smallage, Parsley,
Fennel, Zedoary or Setwal, Florence orrice, China, Sarsaparilla or Brindweed,
Ginger. Woods, Xyloaloes, Guaiacum, Sassafras. Barks, of dry Citrons,
Guaiacum, Cinnamon. Leaves, of Sage, Betony, Rosemary, Majoram, Thyme, Origanum,
Calamint, Pennyroyal, Wormwod, Mint, Germander, Ground Pine. Seeds, of Anise,
Smallage, Parsley, Citron, blessed Thistle, Carowaies, Ammi or Bishopsweed,
Carrots, Seceli, or Hartwort. Fruits, Pepper, Cubebs, Cloves, Cardamome.
Flowers of Sage, Staechas, Rosemary, Lavender, Betony, Squinanth, Mace.
Animals, Musk, Civet, Castor. Minerals, Ambra Grise, prepared Steel.
Compounds.
Waters, of Sage, Betony, Fennel, Hysop, Wormwood, Bawm, blessed Thistle,
Celestial, Imperial, Treacle-water, Cinnamon, Aqua vitae. Syrups, of Staechas,
Hysop, Mint, Wormword, of the five Roots, simple Oxymel, compound Oxymel, Syrup
of conditement of Citron pills, Mel rosatum. Conserves and Comfits, of Sage
flowers, Staechas, Rosemary, of leaves of Wormwood, Ginger, of the roots of
Elecampane, of the root of Acorus, of Citron pills, Myrobalanes, and Nutmegs.
Confections, Treacle, Mithridate, Aurea Alexandrina, Alkermes. Powders and
Electuaries, Diambra, Diamosch of Gems, Dianthos, Diaireos, Diagalanga.
Troches, Gallia Moschata, Alipta moschhata, of Myrrh, of Wormwood, of Eupatory.
Chemical, Oil or Essence of Annise, Fennel, Thyme, Sage, Cinnamon, Gilliflowers,
and many other things.
CHAP. IV. Of Medicaments altering Melancholy.
THe melancholic humor is cold and dry, thick and earthy, therefore the
medicaments that prepare it, ought to heat, moisten, attenuate and cut.

It is impossible to find out any Medicament that attenutes, heats, and
moistens altogether. For those things which heat and attenuate, do necessarily
dry. And therefore we cannot alter this humor in all its qualities, but by
mixing attenuating things with them, which have a peculiar moistening faculty;
which is performed by things that follow:

Simples.
Roots, of Elecampane, Eringoes, Parsley, Buglosse, Fennel. Barks and Rinds, of
the roots of Cappars, the middle rind of Ash-tree, Tamaris, Elder, Citron
pills. Leaves, of Fumiter, Hops, Spleenwort, Dodder, Bawm, Borrage, Burnet,
Maidenhair. Seeds, of Anise, Fennel, Smallage, Citron, blessed Thistle. Fruits,
Raisins, Cappars, smelling Apples, Currants, grames, and Kermes. Flowers, of
Broom, Tamaris, Borrage, Buglosse, Marigold, Elder, Violets, Saffron. Gums,
Bdellium, Ammoniac. Minerals, Steel.
Compounds.
Waters, of Borrage, Buglosse, Bawm, Fennel, Carduus benedictus. Syrups, of
smelling Apples, Fumitory, of the 5 Roots, By Zantine, and of Maidenhaire.
Conserves and Comfits, of flowers of Borrage, Buglosse, Broom, Violets, roots
of Elecampane, rinds of Citron, condited Myrobalan. Confections, of Alkermes,
Treacle. Powders and Electuaries, Diambra, Laetificans Galeni, of Gemms,
Diamoschum dulce. Chemical, Salts of Ash-tree, Tamaris, Tartar, Cream of
Tartar, prepared Steel.
CHAP. V. Of Medicaments altering black Choler.
BLack Choler is generated from adustion, which makes it hot and dry and
something thick, so that the Medicaments which prepare it, must be cold, and
moist, and withal attenuating.

These are not much distinguished from those things, that prepare yellow
choler, only that those are chosen which are more moist, and therefore no sharp
things are here used; because they are thought to have a drying faculty.
Therefore those things which alter yellow choler may here be used: yet properly
and directly the following Medicaments are most convenient against black choler.

Simples.
Roots, of Buglosse, Borrage, Liquorish. Leaves, of Borrage, Buglosse,
Fumitory, Hops. Seeds, the four great cold Seeds. Fruits, Fragrant Apples.
Flowers, of Borrage, Buglosse, Violets, Water-Lilly.
Compounds.
Waters, of Borrage, Buglosse, Water-Lilly. Syrups, of Violets, fragrant
Apples. Conserves, of violets, Borrage, Buglosse, Water-Lilly, Lettice.
Chymicals, Spirits of Sulphur, Vitriol, Sal prunellae, Saturn, Martis, Tartar,
Cream of Tartar.
CHAP. VI. Of opening Medicines.
IN many passages of the body; especially the veins of the Liver, Mesentery,
and Womb, obstructions are bred from thick and clammy humors, which adhere to
the tunicles of the vessels, and hinder the passage of the other humors.

In cold natures, sedentary people, and such as use bad nourishment, crude
humors are generated, which being carried to the narrow passages, cannot by
reason of their crassity pass through, but are more and more thickened, and
become more clammy and glutinous, sticking to the tunicles of the veins, and
begetting obstructions there which brings along with it infinite mischief.

But those obstructions are opened by aperative medicaments, which according to
Galen, 5. de simpl med. fac. c. 11. are of a nitrous and bitter quality, by the
help of which quality they attenuate, cut and cleanse, and so are near a kin to
those medicaments that prepare phlegm.

Opening Medicaments, are by Galen called purging, and unstopping Medicaments,
with which faculty all those medicines are endued, which are most necessary for
the taking away of obstructions, for by their attenuating quality, they take
away the thickness of the humor; as they cut, they take away the clamminesse,
which consists in the tenuity of the parts; and as they cleanse, they shake off
the humor adhering to the parts.

Whatsoever therefore are truly and efficaciously opening, must be of necessity
hot; yet cold opening things are given though of lesser virtue, and less
properly so called, fit for slighter obstructions and hotter natures.

In putrid Fevers or otherwise hotter natures, obstructions do often happen,
which unless they be very obstinate, are to be taken away by cool openers; or
at least, cool ones are to be mixed with the hotter, which notwithstanding are
not so absolutely cold, as compared with others. For of themselves, they are
either temperate, or remisly cold; for an open faculty cannot consist with an
extreme coldness.

Those opening Medicaments are these:

Hot openers. Simple.
Roots, of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Fern, Cyperus, Elecampane, Gentian,
Eringos, Cammock, both Birthworts, Asaraban. Rinds, of the roots of Cappers,
the middle rind of Ash, the middle rind of Tamaris. Leaves, of Origan,
Calamint, Penyroyal, Germander, ground Pine, lesser Centaury, Betony, St. John's
Wort, Wormwood Roman, all the Maiden-hairs, which are temperate. Seeds, of
Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, blessed Thistle, Nettle, Agnus castus, Anise,
Carrots, Siceli on Hartwort, Ammi or Bishopsweed, red Chiches. Flowers, of
Stoechas, Rosemary, Broom, Elder, Tamaris, Hysop, Betony. Gums, Ammoniack,
Bdellium, Aloes, Turpentine, Myrrh. Minerals, Steel.
Compounds.
Waters, of Fennel, Betony, Wormwood, Hysop, Carduus benedictus, Cinnamon.
Syrups, By Zantine, of the five Roots, of Wormwood, simple Oxymel, compound
Oxymel. Conserves, of flowers of Broom, Tamaris, leaves of Wormwood,
Maidenhair, roots of Elecampane, Ginger. Electuaries, Aromaticum Rosatum,
Diarrhodon Abbatis. Confections, Alkermes, Treacle. Troches, of Cappars,
Wormwood, Eupatory, Myrrh. Chymicals, prepared Steel, Salt of Wormwood,
Tamaris, Ash-tree, Tartar, Cream of Tartar, Oil of Anise, Fennel, Cinnamon,
Spirit of Turpentine.
Cold openers. Simple.
Roots, of Succory, Grass, Asparagus, Sorrel, Bruscus or Knee-holy, sharp
pointed Dock. Leaves, of Endive, Succory, Sowthistle, Sorrel Liverwort,
Agrimony, all the Maidenhairs. Seeds, the 4. greater cold ones, Sorrel seeds.
Flowers, of Succory.
Compounds.
Waters, of Endive, Succory, Grass, Sorrel, Agrimony. Syrups, of Vinacre
simple, of Limons, of Succory simple, of the juice of Sorrel, of Maidenhair.
Electuaries, Triasantalon, Diarhodon Abbatis, temperate. Chemical, Spirit of
Sulphur, Vitriol, Sal Prunellae, Cremor Tartari.
CHAP. VII. Of purging Medicaments.
HItherto we have proposed those Medicaments which prepare noxious humors; and
make them fit for purgation: now we treat of those medicines that purge them.

The humors are usually evacuated, by such purging Medicines, as having a
familiarity with the substance of them draw the humors to them, as the
loadstone draws iron.

Therefore there are so many sorts of purging medicines, as there are sorts of
humors in the body fit for purgation, that is choler, phlegm, melancholy and
water.

The humors which are evacuated by the help of purging Medicaments, are
choler, phlegm, melancholy, and the serum or watery humor, to every one of which
there are peculiar remedies electively purging. So those that purge choler are
named Cholagogues; phlegm, Phlegmagogues; melancholy, Melanagogues; the serous
humors, Hydragogues.

These are again divided into mild, moderate, and vehement remedies.

All purging Medicaments work not with like force, but some with less, some
with greater, according to their various power of acting allowed them by
nature: and therefore that their virtues may be the easier drawn forth to use,
they are divided into three ranks, mild, moderate, and vehement. Mild
Medicaments are commonly used in weak natures, or where the first region is
only to be evacuated. Moderate in a moderate condition of the strength, and to
evacuate the second Region. Lastly, the most vehement in stronger bodies, and
when the humor is to be attracted from the remoter parts, as the brain,
joints, etc. But commonly a wary Physician in the same medicament mingleth
vehement with mild and moderate, that they may work the more successefully
together.

And for the better using of them the just dole of every one is to be
propounded.

It Is of very great moment, rightly to understand the dose of every Medicament,
without which no man can make a medicine without the apparent endangering the
life of the patient. But because the dose of purging Medicines, is to be
changed according to the various disposition of the bodies, which wholly
depends upon the judgment of the Physician; we will therefore propound a
greater and less dose, as they are used in a moderate age; that from their
latitude a convenient quantity may be discerned.

But those Doses are so to be taken, according as the Medicaments are taken by
themselves, or (as they say) in their substance. For in infusion there is used
a double quantity of the vehement remedy, in decoction a troble; but those more
mild and moderate, are commonly trebled in the infusion, and quadruple in the
decoction.

The virtue of Medicaments is lost by infusion and decoction; for that remains
in a thin substance, which is easily dissipated by the heat; and therefore the
force of the heat being much stronger in decoction then infusion, it follows
that the purging faculty is more diminished, and therefore a greater dose of
the Medicine to be prescribed.

From this general Theorem, are excluded Rhubarb, and Myrbalans, which purge
more in infusion, then in the substance; because they have not only a purging,
but a binding quality, which is lost by infusion.

These two medicaments obtain a purging and astringent faculty by reason of
their various substance, viz. thin, and thick, or earthy. For the purging
faculty resides in the thin substance; in the earthy, the binding quality. Now
in infusion the thin substance is carried into the liquor, the earthy rejected,
so that the purging faculty only remains in the confusion.

CHAP. VIII. Medicaments purging Choler.
Simple. More mild.
CAssia, from j. to j. ss. Manna, from j. to ij. Juices of Roses, from j ss. to
iij. Tamarinds, from ij. to iij.
Moderate.
Aloes, from j. to ij. it is corrected with Mastick and Tragacant. Rhubarb, from
j. to ij. as well in substance, as infusion, it is corrected with Spikenardand
Cinnamon. Myrohalans Citrine, from ij. to iij. they bind more then purge, the
binding faculty is diministed by infusion, and rubbing them with Oil of sweet
Almonds.
Vehement.
Scammony, from gr. viij. to gr. xv. it is corrected with juice of Quinces, and
being corrected, it is called Diagridion.
It Is corrected also with vapor of Sulphur, as in the description of the
powder of Cornachinus, as also with juice of Limmons by infusion and
evaporation. Lastly, there is an extraction thereof prepared with Spirit of
Wine, which is called Rosin of Scammony, purging mildly.

Compounds. Syrups.
Of Roses solutive, from iij. to iiij. Of Succory with Rheon, from iij. to
iiij.
Opiates.
Catholicum, from j. to j. ss. Diaprunum simplex, from j. to j. ss. Diacassia,
from j. to j. ss. Diaprunum solutive, from ss. to j. Electuary of the juice of
Roses, from ss. to j. Tryphera Persica, from ss. to j.
Pills.
Aurea or golden Pills, from j. to iiij. Sine quibus, or pills without which,
from j. to iiij. Of Rhubarb, from j. to iiij.
Chymicks.
Extract of Rhubarb, Scammony, Mercurius dulcis, Mercurius fita, Crocus of
Metals, and other purging prepartions of Antimony.
CHAP. IX. Medicaments purging phlegm.
Simple. Mild.
SEed of wild Saffron, from j. to ij. it is corrected with Anise, and Cinnamon.
Moderate.
Agarick, from j. to ij. corrected with Ginger and Sal Gemmae.
Vehement.
Turbith, from ij. to iiij. corrected with Ginger. Hermodactyle, with the same
dose and correction as Turbith. Colocynth, is not used unless prepared and
corrected in Troches, which are called Alhandal, from 8. gr. to gr. 15.
Compounds. Opiates and Electuaries.
Catholicum, from ss to j. Diaphaenicum, from ss to j. Hiera Picra, from ss to
j. Electuary of Diacarthamum, from ss to j. Of Citron Solutive, from ss to j.
Pills.
Of Cochie the greater, from j. iiij. Of Agarick, from j. iiij. Sine quibus, or
without which, from j. iiij. Stomach Pills, from j. iiij.
Of Cochie the lesser, from ij. to j. Fetide majores, or stinking pills the
greater, from ij. to j. Lucis majores, from ij. to j. Arthritical Pills, from
ij. to j. Of Hermodactyles, from ij. to j.
Troches.
Agarick Trochiscated, from j. to iiij.
Chymicks.
Extract of Agarick, Colocynth, Mercurius dulcis, Mercurius vitae, Crocus
Metallorum, and other preparations of Antimony.
These purgers fetched from Minerals purge all humors, and are therefore
described in several Chapters.

CHAP. X. Medicaments purging Melancholy.
Simple.
SEna, from j to ij. Polypodium, from ij. to ss. Epithymum, the same dose.
Black Hellebore, from gr. 15. to ss. it is best to infuse or decoct it and give
it from j. to ij.
Compounds. Opiates.
Catholicum, from vj. to x. Diasenna, from vj. to x. Confectio Hameck, from
iij. to vj.
Chymicals.
Extract of Sena, black Ellebore, and Antimony, variously prepared.
CHAP. XI. Medicaments purging watery humors.
Simple. Milder.
SEed of Wallwort, to j. The middle rind of the same, to ij. The juice of the
same, from j. to x. The juice of our orice, from j. to ij. Elder, the same
quantity with the forementioned, but less efficacious.
Moderate.
Root of Mechoacan, from j. to ij. it is not boiled, but infused in Whitewine,
and the liquor is given with the powder. Root of Jalap, the same quantity with
Mechoacan, but more efficacious.
Vehement.
Bindweed powdered, j. to ij. Juice of the same, from ss to j. Elaterium, from
gr. viij. to gr. xvj. Spurge, from gr. viij. to gr. xij. Chametaea, from gr. v.
to ss. Thymelaea, from gr. v. to ss. Gutta Gummi, from gr. v. to ss.
Compounds.
Diaturbith, to j. Diacarthamum, from vj. to j. Pills of Sagapenum, to iv.
Chymicals.
Resin of Jalap, Scammony, Cornachinus powder, Mercury, and Antimony, variously
prepared.
CHAP. XII. Of vomiting Medicaments.
THE noxious humors contained in the stomach and parts near it, oft-times are
more easily evacuated by vomit, then by stool, if the patient be more prone to
it; to which use those Medicaments are destined, which are called vomitory.

Oft-times excrementitious humors swim in the stomach, which are expelled a
shorter way by vomit, especially if the patient be troubled with nauseousnesse,
and be subject to vomit; for choleric, slender, and large breasted people
easily endure vomiting, according to the doctrine of Hippocrates: on the
contrary, melancholy, fleshy and narrow breasted people are more vexed by
vomiting, especially if they are troubled with a consumption, Asthma or any
other affection of the lungs. To this may be added the time of the year; for in
the summer, purgation upwards is more easy; in the winter, not so: but
although the use of these remedies is not very frequent, yet it is certain, that
being used opportunely, they produce admirable effects; for we have seen many
intermitting Fevers that have resisted all other remedies which have been
cured only by vomitories.

These medicaments provoke vomiting either by a manifest faculty, by loosening
the stomach, or by some specifical property, as purging.

Whatever are fat and oily, taken in great quantity, do loosen the stomach, and
subvert it, which causes vomiting; by which those things are only evacuated
that are contained in the stomach. But those things which are properly called
vomimitories by an occult quality, attract the humors to the stomach, and
excite it to an upward expulsion. And so the humors contained in the Liver,
Spleen, and parts adjoining to the Stomach, are not seldom happily evacuated.

The choice and most in use are these:

The more Gentle.
Water lukewarm, Barly-water lukewarm, fat Broths lukewarm, Butter, Oil,
simple Oxymel, simple syrup of Vinegar: all which are to be drank in a good
quantity.

Moderate.
Seed of Arrach, Dill, in decoction from ss. to j. Flowers of Dill, Broom, in
decoction from p. j. to p. ij. Seed of Radishes, in decoction, from ss to vj.
Juice of Radishes, to iij. Pumpion Roots, to j. in decoct. Agarick, from j. to
ij. Root of Asarabacca, from j. to iiij.
Vehement.
Nux methel, balanus Myrepsica, Cataputia, burnt Copper, White Ellebore.

The dose of them is not set down, because it is better never to use them
through the danger, which the vehemence of them may cause, or at least not
without accurate preparation and correction.

The Chymicks abound with vomitory Medicaments, and those for the most part so
vehement, that for their sakes all spagyrick remedies are suspected among the
vulgar. Of this sort are those which are compounded of Antimony; especially
glass and flower of Antimony, which I never durst hitherto use, though I have
been willing to try the effects of Spagyrick Remedies, and their force in
physic. For it is not to be denied, that some Spagyrick Remedies prudently
used by the Physician, have that success which vulgar remedies cannot produce.
And therefore it will not be amiss briefly to declare those Spagyrick
Vomitories which have been known to do good.

Those are four, in virtue and effects very various, which whosoever will use these
remedies cautiously ought to have ready at hand, that he may proceed from those
less vehement, to those more strong, if the others prove not sufficiently
efficacious.

The first is white Vitriol prepared, as is prescribed by Crollius and
Beguinus, which is so gentle a vomit, that it is safely given to children from
ss. to ss. to those that are more grown, to j. dissolved in common water; it
evacuates only the humors contained in the stomach, but nothing from the other
parts.

The second is Salt of Vitriol, extracted out of Cyprian Vitriol calcined,
which works more vehemently then the former, it evacuates the stomach only. The
Dose thereof is from gr. x. to gr. xx. dissolved in ordinary water. It is
described by Beguinus under the name of Sal Colchotar; and by Angelus Sala in
Triumpho Emeticorum, and in his Anatomy of Vitriol.

The third is Aqua benedicta, described by Quercetanus in his Pharmacopoea, it
is compounded of Antimony, and is more vehement then the first, and is not to
be given but to strong men, and that with great caution: but if it be
seasonably used it produces rare effects. The Dose of this water is from j. to
iij. it draws humors not only from the stomach, but from the whole body.

The fourth is pulvis Emeticus, which is vulgarly called Mercurius vitae, and
is described by Beguinus and Crollius, it is more vehement then any before
named; yet it may have its use in the cure of obstinate diseases, and which
resist the force of ordinary medicines; yet it must be cautiously used, and when
the strength is no way impaired; it removes the humors powerfully from all
parts of the body. The Dose is from gr. iij. to v. in Broth, conserve of Roses,
or any such thing. The vehemence of this Mercurius vitae may be corrected, so
that it may be given in greater quantity, and may hardly, or very little,
provoke vomiting; and may perform its work downward. Many ways of correcting
it are to be seen in Hartmannus, in his Commen. upon Crollius.

This we add approved by our own experience, which purges downward in many sick
people, in others causes vomiting once or twice only. This correction of ours
is most easy, which is done by putting Mercurius vitae well washed in a
porrenger glas'd with earth upon a chafingdish always stirring it. A black and
stinking fume exhales, which contains venom that lurks within; which in two or
three hours exhales quite away, continuing the labor of stirring it. And then
the work is done when it has done evaporating. If after the operation it move
vomiting, it is to be repeated, and it will work the desired effect. The
whitest powder by this coction, obtains a gray color; it may be given from gr.
iiij. to gr. viij. reduced into a tablet with sugar and mucilage of tragacanth,
that it may be administered without nauseousnesse.

CHAP. III. Of Sudorifick Medicaments.
IN Chronical and contumacious diseases, Sudorificks are often used.

Those diseases which cannot be cured by altering and purging Medicaments, but
are deeply fixed, such as are Epilepsies, Palsies, obstinate Catarrhs,
Dropsies, Gouts, and any cold affections, and especially the Pox, require more
powerful Medicaments to eradicate them, such as are Sudorificks; which being
used for many days, as the custom is, not only purge the third Region, for
which they are most proper, but also the whole body.

They being endued with a heating and attenuating faculty, melt the humors and
drive them out through the insensible passages.

The humors causing long diseases, are for the most part cold and thick, and
therefore Sudorificks are most convenient for them; which heat those humors,
melt and attenuate them, open the insensible passages of the body, and evacuate
the humors through them.

But many things move not sweat so much by any manifest quality, as by a
specifical property.

This opinion is not among the ancient Physicians, for they referred all the
force of Sudorificks to manifest qualities, neither were these excellent
Sudorificks which are now known to us, known to them; yet it is necessary to
acknowledge an occult quality in them, by which they provoke sweat; when as
Pepper, and wild Pellitory, which are hot and attenuating, do not move sweat;
yet China root, in the first qualities something temperate, does effectually.

The Sudorificks are these:

Simples.
Guaiacum-wood and the bark of it, Sassafras-wood, China-root,
Sarsaparilla-root.

These do effectually provoke sweat, those that follow, less effectually.

Roots, of Carline, Angelica, Setwall, Vipers-grasse, Fennel, Smallage, Parsley,
Burdock, Burnet, Tormentill.

Leaves, of Water-germander, Meadsweet, Carduus benedictus, Maidenhair,
Burdock.

Seed, of Carduus benedictus, common Millet, Lentils.

Flowers, of Camomil, Blew-bottle, red Poppy.

Compounds.
Water, of red Poppy, Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Treacle, Opiate, old
Treacle.

Chymicals.
Salt of Carduus benedictus, Mother of pearls calcined, the Bezar Mineral of
Beguinus. Antimonium diaphoreticum of Crollius. Bezoardicum joviale Hartmandi,
in his Commentaries upon Crollius, and other infinite things described by the
Chemical Physician. We have only the before mentioned brought into use, and
have experienced the good effects of them; some examples whereof may be seen in
our Observations, especially in the cure of malignant Fevers.

CHAP. XIV. Of Diuretic Medicaments.
BY Diuretic Medicaments are conveniently purged the gibbous parts of the
Liver, the Reins, Bladder, Womb, and the whole stock of the veins.

As the effects oppressing the veins, are known by the Urines, because part of
the matter contained in the veins is carried to them, also the same effects
often ending by that Crisis, which is made by a Perirrhoea; so the noxious
humors are the more easily purged away by Diuretics.

Of these some are hot, some cold.

The hot by melting the humors, separate the more watery and serous parts which
are afterward attracted by the reins.

Those Medicines which are properly and truly called Diuretic, are sharp and
vehemently hot and dry, therefore they drain the blood and separate the serous
humor from it, they also melt phlegm and thick humors, and change them into a
watery humor, which is easily mingled with the serous humor, and is together
attracted to the reins, and expelled with the Urine.

But the cold ones sometimes by cleansing, and sometimes by increasing the
watery humor, move urine.

Some Medicaments cleanse the humors that are contained in the vessel and
reins, and do a little attenuate them, because although they are cold, yet they
have thin parts, and so do move urine. Such are Grass, Asparagus, Pellitory of
the wall, Maidenhair, etc. Many other things are endued with a moisture, which
is afforded to the veins, and afterward attracted by the reins, with which the
humors in the veins are carried along. Of this nature is Marshmallowes,
Cucumers, the greater cold Weeds.

The matter of these Diuretic Medicaments as well hot as cold, is this:

Hot Diuretics. Simple.
Roots, of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Eringo's, Valerian, Asarabacca, Cammock,
Radish. Rindes, the middle rind of Broom, and the middle rind of Tamarisk.
Leaves, of Saxifrage, Burnet, Smallage, Nettles, Fennel, Germander, lesser
Centaury, Water-mint, Watercresses, Savine. Seeds of Massilian Hartwort,
Macedonian Parsley, Smallage, Radish, Nettles, Lovage, Millet of the sun, white
Thorn, red Chiches. Fruits, Laurel and Juniper berries. Flowers, Broom,
Camomil. Gums, Turpentine. Animals, prepared blood of Goats, Cantharides.
Minerals, Carabe.
Compounds.
Waters, of Fennel, Smallage, Savine. Syrups, of the five Roots, Venus hair,
Byzantine, Oxymel simple and compound. Conserves of Broom-flowers.
Chymicals.
Spirits, of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, Tartar, Turpentine. Salt, of Tartar,
Ivie-berries, Bean-husks.
Cold Diuretics. Simple.
Roots, of Asparagus, Grass, Knee-holy, Marsh-mallowes, sharp pointed Dock,
Sorrel. Leaves, of Venus-hair, Sorrel, Pellitory of the wall, Burstwort,
Marshmallows, tops of Asparagus. Seeds, the four greater cold ones, Sorrel,
Alkekengi, Barley. Fruits, Gourds, Pumpions, Cucumers, Strawberries. Flowers, of
Althaea, Succory. Gums, Caphura. Juices, of Limmons, Sour Pomegranates.
Chymicks.
Sal prunellae, Spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol: which although they be reckoned
among the hot Diuretics, yet have a very great refrigerating virtue, and are
useful both in hot and cold affections, by reason of their extraordinary
thinness and penetrating quality; which makes them the vehicles of other
Medicaments.

Compounds.
Waters, of Pellitory of the wall, Grass, Sorrel, Barley. Syrups, of
Venus-hair, Limons, and Marsh-mallowes. Conserves, of Venus-hair, Eringo roots,
the inside of a Gourd. Troches, of Caphura.
Corollary.
Among the evacuating Medicaments, those things which move the months are to be
reckoned, which are better referred to the series of Hystericals, where they
may be found.

CHAP. XV. Of Medicaments called Errhines.
IN long diseases of the head, proceeding from phlegm, after universal
evacuations, Errhines are used, which draw it down and purge it away through
the nostrils.

Those evacuations which empty the whole body of humors are said to be
universal, which are succeeded by those, which evacuate only a particular part,
and are therefore called particular: such is that, that brings down phlegm from
the brain through the nostrils, most convenient in many affections thereof, for
after most part of the excrement is drawn away by universal evacuation, the
remaining part is best evacuated through the near adjoining places.

And that they may more easily draw down this thick and cold humor, they ought
to be hot, attenuating and cleansing.

Such are these that follow:

Roots, of Orice, Cyclamine, wild Cucumer. Leaves, of Beet, Colewort,
Pimpernel, Marjoram, Sage, Betony, Pennyroyal, Organy, Horebound, Ivy,
Tobacco. Gums, Euphorbium. Juices of the roots, and leaves of the aforesaid
Herbs, Elaterium.
CHAP. XVI. Of Sternutatories.
STernutatory Medicaments, by exciting the expulsive faculty of the brain
through their acrimony, draw phlegm from the brain, and rouse up the drowsy
brain in comatous affections: Such are these that follow: Roots, of Ginger,
wild Pellitory, Florence Orice, white and black Ellebore. Leaves, of Marjoram,
Betony, Sage, Tobacco. Gums, Euphorbium. Animals, Castor.


Chymicks.
Spirit of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt of Vitriol.
CHAP. XVII. Of Masticatories.
APophlegmatizing Medicaments, are those which draw phlegm from the brain
through the mouth, which they do by their heat and acrimony, by which they
attenuate the humor, and stir up the expulsive faculty. They are of this kind:

Simples.
Roots, of Ginger, wild Pellitory, Angelica. Leaves, of Sage, Marjoram, Hysop,
Organy. Seeds, of Watercresses, Mustard, Stavesacre, Nigella, White and black
Pepper. Fruits, Raisins, Cubebs. Gums, Mastick.
Compounds.
Vinegar of Squils. Oxymel of Squils. Treacle, Confection Anacardina.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Cephalic Medicaments.
Cephalic Medicaments are those which strengthen the brain, and help the
distempers thereof.

Many medicaments are given which by a specifical property, and sympathy which
they have with several parts of our body, strengthen them and resist their
several affections: such are Cephalicks, which are supposed to exercise their
virtues peculiarly upon the brain.

They are twofold, hot and cold.

Hot things heat and dry the brain, cut and attenuate the phlegm contained
therein.

Cold things partly temper the hot distempers of the brain, and partly
incrassate the sharp and salt phlegm, and other thin humors which cause great
defluxions from the head.

Because the brain is affected now with hot, now cold distempers, the
Medicaments which concern it ought to be of two sorts, that we may remedy all
these diseases.

The matter of them is as follows:

Hot Cephalicks. Simple.
Roots, of Spikenard, Calamus Aromaticus, Valerian, Florence Orrice, Acorus,
Galenga, Setwall, Piony. Woods, Misleto of Oak, Xyloaloes. Barks, Cinnamon.
Leaves, of Betony, Marjoram, Sage, Rosemarin, Laurel, Calamint, Pellamountain.
Seeds, of Piony, Cardamom, Mountain-ofter, Roman Nigella. Fruits, Berries of
Laurel and Juniper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cubebs, grain of Kermes. Flowers, of
Betony, Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, Mace, Camomil, Liby of the Valley, Tyletree.
Juices and Liquors, Opobalsamum, Wine. Gums, Frankincense, Mastick, Scyrax,
Benioin. Things taken out of the sea, Succinum, Amber. Animals, Castor, Musk,
Civet.
Compounds.
Waters, of Betony, Sage, Marjoram, Orange flowers, Cinnamon, Treacle, Imperial,
Celestis, Aqua vitae. Syrups, of Stachas, Mel rosatum. Conserves, of Acorus,
Ginger, flowers of French Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, candied Mirobalans,
Wallnuts candied, Nutmegs candied, bark of Citron. Confections, Alkermes,
Treacle, Mithridate, Aurea, Alexandrina. Electuaries, Dianthos, Diambra,
Diamoschum dulce, Diaireos, Aromaticum Rosatum. Troches, of Gallia moschata,
Carabe.
Externals.
Oils, of Castor, Camomil, Orrice, Laurels, Nard, Rue, Spike, and of Foxes.
Unguents, Martiatum, Aregon. Emplasters, of Betony, Laurel-berries, Melilot, of
Mucilage.
Chymicals.
Distilled Oils, of Rosemary, Lavender, Sage, Thyme, Fennel, Anise, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Cloves.
Cold Cephalicks. Simples.
Woods, all the Sanders. Leaves, of Lettice, Purslain, Plantain. Seeds, of
Lettice, white Poppy, the 4. great cold seeds, Fleabane, Barley. Flowers, of
Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, red Poppy. Juices, of Limmons, Granates,
Vinegar, sour Grapes, Opium, Pears, Camphire.
Compounds.
Waters, of Purslain, Lettice, Plantain, Roses, red Poppy, Water-lilly. Syrups,
of Violets, dry Roses, Poppy. Conserves, of Roses, Violets, Water-lilly,
Lettice, Cucumers. Electuaries, Triasantali, cold Diamargarite. Confections,
Philonium, requies Nicolai. Troches, of Caphura. Pills, of Hounds-tongue,
Laudanum opiaticum.
Chymicks.
Sal prunellae, Spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol.
Externals.
Oils, of Violets, Water Lillies, Roses, Caphura, of sour Grapes. Unguents, of
Roses, Poplar, refrigerans Galeni, Santaline Cerecloth.
CHAP. XIX. Of Ophthalmick Medicaments.
OPhthalmicks are properly those, which by a peculiar property corroborate the
eyes, and sharpen the sight, called Oxydorcicks.

There are some secondarily related to the eyes necessary for the various
affections thereof: as Medicaments that ease pain, repel, dry, digest,
cleanse.

The eyes being endued with an exquisite sense, are many times much tormented
with pain, so that they will require great art to ease them with anodyne
Medicines. Sometimes they are inflamed, for which in the beginning repelling
medicines are very good; afterward resolving ones: lastly, they are afflicted
with tears, ulcers, and other affections, for which drying and cleansing
medicines are most convenient: all these must be exquisitely chosen, because of
the delicate disposition and exquisite sense of the part. Which are as follow:

Medicaments quickening the Sight.
Roots, of Fennel, Celandine, Radish. Leaves, of Celandine, Vervain, Rue,
Eyebright, and Fennel. Seeds, of Fennel, Radish, great Clary.
Medicaments easing Pain.
Woman's milk, the white of an Egg stirred and turned to water, Rose Water,
Muscilage, of the seed of Fleabane, Quinces, Crumbs of grated Bread, and boiled
in milk with a little Saffron, sweet Apples boiled, the pulp of rotten Apples,
white Troches of Rhasis with Opium.

Repellers.
Water, of Roses, Plantain, peculi rosarum, Purslain. Juice, of Quinces, sour
Apples, white of an Egg, Alum.
Dryers.
Ceruse washed, Tutty washed, Antimony washed, ointment of Tutty, white Troches
of Rhasis without Opium.
Digesters, or Resolvers.
Sarcocol nourished with milk, Saffron, woman's milk, decoction of Fenugreek,
the blood of young Doves, forced out of the greater feathers into the Eye.
Cleansing without Acrimony.
Sugar-candie, Syrup of dry Roses, Tutty, Pompholyx, Leed burnt and washed,
Antimony washed.
Cleansers with Acrimony.
The galls of Fish are gentle, of Beasts moderate, and of Birds strongest,
among which the gall of a Partridge is strongest of all; that of a Hen most
gentlest: the juice of Celandine, and Fennel, compound water of Honey.
CHAP. XX. Of Medicaments for the Breast.
MEdicaments for the Breast, are those which are familiar to the Lungs, and
prepare the humors contained in them to be purged.

But that these humors may be the more easily expelled by Anacatharsis, they
ought not be too thick or too thin; so that the thicker humors are prepared by
cutting, attenuating, and cleansing Medicines which are hot; the thinner, by
incrassating, which are cold. The matter of these is this:

Pectoral Medicaments hot, and Simple.
Roots, of Elecampane, Florence orice, both Birthworts, Liquorice, Ginger and
Squils. Leaves, of Coltsfoot, white Horehound, Hysop, Thyme, Savory, Origan,
Calamint, Cats-foot, Ground-ivie, Ros solis, Tobacco, which must be given in a
little quantity, because it procures vomiting. Seeds, of Nettles, Hemp,
Colewort, Massilian seceli, or Hartwort. Fruits, fat Figs, sweet Raisins,
Almonds, Pine-nuts, Lawrel-berries. Flowers of Camomil. Spices, Saffron, which
is excellent. Gums, Turpentine, Myrrh. Animals, Honey, Fox-lungs, prepared.
Minerals, flower of Sulphur.
Compounds.
Waters, of Hysop, Coltsfoot. Syrups, of Coltsfoot, Hysop, Liquorice,
Venus-bair, simple Oxymel, Oxymel of Squill, Sugar candied. Conserves, of
Venus-hair, Elecampane-roots, Ginger. Electuaries, Diaireos simple, Diaireos of
Solomon.
External.
Oils, of Orrice, sweet Almonds, Camomil, Lillies. Fats, Hens grease, Ducks,
Calves grease, Butter. Marrowes, of Hearts and Calves. Unguents, of Althea,
Marshmallowes resumptive. Emplaisters, of Sulphur, Bay Berries, Filii
Zachariae, or of the son of Zachary.
Pectorals cold, and Simple.
Roots, of Marsh-mallowes, and Liquorice. Leaves, of Venus hair, Lungwort.
Seeds, the 4. greater cold ones, Mallows, white Poppy, Fleabane, Bombax,
harly. Fruits, Jujubes, Sebestens, sweet Almonds, sweet Prunes. Flowers, of
Violets, Water Lillies, red Poppy. Gums, Arabic, Tragacanth. Juices, Amylum,
or juice of Wheat, juice of Liquorice. Animals, Woman's, Asses, Goats milk,
flesh of Lobster, and river Crabs.
Compounds.
Waters, of Lettice, Purslain, Water Lillies, red Poppy, Barley. Syrups, of
Jujubes, Violets, Venus-hair, white Poppy, which is narcotick. Sugars, of
Roses, Penids. Conserves, of Roses, Violets, Borrage, Lettice, inside of Gourds
candied. Electuaries, Diatragacanth cold, Diamargarite cold, Diapenidion
without species.
Externals.
Oil of Violets, Water Lillies, sweet Almonds. Greases, of Hens, Ducks, Calves,
new Butter. These Greases are temperate, and therefore used both in hot and
cold affections.
CHAP. XXI. Of Cardiacal Medicaments.
THose Medicaments are called Cardiacals, which by a specifical property
corroborate the heart, refresh the vital spirits, and resist poison and
malignant affections; and because the heart is weakened sometimes by a hot, and
sometimes by a cold distemper, therefore these Cordials, some ought to be hot,
some cold.

Hot Cordials. Simple.
Roots, of Dittany, Cink-foil, Vipers-grasse, Setwal, Gentian, Masterwort,
Doringum. Barks, Cinnamon, dry rind of Citron. Wood, Xyloaloes. Leaves, of
Baulm, Scabious, Carduus benedictus, Basil, Pollep, Southernwood, Rosemarie,
Lavender. Seeds, of Carduus benedictus, Basil, Citron. Fruits, Dyers grains,
Juniper Berries, Nutmegs, Cloves. Flowers, of Rosemarine, Borrage, Buglosse,
Mace, Saffron, Spikenard. Gums, Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick. Juices, of Balm,
Scabious, Borrage. Animals, Musk, Civet, Bezoar-stone, raw Silk. Minerals,
Amber, Succinum.
Compounds.
Waters, of Orange flowers, Balm, Rosemary, Carduus benedictus, Scabious, Aqua
vitae, Imperial, Treacle, Celestis, Cinnamon. Oils Chemical, of Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs. Syrups, of the conditure of Citron peel, Byzantine. Conserves of the
flowers of Citron peel candied, Nutmegs candied, Mirobalans candied.
Confections, Alkermes, Treacle. Electuaries, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diambra, de
Gemmis, Letificans Galeni, Diamoschum Dulce.
Cold Cordials. Simples.
Roots, of Sorrel, Buglosse, Bisfort, Tormentil. Woods, all the Sanders.
Leaves, of Borage, Buglosse, Sorrel, sharp pointed Dock. Seeds, of Quinces,
Plantain, Sorrel. Flowers, of Roses, Violets, Borage, Buglosse, Water-lilly.
Fruits, Citrons, Limons, sour Cherries, Ribes, sour Granates, sweet Apples,
Quinces. Gums, Camphire. Animals, Pearl, Unicorns horn, the bone in the heart
of a Stag, Ivory, Spodium, Hartshorn, Bezoar-stone. Minerals, Terra sigillata,
bole Armoniack, precious fragments, Gold, Coral.
Compounds.
Water, of Roses, Borage, Buglosse, Sorrel. Syrups, of Granats, Limons,
Violets, of the juice of Sorrel, of dried Roses, of fragrant Apples. Conserves,
of the flowers of Borage, Buglosse; Roses, Violets, and leaves of Sorrel.
Confection, of Hyacinth. Electuaria, cold Diamargarite, Diatriasantalum.
CHAP. XXII. Of Hepatical Medicaments.
HEpatical Medicaments are destined to comfort the Liver, and to correct the
distempers thereof: some of them being heating, others cooling.

But because all sorts of humors are bred there, and the veins thereof are
very narrow, it is very subject to obstructions. And therefore all Medicaments
convenient for the Liver, are of an opening quality.

Hot Hepaticals. Simple.
Roots, of Calamus Aromaticus, Ciperus, Elecampane. Leaves, of Agrimony,
Wormwood, Mint, Germander, Ground Pine, Betony, lesser Centaury. Seeds, of
An^se, Fennel, Carawaies, Ammi, or Bishopsweed. Flowers, of Rosemary, Mace,
Squinanth, Spikenard. Fruits, Cloves, Nutmegs, Raisins.
Compounds.
Waters, of Wormwood, Mint, Betony. Syrups, of Mint, Wormwood, Byzantine, of
the five Roots. Conserves, of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary, peel of Citron
candied, root of Elecampane candied, Acorus candied, Walnuts candied, Nutmegs
candied, Mirobalans candied. Confections, Treacle, Mithridate. Electuaries,
Aromaticum R^satum, Diambra, Diarrhodon. Troches, of Wormwood, Rhubarb, and
Eupatory.
Externals.
Oil, of Wormwood, Mint, Nard.
Cold Hepaticks. Simple.
Roots, of Grass, Asparagus, Succory, Sorrel, Knee-holy. Woods, all the
Sanders. Leaves, of Endive, Succery, Scariola, Chondril, Liverwort,
Maidenhair, Sorrel, Lettice, Purslain. Seeds, the four greater cold ones, the
four less cold seeds, viz. Lettice, Purslain, Endive, and Cichory, the seed of
Sorrel. Flowers of Roses, Water-lilly, Succory. Fruits, sour Prunes, sour
Granats, Gourds, Ribes, Cucumers. Juices, of Limons, Granates, Quinces, Endive,
Sorrel, Succory, Vinegar, sour Grapes. Animals, Ivory, Spodium. Minerals,
Coral.
Compounds.
Waters, of Succory, Endive, Grass, Sorrel, Roses, Agrimony. Syrups, both
simple and compound of Succory, of the juice of Sorrel, of Granats, of Limons,
of dry Roses. Conserves, of flowers of Succory, of leaves of Sorrel, of Roses,
of Barberies, sour Cheries preserved. Electuaries, Diatriasantalum, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, cold Diamargarite. Troches, of Spodium, of Caphura.
Externals.
Oil, of Roses, of sour Grapes, of Water Lillies. Ointments, of Roses,
Santaline Cerecloth, Refrigerans Galeni.
CHAP. XXIII. Of Stomachical Medicaments.
THE action of the stomach is offended many ways, either in not desiring
nourishment, or ill concocting it, or by not retaining it duly.

The appetite is spoiled, when the ventricle, and especially the upper orifice
thereof, is stopped with any excrementitious humor. The concoction is hurt, by
a diminishing of the heat of the stomach. The retention thereof is weakened by a
loosnesse of the part which is succeeded by vomiting and scowring.

The appetite is raised by Medicaments which cleanse away the noxious humors,
preserving the strength of the part, and by a gentle griping of the part, cause
a feeling of divulsion, such are things sharp and salt. Some things help
concoction by a specifical property, others by a moderate heat and Aromatical
virtue.

The retentive faculty is confirmed by proper astringents.

These stomachical Medicaments are also either hot or cold.

The functions of the ventricle, as also of the other parts, are hurt by diverse
distempers, which indicate generally the removal thereof, and therefore among
the stomachicals those are to be chosen, which as they corroborate the part, so
also they serve for the general indication, correcting this or that distemper.

Hot Stomachicals. Simple.
Roots, of Ginger, Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, Galanga. Rindes, of dry Citron,
Cinnamon. Woods, Xyloaloes. Leaves, of Mint, both Wormwoods, Sage, Betony,
Rosemary. Seeds, of Anise, Fennel, Corianders, Citrons, Pepper. Fruit, Cloves,
Nutmegs. Flowers, of Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Mace, Saffron. Gums, Mastick.
Minerals, Succinum, Amber.
Compounds.
Waters, of Betony, Wormwood, Mint, Sage. Syrups, of Mint, of Pontick Wormwood.
Conserves, of flowers of Sage, Rosemary, flowers of Wormwood, peels of Citron
candied, Nutmegs candied, Mirobalans candied, Ginger candied, Acorus candied.
Confections, Treacle, Mithridate, Alkermes. Electuaries, Aromaticum Rosatum,
Diambra, Diagalanga. Troches, of Wormwood, of Rhubarb.
Externals.
Oils, of Nard, of Wormwood, Mint, Nutmegs, Mastick, Myrtle. Emplaisters for
the stomach, of Mastick.
Cold Stomachicals. Simple.
Roots, of Plantain, Sorrel. Woods, red Sanders. Leaves, of Plantain, Myrtle.
Seeds, of Plantain, Quinces. Flowers, of red Roses, Pomegranate. Fruits,
Quinces, Pears, Medlers, Myrtle-berries. Juices, Acacia, Hypocistis. Minerals,
Coral.
Compounds.
Waters, of Roses, Plantain, Sorrel. Syrups, of dried Roses, Quinces, Granates,
of Myrtle, of the juice of Sorrel, of Agresta. Conserves, of red Roses, of the
leaves of Sorrel. Electuaries, Diatriasantalum.
Externals.
Oil, of Roses, Mastick, sour Grapes. Ointments, Santaline Cerecloth, of
Roses.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Splenetick Medicaments.
THose Medicaments are for the most part destined to the Spleen, which prepare
the melancholy humor, because the spleen is the receptacle of melancholy.

But sometimes that melancholy has a natural quality, and is cold, thick, and
earthy, causing obstructions, and then requires opening Medicaments, cutting
and cleansing, and sometimes softening, when the hardened humor produces a
Scirrhus.

Sometimes it is burnt by over much heat, and has the qualities of black
choler, and then it requires those Medicaments, which we have mentioned before
as idoneous for the preparation of black choler.

Hot Spleneticks. Simple.
Roots, of Smallage, Elecampane, Orrice, Calamus Aromaticus, Birthwort. Rindes,
of the roots of Cappars, the middle rind of Ash-tree, the middle rind of
Tamaris, Cinnamon. Leaves, of Germander, Dodder, Spleenwort, heads of Hops,
Tamaris, Pennyroyal, Thyme, Watercresses, Fumitory, Centaury the less, Balm.
Seeds, of Agnus Castus, Watercresses, Anise, Smallage, Carduus benedictus.
Flowers, of Broom, Margolds, Tamaris, Saffron. Fruits, Cappars. Gums,
Ammoniack, Bdellium, Myrrh. Minerals, Steel.
Compounds.
Waters, of Fennel, Fumitory, Balm, Carduus benedictus, Cinnamon. Syrups, of
Fumitory, of 5. roots, simple Oxymel, Oxymel of Squils. Conserves, of flowers
of Tamaris, Broom, Acorus candied, Ginger candied, Citron peel candied.
Confections, Alkermes. Electuaries, de Gemmis, Letificans Galeni. Troches, of
Cappars, of Euphorbium.
Externals.
Oils, of Cappers, Tamaris, Orrice, Rue. Ointments, of Arthanita or Sowbread,
of Marsh-mallowes. Emplaisters, of Mucilages, of Melilot, Diachylum, with Gums.
Cold Spleneticks.
They are almost the same with those that attenuate choler, which we here omit,
for that they may be fetched from thence, to which may be added those Medicines
that prepare adust choler.
CHAP. XXV. Of Nephritick Medicaments.
MEdicaments that are prepared for curing affections of the Reins, are said to
be so, either as they provoke urine, or temper the heat of the reins, or as
they break the stone, or as they cleanse away the sand and viscous humors
contained in the Reins.

Those things which move urines were proposed above, yet some things are to be
added to them more peculiar to the reins.

Cold Diuretics temper all the heat of the reins, as also other simple
refrigerating things which are called cold Nephriticks.

To correct the hot distempers of the Reins, Diuretics are not to be used
always, although they are cooling: for that distemper being succeeded by an
immoderate flux of urine, other refrigerating Medicaments are to be used, which
do rather incrassate or lightly bind; as Lettice, Purslain, seed of Fleabane,
Gum, Tragacanth, etc.

Those Medicaments that break the stone, do it by a specifical property, either
as they cut and attenuate, without any great heat, otherwise they would bake
the stone harder; or else by their roughness, they cleanse away the outside of
the stone, and as it were grind it away by attrition.

Those Medicaments which cleanse away gravel and clammy humors, are taken from
the Diuretics or Lithrontripticks.

The matter of all these is such:

Medicaments moving Urine.
These both hot and cold were set down in the proper Chapters.

Medicines that temper the heat of Reins and Urine. Simple.
Roots, of Althea, Liquorice. Leaves, of Mallows, Lettice, Purslain, Endive,
Sow-thistle, Scariola, Seeds, of Melons, Pompions, Cucumers, Althea, Mallows,
Lettice, white Poppy, Fleabane, barley. Fruits, sweet Prunes, Raisins, Jujubes,
Almonds. Flowers, of Violets, Water Lillies. Gums, Tragacanth. Animals, Milk,
Butter.
Compounds.
Waters, of Lettice, Purslain, Water-lilly. Syrups, of Liquorice, Jujubes,
Violets. Conserves, of Violets, Water-lilly, candied Lettice. Electuaries, cold
Diatragacanth.
Externals.
Oils, of Violets, Roses, Water-lilly. Ointments, refrigerans Galeni, ointment
of Roses.
Lithontriptick, or stone-breaking Medicaments. Simple.
Roots, of Cammock, great Burdock, Saxifrage, golden rod, Caltrop. Woods,
Nephritical wood. Rindes, of dry Beans, of Lawrel-roots. Leaves, of Saxifrage,
Caltrop, wild Tansie, Strawberries, Pellitory of the wall, sea Fennel. Seeds,
of Millet of the sun, Nettles, Radish. Fruits, Kernels of Cherry-stones,
Peach-stones, Medlers, Juniper Berries, ivie-berries. Gums, Turpentine.
Animals, Hog-lice, Goats blood prepared, river Crabs eyes. Stones, the Judaick,
Nephritick, Crystal prepared.
Compounds.
Waters, of Saxifrage, Caltrop, Tobacco. Syrups, Nephrocathartick of Joubertus,
of Radish of Fernelius, simple Oxymel, Oxymel of Squils. Electuaries,
Lithontripticon, or the stone-breaking electuary.
Medicaments cleansing away sand and viscous humors.
They are the same which the Diuretics, and such things as expel the Stone;
but the most efficacious, are Turpentine, Pellitory of the wall, Radish,
Smallage, red Chiches.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Hysterical Medicaments.
THose Medicaments with are used in affections of the womb, either corroborate
it, or help conception, or forward the expulsion of the birth and secondines,
or bring forth the monthly purgations, or restrain the immoderate flux of them,
or purge the womb from the filth of excrements.

Those things which help conception, refresh the womb with a moderate heat, and
recreate it by an aromatical virtue, and confirm it by a kind of astriction.

Those things which exclude the birth and secundines, hasten the months also,
but the stronger of them are to be used.

Those things which move the months, are hot and of thin parts, yet they dry
not very much, neither do they attenuate only the blood, but also open the
mouths of the vessels.

There is a great affinity between those things which move the months, and
Diuretics; but they are in this distinguished according to Galen, 5. de simpl.
med. fac. c. 22. in that both are hot, but Diuretics powerfully dry, which
those things that move the months do not. For those things which dry more
vehemently, consume the blood, and so steal away the matter from the months, as
also thicken it, and make it less commodious for flux. Yet they help forward
the profusion of urine; for while the blood melted by the heat, is thickened by
the dryness, there must be a separation of the serous substance, which affords
matter for urine.

Medicaments hindering the flowing of the months, either shut up the passages by
a binding quality, or hinder the flux by thickning the humors.

Every immoderate flux, proceeds either from a loosnesse of the passages,
thinness, and movable nature of the humors, and therefore by binding up those
passages, or by the humors acquiring a thickness and clamminesse, it is
easily hindered.

Those Medicaments which purge the womb, are taken from those which move the
months, especially of you choose them which are of a cleansing faculty.

The matter of all these is this:

Simples helping Conception.
Roots, of Calamus Aromaticus, Bistort or Shaleweed, Galingal, Ciperus. Leaves,
of Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram. Fruits, Nutmegs, Cloves. Flowers, of Sage,
Rosemary, Betony, Mace, Spikenard. Gums, Styrax, Bezoinum, Frankincense,
Mastick. Animals, Musk, Civet. Minerals, Succinum, Amber, Coral.
Compounds.
Waters, of Sage, Betony, Marjoram. Conserves, of flowers of Betony, Sage,
Rosemary, Acorus candied, Walnuts candied, Nutmegs candied, Myrobalans candied,
candied roots of Satyrion. Confections, Treacle, Mithridate. Electuaries,
Diamoschum, Diambra, de Gemmis, Diagalanga, Aromaticum rosatum. Troches, of
Galliae Moschatae, Aliptae Moschatae.
Externals.
Oil, of Nard, Myrtles.
Medicaments expelling the Birth and Secundines.
Those things which move the months, bring forth also the birth and secundines:
being these in particular:

Cretian Dittanie, Mugwort, Birthwort, Saffron, Cinamon-water, Confectio
Alkermes, Borax of the shops, Savine, Opoponax, Sagapenum, Myrrh, Castor, Assa
fetida.

The two latter are proper only for the secundines, because that they kill the
child with their evil smell.

Medicaments moving the Months. Simple.
Roots, of both Birthworts, Madder, Valerian, Cyperus, Orrice, Gentian. Barks,
Cinnamon. Leaves, of Mugwort, Mercury, Featherfew, Nepp or Catmints, Sage,
Calamint, Penyroyal, Organy, Rue, Southernwood, Horebound, Cretian Dittany.
Seeds, of Hart-wort, Anise, Carrots, Fennel, Rue, Carrawaies. Flowers, of
Camomil, Featherfew, Saffron. Gums, Myrrh, Assa-fetida, Opoponax, Sagapenum,
Galbanum. Animals, Castor. Minerals, Borax of the shops.
Compounds.
Waters, of Mugwort, Cinnamon. Syrups, of Mugwort, Hysop. Conserves and
Electuaries, are to be seen among the Diuretics. Troches, of Myrrh.
Externals.
The Oils, and Unguents are to be seen in the Emollients, which shall be
delivered in the second Section.

Medicaments stopping the Months. Simple.
Roots, of Lungwort, Snakeweed, Tormentil. Leaves, of Plantain, Mastick-tree,
Horsetail, Raspis, Purslain, Myrtle, Knotgrasse, Mint. Seed, of Plantain,
Sorrel. Fruits, of Myrtles. Flowers, of Roses, Pomegranats. Gums, Mastick,
Dragons-bloud. Animals, Kids rennet, Hearts rennet, Hartshorn burnt, Ivory,
Spodium. Minerals, Bole armoniack, terra sigillata, Coral.
Compounds.
Waters, of Plantain, Roses, Water-lilly, Purslain, Mint. Syrups, of Myrtle,
Mint, Quinces, dry Roses. Conserves, of Roses, candied Quinces. Confections,
Philonium Romanum. Troches, of Spodium, of Terra sigillata.
Externals.
Oils, of Roses, Myrrh, Quinces. Unguent Comitissae. Emplaister of Mastick,
plaster against a Rupture.
Medicaments purging the Womb.
The same which move the months, and chiefly, Briony, both Birthworts, Gentian,
Mercury, Mugwort, Featherfew, Horehound, Germander, etc.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Arthritical Medicaments.
THE joints are composed of nervous parts; now there being such an affinity
between the brain and the nerves; those Cephalicks, which we have shown to be
inwardly used already, may be termed rightly Arthriticks.

When the humor contained in the joints is to be prepared by an Apozem or any
other internal Medicament, the same Medicaments are to be prescribed, which are
to be applied in affections of the head, of which those are more especially to
be chosen, which according to the faith of antiquity, are more agreeing and
specifically proper for the joints.

But because, affections in the joints, are most commonly cured with Topic
remedies; those are here to be set down which are most convenient for them, and
so to be distinguished, that some may presently assuage the heat at the
beginning, if there be any, and hinder defluxions of humor, yet not fix more
deeply the humors into the part inflamed, that others may ease the pain that
happens without any inflammation, and that others the pain being eased may
digest the impacted humor; which are all to be severally set down.

Things hindering defluxions.
Leaves, of Henbane, Hemlock, Nightshade, Mandrakes, Sempervivum or Ever-live.
Juices of Henbane, Nightshade, Lettice, Vinegar, Opium. Gums, Caphura.
Mucilages, of the seed of Flea-bane, Quinces. Waters, of Roses, Plantain,
Nightshade. Oils of Roses.
Easing Pain.
Roots, of Marsh-mallowes, Cows milk, Cows dung, Sheeps dung, Frankincense
beaten with the white of an Egg, Yolk of an Egg, flowers of Camomil, Melilot,
Saffron, and many other things set down by practical Authors.
Digesting Medicines.
Roots, of Elecampane, Hermodactyles. Leaves, of Mullin, Ground Pine, Nettles,
Walwort, Sage, Centaury the less. Seeds, of Nettles, Watercresses. Gums,
Opoponax, Bdellium, Ammoniack, Sagapenum, Galbanum, Euphorbium. Animals,
Castor, Live Puppies applied. Liquors, Wine, Aqua vitae, Seawater, water of
Sulphurous baths. Chemical Oils, of Vitriol, Wax, of Bricks. Emplaisters, of
Mucilages, of Melilot, Oxycroceum, Diapalma.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of Medicaments, increasing and diminishing Milk.
MEdicaments fit to increase Milk, according to Galen, de simpl. med. fac. c.
22. moderately heat, but dry not, for by heating they attenuate the blood, that
it may the better be carried to the Breasts, neither do they diminish the
plenty thereof by drying, which must be very much for the generation of milk.

Things that increase Milk, have the same qualities with those things that move
the months, though as to the effects these do seem much contrary to the other;
for as often as the months are excited to flow, so often is the generation of
milk impeded. But in this they differ, that those things which move the months
are hotter then those things which increase milk, and more attenuating. For in
the generation of milk, there is an expulsion of the blood to the breasts; and
an attraction from the same, but in the vacuation of the months, there is only
an expulsion to the womb; so that the blood ought to be more attenuated, and
the remedies botter and dryer, so Gal. c. 21. l. 5. de med. fac. will have
Dill, Fennel, and Rocket, as being green and moist herbs, most proper to
increase milk, but being dry to move the months; because then they do heat and
dry more.

They diminish the plenty of milk, which by drying consume the blood, or by
refrigerating and incrassating, render it unfit to be carried to the breasts.

The matter of all these is this:

Increasers of Milk.
Green Fennel, seed of the same, green Dill, Smallage, powder of Crystal,
decoction of Colewort, Butter taken with Milk and Fennel.
Decreasers of Milk.
Mint, Celandine the greater, Calamint, Corianders, Basil, sour Grapes,
Vinegar, Oxymel, Camphire.
CHAP. XXIX. Of Medicaments, increasing or diminishing Seed.
THose Medicaments increase Seed and provoke lust which are hot and windy
without exsiccation.

Those things decrease Seed and blunt the sharp prickings of venery, which do
either immoderately cool, or by immoderate exsiccation do consume the seminal
matter. They are these:

Increasers of Seed.
Seeds, of Rocket, Turnep, Nettles, Mustard, Pepper. Fruits, Pistachias,
Pine-kernels. Animals, Scincus, Sparrows brains, Cocks stones.
Decreasers of Seed.
Lettice, Purslain, Camphire, Mint, Rue, seed of Agnus Castus, Dill.
CHAP. XXX. Of Medicaments discussing Wind.
MEdicaments discussing wind, heat and attenuate, and resolve the humors
proceeding from cold matter by Diaphoresis.

These are not much distinguished from those that heat and attenuate phlegm, and
therefore are not here to be repeated.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Astringent Medicaments.
AStringent Medicaments are cold and dry, and of an earthy substance, which
causes them to contract, gather, and condense the parts.

This Theorem is most certain of simple astringents, which are endued with
those qualities; yet there are other Medicaments, with which other faculties
have also an astringent quality, through the various condition of the
substance, as there are many astringents which are hot, as Wormwood, Mastick,
Vitriol, and others of this nature.

What ever things were proposed before for the stopping of the Months, the some
are astringents, and therefore not to be here repeated.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Medicaments that kill the Worms.
WHatever Medicaments are bitter, sharp, sour, astringent, or oily, are good to
kill the Worms.

Bitter, sharp, and sour things, with their tenuity pierce the substance of the
worms and dissolve them; Astringents, by shriveling them up together: Oily
Medicaments by stopping their pores hinder transpiration, by which only they
live, and so they choke them. Yet it is most certain, that there are some
Medicaments which kill the worms, not only by manifest qualities, but by a
specifical property. For example, Mercury, which only applied to the belly in
ointments, effectually kills the worms in the guts; and being inwardly and in
due quantity taken, and rightly prepared, it works wonders. Also raw Mercury,
beaten for some time in fair water, communicates its virtue in some measure to
it, so that the fair water be so used as ordinary drink, is very efficacious to
kill the worms.

The matter of those things that kill the Worms, is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Grass, Cowslips, Setwall, white Dittany, Gentian, Angelica,
Mulberry, Rhubarb. Leaves, of Purslain, Cichory, Sorrel, Wormwood,
Water-germander, St. Johnswort, lesser Centaury, Vervain, Hoarhound, Cretian
Dittany. Seeds, of Citron, Tansie, Coleworts, Lupines, bitter Almonds. Juices,
of Limons, Granates, Purslain, Aloes. Animals, shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn.
Compounds.
Powder against the Worms, Hiera picra. Chymicals, Spirit of Sulphur, Vitriol,
Mercurius dulcis.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of Medicaments for Wounds.
MEdicaments for Wounds, are those which by gently binding, and drying do
forward the conglutination of the wounds.

Wounds are not only cured by external and topical Medicaments, but also by
internal, which being taken do forward the closing of the wounds, of which
vulnerary potions are often made.

The matter of them is this: Roots, of Lungwort, round Birth-wort, Setwall,
Tormentil. Leaves, of Periwincle, Burnet, Sanicle, Bugle, Mousear, Paul's
Betony, Agrimony, Centaury the less. Seeds, of Carduus benedictus. Animals,
River Crabs.


THE FIFTH BOOK, The second Particle of the second Part of the first Section.
Of External Medicinal matter.
CHAP. I. Of refrigerating and repelling Medicaments.
IN the External parts do often happen Inflammations, Erysipela's, Ringworms,
Carbuncles, and such like affections, which must be cured by the applying of
cooling things, especially at the beginning.

And because these affections proceed most commonly from defluxions; therefore
those Medicaments in the beginning ought to repel, that they may hinder the
flux of the humors, and keep them from the part affected.

But Medicaments repel as they have a binding quality, of which we treated
when we discoursed of internal Astringents.

But because external refrigerating, and repelling Medicaments, differ much
from the internal, therefore they shall be set down here in order.

Refrigerating Medicaments. Simple.
Rindes, of the roots of Nightshade, Mandrake. Leaves, of Lettice, the 4. sorts
of Endive, Henbane, Duck-meat, Navilwort.
The foresaid do only refrigerate; these that follow do also by refrigeration
gently bind.

Purslain, Knotgrasse, Plantain, Privet, Nightshade, Semper-vivum or Ever-live,
Mandrake. Seeds, of Fleabane, white Henbane, white Poppy, the greater and less
cold seeds. Flowers, of Roses, Violets, Water Lillies. Juices, of Granates,
Lottice, Purslain, Sempervivum, Nightshade, Plantain, Limons, Vinegar, sour
Grapes. Animals, the white of an Egg.
Compounds.
Waters, of Nightshade, Water-lilly, Roses, Plantain, Knotgrasse. Oils, of
Roses, Violets, Water-lilly, Poppy, Henbane, Mandrake. Ointments, of Roses,
Santaline Cerecloth, refrigerans Galeni, of Poplar.
Repelling and Astringents. Simple.
Roots, of Snakeweed, Lungwort, Tormentil, Reapontick. Rindes, the middle rind
of Sumack peels, Granates, green Walnuts, Acorn cups. Leaves, of Vines and
Tendrels of the same, Myrtle, Cyperus, Oak, Olive Tree, Sumack, Knotgrasse,
Shepherds purse, Horetail, Plantain, Wormwood, Mint, Mullin, tops of Bramble.
Seeds, of Purslain, Plantain, shepherds purse, Dyers grains, Grape-stones.
Flowers, of red Roses, grounds of distilled R^ses, Pomegranates. Fruits,
Myrtle-berries, Cypresse-nuts, unripe Galls, Medlers, Services, Quinces.
Juices, of Plantain and of the foresaid Herbs, Acacia, Hypocistis. Gums,
Mastick, Dragons-bloud, Frankincense, Sandarach, Tragacanth, Sarcocol, Gum
Arabic. Minerals, Bole Armoniack, Terra sigillata, Alum, Coral.
Compounds.
Waters, of Roses, Plantain, Nightshade, Peculi rosarum, of the rindes of Nuts.
Oils, of Roses, sour Grapes, Myrtles, Mastick, Lentisk, Wormwood, Mint.
Ointments, de Comitissa. Emplaisters, against Ruptures, of Crusts of Bread.
CHAP. II. Of Emplasters.
EMplasters, are something near the nature of astringents and repellents, and
are convenient in defluxions, and eruptions of blood out of any part. For they
are of a glutinous and fat substance, whereby they stick fast to the part, and
obstruct the pores thereof, so that the slowing humor cannot pass through
them, then by compressing the part they drive the humor another way.

Of these some are simply such, having no other manifest quality, and some also
do dry or bind withal, and indeed the greatest part of them have these two
qualities joined together.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Meal, of Wheat, Beans. Juices, Amylum, or unground Wheat. Gums, Mastick,
sanguis Draconis. Animals, the white of an Egg, Mummie. Minerals, the
Bloud-stone, Coral, terra Sigillata, bole Armoniack, Parget, Litharge,
Ce-Pompholyx, Cadmia, Lapis Calaminaris, Antimony, Alum, Lead.
Compounds.
Unguents, white ointment of Rhasis, of Litharge, nutritum, Diachalcitheos,
Diapompholygos, Desiccativum rubrum, or drying red ointment.
CHAP. III. Of Medicaments that ease pain.
PAin afflicting the parts of the body uses to be assuaged three ways, either
by taking away the efficient cause, or by stupifying the sense with Narcoticks,
or by the use of those Medicaments which are properly called Anodyne.

Now those are called Anodyne or Paregorical, which ease pain, the cause and
the disease still remaining.

This they do by a kind and moderate heat, by which the part affected is
cherished and reduced to an evennesse, the skin is relaxed, and the pores
opened, that by it a certain portion of the matter may be resolved.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Althea, Mallows, Lillies. Leaves, of Mallows, Althea,
Bears-breech. Seeds, of Hemp, Fenugreek, Marshmallowes. Flowers, of Lillies,
Camomil, Melilot. Meal, of Hemp Seed, Fenugreek.
Compounds.
Oils, common, of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Camomile, Dill, of Plower-de-luces,
of the whites of Eggs. Ointments, Dialthea, Resumptive.
CHAP. IV. Of Narcotick Medicaments.
NArcotick Medicaments ease pain, by stupifying the part, and taking away the
sense thereof; or by causing sleep, which takes away the feeling of the body.

This effect they are said to produce by an extraordinary coldness, which they
have in the fourth degree, according to the ancient doctrine of Galen; but many
modern Authors do think, that they take away the sense, and provoke sleep, not
simply by coldness, but by a peculiar faculty, and specifical quality, which
they call a Narcotick virtue.

The use of them is not admitted, unless after Anodynes tried in vain.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Mandrake, Henbane. Leaves, of Henbane, Hemlock, Mandrake, white
Poppy. Seeds, of Henbane, white Poppy. Juices, of Lettice, Hemlock, Henbane,
Opium.
Compounds.
Opiates, Philonium Romanum, Requies Nicolai. Oils, of Mandrake, Henbane, white
Poppy. Chymicks, Laudanum, Opiaticum.
CHAP. V. Of Emollients.
ALL hardness is produced by three causes, dryness, tension, and concretion.

Those things which are dried, are harder; those which are repleted, are
stretched, and resist the touch, are called hard; those things also which are
condensed by cold, obtain a hardness, as appears in ice.

All these kinds of hardness happen to our bodies. For the humors contract a
dryness by a long action of heat, or resolving medicaments: because the more
thin and moist parts are dissipated, and the thicker and dryer remain. By the
multitude of humors, the parts are stretched and repleted. Lastly, humors
naturally cold, and destitute of proper heat, or settling in a part laboring
with a cold distemper, condense of themselves and harden.

That hardness which arises from dryness, is cured by humectation; that which
comes by repletion, is cured by evacuation; that which comes by concretion, is
taken away by those things which are properly called Emollients.

Now true and right Emollients, are very like to Anodynes; endued with a
moderate heat and dryness, according to Galen, 5. de simpl. med. fac. c. 8.
being destitute of all acrimony, or corroding quality, whereby they melt the
humor congealed by cold, and so take away the hardness thereof.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Mallows, Althea, Lillies, Flower-deluce, Briony, Wallwort, wild
Cucumers. Leaves, of Violet, Pellitory of the wall, Bears-breech, Mallows,
Althea, Orach, Walwort. Seeds, of Hemp, Fenugreek, Mallows, Althea. Flowers,
of Camomil, Melilot, Lillies. Fruits, fat Figs. Gums, Turpentine, Ammoniack,
Bdellium, Styrax, Galbanum, Opoponax. Animals, Butyr, Hogs-fat, Hens,
Goose-grease, Sheeps-dung, Harts-marrow, marrow of Veal.
Compounds.
Oils, common, of Lillies, Violets, Worms, of Camomil, Hemp, Flower-deluces,
Whelps. Unguents of Althea, Resumptive. Emplaisters, the great Diachylum, of
Mucilages, of Melilot, of the son of Zacharias, Ceroneum, Oxycroceum, of Frogs.
CHAP. VI. Of Resolving Medicaments.
REsolving Medicaments, are hotter then Emollients; also they have a thin
substance, so that they easily penetrate, dilate the pores of the skin,
attenuate the humors, and convert them to vapors, so that they may be
evacuated by insensible transpiration, or Diaphoresis.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Elecampane, Orris, Carrots, Birthwort, Galingal. Leaves, of
Marjoram, Wormwood, Hysop, Calamint, Pennyroyal, Origan, Laurel, Rue, Savoury,
Sage, Rosemary. Seeds, of Carrots, Cumin, Dill, Fenugreek, Hemp, Nigella,
Anise, Fennel. Fruits, Lawrel-berries, Juniper Berries, Pepper. Flowers, of
Stoechas, Hysop, Lavender, Dill, Camomil, Melilot.
Compounds.
Oils, of Dill, Rue, sweet Almonds, Cappars, Scorpions, Nard, St. Johnswort, of
Foxes, Turpentine, of Spike. Ointments, of Agrippa, Aregon, Martiate.
Emplaisters, of Sulphur, of Lawrel-berries, Diachylum ireatum.
CHAP. VII. Of attracting or drawing Medicaments.
ATtracting Medicaments are hotter then resolving, and being applied to the
skin, they draw forth the humors lying in the deep parts of the body and
discuss them.

But though they do obtain this faculty for the most part from the heat and
thinness of the parts; yet they perform it also by a certain natural property,
as Dittany is said to draw forth arrows out of the body; others from the
likeness of the substance, as a Scorpion being laid upon a wound caused by it
self, draws the venom to it self.

The matter of drawing Medicaments is this:

Simples.
Roots, of both Birthworts, Pellitory of Spain, Thapsia, Hermodactyles, Orrice,
Hellebore, Cyclamine, Anacardium. Leaves, of Pimpernel, Calamint, Sopewort,
Nettles, Setwall. Seeds, of Thlaspi, Mustard, Watercresses, Nettles. Fruits,
Colocynth. Juices, Elaterium. Gums, Pitch, Euphorbium, Ammoniack. Animals,
Castor, Pigeons dung, Cocks dung, Goats dung. Minerals, Sulphur.
Compounds.
Oils, Balanine, of Mustard. Emplaisters, of Melilot, of Lawrel-berries,
Sulphur, Oxycroceum.
CHAP. VIII. Of Suppurating Medicaments.
SUppurating Medicaments are moderately hot and moist, and like to the temper
of the part to which they are applied, and so they increase the natural heat
thereof, where by the putrefying blood is concocted and changed into true
purulency.

In our bodies there use to be but three sorts of alterations, according to
Galen, 5. de simpl. med. fac. cap. 6. One is plainly natural, when the meat is
concocted for nourishment in the ventricle, liver, and other parts. The other
is wholly preternatural, when the substances contained in the body contract
putrefaction. The third is partly natural, partly preternatural, and is called
Suppuration. For when the blood contained in the part, by contracting a
putrefaction, has obtained a preternatural heat, it is altered and concocted
by the natural heat of the part, so that both heats working together, neither a
perfect concoction, nor absolute putrefaction is produced, but a middle
operation, called Suppuration, by which the humor is not made fit for
nourishment, but is reduced to a certain moderation of substance and qualities,
more consentaneous to nature. But now the Medicaments which promote suppuration
are those, which increase the natural heat, and cause it to be more vigorous in
exerting its strength. Such are those which have a heat like that heat of the
part to which they are applied; and so cherish it and make it more vigorous.

Those are very like emollient Medicaments; yet distinguished in this by
Galen's testimony, that Emollients are hotter and dryer, and so consume some of
the humor contained in the part; but suppurating Medicaments being more
temperate, keep in the whole moisture.

Moreover, suppurating Medicaments being exactly such, ought to be Emplastick,
for that the heat may be retained in the part, the pores thereof ought to be
obstructed, lest a dissipation should be made through them: now it is proper
for emplastick Medicaments to shut up the pores.

The matter of suppurating Medicaments:

Simples.
Roots, of Althea, Lillies, Onions baked under the ashes in tumors, that
hardly come to suppuration, very efficacious. Leaves, of Mallows, Althea,
Bears-breech, Coltsfoot, sour Dock. Seeds, of Althea, Fenugreek. Flowers, of
Camomil, Melilot. Gums, liquid Pitch, Turpentine, Rosin, Ammoniack, Bdellium.
Meals, of Wheat, Hemp, Fenugreek. Animals, Butter, Sheeps dung, Hogs, Calves,
Capons, Goose grease, Hearts marrow, Calves marrow, yelk of an Egg.
Compounds.
Oils, of Lillies, Camomil, Flower-deluces, common Oil, Hydreleum. Ointments,
Basilicum, of Althea, Agrippa, Resumptivum. Emplasters, Diachylum magnum, of
Mucilages.
CHAP. IX. Of cleansing Medicaments.
TO cleanse away the matter, corruption, and other filth of broken impostumes,
or unclean ulcers, we use cleansing Medicaments, which by their roughness and
nitrous quality, remove the matter impacted in those parts.

The cleansing faculties depend not on the first qualities, for cleansing
Medicaments are both hot and cold; but on a roughness and nitrous quality,
which being joined with heat, works more powerfully; because the clammy matter
sticking to the part, being attenuated by the heat, is more easily cleamed away.

The matter of these cleansing Medicaments is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Smallage, Orrice, both Birthworts, Gentian. Leaves, of Wormwood,
Centaury the less, Horehound, Smallage, agrimony, Plantain, Pimpernell. Seeds,
of Smallage, Plantain. Juices, of the foresaid leaves, Wine. Meal, of Lupines,
Beans, Fenugreek, Barley, Hemp. Gums, Turpentine, Aloes, Frankincense, Myrrh.
Animals, Honey, Urine. Minerals, Burnt Vitriol, Rust, Saltpeter.
Compounds.
Syrups, of dry Roses, Honey of Roses. Oils, of Myrrh, Tartar, yolks of Eggs,
of Elder. Ointments, Aureum, of Elicampanes, Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum,
cleansing ointment of Smallage. Emplasters, dejanua, gratia Dei, Divinum.
CHAP. X. Of Sarcotick Medicaments.
SArcotick Medicaments are those which promote the generation of flesh wanting
in an ulcer or wound.

This they perform by moderately drying and gently cleansing the filth of the
ulcers; therefore they are to be moderately hot and dry, and void of all
acrimony; for if they were hotter, and more acrimonious, they would melt the
flesh; if cold and astringent, they would cicatrize the wound before the ulcer
were filled with flesh.

It is the proper office of nature to generate flesh by the assimilation of the
nourishment, but Sarcotick Medicaments cannot perform that of themselves, but
only help the action of nature, removing the impediments; for filth and
superfluous moisture abounding in an ulcer, are wont to hinder the generation
of flesh; hence by gently drying and cleansing Medicaments, the ulcer is
purified, and disposed for the action of nature endeavoring the generation of
new flesh.

The matter of Sarcotick Medicaments is this:

Simples.
Meals, of Fenugreek, Tares, Lupines. Gums, Frankincense, Pitch of both sorts,
Turpentine, Sarcocoll, Aloes, Myrrh. Minerals, burnt Lead, Ceruse.
Compounds.
Unguents, Basilicon, Aureum, Pompholygos, Apostolerum. Emplasters, de Janua,
de gratia Dei, divinum, of Betony.
CHAP. XI. Of Cicatrizing Medicaments.
CIcatrizing Medicaments, are those which make the flesh of the ulcer like
skin, by much drying and binding it.

That the flesh being divested of skin may be cicatrized, the outward
superficies thereof must be very much bound, contracted, and dried; so that
cicatrizing Medicaments being drying and binding, seem to be near allied to
agglutinating Medicaments; yet they differ in this, that cicatrizing
Medicaments more powerfully dry and bind; for they do not only consume that
which flows into the flesh, and is excrementitious moisture, but also they dry
the very substance of the flesh, and turn it almost into the nature of the skin.

The matter of Epuloticks is this:

Simples.
Plants, Malicorium, Plantain, Myrtle, Balaustia, Roses. Minerals, Bole
Armoniack, terra Sigillata, Litharge, Ceruse, Lapis Haematites, Calaminaris,
Cadmia, Pampholyx, dross of Iron, burnt Lead, Squama aeris, burnt brass,
burnt Antimony, Lime; burnt Alum, burnt Vitriol. The six latter must be well
washed till they have lost their acrimony.
Compounds.
Unguents, white ointment of Rhasis, red Desiccativum, Diapompholygos.
Emplastrum, de Cerussa, of the stone Calaminaris, Diapalma, Paracelsus.
CHAP. XII. Of Medicaments stopping Blood.
THose Medicaments which stop the blood flowing from any part, use to be of
three sorts; for they either do it by a peculiar property; or as they are
Emplastick, and stop the open veins, or as they burn and sear the wounded part
and cover it with a crust.

The matter of the most principal of them is this: Roots, of Lungwort,
Cinkfoyl. Leaves, of Knotgrasse, Burnet, Horsetail, Plantain, Peruwinkle,
Nettles. Fruits, Galls. Flowers, of Pomegranates. Juices, of Vinegar, sour
Grapes, Acacia, hypocistis. Gums, Mastick, sanguis Draconis, Frankincense,
Myrrh. Animals, Gluten, Mumy, white of an Egg. Minerals, Bole Armoniack,
terra sigillata, the stone Hematites, Jaspis, Coral, Alum, Vitriol.


This is performed by all Emplasticks also, though less efficaciously.

CHAP. XIII. Of glutinating Medicaments.
GLutinating Medicaments are those which close the lips of the wounds, and
bring them to a perfect union.

And they must be all astringent and drying.

When a part divided is contracted, it is more easily united, to which purpose
it is necessary that not only that which flows in, but that also which is more
liquid in the flesh, should be consumed; and there is great need of much
exsiccation, which notwithstanding must not have such an excessive heat, as
either to melt the part, or hurt it with its acrimony; for thence new moisture
would arise, which would hinder conglutination.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Lungwort, Tormentil, Cinkfoyl. Leaves, of Lambestongue,
Houndstongue, Yarrow, Vervain, Moufear, Betony, Scabious, Bugle, Sanicle, St.
John's wort, Self-heal. Gums, Sarcocol, Myrrh, Frankincense, Aloes, Turpentine,
liquid Pitch. Animals, Worms, Mumy, Hares hairs cut small. Minerals, Litharge
of Gold.
Compounds.
Oils, of Myrrh, Tobacco, Balsama vacia. Ointments, Aureum, red Desiccative.
Emplaisters, against Ruptures, Triapharmacum, Nigrum.
CHAP. XIV. Of Vesicating Medicaments.
VEsicating Medicaments do very much heat the extreme parts of the skin and
attract the serous humors to it; and burning the cuticle, they pluck it from
the skin under, which causes bladders.

They are also exceeding hot, of a thin and almost fiery substance, so that
they easily inflame the part to which they are applied, and cause bladders
thereon, from which they received their appellation.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Roots, of Thapsi, Pellitory of Spain. Seeds, of Mustard, Stafesagre. Gums,
Euphorbium. Animals, Pigeons dung, Cantharides.
Compounds.
Emplastrum Vesicatorium.
CHAP. XV. Of gnawing Medicaments.
CAtheretick Medicaments, consume superfluous flesh increasing in ulcers,
polypusses, and warts.

They are most hot, even in the fourth degree, also of a thin and burning
substance, by which they consume all those superfluities; less vehement then
vesicating Medicaments, which appears for that Catheretick Medicaments laid
upon the bare skin do not alter it, but only they easily inflame naked flesh
which is much more soft; but Vesicatories easily inflame the part to which they
are applied.

The matter of them is this:

Simples.
Burnt Pumice stone, parched Salt, burnt Alum, burnt Vitriol, burnt Antimony,
or Crocus metallorum, Rust, Squamma aeris, preciptated Mercury, Cinabar, Pulvis
Sabinae.

Compounds.
Oil, of Vitriol and Sulphur, Aqua secunda, Unguentum Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum.
CHAP. XVI. Of Causticks.
Caustic Medicaments, not only burn the cuticle, but the true skin it self and
flesh under it, producing in it a crust which is separated from the part, and
falls away, leaving a profound ulcer therein.

These are truly called Pyroticks, because they have a fiery nature, and a
thick substance, which makes them burn the more vehemently; for fire in a
thicker substance burns the more fiercely.

The matter of them is this:

Calx viva, burnt brass, sublimate Mercury, Arsenick, the common Caustic of
the Surgeons, the gummy Liquor which is drawn out for the confection of
Mercurius vitae.

THE SECOND SECTION of the SECOND PART OF THERAPEVTICKS.
Of the Composition of Medicaments.
The PROEME.
COmpounded Medicaments are threefold, internal, middle, and external.
Internal, are those which are taken inwardly.

Such are Apozemes, Potions, Juleps, Syrups, Emulsions, Boles, Opiates,
Tablets, Powders, Troches, Pills, etc.

Middle ones, are those which are taken neither within the body, nor are
applied to the superficies thereof, but are thrust into several concavities of
the body.

Such are Suppositories, Clysters, Insections, Pessaries, Errhines, Gargarisms,
Masticatories, Collyriums, etc.

External, are those which are moved and applied to the external parts.

As Epithems, Fomentations, Baths, Oils, Unguents, Emplasters, Cataplasms,
Sacculets.

Therefore this Section shall comprehend three Articles:

In the first, the manner of composing internal Medicaments shall be shown: In
the second, that of the middle ones: in the third, that of the external ones.

THE FIRST ARTICLE of the SECOND SECTION: OF The Composition of internal
Medicaments.
CHAP. I. Of an altering Apozeme.
A Apozeme is a liquid form of a Medicine composed of the decoction of many
simples, sweetened with sugar or honey, clarified, and aromatized, prepared into
3, 4, or 5. doses to alter or purge.

Therefore it is twofold, Altering, and Purging.

An altering Apozeme is composed of roots, barks, woods, leaves, seeds, fruits,
and flowers, the quantity of which is usually as follows:

Of Roots, iiij. or vij.

Rinds, j. or ij.

Woods, the same quantity.

Leaves, m. v. or viij.

Seeds, j. or j. ss.

Of lesser fruits, as Raisins, j. Sometimes they are measured by number, to 12.
or 16. pair; but greater fruits are measured only by number, and that even, as
figs, to 7 or 8 pair; but the greatest fruits by uneven numbers, as Apples.

Of Flowers, iiij. or six pugils.

All these are boiled in sufficient liquor, which is commonly fountain, and
sometimes barley water, as in choleric affections, or thin hydromel, as in
flegmy affections: sometimes in obstructions a decoction is made in equal
parts of fountain water and white Wine, added at the end, or in two parts of
fountain water, and one of white Wine, according to the judgment of the
Physician.

The quantity of the liquor is not set down, but is prescribed in this manner,
Let a decoction be made in a sufficient quantity of fountain water.

But the quantity of a streined decoction ought to be set down, viz. ad lb j.
for three doses, five quartaries for four doses, ad lb j. ss. for five doses in
this manner, of the strained liquor take lb j ss.

Afterward the syrups are dissolved in such quantity, so that for every dose
of Apozem j. of syrup in this manner, in which (v.z. colature) dissolve syrup,
viz. of Violets or Maidenhair, ana ij.

Sometimes Sugar is prescribed in the same dose, especially when any juices are
dissolved which make the Apozem more efficacious. Now those juices are very
commendably prescribed in an Apozem to ij. in this form, in the strained liquor
dissolve of the purified juices, viz. of Borage or Sorrel ana j. white Sugar
iij. but for the most part the quantity of Sugar is not defined, but it is thus
prescribed, a sufficient quantity of white Sugar.

These things thus done, an Apozem is sometimes aromatized to make it more
pleasant; but the most frequent and grateful spices, are Citrine, Sanders,
Electuarium Triasantali in a cooling Apozem; Cinnamon in a heating Apozem; and
the dose of these spices is j. ss. or ij. in this form, Make a clarified and
aromatized Apozem; as for example, ij. of choice Cinnamon, for iiij. (morning)
doses.

CHAP. II. Of a purging Apozem.
A Purging Apozem is that which not only prepares the humors, but also
evacuates them with one and the same labor, purging Medicaments being mixed
with altering ones.

This kind of Apozem is now very much and almost only in use; for that which
simply alters, is commonly used by the name of a Julep.

And it uses to be fourfold, according to the fourfold difference of
Catharticks, viz. Cholagogue, Phlegmagogue, Melanagogue, and Hydragogue.

It is composed of the same amtter with altering Apozems, and after the same
manner, only Catharticks are added with their correctives, and they are placed
among the fruits and flowers in such a proportion, that there should be so many
doses of Catharticks, as of the Apozem.

It is most useful to prescribe Sena as the foundation of every such Apozem,
for the most part to ij. to wh ich are added Polypodium, and seed of wild
Saffron in the same quantity, or at least to j. of each; then other Catharticks
are prescribed according as the peccant humor requires, of which some are wont
to be decocted, as Turbith, Hermodactyles, Agarick, Epithymum, black Ellebore,
seed of Wallwort, and others are infused, as Rhubarb, Agarick, Tamarinds.

But those which are not decocted but only infused, ought to be prescribed in
this form; as for example of Rhubarb infused by it self,, ss. but those which
are decocted, must be simply set down: but the computation of the doses ought
to be so made, that one dose of Sena in decoction, should be j. of Turbith,
Hermodactyles, and Agarick ss. Rhubarb infused also ss. but of Polypody, seed
of wild Saffron, and Epithyme, there is no account to be had, because they are
of small virtue.

So when we compose an Apozem into four doses, we may prescribe ij. of Sena,
Turbith, and Agarick, ana ss. for so there will be four doses of purgers, viz.
two of Sena, one of Turbith, and one of Agarick, in the place whereof we may
put others as the indication requires, the same method being still observed.

Correctives are prescribed presently after the enumeration of all the purges
which for the most part are Ginger and Cloves; of each j.

In the streined decoction are dissolved the same syrups for the most part
which are prescribed in altering Apozems; sometimes also, when the Apozem is
supposed to be not sufficiently purgative, purging syrups are dissolved, and
most commonly syrup of Roses solutive, sometimes syrup of Cichory composed with
Rhubarb, in choleric affections, and syrup of Fumitory compounded with Rhubarb
in melancholy affections: sometimes in the spring time juice of white Roses is
dissolved, or an infusion of them is made to iiij. in choleric affections, and
then no syrups are prescribed, but only Sugar q. s.

But this is to be observed in the use of all Apozems, first that in the
beginning, the humors contained in the first region be evacuated by a
purgative Medicament, and that in the end the relics of the humors be
removed, which is very often done, if the first and last dose thereof be made
to purge more strongly, dissolving in it, of Opiate or purging Electuary, iij.
more or less according to the disposition of the patient; of purging syrup j.
after this form, In the first and last dose dissolve of Electuarium
Diacarthamum, viz. iij. syrup of Roses solutive j. mingle them and make a
Potion, let it be taken according to prescription: sometimes a minorative
Medicament is prescribed before the Apozem, and then those purging
Medicamentsare dissolved on ly in the last dose.

Sometimes in affections of the head, and parts very remote from the stomach
pills are prescribed after the Apozem, and then nothing is dissolved in the
last dose.

CHAP. III. Of a purging Potion.
APotion is a liquid form of a Medicament to be prescribed for one dose,
composed of the decoction, infusion, or dissolution of several things in fit
liquor.

This is manifold according to the various indications, in which it is used,
viz. purging, corroborating, provoking sleep, killing the worms, helping
parturition, etc.

A purging potion is many ways prepared; and in this three things are to be
considered, 1. Decoction, 2. Infusion, 3. Dissolution.

The most usual decoction is described partly of Sena to ss. or v. Anise seed
j. to correct the Sena, or Anise seed and Cloves, ana ss. herbs proper for the
affection M. 1. ss. or ij. handfuls, of shaving of Liquorice and stoned
Raisins, ana iij. (in almost all Potions, these two are commonly prescribed,
unless it be in some women that abhor sweet things); of flowers proper for
the disease, pug. 1. or 2, and the dection is made to iij.

Or else the common purging decoction is to be used, which is usually had in
the shops.

Sometimes in affections of the Crest, the same pectoral purging decoction is
used after the same method.

The infusion is made of Rhubarb in choleric, of Agarick in flegmie
affections, or of both in mixed, and their quantity is from j. to j. ss.
correctives being added, viz. Spikenard, or Cinnamon, or citrine Sanders, from
gr. vj. to ss. Skice is a corrective only to Rhubarb, Cinnamon to both, but in
affections less hot; citrine Sanders, in vehement Fevers.

The liquor wherein the infusion is to be made, is distilled water proper to
the affection, or else the foresaid purging decoction.

In dissolutions, compound purgers are to be prescribed, Opiates, or
Electuaries in various doses, according to the less or greater quantity of the
purgers, which were prescribed in decoction, and infusion, and some purging
syrup, as syrup of Roses solutive most frequently; sometimes syrup of Cichory
compounded with Rhubarb, or compounded syrup of fumitory, which purges less
then the forementioned syrup: the quantity of the syrup perpetually is j.
sometimes in affections of the Lungs, Manna is dissolved from ss. to i. and
then the quantity of the syrup is diminished to ss.

In these various manners are purging potions compounded, viz. either according
to these three preparations, or two, or one only.

Of the three preparations, various forms are composed, according to the
variety of the decoction, or infusion.

For if a magisterial decoction be to be made with infusion, the form of the
prescription in that decoction shall be thus, fol. senae, etc. make a decoction
to iij. in the Colature infuse of Rhubarb, j. ss. Spikenard gr. vij. the liquor
being pressed out, dissolve therein, of Diaprun. sol. iij. syrup of Roses, sol.
j. mingle them, make a potion to be given to morrow morning with care and
according to art.

But if a magisterial decoction be to be made with an infusion in distilled
water, it is to be prescribed after this manner, make a decoction to iij. in
the Colature dissolve of Rhubarb infused in water of Cichory with Spike and
pressed out, j. Electuary of the juice of Roses, iij. syrup of Cichory
compounded with Rhubarb, j. mingle them, make a potion to be given, etc.

If it be to be made of a shop decoction with an infusion in distilled water,
the prescription is to be made after this manner, Rhubarb Elect, and Agarick
Trochischat. ana ij. Cinnamon ss. infuse them in Betony water, when it is
streined dissolve therein of Electuarium, Diacarthamum, and Diaphanick, ana j.
ss. syrup of Roses solut. j. of common medicinal decoction purging iij. or of
common pectoral purging decoction iij. mingle them, make a potion to be given,
etc.

Note that sometimes no Electuaries are prescribed, when the Purge is gentle,
but only common decoction and syrup.

Potions composed only of two preparations, are twofold, either by decoction
and dissolution, or by infusion and dissolution.

Of decoction and dissolution are made Potions after this form, etc. make a
decoction to iij. in the Colature dissolve of Electuaries, etc. syrup, etc.
mingle them and make a potion.

By infusion and dissolving are made potions after this form, of Rhubarb, etc.
les them be infused, etc. when they are streined dissolve of Electuary, etc. of
Syrup, etc. mingle them, and make a potion.

Those Potions are made with one preparation which consist of simple
dissolution, which is made in urgent cases, where there is not time for
decoctions and infusions, and then purging electuaries are dissolved in broth
or water convenient to vj. or j. in this form,. Electuary, of Betony q. s.
mingle them and make a Potion.

Sometimes powdered Rhubarb may be dissolved in broth for a Diarrhoea or
Dysentery, in this form, Rhubarb powdered, j. ss. let it be given in the
morning in broth; Rhubarb also is given in broth to j to children which cannot
bear more vehement Catharticks.

Manna is also given to children dissolved in broth, to j. to those of greater
age, in affections of the Lungs, to ij.

CHAP. IV. Of Potions corroborating, provoking sleep, killing the Worms, and
the like.
THese Potions because they are prescribed only in one dose, are reckoned under
the name of Potions, though it be now a days a custom in Physic, that they
are often called Juleps for one dose, to distinguish them from vulgar juleps,
which are most commonly prescribed for three doses.

Cordial potions are made of cordial water iij. cordial syrup j. cordial
confection j. cordial powder j. in this form, etc. Mingle them, make a Potion,
(or make a julep for one dose) to be taken at such an hour, for every hour is
fit for such a drink, but chiefly morning and evening.

Potions to provoke sleep, are made of the syrup of Poppies j. cordial water
iij. confection Alkermes ss. or j. in this form,. etc. Mingle them, make a
potion, to be given this night at the hour of sleep.

A Potion against the worms, is made of Purslain water, or water of Grass iij.
syrup of Limons j. confection of Hyacinth j. powder against the worms j. or
some other kind of way.

In other indications the same proportion of ingredients is perpetually to be
observed, that there should be of waters iij. of syrup j. confect. j. powder j.
ss. or ij. at most.

CHAP. V. Of Juleps.
JUleps use to be composed two ways, either of distilled waters, or decoction
of simples.

They are prescribed for the most part for 3 or 4 doses in such a proportion
that for every dose there should be of waters iij. or iiij. of syrups j. in
this form:. of water, etc. Mingle them, make a Julep for three doses to be
taken morning and evening.

Sometimes juices are mingled with the waters in such a proportion, that for
every dose there should be ss. vj. of juices.

Sometime in cooling juleps, some few drops of spirits of Virtriol are
prescribed, which are not set down, but used in this form, of spirits of
Vitriol q. s. to cause a grateful sharpness.

Juleps are composed of decoctions in the same method as altering Apozems,
though with a less dose of simples; yet they differ in this, that
clarification and aromatization are not prescribed in the end, but the form of
them is such.. of Roots, etc. make a decoction to lb j In the Colature dissolve
iij. of syrups. Mingle them, and make a Julep to be taken morning and evening
for three doses.

CHAP. VI. Of Syrups, and first of altering ones.
THere are two sorts of Syrups, Altering, and Purging.

Altering syrups are composed by the Physicians very seldom, because there are
so many ready in the shops upon all occasions.

And therefore magisterial altering syrups, are never or rarely prescribed, but
only those in the shops are used, and that two ways, for either they are
dissolved in other liquors, or else they are administered alone.

How they are dissolved in other liquors, has been shown in Apozems, Juleps,
and Potions.

But moreover, some syrups are usually dissolved in common water, or barley
broth to quench thirst; such are syrup of Maidenhair, of Limons, of Quinces, in
a flux, and they use to be prescribed in this form,. syrup of Maidenhair, iiij.
let it be used with potable water, at time of thirst without meals.

They are given alone and by themselves in affections of the stomach and lungs,
chiefly in weakness of the stomach, syrup of wormwood frequently used, which
is given in the morning in this form,. of syrup of wormwood j. take it in the
morning two hours before meals, continuing so for three days.

In affections of the Lungs, Bechicall syrups are prescribed in this form,.
syrup of Coltsfoot iiij. let it be used by frequently licking it out of a spoon.

CHAP. VII. Of Magisterial purging Syrup.
MAgisterial syrup is composed as a purging Apozeme, and of the same matter,
and with a like Dose of altering simples; but the purgers are prescribed in
almost a double quantity to those of the Apozem, with a double dose of their
correctives also.

Sometimes very efficacious syrups are composed of the juices of herbs and
fruits cleansed, in which the purgatives are infused and boiled, and those
juices ought to be prescribed to iiij, v, or vj lb. because they are much
consumed by the decoction and infusion of Catharticks.

Decoction uses to be made to lb j. or lb j. ss.

And in that is dissolved Sugar as much in quantity as the decoction. Sometime
purging syrups or altering syrups are dissolved to v. or vj. and then the
quantity of sugar is diminished to the quantity of syrup, because syrup is in
the place of sugar.

Sometimes the juices are dissolved to vj. or vij. when the decoction is made
of simple water, and then no syrups are to be dissolved but only sugar.

Sometimes in cold affections of the Lungs, some portion of honey is to be
joined with the sugar, but very seldom.

Afterward it is boiled to Syrup, which is kept for use.

The dose thereof is from j. ss. to ij. according to the greater or less
efficacy of the syrup, and that once or twice in a month.

Lastly, it is taken in broth, altered with convenient herbs, or in melancholy
affections, in whey, or the decoction of cordial fruits and flowers.

All which are prescribed in this form, etc. make a decoction to lb j. in which
dissolve of whitest sugar lb j. Let a syrup be perfectly boiled, clarified, and
aromatized with ij. of Cinnamon; which is to be kept in a glass vessel, of
which take j. ss. or ij. twice in a month with broth, altered with leaves of
Borrage, Buglosse, Maidenhair, and Scabious.

If the Syrup be made of juices, let it be prescribed in this form, of
clarified juices, etc. in which boil leaves of Sena, etc.

CHAP. VIII. Of Vomitories.
THE composition of Vomitories is so manifold and various, that we can scarcely
give certain rules for the composing of them; but various forms of them are to
be borrowed from various Authors, the most principal are those which follow,
which are taken from the three sorts of Vomitories, that is, gentle, moderate,
and vehement.

Gentle Vomitories are composed of lukewarm waters, viij. with ij. of oil and
butter, or a good draught of lukewarm barley water, or very fat broth.

Or of the root of a Pumpion, j. bruised and infused in viij. of barley water,
or Hydromel.

Or of the decoction of the seed of Orach ss. flowers of Dill P. j. to viij.
dissolving simple Oxymel, or syrup of vinegar, ij.

The use of all simples is prescribed in this form,. etc. Make a vomitory to be
taken lukewarm, then after a little walking, put the finger into the throat, or
provoke vomit with a feather dipped in oil.

Moderate Vomitories may be made of Radish roots j. Agarick ss. boiled in x. of
barley water, adding of Oxymel scillit. ij. if thick phlegm abound; or of syrup
of Vinegar, if choler abound.

Or of the roots of Asarabacca, ij. Lettice seed, ss. Broom-flowers, P. ss.
boiled in viij. of Hydromel.

Or of the roots of powdered Asarabacca, ss. dissolved in Mint or Hysopwater.

Vehement Vomitories are made of white Vitriol prepared, ss. or ij. dissolved
in broth, or of Crocus Metallorum, (otherwise called Liver of Antimony) from j.
to ss. infused in iij. of white Wine, or water of Carduus benedictus, with a
little Cinnamon.

CHAP. IX. Of Emulsions.
AN Emulsion is made of sweet Almonds peeled, to j. or j. ss. of the four
greater cold seeds, ss. or j. of seeds of Lettice and whole poppy, where there
is little sleep, ss. bruise them and dissolve them in lb j. of barley water for
iij. doses, and sweeten them with sugar only to iij. or iiij. or with more
pleasing Syrups, as syrup of Violets, syrup of Maidenhair.

The forms of prescribing them is this,. bruise them in a stone mortar, pouring
in by little and little lb ss. of barley water in the Colature, dissolve of
syrup of Violets and Maidenhair ana ij. make an Emulsion for three doses, to be
taken morning and evening.

Sometimes Pine-kernels are added to the foregoing simples in affections of the
breast.

Sometimes to the decoction of barley is added j. of Rose Water, which makes the
Emulsion the sweeter.

CHAP. X. Of Milk.
MIlk is given to people in Consumptions, and wasted by a Hectic Fever; for
others Asses milk is best, where refrigeration or cleansing is wanting; Goats
milk, for nourishing and refreshing.

The use of it is prescribed for a whole month together, especially in the
month of May, the body being first purged; it is given the first to iiij. with
j. of sugar of Roses, increasing every day j. till it comes to viij. increasing
likewise proportionably the quantity of sugar to ij. continuing afterward the
same quantity.

The hour of taking it, is the morning, four hours before meat; in which the
Patient must neither sleep nor stir himself violently.

The form of prescribing them may be such: Let him use Asses milk newly milked
for a whole month, taking the first day iiij. of sugar j. every day increasing
the quantity of milk j. till it come to viij. then let him stay, and let him
take the same quantity every morning four hours before meat; in which the party
must neither sleep nor stir too much.

CHAP. XI. Of Whey.
WHey is prescribed in the spring time for fifteen days or a whole month. In
it are bruised over night cooling herbs, as Fumitory, Cichory, Sorrel, M. j.
ss. or frequently Epithyme in melancholy affections to ss. in which case
sometimes the juice of fragrant Apples is dissolved to j.

The dose is vij. to lb j. in the morning four hours before meat. The form
thereof is thus prescribed,. of Whey q. s. boil it gently and strain it, and in
one pint thereof bruise over night the leaves, etc. strain it in the morning,
adding j. of white sugar, take it in the morning four hours before meat, every
day, continuing a month together.

CHAP. XII. Of sudorifick Decoctions.
SUdorifick Decoctions are commonly composed of the four principal Sudorificks,
Guaiacum, Sassafras, China roots, Sarsaparilla, of which as well sudorifick as
simple diets are composed.

The quantity of sudorificks is prescribed to iiij. or vj. and that of one or
more according to the disposition of the sick party: with this observation,
that Guaiacum is fitter for cold, China root for hot dispositions.

Afterward they are infused in a sufficient quantity of fountain water, that
for every ounce of sudorifick there should be so many lb of water; but infusion
is made for 24 hours upon the hot cinders, and lastly they are boiled to the
consumption of half.

The dose of the decoction is viij. in the morning, covering the body a little
more then ordinary, to provoke sweat more easily.

The form of prescribing them may be thus,. Of the shavings of Guaiacum iiij.
bark of the same, ij. infuse them 24 hours in lb vj. of fountain water, upon
hot cinders, boil them in a double vessel with a gentle fire, and without
smoke, to the consumption of the half, strain them through Hippocrates sleeve,
and let the Colature be kept in a glass vessel; of this take viij. every day
in the morning, covering the body more then ordinary, to provoke sweat the
better, continuing for the space of 20 or 30 days.

Sometimes persons that are more delicate, sweeten them with iij. or iiij. of
Sugar, and ij. of Cinnamon.

All that time that the sick person uses this sudorifical decoction is called a
diet, because then an exact diet is to be observed, attenuating and drying; and
for ordinary drink, the second decoction is prescribed, prepared out of the
remnants of the first, which is called Bochetum.

The remaining part is taken either alone, or that it may be the more
efficacious, add to it j of new sudorifick. It is infused for 8 hours in lb
xij. of fountainwater; it is boiled to the consumption of the fourth part; it
is sweetened and aromatized in this manner,. the remaining part of the foresaid
decoction, infuse it in lb xij of fountain water, upon hot cinders for the
space of 8 hours, boil it to the consumption of the fourth part, strain it
through Hippocrates sleeve, adding of Sugar and Cinnamon q. s. to make it
pleasant. Make a Bochet, to be used for ordinary drink all the time of dieting,
using in the mean while Biscuit with Anise seeds, meat roasted and not boiled,
Mountain-birds stuck with Cloves, or Cinnamon, Raisins, Almonds, and
Pine-kernels parched.

If a simple order of diet be to be gone through, wherein sudorifick potions
are not to be exhibited, but only a drying diet with the use of a Bochet; Then
the Bochet is to be made of ij. of sudorifick infused and boiled in lb xij. of
fountain water, ordering the rest as in the second decoction, in this form:. of
the root of China cut into chips ij. infuse them in lb xij. etc. for twelve
hours, and make a Bochet to be used for ordinary drink for the space of twenty
or thirty days, using Biscot in the same time.

And sometimes a second decoction is prepared in the same manner out of ij. of
new sudorifick, casting away the residence of the former decoction, the virtue
whereof is almost lost.

In every sudorifick diet, this is to be observed, that the belly is for the
most part part bound, which is to be loosened every fourth day with an
emollient Clyster. And furthermore, because by sweat the more thin matter is
evacuated, and the thicker part remains, therefore it is best to give a purging
medicament every eighth day, abstaining then from the use of the sudorifick
Potion.

CHAP. XIII. Of the decoction of an old Cock.
THis decoction is used not seldom in Chronical diseases, as Hypochondriacal
melancholy, Asthma's, and Diuturnal obstructions.

And it is double, Altering, and Purging.

The Altering is made of the same matter which was set down in the altering
Apozem, and sudorificks beside are added to ij. Yet they differ very much in
the manner of prescribing. For in this decoction, sudorificks, seeds, and
fruits are first prescribed, and the belly of an old Cock is filled with them.
Afterward, roots, leaves, and flowers are added in the decoction, in this
form:. of China root, ij. of seeds, etc. bruise those which are to be bruised,
and mingle them together, and fill the belly of an embowelled old Cock with
them, being wearted with blows and running before he be killed; make a
decoction in a sufficient quantity of fountain water (or when there are
obstructions, in three parts of water and one of white wine) adding of roots,
etc. flowers, etc. leaves, etc. boil them till the flesh of the Cock be
separated from the bones, strain and squeeze out the decoction, and keep it in
a glass vessel in a cold place, all the fat being taken off: of which take
viij. every morning for many days.

The Purging decoction is prescribed in the same manner, adding to those
aforesaid purging simples in the same quantity as in the purging Apozem, and
mingle them with those which are put in the belly of the Cock. But commonly in
this decoction is prescribed Sena, Polypody, wild Saffron, Epithyme, Agarick,
Turbith. The form of this decoction is thus:. etc. boil them until the flesh
of the Cock be separated from the bones, of the Colature take lb ij. which is
to be kept in a glass vessel in a cold place, all the fat being first taken
off: of which take lb ss. in the morning for four days every month.

CHAP. XIV. Of Broths.
BRoths are twofold, Altering, and Purging.

The Altering Broths are made of convenient herbs, with a chicken, or with
common broth, so that there be of herbs three or four handfuls.

The Broths most in use are refrigerating broth, in choleric Fevers and hot
distempers of the Liver: in this form,. of leaves etc. boil them with a cock
Chicken, and make broth, to be taken in the morning, continuing it for 8 or 9
days.

There are made sometimes pectoral Apozems in hot affections of the breast of
pectoral simples decocted with a Chicken to the fourth part only, to which is
added of China root j. to be prescribed before other simples. Oft-times opening
Broths are used of opening roots, herbs and seeds, boiled in the said quantity
with common broth half ready.

Restoring Broths are made of a fat Capon disbowelled, and cut in pieces, which
is to be put without any liquor in a glass vessel closely and accurately
stopped, lest any thing breath out, boil it in Balneo Maria to a kind of
rottenness, squeeze out the juice, from which when the fat is separated, keep
in a glass vessel and a cold place for use.

Sometimes in each pint of Broth are added ij. or iij. of cordial juices, sugar
as much, for the patient to use by it self, or with Broth.

CHAP. XV. Of a Bolus.
ABolus is twofold, purging and corroborating.

A purging Bole is made of Cassia only to j. which is only lenitive.

Or of Cassia ss. with ij. or iij. or ss. of other purging Opiate.

Or of purging Opiates one or more to ss. vj. j.

Or of Opiates and purging Electuaries, in that proportion that the quantity of
the purging Opiate be always greater then that of the Electuary, and all
together they must not exceed the quantity of j.

The form of all these is thus prescribed:. of Cassia newly extracted, etc.
make a Bolus with sugar to be taken every morning with syrup of Maidenhair, or
some other more convenient and grateful to the palate.

Sometimes Boles are made of Turpentine to ss. vj. or j. to purge the reins,
which is washed in white wine or some aperitive water, of which the form is
this,. of Venice Turpentine washed, etc. make Boles, which wrap in a kind of
wafer, and let them be taken in a spoon with syrup of Maidenhair, in the
morning (...) or 5 hours before dinner, continuing it for three days.

Corroborating Boles are made of iij. of some conserve or ss. confection ss. or
ij. powder j. in this form,. etc. Make a Bolus with sugar to be taken in the
morning two hours before meat.

Corroborating Boles are prescribed the next day after purgation, to strengthen
the stomach, and other parts which have been weakened by purgation.

CHAP. XVI. Of Opiates.
OPiates are twofold, purging, and corroborating.

Purging Opiates are composed of the shop purging Opiates, purging Electuaries,
powders of simple purgatives, and convenient purging syrup; in such a
proportion that for every ij. of Opiate, there be ij. or iij. of Electuary, and
j. of simple purging Powders.

Sometimes it is made only of Opiates and Electuaries, the simple powders being
omitted.

Sometimes only of Opiates and simple powders, the Electuaries being omitted.

Sometimes of Opiates alone.

Oft-times when the Opiates are to be made gentle, a portion of Cassia is to be
mingled with the Opiates, either alone, or with Electuaries and powders mixed
together.

The quantity of the whole Opiate may not exceed iiij.

But the Dose is from ss. to j. of it self in the form of a Bolus or with the
decoction of fit herbs to be taken once in a week, or twice in a month.

The form of prescribing them is such:. etc. with syrup of Roses solutive, make
an Opiate, of which you may take ss. by it self, or dissolved in the decoction
of Borage, Fumitory and Cichory, once in a week, with great care and good
government of art.

A Corroborating Opiate is composed of Conserves to j. or j ss. Conditements to
ss. j. Confections to ij ss. Powders to iij. ss. vj. with convenient Syrup.

Sometimes for ornament, leaves of gold are mixed N. ij. or iij. and they are
prescribed after the powders. The dose is from ij, to iij. or which is most
usual, about the bigness of a Chestnut, drinking after it convenient liquor, as
some proper distilled water, or white Wine, or red Wine tempered with water.

All which are prescribed in this form:. etc. with syrup, etc. make an Opiate
of which take about the bigness of a Chestnut every day in the morning, two
hours before dinner, drinking after it a little draught of tempered wine, or
borage-water.

Sometimes they are prescribed to be taken two hours before supper, if any
other remedies be to be taken in the morning.

CHAP. XVII. Of Conditements.
Conditements are made in the same manner, as corroborating Opiates, with the
same quantity of conserves, confections, and powders, adding as much white
sugar, or sugar of Roses, as equals the weight of them all, in this form:. of
Conserves, etc. sugar of Roses to the weight of them all, make a Conditement
covered with gold, which may be taken frequently in a spoon by it self, or
dissolved in broths, or with potable water in time of thirst, between meals.

But a Conditement differs in this from an Opiate, because that may be
prescribed to corroborate, or alter all parts; but this only for affects of the
heart and lungs.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Lohoch or Colegma.
LOhochs are convenient only in pectoral affections; to expectorate the humors
contained in the lungs, smooth the roughness thereof, and to stop spitting of
blood.

They are commonly made of Bechical powders to iij. ss. of sugar candied or
penidiate, or of rose tablets vj. j. of convenient syrup, q. s.

Or to the foresaid are frequently added pulps of fruits, as of Raisins, Figs,
Jubebs, to ss.

Lohochs are also made several other ways, but less commonly, which may be
seen in several Authors.

They are prescribed after the following form:. etc. with syrups, etc. Make a
Lohoch, to be used frequently with a stick of Liquorice, licking it by little
and little.

CHAP. XIX. Of Tablets.
TAblets are twofold, Purging and Corroborating.

Purging Tablets are in the shops common, and magisterials are seldom or never
prescribed.

Roborating Tablets are made of simple powder, or compounded ss. vj. of sugar
dissolved in proper water iiij or vj. in this form,. etc. Make Tablets in
weight ij. of which take one every day two hours before meat, drinking, etc. in
the same manner as in a corroborating Opiate.

Tablets are also frequently used in affections of the Lungs, made of
convenient powders in the same method.

Of Pills.
Pills are double, common in shops, or Magisterial.

Those in the shops are prescribed in cold affections especially, and in the
winter season, to evacuate the remote parts from the stomach.

The form of prescribing them is this,. Mass of Pills, etc. let them be softened
with etc. (water or conventent syrup) form 6 or 7 gilt Pills to be taken after
the first sleep.

If the Pills are weak, add gr. iiij. or v. of Diagrid. or Trochis Alhand.

Magisterial Pills which are vulgarly composed by the Physicians according to
several indications, and are vulgarly called usual, because the use of them
ought to be frequent; that is, once in a week, or twice in a month.

They are composed of several purgatives, viz. Aloes, Agarick, Turbith, Hermod.
Rhub. Diagrid. Troches, Athandal, with correctives, all being reduced into
powder, and mingled with convenient syrup.

The Basis of all these Pills is commonly Aloes, and prescribed usually to iij.
or ss. the other purgatives taken together exceed not the quantity of ss. the
correctives to j. or j ss. the quantity of the syrup is not proportioned. The
dose of the Pills is to be measured according to the efficacy of the
purgatives, so that they may not purge vehemently, they must not exceed ss. or
ij.

Sometimes against obstructions, Gum Ammoniack, or Bdellium dissolved in
vinegar, is mixed with the purgatives to ij. or iij.

They are prescribed in this form,. Aloes hepatical etc. make a powder of them
all, and with syrup of Roses solutive, make a mass of Pills, of which let j.
be formed into pills gilt, take N. iij. or iiij. in the morning two hours
before dinner, once in a week.

CHAP. XXI. Of Troches.
TRoches are seldom prescribed by the Physicians, who are content with those
in the shops; yet if a make them, he may easily do it, by taking powders fit
for his intention to j. or ij. and moistning them with convenient liquor or
mucilage, of which being mixed together, make a paste, and of that tablets to be
dried in the shade.

CHAP. XXII. Of Powders.
POwders are prescribed to purge, corroborate, and for other intentions.

Purging powders are composed of simple powders acceptable to the taste, with
their correctives, and sugar, in persons more delicate, the dose whereof is to
be measured according to the efficacy of the purgatives.

These powders are taken dissolved in broth, or other liquor in the morning,
with care and good government.

Among the corroborating powders, those for the stomach are most in use, which
are called digestive; they are made of the sweeter stomachicals, as Corianders,
Anise, Fennel, Cinnamon, and the like to ij. with an equal or double quantity of
sugar, in this form,. etc. an equal or double proportion of sugar; mingle them,
make a powder, of which take one spoonful after meals, eating or drinking
nothing after it.

THE SECOND ARTICLE of the SECOND SECTION: OF The Composition of midling
Medicaments.
CHAP. I. Of Suppositories.
SUppositories are used commonly to loosen the belly; but sometimes, though
very seldom, against some affections of the fundament, and straight gut.

Those that loosen the belly are composed of honey to j. boiled and hardened,
adding fit powders to j. or iiij. but those powders are common salt, Hiera
picra; or if stronger Medicaments be required, Sal gemmae, Ammoniack, hiera
Diacolacynth, Hellebore powdered.

The form of them is thus,. etc. Make Suppositories, of which one anointed with
oil or butter may be put into the fundament as often as need requires.

CHAP. II. Of Clysters.
CLysters, some are mollifying and laxative, some cleansing, others binding,
others easing pain, others for other intentions.

Mollient and laxative, are made of the decoctions of mollifying herbs to lb j.
or lb j. ss. laxative opiates, to j. or j. ss. sometimes of honey, Mercurial
honey, honey of Roses or Violets, to ij. common oil of Lillies or violets to iij.
common salt, or sal gemmae, to j.

But because emollient Clysters are prepared in the shops, therefore they are
never prescribed, but absolutely proposed.

The form of this clyster is such,. of the common emollient Clyster decocted lb
j. ss. in which dissolve etc. mingle them, make a Clyster to be injected in a
convenient hour.

A cleansing Clyster is composed of the decoction of barley, thin bran, and red
Roses, of each one pugill. If it be to assuage also, flowers of Melilot and
Camomil are prescribed to j. or ij. pugils. If for worms in children, Raisins,
and Liquorice, to j. of each.

The quantity of the decoction may not exceed lb j. and in that red sugar may
be dissolved to ij. or honey of Roses with it, the quantity of the sugar being
diminished; the yolk of an egg may be also dissolved N. j. for children, ij.
for grown people.

The quantity of the decoction for children is diminished to lb. ss iij.
quartaeries.

Astringent Clysters are made of the decoction of astringent simples. The dose
being little less then that of the Apozem, and in one lb of the decoction
sugar, honey of Roses, and yolks of Eggs according to the former dose are
dissolved.

Clysters easing pain are made of Goats milk, Sheeps milk, or the decoction of
the head and guts of a Weather to lb j. dissolving sugar and yolks of eggs
according to the foresaid quantity.

Sometimes in very great pains of the guts or parts adjacent, as the reins,
etc. Philonium Romanum is dissolved to j. or ij. or Laudanum opiaticum to gr.
viij. or ss.

Sometimes are made nourishing clysters of broth, sugar and yolks of eggs, in
which to corroborate the more, is dissolved confect. Alker. and of Hyacinth. to
ij.

For the colic pain, are prescribed carminative clysters, of the decoction of
simples that dispell wind; such as those are that attenuate phlegm, after that
manner as is said in the astringent, dissolving in the decoction oil of Rue,
Bays, to iiij. Or else Clysters are made for the same intention, of strong
Wine and oil of Nuts, both to lb ss.

To expel the stone of the reins, are made Clysters of the decoction of
opening simples, dissolving aperitive oils to iij. or iiij. of which the chief
is oil of Scorpions, Turpentine also is added dissolved with the yolk of an
egg to j.

CHAP. III. Of Injections.
INjections are made into diverse parts, as the womb, bladder, ears, and other
hollownesses of the parts, whether caused by nature or disease, as fistula's
and the like.

Injections are made into the womb to move the months, cleanse the filth
thereof, assuage pain and inflammations, and on many other occasions.

These injections are made of the decoction of convenient simples, the dose
being little less then of an Apozem, the decoction is made to lb j. which is
cost into the womb with a syringe, commonly called a Metrenchyta.

Or such Injections are made of the juices of herbs purified, or distilled
waters.

Some things are not seldom dissolved in the said liquors, as syrups,
electuaries, troches, powders, and the like.

The other Injections are prescribed after the same method, which, as the
before mentioned, being particular Remedies, are to be found in the books of
particular practice.

CHAP. IV. Of Pessaries.
PEssaries in various affections of the womb are thrust into the neck thereof,
being formed like the thick and long singer. Sometimes for Virgins they are
made like little bals, for the easier admission, and then they are called
Mascals. Pessaries are made, first of Opiates or ointments only to j. ss. ij.
sucked up in soft flax, and wrapped in silk or fine linen. Secondly, of
convenient powders to j. j. ss. moistened in boiled honey, like a suppository;
of which a pessary is made. Thirdly, of the juices of herbs sucked up in cotton,
to iij. with which powders may be mingled according to discretion, to ss. vj.

They are prescribed in this form,. etc. make a pessary about the bigness of
the great finger, which wrapped in silk and bound with a string, is to be put up
into the neck of the womb.

CHAP. V. Of Errhines.
AN Errhine is a liquid Medicament, which being snuffed up into the nostrils
draws the humors from the brain, especially phlegm, and is used for several
affections of the nostrils.

It is composed of the juices of herbs appropriated to that purpose, which are
extracted out of bruised leaves M. iiij. with iiij. vj. or viij. of white Wine,
Cephalicks being added to the leaves for correction, and sometimes j. of Aqua
vitae for penetration.

Or of the decoction of fit simples consisting of half a dose of an Apozem to
viij. in which are dissolved sometimes juices to ij. or iij. honey or syrup to
j. or ij. powders to ss. or j. They are prescribed in this form:. etc. Make an
Errhine to be used lukewarm in the morning two hours before meals, the mouth
being filled before with water.

CHAP. VI. Of Sternutatories.
STernutatories are made to draw phlegm from the brain, and in sleepy affections
to excite the drowsy expulsive faculty thereof.

It is composed of the powders of sharp things, as pepper, sneezing-wort,
mustard seed, seed of Stavisacre, root of white Hellebore, Euphorbium.

The quantity of all those must not exceed ij. to which you may add for the
safety of the head j. of dry Marjoram.

Note that Euphorbium is very vehement, and not to be prescribed above gr. iij.
or iiij.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Mingle them, and make a very thin
powder to be blown into the nostril through a small quill.

CHAP. VII. Of a Gargarism.
GArgarisms are made in several affections of the mouth and parts adjacent.

They are composed of the decoction of simples, equalling the dose of an Apozem
to lb j. in which are dissolved convenient syrups to iij. or iiij. but because
most frequently astringent Gargarisms are prepared to repel fluxions,
therefore Diamorum dianucum, and syrup of Myrtle, and juice of Roses are most
commonly dissolved therein: and often honey of Roses, if cleansing withal be
needful.

They are sometimes also made of distilled waters to lb j. dissolving the
aforesaid syrups.

They are prescribed in this form,. etc. Make a Gargarism to be used every hour.

CHAP. VIII. Of Masticatories.
MAsticatories draw phlegm plentifully from the brain.

They are made of the roots of wild Pellitory only, cut in pieces and steeped
in vinegar.

Or of the powders of many simples mingled with wax, of which little bals are
made. The most usual simples of which they are made, are the roots of wild
Pellitory, Ginger, Orrice, Mustard seed, Stavisacre, long Pepper, Mastick, to
which Cephalicks are added, as Cloves, Nutmegs.

The quantity of the powder may not exceed ss. the quantity of the wax is not
determined.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Make a powder of them all to be
mixed with white wax, whereof make many little bulls, chew one of them in the
morning with the head downward, spitting often.

CHAP. IX. Of Collyriums.
COllyriums are composed in many forms, either in the form of an ointment, or a
liquor, or a cataplasm.

The most usual are those which are liquid, which are truly and properly called
Collyriums.

They are composed of distilled waters to iij. or iv. with which mingle
convenient powders, as Tutty prepared, white Troches, of Rhasis, washed
Antimony, Sarcocol, steept in woman's milk etc. to j. or j ss. sometimes juices
are mingled with them, or the white of an egg beaten, to j. or ij.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Make a Collyrium to be instilled
into the eyes morning and evening.

The other forms of Collyriums are taken from particular practice; because they
require an exact choice of remedies, and an accurate preparation, and dose, by
reason of the exquisite sense of the part.

THE THIRD ARTICLE of the SECOND SECTION: OF The Composition of external
Medicaments.
CHAP. I. Of an Epithem.
AN Epithem is chiefly applied to the heart and liver, to alter and corroborate
those parts.

It is twofold, liquid, and solid.

That which is liquid is made of distilled waters to viij. or lb j the juices
of fruits, as Limons, Granates, fragrant Apples to ij. or iij. of vinegar of
Roses to j. or j ss. of cordial powders to ij. iij.

Note, when sharp juices of Limons and Granates are prescribed, there is no
need of vinegar.

Note also in an Epithem for the Heart, if the lungs be peculiarly affected,
sharp things are not to be prescribed, because they hurt the breast.

Also in an Epithem for the Liver a greater quantity of sharp juices or vinegar
is to be prescribed then in an Epithem for the heart.

Sometimes beside cordial powders, cordial confections are also mixed with
them, Alkermes, or Hyacinth, to j. or ij. and Troches of Caphura in a
refrigerating Epithem to ss. Saffron in a heating Epithem, to gr. v.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Make a liquid Epithem to be
applied to the region of the heart lukewarm, frequently with scarlet clothes
dipped and squeezed in this liquor.

The solid Epithem is only applied to the heart, and is composed of cordial
conserves to iij. consections ss. powders j. ss. or ij. with convenient cordial
water.

The form of them is thus,. etc. with Rose water, make a solia Epithem to be
applied to the region of the heart, with a scarlet cloth.

This solid Epithem is not seldom prescribed alone, where there is a greater
necessity of corroborating then altering. The liquid one is never applied, but
the solid one must be applied after it presently. Therefore the Physicians use
to prescribe the liquid and solid one one after another, adding in the end of
the prescription, make a solid Epithem to be applied to the region of the heart
presently after the liquid one.

To Epithems are referred the younger sorts of Animals dissected in two through
the middle, sprinkled with cordial powders, and applied to the region of the
heart. Those animals are Pigeons or Whelps: the form of prescribing them is
thus: Apply to the region of the heart a young Pigeon cut in two in the middle,
and sprinkled with powder of cold Diamargarite Electuary.

Or,. of the powder of cold Diamargarite Electuary ij. sprinkle the inside of a
young Pigeon cut in two, to be applied to the region of the heart.

Sometimes those Animals are applied to the forepart of the head shaved, and
sprinkled with Cephalic powder, to strengthen the brain.

CHAP. II. Of Fomentations.
FOmentations are made in diverse parts, but most commonly in the side, against
Pleuretick pains on the stomach, to corroborate it, on the Hypochondriums, to
remove obstructions.

For the sides, decoctions are made of Emollient simples with addition of
Anodynes and Resolvers, all which are prescribed in the dose of an Apozem in
this form,. etc. make a decoction of them all, with which frequently foment the
side that is in pain, with a Hogs bladder half full of the decoction.

For the stomach, are prescribed stomachical simples in lesser dose then of an
Apozem, to which are added Spices, or Cloves, Nutmegs, Spikenard, in a
sufficient quantity, viz. of every one ij. iij. or ss. Make a decoction in
equal parts of fountain water, and of astringent red Wine added at the end; or
if no binding be required, in stead of fountain water, smiths water is to be
prescribed.

The form of it is thus,. etc. Make a decoction in equal parts, etc. with which
foment the region of the stomach while it is warm, a good while before meals,
with two of the foresaid bladders half full of simples.

For the Hypochondriums is made a decoction of opening simples in the said
dose, some emollient things being mixed therewith in equal parts of fountain
water, and white Wine added at the end; so that a hot distemper do not hinder
it.

The form of it is thus,. etc. Make a decoction, etc. with which frequently
foment the Hypochondriums with linen clothes dipped in the warm decoction and
squeezed. If one Hypochondrium be pained only, you must prescribe that the
region of the spleen, or liver be fomented, according as this or that part is
affected, those simples being mixed in the decoction, which concern the parts
most especially.

CHAP. III. Of Bathes.
BAthes are prepared for many intentions, viz. to refrigerate and moisten, to
move the months, help conception, and in external affections, as scabs and
leprosy.

They are composed of roots 3, 4 or 5, ana lb j. lb j ss. herbs 5, 6. of every
one fasc. j. of seeds, from lb ss. to lb j. fruits, from lb j. to lb j ss.
flowers, to M. iij. or iiij.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Make a decoction for a bath, to
bathe in warm, without sweat, twice a day, for two or three days.

CHAP. IV. Of a Semi-cupe.
A Semi cupe, is nothing else, but a half bath, which is but up to the navel of
the Patient.

It is made of the same simples with the Bath, the dose being half as much, and
prescribed as follows, R. etc. Make decoction for a Semi-cupe, for the
patient to sit in from the knees to the navil morning and evening a good while
before meals, for two or three days, or when necessity requires, if it be
prescribed to ease pain.

CHAP. V. Of Oils.
Oils are very seldom composed by the Physicians, because they are ready in the
shops upon all occasions: but if any one desire the way of composing Oils, he
may thus proceed.

Prescribe first of common oil, or of the shops, of one or more lb ss. of
powdered simples, j. of juice, wine, or other liquor fit for the purpose, ij.
or iij. boil them to the consumption of the juices, squeeze them out strongly,
and make an Oil to be kept for use.

If the shop Oils are only prescribed, as is often done, or whether they be
composed by the Physician, the form of them is thus:. etc. Mingle them, make an
Oil, wherewith to anoint such a part, hot or lukewarm, warm clothes being also
applied.

Or. etc. Mingle them, make an Embrocation upon such a part, applying etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Liniments.
LIniments are made of the shop Oils, with greases, butter, marrow, or
mucilages in such a proportion, that the quantity of the oils ought to be
double to that matter of which the Liniment consists; which is betwixt an oil
and an unguent.

Or in the place of grease or butter, wax is prescribed in such a quantity that
for j. of oil, there be j. of wax; yet commonly the proportion of the wax is
not set down, but in the end is prescribed of wax q. s. sometimes powders are
mixed to ss. for j. of oil.

Or lastly, a Liniment is made of shop oils in a double quantity, adding, if it
be requisite, powders in the same quantity.

The quantity of the Liniment is prescribed according to the bigness of the
part affected, commonly to iiij. or vj.

The form thereof is thus:. etc. Make a Liniment for the part affected, with
which the part affected is to be anointed while it is hot, still applying warm
clothes.

CHAP. VII. Of Ointments.
Ointments are composed of oils, powders and wax in such a proportion, that for
j. of oil, there be of powder j. j ss. of wax ij. yet the quantity of wax is
not prescribed, but only they say of wax q. s.

The quantity of the whole mass is prescribed proportionably to the bigness
of the part to be anointed, and the length of time wherein it must be used, to
v. vj. or viij. the form thereof thus,. etc. Make an ointment to anoint the
part affected.

Frequently the most efficacious unguents are made of oils to iv. v. or vj.
powders to ss. vj. juices half as much as the oil, or a little more, so that
they may boil to the consumption of the juices, adding afterward of wax q. s.
or sometimes of shop ointments j ss. ij. q. s.

The form of them is thus:. etc. Let them boil to the consumption of the juice.
In the liquor squeezed out dissolve of wax etc. Make an ointment.

Note, that in the aforesaid ointments, fats, marrows, butter, and mucilages
are often mingled, which are to be taken for oil, and gums, as Ammoniack,
Bdellium, etc. which are in stead of wax.

Ointments are also made of the shop ointments to ij. oil in the same quantity
more or less, powders to ij. or iij. wax q. s.

Sometimes ointments of the shops are prescribed alone without any other
addition.

CHAP. VIII. Of Emplasters.
EMplasters are commonly composed of oil, powders, and wax, or of such things
as are of an oily substance, as grease, marrow, butter, mucilages, or such
things as are like wax, as gums, pitch, rosin.

The proportion of these is such, that for j. of oil there be of powder vj. of
wax j ss. the quantity of the whole mass is the same with that of the ointment.

Emplasters are also made of the shop-plasters to j. or j ss. powder to ss. or
vj. oil j. wax q. s. adding a little turpentine.

Or else only of the shop plasters; in bigness proportioned to the part
affected.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Make an Emplaster, to be spread
upon leather, and applied to such a part.

Note, that the figure of the Emplaster is prescribed in many parts, for the
forepart of the head like the letter T. or an ovall figure for the stomach,
like a buckler; for the spleen, like an oxes tongue; for the womb, round; for
the kidney, foursquare; for other parts the shape is not determined, but only
is said, Make an Emplaister of a convenient bigness.

CHAP. IX. Of a Cataplasm.
A Cataplasm is commonly made of roots, leaves, seeds, fruits, amounting to the
dose of a fomentation, which are boiled in convenient liquor, afterward they
are bruised and strained through a hair seive, adding of powders or meal ij.
iij. or iv. of oils, or greases, iij. or iiij.

The form of prescribing them is thus:. etc. Boil them all, bruise them in a
stone mortar, and pass them through a a hair seive, adding etc. make a
Cataplasm, and apply it to the part affected.

Very often after the use of the fomentation, a Cataplasm is applied, and is
prepared of the remaining part thereof, when there is an intention to mollify
or resolve, etc. in this form,. the residence of the foresaid fomentation,
bruise them in a mortar, etc.

Sometimes it is made of fruits roasted under the cinders, as in a loosnesse of
the belly, and a dysentery of Quinces roasted under the cinders N. iij. or iiij.
according to the bigness of them; or more certainly to lb j. lb j ss. bruised
and streined, adding astringent powders in the said dose, and a little red
wine, if it be requisite.

In a flux of the belly, a Cataplasm is made of crusts of bread steeped in Wine
to lb ss. or quar. iij. to which are added corroborating and astringent
powders, to j. or ij.

Or to assuage pain in inflammations, a Cataplasm is made of crumbs of white
bread steeped in milk to lb ss. two yolks of eggs, Saffron j. sometimes of oil
of Roses q. s.

CHAP. X. Of a Vesicatory.
A Vesicatory is twofold, either out of the shops, or Magisterial.

In the shops is used a vesicatory Emplaster which is often prescribed by the
Physicians in this form,. of the mass of vesicatory Emplaster j. or j ss.
spread it upon leather, and make an Emplaster about the bigness of the palm of
the hand to be applied to the hinder part of the neck, or to what other part
shall seem requisite.

Magisterial is composed of sharp leaven j. powdered Cantharides iij. with
vinegar of Roses, to make a vesicatory Emplaster.

Sometimes in affections of the eyes and teeth vesicatories are applied behind
the ears in the form of a half moon, in this form,. of the mass of vesicatory
Emplaster j. form two Emplasters in the form of a half moon, to be applied
behind each ear.

CHAP. XI. Of little Bags.
LIttle bags are prescribed for two reasons chiefly, to resolve any cold, thick
humor settled in any part; so such little bags are applied to the head
frequently in the time of sudorifick dietings, after the taking of the
sudorifick potion, or to strengthen chiefly the heart and stomach.

Little bags made to resolve, are most commonly composed of millet to lb j.
common salt lb ss. discussing seeds, as Anise, Fennel, Fenugreek, Bay Berries,
to lb ss. iij.

They are prescribed in this form:. etc. fry them in a pan pouring on them by
little and little generous wine q. s. put them in two little bags, which are to
be applied hot one after another, sprinkled first with Aqua vitae.

Corroborating little bags, are made of the powders of roots, woods, barks,
spices ij. ij ss. to which Cyprian or Violet powder is sometimes added to ss.
Mosch and Amber to gr. iiij. vj. ss.

They are prescribed in this form:. etc. Make a powder of them all to be put in
a musked cotton, and with red silk pricked in many places, make a quilt, which
being hung about the neck is to be carried upon the region of the heart or
stomach.

CHAP. XII. Of Quilts.
QUilts do imitate the corroborating little bags designed to corroborate and
heat the brain.

They are made of odoriferous Cephalicks, as roots, to j. leaves, to M. ij. or
iij. flowers, to P. ij or iij. spices, ss. to which may be added Violet and
Cyprian powder, ss. Storax, Benzoin, j. or ij. Musk ss.

The form of them is thus prescribed:. etc. Make a powder to be put in a musked
cotton, and with silk cloth pricked in many places, make a Quilt to be carried
upon the head, or sowed to the cap.

Sometimes two Quilts are prescribed, one for nights, another for days, and
then the quantity of the powder is to be doubled; and so to be prescribed, Make
two Quitts, one to be sowed in the cap, the other to be worn by night.

CHAP. XIII. Of Frontals.
A Frontal is frequently applied to assuage pain in the head, and provoke
sleep, of the four greater cold seeds, Lettice and white Poppy, to ss or vj.
flowers of Roses, Violets, and Water Lillies, p. iij. adding for strength
Chermes, to ss. powder of the three Saunders, to j. sometimes flowers of
Camomil, and Melilote, ana p ss. which ease pain, and do not heat very much.

The form of them all is thus:. etc. Make a thick powder of them all to be put
in two linen clothes, which being sprinkled with vinegar, is to be applied to
the forehead at the hour of sleep.

A Frontal is made sometimes in a moist form, near the nature of an oxyrhodine,
and more intensely refrigerates, and provokes sleep in Phrensies and burning
Fevers, and long watchings. It is composed of Populeon ointment, to j. oil of
Roses, to ss half the white of one Egg, adding a little vinegar of Roses, in
this form:. etc. beat them all together, and moisten flax therein, and so apply
them to the forehead between two linen clothes.

Sometimes are added conserves of Roses, Violets, to ss. or vj.

FINIS.
These Books following are to be sold by Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard.
AN Exposition, with Practical Observations on the Nine first Chapters of the
Proverbs, by Francis Tailor Minister of Canterbury, in quarto.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the whole Book of Canticles, in
quarto, by John Robotham, Minister of the Gospel.

An Idea, or body of Church Discipline in the Theorick and Practick, by Mr
Rogers, in quarto.

Imputatio Fiaei; Or a Treatise of Justification; wherein the imputation of
Faith for righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4.5, 6.) is explained, by Mr. John
Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel, in quarto.

The Right of Dominions, or the Prerogative of Kings, proved from scripture, by
Dr. Welden.

Lucas Redivivus, or the Gospel-Physician, prescribing (by way of meditation)
divine Physic to prevent diseases, not yet entered upon the soul, by John
Anthony Doctor in Physic, in quarto.

Mercy in her Exaltation, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Tailor, by Mr. John Goodwin, in quarto.

Anabaptists Meribah, or Waters of Strife, being an Answer to Mr. Tho. Lamb
Merchant, by Mr. Price one of Mr. John Goodwins Congregation.

The natural man's case stated, or an exact map of the little world, Man, in
seventeen Sermons, by Mr. Christopher Love; to which is added a Sermon preached
at his Funeral, by Mr. Thomas Manton of Newington, in octavo.

Gods glory in man's happiness, or the freeness of Gods grace electing us, by
Francis Tailor of Canterbury, in octavo.

The Lords Prayer unclasped, being a vindication of it, against all
Schismatics and Heretics, called Enthusiasts and Fratra cilli, by James
Harwood, B. D.

Hippolytus Translated out of Seneca, by Edm. Prestwich.

Gospel public worship, or the Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and
Exposition of Romans 12. from verse. 1, to 8. describing the complete pattern of
Gospel Worship.

Also an Exposition of the 18. Chapter of Matthew; to which is added a
discovery of Adams threefold estate in Paradise, viz. Moral, Legal, and
Evangelical, by Thomas Brewer, in octavo.

A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live well;
the other minding all how to die well, by Tho. Fuller Author of the Holy State.

Pearls of Eloquence, or the school of Complements, wherein Ladies, and
Gentlewomen may accommodate their Court by practice, by Will. Elder Gent. in 12.

The doctrine of laying on of hands vindicated and asserted, being an Answer to
Lieut. Col. Paul Hobson, in quarto.

The Male of the Flock, a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, out of the 4.
of Malachy, by Mr. Aggas Minister of Chynis.

The Tryers and Ejectors tried and cast by the Laws of God and men, by J.
Goodwin.

The Grand Inquiry who is the righteous Man, by Will. Moore Minister at Whaley
in Lancashire.

The just man's Defense, being the Declaration of the Judgment of James
Arminius, concerning Election and Reprobation.

FINIS.
A Dictionary Explaining all the difficult words in this Treatise.
A.
ABdomen, The belly or paunch. Acidity, sharpness, sowreness. Acrisy, want of a
Crisis. vide Crisis. Adolescency, growing age. Agglutinate, to fasten or glue
together. Aliment, whatever is taken into the body to nourish it. Alommous, of
the nature of allom. Alopecia, shedding of the hair. Alysmus, unquietness of
the mind. Amaritude, bitterness, sharpness. Ametry, immoderateness, excess in
proportion. Amnion, skin next the child wrapping it all over. Anacatharsis,
purging out, expelling by purge. Analogy, likeness, resemblance. Anastomosis,
an opening of the mouths of the veins whereby blood issues. Anodyne, a
medicine to assuage pain. Antiperistasis, the concurrence and jarring of
contraries. Aorta, the root of all the arteries which serve the whole body.
Apertive, opening. Apposition, putting together, joining. Apozeme, a medicine
made of broth of several herbs and other ingredients. Apyrexy, the remitting of
a fever. Aqueous, watery. Aridity, dryness, drought. Aromatize, to perfume,
sweeten. Arthritical, gouty, diseased in the joints. Arteria aspera, the
windpipe. Asperity, roughness. Astriction, binding together. Asthma,
difficulty of breathing. Atrabilary, troubled with black choler. Atrophy, want
of nourishment when the body pines away. Auctive, increasing, causing growth.
B
BEchical, belonging to a cough. Bilious, choleric. Boulimia, an insatiable
hunger. Bronchia, the hollow gristly pipes that spread themselves through the
body of the lungs, being branches of the windpipe. Bronchorele, swelling in
the windpipe. Bubo, a sore in the groin.
C.
CAcochymy, the abounding of evil humors. Calcined, burned to ashes in a
crucible. Calidity, heat. Callosity, a brawny hardness in the skin.
Carminative, medicines that break the wind. Cartilage, gristle. Carotides,
branches of the great artery going up to the head with the jugular veins.
Carnosity, fleshiness. Caries, foulness, rottenness, or corruption of a bone.
Cataplasme, a pultise. Catarrhe, a defluxion of the humors from the brain.
Catoche, a waking drousiness and dullness of the senses. Cavity, hollowness.
Caustic, medicines to burn the skin for issues. Cephalic, belonging to the
head. Chorion, the outmost skin wrapping the child all over. Chyle, white juice
coming out of the meat digested in the stomach. Cicatrize, to bring to a scar,
or close up a wound Colature, straining. Collyrium, an eyessalve. Coma, heavy
and long sleep. Condensation, a thickening. Congelation, freezing together.
Consistence, body stiffened with cold, or substance. Constipation, stopping up.
Contiguity, nearness. Corneatunica, a coat of the eye like horn. Corrode,
biting, fretting. Crisis, a breaking away of the disease by natures conquest of
the cause. Crassity, grosness.
D.
Decoction, the liquor wherein things are boiled. Defecated, cleansed from
dregs. Deliration, dotage, raving, talking idly. Deliquium, a fainting or
swouning. Density, thickness. Deterse, scoured, cleansed. Diabete, a plentiful
sending forth of urine, which a violent thirst and consumption succeeds.
Diagridiate, medicines that have scammony in them. Diametrically, directly
opposite. Diapedesis, an issuing of blood through the pores of the veins.
Diaphanous, transparent, clear. Diaphoretick, sweats caused by nature oppressed
with a malignant humor and forcibly driving it out. Diaphragma, the midriffe.
Diastole, the extending or swelling of an artery. Diathesis, disposition.
Discrete, quantity uncontinued, parted. Dislocation, displacing. Disparity,
unevenness. Diuretics, medicines provoking urine. Dyscracy, evil temper or
disposition. Dysenteria, qloudy flux. Dyspnaea, snortness of breath.
E.
EMbrocation, bathing, bedewing, moistening. Emplastick, sticking.
Emprosthotonus, a Cramp in the forepart of the body. Empyema, a corrupt matter
between the breast and lungs following a pleurisy. Emulsion, milkes made of
cool seeds. Eneorema, that which hangs like a cloud in urine Enaergetically,
effectually. Ephemeral, daily returning. Epiala, a fever produced by cold
phlegm. Epicrasis, a gentle evacuation of bad humors, and receiving good
instead. Epilepsie, a convulsion of the whole body by fits Epiploon, the caul.
Epoulotick, causing or inducing a scar. Erosion, fretting, eating. Eruginous,
rusty. Erisipelas, a swelling caused by choler. Exacerbation, the fit of a
disease. Excoriation, fleaing the skin away. Eucrasy, a good well disposed
temper.
F.
FArinaceous, mealy, like meal. Fissure, cleaving, dividing, parting. Friable,
apt to crumble, short. Frigidity, coldness. Fuliginous, smoky, misty. Fungous,
spungy.
G.
GIbbosity, crookedness of the back. Glasteous, of the color of woad.
Glutinous, clammy like glue. Gracility, slenderness. Gravative, burdensome,
heavy. Gravity, heaviness. Grumous, full of clodds or lumps. Gypseous, limy.
H.
HAbit, the whole bulk and substance of the body. Hallucination, error in
judgment. Haemorrhagia, breaking forth of the blood from any part of the body.
Haemorrhoides, veins of the fundament, to which leeches are applied.
Hepatitides, veins coming out of the liver. Heterogeneous, of another nature or
kind. Homogeneous of the same nature or kind. Humidity, moisture. Hydromel,
honey and water. Hypochondrium, theforepart of the belly about the sides and
short ribs above the navel. Hypogastrium, the lower part of the belly under the
navel. Hypostasis, the settling of urine. Hysterical, troubled with fits of the
mother.
I.
IChor, raw unconcocted blood. Idiopathy, any ones particular and proper
affection. Idiosyncracy, any ones proper and peculiar temper Igneous, fiery,
burning. Immobility, staiedness, fixedness, not moveable. Intestinum rectim,
the straight gut. Intercostal, between the ribs. Invalidate, to weaken.
Irrepent, creeping in secretly.
L.
LAevity, smoothness. Levity, lightness. Lienous, troubled with the spleen.
Lienteria, a flux when meat goes away unconcocted. Lipothymia, fainting or
swouning. Lipyria, an hot fever, the outward parts being cold.
Lithontripticks, medicines to break the stone. Lubricity, slipperiness.
Luxation, loosening of one joint from another.
M.
MAgisterial, medicines invented by a Physician for his patient contrary to
common ones in shops. Malacia, immoderate lust of women with child Marasmus, a
consuming fever. Masticatory, medicines to be chewed to bring away rheum.
Membranes, skin or coat of the arteries or veins. Meninx, the filme enwrapping
the brain. Mesaraick veins, little veins conveying the chyle from the stomach
to the liver. Mesenterium, the skin which knits the guts together. Morbifick,
matter causing the disease.
N.
NArcotick, stupifying medicines which dull the sense of feeling, and cause
deep sleep. Nauseousness, sick stomach inclining to vomit. Nephritical,
troubled with pain in the reins. Nephrocatarticks, medicines to purge the
reins. Nidorous, swelling of burnt fat, or scorched meat
O.
OBesity, fatness. Obturation, shutting, stopping. Oesophagus, the mouth of the
stomach. Oleaginous, oily. Ophthalmia, an inflammation of the eyes.
Opisthotonus, a convulsion when the body is drawn back. Organ, peculiar parts
of the body. Osseous, bony, full of bones. Oxycratium, vinegar and water
mingled. Oxydorticks, medicines making the eyesight quick. Oxyrohodine, vinegar
of roses. Oxysaccharum, syrup of vinegar and sugar.
P.
PAraphrenitis, a hot distemper communicated to the brain causing a disease
like a frenzy. Paregoricall, mitigating, asswaging. Parenchyma, the substance
of the bowels. Paroxysme, a fit of any disease. Pathognomonical, properly
signifying the species of the disease. Pathology, treatise of diseases.
Pepasmus, the producing a thing to ripeness and concoction. Pepsis, concoction,
ripeness, digestion. Peripneumony, an inflammation of the lungs. Peritoneum,
the inner coat of the belly which covers the gut. Pharmaceutick, any medicines
made by the Apothecary. Phlegmon, an inflammation or swelling caused by blood.
Phthisis, consumption, corruption. Physiology, treatise of nature. Pica, lust
of women with child. Pituitous, flegmy. Plethora, abounding and fullness of
blood. Pleura, a thin skin investing the inside of the ribs. Podagrical, gouty.
Polypus, an excrescency of flesh hanging down to the lower part of the nose
like the fish Polypus. Porraceous, green, of the color of leeks. Primigenious,
primitive, first produced. Procatarctick, first working, primary occasions, and
causes. Puerility, child's age. Pulsifick, causing to beat. Pungitive, pricking.
Purulent, full of matter and corruption. Pyrotick, hot, burning.
Q.
Quadruple, fourfold.
R.
RArity, thinness. Refrigeration, cooling. Respiration, breathing. Retentive,
power whereby the parts hold fast nourishment drawing back of blood or humor
from the parts affected.
S.
Salprunellae, saltpeter purified with brimstone Salsuginous, salt. Salubrity,
healthiness. Sarcotick, producing flesh. Scirrhus, an hard swelling without
pain. Sediment, settling of urine. Semeiotick, showing the signs or Symptonmes
of diseases. Serum, wheyish humor affording matter of urine. Siccity, dryness.
Spagyricks, Chemical Physicians. Spasmus, a cramp or convulsion. Spermatick,
full of seed. Spinalis medulla, marrow of the backbone. Spumous, frothy.
Struma, a swelling in the neck, the kings evil, or a bunch in the back.
Sudoriferous, causing sweat. Superficies, the outside of any thing.
Suppuration, a collection of matter in an impostume when it is ready to break.
Syderation, blasting with heat. Syllogizing, reasoning by argument. Symbolize,
to be like. Symmetry, just proportion. Symptom, an evil disposition of body
which depends upon and accompanies a disease. Synochical, continual,
symptomatical fever without fits, caused by a foregoing disease. Systole,
contraction, falling or sinking of the artery.
T.
TAblets, medicines made up four square. Tenesmus, a continual desire of going
to stool, and voiding nothing butslime or bloody matter. Tensive, stretching
out. Tetanus, an extending cramp. Therapeutick, treatise of healing medicines.
Tophaceous, sandy. Transpiration, passage of vapors through the pores.
Trochissated, made up in form of a little bowl.
V.
VAletudinary, sickly. Ventricle, the stomach. Vertebra, the turning bones of
the whole back. Vertigo, swimming in the head. Vesicatory, medicines applied to
the skin to cause blisters. Vitelline, like the yolk of an egg. Vitreous, like
glass. Ureters, passages conveying the urine from the kidney to the bladder.
Vulnerary, belonging to wounds.
FINIS.

