The Right PICTURE OF KING OLIURE, from top to toe.

That all the World may a false Rebel know.

Whereunto is added, His Genealogy, and the Memorialls of all his Worthy Acts
from the beginning of his reign, to his present routing in IRELAND.

By PHILO REGIS, Written in Rhyme Doggerill for the benefit of all His SVBJECTS
at WESTMINSTER.

Behold your KING! Jan. 2d Printed at the Sign of the Traitors Head within
Bishops-Gate, and are to be sold to all them that work for Sir THOMAS. 1649.

The Picture of King NOLL, from top to toe.
THE ARGUMENT.
OF Nolls Nose my Muse now sings,
his power, force, and might:
Subduing Kingdoms, murdering Kings,
and winning all by fight.
HIS PICTURE.
NOlls Nose is toasted, his Jowle is roasted,
his Horns do fear no knocks,
His Ears hang down, from his bald Crown
made bare with the French P --
Of all the Brewers, my Muse assures,
Noll bears the comely grace?
His Lips do blopper, he bears his Copper
in his Brazzen Face.
Nolls sawcer Eyes stairs in the Skies,
his Teeth like Hedge stakes stand;
He strikes his Breast, and tells the rest,
that God troops in Ireland.
Nols Chaps does wag, his Tongue does brag,
his Brains do deceive all:
And if his Neck, the Hemp does check,
he then may escape a fall.
Nols Mouth devoures; Kings, Crowns, and Powers,
his Gullet stretches wide;
His Stomach good, as Kentish VVood,
old Mallet, or young Pride.
Nols Shoulders full, like a Town-Bull,
can bear the State a pick-pack,
His Lips can meet, and the Sisters greet,
when he is at Tub-tick-tack.
Nols Arms hangs by, assuredly,
from's Shoulders on each side:
His wrists do join, makes me devine,
he shall be hanged with Pride.
Nols theevish Hands, as the Case stands,
do pilfer all our goods:
His Nails do claw, at Truth and Law,
he thirsts for our Bloods.
Nols Breast may well, be termed a Hell,
his Heart so full of Treason,
His Ribs does crack, his Conscience wrack,
his Maw will brook no Reason.
Nols Sides and Back, do Sear-cloath lack,
since Peter's was his Pander;
He took such pains, he ^un in the Reins,
yet since made Hugh Commander.
Nols Guts does ache, like Bull at Stake,
since Lilburnes Dogs did rouse him,
He did defile, himself the while.
brave Towzer he did towze him.
But out behind, flew such a Wind,
from his Back-doore with powder,
That Bradshaw Jack, quaked at the crack,
and said he nere heard louder.
Oh! but Nols Hanch, the Devils Panch,
that devoures all our Treasure;
His P^zzle too, no more can do
the ^isters any pleasure.
The Surgeon sure, made him endure,
for's Treason in a Tub,
Which made his Wife at mortal strife,
Cornelious did him rub.
Nols Hanger-byes caused then the cries,
of many a lecherous Sister.
His Wife did get one that would fit,
Morly devoutly kissed her.
Nols Knees and Thighs none could divise
how they should hang together:
His Calves were shrunk so by that punck,
his Skin looked like tand Leather.
Nolls runagate Feet, stradled in the Street,
full half a yeard or more:
His Legs were shrunk his flesh so stunke,
that he nere since could whore.
Thus have you him from top to toe,
drawn naked to your view,
The dismal Author of our woe,
since hanging is his due.
The Genealogy of Noll Cromwell, and his direct Line, since the Creation,
descending from his first Parents ZIMRI and CORBY.
A Than begat Zimri, Zimri begat Corah, Corah begat Dathan, Dathan begat
Abiram, Abiram begat Shimei, Sihmei begat Achitophel of Jezebell, Achitophel
begat Absalom, Absalom begat Athaliah, of Athaliah was borne Judas that
betrayed Christ, Judas begat Pilate, Pilate, begat Arius, Arius begat Julian,
Julian begat Nero, Nero begat Catalin, Cataline begat Luther, Luther begat
Rivilax, Rivilax begat Ignatius Loyolla, the father of the Jesuits, Ignatius
begat Faux, Faux begat Fairfax and Cromwell, who betrayed and murdered their
King.

For his Nativity he was borne about Huntington, educated in the School of
Rebelion; afterward was stocked by his Uncle (whom he since plundered) with
500 li. to set him up, which by his debost life he soon run out; for his
Trade, he brewed small Beer in the Isle of Ely, which after he had gotten
seven Wenches with Child (and was named the Town Bull of Ely) he broake,
couzened his Creditors, lived by his shifts, (which were more then were good)
since which time, by reason of his Sons poisoning his Master (an Usurer in
Fetter Lane) he got an estate by his wits; and at last chosen a Burges in this
Black Parliament for Cambridge-shire, and now is become the Junctos Factotum;
Lord of Lords, King of Kings, the only Ruler of Princes: made Lord Governor
of Ireland, Duke of Distraction, Marquis of Mar-trade, Lord Controuler of
Consciences, chief Peer of Persecution, and grand Resident among the Tyrants
at Westminster, nine times a perjured Rebel, that stricke his breast, out face
God and dissemble with Men, in mischief out of Machiavell, in treachery his
forefathers Judas, he was an Hypocrite borne, lived all his life hitherto a
Knave, his good qualities innumerable, his best conditions (save those of
rebelion and murder) as inconstant as the Wind, he can die his intentions into
more colors then the Camelion, his mercy is cruelty, his lust his God, his
Religion Rebellion, his faith is Falsery, innocent blood his best sacrifice;
Will to clear his fraud call God and men to witness, his murder and perjury
professing to be what he is not, will (like a right Hypocrite) justify his
protended innocence to your face, yet hug himself in his deep plots to ruin
you, as he has done the rest of the Kingdom; abolished the true Religion,
made null the Law of England, killed his King, disinherited his Royal Issue,
jugguled and packed together a set of the most notorious known Knaves and
Tyrants as ever were to rule and wrack the Common people.

Now they have put out legal Taxes and Assezments for Sir Thomas and his
Kennell of Bloodhounds, who with our Moneys feast before our faces with
Sturgeon, Cavarre, Pheasants, Partridges, Turkies, etc. swagger with whom they
please, and rebel in all voluptuousness and epicurisme, riotousnesse and
excess; Whilst the poor Tradsmen are undone, and lies idle for want of
employment, his Family hunger-starven, the Committee Men and Sequestrators
laughs, the Widow and Fatherless cries, pynes, and makes moan; the Land
languishes, War a fresh prepares, Desolation ensues, Misery comes after, and
Plagues closes up the sad scerne of dying England. Truth, Faith, Religion, Law,
Justice, and all Honesty being banished; and nothing suffered amongst us but
Blood, Rapine, Murder, Plunder, Equivocation, Lies, Perjury, Treachery,
Tyrany; and all for Sir Thomas, though we have not a piece of Bread to Put into
our Head, nor the heads of our Wives or Children, yet we must pay what our
Egiptian Taskmasters lay upon us; or have our goods seized on and forcibly
carried out or our Houses, and sold before our faces by their cruel Officers;
Our Wives, Children, and Servants, abused, nay, threatened upon the least
Resistance to kill, slay, and murder them, and this is all th Liberty we poor
Wretches yet enjoy from our New Keepers, after all our War and Sweat, that we
cannot keep a penny in our purses, nor a good Conscience in our Vocations
without being devoured by these Egiptian vermin, flung in their Prisons, and
sacrificed to pining, want, scorn reproach, poverty, and misery: this is the
Image of this Apostatizing State, and the Picture of their new Government.

Now let us return to record the acts of King Noll, he has always hated the
true God, reviled and abandoned the Protestant Religion, hated the Church and
all Discipline and Order therein; brought all Law, Justice, and Power, under
the cruel restraint of the Sword, basely bertayed His late Majesty (of blessed
memeory) into the Isle of VVight, where after he was tired out in a Treaty for
the firm establishing of Peace and Concord in this Nation amongst His Subjects
was wickedly by his Order removed to Hurst-Castle, and from thence to VVinsor,
and so to Saint Jamses where he was wickedly reviled, most illegally and
cruelly murdered by Pilate Bradshaw, Judas Cook, Ananias Ask, and the rest
of that Crew of blood-stucking Tyrants, Traitors, and Rebels, subborned and
hired by him; and so against all former Declarations, Oaths, and Protestations,
Leagues and Covenants, he has betrayed his trust, and treasonably acted his
bloody Design in the Name of the Commons of England, though not the twentieth
part thereof were agreeing thereto; he has traitorously put guards upon the
Parliament, that ought not to be forced in the least; imprisoned forty at a
time of the Members thereof, he has at his sole disposing, the Kings Manners,
Courts, Parkes, Forests, Chases; Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters Lands, the
Kings, Queens, and Princes goods, and divides them amongst him and his heirs;
and yet wracks by Excize, Assezment, powling and impoverishing the Common
people: he has traitorously changed that happy and ancient Government of
King, Lords, and Commons; and has now imposed upon them a Demorricall and
Ararchicall Government, consisting of Thieves, Knaves, and Fools; he has
enforced a new Engagement to be taken, To be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it now stands established.

This Picture of these three; Knave Cromwell Fool Fairfax, and Beggarly
Bradshaw, who now excercize all their Tyranny and Spleen over the Saints of the
Most High, a virtuous King, a learned Clergy, a true-hearted Nobility, a loyal
Gentry, and a faithful Communalty; and this is the sad Picture of our present
Condition, drawn out to the life.

Now let me draw you the Pict^re of England what it was; the Paradise of
Europe, the Pattern of Piety, Beati Populi, a Blessed People; Where our King
like the Sun in the Firmament, by his bright raines of Honor gave light to our
prosperity, where the Queen like the Moon keept a just motion in her Orb and
received her light from that Fountain of Justice her Loyall-hearted Spouse;
Where their Progeny, as numerous as the Planets, kept their royal Station in
this Earthly Heaven, where was no aspects of hatred of discord, but conjunctio^
of Hearts, a Sextile of Virtues, a Qartile of Faith and Alegiance, a sacred
Religion binding all, and no opposition nor evil influences in this blessed
Fabric; here was Caput and Canda, the head and the body, Unity lincked to
Peace, Prosperity to Joy, Religion to Purity, Love to Obedience, Loyalty to
Faith, and Charity to all; these walked hand in hand, tyd together with that
sacred band of Unity: no contradiction, jarring, hatred, malice, murder,
pilling, nor powling by force of Arms; Trading was plentiful, the people were
rich, Religion was exercised, the Law executed, every man knew his own sat
under his own Vine and eat of the fruit that his own hands had planted, but
now -- I cannot write for passion: the Subject murders his Prince, the Son
kills his Father, the Brother betrays his brother; blooshed, murder, rapine,
hatred, malice and all uncharitableness, no man can believe his Neighbor,
nothing but fraud, cozzenage, and devilishnesse exercised amongst the Children
of Men; no true Honor nor Faith upon the Earth, but a mere Hell of all sorts
of cruel Fiends, a Sodom of lust and uncleanness, a vale of misery, a seat of
war, a Kingdom of cruelty, an Island of desolation, and in fine a confused
Choas of all miseries; and this is the Picture of Nols Kingdom, his Government
established without King or House of Lords.

O let every heroic Englishman look upon this Picture, and if a Democritus
let him laugh to see what a King of Clouts we have set over us; and what fools,
versalls, and slaves, we have made our selves; and if the Reader be an
Hiracletus, here is matter for weeping-work enough, even to a second deluge,
poverty, anglish, grief, woe, and lamentation; but I believe all true hearts
have drunk already a full Cup of Sorrows; therefore to conclude this Picture
and finish this piece, it will not be amiss (in the midst of our grief) to
make our selves a little mirth, and drink a Health to King CHARLES the II, an
a Cup of loyal Cannary, singing over it this Catch following.

The CATCH.
A Health to King Charles says Tom,
away with it says Ralph like a man,
God bless him says Moll and raise him says Doll,
and send him his own says Nan:
A pox take them all says Besse,
and a plague says Margerie,
The Devil says Dick, and his Dam says Nick,
and Amen, and Amen say we.
FINIS.

