ENDOXA, OR, Some probable Inquiries INTO TRUTH, BOTH Divine and Humane:
Together with A STONE to the ALTAR: OR, Short Disquisitions on a few difficult
places of SCRIPTURE; AS ALSO, A CALM VENTILATION OF PSEUDO-DOXIA EPIDEMICA.

By John Robinson, Dr. of Physic.

Translated and augmented by the Author.



Though diverse Heads, Faces averse you see;
Yet for Truth's sake, they all in Heart agree.
London, Printed by J. Streater, for Francis Tyton, 1658.

The Contents of the Endoxa.
Chap. 1. Of a Church. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of Ministers. Page 20 Chap. 3. Of
Sacraments. Page 25 Chap. 4. Of Adam. Page 28 Chap. 5. Of Marriage. Page 33
Chap. 6. Of Sympathy. Page 39 Chap. 7. Of an Egg. Page 43 Chap. 8. Of Floating
or Swimming. Page 45 Chap. 9. Of Remedies. Page 48 Chap. 10. Of Telesmes. Page
52
A Key to the Work.
THe Pillars of this Universe are the Church, to which for guidance Ministers
are sent, for solace Sacraments: It considers man either innocent as was
Adam; or fallen, as his Posterity: The due propagation whereof is by Matriage:
This ushereth in love and Sympathy, being part of the Parents; The truth
whereof is examined in an Egg, whence dissimilar parts arising, are best
distinguished by Floating: These, in a right order, are preserved, in disorder
rectified by lawful Remedies, not by Telesmes: Or thus, Man may he considered
as a Subject of Morality, which takes up the first four Chapters; or as a
Political Subject, which is handled in the two middle ones; or as a Body
Physical; which finisheth the rest of the Treatise.

The Preface, To the candid Reader.
TRuth, both divine and natural, has two adversaries; one real, the other in
a mask. The real is all oblique, though not diametrically opposite, Error, The
other, when, by our misconstruction, Verity seems combating with it self; as
several places in Holy Writ. Now, to reconcile that which has a semblance of
repugnancy, and to rescue truth surrounded with falsehood, is a badge, both of
charity and valor; and to an ingenuous mind its own sufficient recompense.

Some upon a supine despondency procrastinate their searching into truth,
because at our nearer union with God, which we shall enjoy at our solemn
change, we shall know all things more perfectly: yet is it a more heroic
spirit, to antedate heaven, to assay to add something unto eternity a priori,
causing it to begin the sooner: That eternal beatitude consisting in knowledge
and holiness, which differ from these our commenced and initiated first
fruits, only in degree. He that has not had a primitiall cast and prelibation
of them here below, is like never to be satiated with a full harvest of them
above.

Here therefore you have a handful of abrupt Nec tamen sine calce arena.
conceptions, or rather, abortions of mine; their birth at first, for some
reason, being precipitated; there hanging then over our heads the fear of a
great cataract, swiftly running down, from the top of the highest Senate; by
which the soil of superstition was not so much likely to be rinced off; as the
tender sprouting grass of sincere godliness was in danger to be choked.
Besides, neither my Genius, nor calling, will allow me a sequestered time, to
dwell long upon any subject: Afterward, at more leisure, and, I hope, without
being tedious, I have, in some measure, endeavored their augmentation.

It was with me, as with them that dwell near the coast, who, upon a
Sea-breach, will cast in any thing that is next at hand; though but loosely
compacted; which, the springtide being over, and waves calmed, they can more
orderly dispose against a future inundation: Neither, in a public flame, would
I have my bucket, though of a lesser size, to be wanting.

The style and method is neither accurate, nor altogether neglected: yet one
thing I must advertise the Reader, concerning the translation; that though I
was conscious to my own weakness, in the English Tongue, becanse of my long
abode out of my native Country; yet, because the drift of the Author is best
known to my self, that would make some recompense for the barbarous andhobnail
phrases, wherein are several word, for necessity more then affectation, which,
in a vulgar ear, would sooner beget a wonder then satisfaction.

If any thing be false, [for we are but men] do not carp at it; but teach
better. I shall promise my self, though here and there be gray hairs, a
willing and thankful disciple: If there be doubts, [as in untract paths it is
hard to find the nearest way] let them be examined by the scales of the
Sanctuary, and beam of right reason: What is true, embrace and lodge it. Let
neither the meannesse of the Superficies, nor dwarsnesse of the Bulk,
prepossesse your, otherwise unbiased, expectation. Among the rushes you may
stumble upon Exodus 2. Esa. 65.
a Moses, and there may be a Blessing, even in a Cluster of Grapes.

You may meet with two obstacles retarding your consent: First, that I take
many Postulata for granted; which, because they are by others sufficiently
proved, I do on purpose pass over: And then, that the names of the Authors are
not set down; to which I answer, that some are Anonymi, though not to me:
Besides, I have no quarrel with any man; but rather discuss the questions
which many defend.

My intention is not to enter into the field of controversy, with all the
strength, and main body of a Battalie; but rather by excursions, in a velitary
way, to skirmish with some, whom (all due love and respect unviolated) I
dissent from.

My wished end is, by gentle concussion, the emulsion of truth, and so reduce
the fruit of these exercitations into practice; that, by emelioration of
Judgment, they may, in their proportion, be useful to the generation wherein
we live: which if I find to answer my desires, I will acknowledge as an ample
reward of these few unfiled lines.

Farewell.
ENDOXA. OR, Some profitable Inquiries into Truth, both Divine and Humane.
CHAP. I.
Of a Church.

WHen by a figurative denomination, an Error, or, which is of affinity unto it,
Confusion and Ambiguity is either begotten or fostered; then I think it safest,
to reduce it to its primitive simplicity. Our Savior cites corrupt manners,
to the Tribunal of first Institution: Mat. 19. 8. Words are more flexible; When
I call Tuesday the third day of the week, to a Jew or Turk, [its well, if not
to many English,] I shall be a Barbarian. Mars-Hill, Castor and Pollux, were no
idolatrous titles, in the mouth of the holy Scribe. An appellation of a
brother, to a beleiver, is most rational, where there can fall no
misconstruction: In religious actions, I commend it; but not in civil
conversation; For then must I, except I infringe the rule of Jam. 2. call and
write my Father, Son, and Servant, Brother; which is a confounding of
Relations. Here would have been a specious excuse for Abraham's simulation:
Genesis 12. and 20. So in this subject, the attributes belonging to the body of
Christ, i. e. his Church, are conferred upon the place; as glory, holiness,
etc. These titles did indeed in some measure, and for a certain time befit the
Temple at Jerusalem: because this sole place God had assigned for his solemn
Worship: But, the Veil being rent, any place of service, so it were in truth
and spirit, was agreeable unto him, John 4. which has of late made a just
distinction between a meeting Templum quod teneat populum.
people and house. But to the thing.

There being several opinions concerning a Church, both ancient and modern; I
will endeavor, what may be, to build upon such general concessa, drawn from
Sacred page or reason, as whereby the truth may be most manifest.

That God had a Church, that is, a selected company out of the World, from
Cain's time and shall have unto the end, is undeniable among all professing
Christianity: First in Families, as in Noah, Melchizedeck, Abraham; afterward
in the Nation of the Jews; and now under the Gospel, dispersed throughout the
face of the earth.

This Church, as it is taken for an Universal Congregatum, or Collective, are
all the believers, past, present, and, in some sense, to come. The Jews, Gods
elder daughter, did not disdain, to call the Church of the Gentiles, their
younger Sister; though without breasts, i. e. the sincere milk of the Word:
yea, yet unborn, Cant. 8. 8. This may be called, as vulgarly it is, the
Universal or Catholic Church, out of For which who prays, prays for the
dead.
which there is no salvation: And of this many have been and are amongst the
Pagaus, Turks, and remotest Heretics: saved by a way unknown to us: as little
Children are said to believe: Math. 18. 6. i. e. only passively; having the
root, though not the form. These hidden things are beyond the reach of any
Ecclesiastical Consistory.

But that there are particular Churches, and joined into bodies, is past all
controversy.

Now, that the way of gathering of them, as well as ruling, is in a determinate
manner unalterably set down, either in the heart of man, [which none can
aver,] or in the holy word by God himself, [let them especially look to this
who urge an uniforme discipline upon all Churches,] might be gathered thus. A
Prince demanding obedience of his Subjects, must needs set down positive Laws,
unalterable, but by himself; and not leave it to their prudentiall change,
Where, When, and How to obey: This is a clear dictate of reason which God does
not ordinarily contradict. Thus did Adam, Noah, Abraham, before the
written-Scripture, teach their Families, by the primmer of divine Traditions:
Not that every one by Enthusiasm was immediately inspired; the teaching of
their Children else had been frustraneous, which God and Nature abhors.
Afterward, God himself gave Moses a perfect pattern of every particular thing
in the Tabernacle, even unto the smallest bagatello's, from the which he might
not warp an Inch; which did bind the Children of Israel immutably unto the time
of Solomon; who likewise did not in the least deviate from the express command
of God in the meanest punctillo: Hereunto were the Jews obliged until Christ's
time. And what the Pharisees did in the worship of God, either omit, add, or
alter, was listed among the traditions of men; and so rejected as spurious. And
is it reason, that after Christ's coming, it should be left to prudence of man,
either Prince or Church, to vary any way of worship of God, according to the
mutability of their own discretion?

The whole stream of both Testaments run irresistably this way: God menaceth
judgments to the Jews, because their fear toward him, was taught by the
precepts of men, Isa. 29. 13. And the Temple [speaking of Christian Churches]
is exactly measured by John, Revel. 11. which is far wide from any prudentiall
way, or [which prudence importeth] any alteration upon occurrences.

Moreover, the Author to the Hebrews does expressly teach the faithfulness of
Christ as a Son; above Moses as a Servant; in setting down every particular
concerning the ordering of his House, which is the Church: which no earthly
power can or ought to change, or silence the publishing of it: but every one is
bound faithfully to submit unto, and in his place to divulge: He is bound, I
mean in foro divino.

That God did at any time change the external garb of his Church, was no mark
of unadvisednesse in the Guardian; but of weakness in his Ward. He would, in
the twilight and morning of the Gospel, have his orphane put on her
night-attire, that the Sun being risen, she might wear her Nuptial Garment;
until it, [with all outward services] do set for ever.

What Politicians distinguish between Law and Counsel, is granted between man
and man; but the introduction of this distinction into divinity, does look with
the face of an encroachment. For to despise either of these, is sin, and that
is the breach of the Law: The reason is clear; because all his Commandments
aim at our good; and all his counsels, are, unquestionably, profitable for us;
none of which quadrateth with those of men. That Christ, Mark 10. does bid the
young man sell all, must not be taken in an absolute sense, for a positive
command, or standing rule to him, or any others; but by way of probation: If
these things be true, give a Testimony, the selling of all thy goods.

To wade a little further; the causes of a Church, [as being known] I do but
mention.

The Efficient; God, out of his love, through the word and spirit, persuading
men's hearts to believe in his Son.

The Material; are all the Saints, and members of his mystical body.

The Pormal, Union with him, and one with another.

The Final, his own honor; their revesting themselves into the formet, or
rather, better image of Himself; the edifying one another, and their mutual
eternal bliss.

Now the way of gathering, and rule of governing is the same; namely the
preaching of Ex quibus constamus, iisdem nutrimur.
the word of God.

But because the manner of divulging the Gospel, is by some of our age
controverted; and they would have nothing to be the word of God, but the very
text of the Old and New Testament; because, say they, a concionatory way is not
wholly, intrinsecally, undoubtedly, and merely true; driving rather to content
themselves, with a private conclave worship; by reading of the sole Scripture,
as it is and lays; than to be present at, an assembly publicly serving God.

In a body Politic, it is no wise to be tolerated, much less in any
Ecclesiastical corporation; that without mutual help, whilst every one sets
up for himself, the external invasion of public adversaries, or the domestic
pruning of rotten branches, should be neglected.

Of these, I desire first to ask one questiou: Whether the Word in its
original, not being understood, be able to convert souls? Or, Whether all to be
converted, must be masters of the Hebrew and Greek Languages? Which both seem
absurdities: Or, which necessarily must follow; they must be converted by the
word translated; which, besides the various readings of the Originals, is not
wholly, intrinsecally, undoubtedly, and merely true.

I shall point at a few reasons.

1. God in writing his holy Will, would not give us bare husks of words; but by
them the solid kernel of his intended mind: Neh. 8. 8. does teach, that what
by right reason can be concluded from authority of Scripture, is Scripture,
though no text: we being endued with reason, as well as the Beroeaus, who for
examining the truth, in its self authentic, were honored with the Title of
Nobility.

2. The Holy Ghost frequently varieth the Text, in quoting the Septuagint, only
keeping to the meaning of the Spirit.

3. If private meetings be satisfactory, then are all admonitions, censures,
etc. frustrated, Mat. 24. 26.

4. Every first day of the week, when ye are met together, lay aside for the
poor. The objection which the Antisynusians make, that this precept was but
transient, to last but for a while, Christ meets withal; John 12. 8. That
the poor, therefore Deacons, will be perpetuated.

5. We may not withdraw from public assemblies, Heb. 10. 25.

6. Faith comes by hearing.

By Hearing, is meant, any way of attaining knowledge and so is Reading. Object.


If by hearing here be understood reading, Answ.
I marvel what construction they will make of the subsequent words, they must
be sent: and how this sending is competent unto books, I cannot understand.
Reading, I grant, is an informing and perfecting of the understanding; but that
the will and affections, [the main wheels in faith] are thereby, as well as by
a lively voice drawn into consent, I utterly deny: And because the clock of our
love, by the weight of our terrestrialls, runs down from God continually, we
need every day, by the cords of our affections, a new winding up of former
truths.

Against these premised things, there is a Object.
great and general Objection. That the external form of words in preaching,
praying; the days and places instituted for fasting and thanksgiving, with
other circumstances, are not distinctly set down in holy Scripture; but may in
a prudentiall way, according to the exigence of occasions or persons, be
changed.

In the Worship of God two things are to Answ.
be considered; The Substance, and the necessary intervening Adjuncts: That the
word of God must be preached, the Sacraments administered, in time of danger
Gods help must be implored, after deliverances praises must be returned; is an
institution of God, and so a law unalterable: The intermixed adjuncts, crowding
into all our actions, are natural and no part of Gods worship: The manner of
expression, the time is no more then the place; nor the public either time or
place, more than a private, whiles I am with God in my closet-approaches, or
Family Duties: they being such Circumstances, without which nothing can be
done; A natural necessity of adjuncts will follow, without the spur of a
command; nor need any curb of restraint: If there be any holiness in them, it
is for the works sake, and so but Relative.

The difference is worth observing, when the work is done for the days sake,
or the day is used for the works sake: If the Circumstance be determined by
God, it becomes
a necessary part of his worship; which no man can extort out of his hand; it
being a Prerogative Royal, belonging only to him, to make any time, place, or
person holy.

Besides, because these circumstances are fortuitous, they do overturn and
interrupt the Celebration of anniversary-dayes: many times, to our
long-prefixed humiliation, a sudden victory will run counter; and unexpected
calamities will quench the feudejoy of a long-fore-set gratulation: But these
accidents being various, we must from a general rule, draw forth the
particulars.

All God's dispensations are books of his appointment, which we may and must
read; though in them there be many hard lessons: But to erect and keep any
thing for a holy use, upon the authority of our own complacency, is to build
too near the banks of Superstition.

Neither do I mean by holiness, a sanctified use, as many cavil; for so is
meat and drink; but separated unto an holy end. The Sabbath is excepted, which
[give leave to a small digression] being first instituted in relation to
Christ, Psalm. 118. 22, 23, 24. was an ordinance of grace, and not of nature;
nor competent to Adam in innocence; and is Geo. Walker, of the Sabbath.
holy for it self sake, though no body in the world should keep it. Let it be
no hinderance to the truth of these words, that but little mention was made of
it, before the Law written in stones, either in Marah or Alush; No more there
is of other long-lived Laws, as that a man should marry his Brothers widow,
or, that whoredom should be punished with death, and the like; which easily
might be proved to be in force before; I speak of a civil Law, under which rank
these forementioned do march: not of the moral Law, engraven in the heart of
all mankind.

They object further; Many things are adiaphorous Object.
and indifferent, the choice whereof is within the command of our will.

By what is said may be concluded, that in Answ.
Gods worship there is nothing indifferent: In natural things most actions do
contemn the voice of our command. To speak with the Schools, I add more
presly; Though in actu signato, there may be; yet that there is no indifferency
in actu exercito, I remember to have read with full satisfaction.

But to close more near: Besides the Universal Church dispersed here on earth,
God has appointed some particular Congregations to join into bodies, for their
mutual edification; which challenge right to all the ordinances, left by
Christ, and his Apostles: as is, the receiving in, building up, casting out;
which actions, not being competent to the Universal, do justly descend to the
Ministerial Universalibus non competunt personalia.
or Oeconomicall Churches; whose duty it is, to see their inheritance not to
lay waste.

The Antisynagogians do object; that there Object.
is no crime in the Church, which the Christian Magistrate is not to take
notice of.

This title I understand in division, not in a Answ.
conjunction; Nor a Christian Physician, or Mathemematician, to prescribe pious
rules of Health, or Angels: Morality, not faith, is requisite in a Prince;
Caesar was as essential, and integrall an Emperor, as was Joshua. But what if
he fall into scandalous errors, or practices? by what means shall he be moved,
or removed, not as a Magistrate, but as a commensall and fellow-commoner with
the faithful? what if he neglect his duty? shall all run to wrack? Were there
not in the Apostles and latter times, Churches, for their piety and purity, as
famous as ever? But power being granted, abilities for discerning heresies,
accomplishments for public and private duties, are neither allotted nor
required, in a civil power, qua talis.

That sentence, which goes cheek by jowle with Scripture; that Moses, and
thence all Magistrates, are the preservers of both tables, will hardly go down
with me? By keepers they must understand [impertinency attends others
interpretations] overseers, to look to the outward execution of the Ten
commandments; which if it were granted unto Moses, it would prove but a lame
argumentation, to derive it unto Princes under the Gospel; because their Church
and Commonweal, were the same subjects. We are to pray and endeavor for the
conversion of the Jews, which can hardly be conceived without conversation:
But, upon their co-habitation with us, to compel them, against conscience, to
a positive Celebration of our Lords day, were Duci non trahi volunt.
a preposterous way to gain them to the true faith. The interdiction of public
labor, for the not disturbance of the rest, is sufficient, Neh. 13. 19. The
Sabbath being a lesson of grace, cannot be read by the letters of reason, as
was mentioned before.

But, as the injunction of all Divine worship upon an unbeliever has little
equity in it; so neither is it possible for the Supreme Power to take
cognizance of the breach of every Commandment: For the last precept, Thou
shall not covet, etc. the new conceived motions, and infant-affections of the
desire of our Neighbor's goods are forbidden; which because not apparent, they
are as if they were not; [I speak ad hominem] according to that Maxim, Non
entis and non apparentis eadem est ratio. When these concupiscences break forth
into actions, they are to be ranked under the heads of Adultery or Theft; And
the Dealogue does not admit of Tautology: This concupisence if it be hidden to
ones own self, Romans 7. 7. How shall it be manifest unto others? Thus God
securerh both tables with a lock, which no key of reason can open.

That place Esa. 65. I will create new Heavens, and new Earth, with the like
consonant places, are meant of new-moulding the State; both in Church and
Commonwealth, under the Gospel; when they shall be more remarkably
distinguished: But these men labor for a monstrous prothusteron, that the
Heavens should be ruled by the Earth, the Higher governed Gen verkeerde weerld.
by the Lower; and the greater by the lesser orbs. Let every Sphere enjoy its
proper Intelligence.

Neither can I so readily assent to those, who affirm, that two or three
gathered together into a society, rise up to an Organicall Church: For that,
Mat. 18. speaking of such a Church, presupposes more persons: For if thy
brother offend thee, there are two persons; and after reproof will not hear
thee, take one or two with thee, there are four perfons, and those males,
whereas experience daily teaches the contrary, Acts 16. 13. besides the
Church: yet how small the embryo of a particular Congregation may be, is hard
to depose definitively.

As in all sensitive bodies, these three faculties are required; to attract, to
nourish, and to expel; the same may be said of every Congregationall body: It
must have power within it self, to admit and receive in, to nourish and foster
those received, and to expel or decline that which is noxious.

But the grand Quere will be, Whence this Power is derived? Doubt.


They of the Sea of Rome lay claim of inheritance to it, by succession from
Christ and Exam.
his Apostles; and so exclude, as Heretics, all those that usurp the title of
a true Church or Ministry, without succession or ordination from them.

Others, even of our brethren, in the Reformed Churches, do deny this to belong
to a Church, without some succession or dependency on other Churches: Of whom I
dedesire the solution of these two Questions.

Whether a company of godly people, being by Quest. 1.
shipwreck cast into the a barbarous or empty Island, where they are like to
live out their days, may not join into a spiritual body; and so raise up unto
themselves, the exercises of all Ordinances revealed in Gods word?

If any one think, that, by stating the godly Sol.
out of the Church, it is a begging of the question: he must have recourse unto
the former distinction, that they are indeed dispersed parts of the Universal
Church: but not organized by union unto Ecclesiastical duties; A multitude but
no people. Paul, when he assayed to join himself unto the Church of Jerusalem,
Acts 9. 26. was, as a private man, no actual member of any determinate Church:
but, as an Apostle, vertually, of all, confined to no particular place; rather
a Father then a Nurse to most of the Churches of the Gentiles.

Lest any should deny this Demand, these things are tendered to their
consideration.

Whatsoever is Spiritually a living body, is Spiritually (...), perfecting it
self: An Axiom grounded upon Reason: Aristotle applies it to the Soul of Man:
But all Believers are Spiritually living Bodies, and have an inward principle,
to build up themselves and others, in their holy faith. So 1 These. 5. they are
commanded to edify one another, and 1 Pet. 2. the Faithful are called living
stones. Now presuppose, that a company of living stones, (it is lawful to
dispute upon a false Hypothesis) meet and join together, who will doubt, but
they may, and ought, to rear up from themselves a perfect Edifice? Ephesians. 2. 21.

From this ground arise all Politic Corporations, Common-Weals, and Kingdoms:
since a man, for his well-being, has need of several things; and one alone is
not laid in with all kind of Handicraft, or Art; for a mutual good, there is a
coalescency: So in the Church, every one is nor an eye or hand; some must act
the ear, others the foot. Semblable is that of Solomon, Eccles. 4. Woe to him
that is alone; for if he fall who shall raise him up?

Again, I ask, In time of Reformation from Quest. 2.
Idolatry or profaneness to an Orthodox Holiness; Whether there be not the same
necessity, which there was in the case stated before?

How shall they be reduced, where there is Exam.
no Church, will be the question. The Examples of the Disciples, that were sent
out by Couples, will teach that: These Hewers of Stone and Timber did, by
converting many, fit and square them for a Spiritual Edifice.

If it be answered affirmatively, then they may unite together into a Church,
without succession or dependency on other Churches. If not, either they must
procure some Superltious or profane Minister, to receive-in Members, to ordain
Officers in a true Church, which is absurd; or else they must stay, till they
meet with another true Church, or Ministry; which, besides the difficulty,
favors of a Prelatical Jurisdiction of one Church over another; of which,
something in the subsequent Chapter; where the difference of Authority and
benefit of one Church toward another, is more copiously examined.

Some that meekly, yet earnestly, contend against this way, object two main
Arguments: The first is, It is unlawful to withdraw, or separate from a true
Church. The second is, concerning readd Prayer: A word to each.

First, Cases might be stated, in which it is lawful to forsake a true Church;
and so the Proposition shakes: But I deny the assumption that there is, or
has been, since the divorce of the Jews (their Church and State being the
same) any National Ministerial Church, in which none might abide, alien from
their Religion, as far as concerns the Moral Law; Proselytus aut domu^s, aut
Justitiae.
though some were exempted from the Ceremonial Obedience: As were the
Gideonites, and Nethinims; and so it is the begging of the question.

To the second, I answer, That there is a great difference of reading of a
Prayer, and committing Heads thereof to memory: [the case is the same in
Preaching] the latter being a means sanctified, and a gift required in every
Minister: The former, there being no Example, or Rule for it; nor any Pastoral
gift eminent in it.

The Ministers Prayer is a stinting of the Spirit, and so of my Prayer. Ob.


The Ministers Prayer is not my particular Sol.
prayer, nor properly his, but the Churches; and he, therein, the mouth only
of the Church unto God: And if his Prayer be by the Spirit, [as it ought] mine,
as a member, is no other; neither is mine more stinted then his. In Preaching,
the case is inverted; for there he is the mouth of God unto the People. The
Blessing is a mixed action: as he does apprecate unto us God's favors, is his
Vicegerent, Unto which Amen following, is the Peoples assent. No man properly
can bless himself, but the lesser is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7.

To conclude this point, It seems more then probable, that a company of
faithful, (the heart no man knows) uniting into a body, become a true
Oeconomical Church, and, having Christ for their sole Head, may, with a
pleniporent Octroy or Concession, claim privilege to all the Ordinances
instituted in the Gospel, as by a Charter belonging to them; by virtue of their
Pact and Covenant with the Lord their King; without any dependency upon any
Foreign Authority, either Secular, or Ecclesiastical. The same case is of a
Church released from Babylonish Bondage; who, by Writ of Recovery, may
challenge her Pristine Inheritance.

I must clear up one Objection; There are Ob.
Hypocrites in the Church; and Christ communicated with Judas.

For Hypocrites, there is no Law against Sol.
them: Not Divine, because they are the worst of Atheists; Nor Humane, because
they have the face or vizard of devout Penitents: The Church, therefore, takes
no cognizance of them: and what an encased or discovered Hypocrite is, I could
never apprehend. Christ indeed, by His Theanthropy, searching the Inwards, knew
Judas to be one; but, because he himself was beyond reach of Contagion, and
Judas's dissimulation in secret, was not yet broken out into open profaneness,
every one of the Disciples questioning, Who should be the Devil their Master
spoke of, Christ did not refuse him: which is the mistake of many Learned men
in our days; making his secure Example, a pattern of their perilous practice.

Appositely do others observe, that Christ would not be both Witness and Judge,
which no Court of Equity does admit of.

CHAP. II.
Of Ministers.

THere is a vulgar error, even among the best, concerning the Name; which if
they mean, as they speak, is an open door unto Anarchy. They call their
Pastors, as also their Magistrates, yea, Angels, Their, or, the Churches
Ministers, which is false; especially, those whom they furnish with things
necessary for this present life: Whereas it is grounded upon a triple
Foundation. Natural, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads
out the corn: Levitical, By the Law of Decimation: Evangelical, 1 Cor. 9. If we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter, if we reap your
carnal things? Paying a Debt, does induce no obligation. They are indeed God's
Ministers, and to they are styled, 2 Cor. 6. 4. Romans 13. 8. Psalm. 104. 4. not
man's: That 2 Cor. 4. 5. is a strain of holy courtesy.

Not to speak here, of four things requisite to the constitution of a Pastor,
1. A faculty of administering the Sacraments and Keys, which is called Mandate.
II. The applying of this Mandat to a certain person, named Ordination. Grotius.
3. The adjoining of the person to a certain company, and that is Election. 4.
When the same exercises his Ministry by public Authority, which is with them
Confirmation: The discussing the truth whereof, would take up time, and swell
the Bulk, beyond my intention. Let the first question be,

Whether a Minister may celebrate the Sacraments Quest.
out of his own Church?

There may be considered in a Minister's Exam.
Office two things; his Power over his own, and his Duty of Benefit toward
others. Now no act of power can he exercise out of his Church; but any grace of
benefit he may; provided always, that by feeding of others, his own be not
pinched.

But, because his duty of benefit does extend to all, whether of the same
Profession, or not, that therefore his power should do the like, is no
necessary consequence: This Key well turned, will unlock most of our Dissenters
Arguments: The Sacraments, therefore, being no act of power, seem to may be, by
him, administered out of his own Church; these considerations being balanced.

1. The Levites, this way were tied, though to a Nation; yet not to any
particular Tribe, Jud. 17. 9.

2. If he may not administer the Sacraments out of his own Church, then none
upon a just absence from their own, might either themselves, or their children,
be partakers of the Sister-Churches Sacraments; which is against the practice
of the Apostles, and now best Reformed Churches: The reason of the consequence
is this; If he admit a stranger, either, by that act, he becomes one of them,
or no: If not, then he administreth to some out of his Church; and why not then
unto most, or unto all? Who shall set a certain bound or number? If he become
one of that Society, then may he be a member of two or more Churches at once:
which though in Civil Corporations, it may be admitted, is inconsisting with
Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

3. Deacons might, and ought sometime to administer out of their own Church, 2 Corinthians. 8.

4. It would redound unto the greater comfort to the Neighbour-Churches, in
their building up, and Spiritual Hospitality, without any fear of ataxy.

The Administration of the Sacraments is an Object.
act of Power and Authority.

I confess it is an act of Place or Office, not Answ.
common to every one: So was the carrying out of the Ashes under the Altar, yet
without any power; yea, all the Sacrifices, which went only through the
Levites hands, ushered in no Authority with them: But if the giving of the
Sacraments be an act of power, then, by the Rule of Relates, is the receiving
of them an act of subjection: But none will say, that, by receiving the
Sacrament, they become subject to that Church or Power, or have the privilege
of choosing Officers, or a suffrage in censures.

The Mayor is not, to exercise any power of his Instance.
Office, neither set the City Seal, to any person or thing, out of his
Jurisdiction. So neither, etc.

The Argumentation is from a Similitude, Answ. 1.
therefore not Apodictick, or of evident Demonstration.

He may give advice, yea, as a Deputy, be 2.
helpful out of his own Corporation, for some neighbor, or public good.

The Simile differs in the main; because every Corporation has its several
Seal: But 3.
all the Churches throughout the World do make use of the same; which pleads,
not weakly, for the question in hand; and withal resolves, by a just Analogy,
that Controversy perplexing many; Whether Baptism be an obligation to a
particular Church? Those in Jordan were not Baptized into an individual
Society, Math. 3. Neither the Jailer, Act. 16. Nor the Eunuch, Act. 8. I know
it was the Office of Apostle-ship, to continue till Churches were established;
but that does not enervate altogether our Argument. Neither does it presently
follow, that Sacraments may be administered out of the Church, either by
wandering Itineraries, or fixed Fathers of Families to their Household; which
controversy being handled by others, I pass over.

Whether if a Popish Priest, reforming unto Quest. 2.
Protestantism; by virtue of his former Order, remain a Minister in a Reformed
Church?

The Negative is most likely, these Reasons considered: Answ.


He must be chosen from among the Godly; yea, among his own Flock. Now (...), 1.
[after the conveighing of gifts by Miracles, which like the Therapeutick
Chrism, died with, or soon after the Apostles] is but the Denominatio visibilis.
demonstration or confirmation of his choice; the word being attributed to God
Himself (...), Act. 10. 4. This has been proved by others Grotiusde Imp: circa
sacra, Lib. 10. Seldom de Synod. Lib. 1. Cap. 14.
, See Number. 8. 9. The Imposition of Names in Baptism is of the like nature,
without which, some think that lavacre defective; but unadvisedly: It is not
probable, that John did superadde any new names to his Disciples: neither was
there an imposition of names, in the long differred Circumcision, Jos. 5. Of
old, all Women should have been nameless; Personal forgotten; Patricious, if
married, swallowed. Neither did conferring of gifts accompany always the laying
on of Apostolical hands, Act. 6. 6. for, they were full of the Holy Ghost
before, ver. 3. Sometime this Ceremony was repeated; as may be demonstrated, by
comparing Act. 9. 17. with Act. 13. 3.

He shall have an Office of Pastorship before 2.
he have a Flock, whereas the nature of Relates is, to live and die together:
nay, perhaps before he be a member of a true Oeconomical Church, which is
difficult to imagine.

Concerning the difference of reteining Baptism, and not Ordination, I remit
you to the satisfactory Treatises, of our worthy Predecessors.

Other things might be added, and doubts cleared; but because I study brevity,
and am loath to plume my self with other birds feathers, or to surfeit my Reader
with twicewarmed cabbadge, I proceed to another controverted subject.

CHAP. III.
Of Sacraments.

SAcraments are so near allied unto Ministers, that they might well have lodged
under one roof; but, for breathing sake they are severed.

Sacraments are visible words, differing from the audible, in that the latter
serves not only for food, but also for seed; the former only for nourishment:
To tender nutriment, to not yet generated, is preposterous. But to the Problems.

Whether Baptism received unworthily, that is, Quest. 1.
either on the exhibents or receivers part, so it be done to a religious use,
the element and word always concurring, may be reiterated?

It being on Gods part a Seal of a federal Covenant, Exam.
Romans 4. 11. [not of a civil one, as many urge; except justifying faith be
reckoned among civil affairs] It is truth-like, that once administered, I
afterward by faith applying the sign to my self, may have fruit and benefit
thereby.

Though in order the Covenant be before the Seal annexed; yet God, in mercy,
does often vary that course, which man may not, till he have proved the
Sacraments to be a seed of faith: But he finding his Seal truly set to a
blanck, though unworthily, does, of grace, susuperscribe his Covenant to it;
though not for it. God always knowing and owing his vessels, though in
Usurpers hands: which Belshazar abusing, did woefully rue, Dan. 5.

So if at any times [alas too often] we sin, by rumination on the foregoing
signs, we may draw fresh solace; without reiteration of the element. We have,
for example, several of our Savior's Disciples, recollecting the words after
his death; which, in his life time, they had negligently, either overflipt or
overslepr. The Spirit ecchoing over former either Precepts or Promises: Which
practically applied, might turn to the great support of those who have misspent
many ordinances fruitless: so also in the Lords supper; the strength and
signatum thereof, may, upon necessity, be oftener extracted by meditation and
application, then it is elementally exhibited.

This, for fear of mistake, I write, somewhat to inform the dissenting
Christians, for rebaptizing themselves: What if they be baptized under the hood
of hypocrisy being unmasked shall they renew their mark? As also, for the
reforming of those, who, without the Lords Supper in their deathbed, [a
viaticum in their journey] cannot die quietly: bread and wine denying
nourishment; which is next to communicating without elements.

Whether is the immersion of the whole body necessary? Quest. 2.


Where an opportunity is, and no danger to Exam.
the party by cold, I should think it fitting: But in severer weather or
region, as it was with the Jailer in the night, here takes place that
compassionate rule, Hos. 6. I had rather have mercy then sacrifice: And I see
not but the hand, or other convenient part, might stand synecdochically for the
whole; because by its immersion, and emersion, is better signified the burying
and resurrection of Christ, as indeed it ought: See Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12.
which in the front-aspersion is more obscure.

They who prefer this part, in regard of religious signification, before any
other, are, at least, within the confines and suburbs of superstition.

In the Lords Supper, the elements must somewhat be regulated in quantity,
according unto the measure of the appetite: a morsel will suffice a weaker
stomach; when to the stronger a more liberal draught is agreeable: although
spiritual nourishment depends not upon the proportion of the sign, but of
faith.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Adam.

I Am not purposed to digest this Treatise into common-places; but rather trace
polemick and eristick discourse, and that in unbeaten paths.

How was Adam made after God's Image, Quest. 1.
Genesis 1. 26.

Every ens, in opposition to privation, is an Sol.
image of the Deity: every living thing is an expression of his life: Old age
is a print of his eternity: Strength, riches, beauty, sculptures of his
excellency: yea, every thing [sin and its fruit excepted] is an impress of its
Creator: But it could not be as he was living; [for now there was a new thing a
working] for so were other Creatures before him: Neither because of his
righteousness, or immortality a posteriore; nor as the three faculties of the
soul Intellect, Memory, and Will, resembling the Trinity; for so were the
Angels.

I rather think it was, to rule and govern, as Gods deputy, all the Creatures
below: which Imperial power was wanting to the Creation. This exposition
seems most genuine, as having Moses in the same verse, totident verbis, for
an Expositor.

That the Image of God is expressed in superiority, is further manifest from 1
Cor. 13. where the man, in an antithesis to the woman, is said to be the Image
of God: If it had been in righteousness, their portion was equilibrous, both in
a complete degree.

The difference is also not to be neglected, between (...), the image of
superiority, and (...), the similitude of qualities; though I read them
confounded; Col. 3. 10.

Genesis 3. 6. We may eat: Ergo, the woman, as Object.
being coloeir by joynt-issue, had power.

All is hers for participation and use, not for Answ.
disposing: a prime token of the latter has of old been a power of
denomination. Thus Adam nominated his wife and the creatures: Joseph and
Daniel, being captives, had their names changed, by their conquerours or
owners: All the tenure the woman had, was in capite.

Note here two things by the way. First, that meum and tuum, as they were
natural relatives, were before the Creation: Before time was, was the Son the
Fathers Image; but Possessives came in since. Priority and causality is from
eternity, and from thence being derived, may not be given away: I may pass
away my right among my equals; not to my inferiors: because it is the Image of
God: Ergo, Magistrates, Parents, Firstborn may not resign their power, because
it is Gods inheritance: And this was the sin of Esau.

Secondly, That there was no subjection, i. e. ejusdem speciei, before sin; no
not among the Angels: What the Scripture holds forth of an Archangel, a
Michael, etc. does very fitly suit with the Angel of the Covenant, Christ.
Where there is no fear of enormity, there may be a secure seriation of
supremacy. In Adam, yet entire, there was a priority and a prestancy, but no
sovereignty; for that became afterward a part of the woman's curse; she being
the first in the transgression: If the leader fall into the pit, he bears his
own, and the followers burden.

Whether matter of propagation were concreated Quest. 2.
with Adam?

Upon this question affirmed, seems to Exam.
depend Cain's exemption from Original sin: For every thing in innocence,
executing, without let, the grand Fiat of his Maker, and nothing being
unfruitful; it should seem, that Cain was privileged from that contagion; or
else, that it is contracted by imitation, which some defend.

Besides, why should not Man, master of multiplying creatures, enjoy the
material principle of Generation, at his Creation; seeing inferior servants
were entrusted with so noble a treasure, every thing being created in his
fullest estate? For the forbidden fruit, with the rest, [and therefore the
kernel] was certainly ripe: else neither would it have been so lovely, nor
desirable to eat: especially by those, who, before the fall, could see further
then paring deep.

Not only the plastic virtue, but matter, though in potentia remota, was, as
with all creatures so connate with Adam: his whole posterity else had been
defective in one rib.

Yet the contrary opinion has its weight. Crescite et multiplicate was the
first blessing that God delivered to our Primogenitours. Now the latter in
nature being impossible without the former, [for propagation before
adolescency, according to the Decrees of Philosophy, is imperfect] the former
was not to be obtained without eating; yea, the extremest digestion: It being,
as Physicians teach, the excrement of the last concoction.

To the question then I answer, That the first conception is not properly man,
nor the subject of sin; but a plant, in order unto man; whose conception is at
the quickening: whereunto witnesses the Law of Moses Exodus 21. If it be
expounded as do the Septuagint: and, (...).
that innocence continued so long, is not probable.

As is the Seed, so is the Field, a Plant-animal, or rather an inmate, and,
[mirandum] as that which is sown does increase, so does the field extend, not
only in circumference, but also in thickness; For better distinction, let me
insert a short Synopsis of excretions.

Of excretions some are Mere and pure as Ordure, Sweat, and become by a new
Putrefaction Worms, Lice.
Petrification, Stone


Urine, Mixed intheir end for Lubrification, as phleghm in several parts of the
body. Covering, or Ornament, as hair, nails, etc. Exclusion or irritation, as
Choler, Melancholy
Part of the body and either Artificial, as Venesection. Critical, several
ways. Natural, either for Generation, as seed in both sexes. Preservation,
within, Menses. without, Milk.





Of the first sort, I think, none were concreated; the rest, save Phlebotomy,
and Crises, were coexisting with their first Being; or, upon the least Wink of
Opportunity, pressed to be drawn forth. Sweat, and Thistles, came in Twins into
the World together.

CHAP. V.
Of Marriage.

A Dam had the liberty of all Trees, but one; A man is forbidden all Women, but
one: both, for preservation of Mankind. If in Food, he had been confined to one
standing dish, it might have bred a nauseousness: If man were not limited
within the Bounds of one Woman, his exhausted Spirits would produce but a weak
Progeny. Marriage, therefore, does not owe Homage of its being, solely to the
Civil Law; there is some Ingredient of Nature in it. Among several Birds, one
may read a conjugal love, and see Footsteps of a Nuptial-Bed, which makes
them (...). In the Ark, the Nursery of the future World, there was an undoubted
Testimony of Combination: and what if I should fetch it as far as the
Creation? But in Mankind, I shall enquire into two Questions.

By whom the Parties are to be joined?

Marriage is the first Foundation of a Family, Quest. 1. Sol. Mr. Hobs
out of a principle of love; not of mutual fear, as some, too narrowly, derive
all Societies from: For the end of the first Society, is rather the
preservation of the Universe, then a defense of some Individuals; and therefore
no pact equipollent to the Conjugal contract: the perpetuation of the Creation
is a more noble end, than the continuation of others, or himself: so that if
man were alone, as was Adam, the first companion he could in Wisdom wish, would
be a Woman.

Out of the conjunction of Families, arising a Political Body, which being
common to the whole Earth, Matrimony, its ground, may rather be rancked under a
Civil, than any Religious, or Ecclesiastical Constitution: the Administration
whereof, we never read in Holy Scripture, was done by any in Priestly Office;
but by Judges, and that in places of Civil Judicature. That Duty did, of old,
belong to the Father of the Family, by the Example of Laban, Genesis 29. 19
quoting their Municipall Statutes, ver. 26. Neither is there any Precept or
Precedent, directly, or analogically, either in the Old or New Testament, tying
it to the Office of a Priest, or Minister: yea, the Jews would not suffer it
to be celebrated on a Sabbath, or Festival Day.

It might be questioned, whether marriage were instituted in innocence; seeing
the end of marriage is to flee fornication, which they were incapable of.
Propagation is the proper end of the conjunction of male and female, which is
natural; and to make a natural end of a civil cause, seems to me difficult.

But those that would make an Evangelicall Sacrament of it, or a Sacramental
signification, at least, and yet to be instituted in pararadise, shoot wider:
because, as there was no need, so there was no thought of Christ. That which
the modern have borrowed from the Ancient Fathers, as they style them, that the
tree of life was a Sacrament before the Fall; must not be taken in a strict,
but Metaphorical sense.

Further, as far as my prospective of enquiry could reach, among the Heathen,
out of a principle, of nature, [not corrupted by perverted reason; for then
(...), they become sottish, Romans 11. 2. but regulated by its own light, they do
by nature, those things contained in the Law] the King joyneth them together,
and not the Priest, where the offices are distinct. The confarreation, where
the High Priest and Flamen were president, was, because of its incongruity,
but-shortlived.

Mal. 2. 14. A wife of thy Covenant, where the Lord has been witness. Ergo,
the Covenant is religious.

Distinction must be made between an act, and the confirmation of it: The one
may be civil, the other religious. Abraham's sending his servant, Genesis 24. for
a wife to his Son, was no spiritual transaction, though obsigned with a
Religious Oath: Nor can the bargain between Joshua and the Gibeonites, though
strengthened by an Oath, be marshalled in the band of sacred proceedings; Paul's
enemies did bind their unwarrantable determination, with a solemn curse, Act.
23.

Prayers for a blessing on matrimony, makes it no more a spiritual thing; then
apprecation to peace, war, bodily labor, make them holy and of a religious
nature.

Whether Incest be a sin against the moral Law? Quest. 1.


Matrimony among consanguinity, does Exam.
hinder the extension of affinity and society: which man, being a sociable
Creature, is bound to enlarge: But, as we take incest, a pollution of them,
that are allied by birth, it seems doubtful; except it be between Parents
and Children; Uncle and Niece; Grandfather and Grandchild, in which are the
footsteps of descent; but we speak of Homotimous persons, level in the same
degree of honor; where a former tie of reverence does not prevent it, by the
Law of Nature. First, God would never have put such a Law in the heart of Adam,
the executing whereof in the two succeding generations, He was necessitated to
dispense withal: For Cain and Abel were Husbands to their Sisters, [though not
to their twins, according to the Rabbins] and, among their Children, marriage
was reciprocal; there being no natural obligation or tie, of reverence,
before; except God had created another stock, which is more likely, then to
bring them to that indigency, and that without their own delinquency, that,
without this sin, the whole species of mankind must have perished.

Further, it did consist neither with the wisdom nor justice of God, to
command any thing in the Judicial or Ceremonial law of the Jews, that should be
diametrically countermanded in the Moral Law: But, not to take his Brothers
wife, after his decease, was sometime punished with death: always with public
shame, by pulling off the shoe, and spitting in the face; Deuteronomy. 25. 9. or
rather in his presence; for so (...) is generally else where expounded; and
afterward the same phrase did descend into a Grecisme, Luke 9. 52. Yea this law
may be fetched from before Moses time, Genesis 38.

That Theft had a remisser punishment among the Jews, was, because they enjoyed
a kind of community, both in Religion and Politics: That Adultery had so
severe a punishment annexed unto it, was to keep their tribes unmixed, to
verify the stremme of Christ: Semblable to which was the examen of pucellage,
the waters of jealously, etc. very strict; and, to the same end, municipall.

Levit. 18. 24. For in all these the Nations Obj.
were defiled, that I cast out before you.

These Nations had, besides Noah's precepts, Sol.
the law of nature, which prohibiteth a conjugall familiarity, where there is a
natural obligation to superiority; as several of the foregoing precepts do
forbid. It may also have a respect unto the three immediate preceding verses,
where sins are mentioned worse then bestiall.

Lest any hereby should be encouraged unto He that diggeth a pit must cover it
licentiousness, I add; Where conjunction of consanguinity, and how far it
is for bidden, by the supreme seigniory, there the committing of it, is
formally, as well as materially, against the Moral Law; both against the fifth
and seventh Commandment: Though, in a strict sense, sin has no matter, being
void of entity, but modus entis, an obliquity from the right line: But not
finding a word more suitable to it is object, I beg it a pass.

Besides, that the Sovereign Authority may enlarge contract, or alter these
bounds, and their punishments, according to variety of occurrences, I sec no
enormity in it; Since the determination, and so the alteration of whatsoever is
meum and tuum, rests in the breast of the Legis-lative Power, whether Person
or Senate.

That the paternall relation is civil, I do incline to believe, till the marks
of the issue of blind born women do envince the contrary: yet if gratitude be
within the tables of reason, the obligation is moral.

These, and the like truths, are to be pondered by those, who would make the
Laws of this Land run parallel with the Judicial of the Jews.

CHAP. VI.
Of Sympathy.

SYmpathy is a hidden love; Love a desire of Union: but, being scanted in
words, we take the effect for the affect.

To refer most of the strange events to Sympathy, without studying of the
causes, is a mark of supine oscitancy. The Lawyers, when they are at a stand,
take their refuge to a special case, or verdict: The Divines to a particular
warrant: The Philosophers to the hidden quality. But rational men, upon
narrower scrutiny, will often find out a manifest reason, which former
predecessors, or present yonger-heads take for an occult cause: and herein
consists not the smallest part of an industrious mind.

There is an error on both hands; either, when every new-discovered truth, is
laid upon the asses pack-saddle the occult Synerasy; or, when impertinent and
ridiculous reasons are derived from the Elements to produce an effect,
transcending their nature. For these properties are a mystery to modest minds;
and to the curious, an imposture. The mean is the safest.

So in Scripture, an allowable reason may be given excusing Abraham from
Pilicide; The Egyptian Jews from theft, and Sampson from Suicide; the two
latter whereof, here below, are vindicated from crime, and prove acquitted.

If there be an hostile exercise between two Creatures, for the conservation
either of its species, or individual, i. e. for propagation, as between Cocks;
or livelihood, as Kite and Chicken; the last whereof is more durable, the
former more violent: [in the latter kind, to speak justly, there is no hatred;
but a love unto, and a necessity of its own preservation: Rats, though friends
at their setting out; put into a great vial, a spectacle worthy of a second
Nero, will make a banckquet one of another; yea to kill a homebred beast, to
furnish a dish, will cause a regret.] This latter I can hardly call an
Antipathy, except I involve man into an Antipathy with almost the whole
nether-world, whose beasts, fouls, fishes, he does destroy, and they him again:
yea the same species, as so many Cadmean teeth, will stand in Antipathy to its
own kind. But to survey two untoucht examples.

That a man helps a woman to breed; that Doubt. 1.
is, is sick in the time of her gestation, is a current opinion with many; and
among our Commeres applauded, as an infallible token of kindness.

That sickness, unto both, at the same time, Exam.
may often concur, casually, though not causally, I confess. But that an
excretion, or part of man, being separated, should affect, at a distance its
former remainder, cannot to me be made out, either by digitall experience, or
solid reason: though much of late has been written, both learnedly and
largely, concerning such subjects.

But touching this point: That the retention of the Lunary evacuations, may,
[as it does the woman] by a diaphoreticall way, cloud and stain the spirits of
an accompanying man, which soon will produce a dyscrasy in natural actions, I
can, without difficulty, conceive. As also, that a strict continence [which
some other-wise, after their wives known impregnation, do scrupulously and
unadvisedly vow to themselvs] where use has met with fit temperature to the
contrary, may often sensibly annoy the male, our daily experience teaches.

Some indeed, are like the Hebrew women, who can pass it over with a groan or
two; which the Husband tender and pusillanimous hearing, falls into pangs of
fears and contristation: But, that this should be an abatement to the wife,
were, to invert the curse laid upon the woman; as my unmatched
fellow-Practitioner shows in another case of the Viper. But if it were true,
it would, with the Dr. Browni
spurious Father, of the doubtful issue, bewray the disloyalty of suspected
women.

There are Writers that speak concerning Doubt. 2.
Sympathy of a woman newly engravidated and a Bear: and, for experimtnt, remitt
us into England; which yet I could never see, nor fully be satisfied in.

But upon supposition of its truth, it is Exam.
worth the inquiry, whether it be out of lust toward the woman, through
salaciousnesse; which would produce a strange Paradox. A Serpentine malice in
the Bear, to superaddde such an inmate unto the fruit, despoiling it of its
allotted aliment: Or, whether by a cruel and immature mid-wiving of the
embryon, to satiate the immensity of its hunger, which would betray a dainty
tooth in the Bears head.

Howsoever, if it were certainly true, one might, without danger, use it in
discovery of impregnation; and, by that means, often save the lives of two at
once.

It is the most provident husbandry of man, to turn the stream of impetuous
enormities, in brute Beasts, into the Channel of humane accommodation.

CHAP. VII.
Of an Egg.

SEveral Creatures continue the Lineage of their Descent, by Eggs; as Fowls,
Fishes, Insects. The Tortoise I take for a mixed kind of the two latter: But
here I speak of our ordinary Eggs; which, if not addle, are in proxima
potentia, but once removed from flesh; and being eaten, become the lightest,
purest, and fullest nutriment, and soonest converted into our substance,
because we see a moderate heat, either Natural, or Artificial, will produce
Incarnation.

Now though the yoalk seems the nobler part, according unto Analogy of other
natural Situations; for it is seated in the inner-Room and Abditory, for its
defense envelloped with the white, which rather were in order to the food of
man, (Adam, in Innocence, eating Milk and Eggs; because all things were
exempted from Death, and nothing frustraneous) than for propagation: Seeing a
Hen, without the inition of a Cock, will not lessen her daily task, and that
almost the whole year through: For even yet, (Sin having impaired Fertility)
more Eggs are excluded, than the Hen, (yea, add the Cock into the bargain, for
in coupled Fowls that is not unusual) is able to set: yet that the tread of the
Cock cannot reach the yoalk; but that the White is nourished by it, as having
its Menstruum within it self, is both wonderful, and by daily Autopsie
uncontrolable.

But here lays the knot, which is not so Doubt.
easily dissolved. By what Vessels the nourishment is attracted, and where they
are inserted?

I know, after two or three days incubation, Exam.
that there is a Sanguine-like string, from the treading or Cock-sperm; but
that that should be the Umbilicality of the Chicken, is not by sight
demonstrable; neither is there any Mark, or least Vestigium thereof remaining,
in a new-hatched deplumed Chicken. Neither is it like, it should be inserted at
the Bill; for then the Bill, as the deferring Organ, should be formed first:
Nor does any perfect creature attract nourishment mouth-wise, before its
eruption into the World: though Hippocrates (...), be very plain for it;
affirming, That both Breath and Nutriment within the Womb, are sucked in by the
Lips: but this place is suspected to be spurious.

And if aliment should be conveyed by the vent, besides the preposterousness in
Nature, the Entrals must suffer a great perturbation, before the turning of the
wonred peristaltick motion: then is there likewise no place assigned to the
Exrements: or, to speak ad amussim, rather remainders of the thickest and
impurest blood, then the superfluous dregs of the first concoction.

Or if by a Diaphoresis, or Transpiration; it would encourage us, to administer
such Aliments topically, as might afford solid nourishment, and so become the
easiest and safest remedy, in many deplorable Diseases.

At last, upon second review, (neither is it a shame to recant an error) I
found the Navel with some part of the yoalk, adhering to the belly.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Swimming.

HEre give me leave to write an ocular Experiment of mine own.

Being in the Canicular days, with some friends, about Noontide, in a high
Chamber, at Catwick up Zee, near to the Arx-Britannica, (founded, as some say,
by Julius Caesar) we espied a young man going to bathe himself in the main; and
falling into a hole, which a ship, newly lanched, by the in-coming Flood, had
made, being unexpert in swimming, was drowned. Two or three hours after, we
also run down into Sea, and found this imprudent man floating, the Nucha, with
the hair of his Neck, was all we could discern; we brought him to shore, but
without either hope or trial of recovery.

That this sudden Fluctuation does not befall all men, is certain. But upon
this Testimony, the truth whereof, I hope, is beyond the reach of suspicion, a
more sedulous encouragement may be taken, for the enquiring of the causes,
which are somewhat abstruse.

In Man there be diverse parts to be examined, in relation to gravity of Water:
There are Bones, Flesh, Brain, Liver, and other Entrails heavier; some of
which, the Water, if fully impregnated with Salt, shall contend with for
Victory in weight. There are the Lungs and Fat lighter, besides many
concavities, where, upon Anatomy, we can see nothing but the empty Cells of the
newly removed Spirits.

Now the body of man, as in its several parts, it differs in gravity; so does
also one body, in its totum, from another: that in some, there need but a small
moment to make them equilibrous with the Water.

Some ridiculously ascribe it to the breaking of the Gall, which, as in
reality, so in reason, is false. The bilious vesicle remains entire and full:
Choler, though it produce an incalescency in the Spirits, and by it an agility
in the members; yet does it afford no levity to the body. I doubt not, though I
never tried it, but icteritions bodies, which they give out to proceed from the
Gall, being suffocated, will sink.

The supine resting on Water, without motion, only by retention of Air within
the Spungie Lungs, does digitate a reason.

A culinary Experiment has in some part given me satisfaction: the boiling of
Lights in a Pot, it is worth our observation to see, what a weight it will bear
up. So, if there can be conceived, (as I know nothing to the contrary) an
allien heat, which the Lungs may acquire, either while all the warmth, at the
point of death, does retreat to the Heart; or its heat, (the refrigerating
motion of the Lungs ceasing) is derived into their cavernous Vessels, and so
rarifie the contained Air; the reason may, without difficulty, be conjectured.

Finally besides that the Sea, by all probabilities, is salter, and so more apt
to bear up any body, at the flowing, then at the ebb; because every Ebb the
River-Waters do more freely intermixe themselves with the saltness of the Sea;
and the middle Ocean, because of its gravity moves slowest; I speak in
relation to this individual instance; some men's bodies, sometimes of the year,
are proner to a suddainer put refaction; which being a new fermentation, is
accompanied with a further dilating expanse, and so advances their Fluctuation.

CHAP. IX.
Of Remedies.

IN the disquisition of Therapeuticks, I would look first into the home-born
shop of Nature; the sedulous culture whereof, would abridge the number of
exotic simples: most of which are either adulterared, by the avarice of the
Merchant, or come to our hands corrupted, by the long and torrid space of the
Voyage.

In Prophylacticks we see, where the pinchingest cold is, there the wise
Creator has stored up abundance of Furre and Fuel, either Wood, Turf, or Coal.
Where an Endemicall Disease does tyrannize, look there for an adequate
Alexiterium: as the Guajacum, where the Venereous scourge had its Commencement:
The Irish Slat gives succor to their particular Flux: So we shall find
Scorbutical Plants to luxuriate, where the Scurvie is predominant. The Sedum
Minus in Sweden: The Chamerubus in Norway: The Cochlearia in Germany and
England, and will not abide the French Air, (which is immune from it,) either
by Seed or Plant; as the Physic Professors there did credibly relate unto me.
Nature is the best Druggist.

She seems also to observe Seasons and Times; For when Fevers and Plurisies
are most rife, which is about the Summer-Solstice, then are Papaver, Rheas,
Lettice, Purslain, with other proper Herbs, in their fullest vigor: yea, as
some make it out, every Month produces Mersennus.
its seasonable Fruit, respondent to the various disposition of the Body.

The like might, by industry, be elaborated, in Domestic Purgative, and
Sudorifick Medicines; the use of the former, with Phleboromy, some Renegadoes
of Philosophy, which I read a regret, have given a Bill of defiance unto, and
endeavored, with weak Engines, to demolish: substituting, instead of them
nothing, but their own frothy Fame; a thing of as eminent a consequence, as
absurdity.

Art is a Servant, or Ape of Nature, especially in internal Diseases:
(Surgery, indeed, stands more in want of the help of Man: Bones broken, or
dislocated, being left to the sole hand of Nature, will never be rightly
restored:) and where it sees Nature to cure by such means, there Art must
imitate it. Thus, in little ones, where natural counsel does work a Cure by
vomiting, there a circumspect Physician may, upon due consideration, supply the
place, and be Lieutenant to its Leader.

Neither does the Purging Medicine corrupt good Humors, as they pretend; most
of the Purges being bitter, and so Preservatives against Putrefaction. This
appears in the Embalming of Dead Bodies, which preserves them entire, unto
many Generations.

Behold the Dogs and Rats, exhibiting unto themselves a dose of Spear-grass,
for their evacuation, either by Vomit, or Siege, which they never learned from
the corruption of Pagan Universities; which, as a Bone to know on, thief
Mis-academicks do, upon every occasion, cast unto us: which grass, (I note by
the way) does it rather by its external form, with its pricking irritating the
Stomach, then by any inward offensive quality: The same effect, not being
common to them, that have their dentes molares, and use rumination.

Daily experience does teach besides that warm Water, which in so short a time,
cannot be conceived to corrupt, does, as an emetick vehicle, often educe
superfluous and putrid humors, salt or acide Phlegm, yellow or black Choler,
etc. with a great alleviation of the Patient. As well they may imagine, that a
Glister of Milk, does, in so quick a space, breed those Worms, which are
allured to it, and excluded with it.

Moreover, we see in most acute Diseases, that by spontaneous Bleeding, and
that several ways, either in Man or Woman, sometime also in Children, there is,
by the sole help of Nature a critical Solution: Several of Hippocrates
Aphorisms, which alone are left in credit with these men, do astipulate the
same.

But, because in Living Bodies, we cannot so well demonstrate the industry of
Nature within; while, by its Natural Heat, it separateth, digesteth, and, by
its unsearchable paths, does banish to its utmost Borders, whatsoever it
finds refractory to its Laws; let us examine a contusion without; where the
Blood, being provoked out of its proper Vessels, is of all hands necessarily
granted to be corrupted: yet we see, that by unperceptible Pores, Nature does
evacuate this; First, in blew, then green: Last, a yellow color, till she has
expelled whatsoever is noxious, and restored the part to its former Crasis.
Doubtless, Natures operation within, though of less sense, yet is of greater
subtilty: Whence may be concluded, that, though nature never enters into
league with any thing corrupted, (which they urge continually upon us, that
never denied it) yet after the exile of her Enemy, renews amity with its
rescued remainer.

Finally, the long Experiment of the concording Practitioners, with the
confirmation of Myriads of Patients, confessing the sudden refreshment by
bleeding, (often before the Surgeon gets to the door) when the Blood is
peccant, either in quantity, quality, or motion, may confirm the usefulness,
yea, necessity of Phlebotomy.

If Empirical practice does agree with rational and Methodical Art, He who will
not believe these two faithful Witnesses, is not worthy to be believed himself.

CHAP. X.
Of Telesmes.

Whether Averruncation of Epidemical Diseases, by Telesmes, be faisable and
lawful? Quest.


THat this has been effected, and that lawfully, upon the Warrant of God's
Edict, is Exam.
evident; in the curing of the biting of Serpents, by erecting a Brazen Serpent
in the Wilderness: Which, together with their Sacrifices, the mimick Heathens
have translated into Superstition: the Aspect whereof, I confess, did cure at a
distance. Here was no mummie of the Wound, nor Mundane Soul required; as being
transcendant, beyond the Effects of Nature: Though the Rabbis do contend that
the matter of the Telesme must not be contrary to the Disease; as they imagine
Brass to be, against the biting of Serpents. Yielding some Latitude to the
Word, I shall commit no Solecism, if I say, That the Rainbow has a
Telesmetical signification, for the preservation of the Universe, from
Inundation: which Rainbow, I see not, why it should be the first, much less a
miracle, seeing it depended upon manifest secundary causes: Morning and Evening
every Eye, opposite to the Sun's Beams, will receive a proper Rainbow, when a
Horse pranceth in the Water. What if it were granted never to have been seen
before? Were, therefore, the first Discoveries of Load-stones, Prospectives,
Gunpowder, etc. to be canonized for Miracles?

That the Ekronites did make their eight Golden Mice. and five Emrods, and put
them in a Coffer by the Ark, 1 Samuel 6. 5. for averting Apotelesmatically their
Epidemical Diseases, is clear. As also those blind and lame, 2 Samuel 5. Jo.
Gregory, A. M. on the place.
6, 8. were the Jebusites Telesmes, erected in their Idol-Temples: And Humane
Writers do often concenter in this truth: In which Art Apollonius Thyaneus, by
the testimony of several Authors, of all the rest, did obtain the Laurel:
Insomuch that Justine, with others, can afford him a laudible Encomium.

But, how lawfully this was done, or the like now might be practiced, is not
obvious to my capacity.

I am not afraid to exhibit many simples, the effects where of I cannot so
readily reduce to manifest causes: Else were I to abandon, and utterly divorce
all Magnetic, Electrick, and Antimonial Medicines; especially being ignorant,
by what faculty, the purging Simples do electively attract their adequate
humors: yea Light and Fire, the Effects whereof are in view of every vulgar
Eye; their proper forms a priori, being retired from the acquaintance of most
judicious men.

But that the Forms of these sublunary things, are answered with the like
Celestial Figurations; and that the Ideas of all terrestrial Beings, are, as
in a Copy, in the fixed Heavens, by man to be distinguished, I cannot be easily
persuaded to believe, no more then the Rabbinical Letters in the Firmament, or
the too occult Gamahes of our new Philosophers: Gaffarel.
Some Phantasticks, especially if there be a tincture of Melancholy mixed with
it, will imagine upon an old Wall, Flame, Grass, etc more Regular Forms, and
better-shaped Let ters. But I will lay down some grounds.

1 The Signs within the Zodiac, or beyond the Tropicks, were made in an
arbitrary or fortuitous way: because such a Sidus, whether animal or
artificial, would best contain the most eminent Stars of that Constellation.
For the Hebrews, Originally, did decifre them by their Alphabetical Letters;
the lying Grecians did afterward reduce them into Figures.

2 There be many glorious Sidera, which can have no response with things here
on Earth; neither are they to be ranked among natural things: as Lyra, Crater,
etc.

3 Some are duplicated; as Corona, Triangulum, Canis and that within the same
Hemisphere; as Vrsa.

4 There seems a defect; at least, it is hidden from us of Stars, adequating
the Vegetables in the surface of this our Habitable Earth.

5 There is a gross mistake in the placing of them: For Nature, enduring no
leaps, proceeds by steps: When the Sun is soaked with the moist and cold
temper of Cancer, then to leap into Leo, the hottest and dryest Sign, is too
subitaneous an alteration of extreme.

6 The lascivious Aries, and the fiery Taurus, whose Eye with them is Martial,
are so near together, that there would be a fear of the conflagration of the
Heavens: a quotannuall Phaetontick combustion; but that our March Winds, and
April Showrs do prevent it. They neither agree together, nor asunder.

7 The slow proreption of every Sidus, out of his proper Sign almost unto the
subsequent, (whether in the eighth or ninth Sphere, it mattereth not) does
overturn the grand Pillar of Stochelomatical Art: So that, if I were to cure
the biting of a Scorpion this way, I should rather take the time, when the Moon
is in Sagittarius, and make the Sign or Figure of a Centaure, then a Scorpion,
which has crept 28 degrees out of his own Sign.

The reason of parcelling these Signs, to the several parts of Humane Body, is
no less ridiculous: Because Aries excels in Horns, and Taurus in Neck: The
one, they make superintendant to the Head: The other, to the Throat: The
Shoulders being branched into two, must have the Gemini for their tutelary
Angels. Because the Crabbe creeps upon his Breast, to him is committed the
charge of the Chest, etc. But the sole reciting of them would endanger a smile,
from dumpish Democritus.

When the Sun is in Leo, because of the fierceness of the Beast, it is very
hot: and on the contrary, Object.
when it passes Aquarius. and Pisces, their Nature being cold the Sun does
symbolize with them: the like of the rest.

Leo is coldest, Aquarius and Pisces hottest, to them which live beyond the
Southern Tropic, Answ. 1.
and yet the same Signs with us. They that dwell between the Arctick and
Tropic Circles, have, on each side, the same temper both of Sun and Soil, yet
under diverse Constellations, which never can arise mutually one to another.

Cancer, which coopeth in our Summer Tropic, is a cold Creature; and
Capricorn, the describer 2.
of the Winter Tropic, hot.

The conjecture taken from Planets, is more uncertain; for their Light, the Sun
excepted, being borrowed, daily changes Horns, which the Ancients never
understood. I doubt much, whether all those Celestial Lights were made for the
use of man; since many are, of late, discovered; which, without an adventitious
telescope the quickest sight on Earth could never have perceived.

So that if any effect of removing Epidemical Diseases by Telesmes be produced,
I should rather ascribe it unto the Prince of the Air, (it being the fittest
medium to propagate, and so to cure all Topical Missances) who will servilly
obey such demands, that he might perpetually captivate the Soul, in a false
persuasion of his Omnipotency. We are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.
11. It is an old Stratagem, and, An Enemies kindness is a dear Bargain.

FINIS.
A STONE TO THE ALTAR OR, Some short Disquisitions, ON A few difficult Places
OF SCRIPTURE

By JOHN ROBINSON, M. D.

LONDON: Printed by J. Streater, for Francis Titan 1658.

The INDEX.
Genesis 2. 24. Page 65 Genesis 8. 10, 12. Page 67 Gen 48. 22. Page 68 Levit. 13. 13.
Page 69 Levit. 16. Page 71 Numb. 36. 7. Page 72 Deuteronomy. 21. ult. Page 73 Deuteronomy.
25. 3. Page 75 2 Samuel 6. 3, 4. Page 79 2 King. 2. 20. Page 80 Job 3. 3. Page 81
Psalm. 25. 11. Page 82 Prove. 24. 16. Page 83 Esa. 50. 8. Page 84 Esa. 63. 1.
Page 86 Esa. 66. 7. Ibid. Jer. 31. 22. Page 87 Dan. 12. 3. Page 88 Math. 3. 14.
Page 89 Math. 8. 6. Page 90 Math. 9. 22. Page 91 Math. 27. 37. Page 92 Math.
27. 44. Page 93 Joh. 20. 17. Page 94 1 Cor. 11. 7. Page 95 1 Timothy 1. 13. Page
97 Heb. 12. 24. Page 98 1 Pet. 3. 19. Page 100 Revel. 12. 11. Page 102
TO THE Understanding Christian.
SEeing God has left Man no better Rule, for the guidance of his Belief and
Obedience then his Holy Writ; and, in the same, has on purpose inserted some
knotty places for to make Man more frequent in examination and exercise of his
Industry: for which cause the Jews had their Oracles delivered unto them
without Vowels; (for it is not a bare word but sense, which he intends we
should take notice of) and every Christian, within his sphere, ought to promote
his truth. with modest reverence unto former men's labors, I thought it not
disadvantageous to the Well wishers of Sion, to offer unto them these small
Meditations of mine; especially having found very few of them, and those short,
in our worthy Predecessors Expositions.

Neither in the building of the Temple, were the laudable endeavors of
Inferiors, that brought Stone or Mortar, to be discouraged, since it was not
given to every one, to be a Master Builder, a Bezaliel, an Aholiab: So neither
do I fear any disgust, at least, from the best sort of men, because I have, in
small measure, endeavored to reach the native sense of these ensuing places,
wherein I follow no bare Authority of Man, the large numerosity whereof,
together with the uncertainty, after pursuit of many tedious Harangues, leaves
their Reader in an unsatisfied Resolution; the spots of their maintained
errors, obnubilating the luster of their asserted truths) but rather by the
scope of the Text and consonant places, I seek to evince the meaning of the
words: By which, if man may have any light, and the Father of light have glory;
it will be a copious return to him, that wishes you all happiness.

J. R.

A STONE TO THE ALTAR.
Genesis 2. 24. They shall be one Flesh. (...)
INto one Flesh, is the Original. Some think that this should have an Aspect to
their Production; because Eve, in the Ribbe, was an Off-set of Adam: But to be
Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone, is also common to our Progeny; though
the manner of the latter, by propagation; and the former, by division, be
different; yet does it not impede an Homogeneousness in the derivation of the
matter.

Others take one flesh for one species, or kind; as if it had been said: You
shall not mix man's Flesh with the Flesh of Beasts: But how that can be, as a
ground of Marriage, I cannot see. Many expound that one flesh; Ye two shall so
join, that one flesh, i. e. your Offspring may proceed from you; having
reference to their Posterity: which neither does fit all Marriages; for those
that are past hope of children should thereby be debarred. Then neither, in
regard of the cause, not kind, nor effect.

The words were not Adams but the Spirits, by Moses, as appears by the
citation of them, by our Savior, Math. 9. 5. To show, that it is the nearest
Union, (except that of Soul and Body, which makes but one person) in all the
World: They two making properly not a Plural, but a Dual: to speak accurately,
As one makes no paucity so no two can amount to a Plurality: (...), glued
together, very significantly the Greeks expound it This is the true Sarcocolla.
.

It might seem strange, that God's Command should make a Civil Tie surpass all
Natural Obligation, but that I love to acquiesce in Ipse dixit.

Two things though, I add; 1. That whether Parental Relation be Natural or
Civil, is questionable, 2. There may, nay there ought to be a separation from a
Father's house; Psalm. 45. never from a Nuptial bed. The one for distribution
of humane society.

Genesis 8. 10, 12. And Noah stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth
the dove, v. 12. and he stayed yet other seven days, etc.
THis man wearied of his prison, though he had the whole world in a lively Map
before him did often look out for fair weather: rather desiring to set his
subjects into their Liberty, than to hear their groans, arising from
abridgment of their due freedom, and pristine enlargement.

But some enquiring the reason of the Seventh day, [to omit all Pythagorean and
Kabbalistical Chimera's, whose studies are to magnify abstracted, especially
the seventh, number] would infer from hence, that Noah kept the Sabbath: the
truth whereof, seeing it was instituted in Paradise, I can readily embrace; but
not the reason. I think he did it in an Astronomicall respect; he by long-lived
experience, knowing that the Moon, every seventh day, changing its quadra, was,
if not predominant, at least concomitant unto the aestuation of the Sea: The
good old man measuring perhaps too straightly this cataclysm, within the zone
and girdle of nature; it being, likely, the first miracle, [with leave of
severer brows] that he had seen.

Genesis 48. 22. I give thee a portion above thy brethren, which I took from the
hand of the Amorite, with my sword and bow.
To wave the natural reason, given by some, why the soul should prophesy
toward its departure; because, its standing, as on tip-toes, at the threshall
of the body, can take a surer and further survey, then being close immured;
[that the separated soul does understand more, then being united to the body; I
take it to be not from a quicker apprehension; but from more glorious objects.]
Some refer this [which I took] unto the spoilo gotten from the Sichemites, by
the sons of Jacob: but that seems very harsh: For their Father, Genesis 34. 30.
reproved them for their perfidious dealing with them; and Genesis 49. 6. he
curses them for it. Now that goods treacherously gotten, should be their
portion, is somewhat absurd.

It will run more smooth, prophetically, [that I have taken] for, [that I shall
take] besides the trope of the Father for the Sons: And so, by faith, he
triumphs before the victory. Such a spirit there was in David, who blazoned the
trophies, before the conquest: Gilead is mine, and Manassch is mine, etc. Psalm.
60.

But why Joseph should have that of the Amorite, taken by sword and bow, more
then the rest my conjecture is; he does, for the preservativation of his
Brethren in Egypt, assign him this surplus, above his Brethren; among whom he
had, besides, his portion equally divided by lot, Ezekiel. 47. 13. For to none of
his remaining Sons, did he bequeath a determinate residence. That he does
confine the Seacoast unto Zebulon, Genesis 49. 13. is rather a presage of his
nautick profession, then a supernumerary grant above his equals.

Levit. 13. 13. Then the Priest shall consider, and behold, if the Leprosy
has covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean, that has the plague;
it is turned white, he is clean.
FOr the clearing of this, because vulgar reason would conclude the contrary, I
must premise a few words.

The Ceremonies of the Jews, were either typical, having reference to Christ;
or Symbolicall, by which, as Gods Hieroglyplicks, they were tutored in some
moral homages: Or more plainly thus, They were either of Privileges, and so
Evangelical; or of duties: Of which latter sort were, Not to assimilate the
mselves according to the superstitious fashions, of the Sabeans or Ghaldeans,
their Neighbors. Of the like nature, was seething the kid in the milk of the
dam; the cutting of corners in the hair; which with them were appurtenances
unto fascination.

In several of these Laws, the thing it self was no sin; though there did
cleave a legal uncleanness unto it. Sometime it was commanded, as laying
forth, and burying of the dead; yea the interring of corpses, the Politicians
Grotius.
make a law of nature; being a preservation of the living. Sometime natural,
as sickness and issues: Now and then defective, as Eunuchs. Note, by the way,
God took away in an advantagous substitute, in the Gospel, their barrenness,
by baptizing the Eunuch, according to his promise, Esa. 56. 3.

Now for the explaining of this text, Why, being spread over, he should be
clean; two reasons may be given: Physical, and Ceremonial: Physical when a
disease is spread all over the body, as in that soon cured kind of Dropsy
called Leucophlegmatia, Nature will easily recover that; because every part
has an innate heat to preserve it self; and expel that which is noxious: and
so the discrimen certaminis, the maine body of the enemy, does not lay upon one
part; except it be in a raw crisis, where, after a battle, conquering nature
does ablegate its adversary, to the vilest and remotest emunctories.

The Ceremonial reason I take, from the several Laws, given to the Jews
forbidding mixture; either of themselves with others; or of things of several
kinds; as of making linsey-wolsey; plowing with an ox and an ass; sowing of
mesling, etc. [into which primitive institution, the Rabbis have shuffled
burdensome and ridiculous devices, of their own] whereas either of these,
without any tesellation or checker-work, single, were lawful. So this
Symbolizing with the former, if it were all over of one color, viz. white,
because void of heterogeneous mixture, it was pronounced clean.

If the Allegory were not strained, the overspread Leprosy, an Emblem of our
sins; and the whiteness of righteousness; might have an aspect unto Christ.

Levit. 16. How could the Scapegoat be a type of Christ's Resurrection, as
generally it is expounded, since Quest.
it never dyed?
BEcause its fellow, which was chosen by Answ.
lot, did die; And for that Resurrection was not competent unto beasts, that
one offering was sown up and patcht of two individualls; whereof one died, and
the other escaped: and being one continued act, did, conjunctim, resemble the
death and resurrection of Christ. The uncapablenesse of the Subject in one,
distributed this type into two: and because no remission of sin without blood,
the latter died in the former; and the former revived in the latter: So the
escape of one of the represented, was an adumbration of the Resurrection; since
it was reprieved from death, by the immediate oracle of God in the lot.

Numb. 36. 7. None were to marry out of their own Family.
TWo sorts of persons were exempted; First, the Levites; and that upon good
ground: because they had no inheritance among their brethren. And secondly,
the Royal family was not obliged thereunto: their portion being assigned them
out of the Kings Exchequer: I And this well considered, answers many
objections; and without this Latitude, several difficulties, and Remora's will
arise in the Old Testament, casting, as it were, a suspicion of levity, by a
transgression of this precept, among the most eminent of the Jews. But the
poor, though they had passed away their inheritance, were not exempted from
this law; because either their near kinsman might redeem it, or at the year of
Jubilee, it was restored gratis.

The accomplishing of the presage of the lineage of the Messiah, was a Cardinal
cause of this edict. As far as it is grounded upon equity, it binds us,
analogically; though not in eodem puncto.

Deuteronomy. 21. ult. He that is hanged on a tree, is accursed of God.
BOth former and latter Expositors run for the nativity of this back unto
Paradise, to the first sin which was brought forth between the knees of a tree;
and therefore hanging on a tree is become a malediction: But that I think is
too far fetched: for a Gibbet is, and may be made variously, of any other
substance.

This sentence is not to be taken in a moral signification, reaching any sorts
of people; but in a Judicial sense, proper to the Jews: and therefore the
reasons must not be common, to all the Universe of mankind; but drawn from
their Political constitution.

This capital punishment was no curse of it self; no more then the lapidation,
precipitation, sword, or fire was. Two probable reasons may be given. First,
that this kind of death, was without effusion of blood; which strangulation,
even in beasts, and that otherwise clean-ones, was an abhorred thing among the
Jews and so Ceremonially accursed. Many both godly and wise Expositors hold
this reason to be moral.

But 2dly, [as in some creatures their own entrails prove the properest sauce:
so in this place] the reason which Moses gives in the text, well pondered will
be most genuine, That the Land be not defiled which the Lord thy God gives
thee. In all Israel, no unclean thing was to be left uncovered. Chapter 23. 19. In
all capital punishments, there was a removing of the offenders dead body out of
sight; in this there was a continued and public show of that which nature it
self does shrink at. See Genesis 23. 4. All dead corpses were Legally unclean:
Their defilement was prevented by burying; which is over and over commanded in
this verse: lest, by hanging on a tree, there be a curse, or rather an
execration of God: then would strangers have exprobrated God's people; Lo there
hangs an Israelite: So that the sense may be, He that remains hanging on a
tree, is ceremonially an execration unto the Lord.

God in the death of Christ, to show his displeasure against sin, did, by this
Judicial proceeding, point at the Moral curse, due unto us, translated upon his
Son. An Evangelical malediction. His elevation above the earth, prefigured, by
lifting up of the Serpent in the wilderness, was rather an emblem of his
obvious and expanse conspicuousness, then of eminent detestation: The Holy
Ghost seems to point at this, Heb. 6. 6.

Deuteronomy. 25. 3. Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed.
THe Rabbis are here as uncertain as various. Let us see, what can be drawn
from text or equity.

God might have commanded man several duties, without alleging any cause for
them; yet in most, where nature is silent, as in the Sabbath; which not having
any dependency upon the Law of Nature, God does annex more then one reason for
the observation of it: the rest of the commandments, are bare and naked,
because their justice may be readd by the Lamp of reason. Where God accosteth a
reason to his precept, there he does persuade rather then compel.

First then, that this was a particular Law proper unto the Jews, may be
evinced from the last words of this verse, lest thy brother should seem vile
unto thee; strengthened by the example of Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 24. Forty save one
stripes did I suffer, five times of the Jews. Neither actively nor passively,
binding the stranger.

That, there should no cruelty be used, among Gods people, is certain: yet does
not answer the reason of the exact and defined number, The Text says, lest he
be contemned. Either it may be, as forty years are the full strength of man;
the third year being the prime of Infancy, of Childhood the 14th: the 21 of
Adolescency; of Youth the 30th, and of Virility the fourtieth: so the highest
degree of punishment should not exceed forty stripes: But that, because
Natural, is common to all Humane kind.

Or, rather alluding to the forty years travel in the Wilderness, lest now
being in Canaan, your promised Rest, you use him harder, then you were
entertained in the contemptible Wilderness; and, by the number of stripes, do
renew the memory of his pristine equal years servitude.

The Feast of Tabernacles, that God instituted, was with rejoicing for
deliverance.

Just forty stripes, was too near the extreme, and, so far, Moral.

The Whip of three Cords, in Maimonides, by whose 13 blows, there amounted 39
stripes, seems a Rabbinical Legend.

Judge. 16. 30. The dead that he slew at his death, were more then those that he
slew in his life.
I Love not to act over Origin; or the Venetian, who, beyond the intention of
the Holy Ghost, do, by force, press an Allegorical, and that often not very
decent, to bear the genuine sense of the Scripture.

But where there are so manifest Lineaments of the prefiguration of Christ, no
man can deny a type.

In the beginning of this Chapter, Sampson was compassed about with his
enemies; he arose at Midnight, carried away their Gates and Bars, unto the top
of the Hill: Every circumstance does quadrate with his and our Savior.

The Question will be, Whether his death, by Quest.
conquering more at it then in his life time, may not as aptly resemble the
death of Christ?

Some make a stand here; because an evil Answ.
act (say they) as is self-assassine, cannot be any type of good.

But I question, whether the act were condemnable; that is, either whether this
fact were not rather a laying down of his life, then a destroying of it; or,
this being granted whether rebus sic stantibus, it were not lawful.

The general Reasons are these: He, before his death, prayed the Lord to renew
his strength: This was accepted and answered: yea, He is registered, by the Test
of God's Approbation, to die in Faith, Heb. 11. 32, 39.

But more particularly, to justify his end; We must have Recourse unto the
Custom, (which in time became a Law) of the Zelotes among the Jews; where a
private man, kindled by Zeal, for Blasphemy, or Adultery, if it were public,
(in the sight of ten say the ancient Masters] might beat or slay the Offender,
taken in the Fact.

The first Example we have in Phineas, who appeased the wrath of Gods, Psalm.
106. 31. by killing Zimri and Cozbi. Upon the same ground of zeal, Christ was
suffered to purge the Temple: Neither did the Jews so much question this,
though it be generally so interpreted; as the Miracle in the Fig Tree, and his
Teaching. See Mark 11. 27. As He walked in the Temple, and Luc. 22. 1. As He
taught the People, etc. Of this Rank was Simon the Zelote, Luc. 6. 15. not the
Cananite, as our Translation has it, Math. 10. 4. Mark 3. 18. being deceived
(...).
by the affinity of the Word (...) signifying a Zelote, as our, far and near
honored, Mr. Seldom observes.

Now Sampson, being no man's subject, might, without injustice, in open
Blaspheny, take vengeance of the Offenders: without a Warrant from the
Magistrate: For he himself, by right, was Judge of Israel: and had power, as of
others, so of himself, in this case. Neither was he a subject of the
Philistines, his life depending on the Will of the Conquerours. Whosoevers body
is bound in chains, is discharged from all civil obligation: and thus he may be
acquitted from the crime of murder, or sui-cide. The Antitype, Joh. 10. 18. is
very significant, No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self.

2 Samuel 6. 3, 4. And they brought the Ark of God out of the house of Abinadab,
that was in Gibeah.
THE ordinary Translations have it, as if Gibeah had been a City; and (...),
were a proper name, which cannot conveniently here have a place: But
appellatively, it signifies a Hill: and so it is used, Jerem. 2. 20. 1 Samuel
10. 5. Sometime, indeed, it signifies a City of Benjamin; and so is the right
Interpretation of Judge. 19. 16. 1 Samuel 22. 6. 7. Hos. 5. 8. But at this time
the Ark was in a City, afterward called Kiriath-jeharim, in the Tribe of Judah,
Jos. 15. 60. 1 Samuel 7. 2. Besides Abinadab was of the Tribe of Judah, and dwelt
there not in Benjamin.

It is not unusual in cognomination, to turn a part of the Commons into a
private Fee-Simple: but the frequent peculation of Appellatives in the same
place, is a hastening unto a generical ataxy.

2 King. 2. 20. Bring me a new Cruse, and put Salt therein,
GOD, in working of Miracles, as being a free Agent, does often vary and change
the manner and dispensation of them: Sometimes He uses uatural and proper
causes, extending the quantity; as feeding many thousands with a Lads burden, a
few loaves, and small fishes: or, intending the quality; as the plaster of
figs upon Hezekiah' s sore: Many times he works without secundary causes; as
in the Creation, raising of the dead, (in raising of the Shunamite's son, 2
King. 4. there were some natural means, which that invisible finger of the Lord
did work by) calming of the sea, etc. Now and then the Miracle was contrary to
the means; as in the Sacrifice of Eliah, 1 King. 18. where, to make the wood
burn, water was three times poured on it: So generally Expositors do paraphrase
upon the clay laid on the blind man's eyes. But that is very questionable; for,
besides the nitre which is in the Earth and Spittle, the Angularity of Sand is
a regular Seif, or methodical Collyrie, (not to extenuate the Miracle) fot the
wasting and lessening of the Scaly Films, the cause of blindness.

The question will be concerning this place. Some utterly condemn Salt, as a
cause of barrenness; and so tropically expound Jud. 9. 45. where Abimelech
having destroyed Shechem, did be sprinkle it with Salt. Others commend it for
the best enrichment of ground, advancing fertility; and that common Salt, as
this was, does, by symbolization, easily turn into nitre.

I think it will bear a double construction: either as some small secondary
cause of emelioration of the ground and water, [the extent was, I am sure,
beyond the power and limits of Nature.] or, as the Text intimates, for the
continuation and perpetuity of the effect: For Salt, in Scripture Language, is
a Metaphor of duration; and so a Covenant of Salt, Numb. 18. 19. the Holy Ghost
expounds it an Everlasting Covenant.

JOB. 3. 3.
SOme, both ancient and modern, have drawn this Book, beginning from this
Verse, unto the sixth of the last Chapter, into question, denying it to be a
History, but rather a Discourse and Treatise, concerning a Moral Question; Why
the Wicked of this world prosper, and the godly are afflicted. Their Reason is,
because all that Discourse is, in the Original, in Hexameter Verse, which is no
style of sadness: the edge of which Argument is too dull, to pierce my
yieldinger apprehension: for we find profane Authors in the same style, which
bemoan their Tragical misfortunes: Ovid writes five Books de Tristibus; the
better half are in that Meter: Virgil, in the same strain, sings very sad
lines. But I rather incline to believe, that it was a real Discourse, or
interlocution, between God out of the Whirlewinde (Chap. 38. 1.) Job, and his
friends. First, in Prose; after by himself, or some godly man, run into Meter;
either for the help of Memory, as all Poetry is, or for the use of the Church,
in singing of them publicly; which, without a Harmony of numerical syllables,
will make a confused Discord.

By the same reason, they may reject several of the Psalms of David, denying
them to be Prayers; which, without contradiction, at first being powered out in
Prose, afterward, for the forenamed Reasons, were, by himself, or some other
Master-Musitian, measured into Verse.

Psalm. 25. 11. Thou will pardon my sin, because it is great.
THE pitiful mistake my Ears and Eyes have been Witness of, and that in
learned men, of the word (...), I pass over: they render it a causality, [for]
Whereas indeed it should be an adversative [although] or notwithstanding: and
so it cannot but be readd, Hab. 3. 17. Although the Fig Tree should not
blossom. The same mistake is in the Greek (...), Act. 1. 17. For he was
numbered with us; instead of although. If it might have the power of a cause,
yet the adversative ought, as most proper, to be taken, in the first place.

Prove. 24. 16. The just man falls seven times, [in a day] is not in the Text.
THE general Comment hereon is; The just sins often, yet he rises again:
Whereas the word used here (...), never, in this whole Book, does signify to
fall into sin: Enumeration of places will evince it, Chap. 11. ver. 5, 14.
and 13. 17. and 17. 20. and 26. 27. and 20. 10, 14. 18. In all these places it
can bear no other sense then of Affliction. Now the safest way, to attain the
scope of an Author, whether Divine or Humane, is, to trace the Age Place,
Dialect, or Genius he writes in: And if between the weight of two equal
Senses, there be an undistinguishable Equipoise, the number of consonant places
must cast the Scales.

Esa. 50. 8. He is near that justifies me.
CAndace's Eunuch need no Interpreter for this place: Every Line being a
Graphical Pourtraict of Christ.

But how Christ was justified, is not so evident; Justification not being here
taken for making one just: in which sense it is but twice used by the Holy
Ghost, Dan. 12. 3. Rev. 22. 11. (though that were true: he being the express
and eternal Image of his Father, as a pure River derived from a pure Fountain)
but for a judicial acquittance, in opposition to condemnation, ver. 9. And
because Justification is by Faith, its Nature in Christ is worth our
disquisition.

None will say, that Christ was justified by Faith, but by Works: He could not
be both the Object and Subject: I speak now of Evangelical, not Legal Faith:
which latter is, to believe that God is true, wise, keeping promise; decisered,
Heb. 11. 6. For this Christ had, and so had the Angels, and Adam in innocence,
only differing in mutability. This kind of Faith will not cease in Heaven, but
there will be a full recumbency of the Soul, upon the Divine Goodness, for its
perpetuation unto Eternity. The Son did believe, that the Father would perform
his Eternal Pact with him, to give him the utmost ends of the Earth, as the
fruit of his travel: And because it became him to fulfill all Righteousness,
Math. 3. 15. he did submit to the Sacraments as they were good Works; whereto
he was bound, by virtue of the second Commandment, but not as they were
Relative and Organicall Signs.

In a word, Christ the Head did believe Legally, that all his members should
believe Evangelically: The former is a mark of perfection; the latter, of
defection.

Neither does Justification, as some will urge, presuppose always guilt; but
sometime a Declaration of Innocence. There was, indeed, a Debt and Bond, which
the Law did challenge against Christ, but no Forfeiture; for, that, He had
discharged unto the full.

Esa. 63. 1. Who is he that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah?
THis literally is not meant of the sufferings of Christ as many think; but
the redness of his blood is rather of his enemies than his own. Bozrah and
Edom did belong to the adversaries of the Church: He speaks of his anger and
fury: v. 3. in the day of vengeance, v. 4. So I gather that the red wine of the
press, as also that, Rev. 19. 15. is not of his passion but of his victory:
Though the former were the way to the latter; and they as the effect upon the
cause, succeeded one another; yet, in conception of reason, can and ought to be
distinguished.

Esa. 66. 7. Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she
was delivered of a man-child.
NOt only Papists, to maintain the virginity of our Savior's mother, in,
ante, and post partum; but some of our Orthodox Expositors, hold this Text to
describe Christ's birth: But, in my judgment, far wide: For, neither in the
antecedent, or consequent, is there any shadow pointing toward the Virgin
Mary. Yea, v. 10. Jerusalem is mentioned, and, v. 8. Sion is said to travel.
Besides, here the Earth is described to bring forth, and that many Children: So
that necessarily it must be understood of the sudden and unexpected
fruitfulness of the Church. The same exposition does suit the like words,
Mich. 5. 3. Esa. 49. 20.

Jer. 31. 22. A Woman shall compass a Man.
COngeneous unto the former, is this mistake: neither will the Original, a
strong man, nor the sense of the sequel v. 32. bear it concerning the
Incarnation of Christ. But it is spoken of the Church under the Gospel; and of
the New Covenant: And so the Author to the Hebrews expounds it at large,
Chap. 8. 8.

Many places, in holy writ, design a state, company, or order; which fastened
upon singularities, and individualls, opens no small gap unto errors. The
same must be understood of Antichrist; which must have its termination in a
profession, not in a personality: He is Antichrist, that, [either in word or
deed] denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2. 21.

Daniel 12. 3. They that turn many, shall shine, as Stars, for ever.
HEnce some conclude, that the converter must necessarily be saved; which
notwithstanding, in the absoluteness of its truth, I question. Christ did add
to his word the gift of miracles, to beget faith in the hearers; and the
Disciples returning, did rejoice that the Devils were subjected unto them:
among these, was the son of perdition. Hereupon is grounded Paul's watchword, 1
Cor. 9. ult. Least, while I preach to others, I my self become a cast-way.

It were a notable shaking to my faith, if the messenger, by whom it was
conveyed, should turn to heresy, or wordly vanity. By the power of his word,
God calls some, though through the mouth of a wicked one, a child, yea, [I
scorn the suspicion of coynage or forgery] a stage player. A weak or leprous
hand may sow good seed: the treasure is more to be valued, then the earthen
vessel.

This then, with other places, which by the holy Ghost are delivered
universally, for fear of corruption, must be taken with limitation; and
seasoned with the salt of restrained sense; a communiter, an ut plurimum, etc.
So, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for all men once to die: This cannot be
reaching every individual: for some never tasted deaths cup: Others, who had
their lives reiterated have twice undergone it. At the day of judgment, instead
of death, there will be a momentaneous change, 1 Cor. 15. 51.

Several things are set down absolutely, which must have a comparative
interpretation, Prove. 8. 10. Receive instruction, and not silver: and
knowledge, rather then gold: Luke 14. 26. Whosoever comes unto me, and hates
not his Father and Mother, cannot be my Disciple, Romans 9. 19. Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated. These positives must have their exposition
graduall.

Mat. 3. 14.
John, in a godly courtesy, excused to baptize Christ, saying; I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? compared with Math. 11. v. 4. Art
thou He, that should come, or do we look for another? seems, as if John at
first knew him to be the Savior of the World; and afterward doubted of him:
which would have been but a slow progress in such a ones faith, when he had
heard and seen so much of him, and from him.

But the probablest reconcilement, I conceive, is, that he sent his Disciples,
rather to confirm their faith, then to inform his judgment: In him it was
rather a work of charity, then of doubt: yet I think his knowledge was confused
and overclouded, till he saw the spirit descend on him, Joh. 1. 33.

It is very unlikely, that upon the temptation of a prison, his faith should be
shaken, who was more then a Prophet, 11. 9. The messenger to prepare the way,
v. 10. The greatest of them that are born of women, v. 11. The Elias to come,
v. 14. These encomiums would have been very unseasonable, at such a time, by
him, who did all things in season: when his affiance was a staggering, and his
confidence a wavering.

Mat. 8. 6. My servant lies at home, sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.
WHat if a Medicall notion should correct his Torments? For a palsy is a
resoluon of the sinews, without any pain; a deprivation, no depravation of
sense, might it not better be rendered for a trial of his faith, and
exploration of his patience? Since the word in its Original (...), does denote
a touchstone, by which silver and gold are brought to their due examen. The
same word is predicated of things void of sense, and feeling: Mat. 14. 24.

Mat. 9. 22. Thy faith has made thee whole.
BY this, and other parallel places, some conclude a general notion: That
Christ or his Disciples did never work miracles, but upon believing persons;
Faith being foreseen either in themselves, or in their friends. But this will
not hold touch: For what faith there could be in the dead bodies of the Saints,
or in their souls, that were raised from the grace; Mat. 27. 52. I cannot
understand. The last miracles Christ wrought in his life time, faith was far to
seek in the subject, Malchus, Joh. 18. 10. or in his kinsman, v. 26. See, Acts
28. 8. In several there was a foregoing belief; not all.

That Christ says, Thy faith has made thee whole, we must understand, as we
are said to be justified by works, Iam. 2. 21. i. e. declaratively, not
instrumentally: Be it unto thee, according to thy faith, v. 29. is not, for, or
by thy faith: Else the luster of miracles would have been divided. Saving faith
was the end, not the means of miracles; not the seed, but the fruit.

Mat. 27. 37. This is the King of the Jews.
IN the whole Volume of the N. T. nothing is more harmoniously recorded, by the
four Evangelists; then the super scription of the Cross of Christ: and yet not
one of them literally agreeing with another: Some make a strange paraphrase
upon it. My thoughts are, that the Holy Ghost sets down nothing a la vole,
at random: but there is a reason of every iota in that incorruptible System:
And he, foreseeing that the Antichristian brood would idolize that title, [I.
N. R. I.] has on purpose varied the expression in the Elements, holding all to
the same sense: that so there might be no ground left, for the canonization of
that devised tetragram.

The same prevention did God of old use with the Jews, in the secret burying of
the body of Moses; which, if that people, prone to idolatry, had discovered;
would have turned his tomb into superstition.

The like I conceive of the birth day of our Savior. All the records we have,
is, In the days of Herod: Whereas other acts, of inferior concernment, have
the year of the reign of the King, the month and day registered unto posterity.
This, me-thinketh, might in sober-minded men, take off the edge, of that eager
pursuit, in the celebration of the Nativity of our Redeemer: Though the
Grandees in Mathematics, would have the conjunction of the eightht and ninth
sphere to have been that day, A. M. 3967; in; yet, that this account does
differ, one, two, three, four, or more years, and upward, many grave Authors
have probably concluded. Better is a modest sitting down under a dutiful
ignorance, than the extolling of an uncertain error.

Mat. 27. 44. The Thieves also, that were crucified with Him, cast the same
things in his teeth.
IT is certain, by the harmony of the Evangelists, that one of these Sufferers
was a convert; and, having faith in Christ, did rebuke his fellow. It is
obvious for the Holy Ghost, to put a plural for a singular, or the whole for a
part: and vice versa.

In this there is something more. The denomination is from the most eminent:
For this was a notorious valliane. His unbelief did overtop the remorse of the
believer; not in worth, but in degree.

Practically it denotes the contagion of sin: that a guiltless person, in
company, should be branded, with the infamy of the malefactor. See, Josh. 7.
11. Mat. 26. 8. Here it is a happiness to keep aloof.

Joh. 20. 17. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to
my Father.
THese words do not import a natural or moral absurdity, of the touching of
Christ. Not natural; For, by his tangible quality, he proves himself to be no
spirit; Luke 24. 39. and lays it in, against suspicion of imposture or
delusion. Nor moral, For he bids his disciples handle and see him, both in
a verse; one sense being as lawful as the other; verse. 27. He bids Thomas
reach his finger, and his hand, and touching him thrust it into his side.

But knowing the strength of Mary's faith, he would have her live higher then
sense: On the other side, he did condescend to meet with the weakness of
Thomas's belief, and make his outward feeling, subservient to the strengthening
of his inward faith.

As leight meat in a robust stomach, or stronger viands in a feeble body; both
are subject to corruption: So does our wise and indulgent Houshoulder, bring
forth suitable dishes of dispensations, according to every ones spiritual
disgestion.

The hardest knot remains yet undissolved, viz. the coherence of the words;
Why his not yet being ascended, could be a reason of his interdiction, of her
touching him?

My conjecture is, because at heavens door, faith leaves us; or rather is
swallowed up, by the real fruition of that beatitude, which we in this life did
but hope for. He bid her delay the highest degree of perfection, till they
should meet in heaven. It was enough here, that she, by her worshipping and
Rabboni-ing of him, did own his Resurrection.

Though, to live by faith, does argue more fortitude; yet to live by sense, is
more certain and more happy: The former most fit for a Soldier Militant: the
latter proper to a triumphant Victor.

Whereas it is said, Faith is of things nor seen, sight is not synecdochically
taken for any sense: It was a strong evidence of her faith to believe not
feeling; And thus expounded, it may be, unto her particular, a sufficient
reason of her interdiction. But from hence to derive a standing rule, that Our
Savior's raised body was either Physically or morally intangible; shows a
defect of natural Logic.

1 Cor. 11. 7. For a man indeed ought not to cover his head.
THe senseof this place, to us, is contrary to the Letter; which seems harsh
to them, who being slaves to syllables, do not consider, the scope and place,
where this was written. For the intention of Paul was, to prefer the man
above the woman; the subjection of woman being signified by their covering; and
that natural, v. 15, [by natural must be meant, the custom of the place, not
an internal cause; for that is also common to a man: I question not, but most
males, would, Absolon-like, if sciffers were abandoned, vye with many women for
length of hair,] as it was a token of superiority, to be uncovered; which
custom pleases several Nations, unto this day: In the Eastern Countries, a
servant is not permitted, to enter bare-headed into the presence of his Master:
And the French Potestants do, upon the same ground, justify their preaching,
having their heads covered.

So some of Hipocrates Aphorisms, though with them unfallible oracles,
transplanted into our nations, by losing their luster, contract a
suspectednesse: and, without subscribing to a Protagorean Sceptism, That which
is true in one place, may be false in another.

1 Timothy 1. 8. I was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief.
FRom hence most Divines conclude, Paul to have been an unbeliever; before
Christ appeared unto him: yet this may be questioned. For he was zealous for
the Jewish Religion, not yet fully buried; brought up at the feet of Gamaliel;
and according to the rule of charity (as we are, if judgment will permit, bound
to construe all things, in the most favorable sense) he did trust in the seed
of the woman, Shiloh, the Messiah, the individuum vagum; though, through
ignorance, he wot it not to be the Son of Mary. Else I know not how to
construe, 2 Timothy 1. 3. And, Acts 23. 1. I thank God whom I serve from my
forefathers, with a good conscience. I doubt not but the Eunuch, Acts 8. before
Jesus was preached unto him by Philip, was a believer. Apollo no less; Acts
18. Conversion after conversion, you find in as eminent an Apostle, Luke 22.
32. Mat. 18. 3. I know that the habits of all graces are infused together; yet
the emanation of them by degrees, in Scriptureidiom is a new conversion; or
conversion renewed, as well in the extense, as in the intense.

Finally, for in-measure, they were his own aggravating depressing words, to
extol Free Grace the higher.

Heb. 12. 24. The Blood of sprinckling, speaking better things then that of
Abel.
OUr general Translation is, then the Blood of Abel: I should rather read it,
then Abel, (...): but I find the Originals to differ.

The Question is concerning the sense, which will carry it probably, against
the stream of former Commentators; better for the active effusion of the Blood
of Sacrifice, then for the passive blood of Martyrdom, which he suffered.

For the scope of the whole Chapter, yea Book, is, to compare the Priesthood of
old, and their Sacrifices, with that of Christ's, showing the transcendency of
the latter beyond the former. Now, to bring in the Blood of Martyrdom, and
compare it with the Blood of Sacrifices, is an infringing of the Rule of
Reason: Comparata debent esse sub eodem, quantum fieri potest proximo, genere.
It Is more rational to confer the first acceptable Sacrifice, set down by Moses,
with the last of Christ's: Or rather the Type, Abel's offering the first-fruit
of his Flock, with the Antitype, Christ's offering the last fruit of his
obedience.

It has a reference unto Genesis 4. 10. Thy Brother's blood cries.

That word cries (...), signifies either a present misery, or denuntiation of
future Judgment: But (...), [speaketh] is of a soft and still nature. As in
our, so in al-Languages, there is a palpable difference between Vociferation,
and Speaking. I add Chap. 11. ver. 14. of this Book, (...), where the same
word is used, may better have reference unto (...), then unto (...); because
Relatives respect ordinarily, the immediate antecedent: So that the sense
should be; and by that, i. e. his Sacrifice, He, being dead, yet speaks;
which concenteth with the Exposition of the former Text.

1 Pet. 3. 19. By which also he went, and preached to Spirits in Prison.
(...), Being sent, which agrees best, both with word and sense: I see not how
this proves, Christ's descent into Hell, any ways: neither in Soul nor Body;
but only, that he was preached by his Spirit, by which He was quickened from
the Dead, ver. 18. whereunto this relative [which] does look; unto the
Generation of Noah that are now in Prison.

Concerning that Article, Descended into Hell, though great Volumes have been
written about it: yet, with me, the uncertainty of the Author, (not the
Amanuensis, else I must question the Authority of the Acts of the Apostles, of
the Epistle to the Hebrews* and in the Old Testament more) of the Symbol, does
justly slack the eager enquiry into its truth. Only we find it first in the
Syriack Tongue; and many of the Eastern Church, either by negligence lost this
Article, or else on purpose left it out: which latter, because of its Senses
ambiguity, I am prone to embrace. Severally it is expounded, and few agree,
which I will not mention. What I have beaten out upon the Anvile of mine own
Conceptions, you shall have.

First, that, in a public Epitome of our Faith, should be neither Tautology,
nor defect, not a preposterous order; I think none will deny: Of each, a word.

If for Hell you take the Grave, as it is frequent with the Originals, then is
it a vain repetition; his Burying before included so much.

If you will have it the Passion of Hell fire, i. e. the wrath of his Father,
for all the sins of the world, it must precede his Death: here would be an
absurd preposterousness: For no passion after the consummatum est.

If for local or vertual descent, it is either a part of his exaltation, or
humiliation: Not the latter; for it is not by us imitable, as all his
sufferings, (Miracles excepted) since his Incarnation, stand as well for our
Ensamples, at least habitually, as for our comfort: But in this, none, I hope,
mean to tread in his steps. If, as a part of his exaltation; it must be, either
in his Body, or in his Soul, or according to his Deity. Not according to the
last; for that was Omnipresent: Neither according to the first; for then could
he not be in the grave, three days and three nights: nor in his Soul; for that
he recommended into his Fathers hands, concording with his Promise, made to the
Thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

What some imagine, that this should be an Exegetick Explanation of the
foregoing Burial, is inconsistent with sound reason: since every Exposition
ought by right, to be clearer then the precedent subject.

The whole Earth, indeed, in regard as well of its dignity, as distance, may,
in respect of Heaven, be called Hell, or Inferi: from whence descending, to
reassume his Body, this Article, if it had any fore going Type, or Promise,
might be expounded.

It is the dullest and sordidst piece of Pedantry, to an ingenuous Spirit, to
believe, with the Catholics, what the Church believes, and to be ignorant of
the thing believed.

It remains then, to know what to hold to, (if I give something more then
humane credit to this Article) that his three days and nights resting in the
Grave; opposite whereunto is his sitting at the right hand of his Father, which
Prophets foretold, and he himself had gloried in, Joh. 2. 19. Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again: his forerunner being Jonas
in the Whales belly, is not mentioned in the Symbol; except you have it here:
And all that while, being in the Bonds of Satan, was a further humiliation, than
to go to Prison, and presently be let out again. Thus, with much ado, it will
make a proper Article in its due rank; and so I can make shift to believe, that
Christ descended into Hell.

A step or two out of the Road, concerning the Systeme of the Apostles Creed,
where I observe some things inserted, not absolutely necessary to the substance
of our Belief; as his suffering under Pontius Pilate, the Catholic Church,
there being thousands now in Heaven, past all Believing, which were here
altogether ignorant of these points. Some things must be taken warily, with a
great caution, as that the Father was the Creator of Heaven and Earth; whereas
it is ascribed also unto the Son, Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. and to the Spirit, Job
33. 4. according to the true and common rule in Divinity, That all the Works,
ad extra, are indivisible.

But a greater oversight there is, in the omission of two principal Heads, the
Basis of all our comfort.

1 No mention there is of his actual obedience, by which he purchased Eternal
Bliss for us: as by His Passion, He freed us from the wrath of His Father. For
they are in an error, who deny any fruit to redound to us, by the perfection of
His Works: because, say they, He being made Man, was, by it, subject to the
Law; forgetting that He put on Humanity, for our, not His own sake. Et quicquid
est causa causae, etc. If for us He became Man, He did also for us fulfill the
Law.

2 His Intercession, by which our Persons and Prayers are made acceptable to
Him, that sits on the Throne, is altogether forgotten. Without the
apprehension of either of these, a Soul shall find but small solace in the
highest pitch of his own performances, and slow Returns of his humblest
Addresses.

Rev. 12. 11. The Woman having the Moon under her feet.
THis is generally expounded of the Church trampling upon sublunary and
unconstant things. Later Writers take it for the Church under the Gospel, which
is promoted a form higher, than the School of the Law, that is, then the Jewish
Ceremonies, and Festivals, which were commonly regulated by the course of the
Moon.

None of these Expositions are Heterodox, or strangers from the Text, but may
have their secundary place, still reserving the most honorable Seat, for the
principal firstborn signification.

The most genuine sense to me, is, (if a tender Forehead may have a place,
among more composed Brows) to synchronize with the History of that time wherein
John lived, to signify the Churches treading down all Idolatry, which was
generally all Asia over, to Diana of Ephesus, whose Emblem among the Heathen
the Moon Crescent was, and is given in the Arms, unto this day, of the most
puissant Idolater of the whole Earth; An encouraging Omen for all Christians,
to wage War with the Grand Turk. Aquilae augurium.


Though they had other several Gods, yet this, exceeding in Universality and
Magnificence, is, Synecdochically, put for all the rest.

FINIS.
A Calm Ventilation, OF Pseudodoxia Epidemica; OR, Doctrine of Vulgar Errors,
Set forth by the hand of the most sedulous THOMAS BROWN, Dr. in Physic, By the
still GALE OF JOHN ROBINSON, His Fellow-Citizen and Collegian.

Pro captu Lectoris, habent sua fata libelli. LONDON, Printed by J. Streater,
for Francis Titon, at the three Daggers in Fleet Street, 1658.

The Contents.
BOOK 1.
CHap. 1. In the first Fall, whether the stronger were deceived by the weaker?
113 Chap. 2. Whether Adam and Eve were the greatest sinners? 114 Ibid. Whether
Satan tempting, knew Christ's Deity? Ib. Ibid. Whether the Devil's Despair be
sin? Ib. Chap. 3. Error defined. 115 Ibid. Whether all things be known by
their causes? Ib. Ibid. Whether the Egyptian Earrings were stolen? 116 Chap. 4.
Of Pythagoras's Bean. 117 Chap. 6. Whether whole Nations be indisposed to
Learning? Ib.
BOOK II.
CHap. 1. Of warmth of Springs. 120 Ibid. Of freezing of Eggs. Ib. Of the
Spirit of cold. Ib. Whether sparks be the accension of Air? 121 Chap. 2. Of the
variation of the Needle by submarine Earth. Ib. Of its rest in the midst of
Water. Ib. Chap. 3. Of the Terrestrial Pole. 122 Of the Wound-Salve. Ib. Of
revealing of Secrets. Ib. Chap. 4. Of Electricks. 123 Chap. 5. Of Daniel, and
the Dragon. 124 Of boiled Gold. 125 Of Coral. Ib. Chap. 6. Of Generation by
Putrefaction. 126 Of Cloves. Ib. Chap. 7. Of Cats. 127
BOOK 3.
CHap. 1. Of Elephants. 128 Of the site of Musculs, 129 Chap. 2. Of Horses
dunging. Ib. Chap. 9. Whether propagation be from every part? Ib. Chap. 12. Of
the Soul of Adam's Rib. Ib. Chap. 13. Of Frogs. 130 Chap. 16. Of Vipers. Ib.
Chap. 17. Of Silkworms. Ib. Chap. 18. Of Moles. Ib. Chap. 21. Of the use of
Nostrils. 131 Of Aliments taste. Ib. Chap. 22. Of Chilification. 132 Chap. 23.
Of Unicorn. Ib. Chap. 24. Whether Terrestrial Creatures were first named? 133
Chap. 26. Of the Glo-Worm. Id. Of the Pigmire. Ib. Of singing of Birds. 134 Of
the Spider and Toad. Ib. Chap. 27. Of the yellowness of the Stomach. 235
BOOK IV.
CHap. 1. Whether Man alone sit? 136 Of the Generation of Males. Ib. Chap. 6.
Of Fat floating. 137 Chap. 7. Of the weight of a Blown-Blather. Ib. Chap. 10.
Of the cause of the Pox. 138 Chap. 12. Of time. Ib. Chap. 13. Of the Dogg-stars
rising. 139
BOOK V.
CHap. 4. Whether any thing in Paradise were hurtful? 140 Whether Eve could
kill her Husband? Ib. Chap. 5. Of Adam's Navel. 141 Chap. 6. Of the Jews
Ceremonies. 142 Chap. 14. Of Jephthe. 143 Chap. 19. Of Long-tail'd Bears. Ib.
Chap. 21. Of sitting cross-leg'd. Ib. Chap. 22. Of Palmestry. 144
BOOK VI.
CHap. 2. The World created in Autumn. 145 Chap. 5. Of the motion of the Sun in
the Equator. Ib. Chap. 7. In Paradise were the principles of all things. 146
Ibid. Of the advantage of the East. Ib. Chap. 10. Of the Mores blackness. 147
Ibid. Of Sight. Ib. Chap. 11. Of cold fire. Ib.
BOOK VII.
CHap. 1. Of the forbidden Fruit. 148 Ibid. Of the word Pomum. Ib. Chap. 4. Of
the Rainbow. 149 Chap. 5. The Printers faults. Ib. Chap. 7. The ancient
Hyssop. Ib. Chap. 13. Whether the Moon be the cause of flowing and ebbing. Ib.
Chap. 17. Of Poisons. 150
Preface.
THE enchaining of Knowledge, within the Fetters of Humane Authority,
surpasses the Turkish Thraldom. Set the understanding free and dis-ingaged
from the usurpation and tyranny of precedent opinion, it will sore into a
serene height. Nay, as further disquisition and experience of man does promote
clearness of mind; so is it no shame, upon second review, to lay Battery to
ones own former weakness; and, upon the demantling of it, to cast up a stronger
Breastwork; still allowing the full weight of reverence unto Antiquity if it be
right.

This candor I have found in my honored Friend and Author; who, in his maturer
years, is willing to rectify, what himself, and others, in their younger days,
were falsely seasoned withal. It is the freedom, besides, of a Philosopher, to
cite any thing doubtful and suspicious to the Assizes of Rational Inquisition.

There need but little care concerning the choice of a Language: For I am sure,
whose art cannot afford him more Tongues, then Nature does Eyes, he will never
attain, to the full understanding of his elaborated exercitations: which, I
confess, require a more subtle Reader and Judge, then my self; my cold Brain
would Snaillike be contented to cozen the Winter with a three Months sleep.
But zeal unto truth the spark of labor, has almost awakened me from my wonted
drow siness: not that I desire to reciprocate the Saw of Contention.

Here I do but more regularly examine, what we have in private, without
infringing the limits of Amity more loosely discussed: We both being loyal
Subjects to Truth, agreeing on that third, cannot disagree from our selves, nor
from any that subscribeth with me, to be

Her faithful Follower, John Robinson.

BOOK. I.
CHap. 1. In the first fall the strongest was not deceived by the weakest: For
Satan in the Serpent, as being created a Sphere higher then man, was the
stronger: We must not think that the edg of his intellect was dulled by sin:
this line not being defective in length, but straightness: Neither are a
regenerate man's thoughts subtiler, but sublimer. The experience of Eves sense,
v. z. not dying immediately, did give the foil to her husbands faith.

Ib. Whether were Adam and Eve the greatest sinners in the world? If the world
be taken for the whole Universe, it comprehends the Angels, which sinned from
inward principles, and that irrecoverably: Neither of which is quadrating with
the fall of man. But take the world stricter, for Mankind; certainly they
escaped the experience of the fruit of sin, which is its aggravation; nor were
warned by the examples of others. Neither sinned they against Evangelical
mercy; nor that pardonless sin, the remission whereof we may not deprecate.
Their sin, indeed, was, by contagion, the greatest, extensive, as being the
source of all; not in their persons, intensive.

Chapter 2. That Satan knew the Deity of Christ at his temptation, I would rather
incline to believe: he having seen the completing of all the prophecies: not
being ignorant, at his conception of the congratulation of his Mother: at the
birth of the hymn of Angels, and the testimony of shepherds; and at his baptism
seeing the Dove and hearing the witness, both of heaven and earth, God and
John. Add unto these, their number and nimbleness of communication; he himself
is afterward brought in, to give a subtle or extorted testimony of his Deity.
Luke 4. 41. Either when the weaker was overcome by the stronger: or, that with
more ease he might delude, when he should be called, forsooth, a Christian.
Neither is it safe to extenuate his sin, or to be his Advocate in pleading his
ignorance.

Ib. I think it a sin in Devils to despair: the like I hold of reprobates; I
mean of the same Economy. If you object, they have no commandment or overture
to hope; I answer, they had a commandment: The former, to trust Gods mercy, in
the confirmation of their estate. The other, have had, if not Evangelical
faith, at least the Law of Nature, which because ill employed, God justly
denies them hope of grace, Romans 1. 21. Besides, as their abilities, are
incapable, so is their will averse: the continuation whereof does justly
eternize their exile. Neither can I condemn their opinion, who make the linked
chain of their continued crimes the reason of the perpetuation of the wrath of
their Judge. For if after the day of Judgment, the Mediatorship of Christ shall
cease, (as the Schools teach) and the perputuation of bliss is Angel-like, by a
congruity of holiness; then, by analogy, the duration of punishment, does
answer their everlasting unbelief. Nor must we think that obdurate souls, in
that fire, are melted into remorse, or softened into repentance.

Chapter 3. Error is defined a firm assent unto falsity. The understanding often
suspendeth its judgment, concerning the truth of an assertion: And so the
Author himself, with most wiser men, does acquiesce frequently in a skeptical
likelihood and probability. Sometime there is an inclination rather unto this
side, than the other; which is an Opinion. In all these there may be one or
more falsities. A determination is not always requisite, to the completing of
an error. Besides, there is one falsehood in notion, another in the speech:
this is an incongruity to the heart; that to the thing. All lies are Errors;
yet some without the suffrage of the mind. Finally, Oblivion it self is a lie,
for either it is of things past, or to come: the forgetting either Ab oblivione
eximuntur impossibilia, illicita, impertinentia.
of them, is a denying either of what has been or should be, and yet without
any firm consent.

Ib. That nothing is truly known but by its causes, though Aristotle's seems
too general an enuntiation. In transnatural things, the Trinity, Election,
Resurrection, etc. We must trust to bare authority; without searching causes.
Properly, I belive no more then I know: See Job 19. 25. Yea, in Physical Ne
credas quod nescias.
things, cannot comprehend the formal causes, why fire burns; the Lodestone
or Carabe attracteth: It is well we know them a posteriore. To reduce the
difference of individuals to a manifest cause were a fruitless labor. See
chap. 10. of this his Book. To speak truly, as sense is dazzled at the excess of
objects, or puzzled at the exiguity of particular moats: so the understanding
cannot attain to the highest cause, because of It Is transcendency; Nor the
lowest atoms of individuality, because of its renuity. To be contented with
the ignorance of some things, is a part of modest wisdom. Scaliger,


Ib. It is too uncharitable a thought, that the earrings of the Egyptians were
stolen. For by Gods Express they were borrowed; in which sole reason, most
acquiesce: But to flee to an exorbitant precept, when firm and solid arguments
may be drawn from a standing rule, is a mark of a weak and shallow judgment.
Upon demand, they were ready to restore them again: But when they were pursued
for their lives, what should they have done with them? In a distinct order to
return every one their own, they had no possibility: to throw them down
promiscuously, would not have been satisfactory to the particular borrowing.

Moreover, in equity there was as much due unto them in arrearage, for their
sapernumerary brick: in the Chancery of Alexander the Great: Since this Pharaoh
would not stand to the pact, made with Joseph for his Fathers family.

Withour making God accessory to it, I see not how it can be registered among
the great benefits bestowed upon them, Psa, 105. 37. He brought them forth with
silver and gold, foretold Genesis 15. 14. which, without angariation or a press,
cannot but have reference to these medals: And to list their felonious riches,
within the Catalogue of God's mercies, in my ears, sounds harsh.

Chapter 4. Pythagoras's bean may elegantly prohibit Venery: Since in it, at the
several ends, there are the manifest signatures of the Genitals in both Sexes.
Our Masters teach us, that all leguminaes or pulse, as also bulbous roots, do,
by their flatulency, blow up this spark of Venus. Neither do I, hereby, abandon
its use, in Political suffrages. Nor was Pythagoras's Genius altogether a
stranger to these abstruse Characters.

Chapter 6. If there be some whole Nations indisposed unto learning it depends
either upon a Celestial or Terestial Cause: Not Celestial, for every thousand
years, the Longitude changes its situation, above five degrees; which, in this
case, is of some moment: so that the Land, which in the Creation, lay under the
middle of Aries is now ruled by the influence, to phrase it with them of Taurus.

But, what will the Astrologers say, to see so continued a malignity of
Aspects; that none should have or Ascendent in their Nativity? Never a
Promissor or Significator strong or sure enough for to cause a benevolent
inclination?

If terrestrial, it is either external or internal: not the former, as air,
water, diet, etc. for often Nature, always Art, can correct those: by which
Moors and Boggs are turned into fragrant Meadows. If internal, either the
unaptness is of the Souls part, or of the Bodies. Not the souls, for all men's
Souls are always alike; though their emaning beams be either brighter or
duller, according to the clearness or dimness of the Lanthorn of the organized
body. If on the body's side, that might have a medical hand: yea many times in
individuals, one disease, by accident, becomes the cure of another: And I see
not but one Epidemical distemper might remedy an Endemical malady. The Plague
of the Ekronites is a preservation and cure of a maniack passion: semblable to
which are many occurrences Barclay,
in quotidian practice.

Further, it is observed by rational Historians, that, after revolutions of a
few Centuries, learning takes its transmigration: so that those people, which
about Christ's time, were, for humane letters, the only mirror of the world,
did, not long after, and now are become the most Boetish of the whole earth; et
vice versa.

The like doom is befaln unto Christianity: Canaan and Jury is degenerated into
Barbarism; The seven Churches of Asia unto Turcism: We, the untamed West, are
grown up more then into civility.

As for the Genius of man, I take it not to be connate; but a retained
propension to observed and approved passages, an inclinable and ready way to a
habit. The Demones of Plato, appropriated to every Country, are inconsisting
with the profession of Gospel Light.

BOOK II.
CHap. 1. That many springs do not freez, their motion may be one cause: which
is swifter, at their narrow eruption, then at their enlarged diffusion. A
violent motion of water, is a preservative against glaciation; yet does not
altogether prohibit it: Drops squeesed from the clouds, in their swiftest fall,
are precipitated into frozen hailstones. Moreover, many springs have a
sensible warmth, at their first ebullition, whose refrigeratedstreams are
subject to the chains of congelation.

Ib. Eggs will freeze in the albuginous parts. That point in the Chalaza, the
spark of vivisication, I wish it might freez; it would rid my trees from
Caterpillars, which continue their noxious species, by their hybernating Eggs.

Ib. Salt peter does excite the spirit of cold. So does Sugar decayed Mustard:
which for affinity of elements in the letter, and aliment in the platter, I
merrily use to call in Latin Sal-charum. This spirit is manifest in snow;
where, if, by the clemency of the air, it be leasurely dissolved, the spirit
fixed will preserve it from putrefaction: whereas, if by fire, you suddenly put
it to flight, a strange heir, making an unlawful entry, does, with a
debauchment of its new inheritance, hasten its corruption.

Ib. If Scintillations are not the accensions of the air, upon the collision
of two hard bodies, what inflammable effluence is there in sand, or a wet
grind-stone? yea, I have seen a horse in the rain, strike fire on the flint.
Chalkcoale blown makes a flame, yet no more smoke then in kindled iron or
stone.

Chap. 2. What Kircherus observes, that the submarine earth does cause the
variation of the needle, is not to be swallowed without chewing: For the
Lodestone does not so freely send forth its effluviums, through heterogeneall
mediums, especially an Iron plate; this experiment will illustrate it.

Put a needle into a beer-glasse, half full of water: hold a vigorous
lodestone at the edge of the glass; the drowsy needle lies dormant: Fill the
glass up to the brimme; which touch with the stone; the awakened needle, with
joy, leapeth toward its allicient: Besides, that the heavier the medium is,
the drowned body is the lighter; as in the weighing of anchor, or drawing up of
a bucket, every inferior hand can witness, [in quicksilver it is most
evident] the effluvium of the lodestone, if it be not contiguous with the
water, does upon its superficies, suffer a reflection; and by that means is
debilitated. The surest way were, to lay a needle upon the surface of the Sea
it self.

Ib. A needle run through corck, may swim in the midst of the water, and not
sinck. It he speak of liquours heterogeneall, it is a thing so vulgar, that it
falls below the worth of his disquisition, who breaths nothing but
excellencies. If it be understood of homogenerall liquours, that, by its
gravity, it should be permanent in the midst, the rule of motion proves it
false; for the self same weight, that brought it to the midst, will depresse it
to the bottom; si catera sint paria.

One thing may be tried, by the brain rather then the hand. If you have a body
equilibrous with the water, it may be thrust, but will never sinck into the
middle: But to attempt this, because the upholding substance, whether wood or
Cork, inebriated with the Dal detto al fatto, vi e un gran tratto.
liquour, loses the memory of its proportion, I have no mind to try.

Chap. 3. From the non-variation of the needle, in the I Will of Elba, in the
Tuscan-Sea, is no firm argument against the terrestrial pole. For all
magnetic bodies, have their attraction and variations more strenuous about the
pole; then toward their Equator; whereunto this place is inclining.

Ib. The Sympatheticall Unguent may best be refuted, by daring, [neither is
there great fortitude or patience required hereunto] to fire and quench the
instrument wounding, or any thing folded therein. For these sublime Surgeons
do give out, that a cloth or stick dipped in the wound or ulcer, and that
refreshed by their panacean Balsam, will solace and heal the part affected; if
kept from extremity of weather: otherwise it proves painful and noxious. Let
the same jury of experience try the calcined, and, in praise, sublimed vitriol.
If kept from extremity of weather; otherwise it proves prejudicial and
noxious: let it either help or hurt, or be an Idol, Isa. 41. 23.

Ib. To discover to another in a several room my intention, may easier and
surer be done, with the hand alone; then to rely upon the uncertainty of the
dubious lodestone. Frustra fit per plura, etc.

Chap. 4. Neither Cabaeus gyration of atoms, nor Sr. Kellem Digby's syrop-like
contraction into a rope, can handsomely stand before the least gale of wind,
in Electrick bodies, drawing up festuceous fragments: For, by a small breath,
both their ways are overturned: Neither would the body attracted rise
perpendicularly; but, by an oblique angle, miss the middle of the Electrum:
The contact us being less virtuall, and more gross, then that of the
lodestone.

Three things I observe, 1. That these bodies are attractive, though but
weakly, not being excited by heat: which has also not escaped the industry of
our Author. 2. That, upon a sudden approach of the warmed Electrick, the
stramineous bodies will, at first, a little recede. 3. That, where the
reverberation of the effluvium is stronger, [as it is on a looking-glass,
beyond on carminated wool; because of its polilshed superficies, the points
are more compact, and at equaller distance; It Is concavity does also promote
the attraction, as it is convexity, though resting on fewer points, does retard
it] there is the love hotter; which gives a hint to a true cause. But the
reason, and superstructure thereon, is not for this place.

Chap. 5. To shore up the esteem of the Apocrypha, like an old house, it
calls for many supporting props: If Daniel had the Dragon at that command, to
put his immune hand into his throat; he, upon deliberation, as this exploit
was, had, (bearing sword or staff,) twenty opportunities of victory, both
surer and readier then this. The same Canon, that binds Physicians in the
cure of a disease, that it be cito and tuto; the same rule will every
circumspect man take, in the conquering of his adversary. Neither is it likely,
that Daniel, the wisest of Sages, was ignorant of that Rule in reason, Entiae
citra necessitatem non multiplicanda.

But let us examine the toxicum: Hair, pitch, and fat. That hair, is not
poison, though taken in a great quantity, is proved, by the excrements of
voracious dogs, which is seen to be very pilous; by their swallowing hair with
the hide. If any one object the the heat of their stomach, by which hard bones
are ground into powder; the fleece coming away whole, and indigested, does
enervate that. Pitch after it has laid a while in the stomach, is turned into
a chilus, where it deposes its viscosity: as we see in Terpentine rejected.
Fat things, are so far from causing adhesion, that, by me, they are counted the
Soveraignest Alexiteriums, besides the dissolution of the pitch, because of the
lubrification.

Ib. That gold boiled should communicate any virtue to the broth, no man can
gather a solid argument, from a possibility, unto a reality; where both the
(...) and the (...) is wanting. If the effects were as evident, as that of
Stibium or load stone, without abatement of weight; then were it beyond all
controversy. That the quenching of it, does induce a stiplicity into the
liquor, I willingly admit. But by the same reason [torrefying the terrestiall
moats, which also produces its suddainer glaciacion] will, besides steel or
stones, bread tosted hard, and dipped in hot, imprint an astrictive quality on
the drink; whereof I use, in case of costiveness, to admonish my patient's
keepers.

Ib. Concerning Coral, whether it grow while it is petrified, as does the
silver-tree; or, whether it be not, in its younger age, an herb, resembling our
Sampire, hardened afterward in its perfect stature, may justly be questioned.
For first, in every branch there is a hollownesse, which may not be admitted;
if it have its accretion by external lapidificall juices: neither could it so
decently ascend into a methodicall form. Let us look into all salts, whether
vitriol or alum, whose increase is by apposition of forinsecall matter; their
substance is more solid; and their form, if within their proper matrix, less
expanse. Besides, then would the lowest and thickest part, as being the
ancientest, exceed in hardness; and not be so stipulous as we find it.

Chap. 6. That putrefactive generations are correspondent unto seminall
productions, in vegetables, is clear, by the Author's assertion, and obvious
experience. Calcination I take to surpass all putrefaction, and to be the
extremest limits of corruption; yet men, of approved integrity, do affirm
that, hereby, generation is not extinguished Unto sensitives it cannot be
altogether denied, especially in Testaceous Fishes, and Eeles; where the muria
of the one, and slime of the other, falling into a convenient womb, will
produce a specificall progeny; yea it is common to all Creatures, which for
want of discrimination in sexes, are denied copulation. For recreation and
admiration, I add; In my garden I have an herb, much like, in figure and
taste, to the Cardamine, with a sumptuous double flower; the leaves whereof
being chopped small, and committed to the earth, every particle will take sudden
root. Though here be no putrefaction; yet does the mincing of it destroy its
extern herbal form.

Ib. Cloves are no rudiments; but a perfect fruit, which I can show compleately
fastened to the Vmbella. It is no kind of Medler, which, after reaping, must
receive a new fermentation. By the same standard, all our corn should but
prove initiated rudiments: which like to the cloves, for their preservation,
have nothing, but their superfluous humidity, exhaled from them.

Chap. 7. Whether for Medicament or aliment, I know not; but several, besides
me, have seen Catts eat mint and nipt. It Is most probable for some correctory:
as Bears will lick ants; insects, in quantity, too inferior, to allay their
voracious appetite. In the time of satiating their former hunger, there would
rise up a second, which should prove more eager.

BOOK. III.
CHap. 1. That Elephants have no joints, though, by some, it be delivered in
general terms; yet was not their Minerva so dull, to except all; but did
intend the suffragineous or knee joints only: without which there may be a
progression in man; as upon stilts; by the sole motion of the hippe: in
quadrupedes, as in a full gallop. But of the Elke consult with Caesar. Alces
crura sine nodis articulisque habent: neque quietis causa procumbunt; Lib. 6.
neque, si quo afflictae casu conciderint, erigere se possunt, etc. Neither can
I deny absolutely rest to standing: since, in that posture, many fouls,
[especially carnivorous or rapacious ones, whom nature for fight has furnished
with the strongest thighs and tallons; A cock does by the same gesture, obtain
his victory, that he does his food by striking backward,] yea horses do take
their ordinary repose. I could relate strange things seen in man.

A favorable construction of the Ancient's tenants, if it can consist without
infringing Authority of truth, is more piety; and it savoreth of reverence, to
cover our Father's nakedness.

Ib. How every muscule has its free site, may best be discovered, where all
the muscules are alike affected: and that is, in those that are drowned: which
is not a right, but an inclining posture. Some advantage to an exquisite
Anatomist.

Chap. 2. The cause of the often dunging in the horse, I should rather ascribe
it to the moisture of his meat, then to his gall: since, if grooms have any
credit, his going to grass, does acquire a frequency in excretion: his
standing in, with dry meat, which is more bilious, does contract a rareness. I
leave the decision to the farriers.

Chap. 9. If propagation be by a real transmission from every part; then would
those, who have supernumerous or mutilated joints; produce their like. Soon
would arise whole families of deformity: Nay, all Adams posterity should have
been defective in one ribb; as is granted 7 Book Chap. 2.

Chap. 12. toward the end. That God animated the ribbe of Adam's apart, is not
so evident: but, by traduction, its soul might proceed from the soul of Adam.
There is no mention, in Scripture, of inspiration into the woman: Neither, for
perfect propagation, is there requisite a distinction of souls into sexes.
There must be a soul of the female; but no female soul: As one man was
generated without a man; so one woman without a woman: both, most like in sleep.

Chap. 13. In frogs, with some few other creatures, I find a riddle: that, all
their life time, they delight in their womb, which is the water. For, after
exclusion from the spawn, in it are all the joints articulated, and
metamorphosed into another shape: from apodes to quadrupedes, from tailed to
bobbed.

Chap. 16. Catterpillers and silkworms are left to their own shift, without a
maternall tuition: I marvel, what privilege the accursed viper should have
got, to be exempted from the same hardship; why nature should be a German to
this, and to the other, but a Stepmother. Though the one be viviparous, the
other oviparous: yet does it not amount to a necessity of discrimination, in
one above another, of a parentall fostering: both being equally able, to shift
for themselves, and live at their own hands: This therefore can be no argument
against the mother's death.

Chap. 17. Others with me, that have brought up silkworms, will testify, that
in them; both of magnitude, wherein, ordinarily, the female surpasses twice
the male; and genitalls, there is a manifest distinction. Three small pricks,
ending like a pyramid, in one point, is the tegument of his virisity.

Chap. 18. The cause of a Mole's dimnesse, is a thick and hard tunicle covering
their eyes: which, if it were thin and tender, would continually be molested,
and soon worn out, by the angularity of sand: they seeking their food, by
loosning the earth, upward.

When they are said to be blind, it is not to be understood in their lowest
species; but in the next above it: in the catalogue of of quadrupedes. They
have skill, though not to use, yet to refuse light.

Chap. 21. I doubt whether smelling be the principal end of nostrills:
Although Fishes have no lungs, yet their gifts, are an analogicall substitute
for respiration. I should count that the principal function of a part, without
which, the creature cannot sublist. What if respiration be not presently
abolished, upon the stopping or loosning of the nostrills? no more is smelling;
in both there is a diminution. The mammillary teats in the brain, are the
proper receptacles of odours: the passage unto them, is the external cartilage.
But of all senses, Smelling would be least missed: and deprivation of that
sense, is reckoned among the leves jacturae. While I was thus scribbling, I had
a patient, who, probably, by the loss of his smell, did redeem his endangered
life. There may be a mercy in a privation: and the night has its pleasure,
says Seneca, in solacing of the blind.

Ib. If in all aliments there be a sapidity: the more sapid, the more
alimentitious: but spiced and salted dishes, are counted among least nourishing
diets. Again, the more alimentitious, the more sapid: yet no food in nutriment
can hold pace, with the insipid egg. But all senses delight in a mediocrity.

Chap. 22. Whether Chilification be not a corrosion, by some sharp ferment, I
question: when I see dogs devour hard bones, and, not long after, reject them
in a friable album graecum: which, if rare, were as wonderful, as that an
Ostridge should digest Iron: Not unlike to that acid phlegm, expelled by
vomiting, which, in corrosion, is not inferior to the sharpest vinegar. The
sour rennets of beasts come under this notion; which being familiar and
pleasant to domestics, within doors; breaking forth, prove troublesomeguests
to their neighbors: which is proper also unto gall.

Chap. 23. It were a rational labor, and would correct, not only Vulgar, but
also Medicall Errors, to search the reason, why Unicorn should cure poison.
Some poisons [I speak not of outward, which are cured by ligatures,
attractives, etc.] are dulled, by exhibition of great quantity of drink, as
livium: Others, by obtunding or blunting the corroding teeth of its arsenick;
and that is by fat things: many by manifest contraryeties, as Opium by
Costoreum; the latter, by its heat, conquering the former's coldness, and that
within the nearest genus of ill-savoured Medicines. Others attain an help by
sudorificks, and that in venomous and pestilentiall air, intermingled with our
spirits. Not a few, by hindering its venom, from spreading to the vitalls; by
their stipticity and dryness, intercepting or exsiccating the effluvium. So
does Bezoar, Bole, Coraell, as Ivory in the Jaundise; And this way Unicorn or
Hartshorn may become a tolerable remedy. But whosoever looks for an effect
proportionable to the height of its renown or price; I am more then afraid,
he shall be frustrated of his expectation.

Chap. 24. In strict reason, Terrestrial animalls should have their
praenomination, above all Marine creatures. The former Adam did name, according
to their nature; to the other [as is confessed] men must fain an analogicall
denomination. The one were preserved in the Arc, to have a name among the
living; The other, if they were not, by the confused coition of fresh and salt
water, destroyed, were mainly damnifyed: For few fishes, and those of the
delicater kind, will endure, especially so long a time, both pure, or
commixture of water. But I see no absurdity to say, that the Sea, [as at the
first so] after the separation of that grand conflux, might produce junior
fishes, out of its emptied womb. And according to this Epoche, in my Herauldry,
the creatures of the earth, should have the prerogative of the ancienter house.

Chap. 26. The contracting of a glo-worm extended, is no argument of life. For
this does befall most dead insects, moving by annnular fibers. In artificial
things it is very obvious; the experiment may be seen in a quail pipe.

Ib. In the center of the kernel of grain, as the safest abditory, is the
scource of germination; which may and does escape the amputation of the
extremes, by a knife; but not the terebration of the pis-mire; though very
small: The latter hinders it from sprouting; so does not the former. Neither
is it a shame to learn from beasts; we owing the invention of most mechanic
arts, to the instinct of unreasonable creatures.

Ib. That no lati-rostrous animal does sing, is not easily gain-sayed: But that
a flat bill, is an open disadvantage unto singing, may be doubted; seeing many
modulations are upon flat winde-instruments; and man, without a beck, can tune
any kind of voice. The reason of circular extremes, in pneumatical pipes, is,
that the sound the easier might be prompted into its proper form, a globe. As,
from the conversion of a triangle, the product is a cone; so, from the
circumvolution of a circle, arises the voice's natural figure, a Sphere. In
strict ratiocination, the proper forge of Music, is not the bill, but the
throat.

Ib. Though a spider should vanquish a toad, it were, [to speak gently]
temerity, to prescribe the one, as an anti dote to the other. Let, by the same
law, a chicken be an antidote against spiders. Oil, which kills all
vegetables, will preserve man against the most deletory Granum Nob. The same
dangers are not to be looked for, in the dead bodies of venomous animalls;
which were feared in their life; as the learned Author does rationally
deliver,. 12. of this Chapter. And if their poison cease, I should scarce trust
their antipoison: yet the plague, after many years sleep in linen or woollen,
will awaken and rage; by the testimony of our predecessors, backed with our own
experience.

Chap. 27. The yellowness of the stomach, and gutts in the chicken, does not
necessarily argue its nourishment on the yolke; though I believe the thing, yet
not the reason: For the same color is apparent, in all newborn babes; except,
with some, Omnia ex ovo, which, in a Metaphorical and florid sense, may be
admitted, with a Rhetorical strain; but in a Physical demonstration in strict
terms, is hard to be understood.

BOOK IIII.
CHAPTER 1. That sitting is not proper to Man only, the several kinds of Apes, by
their untaught Mimicks, and Dogs, by teaching, will draw it into question; If
sitting upon the ground or flat, may come under that denomination. Man can do
no more than these beasts; and will make a cute Angles, between Back, Thigh,
and Leg bone, [though inverted] as do irrational animals: And beasts will, upon
seats, make as right Angles, [two lines to an Angle] as does man.

Chapter 5. The uncertainty of generating males by a ligature, of the left
testicle, may more solidly be refuted, because in congress, the males right, is
the females left; which left side, is not thought the proper place for
masculine conception: so that this conceit falls by its own weight: Neither
was this arrow full drawn home to the head. Some probability there might be in
those creatures, which engender by infilition.

There are three kinds of Being, Real, Rational, and Modal: the latter is
neither of the former, but more then Rational, yet less then Real. Such is
this relative site. The want of which accurate distinction, brings one into a
maze of confusion.

Chapter 6. That fat bodies do soonest float, there is an error, a non causa ad
causam. The true reason is, that they have less proportionable weight
depressing them, then lean bodies. If the whole body were fat, it would never
sink. Not that fat is, under water, more prone unto fermentation, which is the
cause alleged; We besprinkle our almonds, in beating, with Rosewater, to
preserve them from restiness. To speak properly, Oily or fat bodies scarce grow
rotten, but rancid. Neither does fat, so readily symbolize with air, as the
Schools teach. Let oil, grease, or tallow be boiled unto vapors, and I will
believe: super-infused it will preserve liquours fresh, excluding all allien
air: By the same reason, it defends iron from rust, and locketh up,
faithfully, whatsoever it is entrusted withal. To say, it will soon conceive a
flame, is no satisfactory argument; for the same happens unto chalk-coal,
which yields no smoke, the product of kindled fatness. Besides, when the acme
of fermentation is over, except there be, at the very height of it, a fixation,
from some external cause, the subject will fall into a more compacted gravity.

Chapter 7. There may be a mistake in a blown bladder, about the weight of it; if,
either the bladder be moist, and then, with extension, it dries: or if it be
blown up with the breath of man, which contains some water.

Further, Gold foliated, and feathers expansed, will not weigh so much, nor
fall so swiftly, as the same will, being contracted. Smoke rarefied does
ascend; but being condensated into soot, its nature is to descend. The common
road of conception and production of rain, is an ancient and sufficient
testimony.

Chapter 10. If the Smallpox have their Original from some quality in the
Menstruum, imprinted upon the child in time of gestation; It must needs follow
that this disease is endemical to the whole world; because of the universality
of its cause: The truth whereof is worthy examination; and unto mine as far as
travelers report is to be credited, the assertion is seconded. That others
undergo them never, others often, is according to the disposition of the
receiver.

Chapter 12. The measuring of the motion of bodies does teach us their duration. No
duration then to the center either of earth or heavens; because destitute of
motion. If it be replied, the motion need not to be in the thing but either in
the Sun or Earth; neither is that absolutely true: For a motion of either
upupon its own axis, if the body be homogeneous, which is questioned concerning
the Sun, will be no rule of measure. A loco-motion will be requisite. How far
shall Saturn outdure the Moon? A step higher: There may be a time of duration
without motion, as were the three first days, before the Creation of Sun or
Stars. There was a flux of time in the days of Joshua, when the Sun stood
still: This Philosophers call interval time.

Chapter 13. If since the world began Syrius, arose in, and before its end may have
its ascent in by that compute, the world's glass should run yet 12000 years:
And where are then the last times, wherein the Apostles lived? Sed meliora
spero.

BOOK V.
CHAPTER 4. Might not these words have been spared, In Paradise there was no
creature hurtful? Since there was none, the Devil excepted, all the world over.
It might with better reason have been questioned, Whether there were any
Medical Plants? I think, to say, any Therapeutick Medicines were existent,
before a disease be in nature, is frustraneous: But that they had then a
Prophylactick virtue, to prevent all seminaries of maladies, may easily be
understood.

The Botanicks comprehend corn, trees, and fruit, within the tome of their
Herbals. Rosins might be a preservation against rain and darkness. As other
Physical Plants, so Rubarb might serve for food to some creature. Many things
stand for symmetry and complement of the Universe.

But, to speak with the Schools, there were remedies in Innocence, radically
and potentially; but not actually, and formally: So was repentance and
commiseration in sinless Adam.

Ib. There was a natural ability in Eve, after impregnation with a boy, without
imperfecting the Creation, as she had killed the soul, so to destroy the body
of Adam; without the abolishment of a Species: But this would, I confess, have
ushered in many moral absurdities.

Chapter 5. That Adam should be created without a Navel, because he was not
nourished that way* I see no necessary consequence. For it is of all sides
granted, that, to the same part of the body, do appertain several offices. Now
if, for the Navel be taken the outside only, it serves to the Umbo of the
belly, for a Center in way of ornament; or for an emunctory. Nature many times
curing Dropsies that way. Of like use are Paps to men. If, for the Navel, be
understood the Vasa umbilicalia, the inward Ligaments; Adam could not spare
them, they serving to hold up the Liver and Blather; the excision of them
brings sudden death: which kind of punishment is, according to the
Historians, in use with the Egyptians.

A Skar is a defect in the skin: But the outward vessels of the Navel, never
deserved the title of humane part: rather an antecretion, for forty weeks
nourishment in the dark: which, since it precedeth man's being, and does forsake
him being born; the amputation thereof can be no defect.

Lastly, the commonness and universality of this part, to all sorts and sexes
of people, does take away the reproach of deformity, and suppress the tongue
from a shameful upbraid.

Chapter 6. That the Jews did omit the standing or loin-girding, or staff-handling,
in eating of the Passover, and that without sin, is not likely: they being
essential significant Ceremonies, instituted by God, to show their sudden
departure out of Egypt. The Traditions of the Rabbis are not unknown: But
their authority, as being repugnant to reason or Scripture, is often suspected.
Christ indeed was Lord as of the Sabbath, so of the Ceremonies: and he, being
the body, come, the shaddows were shortened; especially, he then instituting a
Sacrament of a dissonant posture.

A Digression by a Parenthesis, concerning those, who fear to approach too near
to the Artolatry. They dare not seem to worship the bread, by kneeling before
it; yet will they reverence it with their head bare; which is no gesture
befitting familiar accumbency, and fraternal communion. Who can think that the
Jews did eat the Passover uncovered, it keeping no decorum, with the rest of
the itinerary postures? They say, we ought herein to show all reverence; But,
to enterweave humane devices, and those incongruous, with divine institutions,
is more then irreverence.

Chapter 14. To the rational defense of Jephthe, I add one argument, by others also
omitted, from Heb. 11. All these dyed in faith: and Jepththe is inserted within
the Catalogue of believers. That one unquestionable testimony, is of more
validity with me, then many disputable arguments, of frail humanity: and when,
without pondering, we follow the steps of dubious guides, we may soon aberre
from the way of truth.

Chapter 19. Bears with long tails, need not be a Poetical fiction; nor a black
Swan a monstrosity. In Egypt there are sheep of incredible tails, weighing 80
li. White Bears, Hares, Partridges, are common to Greenland. The race of Moors,
and that by a regular production, is no anomalous monstrosity. White Thrushes,
are not rare in England. It is not the change of accidents; but the commixture
of foreign forms, that breeds a prodigious spectacle.

Chapter 21. To sit cross-legged, or have our fingers pectinated, does really
induce a numness, and retarding the circulation of the blood, does affect the
heart: and, by compression or distortion of the sinews, is an impeachment to
motion and sense. That which Ligatures do on set purpose, these postures will
perform without advice.

Chapter 22. The line of life, and of Liver, in Man or Monky, which generally are
taken for Nature's Manuscripts, are but the folds of the skin; when the hand or
thumb is bent inwardly. Neither proper to any who have their feet always
extended. By the same reason we have not those now, which we had in our
infancy; but by accidents, diseases, labor, changeable. The variety and
numerosity of these Characters, and Lineaments, are both more legible and
certain, in spelling out ones profession: A Book fit for Justices to study, how
to discover idleness.

BOOK VI.
CHAPTER 2. What Land was out of Paradise, was Terra Incognita: But, to the
Inhabitants the world seems to be created in Autumn: For the fruit of all
trees was ripe, except we affirm, that, before sin, every month had fresh
fruit, glancing unto Rev. 22. 2. Ezekiel. 47. 12. Or, that some of the fruit was
ripe, while other were but in blostome. The name of Thirst signifying
originally beginning which fell on Autumn, being October, does persuade the
same: But the month Nisan, which fell on the Spring, became the new year of the
Jews, not upon any natural ground; but upon the institution of God, in
remembrance of their delivery out of Egypt: And that Abraham did begin the
calculation of years, from the Autumn, as having received it, by tradition,
from the Patriarch Enoch, witness both Josephus and Eusebius. But man and beast
drew their first breath in their spring; because their flouring years did
precede their fruit-bearing harvest.

Chapter 5. If the Sun should move constantly, in the Equator, it would be, unto
both poles, continual day; because of the refraction of the beams, through the
air, contrary to chap. 14. of this Book. But those, who have the Poles
vertical, do, for above half a year, in every month, New Mood excepted, enjoy
the benefit of both Luminaries, 14 days together.

Chapter 7. It is most consonant to the order, which God kept in the Creation, and
to reason of man, that the principles of all things were wisely disposed, in a
convenient Matrix, within Paradise, seeing there was a compendium of the
Universe: For as unto all creatures Adam gave suitable names; so he must have
within it, the epitome of the whole world: or else he could not have known it.
To the Proverb,

Non omnis fert omnia tellus; I oppose, Non fuit sic a principio. Ib. The
emolument of the East is not to be despised, by them, who have any Sea, or Lake
adjacent unto them. There is no small influence from the ascending rays of the
morning; dispersing the exhaled vapors of the night: Whereas in Occidental
coasts, the damps of the Sea enter into the room of the departed Sun: The
Oriental is famous for its dryness; the Occidental mansions, are by their
moisture, rafty. Hence is the frequency of evening thunders; which in a morning
is a rarity. The like I say of rain-bows.

Chapter 10. All things are seen under the vernish of color: How this consists
with the fight of Moles, I see not: For Book 3. Chap. 8. they are allowed the
sight of light; and that of colors is denied them. Yet to speak with the
Schools, color is light, terminated in the superfices of a solid body.

Ib. Concerning the blackness of Negroes, there seems some promotion of it,
either from the climate, or soil, which being situated between four great
Rivers, whose banks are often over-flown; the heat having thereby a thicker
medium to work upon, than upon pure air [hence, after rain, the new beams of
the Sun become most scalding] does exhale and fix more vapors, especially
toward the head; which makes their skulls, to exceed triple in thickness,
ours of Europe: So that their proud depth does contemn the force of the
sharpest sword, as several times, with admiration, I have seen.

Chapter 11. If denigration proceed from mortification, it presupposes a cold
fire: as in an extreme marasm of age, or by frost, in Russia is evident: Of
which subject, I remember to have read a rational treatise in the Teutonick.
But I love no Logomachie.

BOOK. VII.
CHap. 1. It is said, that the forbidden fruit was never produced since. If it
be meant that it should be obscured, and retired into the closet of perpetual
latency, I see no reason for it: because man is now disobliged from that
Commandment. No man might imitate that holy perfume, Exodus 30. or transfer it
into a domestic use: But that it should overawe us, hitherto, morally,
savoureth too much of Judaism. By the same Law, we shall be forbidden the smell
of Frankincense. yea, Bread and Wine being once instituted for a Sacrament,
must not be exposed to a natural and common profanation. If the whole Species
were annihilated, though it were but in one individual, [as that happens unto
some creatures] it mutilateth the Creation, and brings a lameness into the
beauty of the Universe.

Ib. A Peach, though with a hard kernel, is named Pomum by the learned: And so
are jugulandes and siliqua by Pliny.

Chapter 4. The Galaxia or Milk-way, if it had a natural signature, of both rain
and fair weather, might be as comfortable, I dare say, more frequent then the
Rainbow. Besides, the former is not imitable by the industry of man; the latter
every plebeian hand can at pleasure command: yea, a Horse trotting through
shallow water, if the Sun approach near the Horizon shall unwittingly raise the
colors in the Bow, as has been mentioned before. The constancy in duration,
and situation, might challenge a preheminency; but it is safe, to acquisce,
humbly, in the wisdom of the Maker.

Chapter 5. Abraham and Ishmael, instead of Isaac, So Chapter 15. Gold will swim in
quick silver, wherein iron and other metals sink; I dare not but lay the slip
upon the oscitant Printer.

Chapter 7. The Hyssop upon the Wall, I would rather take for our Parietaria, or
Pellitory, which is used for cleansing and pollishing of Vessels and Glasses;
This for site and virtue, will best suite which the Herb, which the Priest used
in sacrifice, and the Botanicks of Solomon. Dioscorides is dubious.

Chap. 13. If the Moon, by exciting the nitro-sulphurous spirits, at the bottom
of the Sea, cause high water; It is either in regard of its vicinity, or by
virtue of her body, or her lihgt. The first cause is vain: For the periodicall
estuation would be at the time of the perigaeum. The body of the Moon is
unchangeable: Neither can we confer this effect to its light; because, at
New Mood, the springtide is not inferior.

Galileus's subtle device, concerning the motion of the earth, has its
scruple. It is true, that the water will rise to the sides of the Vessel, being
swiftly moved; but, that the same befalls the Sea, arrested by the shore, is
a doubtful consequence: because the motion of the one is natural, the other
violent.

In water, as in all liquid things, I acknowledge a double natural motion: by
the one, in regard of its gravity, it descends; by the other, because of its
tenacity, it runs into the form of a Globe. Reiterated drops upon a true
level, (if there be any Physical plane) will evince this; which, swelling in
the midst, cast themselves into a circle. That doleful deluge, which did
compass the whole earth, was a sad example. The latter propriety is the
product of the former.

Chap. 17. That God made all things double, one against another, and that
poison is not without antipoyson, I desire to have my assent excused. Not to
speak of moral things, where one contrary has several contraryes, and one
vice as adverse to another, as virtue to them both; I think God made no Poison,
but all things in the world were made for the use of man. Their chiefest
deleterium is, either in the quantity, or some other circumstance, as in
Lettice, Lecks, Casservi, etc. whose integra are aliments; though juices
mortiferous. Those things that are pernicious by their external form, as
beaten Glass, Sponges, etc. have not deserved the brand of poison. Those that
are really lethiferous, are but peccatorum sudores, excrescences of sin, and
came in with the thorns. The Serpent was destructive rather to the soul, then
the body.

Besides, some Vincetoricks are general, and will be contrary to several
kinds. Finally, in diverse creatures, one part is alexipharmacall to the other,
as is confessed in the subsequent Section, by our Judicious Author, to whom be
peace.

FINIS.

