THE TRIUMPH and UNITY OF TRUTH, IN TWO TREATISES; Intended As a Preservative
against the many Errors, and unhappy Divisions of these times in point of
Religion.

By JOHN ROBINSON, A lover of Truth and Unity.

Stand, having your loins girt about with Truth. Ephesians. 6. 14. Jerusalem is
builded as a city at unity in itself. (So Tindal's translation has it.) Psalm
122. 3. Legant qui non ceciderunt, ne cadant; qui ceciderunt, ut surgant.
Augustinus. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden Key in S. Paul's
Churchyard, Anno 1657.

Men's Emblematis.
BRight Truth, whose tabernacl's in the Sun, In sole p^suit tabernaculum suum.
Sic vulg. Lat. Psa. 19. 4.

To the whole Universe can be but one;
And (though in clouds she for some time remain)
Will with fresh luster yet break forth again.
On the divided world the Furies set,
Laboring t'extinguish her in vain do sweat;
Whilst silly Mortals fluttring up and down,
Sindge their fond wings at candles of their own.
Be gone then with your petty lights, away;
The Sun alone must rule, and have the day.
MAGNO CONATV NIHIL AGIMVS

AMBVLATE IN LVMINE IGNIS VESTRI (...)



TO THE READER.
READER;
NO Theorem that Euclide builds upon Sic unitatem veritatis Aegyptii in
Hieroglyphicis per solemn repraesentarunt. Pier. Valor. lib. 44. cap. 4

Can be more firm then this, That truth's but one.
More S^ns then one in nature cannot be,
Nor saving Truths in true Divinity.
Or if sometimes three Suns at once were seen,
Two have but merely Apparitions been:
Thus Truth has her Parelii, Which to eyes
Dimmed with pride, ignorance or prejudice,
Do seem her self; and whilst they are in view,
The world's divided which should be the true.
Now to discover this, the Prince of Night
Persw ades men candles of their own to light,
And that they cannot dash on falshood's shelves,
When guided by the light that is in themselves.
This counsel they embrace, until they find,
That what should light, does burn and make them blind:
And whilst they buisily, like flies, about
These twinkling false lights flutter in and out,
His Emissaries, all the Furies sw eat Sic Libertinos iisque similes, qui S.
Scripturas despiciunt, Furiis Calvinus assimilat. In 1. Thessalon. cap. 5.
verse. 20.

About extinguishing the true: But yet
It Is all in vain, for this will then be done,
When with their bellows they blow out the Sun:
All this truths Hieroglyphic does thee show
Obscurely legible, and more then so;
For look again, and see this only one
Placed on a radiant and triumphant throne.
Where she is beyond all blasts, and gives forth light,
Maugre those clouds that would the world benight.
If then Truths shadow thus illustrious be,
How splendent is her self in Majesty!
Not violence, cra^t, nor the audacious rout
Of Sectaries shall e're her light puff out.
But if thou wait a while, she will shine more clear,
Then in our troubled sky does yet appear.
So common is it for our eyes to see
The Sun grow brighter by obscurity!
Only sh'expects (though in a clouded state)
Thy true fidelity; nor will she bate
One jot of that, but have thee constant prove,
And serve her with thy joy, esteem, and love.
To the much Honored and truly Religious Lady THE LADY HUSSY of DODDINGTON.
Madam;
IEsteem it an honor to be related to any stem of that Body, whereof your
Ladyship is the Root; God having made you the happy Stock of a numerous and
verdant Offspring in your country, and at the present, of as many eminent
Families there, as the golden Candlestick in the Tabernacle Ex. 37. 18.
had Branches proceeding Sic de sorore Nazianzenus; (...). Orat. 11.
from it; who are all looked upon as singular ornaments and examples of Virtue
in it.

And I hope it will be (if an error) easily pardonable, to ingratiate my
service here by this Relation, and humbly to beg your Ladyships patronage for
these two small Treatises: which may serve as a little vantage ground to stand
upon, from whence you may see the Unity of Truth encompassed with Errors, as
the Sun with Clouds, on every side, and puffed at by enemies of all sorts,
endeavoring (if it were possible) to blow it out; the strangely-destructive
ways some take, whilst they walk in the light of their own fires, and will not
have the great Luminary of Gods Word to guide them; together with the sad
divisions in this our Sion; and upon sight thereof, take occasion to mourn over
her.

Now whether (Honored Lady) can I better address these Lines for Sanctuary,
then to your self, whom God has given (what few of your Sex arrive at) Virilem
intellectum, In understanding be ye men. S^ we translate it, 1 Cor. 14. 20.
to be as a man in understanding; able, not only to discern Truth from
Falsehood, and Unity of Religion from Combination in Faction; but also, with the
Elect Lady and her children, (Oh let not envy grudge when the Grace of God is
magnified) to walk in the 2 Epistle of S. John verse 4.
Truth with an upright and steady heart?

Continue then your stand (most Christian Matron) in the Reformed Religion you
have received, as most consonant to the word of Truth in the sacred page; and
your affectionate love to our Jerusalem, Gal. 4. 26.
which is from above, and the mother of us all, though now forced by the
unkind struglings of her own children within her, to cry Genesis 25. 22.
out with Rebekah, why am I thus?

Let your Constancy be made manifest to all men, for the Lord is nigh at hand:
and persevere (as you have begun,) that none take Rev. ^, 11. 7, 9. Sine
perseverantia nec militarem qui pugnat coronam, nec palmam victor consequilur.
Bern. Epist. 1 29.
either the Crown or Palm from you; either the Crown from off your Head, or
else the Palm out of your Hands.

Your Zeal hitherto has provoked many; do but add to it the exercise of your
Faith and Patience, and see the Salvation of God: For the poor shall not
alvvayes be forgot, Psalm. 9. 18.
the patient abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever: but Truth and
Unity, which are yet so much clouded with us, shall e're long (when God has
sufficiently humbled us under the want of them) Clarius eluxit lumen Phoebi
redeuntis a tenebris. Ovid.
break forth again, and shine more gloriously then ever; the one triumphing
over falsehood, and the other over division. Which choice blessings that your
Ladyship may live to see Gods Church here reinvested with, and have a high
enjoyment of, even till Shiloh come again, is the sincere prayer of him, who is

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humble and faithfully devoted servant JOHN ROBINSON.

Mistakes to be corrected.
PAge 32. line 35. after immediately, read relate. P. 48. marg. l. 6. read Live.
P. 97. l. 8. read covetousnesses. P. 108. l. 32. read as it did the. P. 129.
marg. l. 2. read contra unitatem. P. 141. l. 18. read religand^.
THE TRIUMPH OF TRVTH.
James 1. ver. 18. beginning of the verse. Of his own will he begat us with the
word of Truth; or, by the Word of Truth, as the French translate it.
THe writer of this Epistle was S. James. Par la parole de Verite.
Now there were two of this name, and Mat. 10. 2.
both Apostles. The one was the son of Zebedee, and brother to S. John the
beloved disciple, whom Herod Agrippa slew, as you read Acts 12.

The other was the son of Alpheus: and this is Mat. 10. 3.
our Apostle here, who in the 15. chapter of S. Mark verse 40. is called James
the less, to distinguish him from the former by his small stature; and in the
1. chapter to the Galathians Creditur esse filius illius Mariae, quae fuit
soror Domini. Sic Bucholc. ad annum Christi 63. et Spalata in his Resp.
Ecclesiastica, lib. 2. cap. 2.
verse. 19. he is said to be the brother of the Lord, non natura sed cognatione,
not by nature but kindred, as being Cousingerman Erat Cognatus domini, ideoque
Hebraeorum more Frater; Gagu. in locum.
to Christ by the mothers side.

And the Ecclesiastical writers tell us, That he was the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 23. Et Doroth. in Synopsi.
unto whose special charge the care and oversight of that Church was committed
by the Apostles.

They to whom he wrote were the twelve Tribes that were scattered abroad, (as
we read verse 1.) For when S. James wrote this Epistle, God had put the faith
of the Jews to the trial by three great dispersions, besides some smaller
scatterings.

The 1. was of the ten tribes, by Salmanazer king of Assyria.

The second was of Judah See M. Mede's Diatribe in Acts cap. 2. verse. 5.
and Benjamin the two remaining tribes by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.

The third was of those Jews that returned out of Babylon to Jerusalem under
Cyrus, and built the second temple, of whom many were carried away captives
into Egypt by Ptolemeus Lagi one of the Grecian kings, when he surprised
Jerusalem.

Now the Apostle in this Chapter does

1. Comfort the twelve Tribes in their sad dispersions and tentations: For the
Apostle knew that comfort could never be more seasonable then now in their
needful time of trouble; and a word spoken in season (says the Wise man) how
good is it* And this he does from the 1. verse to the 13.

2. Instruct them, as to the cause of tentations, ( viz) That God, although he
be the Author of penal evils, as the executions and acts of his punitive
justice, yet not of sinful evils; for let no man say (says S. James) De hoc
vide Lips. de constant. lib. 2. c. 6. Et King in Ion. page 246. ad fol. 251.
Vu^t Deus fieri malum, licet non v^lit malum.
when he is tempted, he is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man, verse 13. And one reason is, because he is the
fountain of all good, verse 17. and a (...) Nazianz. Invect. 1.
fountain cannot send forth at the same place sweet water and b^tter, chap. 3.
verse 11. Nay, he is not only good by nature, but further, even goodness it
self, and God makes it a branch of his name that he is abundant in goodness.
Exodus 34. 6.
so cannot possibly be the author of any evil. Indeed God is granted in
sinful evils to be permissive, restrictive and ordinative, S^ quid boni est
(Domine) donum tuum est, and non est nostrum n^st malum. August. Soliloq. 15.
ver. 14. 15.
but not effective: No, their efficiencie is from their inward cause, which is
our own lust and natural corruption; this being the womb that brings forth
actual sin, which once finished brings forth death.

3. He exhorts them to a Quia de sermon veritatis sententiam proximae
congruentem mox annecti^, non dubito quin exhortationem hanc peculiariter
instituto suo accommodet. Calv. in locum.
most diligent and effectual hearing of Gods word, verse 19. And the ground of
it is here premised in the Text, because cause it is the isntrumental cause of
our new birth.

Of his own will he begat us with the Word of Truth.

The Apostle then in these words lays down two things.

First, the nature of true conversion, in this word Beg at. Our birth of Grace
being in some respects like that of nature; wherein 1 Pet. 1. 3.
the father that begets us is God; Jerusalem quae est sursum, and communis
nostrum matter, est Ecclesia, originem habens a gratia coelesti, Idem Galat. 4.
26.
the mother that bears us and brings us forth, the Church; the men-widwifes,
Gods ministers, 2 Cor. 6. 1.
Gods co-workers (as the Apostle calls them:) and the Luc. 8. 11.
seed of which we are begot, the word of God.

Secondly, the efficient causes of it. And they are two.

First, the Principal, The will of God.

Secondly, the Isntrumental, The word of Truth.

First, the principal is the will of God. His will is the source and fountain
of all subordinate causes, which as inferior orbs have their influence and
motion from this, and to this, as to the principal, is our conversion here
attributed: before which there could be nothing, because it is eternal;
nothing Cui semper subest cum volet posse, non aliud est in illo velle quam
pesse. 1. lib. Fulgent. ad Mon. cap. 12.
greater, because omnipotent, for what God wills, he does in heaven and earth,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 135. 6. nor any thing more just, Totus ordo justitiae
originaliter ad divinam voluntatem reducitur. Carthusian. in 4. Sent. did. 46.
qu. 1.
because it is the rule of all justice and righteousness. There is nothing
then without God deserving Neque extra, neque ultra divinam voluntatem causa
est inquirenda. Aug. in Manich. l. 2. c. 2.
this, nothing beyond him moving to it, nothing by way of activity concurring
with him in it. Our birth of grace is neither from our Parents, nor our selves,
whether by nature or industry: which makes S. John say expressly of those that
have the prerogative to be the sons of God, that Ioh. 1. 13.
they are not born of the will of man. Where the word is (...), and not (...).
So the Hebrews distinguish betwixt Isch and Adam, and the Latins betwixt Vir
and Homo, reading it in their translations generally, Ex vol^ntate viri, not
hominis.
(...), which notes a man qualified with some goodness or other, that serves
to advance him above the common sort. And though we grant a man that is to be
converted and considered in the state of degeneration a passive concurrence, as
a subject endowed with reason, and therefore capable of grace, if God will give
it; yet do we deny him The will of man fallen is able to do nothing to the
performance of any spiritual actions, without the assistance of grace.
Suffrag. Theolog. M. Britan. in 3. and 4. Artic. posit. 1.
any actual concurrence whatsoever to it.

Our conversion is no work of nature, but of Grace; Nature being the subject of
it, but not the cause: for there is this difference (says Aquinas,) betwixt
Hoc interest inter gratiam Dei and hominis: quod gratia hominis non causat, sed
praesupponit bonitatem in homine grato, vel veram, vel apparen^em; Gratia vero
Dei causat bonitatem, quia voluntas Dei est causa omnis boni creati. Sum. 3.
part. qu. 86. Artic. 2.
Gods grace and man's, that Gods grace creates goodness, because his will is
the cause of all created goodness, whereas man's grace presupposes it. And
hence it is that our conversion is here compared to the generation of a child:
Now it is against nature for a child to be it is own parent: Generation is no
act of the child, but of the Parent.

Let no man The condition of man after his fall is such, that he cannot turn
and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith, nor
do good works acceptable to God, unless prevented by the grace of God in
Christ. So the 10. Art. of the English confession.
say then, that we are able by the strength of nature to prepare and dispose
our selves for the grace of conversion, since it is God (says S. Paul) that
works Phil. 2. 13.
in us both the will and deed of his good will and pleasure; not only the deed,
Dei est and ut bonum facere velimus, and ut bonum facere valeamus; Fulgent. ad
Monim. lib. 1. cap. 9.
but the will also which disposes us for the deed. And here there is a
distinction in Alvarez that may be taken notice of, and it is of a twofold
disposition to Grace. Alvarez de auxiliis gratiae.


First, negative, and this is when a man is not so practical of sin in the
notorious courses of it.

Secondly, positive, and this is when he has an aptitude or fittingness to
embrace and yield to the motions of sanctifving grace.

Now one man (says he) is more negatively disposed for grace then another; and
it is exemplified in the Scribe, of whom our Savior says, Non long Mark 12.
34.
erat a regno Dei, that he was not far from the kingdom of God: but no man
positively. As dry wood is more negatively disposed for fire, then the wet, as
containing not those so many hindrances of fire as the wet does; and yet the
dryest wood cannot positively make it self fire.

But here it is not amiss (I suppose) to take in a grane or two of salt to
season this withal: As

First, that every one by nature is alike indisposed to good; for we have all
sinned (says the Apostle) Romans 3. verse 22 and 23.
and are come short of the glory of God: nor is there any difference betwixt
one and another, as to the corrupted mass, but we are all equally sinful,
till grace come to give the difference, and are all August. in Soliloq. Nullum
est peccatum quod unquam fecit homo, quin alter possit facere, si creator
absit, a quo factus est homo.
disposed na^urally to commit the worst of sins that the worst of men were ever
guilty of. Again*

Secondly, that the reason why one man is less sinful in his life then
anot^er, is not because he has less evil in his heart, or better
dispositions of himself then he; but from restrictive grace, which suppresses
the natural rebellion, and keeps it, not from being, but from breaking forth:
as the lion has the same nature when he is tied up, as when he is free, though
it expresses it self more violently in a loose then in a chained condition.

And thus much for the principal cause of our new birth, which is the will of
God.

The Isntrumental follows, which is the word of Truth.

Now this presents 2. things to our consideration.

First, that the word of God is the word of Truth.

Secondly, that the word of Truth is the ordinary means or instrument of our
new birth and conversion.

Where by the word of Truth, I understand not any humane or moral truth,
(though this may do something to the reforming of the outward man in sundry
particulars; as we read of Polemon, a loose young man at Athens, who by hearing
Xenocrates read but one Valor. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 9.
lecture in the commendation of Temperance, became afterward very sober;) but
that only which is divine and theological, there being no other truth that
works thoroughly upon the inward man, and purifies the heart, but this alone.
And that I call divine and theological, which is originally contained in the
Scripture, is deducible from it, and conformable to it; whether conveyed unto
us by preaching, as Gods solemn and public ordinance, or else by reading,
writing, conference, or otherwise, as his more private ways of communicating
it. All which God uses as several channels to let his word of Truth run in
toward our conversion, though all of them be not alike clear and excellent,
but every one of them in their own order, and in that rank of superiority and
subordination wherein God has placed them.

Now that this word of Truth is a means or instrument of our new birth, (I
think) needs not be questioned, since the major part of Divines is for it, and
S. Peter, in that parallel place of his, seems to express, where he says,
that we are born again not 1 Pet. 1. 23.
of corruptible but incorruptible seed, (...), by the word of God which lives
for ever. And what else this preposition (...) should note there besides the
instrument, I do not see; nor this par la parole de Verite, this by the word of
Truth in the Text, as the French translate it. Nor shall I take upon me to
determine what kind of operation it has upon the soul; as whether it work upon
it either as a physical, or moral instrument: (though my judgment be for the
Baxt. Sts Rest, 2 part, page 160.
latter of the two:) But that it is set a work by God the principal agent
Instrumentum agit dispositive ad virtutem principalis agentis. Aquin. Sum. 3.
part. q. 42. Art. 1. and Keck. log. p. 132.
to operate upon the soul, and that powerfully too, the Scripture every where
is plain enough, as in the 2 Cor. chap. 10. verse 4. 5. where the Apostle
says, that the weapons of our warfare (the chief whereof there intended by the
Holy Ghost, says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in locum.
is the word of God,) are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, or reasonings of flesh and
blood, and (...).
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. For what can
be more powerful against the hold of lust, then the word of purity? against
the hold of infidelity, then the word of faith? against the hold of
presumption, then the word of fear? or against the hold of falsehood and
insincerity, then the word of Truth?

But in the next place, that it is Gods ordinary means of our conversion, I am
sure was yet never doubted by any rational Christian. And by this I
distinguish it from those extraordinary means that God made use of at the
first, before that this standing Canon of the truth was fully settled and sealed
by the Holy Ghost for the ordinary means; Revela^. last, v. 20.
which now (there being not the same reason for them as before) we look upon as
out of date in the Christian Church, and have in their stead the more sure word
of the Prophets to rest upon, or the Firmissimum Sermonem. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
most sure word, as Beza renders it.

And this makes me wonder at Rog. in 17. Artic. proposit. 7.
the Schwenckfeldians, and others of the same mol^e in these times, who
depending altogether upon Caspar Schwenckfeldius Eques erat Silesius, nobili
ortus genere; Docuit Scripturam literam esse mortuam, ac illuminationes and
revelationes majoris esse faciendas. Spanhem. in Diatri^. Historic. de
Anabaptist. Numero 24.
the immediate revelations of Gods spirit, do slight this word of truth, and
Gods ordinary calling by the ministry of it, affirming the Scripture to be as a
dead letter, and their own Enthusiasmes to be preferred before it: Whereas Gods
word of Truth and his spirit of Truth go together; nor is there any other
ordinary Ideo Evangelium dicitur Ministeriumspiritus 2 Cor. 3. 8. quia est
instrumentum per quod fidem in nobis vivificam Spiritus Sanctus operatur.
way revealed unto us but this, to the truth of regeneration. The word of God
therefore in the Scripture is compared to seed, without Luc. 16. 13
which we cannot in reason expect here any harvest of grace, since the harvest
is potentially in the seed.

It is then but an idle Christianis spiritus non est phantasma quod aliqui
somniant, sed quem prophtae commendarunt, and evangelium nobis in
sanctificationem praedicat. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 14.
dream, to think of an immediate Spirit to work in us this n^w birth without
the word, or otherwise then the word prescribes; since the work of Gods Spirit
now is not to perfect the word, or to be in stead of it, but only to clear the
dim sight of our understandings, whereby they are enabled to see more plainly
what is that good and perfect will of God revealed to us in the Scriptures.

And yet there be too too many now-a-dayes that have such conceptions in their
brains, which (like false conceptions in the womb) never come to have their
perfect form, nor to amount to any substantial birth: that as the evil
spirits said to the Exorcists, Acts 19. 13.
who took upon them to cast them out in the name of Jesus, Jesus we know, and
Paul we know, but who are ye? so say I to such, The Spirit of Jesus Christ we
know, and the same spirit in the mouths of all his holy Prophets and Apostles
we know, but that spirit whereof these men speak, we do Spiritus iste qui
multos nunc dierum sanctos reddit, ac est ipsis pro norma fidei and doctrinae,
mill formas induit, exuitque in dies, ^^ as, and momenta, dubiae ac fluxae
inspirationis. D. R. page 369.
not know; nor have we any warrant at all to look after it; or if we should,
could we find any thing but error and thing but error and incertainty in it.
But I forbear to speak more of this, because it is a theme obvious every where;
and turn That the word of God is the ordinary means of our new birth, see more
in Reinolds on Psalm 110. and Baxt. Saints rest, 2. part.
back to the former of the two, viz. That the word of God is the word of Truth:
upon which I lay the main weight of my discourse, and set down my rest.

And it is called the Word of Truth not only by Psa. 119. 43 2 Cor. 6. 7. 1
Ephesians. 13. 1 Coloss. 5. Ioh. 18. 38.
S. James here, but also by the Prophet David, and S. Paul above once or twice.

Now in speaking to this, I shall not go about to answer Pilates question to
Christ, What is Truth?

Nor yet shall I give you any exact definition of it; it being like the eye,
which although it see other things, yet does it not see it self; Democriti
proverbiale, Veritas in profundo: Tull. 1. Academic. Erasm. Adag. p. 453; and
Are^. Probl. de veritet^.
which made one of the ancients feign her dwelling in a deep pit under ground,
and another say, that she lies there in (...), Plat. Epist. ad Dionysium.
a little room; both which imply some difficulty to find her out.

Though it will better appear if we consider

Either the parts of truth, which are very numerous. De hoc lege Timplerum in
Metaphysic. lib. 2. cap. 4. and 8. ubi plura.


Or the conceptions of men, which are exceeding various.

Or the dim-sightednesse of our in ward man, which is apt to mistake Genesis 29. 25
Leah for Rachel, and falsehood for truth, as looking upon it here but through a
glass darkly. 1 Cor. 13. 2.


Nor will I be so troublesome as to tell you how some Polan. Syntag. de
veritate; and Tilen. de Attrib. communicab. disp. Ia. These. 12.
as to tell you how some distinguish her, viz. into Original, Real,
Intellectual and Signal. The Signal truth (they say) is that which is
signified either by word o^ otherwise, as when the word agrees with the
understanding; the Intellectual truth they call that whereby the understanding
does suit and accommodate it self to the true nature of the thing it searches
after; the Real truth that whereby the things themselves are agreeing and
conformable to the Ideas and patterns of them in the mind of God; and the
Original truth that which resides in the understanding of God himself, which
had in it the Idea and pattern of all created truths from eternity; It being
nothing else but the very essence and nature of God, which, although it be but
Vna est in rebus omnibus veritas, quia non in ipsis rebus, aut ex ipsis suum
habet esse; sed cum res ipsae secundum illam sunt, tunc hujus vel illius rei
dicitur verit^s. Ans. Dial. de Veritate cap. 14. Et Lessius de Perfectionibu^
divini^ l. 6. cap. 4.
one and the same in all created things it is given out into, yet, as the
things themselves are different, so does this Truth receive diverse names; like
as the sea, which although in it self it be but one, yet according to the
diverse shores it washes in its passage, it has diverse names, being sometimes
called the Germane, sometimes the British Ocean, and the like. Even so it is
with Truth, which, when it lights upon natural things, it is then called
Natural Truth; when upon Moral things, Ethicall Truth; and when upon divine
things, Theological Truth.

And from hence by the way, we may take occasion to admire the excellency of
Truth, as being (...) the offspring of God: for what is Signal Truth, but a
conformity of words, or such like, to the understanding of him that speaks?
again, what is Intellectual Truth, but a conformity of the understanding to
the things themselves? or Real Truth, but a conformity of the things to the
eternal mind of God?

So that every truth (you see) has its foundation in the very Deity. And this
made the Greek Poet call Truth the (...) Pindar. Olym. 10
daughter of Jupiter the chief of the heathen Gods.

But to wave this discourse of Truth in general, and to come more
particularily to the point in hand. Now here know, that (as Divines make a
twofold beginning, viz. of being Essendi, Gognoscendi. see Keck. Syst. Theolog.
lib. 1. cap. 8.
and knowing) so also is there a twofold Truth.

First, veritas essendi, Truth of being; and this is God himself, who is the
being of beings, or the most perfect and (...). Acts 17. 28. ex Arato. And thus
understand that of Hermes Trismegistus; That which is true, has of it self
alone its constitution, and abides according to it self, such as it is. In l.
15. number. 26. De veritate.
simple being: which is the reason that when God would make himself known to
the Israelites by a name that would suite best with his own nature, he makes
Truth one branch of it; as Exodus 34. 6. where the Lord proclaims his name
this, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffring, abundant in
goodness and Truth; Truth being essential to him, though to us only
contingent and accidental. And our Savior also styles himself (...) the
Truth, John 14. 6.

The second is Truth of knowing God: which is 1. Natural, by his works. Now
this way of knowing God is afforded even to the heathen who are without the
pale, and is but a duskish Qui foris sunt. 1 Cor. 5. 12.
and uncertain light; which makes S. Paul call it a feeling or groping after
God, as men do in the dark after a Acts 17. 27
thingthey are in some doubt to find.

2. Supernatural, by his word. Now this, is a favor indulged only to Gods own
Verbum Dei in Scripturis, peculium Ecclesiae. Ambros. Sola Ecclesia pio affectu
veritatem possidet. Id. tom. 2. p. 979.
people, as in the 147. Psalm. verse 19. where it is said, that he showed his
words to Jacob, his statutes to Israel; and is most clearly assured unto us in
the prophetical and Apostolical writings of the Old and New Testament; from
whence they are called by S. Peter, the more sure word of the prophets, and a
light in a dark place 2 Peter 1. 19. And this is the word of truth here spoken
of. And it follows upon the former: for if we believe that there is a God, we
must believe him to be Si Deum credas, veratem credas oportet; and si veracem,
nihil verius quam quod veritas ipsa in Scripturis inspiravit. Erasm. Enchirid.
milit. Christiani.
true of his word; and if this be so, then can nothing be truer, then the word
which truth it self has inspired in the holy Scriptures. The Heathen had
Credit me folium vobis recitare Sibyllae, Iuvenal. Satyr. 8.
their Sibylls leaf in high esteem, insomuch that they cried it up for truth
by way of proverb; but with us Christians, if any leaf be thus far truth, it
is Scripture folium the sacred page, called here the word of truth in four
respects.

First, Normaliter, by way of rule, because it is the rule of all saving
truths. Wherein observe

First, what truths come under the cognizance of the Scriptures; and

Secondly, how they come under it.

First, what truths come under the cognizance of the Scriptures, and these are
all saving truths; to distinguish them from natural, civil, and moral
truths, whereof the Scripture takes small notice, because they make a man wise
only to the world, and not (as the Scriptures do) wise to salvation: yea 2 Ti.
3. 15.
and from some divine truths too, for all truths in divinity are not saving
truths; of which sort are many historical, ethicall, ecclesiastical, and
problematicall truths, that serve rather to puff up the head with knowledge
then to edify the heart with charity. Now these and such like are vera, sed
libere credenda, Truths indeed, but such as we have a liberty in, either to
believe or not, without laying our salvation to stake upon them. But as for
Doctrinall truths, that serve as well to reform our lives as to inform our
understandings, these only are necessario credenda ad salutem, necessarily to
be believed to salvation, and so become saving truths, at least in their
fundamentalls, whereby Fundamentals must be believed with a faith explicit,
absolute and divine. Baxt. Saints rest part 2. page 241.
they challenge the holy Scriptures to be their rule; as in the doctrine of the
Trinity, the deity of Christ, and others of like sort.

And the reason is this, because all such truths are either in plain and
express terms laid See the 8. Article of the Church of England, and the 20.
Article proposit. 7. explained by Rogers.
down in the Scriptures, or else are naturally and by good consequence deduced
from them as their grounds, or else reduced to them as to their rule.

Whereby the way take notice, that inference (...). ( That is) There are some
things that both are in the Scriptures, and are expressed there plainly in so
many words and syllables: but other things that are there, though not so
expressed, but only collected from them; as that the Father is unbegotten,
etc. Nazianz. orat. de Spiritu Sancto, ubi plura.
of truth from Scripture is scripture-truth, though not formaliter formally (as
the school speaks) yet reductive and fundamentaliter, that is, as it is reduced
to it, and founded on it: Christ being the personal foundation our faith must
rest upon, as in the first Epistle to the Corinth. chap. 3. verse 11. Other
foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ; but the
Scripture the Doctrinall, as in the 2. chap. to the Ephesians. verse 20. Ye are
built upon the foundation of the Prophets Ambr. in locum; supra vetus and novum
testamentum
and Apostles, i. e. says S. Ambrose, upon the prophetical and Apostolical
Doctrine of the Old and New Testament. And so much for the first.

The second is, how all saving truths fall under the cognizance of the
Scriptures: and this is by being subjected to them as to their rule. Whereby
Rule I do not mean so much the material book wherein they are written, as the
formal truth, which is the will of God revealed in them; as when we speak of a
rule, we intend not so much the material wood, as the formal measure. And S.
Paul in two several places calls it so in express words: as in the 3. chap.
Philip. verse 16. (...).
Let us walk by the same rule; and 6. Galat. 16. As many as walk after this
rule, etc. Where the word that we translate Rule is in the Greek (...), from
whence we have the name of Canonical Scripture, to distinguish it from the
Apocryphal, admitted no further then as regulated by this, and conformable to
it: And it is a Metaphor taken from Translatum a fabris lapidariis, aut
lignariis, qui funiculo illo regulari operis aequalitatem explorant, Eras. in
his Adag. page 199.
Masons or Carpenters, who try by it whether their work be equal or no; so
does God, the great Architect, use the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
as his rule or square to build his Church by.

Now a Rule has four properties, all which are agreeable to the holy
Scriptures.

First, a rule has a kind of authority over the things that are laid to it, to
be tried and examined by it whether they be strait or no: and so have the
Scriptures a delegated power over all truths that are held out in order to
salvation; every one of them may say of this word of truth as S. Cyprian did of
Tertullian, Cedo Hieronym. in Catalogo virorum illustrium.
Magistrum, Give me my master; this being the Magisteriall truth, unto which
all others resort to be tried and examined, as the Scholar does to his Master:
to this rule and standard they must go; To the Isai. 8. 20.
law and Testimony says the prophet.

There is no particular Church, much less any man, that can obtrude upon their
own word and credit any Doctrines to bind their peoples faith, until they have
first weighed them in the balance of the Sanctuary, this word of truth. For
all humane assertions taste much of the earthen vessel through which they run:
We have this treasure in earthen vessels. 2 Cor. 4 7.
but what the Scripture affirms for truth, we must believe as the Oracle of
God; and what it denies, we must reject as falsehood. Hence it is that truth in
humane testimonies is truly said to be Verit as probanda; but in divine,
Veritas probans: because the word of man, how true soever it be, yet is it in
the great matter of salvation to be received only with a Quatenus, so far as it
accords with this rule of truth, With the Pythagoreans, (...). Naz. 1. Invect.
and no further. It is not then (...), He said it, that must sway with us, (as
it did with Pythagoras his Scholars) nor is it every word which this or that
Minister says, that is the word of Truth; for there shall arise many false
Prophets Mat. 14. 11, 24.
(says our Savior) and shall deceive many, yea, if it were possible even the
elect: but it is (...) what God spoke by the mouths of his holy Prophets and
Apostles, in the verbum scriptum, in the written word of the Old and New
Testament. And Isai. 8. 20.
if any speak not according to this word (says the Prophet) 't is because
there is no light Erasm. Adag. sub loco communt Libertatis.
of truth in him. Amicus Plato was the old saying, that is, Plato is my friend;
sed magis amica veritas, but truth much more. And therefore though in matters
of faith we that are Gods Ministers expect your hearing Nemo trahatur
authoritate cujusquam, sed verita^i potius saveat and cedat. Lactan. de falsa
sapient. lib. 3. cap. 13.
and believing us too, yet (as they said to the woman of Samaria) Non tam
propter verbum nostrum, Ioh. 4. 41, and 42.
not so much because of our word, as because of Christ's word, which we carry
in our mouths; for when it is said of the people, that Crediderunt Exo. 14. 31
Deo and Mosi, that they believed God and his servant Moses, the meaning is,
that they believed the Doctrine which Moses taught them, but yet only propter
Deum, because of God, from whom it came, and whether it tended. And if an angel
from heaven Galat. 1. 8.
(says S. Paul) shall preach another Gospel, another Doctrine then is held
forth by this word of truth, let him be accursed.

Secondly, a rule must be strait and right: and so is the Scripture, a right
word, (as David calls it;) Psalm. 33. 4. Ecclesiastes chap. 12. verse 10.
and the Preacher says to the same effect, that what was written was upright,
or, as Tremelius translates it by the Hebrew, Scriptum rectitudine verba
veritatis. It is not like that Lesbian rule which Regula non quam formosa, sed
quam recta sit quaritur. Sen. Epistol. 76.
would bend any way: no, it inclines neither too much on the right hand, nor
yet on the left, either to maintain superstition on the one hand, or
profaneness on the other.

Thirdly, a rule is perfect, at least in suo genere, and in relation to the
things that are to be perfected by it; it being impossible to perfect any thing
by an imperfect rule. And such also is the holy Scripture, a perfect rule in
order to saving and converting truths: which made the Prophet David say, That
the law of Psalm 19. 7.
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Else why does S. Paul tell us that
all Scripture is given of 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
God by inspiration, that the man of God may be perfect? Now it cannot make
perfect, Nihil dat quod non habet, nec minor est vir^us causae quam effect us.
Gerhard in locum.
unless it be perfect it self. And it is Locus Classicus, a Signal place
(says one) against the Papists, in which the perfection of the Scripture is
demonstrated: and if (says he) it can perfect the teachers, why not the
heare^s also?

Fourthly, A rule must be known: for though This Bellarmine acknowledges, lib.
1. de verbo dei cap. 2. Si regula catholicae fidei nota non sit, regula nobis
non erit.
it have in it self both authority, rectitude, and perfection; yet if I know it
not, it is no rule to me; since there is the same reason for things that do not
appear, as The law rule is this: De non en^ibus and de non apparentibus eadem
est ratio.
for things that are not.

Now from that which has been said (methinks) the Papists are much out.

First, By making the Scriptures depend upon the Church, and not the Church
upon the Scriptures; as if the reed spoken of Sic lapis ad amissis (non amussis
ad lapidem) applicandus* Eras. Adag* sub loco communi I^sti^ae.
Revel. 11. 1. were to be measured by the Temple, and not the Temple by the
reed. Whereas we, although we honor the Church in diverse respects, yet still
do we remember that of S. Paul, Non tu radicem, sedra^i^ te, That thou do not
To. 11, 18.
bear the root, but the root thee: so that the Scriptures bear up the Church,
Where the Scripture is silent, the Church is my Text: where that speaks, it is
but my Comment. Relig. Medic. Sect. 5.
and not the Church the Scriptures; The Church being Christ's spiritual house
or building, and the Scriptures the foundation of it, as it is in that place
before cited, Ye are built upon 2 Ephe. 20.
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that is, upon their Doctrine (as
Anse me, Gagnaeus, Cajetan. and Aquinas in locum.
some of their own learned men expound it.) Now the building (you Huc etiam
tendit illud Bielis; Veritates Catholicae absque omni approbation^ E^clesiae ex
natura rei sant immutabiles, and immutabil^ter verae. In Sent. lib. 3. did.
25. Conclus. 6. dub. 3.
know) depends upon the foundation, and not v^ce versa, the foundation upon the
building.

Secondly, by telling us, That the Doctrine of the Church (meaning that of the
Roman Church) must rule us, though yet they will not rectify it by the rule
of Gods word; whereas particular Churches may and do often err (as Rome now
does) from the right way of truth, because Gods promise of sending John 14. 13
his holy Spirit to lead into all truth, was not made to any particular, but
only to the Catholic Church. See Carlton's Directions to know the true
Church, page 48.
And therefore when they cry out to us so much, that their Doctrine must rule
us, (methinks) it would do well, if withal they would let us know what rule
should rule their Doctrine; which is this rule of truth here spoken of.

Thirdly, By making unwritten truths (as they call Traditions) a part of this
rule, as Bellarmine does, whose words are these; I say that the Scripture is
not the total, but the partial rule of Totalis enim regula est verbum Dei,
sive revelatio Dei Ecclesiae facta, quae dividitur in duas regulas partiales*
Scripturam and traditiones. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Verbo Dei non scripto, cap. 12.
faith. Whereas if the Scripture rule (as it is) be perfect, then is there no
need of their traditions, which have only a pretended Original De hoc lege 6.
q. clar. Theol. Whitakeri de Scriptura, ubi plura.
from Christ and his Apostles, to complete and make it up.

Fourthly, by denying the reading of the Scriptures to the people in a tongue
they understand; whereas no man can Qui dat operam veritati, venit ad lucem, ut
opera ejus sint manifesta. John 3. 21.
walk by a rule that is either not known to him, or else hid from him: Truth
being like Non amat veritas angulos, sed in medi^ stat. Bern. in bis Sermon.
a candle, that is not brought to be put under Mark 4. 21
a bushel, but to be set on a candlestick, to give light to all that are in
the house.

2. The Scriptures are called the word of truth Efficienter, from the efficient
cause, or author of them; and this is God, who is essentially true: so says
the Spirit, Rev. 3. 7. These things says he who is holy and true. For which
cause it is called the breath of God, as in the 2. Epist. to Tim. 3. chap.
(...).
and 16. ver. where S. Paul says, that all Scripture, whether Legal or
Evangelicall, is inspired or breathed of God; even as the soul is said to be
breathed into the body, Genesis 2. 7. to show its immediate Original from God the
father of spirits.

Now though all truth calls God father, as flowing from him, who is as well the
Summum verum, the highest Truth to fill up the understanding, as Summum bonum,
the highest good to satisfy the will and affections; yet is there none that
lays so strong and near a claim to Of this Baxter discourses at large in the
2. part of his Saints Rest.
him as Scripture truth; this being to God as Reuben was to Jacob, his
firstborn, and the beginning of his strength: and you know that the nearer any
stream is to the fountain, the more strong and clear it runs; which is the
reason that God owns it for his, after a more special manner, both by his
word, hand, and seal.

1. He owns it for his, by his word and hand; which were both immediate for the
truth of the Law, as to the plain Tex: and groundwork of it, (for Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
this he spoke viva voce, with a lively voice from heaven, and wrote it with
his own finger in two tables of stone) but mediate as to the exposition and
revelation of it, both by his Prophets in the Old Testament, and his Apostles
in the New; for holy men of God spoke it (says S. Peter) as they were moved by
2 P^t. 1. 2^.
the holy Ghost. And S. Paul also tells us, that the things which he wrote were
the commandments of 1 Cor. 14. 37
God; God was the Dictator of them, and S. Paul only his Spokes-man or
Amanuensis.

2. God owns it also for his, not only by his word and hand, but also ratifies
and confirms it by his seal.

Now for prophetical Doctrine we have his seal in the 8. chap. of Isai. verse
16. where the Lord says thus, Bind up the testimony, seal up the law among my
disciples; comparing there his word by the Prophet to a letter, which though
the people slighted, yet was it of divine and authentic truth, because it had
Gods stamp and seal of authority impressed upon it.

And for Apostolical Doctrine, we have that sealed in the end of the
Revelation, where we have Rev. last, verse 20.
his Amen to it, which S. Ierom Hieron. in Orat. Dominicam.
calls well Sigillum or ationis Dominicae, the seal of the Lords prayer: And so
is this Amen here the seal of the New Testament, to confirm and ratify all the
books of Evangelicall Doctrine for Gods special and peculiar truth. And
therefore if any one now after that God has impressed his seal upon it, shall
add any thing to it, God says, that he will add unto him all the plagues that
are written in this book; or if any shall detract from it, God shall then take
away his part out of the book of life.

And now by way of Corollary* If God be the Author of this word of Truth, who
is but one, nay more, Unissimus (to use Bernard's expression) most Deus (si
dici possit) est unissimus. Bern. de Consid. lib. 5. cap. 7.
one, why then it will follow, that as God is one, so also is that truth of
salvation, which is originally in the Scriptures, and derivatively from them,
but one also: That as the Apostle Ephe. 4. 5.
says, (...), as but one Lord, so but one Faith; so may I here, (...), as but
one God, so also but one Truth. And this did the Egyptians represent Pier.
Valor. lib. 44. p. 130. Totus mundus non sufficit ad duos continendos soles,
said Alexander (...) Q. Curt. hist.
by the Sun, which is but one in the firmament of heaven. Indeed you may
distinguish God into 3. persons; but you cannot, you must not divide him into
3. substances: the essence and substance of all 3. being but one and the same.
And so it is with this saving truth here, which is one for the nature of it,
but not one for number; as there be many rays of the Sun, and yet but one
light: again one Ut solis multi radii, sed lumen unum. Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
truth, ratione Objecti for the object that is to be believed, but not one
ratione Subjecti for the subjects that are to believe, who are all true
Christians. To this end know that the Law and the Gospel are not at ods, as
two several truths, but are only one and the same; Diversa, not Adversas
diverse one from another, but not adverse one to another: for the Law what is
it but Verit as Dei ^elata, and the Gospel but Verit as Dei revelata? the one
Gods veiled, the other his revealed truth; the one his condemning, the other
his absolving truth?

Indeed Multa novit vulpes, Aesop. sab. page 43.
(as in the Apologue) ^t f^lis unum magnum; the Fox bragged he had many shifts
to save himself from the dogs, but the poor Cat said that he had but one: yet
that one was unum magnum a great one, and better then the Fox^'s many; which
was to leap up into a tree, and there to be secured.

And so does the unstable man find out to himself, many new lights to walk by,
and many truths in order to salvation; but when false teachers, whom Phil. 3. 1.
S. Paul compares to dogs for their barking and snarling nature, when they (I
say) come to hunt for him, all his own truths will then leave him in the
briars, as Abraham's ram was in the thorns to be sacrificed. But as for the
true Christian, he has but one truth to fly unto, and this is Gods Scripture
truth, his will revealed in his word; whither he retires himself in any danger,
and is safe.

Let the unstable man then coin unto himself many truths: sure I am, that (as
Jesus told Martha) unum Luc. 10. last
necessarium, that one only is absolutely necessary, one alone is current,
which has Gods image and superscription upon it; and this will go when other
base coins shall be rejected.

And yet what a number of false and counterfeit pieces of Truth are put off in
these days, because fathered upon the word of God, and Lege P. Samosateni
opuscula, Eunomii, Priscilliani, ubi cernes nullam omitti paginam, quae non
novi aut vet. testam. sententi is fucata sit; ut qui humanum facile despiceret
errorem, divina nonfacile despiceret oracula. Vincent. Lyrin. in lib. de
cathol. fidei univerfitate.
stamped upon with a forged impress of Scripture to hold them up? wherein
(methinks) they are like those who, to uphold a bad cause the better, use to
entitle the King and his law to it; or else Sicut quis gypsum aquae mixtum dat,
seducens per similitudinem coloris. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 19.
like him that gives lime mixed with water instead of milk, seducing thereby the
simple with the likeness it has to it in its color: so do many now give a
color of truth to falsehood, that so by that means they may more easily deceive
the ignorant, and make truth and falsehood cleave together, as the iron and clay
did in the toes of Nebuchadnezzar's image, Sr. Fr. Bac. Essay 1.
though they will never incorporate; so that we may well complain after this
manner, Alas poor Truth! How art thou used, or rather abused in these times of
ours? Even worse then the Levite used his Concubine; for she ludg. 19. 29
was divided but into twelve pieces, but thou into 12000. pieces, and art sent
away into all the coasts of this our Israel.

Thus the Papists and Arminians have their truth, the Antinomians and
Anabaptists theirs, and the Socinians and Millenaryes theirs also: Quot
homines, tot veritates, look how many men, so many truths there are. And every
Sic Arriani 40. loca Scriptura prose torquebant contra filii
consubstantialitatem; ac Arrius ipse nihil praeter Scripturas crepabat,
Evangeium, Evangelium. Plura apud Phil. Bosqui. volum. 1. page 642.
one has now got the Devils trick, to cry up his own by Scripture, with
Sifallor ego, fefellit me Scriptura; when God knows, if we look into the
Scripture with a discerning eye, we shall find these men's truths to be but old
errors newly varnished, and then set out to the vulgar for new truchs.

That as the Heathen used to paint over a piece of old rotten wood, and set it
up for a new God to be worshipped: so do these with old falsehoods, and hold
them forth to be adored for new truths, croaking them up with as much noise as
the ignorant Ephesians did their Goddess: I, and we hear what some call truth
to day, but what they will call it to morrow we cannot tell; such is their
ignorance and unconstancie in the truth.

So that it is much to be Religionem evertit, quisquis liberate religionum
inducit, ex qua contemptus Dei sequitur, and confusio. Lips. in lib. de una
religione.
feared that whilst we admit of all religions, we may soon loose the true one
in the crowd; and that our having of so many truths, will bring us in a short
That divisions in religion are an inlet to Atheism, see Sr. Fr. Bacon Essay
16.
time to have none at all, and to ask e're long with Pilate, what is Truth?
But though there be many that are called Gods, (says 1 Cor. 8. 5.
the Apostle) yet to us there is but one: so, though there be many nominall Seu
potius multa verisimilia, sed unum verum. Sen. Epist. 118.
truths, yet to us there is but one real; and though many Idols, yet but one
God; though many superstitions, yet but one faith; and though many falsehoods,
yet but one truth, as God the author of it is but one.

And so much for the second reason, why the verbum Scriptum the written word is
called the word of Truth.

3. The holy Scriptures are called the word of Truth Eminenter, What he said of
philosophy, is more truly verified of this, Hoc sapientiae studium est sublime,
magnificum; caetera sunt pufilla and puerilia. Seneca Epist. 88.
for their eminency and excellency, as the highest and most excellent truth
that ever was made known to the sons of men; which makes our Savior call it,
the Truth, per modum eminentiae, John 17. verse 17. and S. Paul Ephe. 1. 13.
prefix an emphaticall article before it, (...); not only the word of Truth,
but the word of that Truth, by way of eminency, as communicating unto us the
excellency of the Eminentiam notitiae Icsu Christi. Phil. cap. 3. v. 8.
knowledge of Christ Jesus, in comparison of which he counted all things as
loss, (...), qu^si (...), quae conibus projiciuntur. Corn. a Lapide. and
Gagnaeus.
and for whom he suffered the loss of all things, and counted them as dung, or
as scraps which are thrown away to dogs, that he might win Christ.

There is no liberal Art or Science but has its truth, yea, and its word of
truth too; but none its word of that Truth, that which brings us to eternal
life, but only this: for search the Scriptures, (says our Ioh. ^. v. 3^
Savior) in them ye think to have eternal life. Other truths lie very low,
and mole themselves in the earth, whereas this is high and sublime, the head
thereof (like Jacob's ladder) reaching up to heaven. Though I have all
knowledge (says S. Paul) yet if I 1 Cor. 13. 1
have not charity, I am nothing; Bucholc. ad ann. Christi 212.
and Severus the Emperor used to say, Omnia fui, and tamen nihilexpedit, I
have been all I could desire, yet this all is nothing: And so may I say here,
that though we have the knowledge of all other truth, yet without the Vulgar,
sed verum; Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
true knowledge of Christ, which this word of truth teaches, it is nothing;
much it may be to this life, but nothing to eternal life; for this is life
eternal, to know thee, and whom thou John 17. 3.
have sent thy son Jesus Christ.

That as Esan said, I am now ready to die, and what Nec quicquam tibi prodest
Aerias tentasse domos, animoque rotundum Percurrisse polum moritur^. Hor. lib.
1. od. 28.
is this birthright to me? so may a dyingman say of all other knowledge, Quid
tu si pereo? in what stead can thou stand me if I perish eternally? Surely in
none at all, unless it be (as King James said well) to let In Declar. in Vorst.
us see how to go to hell with more light then others, Haec est condemnatin,
quod lux venit in mundum. Ioh. 3. 1^.
which will but aggravate our condemnation.

It was said of Themistocles a heathen man, that being now above a hundred
years old, he shed tears, Quod tunc egrederetur ex hac vita, cum coepisset
sapere, because he was Plutarch. in vita, and Bruson. lib. 2. cap. 31.
then going out of the world, when as he had yet but newly entered himself ut
veritatis candidatus, as a Candidate of Truth in natures school and had only
gained some little smattering of her wisdom. But had he been so happy as once
to have heard of the Scriptures, Gods supernatural truth, that is able to make
a man wise unto salvation, (as the Apostle speaks) ^ Tim. 3. 15.
then think how much he would have been troubled, that he was to leave the
world before he had so much as tasted of it. How would he then have slighted
his natural truth in comparison of this, and have counted it (as Caligula was
in Dion Appius) but (...), a Dion. App. Hist. lib. 59.
great Dotage?

4. The holy Scriptures are called the word of truth Effective, for the effect
they work upon the understandings and hearts of men, which per se is nothing
but truth: and therefore if at any time we find the contrary in those that
profess the knowledge of truth, we must conceive this to arise not causally
from the word of God, which so considered is the word of truth, and leads us
into all truth, but occasionally only; non ex natura sua, sed ex accidenti; the
fault not lying in the word itself, but in those that pervert the word, and
deal with it as Caligula did with the image Suetonius in vita Caligulae.
of Jupiter Olympicus, who did proprio capite dempto suum imponere, who took
from him his own head of gold, and put upon him one of his own making that was
of a Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum and corruptor stylus.
Tertull. adversus hares. cap. 16.
baser metal: and so do some take off from the word of truth its pure and
genuine sense, and put upon it a false gloss and interpretation of their own,
which does spoil and mar the Text. And this is that which S. Peter says 2.
Pet. last chapter verse 16. that some who were ignorant and unstable did wrest
the Scriptures, or lay them upon the rack, (for so much (...).
the word imports) that so they might extort a sense from them they never
meant; which is contrary to the proper end for which they were written, that
being to lead us unto truth here and salvation hereafter.

Now by this that has been said, we may easily Use of Examination,
see whether we be the sons of the true Church, or the sons of the false; of
Gods holy Catholic, or else of Satan's malignant Church, (as the Septuagint
has it:) or else by this lapis Lydius, (...). Psalm. 26. 5.
by this touchstone, we may easily discover where the truth of Christian
Religion is.

As whether it be with the Antinomian, who is all for the Gospel rule as
obligatory Vt rectum est index sui and obliqui, sic verum sui and falsi.
to believers, and nothing for the law: or whether it be with the Socinian and
the Anabaptist, who are neither for the one, nor yet for the other; the one
making reason his chiefest rule, the other his own private and immediate
spirit: or else whether it be with us of the Reformed Religion, or else with
the Papists, (for against these I shall chiefly bend my discourse, as the most
subtle and considerable enemies of Gods truth, above others.)

Indeed none have been so great pretenders to truth as the Papists, Fox in suo
martyrolog. 2. part.
which made Q. Mary at her coming to the Crown bear for her Impresse winged
Time drawing truth out of a pit, with this Motto, Veritas temporis Aul. Gell.
noct. At. ^. 12. cap. 12.
filia, Truth is the daughter of time. But whether she or her sister, whether
the Papist or the Protestant have most right to that bearing, I leave it for
you to judge. And here I lay down this for my ground to build upon, ( viz.)
That Church, whose Doctrine is according Religio e libris sacris sincere
petita, vera est and Christiana religio: Lips. in lib. de una religione. Ea
demum vera religio est, quae verbum Dei pro cultus divini lege habet. Pless. de
verit. Christ. Relig. cap. 20.
to the word of Truth, without question has the truth of Christian religion;
which if the Popish Church ( qua Papalis, and dissenting from ours) have, yea
or no, we are now to see.

The Apostle in the second Epist. to the Thessal. chap. 2. verse 11. speaks of
some upon whom God would send strong delusions, and infatuate so far in their
pertinacie to error, as that they should believe a lie: and does he not hereby
seem to point at the Roman Church? The time would fail should I tell you of
all her Theological untruths, as of Freewill, praying to and for the dead,
Justification by works, merit of condignity and congruity, the carnal presence
of Christ in the Eucharist under the forms of bread and wine, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, of humane satisfaction for temporal punishments, works of
Supererogation, and the like: of all which the Scripture speaks not a word of
her self, without enforcement.

But to wave these, and to instance only in 2. or 3. particular falsehoods that
do more immediately to the Scriptures, this word of Truth. For

First, what? when our adversaries Inter alia quae ab Ecclesiae Praesidibus
sunt optime constituta, illud non minimam meretur landem, quod biblias
vernaculas populo interdixerunt. Stella in Luc. 9.
shall commend as a meritorious act, the prohibiting of the sacred Scriptures
to be read of the people in a known language; though our Saviors command to
all in the 5. chap. of S. John and the 39. verse, is to search the Scriptures:
And how shall they do this; when they keep them as a fountain sealed up, to
this end that they may not be searched into? Is this according to the word of
Truth?

Secondly, again, when they teach that all decisions of saving truth must be
resolved ultimately to the Pope, who cannot err dogmatice in Cathedra,
dogmatically in his chair; whereas the word of Isai. 8. 20.
Truth says, to the law, and to the testimony; is this their Truth according
to the Scriptures?

Thirdly, when they would obtrude upon us, that the written word (which is the
formal object of faith) is not Veritas prima the first truth, but the
testimony of the Church; whereas S. John says, that 1 John. 5. 9
the witness of God is greater then the witness of man; is this their
Scripture Truth?

Fourthly and lastly, when they hold not the true rule of saving Truth, viz.
the Prophetical and Apostolical Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, which
the Church of Christ ever held, till Non erat legitimum Christianorum
concilium, sed Antichristi conventiculum ad oppugnandam Evangelii veritatem
institutum. Whitak. 1. Q. cap. 4. de Scripturis.
the Trent Conventicle (for so it may be called) did determine unwritten truths
and Traditions to be respected pari Pietatis affectu In the 1. Art. of their 4.
Session.
ac reverentia cum Scripturis (that is) with the same equal affection of piety
and reverence that the Scriptures are; (for so their own words go) think you
that this is the Truth of Christian Religion, and yet so contrary to the word
of Truth? Or 1 Romans 25.
rather is not this to change the Truth of God into a lie, as the Apostle
speaks?

The harlot (you know) would have her child divided; 1 Reg. 3. 26
whereas the true Mother would have her whole child or none at all. By this
then you may judge which is the true Mother, I mean, that Church which has the
true Religion; and again, which is the harlot, or whore of Babylon, Quae
adulteravit verbum Dei, (to use Calvin's Adulterantes ve^bum Dei, 2 Cor. 2. 7.
expression) that has adulterated Gods word by her own traditions: whether we,
who hold the verbum Dei scriptum, the written word to be the total rule of
saving truth; or else they, that divide this rule betwi xt the Scriptures and
Traditions.

As Elijah said, If God be God, then follow him: 1 Kin. 18. 21
so say I, if our Protestant faith be truth, let us follow it; but if Popery be
truth with us, then we may follow that, and see what will be the sad end
thereof.

2. If the Scriptures be the word of truth, then see Use 2.
from hence the great encouragement we have to search the Scriptures, since
Quid veritate admirabilius, ad quam omnis sp^ctator per^enire se cupere
confitetur? August. in lib. de vera Relig.
all men naturally do pursue after truth to enrich their understandings, as
well as after goodness to satisfy their wills and affections; and the word of
God in the Scriptures is the only mine where this rich treasure of truth is to
be found. Our Savior therefore commands (...), John 5. 39.
his disciples, and us in them (for the verb is imperative) to search the
Scriptures: And it is a metaphor taken (it may be) from silver mines, as may be
thought, by comparing this place with that of the Proverbs chap. 2. verse 4.
where Solomon speaking of wisdom says, That we must seek for her as for
silver, and search for her as for hid treasure. Atque utinam omnes faceremus
illud quod scriptum est, Scrutamini Scripturas; and it was Origen's wish, that
we would all be searchers Orig. in Isai. homil. 2.
of them.

I but you will say (it may be) to me, as the woman of Samaria did to The true
sense of the ^criptures lies not in the Superficies, (...), but as a treasure
hid in great depth. Euthym. in Ioh. 5. 39. ex Chrysostom.
Christ, that the well is deep; so, that saving John 4. 11.
truth lies deep in the Scriptures, and we have nothing to draw it out withal.

For answer to which know, that although the true sense of the Scriptures lie
very deep, and to draw it out from thence is the gift of God; yet does Iam. 1.
17.
not he give it now by immediate inspiration, or miracle, as he did, when he
gave the Israelites Manna from heaven, or as he did in the Apostles days, but
he gives it now unto us by the use of ordinary means.

And here (if I would tire out your patience in making use of the scholars
Directory) I could then tell you of these means to be used for the extracting
of it: As of the general opinion and practice of the Church in all ages, of
the Decisions of Counsels, the interpretation of the ancient and modern
writers, the Inspection into the fountains and Original languages, the
knowledge of humane Arts and Sciences, conference with learned men, and the
like; all which are good helps toward the extracting of Scripture truth. But
it shall suffice me to insist here only upon those that are most obvious to
the practice and capacities of the meanest. And to this end I shall fit and
prepare you for the use of the subsequent means by 2. previous qualifications.

The 1. is Humility. For none err more then proud persons, who lean too much
to their own wisdom; which makes the Apostle exhort his Romans that they be
not w^se in their own The Greek is very elegant, and runs the third verse with
a double Paronomasie. (...).
conceit. Romans 12. 16. We must not then be highly conceited of our own
knowledge, nor think of our selves more highly then we ought to think; but
think soberly (verse 3. of the same chapter) endeavoring chiefly to have a
sight of our own ignorance, and with Erasm. lib. 3. Apoph.
Socrates, hoc tantum scire quod nihil scimus, to know only this, that our
ignorance is above our knowledge. Chrysostom writing on the 3. chap. of the
Ph^l. (...).
verse 15. says, that it is the perfection of a Christian to acknowledge
himself to be imperfect. And so it is the knowledge of a Christian to know
himself ignorant of many things he ought to know. For if a man be filled before
with Intus exist^ns probibet alienum. A full stoma^k loathes a hony-combe. Prove.
27. 7.
his own wisdom, there will then be no r^om in him for the wisdom of God to
enter.

If then thou would be truths scholar, and a good proficient in her school,
go thither prepared with humility; for it is the meek (says David) Psalm. 25. 9.
whom God will teach his way: And a man is so much Tanto veritati vicinior,
quanto longior ab ea tuo fueris arbitratu. Bern. de ordin. vit. sol. 1126. Et
Isiodor. Hispal. Sentent. cap. 23.
the nearer truth (says Bernard) by how much further he is from it in his own
overweening conceit: which makes the Apostle say 1 Cor. 8. 2. If any man thinks
he knows any thing, (i. e.) has Multi ad veritatem pervenire potuissent, ni
jam putassent se pervenisse. Ludov. Viv. in Introductione sua ad sapientiam
Sentent. 198.
a proud opinion of his own knowledge, he knows nothing as he ought to know;
for the true knowledge of God begets humility, and this teaches a man always
to suspect his own sense in divine things, but then especially, when he is
singular Quam facile deviare potest, qui nec tramitem habet quem sequatur, nec
lucem!
in it, and has not the clear evidence of Scripture for it. And it is pulcher
locus, an excellent place, Que^ utinam omnes perdiscerent! Calvin. in locum.
says Calvin (which he wishes all men to be thoroughly acquainted with; if they
were, there would not be so much novelty in religion, nor yet so much erroneous
obstinacy as there is in the world) for if any man (says the Apostle) cons^nt
1 Ti. 6. 3, 4
not to whole some words, and to the doctrine a^cording to godliness, he is
proud, knowing nothing. Alas! there is no rock more dangerous to a Christian,
then pride of spirit: it has shipwrackt many a soul, and lost it
irrecoverablie. And here do but take a view of the Enthusiasts and Quakers in
these times, and you shall find spiritual pride to have had a great influence
upon them: for hence it is that (like the old Gnostics) they think themselves
the only (...), and boast so much of their new light, and of those immediate
revelations of Gods Spirit, as their guides both for life and Doctrine; whereas
now, new doctrinall and saving truths are vainly exspected, and fondly
pretended to, since this Gospel we have from The Mendicant Friars published a
book which they called their Evangelium aeternum, circaannum Domini 1250. cujus
meminit Mat Paris, Chawcer in Roman. de Ros. Et Fox Martyrol. 1. part. page 322.
Christ is that Evangelium aeternum, that Gospel which must continue for ever;
neither needs the Church any such in these days, as some heretofore would have
obtruded on her. But oh the pride of graceless hearts! As if that in the great
matter of salvation, the new light of their own fancy or reason (for it is no
better) did shine as bright, if not outshine the Scriptures: Whereas the
Prophet Isai says, To the law and to Isai. 8. 20.
the testimony; and, if any speak not according to this word of truth, it is
because there is no light in him. And such were they against whom the Lord
complains by the Prophet, who followed their own Ezech. 13. 1, 2.
spirits, and saw nothing. Or else, as if the Scriptures were of little or no
use at all unto them, but they must have the same unerring and immediate spirit
to be their guide, which the Prophets and Apostles had who wrote the
Scriptures, being moved thereunto by the Holy Ghost; which is too high a 2 Pet.
1. 21.
presumption for the highest of men since their times to lay claim unto.

Again, hence it is that they profess their own consciences to be the rule of
their Faith and Doctrine, conforming the Scriptures to them, and not them to
the Scriptures; which is, as if a man should set his Sundiall by Clock, and not
his Clock by the Sun.

And they add further, that nothing to them is Scripture-truth, till it be
made out by the voice of the spirit within them. As if that the voice of Gods
spirit speaking infallibly in the Scriptures, should speak truth unto them no
further then it does answer the voice of their own spirit, (for their own it
is, if not worse) when it speaks otherwise Eusebius. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
then the Scriptures do: That as Tertullian said of the Romans, who would not
acknowledge Christ for God, because he was not approved of by their Senate,
Nisi homini Deus placuerit, nonne erit Deus? Must God be made by man, or shall
he not be God? So, must the word of God please our taste, or else must it not be
his word? Yes; For prophecy (says S. Peter) came not of old by the will of
man, but holy men of God spoke it as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Peter
1. last. But last of all, hence it is, that they would make us believe they
walk above all ordinances; when Quis non harret hujusmodi profanas novitates
verborum and sensuum^ Bern. Epistol. 190.
as both Christ himself, who was herein our great exemplar, and the children of
God in all ages have ever had recourse to Scripture-ordinances upon all
occasions.

Whereby we see, that these and such like strange Phenomenon are nothing else
(whatsoever is pretended to the contrary) Libertini similesque illis furiae,
superbe Scripturam ipsam despiciunt, ut spiritum assequantur, ac quot quot
illis desiria ingerit Satan, pro arcanis spiritus revelationibus fastuose
venditant. Nos autem, Pauli exemplo, discamus spiritu^ cum voce hominu^
conjungere. Call. in 1. Ep. ad Th. c. 5. v. 20
but either the furies, or dotages of our own brains, which Satan puts in,
that so we may in the pride of our hearts set up our own private spirits in the
throne of rule and authority, and keep under the scepter of Gods spirit in the
Scriptures from ruling over us; from whence we are easily led by Satan's
instigation, and our own natural corruption joining issue with him, into all
manner of Atheism and profaneness without control.

And such as these does S. Jude point at in the Gnostics, of whom he says,
that they did separate Jude v. 19
themselves and were sensual, having not the spirit, (whatsoever they
conceited of themselves otherwise.) And therefore as the prophet I sai speaks
to such by way of Irony, so do I, Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass your selves about with Isai. 50. last
sparks, as refusing to walk after the light of Gods word, that Ignis Sacer,
that holy fire, and light in a dark place (as S. Peter calls it) walk in the
light of 2Pet. 1. 19
your fire, and in the sparks your selves have kindled: but this shall ye have
from my hand, that ye shall lie down in sorrow: that is, that not withstanding
all the fire which your selves have kindled, and all the dark lights you have
set up, ye shall in the end, when ye come to die, find no ease or rest therein
for your souls, but lie down in sorrow and perplexity.

Thus when S. Austin lay upon his deathbed, whither did he go for comfort but
to the Scriptures? whereof he caused some choice and suitable passages Sibi
jusser at psalmos Davidicos de poenitentia scribi, ipsosque contra parietem
positos legebat. Possidon. in vita Augustini.
to be writ upon the wall before him, that so he might have them ready for his
use on all occasions. And so, when our souls shall one day come to sit upon our
lips, ready to take leave of our bodies, alas! how Haec est consolatio mea in
tribulatione, sermonem tuum vivificare me. Psalm. 119. 50.
little water of comfort shall we then find in our own broken cisterns, Ier. 2.
13.
when we have deserted the sacred Scriptures, which are the fountain of living
waters!

And this is the first previous qualification in order to the means of
extracting saving truth out of the Scriptures.

The 2. is Prayer; for it is but lost labor to think of any means conducible
to truth, unless we first beg of God his blessing on them by our prayers. It
was the preparative speech the Primitive Christians used in the Introitus to
Gods public service, Ante omnia oremus; and it must prepare us also, since it
is prayer that calls Gods spirit to Sanctum ad se spiritum oration advocat,
serenat cor, abstrabit a terrenis, redditque ad accipiende spiritualia
capacius. Cassiodor. in psalm. 16.
us, called therefore the spirit of supplication Zach. 12. 10. Prayer that
clears the heart of earthly things, and makes it more capable of reciving
spiritual comforts. In a word, prayer it is that sanctifies the means unto us,
and without which they avail nothing: which made Mr. Bradford (as Mr. Fox
tells us) be ever In Martyrol. 2. part. Fulgentius also has a good prayer to
this purpose. A te (Domine) postulo, ut praeveniente ac subsequente gratia,
quaecunque salubriter scienda uescio, doceas me; in his quoe vera sunt,
custodias me; in quibus vero titubo, confirms. Ad Monim. lib. 1. cap. 4.
down upon his knees to God blessing, before he would presume to take this book
of truth into his hands. And to this purpose it will not be amiss to make use
either of that short ejaculation of David, Psalm 119. verse 18. Open thou my
eyes, O Lord, that I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law; or else
that other parallel place of his in the 43. Psalm. ver. 3. O send out thy light
and thy truth, that they may lead me; let them bring me to thy holy hill and to
thy tabernacles.

And now being thus prepared and qualified,

The 1. means I shall commend unto you for the 1 Means.
extracting of saving truth out of the Scriptures is, the constant reading of
them. That as S. Paul advises Timothy to attend unto reading, so must we 1 Ti.
4. 13.
give our daily service and attendance upon reading the Scriptures: Even as the
eyes of a servant do wait upon his master, so must our eyes wait on the sacred
Canon, to read it at all times, and upon all occasions. Cum oramus, cum Deo
loquimur; cum vero legimus, Deus nobiscum. Sentent. lib 3. cap. 8.
For as we speak (says I siodore) to God in praying, so also does God to us in
our reading the Scriptures. And if there be a Golden legend to a Christian, I
mean a book that deserves (as the heathen man said of the beginning Quidam
Platonicus dicere solebat, Initium Evangelii S. Ioannis aureis inscribi literis
dignum. Augustine. de Civit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 29.
of the S. John's Gospel) to be writ in letters of gold, and to be read
constantly of us, the holy Bible is that book, wherein is contained the word of
truth. There is many a one reads the Scripture, yet does not see presently that
truth which is embowell'd in it. Thou take phvsick (it may be) Medicamentum
sumis, and non primo sanat; an non altero die adhibebis? Lips. de constant.
which does not presently cure thee; and will thou therefore give it over, and
not take it again a second time? So thou pursuest after truth in thy reading of
the Scriptures, and yet do not presently overtake it; it may be, not at the
first, nor at the second time; what? will thou therefore flag thy diligence in
reading of them? no; but rather read them over and over again, as often as
Alfonsus Panormit. lib. 1. de rebus Alsonsi.
King of Arragon did, which was 14. several times: and so should we be so
enamo^'d of this book of truth, as that it Nunquam de manibus tuis sacra lectio
deponatur. Hier. ad Nepotian. de vit. cleri^or. Ne discedat lib. legis ex ore
tuo. Ios. 1. 8.
should be seldom out of our hands, and seldomer out of our eyes.

It was a good wish of King James (our Mecoenas of learning) upon the sight of
those chained books in Oxford Library, that he might be always imprisoned with
them; Simihi daretur optio, hisce catenis cuperem ego me semper illigari. And
so should we tie, and chain our Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
selves to a constant task of reading the Scriptures, and be always turning
them over: for how know thou but God may give in to Nemo sensum Scripturoe
potest cognoscere, nisi legendi familiaritate; sicut scriptum est, Ama illam,
and exaltabit te. Hispal. sent. cap. 11. lib. 3.
thy continued course of reading his book, that truth which otherwise he will
deny?

The 2. means to extract saving truth out of the 2. Means.
Scriptures, is the light of reason which God has set up in our
understandings, that so (as the Apostle 1 Co. 14. 15
would have us to pray with understanding) we may read the Scriptures with
understanding also.

Now this, as it is a principal means of beating out truth in natural and
moral things, so also do we allow it for a subordinate means in things divine
and Theological; for Baxt. in prafat. ad part. 2. of the Sis. rest.
if reason (saves one) were of no more use about divine truths, then some would
make it, madmen and infants were fittest to make Christians of.

And therefore though we do not adore it so much as the Socinians do, yet do we
not on the other side altogether slight it and lay it by, since the Apostle
Romans 12. ^
says, that it is (...), the reasonable as well as the religious service which
God accepts. For wherefore has God made us rational creatures, and given us
the talent of reason, but to make use of it to his glory, and our best
advantage? reason making up the best Optimum in homine ratio est: Mac antecedit
animalia, Deum sequitur. Ratio perfecta bonum est hominis proprium, caelera
illi cum animalibus communia. Sen. Epist. 76.
part of our essence and humane constitution: for it is by this (says the
Moralist) that we excel other creatures, and become like unto The Greek has
it (...), as creatures of no logic, of no reason.
God, and without it 2 Bet. 2. 12.
are but as bruit beasts (as we translate it.)

Now our reason applied instrumentally to our reading of the Scriptures, will
be a good auxiliary to help us unto the saving truth that lies in them diverse
ways, but especially these four.

1. Per modum Concessionis, by way of concession, that is, by yielding some
things in the Scripture for truth primo intuitu upon our first sight and
reading of them. Alexander Severus caused this sentence to be in-laid in the
walls of his palace; and it is part of the Turks belief to this day. Aelius
Lamprid. in vita; and Greg. in his notes on Scripture page 143.
As when we read Mat. 7. 12. That we must do to others, as we would they should
do to us; That we must speak every Verum volo dici mihi, mendacem odi. Plaut.
Most.
one the truth to his neighbor, Zach. 8. 16. and not lie one to another, Col.
3. 9. That we must not break our oaths, Nu. (...) was one of Pythagoras first
lessons to his scholars; Iambl. in vita. Tu nequa parentum Iussatime, neu
praeceptis parere recusa. Virg. Ae^eid. lib. 2.
30. 2. That we must be subject to Principalities and powers, and obey
Magistrates our political parents, Titus 3. 1.

Now in these and such like principles engrafted in us by nature, our mere
reason will tell us, (as it did the Heathen) that these are the words of truth,
without any further questioning of them; and on the other side, that the Romish
Notandum, omnes qui sunt haeretico aliqua obligatione obstricti jurisjurandi
five fidelitatis, liberari. Azor. Instit. mor. lib. 8. cap. 13. Erat quastio
philosophica in Comitiis Cantabr. an. 1606. Aequivocationis tenebrae pugnant
cum rationis lumine. See Mason's treatise of the Jesuits new Art of lying or
equivocation. Also Whites way to the true chruch, Sect. 43. digress. 46. And
King James Defense of the right of Kings, page 215, and 227.
Doctrine of keeping no faith with heretics, upon which advantage is taken of
injurying them upon all occasions; again, that her Doctrine of lying and
equivocation, at which the Iesuited Romanists are now very dexterous; that her
Doctrine of absolving subjects from their oaths of allegiance to their Rulers,
yea and then murdering them, (if it will make in rem Catholicam for the advance
of the Catholic cause,) must needs be falsehood, as being against those common
rules of honesty and equity that flow from the natural principles of reason
that are within us.

2. Our own reason will help us to find out saving truth in the Scriptures per
modum Dispositionis, by way of disposing those things we conceive for truth in
the Scripture to the main end they were ordered and appointed to. It is so in
natural and moral things, as well as divine. And here take this short, and
easy rule. viz.

That Doctrine which disposes most to the glory of God, as in Bucan. Loci
commun. de Sacr. Script. page 42. Thus Christ proved his Doctrine to be true,
because therein he sought not his own glory, but his that sent him, John 7.
verse 17, and 18. Of this see Bishop Andrews also, in preface to the Decalogue.
the beating down of corrupt nature, and comforting a distressed sinner after
he is humbled, that certainly must be the truth of God in the Scriptures. And
this is so evident, that he who has but, the dim eye of reason may see it.

Now then, if we consider which Doctrines, either the Romish or ours, do this,
then that will be easily yielded for the truth of Tutiores vivimus, si totum
Deo damus, non autem nos illi ex part, and ex part nobis commi^timus. Aug. de
dono persever. cap. 6. Itidem Bellarminus; Ob periculum inanis gloriae
tutissimum est (inquit) fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia reponere. De
Justificat. lib. 5. c p. 7.
God in the Scriptures. As whether the Doctrine of free Grace or Works, the
Doctrine of final falling away from grace or of not falling, the Doctrine of
laying hold upon salvation by our own merits or else by the merits of Christ,
etc.

Without question, there is no doctrine conducing so much to this end, as the
doctrine of our Reformed Religion; and therefore this, and not Popery, must
needs be the truth of God held out unto us in the Scriptures.

3. Per modum Illationis, by way of inference; and so our reason will help us
to draw and conclude divine truths from Scripture grounds. As when we read Acts
3. 21. of Christ, that the heavens must receive him till the restitution of all
things; here my reason will come in and conclude thus much from it, That then
the body of Christ cannot be carnally in the Eucharist; because it is against
reason to imagine a true body, whose inseparable property is to be
circumscribed in one place, yet to be at once in two several places, as in
heaven and at the Lords table.

4. Per modum Collationis, by way of comparison: and that two ways.

1. By comparing the doctrines collected out of the Scriptures with themselves,
that so we may see by their agreement one with another whether they be true or
no: for reason will tell us, that not only in natural and moral, but also in
divine things there is no surer index of falsehood then contrariety, and of
truth then concent Veritas Dei una, semperque sui similis. In praefat. ad Harm.
Confess. Veritas in omnem partem sui semper eadem est. Sen. Ep. 79. Verum vero
semper consonat; Aristot. lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 8. Nullum est sic art compositum
mendacium, ut undique sibi constet. Erasm. Ratio verae Theolog.
and harmony of things compared together; it being the nature of truth to be
one, and of falsehood to be manifold and disagreeing. As you may see by those
that bare witness against Christ, Mark 14. 57, 59.
it is said of them, that their witness was false, for it did not agree
together: And so in divinity one truth does not give the lie to another.

And by this I would fain know how the Doctrine of Christ's humanity can stand
well with the doctrine of Ubiquity, the last of these pretending to
Scripture-truth as well as the former, and so held out in one and the same
religion.

Surely, a rational Christian needs nothing more to convince him of the
falsehood of the Romish faith, then the dissonancy A quibusdam igitur veritas
dicitur (...) ex ae private. and (...) oblivio, quia mendacii comes est, non,
veritatis, oblivio; secundum illud, Oportet mendacem esse memorem. Lips. Decad.
4. lib. 4.
of the parts thereof: all error being a liar, and very apt to forget it self;
whereas the truth of God does sing always one constant note.

2. By comparing the doctrines collected out of the Scriptures, with See the 2.
Article of the English Confession, proposit. 5. Analogia fidei nihil aliud est
quam constans Scripturae sententia in locis apertis minimeque obscuris, quales
sunt Articuls fidei in Symbolo, quaeque continentur in Decalogo and oratione
dominica. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. and Keck. Log. lib. 2. cap. 1. Ita est
temperata Scripturae obscuritas, ut facile quis se possit expedire, modo cum
similibus locis Scripturae minus obscuris locum obscuriorem conferat, and
inprimis oculos a scopo non dimoveat. August. de Doctr. Christiana lib. 3.
those ordinary rules that Divines give us for the right interpretation of
them: As whether they agree with the Analogy of faith spoken of in the 12.
chap. of the Romans ver. 6. with other parallel Scriptures less obscure of the
same nature, with the scope of the place, with the antecedents and consequents,
and the like; all which a Christian may do by the strength of his own reason he
carries about him, if he know how to make right use of it. And yet seldom do
the Popish Commentatours on the Scriptures eye these rules in their expositions
of it, which is the reason they many times give such wild senses (as they do)
of many places, and err so grossly; else they would never allege See King
James Defense of the right of Kings, page 163. and 164. ubi plura.
the two swords spoken of in the 22. chap. of Luke ver. 38. for the Popes
spiritual and temporal power, nor yet the spiritual man's judging of all
things, and his being judged of none, in the 1 Cor. chap. 2. verse 14. for his
infallibility: both which interpretations are so absurd, that I wonder much how
any sober Christians Tritum illud, Contra rationem nemo sobrius.
should take them up. Which shows the untruth of their religion, by the
dissonancie of their Doctrines in these and many other places (if I would cite
them) from the former rules.

The 3. is, the attentive hearing of the word 3 Means.
preached in the mouths of Gods Ministers. That as the people spoken of in the
19. chapter of S. Luke ver. last, did hang upon Christ hearing (...).
him; (for so the Greek has it) so must we (as it were) hang upon the mouths
of Gods Ministers, even as bees do upon flowers, to suck out the sweetness of
saving truth which falls from them: the Ministry of the Gospel being Gods
great Ordinance he has constituted in his Church to lay hold on that
Scripture-truth, which our own reading and reason does often miss of. And God
will not (on his part) be wanting to his own ordinance, since he has promised
always to Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 13. 2.
assist the Ministers of it with his gracious presence: for to this end has he
set them apart, and enabled them after a special manner for the better
interpretation of the Scriptures, which S. Peter calls well 2 Pet. 1. 20.
(...), the untying of the hard and knotty expressions in them; which makes
Christ bid his spouse, (if she would find him) to feed her Kids, that were
Cant. 1. 8.
newly taken into the fold of Christ, besides the shopherds tents, or by the
tents of those good shepherds which of old led the flock, of which sort were
Moses and Aaron, with all those that succeed them, (as Athanasius succeeded
Marcus at Alexandria) no less in knowledge and (...). G. Nazianz. Orat. 21.
piety then in place and office. And this is that which the prophet Malachy
says in the commendation of Levi, chap. 2. verse 6. The law of Truth (says
he) See Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10, 11 12.
was in his mouth: and again in the 7. verse he says further, that the priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his
mouth; for he is Angelus domini the messenger of Jehovah, and interpreter of
his will unto the people.

Now the word preached in the mouth of Gods Ministers is a good means to
extract saving truth out of the Scriptures two ways. 1. By way of discovery.
2. By way of application.

1. By way of discovery; whereby the shell is broken that so we may come to the
kernel, and the letter of the Scripture opened, that so we may see the truth
that lies hid under it. And thus the Levites are said to read the law
distinctly, to give the sense, and Neh. 8. 8.
cause the people to understand the reading.

2. By way of application, by applying the truth discovered to our own use and
practice; for else, though the word preached may be a truth in it self, yet is
it not so to me, till it be made mine own by application. The word of God
therefore is called a rule: now there can be no right and orderly building up
of the Church without application of the rule unto it.

The fourth is meditation of what we have read 4 Means.
our selves, or heard from others: else all that we read or hear is but as
water Meditaberis in libro legis diebus ac noctibus, Ios. ^. 8
put into a sive, that will not stay with us; for Meditation is as it were a
second Sermon, or a review of truth, vide 1 Ti. 4. 15.
when we look upon it with a more serious eye, and come to have a more distinct
and settled knowledge of it: for what we know no (says Isodore of Sevill)
Quicquil nescimus lect onibus discimus, quod vero didicimus meditationibus
conservamus. Hispalensis in lib. sentent. de lectione.
we learn by reading, but what we have learnt we keep by meditation; which made
the prophet David break forth into that affectionate speech, Oh! how I love thy
law, it is my Psa. 119. 97
meditation continually.

It is the best title that the law gives ad habendum and tenendum, to have and
to hold; and to hear and retain is likewise the best possession that is given
us by the Gospel: and this is done by meditation.

It is a sign of health in nature, when the retentive faculty of the stomach
Cibus mentis est sermo D^i^ ubi alimentum non retinetur, de vita desperatur.
Greg. M in Mat. c 13.
holds good, and does not faileus; and so it is also in grace, when we retain
those truths we have gained by reading: but when our retentive faculty shall
once cease her office, we are then in great danger of death.

The last and chiefest means of all the rest is the 5. Means. ^
Spirit of God, though not the only means, (as the Anabaptists would have it.)
And to this end it is called the Spirit of Truth John 16. verse 13. because it
is the principal means of leading us into all truth. For Truth is as it were
the haven we sail to, the means (before spoken of) as the tacklings we sail
with, the promises of God as the Anchor we stay our selves upon in our passage
to it, Faith as our cable we lay hold on, the Scriptures as the Compass we
sail by, and the spirit of God as the Pilot that stands at the stern to guide
us according to that Compass. All other means without this are little worth:
for the letter kills (says the Apostle) but the 2 Cor. 3 6.
Spirit gives life; quasi dixisset, it is no outward means that can of it self
be quickening Magisteria forinsecus adjutoria quaedam sunt, at in coelo
cathedram habet qui corda docet. Aug. tract. 4. in Exposit. Epist. Ioannis.
and efficacious; for we may read the Scriptures, and apply our reason to them,
hear them preached, and meditate on them; yet are all these nothing, unless
the spirit of God speak to our hearts, as our Savior did to the deaf man,
saying, Ephphatha, Mark 7. 34.
be opened.

Other means may suadere, move us to think this or that Doctrine we conceive
from Scripture to be saving truth, but none of them can persuadere, go
through-stitch with it, and infallibly persuade the heart that it is so, but
the Spirit of God. This being Gods seal to imprint all saving truth in our
hearts; for so much the Apostle intimates where he says, 1 Ephesians. v. 13
that after the Ephesians heard the word of Truth, they were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise.

Nor is it only as a seal to imprint it, but also as a witness to attest it:
so says S. John, The spirit 1 John 5. 6.
bears witness, because the spirit is truth, (that is) because the Doctrine
delivered by the spirit (which is there called the Spirit by way of Metonymy)
is truth.

Oh how should the consideration hereof prevail with us to beg every day the
assistance of his blessed spirit! And our Savior tells us, that if we ask his
Spirit of him, he will give it: which made the Luke 11. 13
Prophet David pray in one place, that God would Psalm. 143. 10
lead him by his good spirit into the land of uprightness; and in another,
that God would not take away Psalm. 51. 11
his holy spirit from him. And so should we pray too; for if he should once
take him from us, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
alas! how soon should we give heed to lying spirits, and doctrines of Devils!

And thus much for the Means of extracting saving Truth out of the Scriptures.

And now having extracted it by these Means, what remains on our parts? but

1. To hold it firmly. 2. To rejoice in it affectionately. 3. To prize it
highly. 4. To love it dearly.
1. We must hold her firmly (at least in her fundamentalls) Fundamenta nobis
esse debent firmamenta. Augustine. de doct. Christiana.
against all opposers, whether by way of contradiction or persecution, as the
Spouse did her heloved; the text says, that she Cant. 3. 4.
held him, and would not let him go.

And this is that standing fast in the faith, or sticking (...).
close to it, unto which the Apostle exhorts us in the 1 epistle to the
Corinthians the 16. chapter and 13. verse; that (...)
quitting our selves like men, or playing the men for it; yea that gathering up
our main strength, and planting it (...).
in defense thereof; again, that fighting the good fight of faith, whereof he
speaks in his first epistle to Timothy chap. 6. verse. 12. that resisting unto
blood, Heb. chap. 12. verse. 4. and that earnest contending for the faith in the
3 verse of S. Jude's epistle, when we contend for the Quae praeter fidem, non
impetuosius prosequamur; quae autem fidei sunt, cum vilae dispendio ^ueamur.
Bp. Hall in lib. qui insc^^bitu^, Pax in terris.
substance of it even unto death, and struggle for it as for life. And because
this is attended on all hands Ad mortem usque certa pro veritate, and pro te
Deus pugnabit. Ecclesiasticus cap. 4. verse. 28.
with troubles* O^r Savior therefore encourages us to it with the profer of a
crown, and a crown of life too, even of eternal life; which is enough to put
the highest of our ambition to a stand, and to make amends for all kinds of
deaths we are to undergo, for all sorts of sufferings; for so he says to the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Fear none of those things thou Rev. 2. 10.
shall suffer: behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that you
may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation 10 days; These 10 days are said
to be the 10 general persecutuns within 300 years after Christ. Pars. Christ.
Directory, 2 part. page 674. and ^agnaeus in locum.
but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. And
again, in the next Chapter and the eleventh verse, to the Angel of the Church
of Philadelphia, Hold fast, that no man take away thy Crown from thee. A
parallel place to which is that of S. James, where he says, Iam. 1. 12
Blessed is he that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive
a crown of life.

And this was figu^'d in the Old Testament, where we read that the Ark of the
Testament, which kept Ex. 25. 11.
the two tables of the Law, had a Crown of gold round about it, in manner of a
circle Beda de Tabern.
(says Beda;) to signify thus much, that if we keep fast the law of truth in
the 2 Mal. 2. 6.
tables of the old and new Testament, we shall have for ou^ reward a Crown of
Glory, Corona rotun^a instar circuli significat perfectionem b^norum onmium
fin^ c^rentem. A Lapide in Revel. 2. 10. Vide Drexel. 1. consider. de aetern.
cap. 1.
which has in it the perfection of allimaginable good, and is as a circle,
that has no end: which is the reason that the Ancients made the Circle always
the Emblem of Eternity.

Nay, of how precious Crowns (says the Quam preciosis ille dignus coro^is,
cujus fidem n^lla tyr^nnorum vis subvert^re, non minae frangere, non ludibria
movere, nec delinire blanditia pote^^! Fox in his Euch^risticon.
Martyrologist) is he worthy, whose faith holds up above all that tyrants can
do against it, either by force o^ threats, scoffs or flatteries!

And here I cannot but make an honorable mention of S. Stephen Christ's
Protomartyr, Act. 7. who had his Crown legible in his name, and (...)
to whom all the stones in his Cross, that were flung at him by the
hard-hearted and enraged multitude, served only as so many pearls and diamonds
to embellish his crown of Glory. For our light affliction (says S. Paul) which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding Upon this occasion
Tertullian wrote his book De corona Militis, when as a Christian So^ldier
refused the military crown that was pro^ered him, sayi^g* Non de^et Christianum
in hac vita coronari.
weight of Glory. In which place of the blessed Apostle we have laid down, as a
support to us in our sufferings for Christ and his truth, not only a double
Antithesis between our afflictions and glory, as that the one is light, but the
other heavy, the one momentany, the other eternal; but also a double
Hyperbole, or exceedings (...).
of Glory beyond our sufferings, for it is a far more exceeding weight of glory
(as we translate it) 2 Cor. 4. 17.

And now (methinks) I see divine Truth riding in her Triumphall Chariot with
that immarcessible or (...). 1 Pet. 5. 4.
never-fading crown of Glory (as S. Peter calls it) upon her head: where on the
one side of her behold a glorious company of Prophets and Apostles confirming
it to us by their writings; on the other side a troup of Confessors bearing it
up with invincible Viros ^ortes and magnanimos esse volumus veritatis am^cos.
Tull. Offi^. lib. 1.
courage and fortitude before Kings and Princes, speaking one to another in
Hester's language, If we perish, we perish, Hest. 4. verse. 16. here a
Convocation of Ministers spending their time, breath, bodies, minds, estates,
and all in vindication of it; there a noble Army of Martyrs asserting and
witnessing it even with their bloods, embracing the Truth, We must rather
(...), Naz. Orat. 3.
though with death and bonds, rather then falsehood with freedom of life and
prosperity.

We can do nothing (says S. Paul) against the 2 Cor. 13. 8
truth, but for it. Where you see that S. Paul is so weak in acting against the
truth, as that he can do nothing, and yet so valiant for it, as that he can
do very much: And if you ask, what? take this account of it.

That he can write all his Epistles in defense of it: he can travail up and
down like a pilgrim from one country to another to propagate it; as you may see
in his peregrination written by S. Luke, from the 9. chapter of the Acts unto
the end; where we read that he journied from Damascus in Syria (which was the
place of his Christendom; to omit Islands, towns and cities, which were
infinite) into 12. feverall countries, viz. into Palestine, Cilicia, Pamphylia,
Pisidia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, Bithynia, Achaia, Macedonia, and at
the last into Italy, to sow them all with the seed of Christianity, with the
truth of the Gospel. Again, he can make the Magicians to burn their books,
though worth 50000. pieces of silver, which amount (say Divines) to about 600^.
In nuperrimis Annotationibus, on Acts 19.
of our sterling money at the lowest estimate, being no inconsiderable sum,
that so they might thereby purchase to themselves that invaluable pearl of the
Gospel truth, which S. Paul preached unto them. He can make Felix tremble by
reasoning about it. Acts 24.
He can make an open profession of it before Agrippa, Acts 26.
and almost persuade him to be a Christian; and so startle Demetrius the
silver-smith, and his fellowcrafts-men, about the falsity of their Goddess, as
that they had no way to crutch her up, but by the vogue of the simple and
foolish multitude, who when Acts 1^.
they could not make good her Deity by reason, knew another way how to make it
out, even as children do, by cry and clamor, with Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.

I but, some may say, can S. Paul only do for the truth, and not suffer also?
Yes; he suffered (as 2 Cor. 1. 8.
he says of himself) above measure: For he was counted by the Epicureans for
telling the truth as a babbler, a trivial fellow, and one made up of nothing
Acts 17. 18.
but prate and noise; and by the Galathians as an enemy. But is this all? no;
he can endure more Gal. 4. 16.
from that glozing orator Tertullus then this; for in the general, he taxes S.
Paul for a pestilent fellow, Acts 24. 5. nay more, for (...), in the abstract.
the very pest and plague of the world (for so the Greek has it) which is a
disease Sic etiam Lutherum, Germaniae calamitatem ae contagium, vocat Strada l.
2 de b^llo Belgico page 33. and 34. Id animis heresis, quod corporibus pestis:
Et duo sunt quae pestem efficient terribilem; unum, quod momento extinguit,
alterum, quod cum unum interficit, cen^um alios inficit; Bellarm. in praefat.
disp. de controversiis fidei.
(you know) malignant and infections in the highest degree: so was S. Paul
traduced for one whose Doctrine would infect and destroy the souls of men, as
much and as soon as the plague or highest malignant fever would their bodies,
and therefore was not to be endured. But in particular, and more plainly,

1. For a mover of sedition in the Commonwealth. And this he knew would render
him very odious to Felix the Roman governor, because it would speak him an
opposer, or at least a disturber of the power and authority that was then in
being. Again

2. For an Arch-heretick in the Church, and a ringleader of the Nazarene sect,
i. e. of those that worshipped Jesus of Nazareth, which was then the only true
worship of God, though at that time cried down by the supercilious Pharisees
for a Sect of all others most despicable; as you may see by that speech of
theirs John 7. 52. Search and see (say they) for out of Nazareth, (so out of
the Reformed Church say the Papists, and other malevolents to it) there arises
no prophet.

These and such like aspersions were then cast upon S. Paul, yet is he content
to suffer by them as a malefactor even to bonds: for so he says of himself, 2 Timothy 2. chap. verse 9. Neither is this all, but further, Gal. 6. 17.
he can for the truth of the Gospe^l bear in his body the marks of the Lord
Jesus; the marks of the manacles in his hands, of the irons in his feet, of the
rods on his back, and of the stones in his face and head; for he was in prisons
frequent, thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, besides his other sufferings,
whereof you may read at large in the 2 Epist. to the Cor. 11. chap. from the
23. verse to the 28. Now all these marks we think very hard to be born, who are
now unwilling to touch the least of them with the least of our fingers, or to
endure any rent or scar in our Qui bonorum direptionem, ac capitis dolorem non
patimur benign, quomodo pro Christo capitis abscissionem pateremur? Hugo l. 2.
de claustro animae.
estates, much less in our bodies: But yet S. Paul can suffer a Plus ultra,
and that is, not only to be bound and stigmatized, but also to die for truth
of Christ; as he professes of himself in the 21. chap. of the Acts verse 13.
That he was ready not only to be bound, but also to die for the name of the
Lord Jesus.

But did S. Paul only suffer Veritas odium parit. Te^. in Andria, Scen. 1.
this for the holding fast of Christ's truth, and not others of Gods children
also? Yes; for did not the 1 Kin. 19. 2. 1 Kin. 22. 8. Ier. 37. 15. Mat. 14. 10.
truth cost Elias danger, Micaiah disgrace, Jeremy imprisonment, and John
Baptist his head? yea thousands of Christians the most cruel and barbarous
deaths that could be invented? as you may read in the 11. chapter to the
Hebrews, (which we may well call the Scripture Martyrology) from the thirty
sixth verse of that chap. unto the end: where it is said, Qui de passionibus
Sanctorum plura volet, legate 8. caput ad Romanos verse. 36. and priorem
Epistolam ad Corinth. cap. 4. verse. 11, 12, and 13.
that they had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds
and imprisonment; they were stoned, they were sawen asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy; they wandered
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth. And yet all
these will the children of God suffer for the truths sake; nay, rather then
they will gratify the greatest persecutours and heretics with the least inch
or title of saving Qui modica concedit, paulatim decidit. Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 8.
and fundamental truth.

For many have been the tempests raised against it in all ages; yet never any
so boistrous as was that of the Arrians against the Orthodox Christians. And
why was it? only for a small thing in show, but great in substance; because
(forsooth) they would not grant the Arrians one letter against Christ's
Divinity; and this was but a poor iota Quod de lege Iudaei, idem nos de fidei
confessione; de unaquaque syllaba magni montes pendent: Literulae unius mutatio
quantat in Ecclesia vetere turbas cierit, sensit orbis. Scilicet quaesono vix
discrepant, reipsa tamen ita toto coelo distant, ut qui divinis enueriti ^unt
eloquiis, millies mori mavelint, quam ut literam unam in fidei suae professione
corrumpi finant. B. H. in libro cui titulus Pax in ter is.
too, the Orthodox holding Christ to be (...) of the same substance with the
Father, but the Arrians only (...) of the like substance. Now if we respect the
matter of this speech, we find that the Arrians brought up their tenet so near
truth, that a man would have thought the contention could not have been great
about it. And again, if we have respect to the terms, we shall find very little
difference between them. Yet see how stiff the Orthodox stood for one letter,
that they would not yield it to them.

As the Ecclesiastical history says of Theodoret. hist. l. 3. c. 7.
Marcus Arethusus, that he would not give so much as one halfpenny to the
re-edifying of an idolatrous temple, though to free himself at that time out of
the hands of his tormentors: so neither would they contribute one letter
toward falsehood, which was the cause that so many streams of blood were drawn
out from them by the Arrian Emperors, and thousands Constantius, Julian and
Valens, etc.
of them in defense of it breathed out their last. Unto whom give me leave a
little to address my speech by a holy prosopopoeia after this manner.

O blessed and victorious champions for the truth of Christ! though I should
pass by all other combatants for it, as Justin Martyr and Tertullian, who
apologized for it against the Gentiles; and S. Augustine and Prosper, who
vindicated it against the Manichees and Pelagians; again, Cyprian against the
Donatists, with many others: yet you I cannot pass by without wonder and
admiration. The whole world almost at that time was become Arrian; Totus mundus
ingemuit, and Arrianum se esse miratus est. Vincent. Lyrin. cap. 6.
and could not you have sat down quietly among the rest, and have saved vour
own skins? If as much as a whole word had differenced you, was that so great a
matter, as that you could not have yielded it? The Orthodox held Christ to be
(...), of the same substance with the father; but the Arrians (...), only of
like substance.
yet was not the difference betwixt you so much as a word, but only a letter;
yea and the least letter also of the Alphabet, but a poor lota. Tell me, had
you so little of Christian wisdom, yea even of nature and self-preservation in
you, as that you would not be beholding to your adversaries for your lives by
granting them so little a letter? Or rather, was it your godly zeal to the
truth that made you stand so much for the least parcel of it? Yes; this it
was, that made them valiant even unto martyrdom; and this it is that makes a
true Christian both do and suffer so much for it. I and if we have any good
blood running in our veins, if any heroic resolution, if any undaunted
fortitude and magnanimity, we will do the like: for as Scaevola said, That it
was Roman-like to suffer for our countly; Pro patria pati Romanum. Live. hist.
so say I, Pro veritate pati Christianum, that it is most Christian to suffer
for the truth of Christ, for so did the Prophets, Apostles, and others of Gods
children before us, that so those words of our Savior may be fulfilled to the
utmost, That heaven and Matt. 5. 18.
earth shall pass away but, not one jot or tittle of the law (which is but one
part of Gods scripture truth) shall pass away.

But it is here query'd,

1. Quare, why we must hold saving truth so fast. 2. Quomodo, by what means we
must do it.
And first for the Quare. Now for this take 3 reasons.

1. Because we are only Lessees to truth from our great Landlord: For Truth is
not our own freehold to sell or dispose of at our pleasures; which makes S.
Paul enjoin Timothy to hold fast the pattern 2Ti. 1. 13.
or breviary of sound words; and one reason there given, is, because it was
committed unto him to keep by the Holy ghost: And they that are Feoffees in
trust must be faithful, and not embezzle what was committed to them as a
Depositum; but keep it safely to themselves, Vid. Annot. in 1 Timothy 6. 20.
and carefully transmit it to posterity. Indeed Truth is ours for the use and
efficacy of it, but Gods for the right and title; and we must neither sell, nor
diminish that which is committed to our custody as a matter of trust from God,
for our own good, and the good of those that succed us both in Church and
State. If we do, Oh what a sad account shall we have to give unto God, when he
shall one day ask us, as S. John did the Bishop of Jerusalem for the young man
he committed to him, Ubi depositum, animascilicet fratris? where is that I
committed to thy keeping, viz. the soul Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26.
of thy brother? Bonum reliqui ego fratris animae custodem; I left thee a
goodly keeper of thy brothers soul indeed: So, when God shall one day say unto
thee after this manner, where is that Protestant and saving truth which I left
deposited in thy hands? what have thou done with it? Ah! bonum reliqui ego te
veritatis custodem, I have left you a good keeper of truth indeed; whenas you
have thrown away one part the eof by Atheism and licentiousness, and lost
another by carelessness; when as you have sold away one parcel thereof for
profit and preferment, and given away another by a willing apostancy. And yet
such keepers of truth we have in these days too many. Our lands and temporal
estates God has given us as movables, and over these he has empowered us
with a right of passing them away to others, as may seem good to us; but as for
his saving truth, this is somewhat of himself given out unto us, and therefore
is not to be made away, but to remain as a standard by us, until the same hand
that fixed it, do (for our unworthiness) remove it from us to some other
nation that shall make better use of it then we have done: which God grant may
never be until time shall be no more!

Whatever then we part with, we must not part with Truth, but keep it for God
our great Landlord and right owner of it: that so when he shall come to account
with us, he may receive his own again with advantage, and reward us for
faithful stewards with an Euge bone serve, well done good and Mat. 25. 21
faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord; and not say to us as David
to Abner, Thou art worthy 1 Sa. 26. 16
to die, because thou have not kept the Lords anointed, even the doctrine of
truth that should have ruled over thee.

2. If we hold the truth, it will uphold us. For in 2 Reason Isai. 26. v r. 1.
and 2.
that day (says the Lord) that we shall be called the righteous nation which
keeps the truth, in that day shall God make strong our cities, and appoint them
salvation for bull warks. For the truth of God is like a ship at sea, in
preserving whereof we preserve our selves.

The valor of Crnegirus the Justin. hist, lib. 2.
Athenian General, in pursuit of the Persian navy, was such, that he espying a
ship of the enemies making off to sail from him, presently lays hold on it
with both his hands to hord it; and when the Persians had cut off his hands, he
holds it then with his mouth: so should we hold truth with our hands first in
acting (if we can) or writing for it; but should we fail of these, then with
our mouths in speaking for it, since our care of that shall reflect
beneficially upon our selves: for as Judah told Joseph, That Jacobs life was
bound up Genesis 30. 40.
in the life of his youngest brother Benjamin; so is our welfare in the welfare
of true religion; if we preserve that, it will prese^ve us: which made David
Psalm. 91. 4.
call it his buckler for preservation. Now it is reported of Epaminond as the
Theban, Plutarch in vit.
that he was wont to say of his buckler, That he would defend that, or else die
for it: And so should a good Christian either defend the buckler of truth, or
else die for it, because he has no such defensive weapon as this. Was it not
then a good saying of Hezekiah, Is it 1 Reg. 10. 19
not good if there be peace and truth in my days? since upon these 2. pins all
that is dear to a Christian both in Church and State depends. Barklay de
faelicit. p. 523.
Lewis the eleventh of France used to say (speaking against his court
parasites) that he wanted nothing but truth: as if his Principes cum omnia
habeant, unum ill is deest, scilicet qui verum dicat. Sen. Epist.
want of this weighed more with him then all other things. And indeed so it
ought to be with every good man, the possession of Non usquam Resp. st^tit fine
religione: quanta igitur verae illius vis est cujus umbra sustinet bane molem!
Lips. in ^^^e una religione.
truth should be more to him then all other enjoiments: for I dare boldly say,
that we hold our liberties, our life's, our livelyhoods, and all, by holding the
truth of religion among us. So that, if there be none with us (which God
forbid) to plead for truth, (which was the miserable estate of the Jews Isai
59. 4.) how then can we think that truth should plead a word for us, when God
shall come to judge us? Or if Truth be fallen in our streets, as it was in
theirs, verse 14. it cannot be then, that we should stand long after it, no
more then Troy did after the Palladium was gone. For tell me, I pray, what was
the fall of Lucifer, but because he abode not in the truth? or of John 8. 44
the Jewish Church, or of the 7. Churches of Asia, or of the Greek Church and
Empire too? And why should we think to speed better then they, when we let true
religion, which is the stay and buttresse of the State and Church, moulder away
to nothing, and take no care at all to keep it up?

The 3. reason why we must hold truth so fast is, 3. Reason.
because what ever becomes of men, the truth of God and his word shall be sure
to hold. And this S. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25. All flesh is grass, and
the glory of it as the flour of the field: the grass withers, and the flour
fades; but the word of the Lord endures for ever.

For 1. when evil men and haters of truth, with all their contrivements and
combinations, shall fall, this shall be sure to stand.

I can do nothing (says S. Paul) against the 2 Cor. 13. 8
truth, but only for it. A man then can do no act against the truth, that
will hold long, but only for it. Wicked men have attempted Malorum improbitate
depressa veritas emergit, in^erclusa respirat. Cicer. Pro Cluent.
still from time to time to stub it up, yet never could. The light thereof has
been sometimes hid under a bushel, but not put out; snuffed, but not
extinguished. That, what S. Paul says of himself, that he was as dying, and 2
Cor. 6. 9
yet behold alive: so may I say of truth, that it has been often moriens, but
never mortua; often gasping for breath, but yet never expiring: or as David
speaking of his enemies says, Many a time have they afflicted me from my Hinc
alii veritatem (...) dictam volunt ab (...) negativo and (...) pro (...) lateo;
quod veritas latere non possit, sed licet ad tempus prematur, tandem tamen
victrix evadet. Pasor. Lexic.
youth up (may Israel say;) Psalm. 129. 1
so, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up (may the truth of God
say*) yet have they not prevailed against me: but if there has been one
against it, there has been another for it; if one to discountenance it, there
has been another to favor it; if one to cast it down, another to hold it up;
a Jesus to save it, as well as an Apollyon to destroy it. Rev. 9. 11.


Now for examples herein I could abound, did I not desire to limit my self to 4
or 5 most eminent ones above the rest.

And I begin with Jeroboam, upon whom the scripture sets this brand, that he
made Israel to sin; for in his days it was, wherein the Prophet Azariah
complains, how for a long season Israel had been 1 Reg. 14. 16. 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
without the true God, without a teaching priest, and without the law, i. e.
without the true service of God in the tabernacle, and without priests called
as Aaron was, to offer up both morning and evening sacrifice unto him, and
enabled by him to teach the law unto the people: for these they cast out (says
the text) even the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, Or,
he made the lowest of the people priests. 1 Kings 12. 31.
Chap. 13. 9
and made them priests after the manner of the heathen, so that whosoever came
to consecrate himself, the same might be a priest unto them. By which it
appears, that the truth of religion lay under a very black cloud all his
days. But as violent (...). Nazianz. Orat. 1.
things seldom hold, so neither did this: for yet a little while, and Jeroboam
is no more, but good Asa is sent to clear the sky, to break down the altars of
the strange Gods, to reduce the Levites to their duties, and to re-establish
the true worship of God in Israel.

My next instance is in Hence comes the word villain, as Isai. 32. 6. The vile
person will speak villainy.
Antiochus, whom the Scripture notes for a vile person, as in the 11 chap. of
Daniel verse 21. Then shall stand up a vile person (says the Text) meaning
Antiochus Epiphanes, i. e. the Illustrious, who obtained the kingdom by
flatteries, but having once gained it, became Antiochus Epimanes, Antiochus the
Mad, such was his rage against the truth; for he did according to his own will,
Sic volo, sic jubeo, etc.
verse 36. his own will was his law, yea he exalted himself above all that was
called God, and spoke marvailous things against the God of Gods. And if you
would have a See also another bedroll of his wicked acts in the 1. of the
Maccab. and the 1. chapter. Among which this was one, that he caused the books
of the Law to be rent and burnt with fire, and with whomsoever was found the
book of the Testament, him he commanded to be put to death, verse. 56. and 57.
Josephus also says as much in Antiq. lib. 2. cap. 7.
further character of him, look back to the eighth chapter of Daniel, verse 11.
where you read that he took away the Judge sacrificium the Jews used to offer
up to God both morning and evening, and cast down the place of his sanctuary
Dan. 8. 11. Nay farther, an host was given him (says the 12. verse) against
the daily sacrifice, by reason of the peoples sins; and it cast down the truth
to the ground, and prosper'd.

But yet though the truth of God were concussa fearfully shaken by Antiochus,
yet was it not excussa quite shaken off, like the viper from S. Paul's hand
into the fire, there to perish; and though much disjointed, yet was it not See
Ierom in Dan.
quite broken a pieces: for (notwithstanding that false title of (...),
Antiochus the God, wherewith he flattered himself) yet did he suddenly die as a
man, or rather (to use Psalm. 22. 6.
David's expression) as a worm and no man; for worms came out of his body (says
the Author of the book of Maccabees) while he was yet alive, and 2 Mac. 9. 9
did eat up this Deus stercoreus, this dunghill God, and set truth right again
by Judas Maccabeus.

My third instance is in D^ocletian, a great enemy to the truth of Christ in
the Vide Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 3.
primitive Church, and yet prevailing nothing; for which cause Orosius the
historian makes him Pharaohs parallel, both for his obstinacy, Bucholc.
Chronol. ad annum Christi 313.
and his impotency against it. And so great an enemy he was, that the Devil
seemed (as it were) on purpose to have picked him out among those heathen
Emperors, The last persecution had 7 tyrants to make it out, viz. Diocletian,
Maximinian, Galerius, Severus, Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licinius.
to give a very sore blow unto it: for he led the van of the tenth persecution,
and used all the ways of violence he could, to have rased out all that was
called Christian; as appears by that Inscription to him upon a pillar in Spain.
Fox in Martyrol. 1 part.


Diocletiano, amplificato per orientem and occidentem Imperio Romano, Edicto
praecepit ut libri sacrorum bibliorum cremarentur, and Ecclestarum praesides ad
sacrificandum Idolis omnibus tormentis adigerentur, etc. Plura apud Bucholc. ad
annum christi 303. ex Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 8. cap. 2. and 3.
and nomine Christianorum delcto: id est, To D'oeletian, who has enlarged the
Roman Empire East and West, and utterly blotted out the name of Christians.

But (by his leave) though he did blurre and blot the truth of Christ very
much, yet blot it out he could not; and though he cut it off in many branches
that sprung from it, yet cut it up both branch and root he could not; no more
then Pharaoh could stub up the I srael of God: because he that sets bounds to
the sea, and says to the proud waters of it, Job 38.11.
huc usque, thus far shall ye go, and no farther, did also bound Diocletians,
pride, and forced him (maugre all his spite) after he had even tired out his
spirits with foaming against it, to leave root thereof, viz. the word of truth,
still in the earth; which a little after, in the halcyon reign of Constantine,
put forth again more Veritatem aperit dies. Sen. lib. 2. deira.
green and flourishing then before.

My fourth instance is in Julian the Apostate, who brought up the Pagan
religion in the rere, being the last of the Roman Emperors that held it up. An
enemy as much beyond the former in his attempts against the truth of
Christianity, as subtilty is beyond force and violence.

For (as if Julian had been ashamed of all those compulsory weapons that had
been formerly drawn out in vain against it) he (...). In his 1 Invective.
eekes out now (says Gregory Nazianzen) the Lions with the Foxes skin,
consulting with his Demons about politics to destory it with: from whom (no
doubt) he learn'c 3 cursed Maxims.

The first was, to destroy the Schools and nurseries of it, by interdicting
therein to the Christians the reading of the liberal Arts Nam propriis (inquit
Iulianus) pennis configimur. Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 8. Et Sozomen. lib. 5. cap.
17.
and Sciences; for want whereof they must needs be disabled to deal with their
adversaries at their own weapons, which of all others with the Heathen were
most convincing.

The second was, to take away from the Christians their spiritual Fathers and
Pastors, their Orthodox Bishops and Clergy. And this he Conceived would be done
thoroughly, and with less noise, by spoiling them of their Satan ejusque
instrumenta tentant doctrina privare Ecclesiam, dum inopia and famis metu
plurimos absterrent ne id oneris suscipiant. Calvin. in 1 Timothy c. 5. ver. 17.
temporal estates and livelyhoods: because it would be ameans to destroy not
only their persons, by exposing them to scorn and starving; but their sacred
Diocletianus occidit piesbyteros, Iullanus autem presbyterium. L. Cook, 2 part
of his Reports. Et Sr. H. Spelm. de non temer, ecclefiis.
office too, which with such hard usage could not reasonably exspect any issue
or succession: for who will feed a flock (as the Apostle reasons in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians Chap. 9. ver. 7. and 14.) and not eat of the milk
thereof, or preach the Gospel, and not live (as the Lord has ordained) of the
Gospel? And (as if this were nothing) the Apostate does but scoff and gibe at
them for their nakedness, abusing to that end the Scriptures (as the Devil
did) to the patronizing of all his wickedness, with a Scriptum (...). Nazian.
1 Invect. in Julian.
est; It is written (says he) in your law, that you Christians must neither
possess any thing, nor call any thing your own: for your Master tells you Mat.
10. verse 9. that you must make no provision for your selves either of gold or
silver, nor must ve have two coats, or change of raiment: and besides in the 5.
chap. of S. Matthew verse 3. he says, that the poor are blessed, and that
theirs is the kingdom of heaven: which if you believe for truth, then may you
thank me for making you poor, and so forwarding your blessedness.

His third Maxim he learned from them was, to spy out the several tempers
and dispositions of the Christians, and accordingly to fit his gins and snares
(...). ibidem.
for them. As when he met with weak and fearful natures, these he thought best
to fright into paganism, by taking away from them all benefit of the law, and
threatening them with (...). in eadem Invect.
bonds and banishment, death and torments. Again, when he had to do with simple
and credulous persons, his course was to stagger these in their Christian
faith, by making his falsehood (as near as he could) the ape of Truth. But when
he was to work upon the self-conceited and licentious, these he thought fit to
court into compliance with him by a toleration Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 22.
of all sects and opinions whatsoever in point of religion. And for the
covetous and worldly-minded, these he flattered into his Idol-worship by
conferring upon them places of Nounullos assentatione and muneribus ad
immolandum allexit. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 11.
profit and preferment; as well knowing that such earthly advantages, although
they contributed nothing to make his false religion true, yet did they put a
fair gloss and outside upon it, and so made it appear more worth receiving
and embracing with carnal spirits.

These and many other cunning fetches had Julian against Christ and his truth;
which was the reason of that Fathers exclaiming so tartly against him, O soul,
wise only to do evil! Yet all this devilish wisdom (...). Idem Naz. in
eodem loco.
(to use S. James his Iam. 3. 15.
expression) would not do; but, like Achitophels, was soon turned to folly.
For 2 Sa. 15. 31.
as Athanasius foretold of this persecution, that it would prove but a could
which would presently be Nubes quae citissime dissolveretur. Theodoret. l. 3.
cap. 9.
dissolved: so it did indeed; when as he not long after being mortally wounded,
threw up his own blood into the air, and acknowledged Vicisti Galilaee. Idem
lib. 3. cap. 25.
Christ and his truth to have been too hard for him.

Upon which a Christian Historian of those times Orosius in his Chronic.
gives this note, That Impii morte Deus impia dissolvit consilia; that* God
usually dissolves wicked counsels by the deaths of their authors. And Solomon
has a saying much to the same purpose Prove. 21. Nihil invitis fas quemquam
fidere divis. Virg. Aeneid.
verse 30. I here is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord. A sentence so succinct, and yet full, as that I wish all the Atheists and
Machiavels of this age would write it in their hearts with a pen of iron, and
engrave it there with the point of a diamond.

But to leave these, and close up here with one of a later date, and more
nearly relating to our selves. And this is the example of Q* Mary: whom, as the
spirit of God pointed out King Ahaz with This 2 Chr. 28. 22.
is that King Ahaz, so may we her, with this is That Queen Mary; that None;
such of women, for her persecuting the Protestant truth: for there is none of
us (I suppose) can be ignorant, how low it ran in her days, though it did not
So I. Carl. the Martyr said, That the main solution the Papists had for all
questions was, fire and ^aggot. Mr. Fox in Martyr. 2. part, page 1750.
clean run out; wherein the chief argument of the Papists against the
Professors of it, (as one of the Martyrs well said) was Argumentum bacillinum
an argument drawn from fire and faggot, to out the true Religion, and to
establish Popery in this nation, as by a law.

But yet, though the truth of God were (like Moses Exodus 3. 2.
bush) all on fire in her reign, yet was it not consumed by it: For Hoc non
duravit aetatem, that law of hers did not endure an age (as our In Iuelli vita.
Jewel foretold it;) but ended with her before 6. years end; and then did her
sister repeal that act which (like the laws of Hinc leges quas sancivit, prae
nimia earum rigiditate, non inepte vocavit Aristoteles (...), That is, not the
laws of a man, but of a dragon. In Rhetori^.
Draco the Athenian Legislator) had been writ with blood, even with the blood
of so many Confessors and witnesses of the Truth, and restore us Gods Truth
again to its former beauty and lust^e: for which she deserves ever to be
honored by us, as the Repairer of our breaches, and Restorer of paths Isai. 58.
12.
to dwell in.

So that by what has been said, you see that to be verified of Truth, which S.
Paul says of himself, namely, how it has been troubled on every side, but not
distressed; perplexed, In the Greek there is an elegant Paronomasia, (...).
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.

For if Satan, the reputed God of the world, (as he is called in the 1 Cor. 4.
chapter verse 3.) if he (I say) thrust sore at truth that it Premente Deo, fert
Deus alter opem. Ovid. de Trist.
may fall; the true God of heaven and earth will presently put under his
helping hand to bear it up. Beloved, the Truth can never die, because it is an
essential attribute of the Deity, a ray of God himself; and therefore as he
is, so is that immortal. Men's persons indeed may die, and so may their names,
power and plots with them; yea, they are dead already (says the Angel) that
sought the child's life, so, they Man. 2. 20.
are all dead already that sought the life of Truth from the beginning: For
where is the King of Hamath, Isai. 37. 13.
and the King of Arphad, and the King of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hevah and
Ivah? so, where are the Grand persecutours of Christ's truth above mentioned?
And (if I may but stain a little paper more with naming of them) where is Manes
the heretic, upon whose Diabolus sibi arcem struxisse videbatur. In his 5.
Sermon. de Iejunio.
madness (says Leo) the Devil seemed (as it were) to have raised up to himself
a high tower and fortification against the Truth? for he denied the holy
Trinity, rejected the Old Testament, and held two beginnings, the one of good,
and the other of evil.

Again, where is Arrius, who denied the Divinity of Christ, and by his Ingentes
secum fluctus traxit. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 31.
subtilty drew great multitudes after him?

And last of all, where is schismatic Donatus, (for I forbear to name
farther) who confined the true Church (as some do now) Vide August. lib. 2.
contra Petilian. c. 15.
to those of his own party, as altogether spotless here, and without sin; and
taught also that the virtue of the sacraments depended on the worthiness of
the person administering them? Is not the skin of their hypocrisy long since
pulled over their ears, their madness manifested to all the world, their
falsehoods uncased, their names gone out in a stench, their doctrines exploded
out of the Church of God, their opinions condemned? and has not the truth of
Christ prevailed against them? nay, are they not all dead, and with them their
power and malice against the truth also? Yes; their breath goes forth, (says
David) they return to their earth, in that Psalm. ^46. 4.
very day their thoughts perish.

But as for the truth of God, (as he says in another Psa. 100. 5.
psalm) that endures to all generations: for one generation (says the
Preacher) passes away, Eccl. 1. 4.
and another comes, but the earth, so the truth of God upon the earth, abides
for ever. And if we look back but to Christ's time, we shall find sixteen
generations and more to be past since that; wherein 1600 years.
the Centurists are very punctual in relating the adversaries Tantam semper
potentiam veritas habuit, ut nullis machinis, aut cujusquam hominis ingenio vel
art subverti potuerit. Cic^r. in Vatin.
which the truth of Christ has had of all sorts, together with their
particular names, the places where, and the times wherein they lived, the
several instruments they made use of, and all their cursed policies to root it
up: and yet has it outlived them all till this very day (blessed be the God
of truth) and shall live till death be swallowed up in victory. For he that
fights against the truth of God, does (as much as in him lies) fight against
the God of Truth; and it is as easy to pull God out of heaven, as his truth out
of the earth, since God has said it Isai. 40. verse 8. that Verbum Domini
manet in aeternum, the word of the Lord endures Ioannes Wolffangus in his Lect.
Memor. ad annum Christi 1549. (viz) V. D. M. I. AE.
for ever. A sentence that some of the German Nobility were so much in love
withal, that in the beginning of the Reformation they caused the initiall
letters of the words to be embroidered on the sleeves of their garments; to let
the world know, that they were not afraid to profess it openly against all
oppositions whatsoever, as being too weak to prevail against it.

And therefore, if thou be an enemy to truth, let me advise thee, as our
Savior did Saul, not to kick Acts 9. 5.
against the pricks; for it is but vain and foolish so to do, since thou can
gain nothing but hurt unto thy self. So says the Proverb, Do not strike Noli
verberare lapidem, ne laecas manum. Erasm. Adag. loco communi inanis gloriae,
ex Plauto.
a stone, lest thou hurt thy hand; and the truth of God is that lapis
offensionis, that stone of offense spoken of Isai. 8. 14. which if thou strike
and offer violence to, it will not only hurt thy hand (as it did (you know)
Ieroboams, when it was dried 1 Reg. 13. 4.
up upon his stretching it forth against the man of God) but (without
repentance) destroy both body and soul for ever. For in that day (says God) I
will Zach. 12. 3.
make Jerusalem (so will God make his truth) as a burdensome stone to all
people, and they that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though
all the people of the earth be gathered together against it: and upon
whomsoever this stone shall M^t. 21. 44.
fall, him it shall grind to powder.

Little thought Libanius, Erat Libanius sophista Iuliani in religione Ethnica
praeceptor.
when as he asked scoffingly what the carpenters son was a doing, of receiving
this answer, that he was then a making a Coffin to carry Julian in, and all his
mischievous intendments against the truth of Christ, to be buried. Yet so it
was indeed; for Julian the Vide Theodoret. lib. 3. c. 21. and 23. and Sozom.
lib. 6. cap. 2.
Apostate had no sooner vowed to sacrifice the blood of the Christians (by him
styled, in derision, Galilaeans) to his heathenish Gods, but presently the true
God disappointed him in it, by cutting him off in a battle against the Persian.
So truly says the Psalmist, Psalm. 21. 11. That the wicked imagine a
mischievous device against the Lord, but shall not be able to bring it to
pass. For why? He that sits in heaven laughs them to Psalm 2. 4.
scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision. He brings the counsels of the
heathen to naught, he Psalm. 33. 10.
makes the devices of the people to be of none effect. He disappoints the
devices of the crafty (says Eliphas) Job 5. 12.
so that their hands cannot perform their enterprises.

Again, if thou be a friend to truth, be exhorted that, however thou may see
the truth of religion obscured in a nation for a time, as a just judgment of
God for the peoples turning of their backs upon it; and their former
unthankfulness to God for it; yet

1. Not to be troubled at it, as one without hope, nor to give it over as quite
lost: but to stay thy self a little upon God by faith Hinc aiunt veteres, Olim
operto capite rem divinam Saturno fieri; significantes tegi aliquando
veritatem, sed tempore aperiri: Saturnus enim temporum author ac Deus fingitur.
Plutarch. in problemat.
and patience; and ere long, (so soon as God has sufficiently humbled the land
by it) thou shall see yet once more, that the lost groat will be found, and the
Sun shine again upon Gods inheritance. For (as the Heathen man said) Time is
the (...). Euripides.
mid wife to bring truth to light: which though it be spoke there of humane
truth, yet will it hold also in divine; Veniet qui conditam, ac saeculi sui
malignitate compressam, veritate^ dies publicet. Sen. Epist. 79.
For the day is coming (says the Moralist) wherein that truth which is now
held down under the clods of Malignity, shall rise again: That, as it was with
Christ, who though he lay 2. days in the grave, yet did he rise the third, the
third day was a sure day unto him; so shall it be with the truth of Christ,
which, though it may lie a day or two buried under all sorts of pressures and
sufferings, yet after two days (to use the Prophets words) Hos. 6. 2.
shall God revive it, and the 3. day he will raise it up, and it shall live in
his sight, to the comfort of his Church and people.

2. Be exhorted not to let the truth of God fall to the ground for fear of man:
For there is nothing that prevails more upon weak spirits then the fear of
man; when as we are so timorous in the cause of Christ, as not to venture,
therein (when he calls) to be stripped either of our lives or livelyhoods. Nor
is any thing (says G. Nazianzen) so to be feared, as (...). In Orat. 12.
our fearing of something more then God, and for that to desert the Doctrine of
faith and truth. S. Cyprian in his book De Lapsis, and M. Fox in his
Martyrology, do furnish us with many examples this way: (and to name no more
then two) the one tells us of Nicomachus, how he being tormented in the city of
Troas by the Proconsul under Decius the Tyrant, deserted presently his colors
of Christianity, and cried out Non sum Christianus. The Martyrolog. 2. part
page 1362.
other tells us of Dr. Pendleton, how his fear alone ran him out of the field,
and that before he had yet received the least blow from the adversary.

But it must not be so with us; for who art thou (says the Prophet) that thou
should be afraid of Isai. 51. 12. and 13.
a man that shall die, or of the son of man that shall be made as grass; and
forgettest the Lord thy maker, and have feared continually because of the fury
of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the
oppressor? Wherein there seems to be a holy kind of Sarcasme against the
oppressors of Gods truth, which teaches us to stick close to it by Gods
slighting the opposers of it. And the rather are we to hold it up in these
declining times, wherein are held out so many falsities to oppose it; since God
in his care and providence does so order it, that whatsoever becomes of men,
his truth shall be sure to hold, if not by us, yet by some others. And to that
end let us seriously lay to heart those persuasive words of Mordecai to Hester;
If thou hold Hest. 4. 14.
thy peace at this time, then shall enlargement arise to the Jews (and so shall
enlargement arise to the truth of God) from some other place and by some other
hand; but then thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. For who knows
whether thou art come for such a time as this? Oh that every one of us then
would think at this time, that we hear God speaking unto us thus:

Thou see, O Christian, how my truth begins to totter almost every where in
the world; and I must hold it up, because my word and honor are engaged for
it. Now, thou art the man whom I have set up (as I did S. Paul) to be my
champion for the Phil. 1. ^7.
defense thereof; having not only chosen and enabled thee for this great work,
but also purposely reserved thee for such a time as this* Know therefore, that
I do now exspect thy helping hand herein: else I shall, for thy default, soon
employ some other in thy stead to do it for me; but then thou and thy fathers
house shall perish. Again

2. When good men also and lovers of truth, with all their helps and
assistances, shall leave us, the truth it self shall be sure to hold; and
though the Candlesticks may be removed, yet shall the light Revel. 2. 5* 1 Samuel
3. 3. Lev. 24. 2, and 3. Psalm. 27. 10.
of them like the lamp of God in the temple burn continually, and not go out,
until the day of glory do appear. The prophet David observed it by his own
experience, that when his father and mother for sook him, yet the Lord took him
up. Our natural parents and friends they will die, (how soon we know not) and
so will Gods Ministers too, our Spiritual fathers: 1 Cor. 4. 15 Zach. 1. 5.
and the Prophet Zachary by that question of his puts it out of all question,
Your fathers (says he) where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for
ever? No; and who knows but that the mouths of Gods For he that follows truth
(says Sr. W. Rawleigh) too near at the heels, is in great danger to have his
teeth struck out. In his praef. to his history of the world.
Ministers, who are now the dispensers of his sacred truth unto us, may be e're
long stopped, and the doors of their Churches shut up? But as for the truth it
self received by them, this shall never die; 1 Esd. 4. 38.
for truth is immortal, (as in Esdras) and lives for ever; and when they are
dead and gone, this will remain to quicken us: so says David, This is my Ps.
119. 50.
comfort in my trouble, thy word has quickened me. S. Paul says of himself,
that he suffered trouble as 2 Timothy 2. 9.
an evil doer, even to bonds, but the word of God is not bound: And so say I,
that the faithful ministers of God may suffer trouble as evil doers even to
bonds, and death also, for the truth of the Gospel; but as for the word of
God, this word of truth made known by them, this is neither bound, nor dies. For

1. If truth should fail, so must God too, who is essential truth, and the
source from whence all saving truth proceeds* which is impossible.

2. We have besides, Christ's prayer and promise for it at his personal
farewell to the world. I will Io. 14. 16, 17
pray the Father (says he) and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may Noli d^fi^ere, ubi te veritas reficere promi^tat. Ber. epist. 106.
abide with you for ever; even the spirit of truth. Now as his prayer was
always effectual with his Father; (for I know, says Christ to his Father,
that thou hear me always) Ioh. 11. 42.
so is his promise true and firm; not as ours are, Yea and Nay, but yea and
Amen. And to double our 2 Cor. 1. 2^*
comfort herein, our Savior doubles his promise, by telling his disciples
further in the next verse, that he will not leave them comfortless. The words
in Ioh. 14. 18.
the Greek are (...), (i. e.) I will not leave you orphans: as if Christ should
have said thus unto them; I see that you all eye me as your common parent in my
provisionary care for your future estate and welfare in a better life, but it
will not be long that I shall stay with you: yet be not discouraged at it, for
Quasi dixisset, Tempore sepulturae meae eritis pupilli, sed non manebitis
tales; nam spiritum vobis, qui vice patris sit, relinquam. H. Grot. in locum.
though I am shortly to depart from you, as touching my bodily presence; yet
will not I for all that leave you as orphans that have none to look after them,
but will abundantly supply your want of my person, by the continued presence of
my spirit.

And as our Savior thought this a sufficient cordial to stay up their
drooping spirits in the declension of outward comforts; so is it likewise to
us, whenas we shall consider, that although Christ himself be now in heaven,
and there must abide until the restitution of all things, yet in his stead
has he left us here on earth the Comforter, even the spirit of Truth, who
shall continue with us for ever, and ever preserve the truth of his Gospel to
us, which is superabundantly more then all earthly enjoyments, as being his
immediate instrument he works by to beg^t us a new to holiness of life. So
says the text, Of his own will he begat us with the word of truth.

And so much for the first thing, which is the Quare, or reasons why we must
hold truth so fast.

The second is Quomodo, or by what means we are to do it. And here I commend
unto you these five.

1. Get a sound knowledge of God in the Scriptures, at least competentem
scientiam, if not eminentem, a competent if not an eminent measure of it, that
so thou may be able in some degree to give 1 Pet* 3. 15.
a reason of the truth thou do profess, and of the hope that is in thee: for
it is knowledge which is the settle-brain King James used to say, that the
reason why so many fell away to Popery and other errors was, their
ungroundednesse and ignorance in the points of catechism, which are the
grounds of Religion.
of a Christian, and bears him up steadily in any weather; whereas ignorance
makes him unstable in all his ways. Ye err (says our Savior to the
Sadducees) not knowing the Scriptures. There is nothing will sooner slide a man
into error then ignorance; for the ways of darkness (says the Prophet) are
slippery ways, in which it is Ier. 23. 12.
easy to stumble and fall.

Alas! How easily is a simple soul led aside from Eheu! quam miseros tramite
devio abducit ignorantia! Boet. l. 3. met^. 8.
the way of Truth! but then especially, when he has to dea^ with a cunning
Jesuit, or a crafty Pelagian, with a prating Anabaptist, or a strong-pated
Socinian, when they shall set their wits a work to glaze over old falsehoods, to
set an edge upon them, and to set them out to sale for new truths.

It was said of Schwenckfeldius, Errores suos in superioris Germaniae
provinciis disseminavit circa annum M D XXVIII. Vide Spanhem. Diatrib.
historic. de origin, progressu, and sectis Anabaptistarum, Numer. 25.
who pretended so much to Enthusiasms and Revelations, that he had a good
heart, at caput illi been regulatum defuisse, but that he wanted a head
well-regulated: and the same may be said of many poor people in these days,
that they have good meaning hearts to God and his truth, but as for their heads
they are very weak, and not well balasted with the principles of true Religion;
which is the reason that they stagger to and fro therein like a drunken man,
and are not fixed. And these S. Paul calls (...) 2 Timothy 3. 8.
(...); which (if we understand actively) will signify, men of no judgment
concerning the faith (as the marginall note in our Bibles has it:) and prays
for the Philippians, that they may abound in all knowledge and judgment, (...)
Phil. 1. 9, 10
(...), (that is) that they may be able to discern with judgment the things
that differ. Now what causes the falling sickness, but a weakness in the brain?
or an apostasy from the truth, but a weakness in the understanding, Cognita
judicio constant. Cato in Distich.
when as we are either altogether ignorant of the will of God in the
Scriptures, or else know it but superficially, and not with a judicious
knowledge.

2. Dispute not against the grounds and principles of Truth, which are plain In
Theologia duplicia reperiuntur principia: Essendi, ut Deus; cognoscendi, ut
Scriptura; Keck. Syst. Theol. cap. 8.
Scripture, common sense and reason; it being a true saying, that Contra
negantem principia non est disputandum, that there can be no disputing with a
man about any art, that denies the principles of it.

For you must know, that in every art and science there are allowed some first
Hinc illud Aristotelis, Principia non ab aliis, sed a seipsis fidem faciunt. 1
Post. c. 2. Itidem, Principia non accipiunt, sed dant. Keck. Log. page 144. Et
hoc vulgar; Oportet discentem credere.
principles, which are not to be demonstrated a priori, from any preceding
cause, to him that learnes it, but to be granted by him, and believed of him;
and these they call Postulata, that is, such things as the art it self requires
the Scholar to grant unto her, and believe, or else she will not undertake to
teach him. Now of these he is not to ask a former cause or reason, Quia
unumquodque Primum superiorem in suo genere causam non habet, because every
first thing in any kind has in the same no superior cause to retreat unto, and
so, not being demonstrable a part ante by any thing that was before it, is not
be questioned.

Thus, if any one (says the Philosopher) will question whether there be motion
in nature, or no, it is fit that he have Argumentum See Pars. Christ. Directary
Part 1. cap. 2.
a fustibus, that he have a club argument to convince him of it, and be well
cudgelled until he yield it; for it is only a feeling argument that is moving
to a sottish and stupid nature. Again if he deny the fire to be hot, let his
hand be held in it, till it extort from him a confession of it. Or if any one
shall deny all liberty from necessitations, let him be well See B^. Bramhalls
defense of true liberty from antecedent and extrinsecall necessity, page 90.
and. 91.
scourged till he be a suppliant to him that beat him, and consesse him to have
either power him to strike, or else to hold his hand.

Evident sense and reason must not be questioned by us as we are men, in such
things as are within their verge; nor as we are Christians, the great Verbum
Dei est commune principium ab omnibus concessum. Bell. Proef. in Disput. de
Contr. fidei.
principle of Religion, the Sacred Scriptures. It was Eves fault, and our
misery, that she entertained Genesis 3. 2.
a parley with the serpent about the truth of Gods word: and should we come once
to the same pass, the Devil need trouble himself no further with us, as being
his sure enough. I and it is his shorter cut, and more hopeful way too, to
make us Atheists thus, Dr. Hammond in his book of the rationality of Christian
Religion.
by our breaking up the foundation it self, then (while that remains firm) to
demolish what is erected on it. And therefore when Satan shall watch us a fall
to the purpose, his main design will be to make us question the Scriptures
whether they be the word of Gods truth or no; as well knowing that when he has
once got us upon this lock, he can be the break-neck of all Religion with us
when he pleases: for what then can hinder us from turning Ranters, or Quakers,
or any thing else but what we should?

It is then very dangerous to admit any question about the truth of the Deity,
the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of Christ, the authority of the
Scriptures, the immortality of the Of this sort is Crellius de uno vero Deo,
against the Trinity; the book De tribus mundi impost oribus not long since
translated into English; Diverse Socinian books against the Deity of Christ and
satisfactoriness of his death; Many Quakers pamphlets against the Authority of
the Scriptures; and a Treatise lately published and entitled Man's Mortality,
assering that our souls die with our bodies.
soul, and such like fundamentalls; about which some have been of late too
buisy, and have misemployed their brains and pens too much: there being no
other end and fruit to be exspected from these men labors, but to heathenize
and unchristian the world a second time. For when the foundations are
destroyed, what can the righteous do? or whether shall he go for saving truth?
If to any, it must be to the Church his mother. But alas! what can he expect
from her, when as the son of Sirach says, that he who roots out foundations
Eccl. 3. 9.
has the curse of his mother upon him. The heathenish Ephesians, when the
deity of their goddess came once to be discussed, which they took pro concesso
for a granted truth, this they would not endure at any hand, but carried it
away with a loud hollow, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Acts 19. 28


Now if these heathenish Ephesians would not endure to hear their false grounds
to be questioned, as well knowing that the whold superstructure of their
superstition would fall with them; how much less should we Christians endure
the true fundamentalls of our Religion? If we do, there is no saving truth will
stay long with us, but we shall quickly be at a loss therein.

And therefore, when any such truths shall be called in question by wandering
heads, and graceless hearts, let us cry them down with, Magna est veritas
Christianorum. Why, these are the foundations Si ipsa fundamenta destruantur,
quid faciat justus? what can the righteous do? so we translate it. Ps. 11. 13.
Videtur esse vox impotentis ad agendu, aut ignorant is quid agat: and Metaphora
est ab oedificiis, quoe dirutis fundamentis, tota concidere, and possum ire
necesse est. Calv. in locum.
of our Religion, and without these we shall not know what to do, nor which
way to turn our selves toward heaven and happiness, but be in a most
desperate and lost condition: yea, these are the great pillars of Truth in
Christianity, that are not to be moved; for if we once suffer these to be
shaken by the gain-sayings and contradictions of simple and unsettled men, we
shall quickly see the whole structure of our religion to be shaken with them,
and Sampsons fate befall us, who had no sooner pulled down the pillars of the
house wherein the Philistines were assembled, but presently the whole house
fell upon his head, and buried Iud. 16. 30.
him in its ruins.

3. Be not too credulous: For the Orator could say as much, That if we will
discern truth from falsehood, we must not give our Noli incognita pro cognitis
habere, nec his temere assentire. Tull. Offic. lib. 1. Tarda solet magnis rebus
adesse fides. Ovid. Ep. 16.
assent rashly to such things as are proposed as truths unto us, until we
thoroughly know them to be so. If we do, we shall thereby show our selves very
weak and simple: for the simple believes every word (says Solomon;) whereas the
Pro. 14. 15
wise Christian will not take every thing for truth which is offered to him,
but weigh it first in the balance of the sanctuary, before he pay his belief
unto it. And here that posie of Epicharmus is good, Memento diffidere, remember
not to trust too soon. And this accords Erasm. Adag. page.. 181.
with that of S. John, Not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits
whether they be of God, or Nemo verius fidit, quam qui sic diffidit. Erasm.
Epist. ad Volsium.
no. 1 John 4. verse 1. For there be many false prophets (says our Savior)
who shall say, Lo here is Christ, Mat. 24. 23, 24.
and lo there is Christ; so, Lo here is truth, and, lo there is truth: but
believe them not. And hence it is that the wise man will have us buy the truth;
that Pro. 23. 23.
is, to deal with truth, as The saying is, Caveat emptor.
buyers do with wares: not to believe all wares to be good, which the seller
would obtrude upon us, because there is a great deal of naughty and counterfeit
stuff, which the seller (if he can) will labor to foist upon credulous
persons; but rather let us do as those Acts 17. 11
noble Bereans did, let us bring those nominall truths to the bar of Scripture,
there to be examined; and if they can acquit themselves for truths at that
tribunal, Quod si unquam, hoc tempore maximopere satagendum, quo tot haereses
pullularunt. Del Rio Adag. Sacr. vet. Testam. 404. part 2. Sen. Epist. 3. De
hoc vide Calvinum, in 1 Thessal. 5. 20. (...). Hesiod. (that is) belief and
unbelief have been alike destructive; belief of every one, and unbelief of any
one.
then we may believe them, but not before. Namutrumque in vitio est, (says the
Moralist) and nulli credere, and omnibus; for both are in fault, as well to
believe none, as to believe every one. The one is obstinacy, the other
lightness: the one lets truth knock at her door a long time, and it is well if
she get in at last; whereas the other lets her quickly in at one door, and outs
her again at the other.

And as not too credulous, so neither too curious, nor prying into those things
which God has clouded: for this itch of knowing Prurigo sciendi scabies
Ecelesiae.
more then we should is very dangerous, and proves an heretical scab at last
not easily cured. It was the disease Genesis 3. 6.
of our first parents, and from them we caught it. Oh that their fall by it,
would be a means to make us stand against it, and that we would be wise Romans
12. 3.
unto sobriety (as the Apostle speaks!)

For why art thou so inquisitive to know all the secrets of predestination,
whenas S. Paul tells thee, that it is one of Gods Here Traske was out, who took
upon him by his inspection upon any man's countenance, infalliblie to reveal
unto him whether he was elected to life eternal, or 2 Timothy 2. 15 no. See Dr.
Slater in 1 Epist. Thessal. c. 1. verse 4.
foundations, and such a one too that God has set his seal upon; The Lord
knows who are his? Now it is very dangerous to break up seals, and especially
Gods, the indorsement being enough for us to read, viz. That he who calls upon
the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

Again, to know what God did before the beginning of the world; when the
Prudens futuri temporis exitum caliginosa nocte premit Deus; Ridetque si
mortalis ultra Fas rogitat. Horat. lib. 3. carm. ode 29
precise day of judgment shall be; and the like: which are therefore hid from
us, Mark 13. 32
that so we may not call our wits to an inquisition about them; since Moses
tells us, That secret things belong Deu. 29. 2^
to the Lord, but revealed to us and to our children. And here that common rule
is good, Relinque incertum and tenebis certum, Touch not at that which is
uncertain, and by this means thou will fix the better upon that which is
certain. And it would do well if we would take the advice of Syracides
Ecclesiast. 3. 21, 22, 23.
in this point. Seek not (says he) the things that are too hard for thee,
neither search the things that are above thy strength: But what is commanded
thee, think upon with reverence; for it is not needful for thee to see with
thine eyes the things that are in secret. Be not curious in unnecessary
matters; for more things are showed unto thee then men understand.

I read of Thales, that he gazing Stobaeus Sermon. 78.
on the stars, fell into a pit; whereupon a maid took occasion to laugh at him,
saying, That it happened deservedly to him, because he would first learn to know
the Ne plus sapiasqua^ oportet, ne dum lucem sectaris, impingas in tenebras,
illudente tibi daemone meridiano. Bern. Sermon. 90.
heavens, before he did well know the earth. And so are pryers into Gods
secrets justly suffered to fall into the pit of error, because they run
division in religion, before they know the plain-song of it. Had Thales looked
into the water first, its like he might have seen the stars; but looking first
upon the stars, he could not think to make them his perspective to behold the
water. And so, if we shall begin and take our rise from the lower points of
religion, we shall come in time, and by degrees, up to the highest; but if we
begin first to build our houses at the roof, we shall show our selves thereby
but disordered builders, and cannot think our structure should stand long
having no foundation to hold it up.

And here S. Austin has two excellent sayings; which are these. Multo facilius
In sermon. de Eclipsi solis.
inveniet syderum conditorem humilis pietas, quam syderum ordinem superba
curiositas: Compescat De Genesis contra Manich. lib. 1. cap. 3. Et Calv. Institut.
lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 2.
itaque (says he) humana temeritas, and ne quaerat illud quod non est, ne illud
quod est non inveniat. i. e. An humble piety will sooner find the maker of the
stars, then a proud curiosity can the order of the stars: let humane rashness
therefore keep within those bounds God has set it, and not seek after that
truth which is not to be found; least in so doing, he loose that which he ought
to seek, and may be found. For he that Melior est sidelis ignor antia, quam
temeraria scientia. Lomb. lib. 1. did. 41.
has a modest ignorance will sit down in the way of truth, when he that has a
presumptuous knowledge will soon loose himself and his faith too in the many
winding Meanders of an over-bold and curious inquiry.

4. If we would hold fast saving truth, we must not lay too fast hold on the
world. And this made the prophet David say, If riches increase, set not Ps. 62.
10.
your hearts upon them: He that will take liberty to disobey Christ in some
gainful particular, will not stick in his own defense (that he may appear
congruous to himself) to cast off at last Christianity it self; Dr. Hammond in
his introduct. to the rationality of Christ. Religion.
for if our hearts be once tenacious of the world, we shall soon let go our
hold of truth. Nay I dare boldly say, that more have been won from truth by the
smiles and embraces of the world, then have been forced from it by her frowns
and hard usage: as the sun (you know) in the Apologue Plutarch. and Aesop. sab.
page 32. Mundus ille periculosior blandus, quam molestus. Augustine. epist. 144.
made the traveller cast away his cloak when the blusting wind could not, but
rather caused him to gather it up the closer about his loins.

Now for examples of this; we read in Christ's time of a young man who to
preserve his estate deserted Mat. 19. 22
Christ, and of a Judas, who to gain an estate turned traitor to him for 30
pieces of silver: so hard is it (says our Savior) for them that trust in
riches Mar. 10. 24.
to enter into the Kingdom of God. And in the Apostles days we read of a
Demas that forsook 2 Ti. 4. 10.
Paul, to hug and embrace the present world.

Again, in the Primitive times that presently succeeded, and were wholly
clouded with heathenish persecutions, we read of many that took up the name of
Christ; but to desert it so soon as their Apostasy might be any ways gainful
to them: from whence (it may be) the Heathen might take occasion so wickedly to
falsify Vide Suetonium in vita Tiberii claudii Drufi Caesaris.
the name of Christ, in turning it by way of nickname and reproach into (...),
which signifies Gain, and calling the followers of Christ (...), rather then
(...), Men made up of gain rather then Godliness. And of such we hear S.
Ignatius (who Ignatius in Epist. ad Trallianos.
was S. John's contemporary) complaining thus, That they were (...), rather
Merchants of Christ, then true Christians indeed. And Gregory Nazianzen also
(who lived in the third Century after Christ) tells us of great numbers during
the reign of Julian the Apostate, (...), In his 1 Invect. in Iulianum.
who (miserable men as they were) had not resisted falsehood in the least
measure, (much less resisted it unto blood) but had exchanged Heb. 12. 4.
and bartered away for a little gain their own salvation. And now after those
10. days, Rev. 2. 10.
those ten primitive persecutions were ended, and that the Sea of Rome began to
be honored and enriched by the favor and bounty of Princes, then presently do
we hear of her Apostacy from her former faith. So truly was it said of her,
that Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit matrem; that Religion
brought forth riches, and the daughter had devoured the mother. And Non inepte
igitur Pontificiae Religionis caput, Missam; Purgatorium autem caeterasque
lucrosas quae ab eo pendent Doctrinas ventrem quidam appellavit Sadeel in
Praefat. lib. adversus human* satisfact. Hinc excitatus primum Lutherus, ut
Indulgentiarum Pontificiara^ nundinationi obicem poneret. Lucri bonus est odor
ex re qualibet. Iuven. Satyr. 14.
indeed, he that looks now into her Doctrine, will easily find a great deal of
mercenary wares in it; as that of Supremacy, Relics, Purgatory, Humane
satisfaction for temporal punishments, the Treasure of the Church, Pardons,
Indulgences, and the like; as if that the main design of Popery were only to
be a mere engine of gain, to heighten and scrue her up to the top of worldly
wealth and glory.

But to leave Rome, and to come to our selves.

Now here I would fain know why so many in these times join with the
Anabaptists, to destroy the Ministerial function in the Percute pastores, and
dispergentur ^ves. Zach. 13. 7.
Church of Christ, being that great instrument ordained by him to preserve us
from apostacy in these latter days. Surely, if men would but impartially
examine themselves herein, they would soon find the main ground thereof to be
covetousness, even a greedy desire of preying upon that portion of maintenance
which God himself has given in dowry with it, and dividing it among
themselves, saying, as the husbandmen did of the heir, Come and let us Man. 21.
38.
kill him; so, come and let us kill and destroy the Ministry, that the
inheritance of it may be ours.

They may pretend herein (it may be) as some Noble men of Scotland did at the
beginning of Reformation there, the spiritual good of the Church, the purity
of religion, and the like; but if you look near unto them, it will then appear
that they intend by it to get spoils, to gripe Hist. Sco^. sub Knoxi nomine
edita, page 503.
the possessions of the church, and to have their share of Christ's coat to
cloth themselves and their children withal. That as Caligula laid clothes
upon Tiberius being sick, as if he would have befriended him in the want of
heat, when it (...). Di. App. hist. l. 58.
was to smother him: so do they with the sick Church, cloth her with pity and
commiseration, when indeed it is to kill her, and set up themselves in her
stead; crying out as the Saepe mantelo religionis velatur ambitio and avaritia.
Lips. in lib. de una religione.
Jews did, Templum Domini, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
but-to destroy it, and to spin a sacrilegious web for themselves out of her
bowels. Which makes a Learned Divine Baxter in his Sts rest part 4. page 282.
of our own take up this sad complaint against these times. Alas! that we must
see the cause of Christ and his Church tossed about in contention from one to
another, like a football among a crowd of boys; every one sweating about it
with a foolish violence to get it into his own power, that so he may drive on
by it to the goal of his private and worldly interests. And this we need not
wonder at, especially if we consider the ripeness of sin among us: for when the
sins of a nation are ripe, it is then usual with God, in his just judgment,
to suffer a varice to give law to religion, whilst generally De civit. Dei lib.
7. Et Lact. de origin erroris, lib. 2.
sub obtentu numinis, under the cloak of religion, men satisfy their own lusts
and covetous desires upon it, as S. Austen notes.

This has been so heretofore, and it will be so still, so long as there is a
Pluto in Erat Mammon idolum quod Syrii colebant, ac opibus praefuisse
credebant. Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 8.
Hell, and a golden Mammon Mat. 6. 24.
on earth to worship. S. Peter in his second epistle, his 2 chapter, and 3
verse, speaking of false teachers, who should speak evil of the truth, and the
ways thereof, makes the original of it to be Covetousness, where he says,
that through covetousness they should make merchandise of their brethren; and
again verse 14. that they had hearts exercised with covetous practices: the
Greek word is (...), that is, with covetousness; not only with the practices,
but also with the principles of covetousness: by which means we read verse 15.
that they forsook the right way, and went astray by following the way of Balaam
the son of Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. And S. Paul also
says of some who resisted the truth, that they 2 Timothy 3. 8.
were men of corrupt minds; that is, such as being bribed with rewards, and
Avaritia fidem and probitatem subvertit, ac pro his Deum negligere, ac omnia
venalia habere docuit. Salust. de conjur. Catilin.
corrupted with earthly principles, would either be Polytheists in religion, or
else Atheists; either of any religion, or else of none at all. And there be too
many now adays of this mind: like him, who being asked not long since of what
principles he was, answered, that in troublesome Theodor. Ver. in Hist. Ind.
times he professed no principle but gain; as for his religion, this he would
not trouble his head withal, but would think upon that, when the times were
for it.

He then that is principled with covetousness, will never be brought to hold
any principles of religion long; covetousness being the root of all evil (as
the Apostle (...). 1 Timothy 6. 10. Ac (...) Philone, (...), H. Grotius.
calls it) which whilst some eyed too much, they have erred from the faith. And
without all question, there is no such bait to draw a carnal mind from truth,
as the pleasing things of the world: for what (says the fig tree) in Iotham's
parable, shall I leave my Judge. 9 9, 11, 13.
sweetness? and the olive, shall I leave my fatness? and the vine, shall I
leave my wine that cheeres God and man? So says the worldling, shall I leave
my sweet bits of profi^, my fat morsels of places and honors, or my delicious
wine of pleasures, for truth? No; there is no Nullum est officium tam sanctum,
quod non avartia violare soleat. Tully pro Quinti^.
duty so sacred, but love of gain will violate. And whosoever thou art, if thou
be once taken with these, Gods sacred truth will never be sure of thee; but, if
the world will give thee higher wages and entertainment, Such was Eustathius
Bp. of Sebaste, who was one day for the Homousian, and another for the
Homoiusian confession, according as they suited with his present turn and
advantage. Magdeb. cent. 4. cap. 11.
actum est de veritate, farewell poor truth, thou art her servant no longer.
And the picture of such a one the Scripture holds out unto us in Demetrius and
his fellow crafts-men, Acts 19. (crafty enough I Will warrant you to keep up
their silver shrines;) for when S. Paul preached the truth among them, which
they conceived would be much to their loss in their means and fortunes, you
find verse 23. that there was no small stir at Ephesus about that way of truth
which he made known unto them: and that Demetrius bestirred himself lustily in
it, you may see by his speech to them verse 25. Sirs, ye know that by this
craft we get our wealth. As if he should have said thus; What? does Paul think
by his new upstart kind of truth to out us of our outward possessions? Has he
nothing else to buisy himself about, then about our D^ana, our Tutelary
Goddess, by making of whose medals we have our trade and What we translate
silver shrines, is in the Greek (...) silver temples, that is, Medals of silver
having the figure of Dianas temple stamped upon them, which the Asiaticks bought
up very much and kept by them in h^nor of their Goddess. Beza in ver. 24. Horum
fabros (...) vocari, notaet Salmas. ad Solinum.
livelihood, our means and subsistence? If he think with his truth to undo us
in our fortunes, he will be much mistaken in it; for rather then he shall
beggar us with that way, we are resolved what way to take, and that is to buz
about him like so many drones to some purpose, to decry his truth, and to cry
up our falsehood, with Great is D^ana of the Ephesians.

In the first chapter of Isai, verse 22. the Lord complains of Israel, that she
mixed his wine with water, which does much abate the strength and efficacy of
the wine: and in the second Epistie to the Corinthians, the second chapter and
the last verse, we find the like expression, where the Apostle says of some
that they did corrupt the word of God. Now the Greek word there used is (...);
and it is a Metaphor (says one) from deceitful vintners, that A corrumpendo
vino, atque infuscando, ut caupones solent. Iun. Annotat. in locum.
use to corrupt their wine by mixing water with it: and what moves them to do
this, but only gain? And so there are some in these days who do corrupt Gods
truth with the watery conceptions of their own brains; and if they can gain to
themselves this way never so little, they think they have done well enough,
though in the mean time the truth be at a great loss with them in its former
strength and efficacy. But as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish
with thee: Acts 8. 20.
so say I to all such, your gain perish with you, who can so far abase your
precious faith (as S. Peter 2 Pet. 1. 1.
calls it) as to make it wait on your earthly interests.

But as for us, let us beware of such mixtures; and if they be offered to us,
let us reject them: for though sometimes we may get by them here, yet sure I
am, that we shall loose hereafter; and if we gain the world, we shall loose our
own souls: and what profit Mark 8. 36.
will there be in this (says our Savior) when as that is only true gain
which will abide with us in another life? He then that loses an estate here
for Christ and his truth, shall be sure to find it hereafter Mat. 19. 19.
with advantage. Nor can we call him (says our kingly Divine) a looser, that
looses all, yet saves his own (...) p. 219.
soul at last.

5. and lastly, If we would hold the truth of God fast, we must watch over the
flexibility of our own corrupt nature, which is very apt to wheel about to any
thing which is called truth. For the world can have no such power to unsettle
us of truth, did not the inclination of our own spirits join issue with it
against us. And thus also may truth be well compared Astringit homine^ veritas,
recte igitur baltheo c^mparatur. H. Grotius in Eph^s. 6. 14.
to a girdle, because a girdle is of a restraining nature, and ties up that
which is loosely disposed: so are all our hearts naturally very loose, and love
not to betyed up close to any constant rule. Hence it is that in the 1. Epistle
of S. Paul to Timothy, chap. 4. verse 1. the Apostle speaking there of some who
in the latter days should prove Apostates from the faith, he makes the inward
cause of their apostacy to be the lightness of their own spirits, whereby
they did (...), give heed too much to wandering spirits and Doctrines of Devils;
for a lightminded man is naturally (...). Naz. 1 Invect.
apt to believe any thing to be truth.

And such a light-head was Marcus Antonius de Dominis Erat primo Archiep.
Spalat. apud nos autem Decanus de Windsor.
(the Grand Ecebolius of later times) who (besides his eying of wordly profits
and preferments) was of himself, in religion, so light and unconstant, as that
he knew not where to stand, but still took it up a new wheresoever he came;
even as children do flowers, tanquam spectaculi and spiraculirem (as Tertullian
In lib. de Resurrect. Carnis.
speaks) even as a matter only of sight and scent, and then threw it away
again: for so we read in Socrates of him, that he was a Christian under
Constantius, under Julian a Pagan, Adeo levis and inconstans erat Ecebolius, ut
se ad Imperatorum ingenia in Religione semper conformaret. Socrat. Eccl. Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
under Iovinian a Christian again: such a juggling Impostor he was all his
days! And there have been too many of late like unto him, who have pinned
their Religion more upon the sleeve of the times, then upon the truth, turning
themselves (like the heliotropium) still toward the sun; and if they do but
see a thief, (as David speaks) Psa. 50. 18
I mean a theevish and upstart opinion stealing upon Gods freehold, do
presently get up, and ride after it, as Iehu did, furiously. How ought we then
2 Kings 9. 20.
every day to set a guard over our vagrant and yielding spirits, and to pray in
Cited by Calvin, Opus^. page 470.
those words of S. Augustine, A me salva Dom ne, Lord keep us from our selves. A
saying that the Spaniards are so much taken with, that one tells us how Mons.
de Scudery in his Censure of Math as Corvinus King of ^ung^ry, Curi* Politiae.
they do ordinarily use it by way of Proverb, Guarda me D^os de mi, that is,
God guard me from my self. And it were a good prayer for us also, that God
would daily guard us from our selves, I mean, from that unsettlednesse of
spirit that is within us.

And so much for the first thing, viz. That we must hold it firmly.

The 2. follows; which is, That we must rejoice in it affectionately.

And to this end I lay before you these two considerations.

1. The great joy and delight that the understanding has in natural truth;
which is such, that some have conceited a proper union Ld. Brooks in his book
of the souls union with truth.
and identity between truth and the understanding: which though I cannot see
how to grant, yet am I Summum in unione consistit gaudium; quoque propio^ unio,
eo major oblectatio. Aquin.
sure of this, that there is a more inward, and nearer conjunction of the
Intellect to truth, then there can be of the quickest sense to any outward
object, and so more rejoicing in it.

Thus when Archimedes Vitruvius de Archit. l. 9. c. 3. Et Erasm. Adag. page 543.
had found out but one natural Truth (which was the proportions of mixture in
gold) he was so ravished with it, as he cried out in the ex^asy of his joy,
(...), I have found it. I have found it: And Democritus also was so taken with
it, as that it made him willing to loose his bodily eyes, that so he Aul.
Gellius lib. 10. Noct. Attic. cap. 17.
might with the eyes of his mind (whenas he had no outward objects to call them
off) be wholly taken up with a most clear contemplation of natures truths. And
has God bestowed upon thee divine Truth, and art thou no ways affected with
it? Oh why do thou not break forth into that affectionate speech of the
Prophet Jeremy, Thy word I have found, Ier. 15. 16.
I have found it, and it was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart? It was
great joy whenas Artaxerxes Est. 7.
sent his letters to the Jews, the contents whereof were Peace and Truth. And
has God given thee his Gospel, with the Superscription of peace and truth
upon it, and yet can it extract no joy from thee? Thy testimonies (says David)
have Psalm 119. 111.
I claimed for my heritage, and they are the rejoicing of my heart.

A good man rejoices as much in the possession of truth, as a man does in his
heritage, which he is to enjoy for him and his heirs for ever. And this may
appear further by the indefatigable labor and travel that natu^es Scholars
have taken to attain it. S. Ierom, writing to Paulinus, says of Hieron. Epist.
Paulino, in prae^at. vulg. Latin. Bibl.
Plato and Pythagoras, that they traveled over all Egypt, Italy and Persia,
to find it out; De Apollon. vide Philostrat. in vit. Sophorum.
and of Apollonius, that he searched no less then 19. several countries to
come to the knowledge of it.

Nature has then taught her Scholars to joy in nothing so much as truth: for
what do you tell them either of their own native Chara est patria, uxor; chari
liberi, parents, fratres, propinquis sed omnes omnium charitates veritas una
complectitur; Sa Tully Offic. lib. 1. Nullus animo cibus suavior quam cognitio
veritatis. Lactant. Instit. l. 1. cap. 1.
country, of their wives and children, of their parents, brethren and kinsmen
in the flesh? all these are nothing to them in comparison of truth. So that you
see there is no delight like that which the soul has in the knowledge of the
truth.

And if truth be so much to nature, then much more to grace.

Which made S. Ierom (of whom we spoke before) go from S^ridon in Hungary unto
Rome for his education, which was then in his time, (being the 3. Century after
Christ) Veritatis schola (as one calls Hutter. in Prae^at. lib. de Sacrific.
Missae.
it well) long celeberrima; and from thence after to travel over the greatest
part of Europe, to confer with learned men; and at last to fix himself at
Bethlehem in Judea, to acquaint himself there with the Hebrew tongue, the
primitive language of Scripture truth.

Indeed we need not go so far in these days for the Non est ultra mare, sed p
opinquu^ est tibi verbum hoc valde. Deu. 30. 13, 14
word of truth, nam venit ad limina, for it is come home to our thresholds: and
yet how few be there now among us, that will give it any entertainment, much
less suffer it to dwell in us richly, as the (...).
Apostle exhorts us Col. 3. 16. For which God may justly give us up to that
fearful judgment he threatened Israel with, Amos 8. 12. viz. that we shall e're
long wander up and down from sea to sea, and from the North to the East shall
we run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, this word of truth, and shall
not find it; because we took so little pleasure in it when we were in
possession of it.

The 2. Consideration to this end is, the great pleasure that men take in
falsehood, when it goes masked with the vizor of truth to cover its deformity.
For let a man think but any falsehood to be truth, and it will please him to
enjoy it, though with the enduring of the greatest evils.

Thus, if the old Carthaginians Solebat ea gens infantes suos aeneae Saturni
statuae cavae, and intus incensae, in sinum ponere; qui velut in Dei complexu
enecabantur. Hinc refert fabula, se omnes suos devorasse filios. Plut. in Apoph.
be persuaded that the sacrificing of their children be the true way of
pleasing their idoll-God, they will then make 200. of them at once victims to
him. And the like the Scripture says of the idolatrous Israelites, Lev. 18. 21
how they made their children pass through the fire to the Idol Moloch, in the
valley of the Idolum hoc quandoque vocatur Melcham vel Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. ab
Hebraeo Melech, quod regem denotat, quem alii Saturnum (ut supra) alii Martem
volunt. Minuc. Fell.
sons of Hinnon, after the pattern of the Canaanites and Amorites; while their
miserably-deluded parents did at the sound of the drum, cornet, and other loud
instruments, dance about the Idol, that so they might not hear their infants
cries.

So again, if Friderick Barbarossa the Emperor be but persuaded that the Pope
is the true head of the Church, and Successor of Peter, how sordidly then will
he lay his neck under the Popes feet; but especially Alexander the 3. Fox in
Martyrol. Et Bucholc. chron. page 685.
when he hears him quote that place of Scripture for it, Super aspidem and
basiliscum ambulabis? though Psalm. 91. 13
every novice could see how pitifully he tortured and misapplied that place, to
serve his own turn upon him.

Tell me then, what is it that a persuasion of truth in point of religion,
though never so false, is not able to do? Sleidan in his Commentaries tells
us, that Sleid. Comment. lib. 10; and Lambertus Hortensius lib. de tumulibus
Anabaptistarum. Ignorant zeal is too blind to go right, and ^oo active to
stand still. F^ller, Prof. state, l. 5. ^. 1^.
it did too much in Germany: and it is sad to say what it has done with us of
late; but what it will do, or rather undo hereafter (unless God prevent) is
like to be a great deal more.

Tantum religio poterit suadere malorum! Lucrer. 1.


Such a Colluvies of evils does usually attend upon De ho^ qui plura velit,
legate eruditam I. Arm. oration^m de compon^ndo dissidio religionis inter
Christianos.
error, when it is miscalled by the name of truth, and bleareyed Leah is
mistaken for comely Rachel; but then Genesis 29. 17 and 23.
most of all, when we are hurried to it either by a misguided zeal, or else by
selfish interests. And if seeming and apparent truth be so pleasing, what
should that be which is real?

3. We are to prize it highly: for the truth of Christ 3.
is that rich pearl spoken of Mat. 13. verse 46. which when the merchant
finds, he sells all that he has and buys it. All that we have then we must
sell to purchase truth, but not sell truth at any rate: So says the wise man,
Buy the truth, but sell it not. Pro. 23. 23.

To this end consider her admirable propertyes and effects.

For it is Truth that informs our understandings, that directs our wills, that
regulates our lives, and sits a Conqueress over our passions. In the 1 of
Esdras chap. 3. and 10. verse, we read of a great contention before King Darius
about what should be strongest, whether wine, or women, Kings, or Truth: and in
the 4. chap. ver. 38. King Darius determins the controversy right enough, by
giving the garland to him that spoke in the behalf of Truth. For wine (says he)
is strong, so are Women, and Kings; but above all Truth is strongest. And there
are added in the same place diverse high prerogatives that are given to Truth,
and all of them truly enough (though found in an Apocryphal book.) Truth (says
he) endures, and is always strong, it lives and conquers for evermore; she is
the strength, kingdom, power, and majesty of all ages. Blessed be the God of
truth, for great is truth, and mighty above all L. Tract. Theolog. lib. 2. c.
12. page 95.
things. That if God (says one) were to be corporeal, he would have light for
his body, and truth for his soul: for God Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm. 31. 5. Isai 65.
16. Luc. 23. 46. John 14. 16
delights in no title more then to be called the God of truth; and what was the
name that Christ took to himself, but the Way, the Truth, and the Life?

And what was one of the main ends of his coming, Ioh. 5. 33*
but to bear witness to the truth? And what was the chief thing he prayed for
in our John 17. 17
behalf, but that we may be sanctified through the truth? And what is one of
the chief Epithe^s the Holy Ghost is known by, but the Spirit of truth? John
15. 26


And what is the high dignity of the Church of God, but to be called the ground
and pillar of truth? 1 Timothy 3. 15
And what is the first piece of St. Paul's Panoply, but Ephesians. 6. 14
the girdle of truth?

Oh the admirable properties and effects of truth! Oh the high elogiums that
are given to it!

It is truth that commends men of all sorts and degrees. For (if we speak of
great men) it was the commendation that Quintilian gave of Vespasian the
Emperor, that he was Patientissimus In Institut. Oratoriar. lib.
very, that he would endure the truth. Or if we speak of Judges and
Magistrates, you shall find in Jethro's counsel to Moses, that truth is one of
the chief things to be eyed in their election. Thou Exo. 18: 21
shall provide (says he) out of all the people men of truth. Or if we speak of
Ministers, it is the badge and cognizance of their profession, to be searchers
and holders out of truth. And to this purpose is the Proverb of the French
Leighs Annotat. in Mark 13. 32. Ministre ne doit scavoir que sa Bible.
Protestants, that a Minister must know nothing but his Bible; nothing so much
as this book of truth. Which makes St. Paul say, that 2 Cor. 4. 2.
he had his ministry by the manifestation of the truth. 1 Timothy 6. 5.


And on the other side, speaking of false teachers, he brands them for men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth. Or, if we speak of man in general,
the Orator tells us, that est homini Tul. Offic. lib. 1.
propria inquisitio very, that the searching out of truth is proper to us as
men, much more as Christians.

Again it is Truth that enfranchises us, and makes John. 8. 32.
us free; Truth that ennobles us, and makes us honorable: I say not so much in
respect of that civil state we are members of (as it did the Veres family in
this nation, who with reference to their name and fidelity that way, bear this
honorable Cambden in his Remains.
Motto in their coat of Arms, Vero nihil verius;) but in respect of our
spiritual estate, as did the Bereans, who are said to be more noble then those
of Thessalonica, because Acts 17. 11
they searched the Scriptures, this word of truth.

Again, it is Truth that preserves us in the midst of all dangers; as it is in
the 40. Psalm. ver. 11. Let thy mercy and truth continually preserve me. Truth,
that shields us from Satan's darts; as in the 91. Psalm. ver. 4. Thy truth (says
David) shall be my shield and buckler: Et O felix anima, (cries Bernard) quae
tentationum Bern. in Psalm. 91.
jacula scuto veritatis repulerit! and O happy soul that can repel Satan's
darts with the shield of truth! Truth, that comforts us in all distresses: for
which cause our Savior calls the John 14. 16, 17.
Holy Ghost both the Comforter, and the Spirit of truth. Truth, that sanctifies
us; as in the 17 Chapter of S. John, and the 17 verse, Sanctify them in thy
truth. Truth, Hoc est, Vitam eorum indies per veritatem tuam read puriorem. H.
Grotius in locum.
that confirms and strengthens us: from whence it is, that the Apostle also
may compare it to a belt or girdle in the 6. Chapter to the Ephesians and the
14 verse; and such a one (I suppose) the Apostle means, as Soldiers used to
wear, which was beset with iron and brass plates to strengthen their loins. In
a word, truth, that regenerates us; as in the Text, where it is said, That we
are begotten with the word of truth.

Now, what shall I say more? Surely, if all this will not set up truth in her
throne of excellency, then may it truly be said of us, what God does by way of
complaint against Israel, that Truth is fallen in our Isai. 59. 14*
streets; she is of very low and base account among us, and has need of an
Atlas from heaven to come Atlantem fingunt coelum humeris sustinuisse. Not.
Com. l. 4. cap. 7.
and shore her up: for it is Psalm. 119. 116.
time, Lord (says David) for thee to set thy self to the work, whenas men do
their utmost to make void thy law, even that law of truth thou have established
with us.

And so much for the third thing, that we must prize it highly.

The 4. and last follows, viz. that we must love it 4.
dearly; i. e. not look toward truth for fear, (as many do) but merely out of
love; for truth is Per se pulchra beautiful enough of her self; yea,
Incomparabiliter Augustine. in Epistol. ad Hieron.
pulchrior (says S. Augustine) est veritas Christianorum quam Helena Graecorum,
(that is) The truth of the Christians is incomparably fairer then Helen was
with the Greeks, and needs no slavish motive to draw our eyes unto her; this
being more suitable to servile natures, then to the sweet and ingenuous spirits
of Gods children. For this cause the Lord exho^ts the house of Judah to love
Zach. 8. 19.
the truth. And there is no slavish fear in love (says S. John) but perfect
love casts out fear; for no man 1 Ioh. 4 18.
was ever scared into truth, that was not Non viextorqu^nda fides, sed
suadenda. Hispal. se^. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Gods slave, more then his, servant in it.

And good reason that we should love truth: for there are but 3. objects of
love, viz. God, our neighbor, and our selves; and if we love these, or any of
these, we must needs love truth.

1. If we love God, we must needs love truth, because God is Summum verum as
well as Summum bonum, the highest truth as well as the highest good; which
makes David call him the God of truth, and Moses also. Psalm. 31. 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.


2. If we love our neighbor also we must needs love truth, because without
truth neighbourly love and unity cannot be continued. And in this sense (if
there were no other) may we understand that of the Philosopher, that Verum and
unum convertuntur, that truth and unity are convertible: which made our
Savior, in that zealous prayer of his for the preservation of his elect in
unity, desire of his father, that he would sanctify them through the Ioh. 17.
17.
truth; and tells them further, that his word is truth. The word of truth then
is a special means to preserve the people of God in unity: For did not the
word of truth direct all the members of Christ's mystical body to act orderly
in their several charges, you should see none of them keep their proper
stations; but the tongue would fall out with the hand, the hand again with the
foot, and all of them stand out against the command of the head, to the
destruction of the whole body.

3. If we love our selves also we must needs love truth, because herein the
happiness of the soul, the better part of us, consists. And to this purpose is
that saying of S. Austin, Quid aliud est beat vivere, quam Augustine. in lib.
contra Academicos.
in disquisitione veritat is consenescere? (i. e.) what is it to live blessedly
in this life, but to grow old in the searching out of truth?

For the happiness of the soul wherein does it consist, but in its uni on with
God? Now our understanding is the highest faculty of the soul, and truth the
object of it. The more then that the understanding is employed about truth its
object, the nearer does it come to God, who is purus and aeternus Intellectus,
Biel, Aquin. etc.
(as the Schoolmen call him) and so make us happy. Now because Love is an
inward affection, and probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis (as Gregory
Greg. Magn. in Mor.
speaks) and the best trial of our love to a thing is to do something for it;
therefore would I have you to manifest your love to truth these 2. ways.

1. By your prayers for it. 2. By your practice of it.
1. By your prayers for it. For wherefore was it S. Paul's desire and prayer
for Israel that they might Romans 10. 1
be saved, but only out of the overflowings of his, love to them? which if it
were not highly excessive, you may judge by that hyperbolicall wish of his,
verse 3. of the 9. chapt. and the threefold protestation Romans 9. 1, 3.
he premises to it verse 1. I say the truth in Christ and lie not, mine own
conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost; that I could wish my self to
be accursed for my brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh.

You see then, that love is an excellent Orator, and there needs not a better
key to open our hearts to God in the behalf of the truth then this. Our own
keeping will not keep truth safe enough: No; Except Quae habemus ab eo, servare
non possumus sine eo. Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat, page 283.
the Lord keep the city (says David) the watchman waketh Psalm. 127. 1
but in vain.

And they are our prayers chiefly that keep God from taking away his truth from
us. For Philosophy tells us, that eodem nutrimur Aristotel. lib. 7. de anima.
quo generamur, that we are preserved with what we are begotten; and Politics,
that empires are Iisdem artibus quibus parta sunt, retinentur imperia. Salust.
in conjurat. Cat.
kept by the same means that they were gained. It cost the Martyrs many prayers
and tears too in Q. Marry's days to re-instate us with it afterward in her
sisters time; witness that zealous Fox in Martyr. 2. part.
Ejaculatory of Latimer at the stake, Vel semel, Domine, Once again, O Lord,
restore the truth of thy Gospel to England. They gained it for us by their
prayers, and let not us loose it now for want of our own; but every day beg of
Almighty God with the prophet David, That he Ps. 119. 38.
would establish his word of truth unto his servants, that are devoted to fear
his name: that so they who succeed us both in Church and Commonwealth, may have
cause in aftertimes to bless him who is the God of love and truth for us.

Or else we may this way (if we please) collect our selves in the words of S.
Augustine; Our strength Coram te est firmitas and infirmitas mea (Domin^:) Illam
serva, istam sana. Ad calcem lib^i 15. de Trinitat.
and weakness, O Lord, in the Orthodox faith are both before thee: Preserve
(we humbly beseech thee) the one, and heal the other.

2. Our love must appear to it by our practice of it: for it is not so much
prayer that is prevalent with God, as (...) an effectual or working Iam. 5. 16.
prayer; nor is love so much verbal as real: so says S. John, Love not in word
and tongue, but in deed 1 John 3. 18.
and truth.

S. Paul was a lover of truth, and all that he could do for her he thought
little enough; for he denied himself, he chastised his body, and kept it under
by 1 Cor. 9. 27.
fasting, he injured no man, was malicious to no man, but lived with a good
conscience, and inoffensively Acts 24. 16.
before God and man. And shall we profess Non penitus amat, nisi qui moribus
e^primit Evangelium. Erasmus in Cyclope Evangeliophoro, per quem talem denotat,
qui Evangelii veritatem semper habet in ore, cum in vita nihil sit evangelicum.
In Colloq.
a love to the truth of God in his word, and yet do nothing for it; but live
loosely, scandalously and inordinately, in riot and drunkenness, in chambring
and wantonness, in malice and envy, without mortifying of any one lust, or
denying our selves in any thing? Surely, as that learned controversall Divine
of ours Dr. Whitaker said once in a Sermon of his, upon the like consideration,
in In Concione ad Clerum. So Linacre said, whenas upon his reading of Christ's
Sermon in the mount, he found the lives of Christians in his time, so far
disagreeing with the rules laid down in it.
the words of Linacre, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus
Evangelici, Either this is not the Gospel, or else we are not professors of it:
so may I say in relation to our practice, Either that faith we profess is not
the true Protestant faith according to the word of truth, or else we are not
faithful Protestants, and true professors of it. For what? shall the Papists
walk more close to the rule of truth with their glowworm light, then we with
our sunshine? shall they fast often, and we never? shall they be strict in
their blind devotion, and we loose in our knowing service? they just to
Plerique nostrum qui Christianam religionem profitemur, ita vivimus ac si ni il
plane crederemus. In Prae^at. Plessaei de verit. Christianae religionis.
their neighbors, and we injurious? they charitable to the poor in giving of
them bread, and we hard-hearted Luc. 11. 11
in giving them a stone instead of bread, and instead Pudet haec opprobria
nobis Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse reselli. Ovid. metam.
of fish a scorpion? Oh what a dishonor is this to our holy profession! what a
shame and blemish is it to our religion! It is enough It was taken up as ^
proverb against the Athenians, Athenienses scire quae recta sunt, sed facere
nolle. Tully, lib. de Senectute.
for bats and owls, heathen and infidels, those children of darkness, to do
thus: but as for us, who (as the Apostle speaks) are the children of the light,
and the children of the day, 1 These. 5. 5.
how should we endeavor to put off these works of darkness, because they are
not for the truth, but against it! For the grace of God (says St. Paul) that
Titus 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
brings salvation (so say I, the truth of God, that brings salvation) has
appeared, teaching us, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world: looking for that blessed
hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savious Jesus Christ; who
gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify us unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

St. Athanasius therefore begins well his Creed thus, Whosoever will be saved,
above all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic faith; and not only
so, but also keep it undefiled, without the least soil and blemish from worldly
lusts; like the stone Amianthus, whereof Isiodore of Sevill Isiod. Hispalens.
Etymol. lib. 6. c. 4.
speaks, that will endure the fire and not be blemished by it. And to this
purpose St. James has a saying very pertinent, Iam. 1. 27. (...), (that is)
Pure religion Dictum hoc saeculo (inquit H. Grotius) maxim ^ogitandum. In
locum.
and undefiled, which like the stone Amianthus will be able to endure a fiery
trial without blemish, is to be charitable to those that want, and to keep a
man's self unspotted from the world; whether it be either the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, or pride of 1 John 2. 16.
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet.
life: for all that is in the world is one of these three. An undefiled
religion and a defiled life non been convenient, do not well suite together;
but are as great an incongruity, as that of the foolish actor, who being to
pronounce O Coelum! pointed down to O Heaven!
the earth: which made Pol^mon say of him, that he committed a (...).
Philostrat. in vit. Sophor.
soloecism with his hand. And so do they that are of a heavenly profession, and
yet of earthly conversations. If we will be called the sons of the Reformed
Church and Religion, we must be of reformed lives and conversations; and live
(as the Apostle would have the Philippians) 2 Philip. 15. 16.
blameless and harmless, the children of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, among whom we are to shine as lights in the
world; holding forth the word of life, that so we may rejoice in the day of
Christ, that we have not run in vain, nor labored in vain (and I add also) nor
received the word of truth in vain.

It was the saying of Luther, that Verba Scripturae non sunt verba legenda, but
vivenda; And so say I, that the saving truths of Scripture are not so much
credenda, as vivenda; requiring Qui volet facere voluntatem Patris mei,
cognoscet de doctrine, an ex Deo ^^t; John 7. 17.
not so much our knowing, or believing of them, as our living up to them. And
this is the very life of truth, this is truth indeed; not only to believe, but
also to obey it. Nam errat (says St. Augustine) Augustine. in lib. de Agone
Christian.
quisquis seputat veritatem cognoscere, si adhuc nequiter vivat, i. e. He errs
much, who thinks he knows truth effectually, if he live wickedly. Ferrerius
said, that the Protestants might well laugh at them, and say, that Patres
scire, sed facere n^ll^. Hist. Council. Trident. page 539.
the Trent Fathers had knowledge enough, but would not do thereafter: and I
wish, we did not in these days give our adversaries too much cause to say the
like of us, that the Reformists indeed know the truth, but will not do it; and
that this is the John 3. 19.
condemnation of England, that the light of divine Truth is come unto us, and
yet have we loved darkness more then light, because our deeds are evil. It
were well then that we would labor now at last to be not so much disputants
for truth, as agents of it. For what talk we either of wording or Sic ille apud
Ovid. Quid verbis opus est? spectemur agendo* Metam. l. 13
knowing truth? or why are we taken so much with men of knowledge, when they
are not men of conscience? Alas! to admire a man for his knowledge of the
truth, whenas he makes no conscience of steering his practice accordingly, is
just as if a man (says our Kingly Divine) Jacob. Rex.
should admire a soldier for his goodly head of hair, who is a coward, and
dares act nothing. If then we be truths children, we must show our selves such
by doing the Truth, and making it our work, (to use (...). 3 John 21.
our Saviors words;) that so our knowledge be not confuted by our practice,
but that the word of truth and the work of it may meet together.

And there be 3. reasons of reducing truth to practice.

1. Because the chief end it was ordained for was practice: which made our Ioh.
17. 17.
Scopus Christianae religionis est, ut qu^ ex doctrina veritatis didicimus,
opere impleamus. August. Ser. de blasphemia in S. S.
Savior pray for his Elect, that they might be sanctified through the truth;
not only enlightened by it, but sanctified through it.

2. To be active is a sign of health; and so to be acting in saving truths is a
sign of spiritual health; which is one reason why the Apostle gives it the
name of a Rule, and says, We must walk by it. Gal. 6. 16.
If we do not, it is a shrewd sign that we are ill at the heart, and unsound in
the faith. And therefore in the 1 Timothy chap. 1. ver. 10. we read of sound or
healing Doctrine. And it (...).
is so called, either

Because it is of a healing nature, and a means to cure us of those spiritual
maladies and corruptions that do adhere to us; as of the inflammation They
burned with lust. Romans 1. 27. (...), that is, Corrupt communication. Ephesians. 4.
29. A metaphor (says Zanchy) either from rotten apples, or a stinking breath.
Some shall fall from the faith. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Then Antiochus swelled with anger.
2 Macab. 9. 4.
of lust, the rotten or corrupt breath of evil speeches, the falling sickness
of apostasy, the swelling of anger, and the like: or else

Because when it has once recovered a Christian out of these diseases, and set
him upon his legs, it presently puts him upon walking and action, to preserve
his spiritual health.

3. Because it is not knowledge, So also S. James, Whosoever is a doer of the work,
this man shall be blessed in his deed. c. 1. v. 25.
but practice that must make us for ever happy: so says our Savior, If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. John 13. 17.

But to close up all; as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, so do we, Beloved,
we are persuaded Heb. 6. 9.
better things of you, and such as accompany salvation, though we thus speak:
and hope that we may praise God for you, as S. Paul did in the behalf of his
Romans, with Deo gratias, Godbe thanked, that Romans 6. 17
ye were the servants of sin, but now ye have obeyed from the heart, the form
of doctrine which was delivered unto you; and conclude (as S. Paul does his 2
chapter to the Thessalonians)

Now our Lord Jesus Christ, who has 2 These. 2. 16, 17.
loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace,
comfort our hearts by the word of Truth, and stablish us in every good word and
work. To whom, with the Father and the everblessed Spirit, be all glory and
honor both now and for ever.

Trin-uni Deo Gloria.
THE UNITY OF TRVTH.

THE UNITY OF TRUTH.
15. Romans 5. Now the God of patience and consolation make you like-minded one
toward another, according to Jesus Christ. But the Greek runs it thus; (...),
The Lord give you to mind the same thing.
THe Church of Christ may well be resembled to Rebekahs womb, wherein Genesis 25.
2^
there was a great deal of struggling betwixt the strong and weak child, about
the honor of primogeniture. And we need not go far for an example of it, no
further then the newly-converted Romans in the Text; with whom there was a hot
strife about meats forbidden to be eaten by the Leviticall Law as unclean. For
the strong Romans were thoroughly persuaded of their liberty in the use of
things indifferent, and therefore did eat what was set before them, making
Ti^^ 1. 15
no question for conscience sake, because to the pure all things are pure; but
the weak Romans, being not yet fully instructed about the lawfullnesse of it,
forbore.

Thus were they divided in opinions; and not only so, but in affections too:
for the strong took upon them with a great deal of liberty to despise the weak,
and the weak likewise on the other side to judge and censure the strong. The
one are despised as simple and ignorant, the other judged as scandalous and
uncharitable.

Now S. Paul seeing the breach so wide betwixt them, does here, like a good
umpire, endeavor what he can to arbitrate the matter in difference with them,
and to reduce them to concord and unity. And this he does 2. ways.

1. By dissuading the weak from judging the strong. Who art thou (says he)
that judge another man's servant? He stands and falls to his own master. chap.
14. verse 4. And it is an argument drawn from common equity, which tells us
that we must not usurp upon another right. For there are 3. prerogatives that
God will not have us to entrench on.

The 1. is his own glory. Isai. 42. 8.

The 2. is vengeance; for vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Romans
12. 19.

The 3. is judgment; as in that place of S. Paul, He that judges me is the
Lord. 1. Cor. 4. 4.

2. By persuading the strong to bear with the infirmities of the weak; as in
the 1. verse of this chap. where the word that we translate bear, is (...): and
it is a Metaphor either from Porters, who make it their livelihood to bear
other men's burdens; or else from Nurses, who bear up their weaklings in their
hands, least at any time they dash their feet against a stone.

And the arguments here used by the Apostle are two.

The first is drawn from the good of their neighbors unto edification, verse
2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good unto edification.
Where the reason is this, That their bearing with the weak would be a means
every day to build them up into a better liking and opinion of the strong; for
it is not the beating down of weaknesses, but the bearing with them, Nobile
vincendi genus est patientia* Ovid.
that gains upon ingenuous natures.

The 2. is taken from the example of Christ, verse 3. For even Christ pleased
not himself (says the Apostle;) as it is written, This is cited out of 69
Psverse 9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon me. As if the Apostle
had said thus unto them; Even he that is infinite in strength, and so could not
have been forced to have born with any thing in his people, yet was he pleased
notwithstanding for their sakes to bear their sins, that were so reproachful
to his father, by suffering the utmost punishment due unto them, in his own
body upon the 1 Pet. 2. 24
tree (as S. Peter speaks.) And this example of Christ (which is a perfect
pattern for all moral duties) should move those that are strongest among you,
to bear with the weaknesses of your brethren.

And now, when he could not lay their heat this way, he then bethinks himself
of another course to do it by; and this is by prayer: That what he could not
gain at their hands by reasoning with them, he may now obtain at Gods hands by
praying for them. And this he does here in the words of the Text, which run in
the form of a solemn benediction, More Patriarcharum and prophetarum, Romany
hanc grandem precatur benedictionem. Anselm.
the more affectionately thereby to express his wellwishes and prayers for
them: Now the God of patience and consolation make you like-minded, etc.

In which benediction 3. things offer themselves unto your consideration.

1. The duty wished or prayed for in the behalf of his new Christian Romans;
and this is, to be like-minded one toward another, both in opinion and
affection: for the word (...) here used is a general word, (as one notes) and
is Zanch. in locum.
to be referred unto all the endeavors of the mind, whether intellectual or
affectuall.

2. The efficient cause of this like mindedness; and this is God: For it is
(...)
God (says David) that sets the solitary in families, (as it is in our new
translation after the Septuagint) Psalm. 68. verse 6. or that makes men of one
mind in an house, (as it is in the old;) for the Hebrew word there used (says
one) Fisher in his defense of the Liturgy, page 295.
comes of a root signifying to unite or make one.

Like-mindednesse then is (...) Gods gift: therefore it runs here, (...), the
Lord give you to mind the same thing. That, as the Apostle says of our
salvation, that it is not of our selves, it is the gift of God: so say I of
like-mindednesse, 2 Ephesians. 8.
that it is not of our selves, it is not of our planting, but a graft implanted
in our natures by the hand of God; for we are all naturally (as Jacob said of
his firstborn Reuben) unstable as water, Genesis 49. 4.
(i. e.) of a wavering and unsettled temper, of scattered and divided spirits,
(as to worldly things, so also to religious duties:) which makes the Prophet
David pray Psalm. 86. at the 11 verse, that God would unite his heart to fear
his name.

Now this Efficient is described here by the two attributes of patience and
consolation.

2. But why is he not called here the God of faith and hope, as well as of
patience and consolation?

R. Either because S. Paul would suit the attributes he gives to God according
to the sense of their losses, as having by their divisions sensibly lost much
of that patience and comfort which they received by Christ; or else because he
would mind them whether to have recourse for the recovery of their losses, and
that is to God, who is a full storehouse of patience and consolation: for the
strong were not patient toward the weak, nor the weak to the strong; which was
the cause of such animosities and heart-burnings among them, as did much wast
and consume their spiritual joys and comforts.

And now if God be the Author of Unity and like-mindednesse, it will then
easily follow, that Satan is the author of disunity and division; and you may
know him (say the common people) by his cloven foot, which is the Emblem of
division. And if they be Gods children Si Dei vocantur filii qui unitatem
colunt, proculdubio Satanae sunt, qui pacem confundunt. Greg. in Pastor.
that love unity; who can think otherwise, but that they are Satan's brats that
love division?

3. The restriction of the duty; and this is, according to Christ. Nam been
addidit, secundum Iesum Christum Anselme in locum.
(says Anselme) for he has well added this clause, because there is an
agreement (...) Nazianz. Orat. 1. propace.
which is not according to Christ: as in the 2 Psalm, ver. 2. where we read
that the Kings of the earth stood up and took counsel together, or agreed
together Convenere in unum.
in one (as the vulgar Latin hathi^;) but it was against the Lord, and against
his Christ. For as Sicut Dei una Jerusalem, it a Diaboli una Babylon. S.
August. initio lib. de civit. Dei.
Gods Jerusalem is one, so Psalm. 112. 3 Mark 3. 26.
is Satan's Babylon one also.

Examples of this abound. As of Sime on and Levi, who as they were brethren by
nature, so also by Genesis 34. 25
combination in evil; as in killing of Hamor King of Sichem and his people:
which made Jacob their Father highly detest them for it; as appears by that
patheticall Apostrophe unto his soul, O my soul, Genesis 49. 6.
come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, (mine honor) be not
thou united: For in their anger they show a man, and in their self-will dig'd
down a wall: Therefore was their rage accursed.

And the like example we have in Judas and the high Priests; the former being
of the tribe of Sime on (if the Jews may be credited in it) and the latter of
the tribe of Levi: and both these enter into a covenant one with another, to
slay the man Christ Jesus. Mat. 26. 15


So also in Herod and Pilate, who the same day Luc. 23. 12.
(says the Evangelist) were Sic h^retici, licet mutuo se lacerant, sic tamen
invicem sese collidunt, ut contra ecclesiam simul existant uniti. Isiodor.
Hispal. Sent. l. 1. cap. 19.
made friends together, (for before they were at enmity among themselves;) but
it was against Christ, and to destroy him.

But above all look upon the 83. Psalm, which was penned on purpose against the
joint combination of several malicious enemies, to destroy the Church of God
in Iehosaphats time; (the story whereof is set down at large in the 2 Chronicles.
chap. 20.) where the Psalmist complains thus; That they took crafty counsel
together Augustine calls this unilatem contra veritatem, Sermon. 6. de verb.
domini c. 12.
against Gods people, and consulted Verse 3, 4, and 5.
against his hidden ones: that they said, Come, let us cut them off from being
a nation, that the name of Israel be no more had in remembrance: Yea, that they
consulted together with one consent, and were confederate against the Lord. And
who these were he tells us in the 6, 7, 8. verses; viz. the tabernacles of Edom
and the Ismaelites, of Moab and the Hagarens; G^bal, Ammon and Amalek, the
Philistines, with those of Tire. Ashur also is joined with them; and they have
helped the children of Lot.

But our agreement must not be such: if it be, it is perversa unitas and
execranda Sermon. 5. in Assump. B. Marioe.
(as Bernard calls it;) or rather Conspiratio magis quam unitas, a conspiracy
rather then an unity; and so it is called Acts 23. 13. where it is said, that
more then 40 men made a conspiracy against Paul, binding themselves with an
oath, that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul: as if
all the blustering power and malice of hell had been stirred up to blow out the
taper of S. Paul's life.

First then, for the duty wished or prayed for by the Apostle in the behalf of
his new Christian Romans; and this is, to be like-minded one toward another.
From whence I commend unto you this obvious, but seasonable observation.

That it is the duty of Christians to be likeminded, Observat.
or at unity one with another.

Now this truth I shall make good unto you both by precept and example.

1. By precept: as in the 2. Epist. to the Corinthians, 1.
the last chapter, and 11. verse, where the Apostle in his valediction to them
leaves these jewels to be deposited with them, and Gods benediction upon them;
Finally, brethren, fare ye well: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

And again in the 4. chapter to the Ephesians; where, being now a prisoner at
Rome, and ready to be offered up in the service of their faith, he begs this
one boon of them before Vnitas in abstracto nusquam legitur in novo testamento,
nisi in hoc capite.
his departure, that they would endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace: And among many other unities wherewith he does balance his
ob^estation, there are none (methinks) more attractive, then that trinity of
unities (if I may so speak) verse 5. and which may serve as a threefold cord
to enforce the duty, (...).

1. (...), there is but one Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ. For though the
Heathen had 1 Cor. 8. 5.
their many that were called lords, and their many that were called Gods, who
had their several sacrifices and services from them; yet to us Christians
(says the Apostle) there is but one God, the Father, 6. verse.
and one Lord Jesus Christ: And therefore in our religious worship of this one
God we are to be as one; for so it was prophesied of the Gentiles by the Zach.
14. 9.
prophet Zachary, In that day shall there be one Lord over all the earth, and
his name shall be one.

2. (...), there is but one faith, but una fides qua cred mus, and una fides
Lomb. lib. 3. Distinct. 23. Sic etiam Augustine. lib. 13. de Trinitat. cap. 2.
quam credimus (as the School speaks;) that is, but one grace of faith whereby
we believe, and one Doctrine of faith which is to be believed: and besides, but
unum objectum fidei, but one object of justifying faith in whom we believe; and
this is Christ: who was not one to the Jews, and is now become another to the
Gentiles; no; Christ is not divided (says the Apostle) but is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; Velatus in 1 Cor 1. 13 Heb. 13. 8.
veteri, revelat us in novo, veiled in the Old Testament, revealed in the New,
and therefore we must be one.

3. (...), there is but one baptism: and this is given us too by one spirit,
and incorporates us into one body, whereof Christ is the head: and therefore we
must be one, for by one spirit (says 1 Cor. 12. 13.
the Apostle) we are baptized into one body.

2. By Example. As in the children of Israel, 2.
who are said at the building of the second temple Ezra 3. 1.
to be gathered together as one man unto Jerusalem, as if there had been but
one heart among them all. So also we read of the twelve Apostles, Acts 1. that
when they began to build up the Christian Church in the world, (whereof that of
Zorobabel was but a type) they assembled all together in Jerusalem, and
continued there with one accord daily in prayer and supplication, verse 14. So
that the first grand Jury (you see) that ever gave in their verd^ct for
Christianity, did all agree together in sacred duties: And not only in these,
but also in common actions; as in breaking of bread from house to house, and
eating their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. Acts chap. 2. v. 46.
They had a single heart as well in common, as sacred duties: Not Cor duplex (as
the Psalmist says See the Margin of our Bibles.
of the wicked, Psalm. 12. 3. or else a heart and a heart, (as the Hebrews
expression is;) much less Cor d^visum, a divided heart among so many: but (as
it is more fully set down Acts 4 32.) there was to them (...), one heart and
one soul. I say not in substance (which Vide Zanch. in locum. Non est animus
ubi animat, sed ubi amat. Eras. Dialog. Proc.
was Averroes dream) but in concent and affection; for the soul is not so much
where it lives, as where it loves.

And this was foretold of the Gentiles by the prophet Zephany, in his third
chap. and 9. verse, That they should serve God with Humero unc; sic T^emel.
Vulgar. Lat. Beza, etc.
one consent, or with one shoulder, (as most of the Latin translatours render
it after the Hebrew.) A phrase (it may be) taken See Exodus 25. 14. and 1 Chro.
15. 15.
from the Levites, who were to bear the Ark of God upon their shoulders; and
were so agreeing together in it, as if there had been among them all but one
shoulder in bearing of it. And thus must we Christians so unite our serverall
strengths together to support the ark of Gods Church, (wherein the two tables
of his truth are preserved) as if the strength of each several were to be
resolved into the shoulders of one particular man for the bearing it up. Q.


But it is here query'd, wherein we are to be like-minded. R.


To which (because in this subject of Unity we would run as little division as
may be) it is answered, only in two particulars. 1. In our judgments and
opinions. 2. In our affections. The one relating to faith, the other to love.

And 1. we must be like-minded in our judgments and opinions. Which makes the
Apostle beseech his Corinthians by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment, 1. Cor. 1.
10. We must not then every day set abroach new opinions, to the prejudice of
the truth we have received, and disquict of the Church; For no man (says our
Savior) having drunk of old wine, straightway desires Luke 5. 39
new: for he says, the old is better. Indeed new wines may be more gustfull
and pleasing to men of a gluttonous and licentious appetite; but to those that
are of stayed palats, the old is most desirable, as being more helpful for the
stomach, and refreshing for the spirits. Our opinions then and judgments when
they are once for the truth, there they are to stand and fix.

It was the Motto of Q. Elizabeth, (who was a Glory to the age wherein she
lived) to be Cambden.
Semper eadem, always the same: And the like Eulogy is given to Venerable
Usher, a great It was the Anagram was given him, when Bp. of Mead, (viz.)
James Mead, I am the same.
Master of learning (while he lived) in this our I srael, that he was, without
wavering, always one and the Barn. in li^. de vita and morte Jacob. Armac.
page 52. and 106.
same, holding fast the form of sound words in Doctrine and practice to his
last. And so must we be no Changelings of our holy faith, but always the same
men in it. And therefore it was a good saying of Melanchthon, (the learned
Phoenix of Germany) that he would be neither the Author Senovi dogmatis in
Ecclesia nec Authorem fore, nec Defensorem. Meminit bujus Overallus noster in
Oratione ad convocat.
of any novell opinion in the Church, nor the Defender of it; neither beginning
to others in the cup of error, nor pledging any one that should begin to him
therein.

And this condemns that boundless liberty of opinion that some are so eager
after in these days.

For if it be so, that a child of God has a liberty (as they say) in the
Doctrines of faith purchased for him by Christ, to what end then does S. Paul
here pray, that the strong and weak Romans be likeminded? For what (might the
weak Romans say) if we be of opinion that circumcision and the law of
ordinances given by Moses be still in force? why, this is our conscience, and
why should not that be free?

But to this we answer, That (do what we can) offenses must come (says our
Savior;) so also will Mat. 18. 7.
differences in judgments and opinions: for even the very Angels differ thus,
Tilen. Syntag. sub loco communi bonorum angelorum. Et Bucan. p. 71.
as Divines teach truly. And one reason thereof the Apostle gives 1 Cor. 13. 9.
because here we know but in part. And as we know imperfectly, so also
unequally: for God has not made the judgments of men all of one complexion,
no more then their faces; nor our knowledge in Divine things all of a size, no
more then our bodies; the acies of one Christian being a great deal more dim
then of another. Now different degrees of sight cannot but cause a difference
of judgments among Christians. Besides, the Church of God has ever had in it
some babes in Christ, some (...), some children in knowledge, who, like ships
wanting ballast, are not able to sail an even and steady course, but are ready
to topple over with the least wind of contradiction, or persecution that blows
upon them. And the reason of it is this, because every one is swayed and
biassed in his judgment according to his knowledge: So that a weakness
Ignorantia veritatis incertam facit labentemque sententiam. Lactant. in Instit.
Christ. Relig.
in knowledge must needs beget an unsettlednesse in judgment.

But yet take this Caveat by the way: That this liberty of ours be not in such
things as are clearly and positively laid down in Scripture as essentialls of
Faith and Worship. For there are some things in Scripture that are only
Credibilia, that is, such things, as we either may, or elfe may not believe,
without peril of eternal damnation: and in these that of the vulgar Latin in
the 14, chap. to the Romans (...), which we translate better thus, Let every
one be fully persuaded in his own mind.
at the 5. verse, (though very ill translated there) yet here will it hold well
enough, Abundet quisque sensu suo, every one may abound in his own sense.
Again, other things there be that are Credenda, things absolutely to be
believed; as, that there is a God, and Heb. 11. 6.
that he is a rewarder of those that seek him; the one against the Atheist, the
other against the Epicure: again, that this God is one in essence, and three in
subsistence; and that there is no other way of attaining eternal salvation but
by Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life; Via in exilio, Veritas John
14. 6.
in consilio, and Vita in praemio, (as Armachanus Richardus Arm. erat Hiberniae
Primas in diebus Edv^rdit^rtii 1350. See Fox Martyrol. 1 part.
well glosses that passage in his Doxology) the way to guide us, the truth to
counsel us, and the life to reward us.

Now in these and such like fundamentals, our liberty is tied up to the word of
God: for (as the Author to the Hebrews has it in the place before cited) He
that comes to God must believe that he is; so, we must believe these things;
and to believe contrary to these, is no part of our liberty purchased by
Christ, but rather of that vassallage wherewith Satan has enthralled us.

It is true indeed that Christ has purchased for us a liberty by his death,
not only from the ceremonial, Si liberet vos filius, vere eritis liberi. Ioh.
8. 36.
but also from the moral law, both in respect of terror, curse and
justification; he has also purchased for us a liberty from the power of sin,
and a liberty in the use of things indifferent. But that Christ should purchase
for us a liberty from our obedience to the moral law (as the Antinomians say;
or else liberty that excludes the being of sin in the elect, as the Catharists
teach; or else a liberty to close with any fundamental error, as the
Anabaptists would have it; this is a licentiousness of erring, Licentia
errandi, non libertas credendi. Vid. Gerhard. in loc. com. de Magistrate. and B.
H. in his Peacemaker, Sect. 7.
rather theh a liberty of believing, and the bane of all religion.

It was a strange image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream, Dan. 2. v. 32.
whereof one part was of gold, another of silver, a third of brass, and a 4. of
iron. And they are as strange Christians that 1 Reg. 3. 26
can be content to divide their religion, as the harlot did the child; a^^ to
be either Jews or Arrians, Papists or Protestants, Socinians or Antinomians.
Deus bone! quomodo hic So Gualter said, when in Henry the 8ths. days he saw
Papists hanged for denying the Kings sapremacy, and others burnt for denying
Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament. Fox in Martyrolog. 2 part.
vivunt gentes! (as one complained) good God! how atheistically do some men
live! as if, with the old Romans, they would set up a new Pantheon, wherein
every one may have a deity of his own to fall down before and worship! But the
Lord charges the Jews Levit. 19. 19. that they should not sow their field with
mingled seed, nor wear a garment of linseywoolsey: which you must not
understand according to the letter, Hoc enim (says the Glossa ordinaria.
gloss upon that place) videtur ridiculum, for this is ridiculous; but you
must understand it (say Divines) as spoken against mixtures in religion, when
we sow truth and falsehood in one Herein seems to be implied an instruction
against mixtures in religion. Sic nuperrimae Annotationes in locum.
Church, and wear a cloak of religion patched up of sound and heretical
Doctrines; much like the Samaritans, 2 Reg. ^7. 41
who would fain fear God, but their idols too, or like the Isralites, Zeph. 1.
5.
who would swear by the Lord and Malcham.

It is enough for Poland to be a miscellany of indifferentmen, and a medly of
mungrell Christians: some there following the Romish, others the Reformed
Church; and of these one is for Luther, and another for Calvin; some admitting
the Bohemian, some the Augustane, and others the Helvetian confession. But for
my heritage (says God) to become as a speckled bird, or a bird of diverse
colors, as it is Ier. 12. 9. this God seems to much troubled at, and therefore
interrogates them by way of admiration (as the vulgar Latin reads it) Numquid
avis discolor haereditas mea mihi? What? is my heritage become as a bird of
diverse Notat hic inconstantiam in religione, modo enim Deum colit, modo idola
sectatur. Sanctius in locum.
colors to me? As if he should have said, It would never have put me to any
wonder or trouble at all, to have seen others as speckled birds unto me; but
for the dearly-beloved of my soul, verse 7. yea for my heritage too, ver. 9.
and her that was my pleasant portion and vineyard, verse 10. for her (I say) to
be a speckled bird unto me, and to wear a part colored coat made up of diverse
superstitions borrowed from the Heathen, this is a wonder and trouble unto me
indeed. For though Israel play the harlot (says the prophet Hosea) Hos. 4. 15.
which had inured herself to a strange worship of God ever since Ieroboams
defection, (who to keep up that usurped power he had got into his hands, made
himself a religion suitable to it) yet let not Judah, so, let not England
transgress.

It was a happy age, when as the whole earth was of one language, or of one lip
(as Sic nuperi Expositores.
the marginall note has it;) which was till about 130 years after the Deluge:
and so it would be still, if in the substance of religion, men's lips and
opinions were but one. But when that one language was cleft asunder into 72,
according to the nations that descended from Noah's sons, then, and not before,
was Babel built, which speaks confusion. Genesis 11. 9.


Indeed, a rainbow has many seeming and specious colors in it; but if you
mark, you shall ever see it in opposition to the sun: so has this liberty of
opinion a fair show of pleasing our corrupt nature, which loves not any tie
upon it; but yet it is still in opposition to Christ the Sun of righteousness,
who is but one; and precedes a storm in the Church, if not the shipwreck of it.
For I look upon (as he did) a toleration or connivence Brinsly's arraignment of
separation, page 73.
at all sects whatsoever in religion, as the passing bell to the Churches peace
and glory, if not to the true religion of God in this nation.

2. As we must be one with our brethren (...) opinion, so also in affection;
for love is (as the School Aquin. Sum. 1a. 2ae, Quae. 28. Art. 1.
says well) an affection of Union. And thence it is that one calls Charity, the
Arc. Cant. in his Sermon on 4. Ephesians. verse 3.
glue of the spirit. For there is a Law of love, (...), a royal law (as S.
James speaks) that God James 2. 8.
has subjected us to, as well as a law of faith Romans 3. 27. Now we must not
(as they say commonly) rob Peter to pay Paul; I mean, under pretense of keeping
one law, break another: but though we be at some dissension one from another,
yet must we not be at discord and enmity with one So Constantine told Alexander
Bp. of Constantinople, and Arrius, that although they did dissentire in matters
of opinion, (siquidem neque omnes de omnibus idem sentimus, neque una ^ademqu^
in nobis indoles, aut men's versatur) fieri tamen potest ut inter vos integre
servetur concordia, ac benevole alter alterum excipiatis. Eusebius. de vita
Constantini lib. 3. cap. 67, and 68.
another. For there is a great deal of difference betwixt Dissentire, and
Discordare, dissension and discord; the one relating to our intellectualls, the
other to our affectualls: and though we may be different as touching the one,
yet must we not be divided as touching the other.

Hence it is that S. Peter writing to those of the Circumcision, 1 Peter 3. 8.
exhorts them to be all, not only of one mind, but also of one affection: which
you may see by the following expressions that breath out nothing else; as

1. That they were to have compassion of one another in all their failings and
infirmities. The word is (...) which notes a sympathy or fellow-feeling of
another misery; as when one member suffers, all the members suffer with it,
(says the Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 26.) or rather such a Leighs Annotat.
sympathy as men have who suffer in the stead of others.

2. They were to love one another as brethren. Now The Greeks therefore call it
(...) Brotherly love. Heb. 13. 1. (...).
the very name of brethren should be sufficient to exclude all differences
whatsoever arising from disaffection, according to that of Abraham to Lot, Genesis
13. 8. Let there be no strife between thee and me, for we are brethren: Which
must be understood in a large sense, either for brethren So it is taken Acts
15. 36. and 2 Cor. 8. 18.
by profession of the same religion, or else by consanguinity: for else (if it
be taken strictly and in its proper sense) Lot was not brother, but nephew unto
Abraham.

3. They were to be pitiful to one another; even as affectionate parents, who
have a natural propensity this way toward their children. And so much seems
to be intimated by that of the prophet David in his 103. Psalm. 13. verse; Like
as a Father pities his children, so does the Lord those that fear him.

Lastly, they were to be (...), friendly-minded or courteous (as we translate
it) i. e. as full of affection as Jonathan was to Est amicus conjunctior
fratre. Prove. 18. 24. Antiqui dixerunt amicorum esse unam animam, propter vim
scilicet amoris; quia igne charitatis conjuncti unum sine dissensione
sapi^bant. Isiodor. Hispal. l. 3. sentent. c. 28. Sic ab Alexandro dicitur
Ephestion, Alter Alexander, in Q. Curt. Hist.
David, as one friend is to another. Now we call a friend usually Alter idem,
another same; viz. another from us in person, but the same in affection.

And this is that knitting together in love, whereof the Apostle speaks in the
2. chap. of the Coloss. and 2. verse; and that bond of love in his 3. chap. and
14. verse. Now the use of a bond (you know) is to bind things together that are
severed from one Sic Aquin. 2. 2ae. quaest. 81. Ar^ic. 1. Ex Augustino in lib.
de vera Religione, non procul a fine.
another: And we can never be truly religious, unless this bond be upon us as
well as the other; the bond of love as well as the bond of faith. For which
cause the word Religion has its Etymon a religanda, from binding to and again;
as first to God by faith, and then by love to our neighbor.

Neither can we believe aright without it: for it is a part of our Creed to
believe a communion of Saints on earth; and we cannot profess this truly,
without love, which is one of the two uniting graces. Fides and Charitas.
And to this the Apostle exhorts us 4. Ephesians. the last, Be ye kind (says he)
one to another, and tenderhearted, (...).
or well-bowell'd (as the word signifies) i. e. as tender in affection, as we
would be to our own* bowels, which are our most inward and tender parts: and in
order to this he tells them before, that all wrath and clamor, and
evil-speaking verse. 31.
must be put away from us, with all malice.

It was this which was the charge that our Savior left with his Disciples in
his last will and testament, before his departure out of this world: Little
Ioh. 13. 34.
children, as I have loved you, so do also ye love one another. And by this
cognizance he would have them known when he was gone, ver. 35. By this shall
men know ye Hoc ipsum Christi praeceptum ut alterutrum diligamus, Joannes
quinquies prius ipsissimis verbis in duabus epistolis inculcarat; ut 1 John 3.
ver. 11. and 23. Itidem 1 John 4. ver. 7. and 11. 2. Epist. Joh. ver. 5.
are my disciples, if ye love one another. Yea, it was this which was the
standing Sermon of S. John the beloved disciple and ultimus Evangelistarum to
his auditors, in his age and weakness; Little children, love one another. And
being asked why he inculcated it so often unto them, his answer was this, Hieron.
in comment. ad Epist. Joannis.
Quia praeceptum Domini est, and si hoc fiat, sufficit; because Christ
commanded it, and thought it command enough, as being the breviate both of the
law and gospel. And Athanasius notes it, That this might be the reason why our
Savior dyed not after the manner Misso carnifice decollavit Joann^m Baptistam
Herodes in carcere. Mat. 14. 10. Doroth. in Synopsi.
that John did, with his head cut off, nor yet was cut asunder, as Isaias was;
that so even in death he might keep his body undivided: by Athanas. de
Incarnat. verbi.
which no occasion might be taken for the dividing of his Church, which is his
mystical body. And had we eyed this in our differences of late, we should not
have had with Jerusalem such cause of complaining as we have, that the Lord
has dashed us one against another, and his anger has divided us; or else with
trees in the Apologue, Aesop. Fab.
that we are cleft asunder with wedges taken out of our own bodies. For behold
(says Amos 6. 1^*
the Prophet Amos) the Lord has smote the great house with breaches, and the
little house with elefts. Yea, and so wide are those breaches and clefts now
grown among us, as that there is little or no hope at all to see them closed
again; but rather much fear that e're long they will swallow us up, as the
earth did Corah and his rebellious rout, unless by faith Numb. 16.
and repentance we get into the clefts of the rock, into the wounds of our
Savior, there to be secured, until this storm of Gods indignation be
over-past.

And now, as Del Rio a learned Spaniard said of his countrymens opinions
Benedictus Deus, quod unus adhuc in Hispania populus sumus! In bis 153. Sacr.
Adag. V. Testam. part prims.
and affections to the Popish Religion, Blessed be God that we are yet in Spain
an undivided people! so do I wish I could say the like of our selves in this
Nations, as to the truth of our Reformed Religion, Blessed be God, that we are
yet therein unus in Anglia populus, a people at unity in England, and undivided!

But alas! I cannot: for we have been so indeed; but how sad and unhappy Quam
missrum est dixisse (fuimus) and non (sumus!)
is it to say, that we have been so for the time past, and not to say, that we
are so for the present! which gives me rather occasion of bewailing the
general want of unity now among us. Devout Bernard bewailed itmuch in his
time: De modo vivendi Ser. 41.
Ecce (says he) sumus in domo una diver si homines, diversa corda, diversae
animae! See (says he) how many several men we are in one house, and every one
of us of diverse minds, of diverse hearts! And have not we cause to take up
also the same complaint in these days? We have doubtless. And not only cause
of complaint against the want of unity, but also against the want of any care
and endeavor after it. That although the blessed Apostle will have us study to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. yet is it with
(...)
some now-a-dayes a great Maxima pars studiorum est studere parts.
part of their studies to study parts-taking and division. For ye have seen the
breaches of Sion (says the prophet) that they are many, Isai. 22. 9. Therefore
in that day did the Lord call the Jews to weeping and mourning, verse 12. not
only to weeping with the eye, but also to mourning with the heart. And so have
we seen the sad breaches of this our Sion, that they are many, and therefore
have great reason to weep bitterly for them. Yea S. Austin thinks it strange we
should not; and says withal, That the agreement of the very Heathen in their
superstition should move us to it. Aug. de utilitate jejunii.
Ecce Pagani (says he) multos Deos indivisi colunt; See (says he) how the
Pagans are undivided in the service and false-worship of their many Gods: and
shall we worship the only true God, and yet not be sub uno in unitate, at unity
under that one true God? Et tu non doles Christian, tu non gemis? and do not
thou, O Christian, grieve and sigh for this?

Or if this come not home enough to us, let me add here what one of our own Mr.
Ley of Budworth.
says, in his notes upon that passage of Scripture in the tenth chapter of
Genesis verse 25. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth
divided: where he seems to be so much troubled for our want of unity, as that
he makes this stand by the way to vent his grief. Alas! How great cause (says
he) have we to call the children that are born in these days by the name of
Peleg or division! For how are we divided, not in tongues alone (as at Babell)
but in heads, hearts and hands! and not only so, but subdivided too, and snipt
Vt Titus Quintius apud Livium: Qui finis erit discordiarum? Ecquando unam
urbem; so, ecquando unam Angliam, unamque Angliae Ecclesiam babere licebit?
into many Schisms! Oh when shall it once be, that the manifold ruptures of our
sacred peace shall be made up again!

It is true that there have been breaches among Christians in all times: as at
Rom: (you know there were in the Apostles days; where the heat was not only
inter ignes minores, among the lesser stars, but among those that were primae
magnitudinis of the first magnitude, as between Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15. 39
between whom there was (...) a sharp contention, a sharp fit, which, like the
fit of an ague, put the Church into a great shaking for a time.

So also in aftertimes we read in the ecclesiastical history of the Church,
that there was a hot contention between the Greek Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 5.
c. 22. and 23.
and Latin, between the Eastern and Western churches, about the celebration of
Easter: which contest held off and on for the space of 200 years together,
Praefa^ ad Harm. confessionum.
and proceeded so far as to the excommunication of each other.

And of late days, since The Lutherans rail as bitterly against the Calvinists
as ever, not forbearing to profess openly, That they will return rather to the
papacy, then ever admit their sacramentary pestilence* Sr. Edw. Sands in Relig.
of the W. parts, page 63. Prolaeus l. 1. fascicul. q. 7.
the Reformation, we are not ignorant of the virulent invectives of the
Lutherans and Calvinists one against another about the presence of Christ in
the Sacrament; as if the coat of Christ were not only of different colors,
but also of different seames; but especially on the Lutheran part, insomuch
that one of them has not stuck to pray thus, A fraternitate Calvinistarum
libera nos Domine, from the brotherhood of the Calvinists Lord deliver us.

Thus have the children of God been divided in all ages. But yet either their
differences have been about Scholasticall niceties, or else in things
circumstantiall, and indifferent, or in Churches newly planted, as here in the
Church of the Romans, or else in Churches differing one from another by
several forms of Ecclesiastical polity.

But for Protestants so called, of one and the same nation, and of one and the
same visible Church, (that has been now planted among us 100. years and more,
and since watered Cranmer, Ridly, Tailor, Iuell, Raynolds, Whitaker, Andrews,
Perkins, Davenant, Usher, etc.
with the blood of so many Martyrs, with the writings and Sermons of so many
pious and learned Divines, as that we were herein the boasting, or rather the
envy of our neighboring nations) for these, yea multitudes of these Thus Dr.
Barnard tells us of Arch-B. usher (one of singular learning and piety in our
Church) That he did, a little before his death, much lament the disjointings of
affections of men, one against another, by their several opinions in religion,
both in opposition to the Ministry and sacraments. In his funeral Sermon. page
90.
to divide so far, as to the questioning, if not denying, both our Baptism,
which is the door to let them into the Church, as likewise our Ministry, which
opened that door unto them, and preserves them in it; Oh this is sad indeed.

Well then might the poet call us a Et penit ut t^to divisos orb Britannos.
Virgil.
people by our selves, and divided from others; for (sure) in division we are
like no body else, nor will any be like us. Gregory Nazianzen speaking of
Nazianz. Orat. 14.
divisions at Constantinople in his time; as that a liberty of all things was
granted to all men, and that he was to day a Judas who was yesterday an Elias;
and all this to be done (...), in such a city as Constantinople, which was the
glory of the Eastern Empire; (...) (says he) (...), for these things I weep.
And can we see so many Double-minded men. Iam. 1. 8.
(...) (to use S. James his expression) who, like travelers, coming to a
bivium, to a place where two ways of gods worship meet, are at a stand
presently, and neither know, nor resolve which of the two to take; or else can
we hear that called heresy to day, which was Orthodox yesterday; and that
(...), in such a nation as England is, which has hitherto been accounted
Antistita Veritatis the prime defendresse of the truth, and reformed religion;
and yet be never affected with it? (...), for these things ought our eyes to
weep, and our souls to mourn in secret; to For every one to publish what he
thinks in matter of religion, and to gather disciples to what he publishes,
thi^ liberty, or licentiousness rather, is the bane of all religion. B. H. in
his Peacemaker, Sect. 7.
see how many are (as it were) Pelagians in this particular, by affecting
freewill in opinion: as if novelty and truth were all one now-a-dayes; and
whatever some apprehend for truth, were free to be vented by them, though to
the ensnaring of the weak consciences of their brethren, without any respect at
all to unity in religion.

There goes a fable of fire, water, wind, and truth, how they traveled
together: and at their parting, it being their joint desire to know where they
should find one another again, the fire told them, that they should be sure to
find him again in a flint; the water said that she should be found at the root
of a bul-rush; the wind, that they should find him in an aspen leaf; but when
truth came to speak, she told them, that she knew not where they should find
her, for she had no house to put her head in, no place whereon to set down her
rest.

Now to apply this is easy enough: Mr. Sedgwick does it for me in a late His
sermon entitled, Christ's counsel to his languishing Church.
printed Sermon of his: One week (says he) this is a truth, and cried up
almost to an article; and the next there is no such matter, but another thing
is in the right. And it is cast (says Baxt. Sis rest, part. 1. page 119.
another) as a just reproach upon us, that we profess our religion with
reserves, and resolvedly settle upon almost nothing; that we are to day of one
opinion, and within a day, week, month, or year, of another. Again, (says
another) I must herein accuse those of Relig. Med. Sect. 25.
mine own Religion; for there is not any of such a fugitive faith, that
transform themselves into several shapes of Christianity, as we do.

Alas, poor truth! whither art thou going, or where shall we seek thee, o^
seeking, where shall we find thee? For what? Number Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
terras, Astraea, relinquis? art thou leaving the earth, and going back again
to heaven from whence thou came? There, there indeed mercy and truth shall
meet together, righteousness and peace shall kiss each other; and when we are
come thither, there we shall be sure to have a full enjoyment of thee in him
who is essential truth. But stay, oh stay thou heavenly passenger; why go
thou away so fast? Though parents, friends, and all earthly comforts leave us,
yet do not thou, but let peace and truth be in our days, and in the days of
our children, even until Shiloh come again. Yet indeed we are so far happy, as
to call our selves by thy name, and to wear thy badge and livery; but to do so
long we cannot think, since we slight thee every day more and more, and are
willing to court every phantasme instead of thee: for which thou may justly
leave us to that sad complaint which Phinehas wife made when the ark of God was
taken, The 1 Samuel 4. last.
Glory, the glory is departed from Israel.

Q. But from whence (you'I say) arises such disunity among us?

R. To which I answer; Either from Pride, Anger, or Impatience.

1. From pride; when like Narcissus we fall in love with our own shadows, and
with the Pharisee Luke 18. 11
contemn our brethren, though never so regular, with a non ut caeteri, nec ut
hic publicanus, we are not as other men are, nor as this slight publican.

The belly is one part of the body, and a principal With this Apologue
Menenius Agrippa pacified the Commons of Rome, whenas they rose up against the
Senators. Live. l. 2. dec. 1. and Quintil. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 11.
one too; yet if the other parts shall out of pride conspire against her, and
deny her food, because (to their thinking) she lives more idly then the rest,
what will they gain in the end by it, but only wasting and destruction to
themselves?

It is pride then that makes a rent in the natural body, yea and in the body
of the Church also. To this end is that passage of S. (...), etc. G. Nazianz.
orat. 1. propace.
Paul 1 Cor. 12. verse 21. where he says, that the eye must not despise the
hand, by saying out of pride and singularity, I have no need of thee, nor the
hand to the foot, I have no need of thee. And one reason there given is,
because this will make a rent in the body; whereas God has so well tempered
the body together, that there may be no schi^me in the body, verse. 25. but that
the members should have the same care one for another, since the hurt and
welfare of any one member reflects upon every one, because they all jointly
considered make up but one and the same entire body.

Now the word (...) there used by the Apostle is not found (as one notes) in
any Leigh. Crit. Sacr.
profane author, nor yet in any Greek versions of the Old Testament; only in
the Mat. 9. 16. Mark 2. 21. Ioh. 7. 43. Ioh. 9. 16. Ioh. 10. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
1 Cor. 11. 18 1 Cor. 12. 25
New it is used eight several times: but as for the thing signified by it,
which is the cutting our selves off from the unity of the Church, which is the
mystical body of Christ, both in opinion and practice, it is hard to say how
many thousand times this has been done by men of arrogant and presumptuous
spirits.

And here take these few instances instead of many.

1. What made Simon Magus, (...) Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 13.
the ringleader and Patriark of all others heretics, affirm so blasphemously
of himself, that he was the father and the son in the Trinity* and his harlot
Iren. l. 1. cap. 20.
Helena the holy Ghost, but only pride? for the Text says, He gave out that he
was Acts 8. 9.
(...), some great one.

2. What made Diotrephes cast out of the Church those that would have been
fellow-helpers to the truth, and prate so much against S. John with malicious
words, but only because he was proud, and 3 Ep. v. ^
loved the preeminence?

3. What made Novatus Vixit Acesius Novatus tempore Decii, circa annum Christi
251. primo Presbyter Carthaginiensis. Cyprian calls him, Importunum
Innov^torem, and poenitentiae interfectorem, in epist.
fall off from the rest of the Church, in not receiving into the bosom of the
Church, but denying all means of recovery after baptism, to them that had
lapsed their faith in those times of persecution for fear of torments, though
they gave afterward never so good testimony of their true repentance and
conversion. As if it were impossible for him that is once shipwrack't, to find
any Tabula post naufragium, any plank of repentance to save himself upon, but
of necessity he m^st perish unavoidably. The Ecclesiastical history speaking
of him, says, that he was a man blown up with pride and self-conceit: Superbia
inflatus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42.
which made Constantine give him this tart reproof, Go to, Acesius; make Erige
tibi scalam, Acesi, ac in coelum solus ascend; Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 21.
a ladder, and set it up for thy self to go alone into heaven* And what has
been said of him, may be said also of Arrius, Pelagius, and multitudes more of
the same gang, did I not forbear.

But to pass them by, and to instance it now in whole Churches. And here tell
me, what made the Eastern Church a separatist from the Western, about the
Procession of the Holy Ghost only from the father, (a point in our Christian
Religion of highest concernment) but only pride? The fault (says Reverend
Hooker) lying in the Hookers Eccles. polit. l. 5. p. 191.
subtle wits of the Graecians, being ever proud of their new conceptions. Or
what caused Rome, Absit ab Ecclesia Romana vigorem suum dimittere. Cyprian.
epist. 31.
sometimes the most eminent member of the western Church, (from whose breasts
Constantine le bon as well as legrand, with multitudes of Gods children more
Idem Hooker. eccl. pol. l. 4
did such that food which nourished them to eternal O Roma a Roma quantum
mutata vet^sta es! W. Thom. hist. of Italy.
life) yet afterward to make so manifest a declension from her primitive faith
unto Antichristian falsehood, but only pride; which then began to work, and
swell her up above all that was called God, whenas Boniface the 3. arrogated to
the Prelates Gregory the Great and first of that name opposed John Bishop of
Constantinople, in obtaining the name of Oecumenicus Patriarcha from Mauritius
the Emperor, saying, it was a proud t^^le* yet afterward his successor gained
^^ of Phocas that murdered Mauritius his Sovereign. Greg. l. 4. epist. 32. and
Fox Martyr. page 120. and Buchol^. Chron. ad ann. Christi 609.
of that See the universal rule and headship over the Church of God? A title
so full of pride, that his predecessor said it belonged to none but him who was
Pr^cursor Antichristi, the forerunner of Antichrist.

Whereby we see that it is pride which has ushered in all the heresies that
have been in the world.

Indeed Knowledge unsanctify'd is as the tool or instrument to shape and
fashion them, Vainglory as the trumpet to blow them about, Ignorance as the
sponge to receive and suck them in, and Obstinacy as the bolts and fetters to
hold them fast: but as for the harbinger that goes before to make way for them,
this is Pride; which makes the wise man say Prove. 16. verse 18. that pride goes
before a fall; for if pride go before, a hundred to one but a defection will
follow after, either from faith to God, or else from love to our brethren.

Again it is pride that is the first stick to kindle contention ^^ns omnis
dissidii est superbia, dum sibi quisque tribuit, alteri minimum. Erasm. Ratio
verae Theologia; page 130. Only by pride comes contention. Prove: 13. 10.
in the Church of God; so says Solomon Pro. 28. 25. He that is of a proud heart
stirs up strife. Pride, that divides the seamelesse coat of Christ (as the
rude soldiers did) into as many parts as there be particular Ioh. 19. 23.
persons: And pride still that alienates us from our brethren, and makes us of
other minds from them, though they walk up never so close to the Scripture
rule. And this is the ground of the Apostles exhortation in the 2. chap. Hence
it is, that the Apostle will have us, Not to think of our selves more highly
then we ought* Romans 12. 3.
to the Philippians verse 3. Let nothing be done out of strife and vainglory,
but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better then Et contra hoc
praeceptum (inquit Grotius) peccarunt omnium fere Schismatum authors.
themselves. And in the 4. chap. to the Ephesians and the second verse, the
Apostle there in his invitation to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, tells us of the manner how it must be done; and that is with all
lowliness and meekness: for Christian unity is then at the highest, when
Christian humility is at the lowest; and were many of us more humble then we
are, without question we should not be, as we appear at this present, so much
divided.

2. From anger: which makes Solomon say, That Pro. 29. 22.
anger stirs up strife and division. For anger is as a cloud to the
understanding, interposing betwixt it, and the light of Gods truth; or as the
fire is to the eye, which scatters the visive beams too much.

Now here I speak not so much of a light anger, which like a bubble is as soon
down as up; but of an Sic inter iram and iracundiam distinguit Hispalensis,
lib. 1. de verborum differentiis.
anger that is settled, and congealed by long standing into malice and hatred
against the persons of our brethren, and reflected (as it is usually) from
their persons upon their opinions and practices. Hence it is that S. Paul
exhorts his Ephesians, Ephesians. 4. 26.
not to let the Sun go down upon their wrath; and he premises this ground for
it, because we are members one of another. As if he should have said, If the
Sun do once but go down upon your wrath, and your anger boil long against
your brethren, this Ne diutius iram concoquatis, Gagnaeus.
will soon disunite and dissociate you so far, as if you were not members of
the same mystical body with Aristoteles in Politic. Sic etiam Author Distic.
qui inscribitur Cato, Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere verum.
them. (...), (says the Philisopher,) for they that are far gone with passion
cannot discern the truth; no more then he that looks upon things through a red
glass, can rightly apprehend them, and in their proper colors. So that if we
once look upon Omnem inquirendae veritatis rationem amittit occupatus
affectibus: astu fertur, and velut rapido flumini obsequitur. Quintilian.
Instit. Orator. lib. 6. cap. 3.
any one through the false spectacles of anger and hatred, all that he does
then (be it never so good) will be represented unto us as under the notion of
evil; and from this misapprehension, we shall be easily drawn to divide from
him, or (which is more) to walk contrary to him; and this sometimes to the
loss of our reason and religion too.

Thus we read of Aquila, the Hist. Magdeburg. centur. 2.
ancient translatour of the Pentateuch into Greek, that he being angry at a
sentence of excommunication against him, turned to Iudaisme. Again of Lucian
and Porphyry, that they In eadem Centur.
were first Christians, but upon a supposed injury received from the Church,
did both of them in mere spite and stomach against her turn Atheists. And one
tells us of an Italian, being at deadly feud with a great rival of Balth,
Castil. de aulico.
honor, how he should say, when he came to vote in the senate, that he voted
against that which such a one spoke: but being told that his adversary had yet
spoke nothing; then (says he) against what he will speak.

And so have there Proclivis admodum lapsus est in dissensionem ^ Doctrina ipsa
veritatis quim very profitentur Christiani, quum id studio habeat, qui odit,
nequid commune ipsi sit cum adversario; ut Arabes, qui Heraclii, ac eorum qui
sub illo merebant, odio, ab iss disc^sserunt religione. Arm. orat. de compon.
Rel. dissidio.
been such waspish spirits in all times, who have set themselves both against
what is professed, and to be professed by their adversaries, though never so
right; as accounting it better to be any ways pseudodox in opposition to them,
then orthodox Christians in union with them.

But as, when Patricius was angry with John Patriarch of Alexandria, and at
evening received from him this Dr. T. in vit. and mort. Christi.
message, Sir, the Sun is set; the good man presently threw away his anger, and
was ruled by him: So, if when we are angry with the persons of any, we shall
but mind our own hearts before we go to sleep, that the Sun is set, and that
the Apostle says it must not go down upon our wrath; Ephesians. 4. 26.
this happily will make us not only think well of their persons, but also, in
stead of crossing those ways of God wherein they walk, embrace them our
selves, or at least take no prejudice against them.

3. From impatience; when we will not forbear our brother in the smallest
matters, but make every grasshopper, every ceremony, circumstance, and Eccl. 12.
5.
thing indifferent, to be a burden; whereas S. Paul exhorts It is one thing to
affirm Christ to be God, and another to say, It is lawful to eat all meats:
for the one I may contend to death; for the other I may not break the peace of
the Church, but forbear my brother. Parr in Romans c. 14. ver. 19.
us to deal gently with a bone out of joint, and to restore it into its place
with the spirit of meekness, and not to break it in pieces with the spirit of
bitterness. Gal. 6. 1. And hence it is, that the Apostle exhorts his Ephesians,
to keep the unity of the spirit, not only with lowliness of mind, but also
with long-suffering, and forbearing one another in love. For the bond of unity
will soon be broke, if every error, every miscariage and infirmity be made a
forfeiture.

And this was the cause of such heart-burnings here between the strong and weak
Romans; that the strong, who were best able, were not patient toward the weak;
and the weak, who had most cause, were not patient toward the strong, but
condemned them as scandalous and uncharitable.

Oh that we would then strive to close up these Use of exhort. 1 Means.
cle^ts that are among us with our tears!

And to help us herein, it will be good a little to cast our eyes upon them. It
is said of our Savior, that he Luke 19. 41
be held the city, and wept over it: And it would do well, if we did behold the
distractions both in city and country; else we shall never come to weep
affectionately overthem. Vidi contradictionem in civitate, Psalm. 55. 9.
says David; and so have we also seen contradictions both in city and country,
the divisions of Reuben being very many. See then, O see how the Judge. 5. 15.
Church is rent in two by the struglings of her own children, and cries out to
us as in the Lamentations, Lam. 1. 12
Is it nothing to you, O all ye that pass by the way, and behold by sorrows,
under which I groan as a woman in travail, and long to be delivered? The time
would fail me to tell you of all the stinking heresies that are now revived,
as Iudaisme, Olim damnata and sopita dogmata, nunc dierum suscitare conamur,
insuper and nova addimus. Surrexerunt a mortuis multorum baereses, quae
dormierant, and apparuerunt multis. Bern. Epist. 190. and 191.
Arrianisme, Pelagianisme, Antinomianisme, Socinianisme, and the Doctrine of
the Millenarys. These, with many such like, are the monstrous issues of our sad
disunions; and we ought to look upon them as our sin, as our shame, that so our
eyes may affect our hearts in mourning Lam. 3. 48.
for them.

And yet this is not enough, unless in the next place 2. Means.
we do every day contribute our prayers unto God for the sewing up of our great
rents and divisions. And this was David's practice Psalm. 60. 2. Thou have made
(says he) the land to tremble, thou have broken it; oh heal the breaches of it,
for it shakes.

We are much in prayer for pardon of sin, for holiness, for patience under
persecution, etc. and we do well in it: but where is he among us that prays
with S. Paul here in the text, that the God of patience and consolation would
make us like-minded one toward another: or else in the Apostles language ^. 4.
ver. 14.
to his Ephesians, that we be no more as children, tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. Where the word that we translate ( slight) is (...),
which signifies such a slight as false gamestersuse by cogging of dice to
deceive the simple: So who prays for poor ignorant souls, that they be not
cheated out of their religion by false teachers into Socinian blasphemies, and
Anabaptisticall fancies?

Whatever then we omit in order to union, let us not omit prayer; for when
other means shall fail us, this will be sure to hold. And this made our Jewel
pray so earnestly upon his deathbed, In Iuelli vita.
that God would give Unitatem Ecclesiae ac piam pacem, unity to his Church and
godly peace. And our Savior, he prayed four John chap. 17. verse. 11, 21, 22,
23.
times for it in that affectionate prayer of his for his disciples, before his
departure from them, that they may be one, as he and his father were one. And
the of prayer to this end our Apostle here knew well enough, when not being
able to work his Romans into union by his reasoning and argumentation, he does
here by his prayers interest God in it; Now the God of peace, etc.

But yet this is not all neither, 3. Means.
for there is one thing Non sais est plangere vel orare, sed opus est etiam ut
cur a geratur qua ratione gravissima Ecclesia tempestas sedetur. Chrysostom.
Innocentio.
still behind; and this is, to have manus ad clavum, our hands to the helm, as
well as oculos ad coelum, our eyes to heaven, and to endeavor after unity, (as
the Apostle exhorts his Ephesians) as well as to eye it Ephesians. 4. 3.
in our prayers and tears. And this we must do with the utmost of our
strength, care, and vigilance: which is the reason of that expression in the
Psalms, Psalm. 34. 14. Romans 14. 19.
of pursuing peace, and in the Romans, of following after it; which are taken
(I suppose) from hunters, who use eagerly to pursue and follow after their prey
until they have taken it. Nay, we must Nullum Erasm. Adag. sub loco communi
Conatus.
non movere lapidem, leave no stone (as they say) unturned, nor any means
unassay'd to procure the Churches peace. But all this, intra sphaeram
activitatis, within our own sphere and orb, within our several places and
stations wherein God has set us: for else our endeavors will not be regular,
but we shall (to use S. Peter's word) (...) 1 Pet. 4. 15.
(...) (that is) play the Bishops in another diocese, and so doing, make a
rent in the body, by inverting that order, which the God of order has settled
Non est Deus confusionis author, sed pacis. 1 Cor. 14. 33.
there to preserve the unity of it.

And here for a whetstone to your endeavors, do but take a little into your
consideration the inestimable good of Unity. It being a good

1. In it self absolutely So the stoics of old distinguished their good into
Honestum, Iucundum and Utile. And the Septuagint here expresses good by the
word (...), which the Scripture uses in all 3. significations. 1 Pro bono
honesto, Romans 12. 17. 2 Pro jucundo, Genesis 3. 6. 3 Pro utili, 1 Cor. 7. 1.
considered; whereof David speaks Psalm. 133. ver. 1. Behold how good it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity!

2. As it is to us, jucundum and utile, a pleasant and profitable good;
comparing it for the one to Aarons precious ointment Hinc illud Ethnici,
Persusus liquidis urget odoribus. Horat. lib. 1. Ode 5.
verse 2. which was made up of the most fragrant and pleasing spices, whereof
we read in the 30. chap. of Exodus verse 23. and 24. and for the other to the
dew of Hermon, that made fruitful the hill of Sion, in the beginning of the 3.
verse: and so does unity make the Church of God Vt Menenius Agrippa dicere
solebat, sio Ecclesia; se multum huic debere sententiae, Concordia res parvae
crescunt. Sen. Epi. 94.
fruitful in works of piety and charity; the Church of God being much beholden
to it, both for her being and well-being here on earth.

But in the close of the Psalm he goes further, and says, That where unity is,
there has the Lord commanded the blessing, and life for evermore. The meaning
whereof may be this:

1. That God has bestowed upon unity not only that inferior good which
appertains unto this transitory life, but also the Summum bonum, the highest
good of all others, even eternal life, or life for evermore called here the
blessing (...), by way of eminency; as if that the naming of this were
loadstone enough to draw us to unity, without the least respect to any other
good whatsoever.

And this made that learned Erat Ep. Davenantius vir apprime doctus, ac inter
nostrates non postremi nominis Theologus.
Divine of ours, a little before his death, close up his pen with that golden
Treatise, which he calls, Adpacem Ecclesiae Adhortatio, An Exhortation to the
peace of the Church, it being as his Viaticum to eternal life, which he now
enjoys.

2. That God has laid a special charge and command upon eternal life, to
wait as a handmaid on Unity. An expression (methinks) that has a great deal of
Majesty in it: for it brings in God speaking (...) like a King, by way of
command, or rather (...), above any earthly King; because a King on earth,
though he command a thing to be done, yet may he fail in the execution of it
for want of power, whereas God, (whose power is, as himself, infinite) his
command and deed are all one, as in the 33. Psalm verse 9. He spoke and it was
done, he commanded and it stood fast. So that whether we eye this life or a
better, in either of them we see a sufficient attractive unto unity.

But that I may yet set off the good of unity the better, it will not be amiss
to give you a clearer prospect thereof (...). Arist. 2 Rhet. cap. 13.
by the evil of Disunity, which is contrary to it; since it is a good rule,
That contraries laid one by the other do best appear.

And this evil of Disunity is twofold: Either the evil of scandal, or of
ruin^

1. The evil of Scandal.

And here I dare boldly say that no one thing has cast more dirt in the face
of our Religion, and hardened the Papists our adversaries from embracing it,
then the differences and divisions that are among us: for how do they upbraid
us with them, and cast them in our teeth upon all occasions?

It is an usual saying among them, Ex uno Luthero quam multoe fides! How many
several faiths has one Luther brought forth! and how many byways of Religion
are cut out of that one they call the Reformed Religion! even Quot
Confessiones, tot Religiones. In Proefat. ad harm. Confessionum.
as many as there be Confessions of several Churches among them. Tush (say
they) do you Protestants ever think to gain us to your religion, whenas you do
not yet agree your selves about it? but have run ever since King Henry the
eighths days round about in a maze of Reformation, and know not where to fix?
Surely, if you were in the right, you would be at more certainty then you are,
and not take up every day so many new Doctrines, according as they suite with
the changeable fancies of particular leading men among you severally biased.
Monsieur de la Militiere in his book lately dedicated to C. R.
It is easy (says one of them) to conclude upon the Maxims of the Protestants
Reformation, that they have neither Church nor Faith; for how many Sects and
insects swarm among them? and let there be with them what difference there
will, they still agree in nothing more then in their indifferency.

Lactantius says of Arcesilas, that he having considered the many
contradictions among the Philosophers, was drawn from it to slight them all:
and so has there been of late many a one drawn to slight, (which is more) to
renounce their former Communion with our Church, merely upon the consideration
of those contradictions and differences among them who profess themselves to
be her children; and among the rest (to name no more) Hugh PaulindeCressy, who
Erat nuper nonimi apud nos subsell^i, sed Decanus de Laghlin in Hibernia, and
Pioebendarius e windsor in Anglia.
makes our aversion from unity, one motive of his conversion to Popery; adding
also touching the French Churches, That whatsoever union among themselves in
the Protestant religion they boast of, they owe it entirely to the Civil power
there: for world, that allow them but the liberty, they would soon fall into In
his exomologesis cap. 14. number. 4.
as many divisions as any of their brethren.

Thus does the cause of God suffer diminution every day by our discords, which
proclaim it too much to the world, that either the Religion we profess accuses
our errors, or else that we professors accuse our Religion, and are our
selves either without Christ, Caussin in his book entitled, The Angel Peace.
or else Christ without peace and unity. Even Heathen and Insidels have always
upon this account kept off from Christianity: for Chrysostom observed as much
of his times, speaking of the Gentiles, A Heathen Venit Gentilis, and dicit,
vellem fieri Christianus, sed nescio cui adhoeream. Multoe inter vos pugnoe,
divisiones mulioe. Singu'i dicunt, ego verum dico. In Act. Apost. Homil. 33. Et
in 1. cap. ad Galat.
comes (says he) and says, Fain would I become a Christian, but to whom among
them I should adhere for truth I do not know; for I see many differences and
divisions among you, and every party says, that they only have the truth. And
the like also may be said of these times; a Papist comes, and says thus, Fain
would I be of the Reformed Religion, but I see that there is much siding in it,
and which side I should be on to gain the truth I do not know; for I hear how
every one lays claim to it, even as the cities of Greece did to the birth of
Homer: as the Lutheran Hinc templa templis opposita frequentantur, ubi non modo
diversa, sed and contraria Religionis dogmata proferuntur, u que adeo, ut in
quo pars un a proram and puppim ceritatis constituit, altera horrendam
blasphemiam vocet; in gi^o hi pictatis apicem, illi exscerandam idololatriam
appellent. I. A. in Orat.
says, that the Truth is on his side, but the Calvinist says, No; and what the
Calvinist hugs for truth, the Anabaptist rejects, and what one says is Christ's
cause, the other says is Antichrists. So hard is it to resolve Pilates
question, What is Truth! Which makes us to be (...) (as Gregory Nazianzen
speaks concerning G. Nazianz. Orat. 14.
the divisions of Constantinople) even a laughing stock to our enemies; who
take occasion by it to clap their hands, and insult over us in that Hec ipsum
Priamus totoque Troja velit. Ovid. Epist. 1.
language of David's Psalm. 35. 25
enemies, So, So, thus would we have it.

But why do we such things? (says the same Father) why repent we not? nay, why
are we not ashamed of them, if for nothing else, yet at least to silence the
tongues of our adversaries, (...), who do easily fasten false crimes upon us,
and strengthen themselves in evil by our differences about good?

Tacitus says, that when the Romans had heretofore overrun a great part of this
Island, Galgacus a noble Britan told his Illi discessionibus nostris clariores
facti, vitium hoc in gloriam exercitus sui vertent. In vit. Agricoloe.
countrymen, That it was their own divisions which turned most to the glory of
the Roman army. And so may we say now, That there is no one thing the Romanists
make more use of, to credit their superstition by, then our differences in
Religion; judging their own waters therefore clear, because they see ours are
mudded.

Oh that our hearts then See Baxt. in his Dedic. Epist. to the Sts rest.
could bleed to look upon the present state of England! to see how few places
there be that are not cut into shreds, and crumbled as to dust by separations!
to think how by this we have wounded the Christian name, rent the seameless
coat of Christ into pieces, and broke his bones asunder, yea hardened the
ignorant, confirmed the Papists, and are become the scorn of our enemies, and
the grief of our friends! And that this could never have been told in Gath, nor
published in the streets of Ascalon, for the 2 Sa. 1. 20.
daughters of the Philistines to rejoice and triumph in!

2. The evil of Ruin, which always waits on division, as the shadow on the
body. The Church therefore is well resembled Navicula (id est, Ecclesia)
turbatur fluctibus in profundo, unda ascendit super naviculam cum persecutio
venit etc. August. de verbis domini in Mat. Ser. 14.
to a ship at sea, where the waves that beat against it are troubles and
persecutions of all sorts, and whose leaks are divisions, through which the
waters enter to swallow it up: Or else to a natural body, which (says Gregory)
Gregor. Moral. lib. 29. Eandem habet and similitudinem Seneca lib. 2. de Ira,
cap. 31.
as it consists in unitate membrorum, in the unity of its members; so does the
mystical body of Christ the Church in unit ate fidelium, in the unity of the
faithful: which unity if it be (...). Nazianz. 1 Invect.
once broke, all the members will be ill at ease, and the whole structure of
the body (without a miracle intervening) be presently dissolved with it.

Thus when Satan would have destroyed Christ, Matthew. 4. 6.
the means he makes use of to this end is Fallacia divisionis, a fallacy of
division, (as Logicians speak) betwixt Gods promise of Promissionem objicit, at
conditionem abijcit. Pareus in locum.
preserving him, and the condition annexed unto that promise, which was the
walking in the ways of God. And the same method also does Satan (like a
cunning sophister) now seem to use for our destruction, by urging the promise
of God unto us, and telling us, that we are his vineyard, which he has
promised to hedge about against wast and spoil; but in the mean time waving
the condition, and saying not a word of walking in Gods ways, (whereof one is
the way of love and Unity) that so we may have a right claim to this promise of
his for preserving us, the neglect whereof has made so many scissures among
us, as (without Gods great mercy) must bring swift and inevitable destruction
upon us: for truth it self has said it over Mat. 12. 25. Mark 3. 24. Luc. 11.
17.
and over again, in the 3. former Evangelists, that so we may the better take
notice of it, that every kingdom divided against it self is brought to
desolation, and every city or house divided against it self cannot stand.

If then the honor of our Mixture of falsehood is like allay in gold and
silver, that does embase the coin. Sr. Fr. Bac. Ess. 1.
Religion be not of force enough to make us lay aside our differences, yet let
our own safety and preservation be so far prevalent with us. Now every thing
naturally labors to Vt in animalibus, cum in unum coeunt ac permanent anima
corpusque, id animal vocatur: cum vero haec unitas utriusque separatione
dissolvitur, interire, nec jam animal esse liquet. Boet. de Consolat. lib. 3.
pros. 11. Singula, eo ipso quo unum quid sunt, idipsum sunt quod sunt, and in
eo quod sunt, unione ista conservantur. Arm. ad initium orat. de comp. relig.
dissidio.
preserve its own being, and the being of every thing consists in unity: For
Omne quod est (says one excellently) tamdiu est quamdiu unum, (i. e.) every
thing that has a being, has it no longer then it continues one. Which makes
Gregory Nazianzen say, That unity is the great preserver of all things: whereas
confusion (says he) breeds thunder in the air, shakings in the earth,
shipwreck in the sea, diseases in men's bodies, sin in their souls, dissipation
in families, ruin in Churches and States; (...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. 26.
for all these (says he) are not the names of peace and unity, but of
confusion and perturbation.

It was this that destroyed the Eastern Church and the Greek Empire: and who
knows what it may do with us? for if the Duke of Roan be right in his censure,
In his book entitled the Interests of the Stages of Christendom.
That England is a great Animal which will never dye till it kill it self; then
In hoc posit^ est salus reip. nempe in una fide; quae ergo spes regnis esse
potest, ubi quot capita tot fides. Del Rio Adag. Vet. Testam. 153. part prima.
may we fear much by our home dissensions, that she is now very nigh her end.

When some sparks of discontent began to fire betwixt the English and the
Netherlanders toward the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's reign, the state of both
Cambd. in his Remains.
was represented by two pitchers floting upon the water, with this motto, Si
collidimur, frangimur, (i. e.) if we beat one against the other, we are broken.
And such seems the state of our Church and nation at this time, like two
pitchers floting upon an Adrian sea of trouble, and dashing one against the
other, to the ruin and destruction of both. All other sins destroy the Church
consequentially, but none so directly as division; for if building the Church
be an orderly joining of the materials, what then (I pray) is disjoyning, but
pulling it down?

We find in the Scriptures false teachers compared to dogs, as Philip. 3. 2.
where there is a threefold (...) or caveat against them, Beware (says he) of
dogs, etc. And they are so called,

1. Either to note their wilful obstinacy against the truth, always barking
at it, as the dog does at the moon, though he be unable to reach or hurt it.

2. Or else to note their watchfulness in spying out all occasions for
worrying of the sheep, if they keep not within the fold. And S. Cyprian notes
it of the primitive Christians, that if they had agreed better Non venissent
haec fratribus mala, si in unum fraternitas esset animata. Cypr. lib. 4. Epist.
4.
together, they had not been worried and persecuted so much by their bloody
adversaries as they were, no^ would they have endured so great evils as they
did.

Alas! the Papists are not any way so considerable to destroy the Church, Gods
pillar of truth set up among us, (so the Apostle calls it) as our selves 1 Timothy
3. 15
divided; even as the sword without kills not half so many as those diseases
that Plures gula quam gladius. Erasm. Adag. page 468.
are from within, which ever are with some breach of unity. For diseases are
either by inflammation in some vital part, or by strife in the humors, or
luxation in the joints, or breaking veins or sinews; all which speak some way
or other breach of unity.

And therefore, as it was the Apophthegm of Severus the Emperor, by way of
advice to his sons, when Bucholc. chronol. ad annum Christi 212.
he lay a dying, Estote concordes and caeteros contemnite: So say I, simus
unanimes and concordes, let us all be of one mind and one heart among our
selves, and then we need not fear what Papists or Anabaptists, men or devils,
can do against us; but we may slight all that oppose us without danger: for
this it is that Satan is most Bern. de modo vivendi, sermon. 41.
afraid of. And it is Bernards observation, that there be some good duties the
devil does not fear: as he does not fear our fasting, quia ipse nunquam
comedit, because he himself never eats; nor does he fear The devil is
therefore called a roaring lion 1 Pet. 5. 8. Now the Egyptians made the lions
head the Hieroglyphick of watchfulness, quia hoc ex animalibus recurvos ungues
habentibus, simulatque natum est, cernit. Pier. Val. lib. 1. p. 2.
our watching, because he watches too as well as we, and never sleeps: sed si
charitatem and concordiam tenemus, hoc diabolus vehementer timet, but if we be
in love and unity one with another, the devil is much afraid of this, quia hoc
tenemus in terra quod ipse in coelo tenere noluit, because herein we hold that
on earth which he would not keep in heaven, and therefore was thrown down from
Inveniat vos diabolus concordia armatos, quia pax vestra bellum illi. Tertul.
ad Martyrs.
thence; which makes him ever since look upon our peace as a set war raised up
by us, on purpose to destroy him and his kingdom here upon earth.

And as Satan is afraid of our unity, so also are all his evil instruments
here on earth; for it is unity that makes the Church of God terrible to her
adversaries, even as an army Acies been ordinata. vulg. Lat.
with banners, or as a well-ordered army (so the Isiodor. Hispal. in Cantic.
cap. 6.
vulgar Latin reads it) Ubi nullus locus hosti per malum discordiae aperitur
(as he glosses it) when we give no advantage to our adversaries by our
divisions. But if still Manasseh shall devour Ephraim, Isa. 9. last.
and Ephraim Manasseh, and they both be against Judah; they are then sure to be
carried a way captives with the other tribes. And so they were by Salmanazar
king of Assyria in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which Isai lived to see. And let
us look to it, lest while we bite and devour one another, we Gal. 5. 15.
be devoured one of another.

The consideration whereof should make us run to Christ our heavenly physician,
and say with the prophet Psalm. 6. 2, 3.
David, Restore us, O Lord, for we are feeble and sore broken, all our bones
are out of joint, our souls also are sore troubled for it: but, Lord, how long?

Let that exhortation then of the prophet Zephany Zeph. 2. 1, 2, 4.
take place with us, Gather Sileant bumanarum contentionum animosa certamina,
and inclinemus verbo Dei. August. in lib. de unitate Eccles. cap. 7.
your selves together, yea, gather your selves together, O nation not worthy to
be desired, before the decree come forth, and the fierce anger of the Lord come
upon you; when Gaza shall be forsaken and Askalon made a desolation.

Oh that the name of unity were amiable in all our eyes! and that we were but
Rogers in his Presace to the 39. Articles.
of Mr. Calvin's mind, who said Ne december maria, that he would not refuse to
pass ten of the roughest seas, so that he might be any ways by it
isntrumental for the reconciling of the differences betwixt the Protestants.
Yea, how happy were the Church of God in this nation, if that prophecy spoken
of Ezekiel. 37. chap. and the 19. verse were now to be fulfilled with us, namely,
That God would take the stick of Joseph, the stick of Israel, and make it into
one stick with the stick of Judah!

And let it shame us to hear the Turks Knolls Hist. Turc.
call themselves Islami (i. e.) men of one mind, in their Mohammedan
superstition; and yet we be of so many minds as men in our Protestant
profession: or that the Papists, Arminians, Pelagians, Socinians, Antinomians
and Anabaptists should be tied together like Sampsons foxes Judge. 15. 5.
with firebrands at their tails, In his Praf. to the Galat.
(as Luther makes the comparison) to destroy the good corn growing in the field
of Christ's Church; and yet we agree together so little to preserve it.

But I have said enough; and close up all with those endearing expressions of
the blessed Apostle to his Philippians: If there be any consolation in Phil. 2.
1, 2.
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels
of mercy; fulfill ye my joy, that ye may be like-minded, having the same loves
being of one accord, of one mind.

And my earnest desire and prayer to Almighty God is that in the text;

Now the God of patience and consolation make you like-minded according to
Jesus Christ, that we may with one heart and one mind glorify God the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the holy and ever-blessed Spirit be all
Glory both now and for ever.

Trin-uni Deo Gloria.
Aspiratio.
OH that the God of Truth and Peace would inspire Magistrates, and people of
all ranks, with an ardent desire of both! That he would plainly discover unto
them the foul and cursed mischiefs that flow naturally from the bitter source
of Disunity in Religion; and affect their hearts so deeply with a serious
apprehension of them, as that they may gather up all their prayers, counsels
and endeavors, to procure such safe and gentle remedies for the sick body of
Christ his Church, as the nature of her present distempers requires, to the
closing up of all her rents, and restoring her to health again! And all for
Christ Jesus sake, our only Lord and Savior.

A General view of the Heads contained in the first Treatise, out of James 1.
18.
1 The Occasion and Coherence of the words. 2 The Division of them.
From whence arise 3 Propositions.
1 The principal cause of our new Birth is the will of God. From whence is
inferred, That we cannot by the help of Nature prepare our selves for the Grace
of Conversion. 2 The Word of Truth is the ordinary means and instrument of cur
new Birth. Under this head the Schwenckfeldians are taxed, for preferring their
Enthusiasms before Scripture. 3 The Word of God is the Word of Truth. And this
is the Point chiefly insisted on.
In the prosecution whereof, Truth is distinguished
1 More generally, into Original. Real. Intellectual. Signal.
2 More particularly into 1 Truth of Being: which is God himself. 2 Truth of
knowing God: which is 1 Natural, by his Works, and common to all. 2
Supernatu^all, (and peculiar to his Church) by his Word, contained in the books
of the Old and New Testament, which is here called the Word of Truth, 1 From
its being the Rule of all saving Truth. Now a Rule has these properties
agreeable to the Holy Scripture: That it is Authoritative, Straight. Perfect.
Known.
And here our Adversaries are taxed, who do in effect divest the Scriptures of
these properties. 2 From its immediate efficient Cause, viz. God, who is
essential Truth. And from hence is inferred, That as there is but one God, so
also but one Truth of Salvation, which is originally in the Scriptures, and
derivatively from them. 3 From its eminency above other Truths. 4 From the
effect thereof, which is of it self nothing but Truth.



Uses.
1 For discovery, where the truth of Christian Religion is: whether with us,
who conform therein to the Word of Truth; or with others, who are but
pretenders to it. 2 For encouragement, to search the sacred Scriptures, because
in them lies that saving Truth we desire to find. And from thence we are 1 To
extract it for our own use and comfort. In order to which we must be prepared 1
With humility of spirit. And here the Enthusiasts are taxed for want of it in
sundry particulars. 2 With prayer for a blessing upon the means to be used for
the extracting of it. And these (setting aside the Scholasticall) are 1 A
constant reading of the Scriptures. 2 The appyling of our reason to our reading
of them. And this helps us to extract out of them saving Truth four ways. 1 By
way of concession. 2 By way of disposition. 3 By way of inference. 4 By
comparing the doctrines collected out of the Scriptures with themselves, or
with the ordinary rules given for their interpretation.
3 The Word preached in the mouths of Gods Ministers; which helps us to saving
Truth out of the Scriptures 2 ways. 1 By way of discovery. 2 By way of
application.
4 Meditation of what we have read our selves, or heard from others. 5 The
Spirit of God, as the chief and principal.
2 Having, etc. See the following page.


2 Having extracted saving Truth out of the Scriptures by these means; we are
1 To hold it firmly against all opposers. And to do so we have 1 Encouragement
1 From the reward annexed to it. 2 From the examples of Gods children, who have
done and suffered much, rather then they would yield their adversaries one
tittle of saving and fundamental truth. 3 From these Reasons. 1 Because we are
only Lessees to Truth. 2 Because in holding that up we uphold ourselves. 3
Because though men may fail, yet shall the truth of God besure to stand
immovable. And this is instanced 1 In those that have been haters of truth; as
in the notorious examples of leroboam, Antiochus, Diocletian, Julian, and
others. Inferences from hence are 1 Of advice to the persecutours of Gods
truth, To desist from their rage against it as vain and foolish. 2 Of
exhortation to the friends of Truth; 1 Not to despair of seeing Truth recover
her former luster, though for the sins of a nation she may be for a time
obscured. 2 Not to let the truth of God fall to the ground for fear of man.
2 In those that are lovers of Truth, who though their persons may dye, and the
exercise of their Ministry be taken from them, yet shall the Truth, taught and
maintained by them, live for ever.! 1 Because God who is Essential Truth is
Immortal. 2 Because of Christ's prayer and promise.





2 Direction, etc. See the next page.

2 To rejoice etc. See the next page.

2 We have direction as to the means how to hold fast the Truth: which are 1 A
sound knowledge of God in the Scriptures. 2 Not questioning the principles of
Truth. 3 Not being too credulous nor curious. 4 Not laying too fast hold of the
world. 5 Watching over the flexibility of our own natures.
2 We are to rejoice in it affectionately. Which is pressed upon 2
considerations. 1 From the great joy which the Understanding has in natural
Truth. 2 From the pleasure men take in only apparent Truth.

3 To prize it highly, from its admirable propertyes and effects. 4 To love it
dearly: which we cannot but do, if we consider it in relation to. 1 God. 2 Our
neighbor! 3 Our selves
And our love must appear by our 1 Prayers for it. 2 Practice of it. Because 1
Practice is the chief end that Truth was ordained for. 2 It is a symptom of
spiritual health. 3 Eternal happiness consists in it.



A General view of the Heads contained in the second Treatise, out of Romans 15.
5.
1 The Occasion and Coherence of the words. 2 The Division of them.
Out of which arise three Observations.
1 That God is the Efficient Cause of Unity. 2 That there is a like-mindednesse
which is not according to Christ. 3 That it is the duty of Christians to be
likeminded, or at unity one with another. And this is the point chiefly
insisted on: which is 1 Confirmed 1 By eminent places of Scripture. 2 By
Reasons. 3 By Examples.
2 Demonstrated in two particulars. 1 In our Opinions and judgments in relation
to Faith. Under which head is condemned that exorbitant liberty of opinions in
Religion, so much pursued in these days. 2 In our Affections, in relation to
Love.


Uses.
1 To discover the exceeding want of Unity now among us; and to let us see how
great cause we have to mourn for it. And to this end are set before us 1 The
sad divisions that have been in the Church of God in former times. 2 The
aggravation of our differences compared with theirs, by way of complaint. 3 The
grounds and causes of disunity in religion: which are 3. 1 Pride: which is
exemplified 1 In particular men. 2 In whole Churches, as in the Eastern and
Western Churches.
2 Anger, and hatred to men's persons. 3 Want of Patience to our brethren.

2 To exhort us unto Unity. In order to which we are to make use of these
means. 1 To have an affectionate eye upon the present distractions. 2 To pray
unto God for his assistance. 3 To consider the inestimable good of it. Which is
1 Demonstrated to be 1 In it self, an HonestGood. 2 As to us, pleasant and
profitable.
2 Illustrated by the contrary evil that attends Disunity in Religion: which is
taken 1 From the scandal and dishonor it brings upon our Reformed Religion. 2
From the inevitable Ruin it draws upon the church and State.



FINIS.

