CHRIST THE Perfect Pattern, OF A Christian's Practice, Being the substance of
several Sermons, about the Imitation of Christ. PREACHED, By the Reverend and
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Ralph Robinson, late Minister of Mary
Wolnoth London.

Phil. 2. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. Eandem
humilitatem eligeret servus, quam sectatus est Dominus. Leo. Quid vobis cum
virtutibus, qui virtutem Christi ignoratis? Ubinam quaeso, vera prudentia nisi
in Christi Doctrina? ubi vera temperantia nisi in Christi vita? ubi vera
fortitudo nisi in Christi passione? Bern. Absonum est, membrum superbum and
delicatum esse, sub capite humili, and spinis coronato. Davenantius. Published
by Sim. Ash, Will. Tailor, Sam. Clarke.

London, Printed by J. S. and are to be sold by John Sims, at the Crosse-Keys
in the new Buildings in Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

Christ the Perfect Pattern.

Christian Reader,
IT is not long since, that a Book of Mr. Robinsons, attested with Our Names,
was published; the Subject whereof was this, That Christ is All in All; wherein
were opened those Elegant Scripture Similitudes, by which, it pleased the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost, to illustrate unto us, the Person, Dignity, and
Offices of our Lord Jesus Christ: which Book, (as we are informed,) has been
very acceptable to the People of God; especially, of those who still retain
the fresh remembrance of Mr. Robinson's precious, and profitable Ministry.

It were to be wished, that those Ministers, who have leisure, answerable to
their great parts and abilities, would enrich the Church of God, with the
fruits of their studies and experiences, whilst God continues them in this
life: that so their Works might neither be neglected as posthumous, nor
suspected as spurious.

This little Treatise, now put into thy hands, thou may be assured, is
printed, according to the Copy, left written by the Authors own hand.

The subject here handled, is most Noble, viz. the imitation of Christ, who is
the grand Exemplar, and Perfect Pattern to all Christians. Though we dare not
say, that the only or main end, either of Christ's Life and Death, was to leave
us an Example; yet we say, that one end thereof, was to leave us an Example, 1
Pet. 2. 21. We do not, dare not, press the imitation of Christ upon that design
that some have done, thereby, to enervate the satisfaction and propitiation by
Christ's death: For we do abhor both those opinions, viz. that the first Adams
sin, and the second Adams righteousness, are no otherwise ours, then by
imitation. But yet we say, that it concerns all Christians, so to improve the
Example of Christ's humility, meeknes, mercifulnes, obedience and zeal, that
they should walk, even as Christ has walked. 1 John 2. 6. who has not only
left us, 1 Pet. 2. 21. (...) a Copy to write by; but also Joh. 13. 15. (...),
a perfect example; showing us, and guiding our hearts and hands, to write
according to that incomparable Copy.

The Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit, lead thee (Christian Reader) into all
truth,

So pray, Thine in Christ, Simeon Ash. Sam. Clark. Will. Tailor.

London, Jan. 27. 1657. Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy.

CHRIST The perfect Pattern, OF A Christians Practice.
Mary Wolnoth, Aug. 27. 1648.
1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in Christ, ought himself so to walk, as
he walked.
THe Apostle having laid down the sum (...)
of the Doctrine of the Gospel in the former Chapter, does in this and the
following Chapter, make the application of it.

There are four principal duties, to which he exhorts in this Chapter, viz.

1. To sanctity and holiness of walking, verse. 1. ad finem verse. 6. 2. To
brotherly love, ad finem 14. 3. To the contempt of the World, verse. 15. ad 18.
4. To shun seducers, and to be constant in the faith, v. 18. ad finem.
Each of these are urged by sundry Arguments.

The Arguments exciting us to holiness of life, are,

1. From the end of the Gospel, v. 1. These things write I unto you, that ye
sin not. 2. From the Mediation, and intercession of Christ, v. 1, 2. 3. It Is an
Argument of the truth and sincerity of our Faith, v. 3, 4. To know Christ, is
to believe in him. 4. It Is an Argument of the sincerity of our love, v. 5. 5.
It Is an Argument of our union with Christ, v. 5. latter part, which is
amplified, v. 6.
So the Text is the amplification of one Argument, pressing holness of life, in
which we may observe two things.

1. A high Dignity. 2. A special duty.
To abide in Christ, is the same with that in v. 5. To be in Christ to have
fellowship with Christ, Chap. 1. v. 6.

(...), says the Scholiast.

The Phrase is further opened, and illustrated, John 1. v. 4, 5, 6.

Explication.

That great mystery of our union with Jesus Christ, it is comprehended in this
Phrase.

There is an external abiding in Christ, by outward profession; and an
internal, by spiritual union.

To walk as he walked, is,

(...), To tread in his steps, to follow his Example, to imitate him in his
holy actions and virtues.

From the whole Text arises this Lesson.

That it is the duty, and should be the care Doct.
of every one, who pretends an interest in Jesus Christ, to imitate the holy
life and conversation of Christ. It Is laid down peremptorily and positively,
not as an Arbitrary thing, but an act of debt; he ought. This is that which
this Apostle enjoynes in other places also, vid. Romans 13. ult. (...). This is
the true putting on of Christ, which we do not only (...), but in our
Conversations, put on his example.

Math. 11. 29. Col. 2. 6. To walk in Christ, signifies two things; To live the
life of Christ, to persevere in him, Phil. 2. 5.

There are three things to be done in the explication of this Doctrine.

1. What it is to imitate. 2. Wherein we must imitate Christ. 3. Why we should
do so.
1. There are three things which must concur to imitation, viz.

1. There must be a performance of the same actions which are done by him, whom
we imitate. Identity of practice.

2. A performing of those actions, out of a desire to imitate; else, though
there be the same actions, yet that is no imitation. Children do the same
actions which their Parents do, viz. eat, drink, walk, etc. yet they are not
said to imitate their Parents in them, because they do them naturally, not out
of any desire of imitation.

3. An endeavor to come as exactly as we can to the Copy: So now to imitate
Christ, is,

1. To do the like actions which Christ did. 2. To do them out of a desire to
be like him. 3. To do them with all the care and exactness we can, that if it
were possible, we would outstrip his example. A Christian should be, Alter
Christus.
2. Wherein we must imitate Christ. This is not unnecessary, because there are
some actions of Christ, which are not imitable. There are three kind of actions
which Christ did.

1. Some things he did, qua Deus, his works of Divinity and Omnipotency: As his
miraculous works of forgiving sins, raising the dead, casting out Devils, and
curing Diseases by his word, walking upon the Sea, etc. It Is the pride of the
Papists, to imitate Christ in these things, as their Quadragesimal Fasts, etc.
These are for our admiration, not for our imitation.

2. Some things he did, qua Mediator, his works of office. As his Dying to
reconcile God and man, offering up himself a Sacrifice for sin. This is not for
our imitation, only the mo^al of these is for us, That as Christ did,
carefully, the works of his Calling, so should we of our particular Calling.

3. Some things he did as he was made man, under the Law. And tehse were of two
sorts: Some in obedience to the Ceremonial Law, as he was the Son of Abraham,
according to the flesh. As his submitting to Circumcision, keeping the Jewish
Feasts of Tabernacles, Pentecost, etc. these we are not bound unto: Others, in
obedience to the moral Law, those moral actions of Christ, the works of piety,
of charity, which he did: his virtues as they are called, 1 Pet. 2. 9. his
humility, meekness, etc. And therefore it is observed in Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of
me, says Christ: what? not to cast out Devils, raise the dead, etc. but learn
meekness, lowliness, etc.

These are the things which we are tied toimitate Christ in: The Reasons why;
these are,

1. Those Relations between Christ and a Christian, call for it, viz.

1. Master and Servant, this is a Relation of Imitation, Matthew. 10. 24, 25.
it is there spoken, in regard of suffering: it is as forcible, in regard of
doing. Our Savior urges us in a particular case, upon this very ground, Ioh.
13. 13, 14. Other Masters cannot require imitation from their Servants in every
thing, because they mislead, but Christ may.

2. That of Captain and Soldiers, that is a Relation of Imitation. Abimelech to
his Soldiers, Judge. 9. 49. Christ is our General and Captain, Heb. 2. 10.
Josh. 5. 14.

3. That of Father and Children, Children should imitate their Parents, not in
every thing, many Parents would lead their Children to Hell, should they follow
them. The Apostle argues upon this ground this duty, Ephesians. 5. 1.

2. It Is one end of Christ's Incarnation. There are in reference to man, two
principal ends of Christ's Incarnation; (for in reference to God, his main end
was, Ephesians. 1. 6.) One was to reconcile God and man, by his obedience and
suffering, and so to bring in everlasting righteousness. The other was, that he
might set us an example for our Imitation, 1 Pet. 2. 21. that there might be
found a perfect Pattern of grace and holiness in our natures. Now unless we
imitate his example, we shall, as much as lies in us, frustrate one end of his
incarnation.

3. It Is the highest pitch of spiritual perfection. It Is the duty of every
Christian, to grow up to as great a height as he can in grace and holiness.
Christians are as Trees, which from a small graff, grow up to a great stature,
vid. Mat. 5. ult. It Is a (...) of simi^itude, not of equality. Now the very top
of this perfection, stands in this, that we be like Christ.

There is a threefold likeness of Christ.

A likeness of nature, so we are all like him.

A likeness of glory, that is reserved for Heaven, of which the Apostle, 1 Ioh.
3. 2.

A likeness of Grace, which consists in the renewing of the mind, and in
walking after this holy Pattern. This is the very Apex of that poor imperfect
perfection which we can reach to here. Greg. Nyssen defines Christianity to be
Imitationem Divinae Naturae. Qui plus habet Christi, plus habet
Christianitatis, so does the Apostle also, Phil. 3. 10.

4. There is no other perfect Pattern to walk by, while we are in this World.
All men, either give us a bad example, or else an imperfect example. There are
two things which make a perfect pattern,

First, That it have exactness of every thing, which should be required.

Secondly, That it have no blemish, or redundancy of any thing which should not
be. Now there is no such Pattern, besides Christ's example. The Scripture indeed
calls upon us, to follow the example of the Saints, the Apostle propounds his
own example, Phil. 3. 17. but there are these limitations:

1. We must not imitate them in all things, because they had graces in
imperfection, and because they had obliquities and deformities, as well as
graces. That which is said of Books, is as true as men in every thing else.
Etiam in optimis Authoribus quaedam vitia. Moses was not without his murmuring.
David had his Adultery, Peter his denial. These are recorded to be as Shelfs of
caution, not Copies of Imitation; we must follow these only in their
reflections, and sparks of piety.

2. We must not follow the example of any one of them alone, because there was
in no one of them a complete Pattern of all grace. God scattered his graces
among the Saints; one was more eminent in one grace, a second in another, etc.
Moses for meekness, Job for patience, Paul for contentment, etc. This God did
to preserve the Communion of Saints, as the Apostle speaks in another case, 1
Cor. 12. 8. but now we may follow Christ's example, without any of these
limitations, for there is in him,

1. A full concurrence of all graces completely, Cont. 5. 10, 11. ad finem.
Col. 1. 19.

2. There is no obliquity in him. No spot, Cant. 5. 16. The Saints are like the
Moon, the best of them have a dark side as well as a bright, who is she that
looks as the Moon? Cant. 6. 10. Christ is as the Sun, which is all light,
without the least spot.

5. The Saints are the Image of Christ, therefore they ought to walk as he
walked. As the shadow follows the substance, Christians are (as it were) the
shadow of Christ. And the goodness of all the actions and works which we
perform, does not stand in the substance of the work, but in relation and
conformity to the Rule and Example, by which they are done.

Information 1. That it is the duty of every 1. Use.
Christian, to know, and to be acquainted with the life of Christ: he that is
ignorant of what Christ did, cannot possibly walk as he walked. What a sad
condition are they in, who having but one Copy to write after, are altogether
without the knowledge thereof.

2. What a great blessing it is, that God has given unto us the Gospel, and
with what care and diligence, should we bend our selves to the study of it; for
Christ's Example is to be found only there. In the volume of the Book it is
written of me, There are but three places where Christ is,

In Heaven corporally;

In the hearts of his people, by his Spirit;

In the Gospel, by his Example.

The Gospel is the Table, wherein the lively picture of Christ is, it reads us
a Lecture of the life and death of Christ. Here are vestigia Christi, you may
see the prints of his feet here, here is the golden Sampler, its a rich
Treasure the Gospel, vid. Col. 3. 16. not to sojourn with us, but to dwell,
etc. What strange Families that want Bibles, or having them read them not: what
strange work would Children make, had they no Sampler?

3. This is justification for a strict and circumspect life. Many are ready to
quarrel with the Servants of God for their preciseness, because they will not
run into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Profaneness is not so much
quarreled as Piety. Gods Servants dare not swear, dare not omit prayer, etc.
wicked men reproach them for it; but God commands it, Ephesians. 5. 15. and Christ's
example calls for it. Christ never swear, never spoke idle word, etc. He that
reproaches them for their holiness, reproacheth Christ. As the Apostle says in
another case, Jam. 4. 11. so it is in this; he speaks evil of Christ, and
judges Christ.

4. It shows us, that many who live in the visible Church, are far from true
Christianity, because they have so little of Christ upon them, Swearers,
Blasphemers, etc. yea, formal Professors, etc. Our Savior argues well with
such men, shows them their Pedigree by their works, Joh. 6. 39. They claim
Abraham for their Father, because of their outward privileges, Circumcision,
etc. yea, v. 41. They claim God to be their Father: our Savior, v. 44. tells
them whose they are, or if Christ's Example must be the Standard of true
Christianity; we may complain, Quam pauci, etc. Many hate his Example, many
only talk of it, many follow it in one kind only, few take up his whole
Example, etc.

Exhortation. That we would be more careful Use 2.
for time to come, to do our duty. A Christian should be alter Christus. When
you miscarry, or are tempted to it, say then, Did Christ thus? I might use many
more, viz.

1. It Is the will of God. 2. It Is the end of your Calling. 3. It will credit
Religion. 4. It will vex the spirit of Satan.
As sin grieves Gods Spirit, so holiness grieves Satan.

5. Christ will direct you, if you desire to walk as he did, he will show his
actions to him that would be like him.

6. Christ will protect you, when you act by his example.

7. Christ will give you comfort in such Actions, Matthew. 11. 29. you shall find
rest.

8. Christ will be sure to walk with you, if you take up his Copy.

9. Else you shall have no benefit by his sufferings: none have benefit by his
Ransom, but such as imitate his Example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. A serious motive.

This shall suffice for the urging of this Doctrine in general.

I shall further press this necessary Subject, by giving you a more large Table
of Christ's Actions severally, which I shall gather out of the Gospel, from
other Texts, and then I shall urge them upon your practice, severally by this
Text.

And I shall begin with that grace, which was very eminent in Christ, viz. the
grace of humility, and lowliness of mind, out of that Text, Matthew. 11. 29.

And I shall urge it upon you in the words of this Text. He that says he
abides in Christ, ought so to walk as he walked.

So much for this Text, which is only a Preamble, or Preface to those which
follow.

September. 10th, 1648. Mary Wolnoth.
Matthew. 11. 29. Lowly in heart. (...).
THere are in this Chapter, several passages (...).
recorded for our instruction, viz.

1. A Message sent by John Baptist, now in prison, to our Savior, wherein we
have,

(1) The occasion of it, viz. the report brought to him, of the great works of
Christ, particularly, that miracle of restoring the Widows Son Verse. 2.
of Naim from death to life, so Luke sets it down, Luke 7. 18.

(2) The Messengers sent; two of John's Disciples. Verse. 2.


(3) The Message it self, Art thou he that should come? etc. This Message he
sent, not for his own sake, as though he were ignorant Verse. 3.
or doubtful, but for the sake of his Disciples, who it should seem, were
doubtful of John's Testimony.

(4) The Answer returned, which has two branches.

1. A Narrative of his works, the blind receive Verse. 4. 5, 6.
their sight, etc.

2. A positive Answer, which is propounded by way of admonition; blessed is he,
etc.

(2) The Testimony which is given by our Verse. 7. ad 16.
Savior, to John Baptist, and his Ministry, to the multitudes which were with
him, ver. 7. ad 16.

(3) A sad complaint of the obstinate carriage of the Jews, both in the
rejecting of John Baptist, Verse. 16. ad 20.
and Christ, verse. 16. ad 20. Neither the retiredness and austerity of John,
nor the sociableness and affability of Christ, did prevail with them, but both
of them were quarreled, v. 18. 19.

(4) A sharp reproof of Chorazim, Bethsaida, Verse. 20. ad 25.
and Capernaum, Cities of Galilee, for their impenitency, unbelief, and
intractableness, verse. 20. ad 25.

(5) The Argument used by our Savior, to Verse. 25. ad 28.
comfort himself and others, against this obstinacy, and incredulity of the
Jews, in rejecting him and his Doctrine, viz. from the determination of God, in
giving effectual grace to some, and denying it to others, I thank thee, O
Father, etc.

(6) A general Exhortation unto all wearied Verse. 28. ad finem.
and penitent sinners, v. 28. ad finem, wherein we have,

1. The matter of the Exhortation, viz.

1. To come to Christ, and submit to his yoke.

2. To follow his Example.

2. The Arguments urging both these; which are three,

1. From the nature of Christ, meek and lowly.

2. From the benefit and advantage, find rest, etc.

3. From the Nature of Christ's Government, my yoke is easy, my burden is
light.

That part of the Verse which I have read, is a description or commendation,
which our Savior gives of himself; and for orders sake, they have two parts.

1. The excellent quality, (...). 2. The Subject of it, (...).
Lowly, the word (...) properly signifies, one that is near the ground, quasi
(...) ab (...) pavimentum solum, as the Latin word Humilis does, ab Humo. Quum
de homine dicitur, a corpore ejus ad animum translatum est.

Its opposed sometimes to rich, Jam. 1. 9, 10. (...). usually its ^pposed unto
proud, Jam. 4. 6. (...). So 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Significat non tam humilem statum, quam demissum animum and humilem affectum.
So it is used in this Text: therefore the word (...) is added, quasi (...), as
the Greek Tongue sets it out sometimes in one word.

(...). That Is the shrine of this Saint, the princely Palace, where this Queen
inhabits. Sin is sealed in the heart, the sin of pride. No Room but the best,
will serve Satan, pride is in the heart, Obad. 1. 3. so grace is planted in the
heart, vid. 1 Pet. 3, 4.

The Lesson which we learn hence, is,

That the Lord Jesus Christ was very lowly, Doct.
and humble-hearted, while he conversed with men upon the Earth, he was (...):
In all his actions and carriages, he expressed very great humility.

1. I shall demonstrate his humility. 2. I shall give the grounds of it. 3. I
shall apply the point.
Sundry things testify his humility, viz.

1. His avoiding and declining earthly greatness, upon all occasions. It Is a
sign of a humble heart, to contemn and reject worldly honors, and promotions.
A man may perhaps, seemingly decline such advancement, either out of a desire
to be accounted humble, or that more importunity may be urged to prevail with
them for acceptance, or out of a Complement, or to avoid trouble and charge, or
because of untiteness as Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 22. A man of quality may take the
lowest place, and decline to sit in the highest Seat, that it may with more
solemnity be conferred upon him.

Visne Episcopari? Nolo, that Answer was given by the Bishop, he must modestly
show himself unwilling, though he had used both Cap and Purse to get the Chair.
But Jesus Christ did really avoid all earthly dignity, and that out of humility
of spirit, vid, Joh. 6. 15. he ran away for fear of a Crown; not as Saul,
because of the care and the trouble, but merely out of a contempt of outward
greatness.

2. His concealing and suppressing his own praises. Proud persons will be
always stroaking their own heads, and trumpetting out their own praises; but
humility will cast a vail over that goodness and glory which is in it self,
vid. Prove. 20. 6. and thus did the Pharisees, Luke 16. 15. our Savior he
kept-under the glory of his own miracles;

1. Sometimes by doing them in secret, Mar. 5. 37. Pride loves to act upon an
open Stage, in the face of many spectators, it would be seen of men; but
humility acts under Curtains. And,

2. Sometimes by charging those who were beholders and partakers of them, not
to make him known, as Math. 17. 9. concerning the vision at his
transfiguration, Mar. 5. 43. when he restored to life, the Daughter of the
Ruler of the Synagogue, and Mar. 7. 36. when he gave speech to the dumb man;
and so Luke 5. 14. to the Leper. His disciples we find, did earnestly solicit
him to set up his Bills (as it were) and to practice his mighty works openly,
John 7. 4. And yet he declined it, yea, we find, that he rather chose to be in
the Desert, when his miracles were noysed abroad, than in the Cities, as Luc.
5. 16.

Sometimes indeed, he commanded his miracles to be made known, as Luke 8. 39.
that his Father might be glorified in the World, and that there might be an
accession of people to himself, to receive his Doctrine, and believe in him;
but we find, that for the most part he concealed them.

3. He mixed and joined himself to persons of the poorest and meanest
condition: he never declined converse with any, either because of their low
parts, or mean condition. Proud persons will not keep company with beggars, and
ragged persons; they keep at a distance, and shun their Company, though perhaps
nearly realted to them: many a proud Child, when once rich, forgets his
Parents, or nearest friends. Jesus Christ did otherwise, he conversed freely
with the poor Woman of Samaria, who came with her Pitcher to draw water as
freely as if she had been a royal person, John 4. His Disciples we find,
wondered at it, when they saw their Master discoursing with a Woman, as thinking
it too low for him, John 4. 27. their spirits were a little higher than their
Masters. A poor blind beggar at the highway side, calls to him, he straight
commands him to be brought, and discourses with him, Luke 18. 40. yea, not only
with mean persons, but many times with lewd and vicious persons, such as the
Publicans and sinners were, when he might do them any good: Though his credit
with men was blasted for his condescension that way, called a friend of
Publicans, yet for their benefit, he regards not that. He even made himself
equal with them of low degree, Romans 12. 6. yea, he did not scorn to have, even
Children brought to him, Matthew. 19. 14. his Disciples they find fault with it,
verse. 13. as thinking it too far below the dignity of his person, to have any
thing to do with them, but Christ entertains them.

4. He was ready and willing to do the meanest Offices for men, he takes water,
and washes his Disciples feet, John 13. 5. as though he had been their Servant,
and not their Master, he was ready to go at every ones call, Matthew. 8. 7. I
will come and heal him, though it was but a Servant.

5. He did bear with the weakness and ignorance of his Disciples, in many
things, without scorn or derision. We are exhorted to this, Romans 15. 1, 2. When
he preached to the multitude, concerning the Parable of the Tares, they come to
him, and he interprets without upbraiding them. They dreamed of an earthly
Kingdom, though Christ had often told them, that his Kingdom was not of this
World, yet he humbly informs them.

6. He lived meanly in the World, did not choose Kings, but mean persons for his
Disciples; was contented to lie hard, and fare hard; was of a mean Trade and
employment in the World, till he took him upon the work of the Ministry, Mark
6. 3. If you trace him from the beginning of the Gospel to the end, you will
Zach. 8, 9.
find his humility.

7. His miserable and cursed Death, Phil. 2. 7, 8. his patient sufferings from
meanest persons, 1 Pet. 2. 23.

Second thing, Why Christ was thus humble? Not because he had nothing in him,
though he had all things in him, which might have heightened his heart.

(1) Psalm. 2. 7. he was high born, the Son of God.

(2) He had high Offices, King, Prophet, Priest.

(3) He was rich, Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. greater than Solomon, Mat. 12.
42.

(4) He had all excellent parts; he was wise, He was beautiful, Psalm. 45. 3.
Cant. 5. 10. He was full of grace, John 1. 14. He had Angels his Servants, etc.

(5) He was appiauded by many: yet was he lowly in heart: which will appear by
seven particulars.

1. It was suitable to his condition, he having taken upon him the form of a
Servant, by taking our Nature upon him, Phil. 2. 7. it was meet, that he should
be humble. He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Mat. 20. 28. He
was in statu humiliationis, as he stood in our stead, and it was necessary,
that his carriage should be suitable to his state.

2. He was full of every grace, John 1. 14. He was full of the Spirit.

3. To teach his Disciples, both the twelve 1 Pet. 2. 21.
that followed him in the flesh, and all others after them, how they should
carry themselves in the World, John 13, 14, 15, 16.

Third thing, is the Use. I will only make one.

That we would all endeavor to walk as Christ walked, in this regard. We live
in a proud age: Christians were never swollen bigger, either with corporal, or
spiritual pride, than now they are, as though they were not Disciples of
Christ, but Disciples of Lucifer. Hardly is there a foolish garish fashion in
the World, but its taken up, if not invented by Professors of Religion. The
Apostle would not have Christians to be conformed unto the World, Romans 12. 2.
but most Christians study nothing more than this comformity. This flag of pride
is not displayed any where larger then in the houses and hearts of those who
would be accounted most eminent in Christianity. Solomon speaks of such a
generation, Prove. 30. 13. if ever such a Generation lived upon Earth, it lives
in the present age.

The Servants of Christ in former ages walked in another posture, they were
little in their own eyes. See what Abraham says, Lord, I am but dust and
ashes, Genesis 18. 27. God calls him the great man, Isa. 41. 2. See what Jacob
says, Genesis 32. 10. I am less, etc. See what Asaph says, Psalm. 73. 22. I am
even as a Beast before thee. Wise Agur, what he says of himself, Prove. 30. 10.
See what Paul says, I am less then the least of all the Apostles, I am as one
born out of due time, 1 Cor. 15. 8, 9. And in another place, less then the
least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. verse. 8. In another place, The chiefest of
sinners; 1 Timothy 1. 15. David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. The Publican, Luke 18. Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner. But what is the Language of Christians now? just like
that in Esaias 65. 5. Stand by thy self, come not near me, I am holier then thou.
We may say as he did, when he read the Gospel, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut
nos non sumus Evangelici. The Apostle foretells of the sins of the last days, 2 Timothy 3. Pride and high-mindedness are two of those sins. Surely that Prophecy
is calculated for the meridian of our time. They are the two sins of our age,
what else means the bleating of the sheep, etc.

1. Why else comes it to pass, that there is such distance amongst the people
of God? why such with-drawings one from another? Too much pride, and too little
love, is the cause of Schism. Solomon tells us, Only by pride, comes
contention, Prove. 13. 10. If contention be the child of pride, surely we are
guilty.

2. Why are Christians of low parts so much despised? Is it not for want of
humility? vid. Phil. 2, 3.

3. Why else do men thrust themselves from their private Callings, into the
Ministry? Is it not because of pride? They think too well of themselves
certainly, vid. Psalm. 131. 1.

4. Why do men slight the plain wholesome truths of God?

5. Why will not men come under the Government of Christ? It Is for want of
lowliness of heart. Our Savior hints it in this Text, where he puts lowliness
of heart, and the taking of his yoke, together; other things are pretended, but
pride is at the root.

Be instructed therefore, as the Apostle exhorts, Col. 3. 12. to put on
humbleness of mind. Be ye clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Consider your
Master, as in other respects, so in this, Phil. 2. 3, 4. If you will not be
like Christ in his humility, you shall not be like him in his exaltation.

Having fallen upon this necessary subject, I shall,

1. Press you by some Motives to this grace.

2. I shall lay down some Directions, or helps to attain to it.

1. Motive. From the mischief and danger of pride of heart. The danger of
high-mindedness will appear in two things.

1. It brings men into many sins.

2. It brings them into many punishments.

There are 11. misshapen births of Pride.

Pride of heart does beget many sins, viz.

1. It will not patiently suffer the word of rebuke, neither private from
Christian friends, nor open rebuke from the public Ministry. Pride will not
bear reproof, but will rage at it. Its a great mercy to be reproved and rebuked
for sin, Rebuke an Ordinance of God. Lev. 19. 17. Pearls Matthew. 7. 6.
Prove. 10. 17. Ezech. 3. 26. Cap. 12. 1. Cap. 15. 10. David prays for it, Let
the righteous smite me, it shall be as precious balm, Psalm. 141. 5. But Pride
in the heart will make the spirit fret and rise against home-reproofs, and
against the reprover also, Esa. 29. 21. Reproofs are veritates mordaces, and a
proud heart cannot bear them. Proud Ahab cannot bear the reproofs of Micajah, 1
King. 22. 8. Proud Amaziah storms at the rebukes of Amos, the Land is not able
to bear his words, Amos 7. 10. The proud men were they who raged at the reproof
of Jeremiah, Cap. 43. 2. A humble heart lies open to rebukes for sin, will pray
for them, and bless God when it comes home to his Conscience, etc. Prove. 9. 8.

2. Pride of heart, it will incline them to envy the graces of God in other
men. A proud person hates and malignes every one who out-strips and out-shines
himself: he cannot bear either an equal or superior. Its a duty to rejoice in,
and to bless God for, the excellent gifts and graces of other men.

Moses did well: Would all the Lords People were Prophets, Numb. 11. 29. Joshua
he is a little troubled at it, Moses rejoices: high-minded men are very apt to
slight, and grieve, and repine at other men's eminency, which is a very great
sin. A proud man is glad to see others eclipsed, that he may shine the clearer.
Yea, its his ingeny and disposition, to be blotting and disparaging others, to
make himself the more glorious. Now what a fearful sin is this, to hate and
despise men for their goodness!

3. It will incline a man to be glad at the sins and slips, and miscarriages of
others. Its a very great sin to rejoice in iniquity, 1 Cor. 13. 6. It Is a very
diabolical thing to be delighted to see others fall into sin, or into misery.
It cannot stand with grace.

It Is Satan's great work and design. Now he that is proud in heart, is easily
tempted to this sin.

4. It inclines a man to slight and contemn all other men, and to think very
meanly of them, vid. Phil. 2, 3. there is a duty laid down, To esteem others
better then our selves, and there is the way to attain unto it, viz. lowliness
of mind. Vid. Luke 18. 11. proud Pharisee.

5. Pride keeps a man from seeing or confessing his own sins, errors, etc. Yea,
it will put a man upon the maintaining of them: it hinders a man from
retreating, or retracting any evil which he has done. Humility will make a man
acknowledge what is amiss in himself, and recede from it presently. Pride
keeps off conviction.

Luther would have retracted his Doctrine of consubstantiation, but he was
afraid all his other Doctrines would have been called in question. There was a
little want of humility. Had David been proud, when Nathan told him, thou art
the man, he had not confessed.

6. Pride of heart will make a man content to arrogate to himself, or to have
others ascribe to him, that which is not indeed in him. It is the voice of a
God, and not of a man. Proud Herod will swallow and digest that flattery from
the people, Acts 12. 22, 23. It Is a great sin for a man to think of himself
better then he is, or to desire that others should do so. It Is a sin for a man
to think himself something, when he is nothing. Magus. Acts 8. 9.

7. It will hinder a man from doing and performing those duties he owes to
others, whether Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors. He will not honor his
superiors, not condescend to do those offices to inferiors, which he ought.
Should I stoop to such a one as he is? so mean, so poor?

He will not make himself equal to men of low degree, Romans 12. 6. In giving
honors prevent one another.

8. He will not bear the least indignity, or injury from another, but will
revenge himself. Should I put up such a wrong from such a mean hand? etc. I
will make him know who I am, vid. Col. 3. 12, 13. No forbearing one another, if
there be not humbleness of mind. Haman will destroy Mordecai, if he give not
Cap and knee.

9. He will never be so thankful as he ought, for mercies received, either from
God or man: A proud person judges all of debt, which comes in, either from God
or man. Low thoughts of our selves, is that which makes us thankful for
mercies. Lord, what am I, etc. 2 Samuel 7. 18. this made him thankful, Genesis 32.
10. Psalm. 8. 4, 5. Lord, what is man?

10. It makes men contentious, Prove. 13. 10. Its ill living by a proud man.

11. It will create discontent and risings of heart against Gods hand upon him.
Humility makes the heart quiet, Levit. 10. 9. Psalm. 39. 10. Pride thinks all
cross providence injurious, and therefore frets and rages, Paul's humility
learned him contentment. Phil. 4. 11, 12.

It brings upon men much anger, many judgments. Pride has trouble.

1. God hates them, Prove. 6. 16, 17.

2. God resists and fights against the proud person, vid. Jam. 4. 6. (...). God
has determined, that every knee shall bow unto him, Isa. 45. 23. that all
things and persons should be levelled and laid flat, that he alone may be
exalted. Now the proud person will not stoop, therefore God is resolved to make
war with him, to set himself in battle array, to bring his Armies against
him, to constrain him to subjection; as the lightning does break in pieces that
which resists, so does God. Vid. Esa. 2. 12, 13, and 11. 17.

Explication. This is a sad judgment, to have God an adversary. Vid. Prove. 5.
25. God overthrows the house of the proud. All men are enemies to the proud
man: His hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him. Though all
Creatures resisted him, yet if God take his part, his condition were safe; but
God is more against him then man. God resists his person, and God resists his
services, etc.

2. Pride is the ready way to blast all your excellencies. It either removes,
or brings a Absalom proud of his hair.
Cloud upon every precious thing which God has given you. There is but a few
steps between pride and destruction, Prove. 16. 18. It is Many have lost their
wits and memories by pride. God strikes men, in that which they set highest,
usually.
the grave of every thing which is precious, Isa. 3. 24. To be proud of beauty,
of parts, of graces, is the way to lose them, etc. Vid. Ezekiel. 16. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. see her sin, verse. 15. Pride, this stripped her of all. God has resolved
to stain, and mar the pride of all glory, Isa. 23. 9. Pride will moath-eat
your Garments, and rust all your brightness.

3. Pride, it is venenum omnium virtutum and recte factorum. It deprives a man
of the benefit and comfort of every good thing which he does or has.

Austin says, Magis placet Deo humilitas in malis factis, quam superbia in
bonis. God would rather have Paul to be buffetted with Satan, than to be proud
of his visions, 2 Cor. 12. 7. He that is humbled after an act of profaneness,
is better then he that is proud of an act of piety. As our Savior says of the
Hypocrite, He has his reward, Matthew. 6. 5, 6. his ostentation and pride,
bereaves him of the wages he might have of his work. A Servant that is humble,
though he do not his work so well, is better than he that is excellent at
working, and puffed up with pride. Vid. Luke 18. the proud Pharisee, and lowly
Publican. Vid. verse. 14. Solomon prefers humility in a low condition before
pride, in a higher condition. Prove. 16. 19.

2d Motive, From the excellency of Humility.

1. Its an excellent grace in it self.

2. Precious Promises are made to it.

1. In it self its very excellent. It is a very choice part of the Image of
Christ. Pride and self-admiring is the chief part of the Image of Satan.
Initium Peccati, superbia: the Devils sin was pride, he would be equal to God,
Ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5. Diabolus superbus hominem superbientem produxit
ad mortem. Humility is Christ's Image, I am lowly in heart. It is the Ornament
of all other parts and graces, its the varnish of graces, and the beauty of
Christianity. A humble Christian is a lovely Christian. Pride brings contempt
upon rich parts, humility casts glory upon them. It is the preserver and keeper
of all other excellencies in a man, its the basis which upholds all. A building
set upon a good bottom, will stand, when high Turrets which stand upon Sand
will fall. The Devils pride destroyed all his excellency: had they been humble,
they had saved all, as well as the other Angels. Humility is the lock and key
of all the rest.

Humility is the first, second, and third grace, as he said of elocution in
Rhetoric. Its lovely to Men, to God. It makes a man do any thing, bear any
thing. It makes men fear Gods frowns, etc. Mich. 6. 8. It will carry a man
through scorns, 2 Samuel 6. 22. It Is the totum postulatum of a Christian.

2. God has made many excellent promises to it.

1. That he will teach them, Psalm. 25.

9. Humility is one necessary qualification for instruction. Proud men scorn to
be learners. The Philosophers Scholar must be Humilis. Its a great happiness
when God undertakes to teach a man, he has skill, and he has ability, he can
give men a heart to learn, Vid. Isa. 54. 13. The reason why men learn no more
by God word, by his works, is, because God does not teach them, and God
refuses to instruct them, because they are so proud. Men will not instruct
proud persons, no more will God.

2. God has promised to hear their cries, Psalm. 9. 12. He forgets not the
cry of the humble. Proud beggars are usually answered with scorn and denial, so
are proud Christians. Proud person will not receive Commands from God, and God
will not receive Petitions from them. It Is a certain Rule, God will receive
prayers from none who will not receive Commands and Precepts from him. It Is a
singular favor, to have our prayers granted, and a discouraging thing to have
our suits rejected: what Complaints the people of God have made, when they have
been refused, vid. Lam. 3. init. and many sad complaints in the Psalms to this
purpose: and much gladness of heart, does the receiving of our Petitions,
create in our hearts, Psalm. 66. 20.
in the saddest troubles. Humility prepares Audience, Pride puts a bar in the
way; fasting and prayer are found together, fasting notes Humility.

3. God has promised to respect them, and to dwell with them. Vid. Psalm. 138.
6. and Isa. 66. 2. God despises the proud, and looks upon them afar off.

They look upon all others at a distance, and so God looks upon them, vid. 1 Samuel 15. 17. Gregory upon those words, Magnus mihi fuisti quia despectus tibi;
at nunc quia magnus tibi es mihi despectus es. It Is a singular happiness to
have respect and good looks from God, to have communion with him. This is our
Heaven upon Earth. This the Servants of God have begged, and mourned for the
want of it. Humility draws Gods eye.

4. God promises to fill them, Jam. 4. 6. Parisiensis calls Humility Vacuum
Spirituale. Air will descend, water ascend to prevent a Vacuum.
Now Nature admits no Vacuum, but fills it presently. God will not suffer the
humble heart to be unfilled, vid. Luke 1. 52. The rain which falls upon the
Mountains, falls down into the Valleys. Your Valleys and low grounds have the
richest crops; your humble Christians have fullest souls, high Mounts are
barren, etc.

3d. Motive. In Nature we see humility; your fullest ear hangs lowest, and your
fruitfullest boughs. Slicker ears stand highest etc.

2d thing is, To lay down some directions or helps, to attain to this grace.

A Medicine of these seven Ingredients.

1. Often and serious reflecting upon our mean condition, we are but animated
earth: we have a low Original, Houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust.
Job 14. 17, 18. This weighed Abraham to the ground, Genesis 18. 27. If men would
look to the hole of the pit, etc. Isa. 51. 1.
they would not sore so high. A piece of red clay, etc. Who am I Lord, and what
is my Fathers house? this kept David down, 2 Samuel 7. 18. We have black feet:
The Peacock looks on her feet.

2d Meditation of our base condition by sin. This has put us lower then the
dust; envenomed, poisoned, infected souls, full of all Diseases. This was that
which made Paul humble, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a persecutor, etc. A Christian
would say, I that have so many diseases upon me, and should I be proud?

3d Meditation upon the condition which death will put us in. We must say to
corruption, thou art my Father, Job 17. 13, 14. a moatheaten Garment, a rotten
thing, Job 13. 28. the body must breath out to dust, etc. Charles the fifth had
his Winding Sheet for a Standard to keep him humble. If that cry in Isa. 40. 6.
were more in our ears, it would make us stoop.

4th. The vain, frail nature of all outward things, Jam. 1. 10, 11. That is the
receipt which he gives.

5th Consideration, That all our good is imperfect: We want more then we have,
maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus. We have
more deformity then beauty, etc. we have more worst then best, more chafe then
wheat.

6th Consideration, That all the good we have is received, 1 Cor. 4. 7. for a
man to be proud of a borrowed suit, etc. is ridiculous, Romans 11. 18. It grows
not in our own Garden, we cannot say, Is not this great Babylon which I have
builded, God has found materials and tools to work also, Deuteronomy. 8. 14. 17, 18.

7th Consideration, Of the account which must be given for what we have, what
little improvement has been made, either of riches health, strength, parts,
graces, etc.

8. That others have an equal share of all excellencies, and are instruments of
Gods honor, and the good of men, as well as we our selves: we are not alone,
other Stars shine as bright as we do.

Mary Wolnoth, October the 8th, 1648. (...).
Matthew. 14. 23. He went up into a Mountain apart to pray.
(...).

IN this Chapter we have several things considerable, viz.

1. The History or Narrative of John Baptists death, by the hand of Herod,
verse. 1. ad 13. wherein we have, 1. The occasion of this History, verse. 1. 2.
Herod hearing the report of the mighty acts of Christ, his Conscience smites
him presently with thoughts, that this was certainly John Baptist, whom he had
lately executed.

Note, Sins formerly committed, are oftentimes brought to sad remembrance, upon
the awaking of conscience. Conscience, though it be long silent, yet will speak
at last, and recoyl upon men for sins, long since committed.

2. The History it self largely set down, verse. 3. ad 13. wherein we have,

1. The ground of Herod's opposition and persecution, verse. 4, 5. Herein is that
of the Prophet fulfilled, Isa. 29. 21. John Baptist stood between Herod and his
lust, this makes Herod incensed against him.

2. The reason of the former forbearance of his execution, verse. 5.

3. The proximate occasion of his death, verse. 6, 7, 8.

4. The manner of his death, verse. 10, 11.

5. The care of his Disciples, for his dead body, verse. 12.

2. The miraculous feeding of 5000. men, besides Women and Children, with a
small quantity of provision, verse. 13. ad 22. He had healed their bodies, and
now he feeds their bodies.

3. The great miracle of asswaging the tempestuous Sea, which had so much
distressed his Disciples, verse. 2 2. ad 34. wherein we might observe many
things.

4. The miraculous healing of diverse diseased persons in the Land of
Gennesaret, by the touch of his Garment, verse. 34. ad finem.

The words which I have read, fall within the third general part. And they are
a discovering of the employment of our Savior, in the absence of the
multitudes of his Disciples. He went up into a Mountain apart to pray.

In which we have two things.

1. The Act of Devotion, prayer.

2. The accommodation for this duty, He went up into a Mountain apart. Christ
had several places of prayer, sometimes a Mountain, sometimes the desert, etc.
Any place is fit for prayer, if the heart be in frame, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Put them
together, and this is the lesson.

Doct. That our Lord Jesus Christ was very frequent in the duty of private and
solitary prayer.

He was frequent in public prayer, and other public Ordinances, witness his
frequent resorting to the Synagogues, Matthew. 12. 9. Mar: 1. 21. insomuch, that
Luke 4. 16. its said, ^^at He went as his custom was, into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day. He did not neglect the public; nor did he omit the private
neither, as will appear by several Texts of Scripture besides this, Mark 6. 46.
where the same History is related, Luke 5. 16. when the same of his miracles
began to be noysed abroad, he withdrawes himself to private prayer, Luke 6. 12.
when he ordained his 12 Apostles, he spends the whole night before in private
prayer. And before his passion, he was much in this duty, so all the
Evangelists agree, Matthew. 26. 36. 39. 42. 44. Luke 22. 32. 44, 45. John 17. per
totum. His life was a life of prayer.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall,

1. Show why Christ prayed at all.

2. Why he prayed private^y?

1. Christ did not pray in regard of want, as we do, we are always wanting
something, therefore have constant need of prayer, but our Savior wanted
nothing, Col. 1. 19. all fullness was in him, fullness for himself, and fullness
for others; fullness of the Vessel, and fullness of the Fountain. He indeed took
our nature upon him, and so our wants. He did not pray, because he wanted; but
because he would pray, therefore he would want.

2. Christ prayed in reference unto precept and command Prayer is a duty
enjoined of God unto all Christians. Its a special piece of Gods worship. Its
an Act of Adoration. Prayer gives unto God the glory of many of his Attributes,
viz. of his wisdom, Power, Providence, Omniscience. And if we should be under
no wants, yet we should pray. Its our sin, that we look more at necessity, then
at duty. Now in this respect Christ prayed. He being made man under the Law, it
was necessary, that he should stoop to every command thereof.

3. Christ prayed to honor prayer. Prayer is a very great privilege, as well
as a duty. Though there were neither necessity to move us, nor command to
enforce us, yet the very dignity and Prerogative were enough, that dust and
ashes should be admitted into such familiar acquaintance, and converse with
God, this is a great advancement. Jesus Christ he honored prayer by performing
it, but we are exceedingly honored by prayer. Christ therefore, to preach up
the worth of this duty, was so frequent in it, to make us in love with it.

4. Christ was, Os Ecclesiae, the Mediator of the Church, our intercessor and
high Priest, ergo; prayer was a very principal part of his mediatorious office
and work. He was no less meritorious, when he lay praying in the Garden, than
when he hung upon the cross of his passion. There are two parts of Christ's
Priestly Office; Satisfaction, Intercession. He began his Intercession on
earth, he continues it still in Heaven. There is great difference between his
prayer in Heaven, and his prayer on Earth. That is only the prayer of
intercession, this was also the prayer of supplication, vid. John 17. I pray
for them whom thou have given me out of the World, etc.

5. Christ prayed for our Imitation, ut Magister noster, that he might teach us
to pray. Audis Christum orantem? says Austin, Disce orare, Ideo Christus
oravit, ut doceret te crare. As the Apostle speaks of his sufferings, that they
were for our imitation, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps,
1 Pet. 2. 21. Hereupon, one well descants upon this; Orat miserecordia? Tacet
miseria? Orat innocentia? silet impietas? Orat is qui non fecit peccatum? silet
peccator? Orat medicus? cessat agrotus? Orat Judex ut parcat? and silet reus?
The Physician prays, to teach the Patient his duty: the Judge prays, that he
may excite the guilty and condemned sinner, to do his duty. Mercy is upon her
knees, to teach misery to bow. -- Vid. Luke 11. 1.

6. Christ prayed, to sanctify his other performances, his preaching, his
miracles. Our Savior knew well, that its prayer which renders other things
efficacious. Hence it is, that we find prayer following his preaching, and his
miracles. His preaching, so it is in Luke 5. 16. Vid. verse. 1. it was after his
preaching, and so after his miracles; so in the Text, he had wrought a great
work in the sight of the people, and afterward he betakes himself to prayer.
Our Savior would not have, either his Sermons, or miracles to fall to the
ground, ergo, he prays, when he ordained his Disciples, and sent them abroad
to preach the Gospel, he spends a whole night in prayer beforehand, Luke 6. 12.
Our Savior was much in public works, Ergo, frequent in prayer. Every Creature
of God is sanctified by the word and prayer, says the Apostle. Christians
miscarry in other performances ordinarily for want of this duty. The Seed
sown, does not prosper for want of the watring of prayer.

2. Why Christ used private prayer.

1. Obedience to divine Command. God has enjoined Christians, not only the
public, but the private also. Families apart, and their Wives apart, Zech. 12.
12, 13. Closer-prayer is commanded, as well as Church-prayer, Matthew. 6. 6.
Enter into thy Closet. As this made him pray, so it made him to pray privately,
to honor private prayer.

2. Christ goes apart to pray, that he might not be observed. He has given
others a Rule, and he walks by it himself, Matthew. 6. 6. Our Savior did
earnestly despise and decline vain glory. He did many miracles in private, that
they might not be known, and he prays in private, that he might not be seen of
men, that he might avoid all ostentation, and shows of popular applause.

3. That he might not be interrupted in the duty. Our Savior would not be
disturbed in prayer, therefore he go^s apart: secrecy is an advantage, in
regard of distraction.

It is granted, that our Savior could prevent distractions, when he was in the
greatest concourse of people. As he was never simply alone, because the Father
was with him; so neither was he simply in Company: but because men are not able
to avoid disturbance, when they are with others, therefore he sets them the
corporal way.

4. To set us an Example, that we should not content our selves with public
prayers only, but should also be employed in the private also.

Use of this point, is threefold.

(1) Consolation. (2) Instruction. (3) Exhortation.
1. Its great comfort to a Christian, that Christ prayed so much. All his
prayers, both public and private, are for our consolation. He prayed not so
much for himself, as for us. The Incoms of his prayers are exceeding precious,
and advantageous to Christians: we reap the benefit of his prayers on earth to
this day, and so shall all the servants of God to the end of the World. Some of
his prayers are recorded those are full of comfort, as that in John 17. how
much is there in that prayer: others are only generally related, the duty is
mentioned, the words are not mentioned. Its a comfort to us.

1. When we go to pray, that our prayers shall be welcome to him. He that prayed
so much on Earth for us, will gladly accept our Petitions, when they are
preferred; and the rather, because his work now in Heaven is to present our
prayers to the Father. We may come boldly therefore to the Throne of Grace,
Heb. 4. 16. He lives for ever to make intercession Heb. 7. 25.

2. It comforts us in the assurance of being taught, and instructed by him how
to pray. He that was so often speaking to God for us on Earth, will not deny his
spirit of prayer and supplication to us, when we ask it; and this the rather we
may be persuaded of, because of his word of promise, that is gone out of his
mouth. He that is the spirit of prayer, is the spirit of the Son. God has sent
forth the spirit of his Son into their hearts, Gal. 4. 6. He taught his
Disciples to pray, Luke 11. 1, 2.

3. When we are interrupted, and taken off by any hand of God from this duty of
prayer; if sickness, weakness, be upon us, etc. It Is our comfort, that Christ
was so frequent in this work for us: the virtue of his prayers are in force to
this very day. It Is a comfort, when we are hindered in prayer, that the Saints
are a praying for us, not the Saints in Heaven, Abraham is ignorant of us, Isa.
63. 16. How much more, that we have so many prayers of Christ on the file for
us.

4. Against the infirmity of our prayers, its a ground of comfort, our prayers
are much soyled, many deformities are upon them, but all the prayers Christ put
up were pure and holy: ours are smoke, Christ's were pure incense.

5. When we are in trouble, when the Disciples are rossed on the Sea, Christ is
a praying in the Text.

2d Use, Instruction: teaches, that Jesus Christ was a very faithful Mediator
and High Priest. He was careful of both parts of his Priestly Office, not only
of satisfaction, but of Intercession also. He was the Churches Spokesman, and
he performed it faithfully for them. Not a day passed over his head, in which
he did not make mention of his Church unto God by prayer. He did constantly
pour out tears, breath out sighs and prayers for them. There was not the
least piece of his Office in any kind, but he faithfully performed it.

3d Use. Exhortation. He that says he abides in Christ, ought himself so to
walk, as Christ 1 John 2. 6
walked. Let us imitate his example in the duty of private prayer. I fear this
duty is much neglected by Christians in our days. I fear the public swallows
up the private. Shall our Master pray in private, and shall we neglect it? It
is not enough, that you pray in your Families with others, or that you pray in
the Church with the Congregation. Christ did this, and yet he had his private
prayers besides. The servants of God, they have been careful of this. Peter, he
goes to the housetop to prayer, Acts 10. 9. Daniel he had his closet-prayers,
Dan. 6. 10. it had been his manner, so to do. So had David Psalm. 119. 164.
Isaac, Genesis 24. 63. Jonah he had his private prayer, in the belly of the Whale.
Chap. 2. 1. and generally, all the Saints, Masters, Parents, Servants,
Children, etc. every one apart, Vid. Zech. 12. 12, 13. and Matthew. 6. 6. it is
enjoined. Governors of Families must do it themselves, and persuade and call
upon their Children and Servants to do it, particularly, morning and evening.

I would urge this by some Motives.

Motive 1. The advantage of this secret prayer would be considered, besides all
the benefits of Prayer in general, secret prayer has these, viz.

1. The soul has more freedom and liberty than it has in the public; many
sins are to be confessed, which cannot so well and conveniently be done in the
public.

It is not so convenient, not is there such opportunity of ripping up the
particular secret sins of the soul in public, but the Closet gives us
convenience to unbare all, even the most secret sins. The soul may without
shame or fear, etc. discover all. And so for the wants for soul and body, they
may more particularly and with greater freedom, be represented to the Lord in
secret, then they can elsewhere. In public, perhaps many a Petition is
omitted, and many a consession which is suitable to our private necessities.
The Minister in the Church, and the Master in the Family, cannot meet so
particularly with all my necessities, etc. as I can do in private, etc.

2. Private prayer has not so many occasions of distraction and interruption
as the public. The heart can keep more close to God. In public there are many
aversions, etc. many objects upon which the eye fastens. Many noyses after
which the ear too much runs, etc. the irreverence and vain carriage of others,
are a great cooling to the affections of those, who are good, many times in the
public, etc. one gazing eye disturbs many, etc. the demeanors of many is such
in the public, that their presence is occasion of much hurt to those, who
would have their hearts fixed, by their whisperings and talkings, and
wanderings, etc. they take off from the fervency of others; or else by the
garish attire, etc.

3. In private, the duty may be performed, when the heart is in the best frame;
for the public, its not so much in our power, to undertake it at this to that
instant, when the heart is best turned, and most elevated. It is true, we
should always have our hearts tuned for prayer, etc. but they are not, etc.
for the public you must pray, when others call, etc.

4. In private prayer, we have greater advantage of learning to pray; for then
we exercise our own gifts, etc. in public, we only hear others, exercise their
parts, etc. we are more passive in the public, more active in the private.

Motive 2. Private Prayer is an Argument of greater love to the duty. A man may
publicly pray, who has not love to it, out of other respects, as to gain
credit and applause, etc. but to perform the duty in a corner, when no eye sees
us, etc. this evidenceth more affection. And its a greater Argument of
sincerity, etc. That man's heart is not right in his public devotion, who is
very seldom, or never in private devotion. Ille dolet vere qui sine test, etc.
He prays but hypocritically in the Church, or in the Family with others, who
neglects praying alone. Vid. Matthew. 6. 5, 6. An hypocrite is all for the
public, little for the private: sincerity is equally for both. A Christians
heart is what it is when he is alone.

Motive 3. He that neglects private prayer, shall be neglected in his public
prayer. If thou will not call upon God in secret, God will not hear thee in
public. Want of private duties, is the reason why the heart is so dead under
the public, etc. Ordinarily, that man or woman's heart is best in public, who
is most frequent in private. Private duties fit the heart for public, etc. If
thou will carefully call upon God in private, God will enable thee to serve him
in public.

Motive 4. Private prayer is more our own, then public is, its personal
service. Its true, in some sense, public prayer is personal; but private and
secret is more personal. A man in the public, tenders up Confessions and
P^titions, and Thanksgivings, by the mouth of another, but in private by his
own mouth.

Motive 5. God has usually let out himself most to his people, when they have
been alone at the Throne of Grace. There have been more meltings, and greater
manifestations of God. Peter when he was alone on the housetop, sees the
vision, etc. Acts 10. 11, 12. Daniel when he was alone a praying, has the
Angel disparcht to him, with a Message that he was greatly beloved, etc. Dan.
9. 20. 21, 22, 23. many Saints have had their assurance sealed to them, when
they have been in their Closets a praying, and meditating.

Motive 6. There is more of the power of godliness in private prayer: the
public may be only in form, the private is more in the power and life.

Let all these things move you to this duty.

Object. 1. I have no time to pray, I am a servant, etc. my time is not my own,
etc. my Masters business will not allow me.

Sol. 1. I would not stay with such a Master, if thou be a servant that
can remove, etc.

2. It Is no neglecting of thy Masters business, to take a little time daily for
prayer, etc. and other duties. Its Gods, not thy Masters.

3. Rather take time from sleep, then omit this duty. God will, I warrant thee,
bless two hours sleep better to thee, than 12. hours, if thou take it from
thy sleep or recreation, to give to him.

2. Object. I cannot pray.

Sol. 1. Beg of God to teach thee, he has promised his Spirit to them that ask.

2. God does not so much look for eloquence, as sincerity in prayer. Thou can
smite thy breast, and say, God be merciful to me a sinner, etc.

3. Make use of other helps of prayer, till thou have attained ability to pray.

4. Thou can manage thy worldly calling, as well as another; why then can
thou not pray as well as others? It is because thou do not regard this, so
well as the other.

FINIS.
Mary Wolnoth, October the 15. 1648. (...).
Matthew. 20. 34. init. Jesus being moved with compassion, touched their Eyes.
(...).

IN this Chapter, we have four things considerable.

1. A Parable of Laborers sent forth into the Vineyard. This Parable is 1.
Propounded, verse. 1. ad 16.

2. Applied, verse. 16. The scope of it, is to overthrow the Doctrine of merit,
and to establish the gift of salvation, and eternal life upon the mere mercy
and free grace of God. Eternal life is not given unto any for his working; it
does not flow from any good in the person receiving, but from the free love of
God in Christ, choosing unto holiness and salvation, whom he pleases. It is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy,
that is the Apostles determination of this Question, after a serious debate,
Romans 9. 16. Eternal death, that is of merit, but eternal life is of grace, Romans
6. ult.

1. A premonition, or Prediction of the Passion and sufferings of Christ at
Jerusalem, verse. 17. ad 20.

2. And of his Resurrection from the dead: the Doctrine of the Cross is not
easily submitted unto, therefore there is necessity, that it should be often
preached. Our Savior ever and anon, was preaching the Doctrine of his
sufferings to his Disciples, as Matthew. 16. 21. Matthew. 17. 22. and in this
Chapter again, he takes up the same Argument. They dreamed of an Earthly
Kingdom, and earthly honors, therefore our Savior preaches so frequently of
his sufferings, to take them off from such a conceit, and to prepare them for
Trial. And he does not only foretell of his suff^rings, but of his Conquest
also, his Resurrection, verse. 19. We shall find ordinarily, that when his
death is mentioned, his Resurrection also is spoken of, as in those places
before cited, Matthew. 16. 21. Mat. 17. 23. and here in this place, Mark 8. 31.
Mar. 9. 31. Mar. 10. 34.

Its very profitable and necessary for the Ministers of Christ, when they
preach of sufferings, to add something concerning the issue and consequence of
sufferings: when we speak of Death, its good to mention the Resurrection also.
The Spirits of the best Christians, will soon sink under sufferings, if they be
not acquainted with the victory they shall have over sufferings. We find in
the Scripture, that when the Apostle spoke any thing of the Cross, there is
usually mention made of the good issue of it, as Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9. there is
the Doctrine of the Cross. And verse. 10, 11. there is the Doctrine of the
Resurrection. So 1 Pet. 4. 12. there is the cross; Verse. 13, 14. there you have
the Crown also.

3. A solemn charge given to the Disciples, against affectation of Dominion,
and pre-eminence one over another, verse. 20. ad 29. where you have,

1. The occasion of it, viz. A Request made by the Mother of Zebedees Children,
for her two Sons, James and John, verse. 20. ad 25. It was their ignorance and
fault, that they would not be beat^n off from the thoughts of a worldly
Kingdom, etc. This gave occasion to the other 10. Disciples, to be angry with
the two Brethren.

2. The urging of the thing it self, verse. 25. ad 29. our Savior solemnly
calls them together, and gives them a charge against any such ambition.

4. A great miraculous Cure, wrought by our Savior, upon two blind men, in
the sight of a great multitude which followed him, verse. 29. ad finem. They
hearing that Jesus, who had done so many miracles, passed by, send out their
cries after him. The multitude rebuke them, that they should hold their peace:
grace grows stronger by opposition, the more they are rebuked, the louder they
cry. Their prayers and importunity stop the Lord Jesus in his way: he calls
them to him, reasons with them, desires to know why they called him. And upon
the hearing of their desire, grants their request, He had compassion on them,
and touched their eyes, etc.

In that part of the Verse which I have read, we have two things.

1. An Act done, (...), that shows the miracle, Christ could heal with a touch
of his hemme sometimes, Matthew. 14. 36.

It shows his condescension, that he would touch them, mean persons, Mat. 8.
3. the Leper Mat. 8. 15. the Fever, Mat. 7. 33. deaf, and the impediment of
speech, Luke 22. 51. Malchus his ear.

Note, The least touch of Christ's finger, will cure perfectly the greatest
disease of soul, or of body. If Christ do but touch the hand, the fever is
gone, the eyes are opened, etc. If the woman that had the bloody issue for
twelve years, do but touch his Garment, she finds a present cure, Mark 5. 25.
etc. when the Disciples are overwhelmed with fear at Christ's Transfiguration, a
touch of their Masters hand revives them, Matthew. 17. 7. When Daniel is in his
Agony, overwhelmed, a very touch of the Son of man strengthens him, Dan. 10.
18, 19. The hard heart is broken with a touch of Christ's finger; the dead heart
is quickened, if Christ does but lay his hand upon it: the troubled conscience
is pacified and quieted, if Christ put but his finger in at the hole of the
door: the deaf ear is unstopped, the stammering tongue speaks plainly, the
frozen heart is thawed, etc. If Christ do but touch the bier, the dead body is
raised, Luke 7. 14.

Nay, Our Savior cures with less then a touch. His very word heals any
Disease of soul or body. He cast out Devils with his word, a Legion out of one
man, Thou unclean Spirit come out of him, Matthew. 8. 16. He rebuked the fever
with his word, Luke 4. 39. The Noblemans Son, who lay at point of death,
laboring of a Fever, was healed with a word, speaking at a distance, John 4.
50. 52. He has absolute power over all Diseases of body, and all spiritual
maladies, and when he says, Go, they go, when he says, Be removed, they
depart immediately.

Nay, He can cure with the glance of his eye, which is less then his word.
When Peter's heart was grown hard with sin: first denies, and then denies with
Oaths and curses that he knew not the man: Christ did but cast his very eye
upon him, and his heart relented presently, Luke 22. 61. As the very look of
Christ can make the Earth to tremble, and his enemies to languish, so the least
glance of his eye cures all Diseases. As he can kill with his touch, so can he
cure with his touch. All Job's troubles, was nothing but a touch of Gods hand,
Job 19. 21. He did but touch Jacob's thigh, and it was out of joint presently,
Genesis 32. 25.

The touch of his hand sets the Hills a smoking, Psalm. 104. 32. so his touch
revives, comforts, strengthens. He did but put his finger through the hole of
the door, and the languishing lovesick Church was comforted, Cant. 5. 4, 5. He
did but touch Jeremiahs mouth, and he was emboldened against all the
contradictions of men, Ier. 1. 9. He did but touch the Prophet Esays lips, and
his iniquity was purged, and his guilt removed, Isay 6. 7.

1. Use. We have here a notable and clear proof of Christ's Divinity from this
passage. He that can open blind eyes with the touch of his finger, is no less
then God undoubtedly, his touch is omnipotent.

2d Use. It is a ground of exceeding great comfort and joy unto the Servants of
Christ, who labor under many spiritual Infirmities. Its the condition of the
Servants of God, to be exercised under many foul maladies; they have blind
minds, dead hearts, cold affections, feavorish heats of inordinate and worldly
love, they use many Medicines, and find not healing. Well, do not despait, do
not despond, Christ has a healing hand, his very touch can cure you prefectly
of all; the very tip of his finger, the very breath of his mouth, the very
glance of his eyes can make your flesh whole. Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean, says the Leper. I will, says Christ, be thou clean, and
immediately, his Leprosy was cleansed, Matthew. 8. 3. If he do but touch your
eyes, they will be opened; if he touch your tongue, it will be untied; if he
touch your hearts, they will relent; what though you have layn very long, and
in your own thoughts, be ever at the point of death, yet his touch, his word
can recover you. Jesus Christ never sent any diseased persons away, for want of
power, he never said to any, the Disease is too far gone; no, though they lay
gasping for life, yet he wrought their recovery.

Be strengthened therefore, and you have the more reason to be so, if you
consider, that he is not only able, but willing too; for he has compassion in
him toward those, who seek to him in their misery, which is the second part of
the Text.

2. The impulsive cause of this act, viz. his own goodness (...). The word
comes from (...), or (...), which signifies the bowels, (...). Phil. 2. 1.
bowels of mercies, hence comes the verb, (...), to show compassion, Intima
miserecordia tangor. It answers the Hebrew word, rachamim, which signifies
mercy proceeding from the bowels. And indeed, that's true mercy, which springs
out of this Fountain, it must be spun out of the bowels, or else it is not true
charity. There may be hand-charity, where there is no heart-charity. Therefore
ye have the expression, of drawing out of the soul to the hungry, Isay 58. 10.
Though we do satisfy the soul of the afflicted, yet if that do not spring from
our very soul, it is not mercy, but hypocrisy. The Apostle speaks of shutting
up the bowels from the poor, Col. 3. 12. Though the doors be opened, to take in
the wanderers, and the hand and purse opened to relieve the needy and
distressed, yet unless the bowels also be opened, it falls short of true mercy.

This is enough for the word. The Doctrine Doct.
is this: The Lord Jesus Christ, when he was upon the Earth, was exceeding
compassionate toward those who stood in need of mercy. He had bowels of
compassion toward those who were in misery. He was very pitiful and tender
hearted toward the distressed.

1. Toward the souls of men, he showed compassion, vid. Mat. 9. 36, 37, 38. He
sets his Disciples a praying, when he saw how they were necessitated and
distressed, for want of Preachers, to open to them the way of life, his soul
was grieved for them. They perhaps had no compassion toward themselves;
perhaps, thought themselves better without a Preacher, than with a Preacher, as
many Congregations in this City, but Christ had compassion toward them: and in
the very next Chapter, sends out his twelve Apostles, to preach the word to
them for their salvation. This is the very first Commission which Christ gives
them, to preach. His very bowels yearned within him, to see souls perish for
want of instruction. Their ordinary Teachers which they had, the Priests and
Levites, and the Pharisees were as good as no Shepherds: therefore Christ out
of mere compassion, ordains another Ministry for them.

1. The spiritual distempers of their hearts, was a great grief to his spirit,
Mark 3. 5. He went up and down preaching in their Synagogues, and teaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, conferring privately upon occasion, with persons about
their souls.

2. Toward their bodies, he was full of compassion.

(1) Whenever any came to him, for any cure of any malady upon himself, or
any of his; his bowels were moved, and he healed them, as these blind men in
the Text: the Leper comes to Christ, Mark 1. 41. Christ is moved with
compassion toward him. We do not read of any that desired cure, that were
rejected. Vid. Mat. 15. 30.

(2) We find many times, that even undesired, he did acts of mercy to the
distressed. Vid. Matthew. 15. 32. he spreads a Table for them, was loath they
should faint by the way, Luke 7. 12, 13. meeting with a Widow of Naim,
following her only Son to the grave, his bowels roll within him, and without
being desired, he raises him up. At the pool of Bethesda, seeing a poor
helpless Cripple, who had layn long there 38. years
for cure, but could not prevail with any to throw him into the water, when the
Angel stirred it, he applies himself to him, and heales him, John 5. 5, 6. So
Luke 10. 33. when he sees the wounded man by sprawling in his blood, of his own
accord, he goes and takes him up, and makes provision for him, he is the
compassionate Samaritan.

(3) We find, that he shed tears, when men had incurred irrevocable misery
upon themselves. That in Luke 19. 41. etc. Jerusalem had let slip the
opportunities of her healing. This pierced his soul.

(...) The Reasons of it are,

1. Vinculum Naturae, He was Goel our Kinsman, bone of our bone, and flesh of
our flesh, he being truly in our Nature, had a condolency and sympathy toward
our Nature. There is another ground of that sympathy and compassion, which
Christ has toward his own, viz. the mystical union. He is the head of the
mystical body; therefore he compassionates them. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? Identity of Nature works this compassion. All Creatures have a
compassion toward their own Nature. As the affections of Christ, viz his joy,
sorrow, etc. argue the truth of his humanity; so the truth of his humanity puts
out these affections Heb. 2. 17.
toward us.

2. Vinculum officii, It was suitable to that Office which Christ sustained,
and to that employment for which he came into the World. He was that great
Physician which was sent from Heaven, for the healing of men. He was that
Savior, who came to recover men out of their misery, therefore requisite, that
he should be moved with their misery. He came purposely to help fallen man out
of the pit: therefore he must reach his hand to them. He was that Shepherd, who
came to seek that which was lost. To bind up the broken hearted, to appoint to
them that mourn in Zion beauty for ashes, etc. Isa. 61. 1, 3. His work being to
save, to heal, to comfort, to restore, he could not but show compassion toward
Creatures, who wanted him.

3. Vinculum Doctrinae. To teach us compassion. To take away that cruelty which
we have in us. To put us upon the practice of mercy. Be ye merciful, for I am
merciful.

4. Vinculum experientiae. His own experience of misery. Non ignara mali
miseris succurrere disco. He felt the weight and burden of many miseries. All
the infirmities of our Nature, Christ was subject to, not personal infirmities*
etc. This the Apostle makes a ground of his compassion, Heb. 4. 15. He was a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53. 3.

1. Use. You who are the Servants of Christ, you may expect much more
compassion from him now. Heaven and glory, and the advancement of your head,
has not dried up the bowels of his compassion, nor made him mindful of your
sorrows. Though he be in glory, and so not capable of any sufferings; yet he
has a condolency toward them in their troubles. In all their afflictions he
was afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. vid. Heb. 4. 15. It Is an exceeding great mystery,
how Christ in glory can be touched with a sense of his Saints Infirmities, yet
it is a truth. He that did compassionate strangers, will he not much more pity
his Brethren? he that healed his enemies, will he not much more tender his
friends? Quid si ipse amasset? Quid mihi hic faciet Patri? when you seek to him
in your trials, Temptations, etc. you may expect to have his very bowels melt
over you. He will not look disdainfully and strangely upon you, who looked with
such a compassionate countenance upon all, who came to him when he was on
earth, He is a merciful High Priest still. Vid. Heb. 4. 15, 16. He will not
suffer you to lie for ever under your troubles: he will not leave you without
comfort, while your affliction lasts.

Object. I, but he delays and defers, I have been long afflicted, etc.

Sol. It Is not for want of compassion, but from abundance of compassion. He
would rather have you under trouble, than under sin. He is not so without
compassion, as to take away the Physic, till the Disease be cured. To remove
the Plaster, till the corruption be drawn out, etc. He is so compassionate,
that he will not let you be in sorrow one minute longer, than need requires.
And in the mean time, he stands weeping over you, etc.

1. Its an exceeding comfort under sorrow, and a good preparative to prepare us
for greater sufferings. Though we must be tossed more, and longer in the waves
of affliction, etc. Jesus Christ will hold our head, stroke our wounds,
strengthen our loins: When the Disciples are upon the tempestuous Sea, Jesus
Christ is a praying for them, Matthew. 14. 23, 24. And so is he continually,
while his Church is on this tempestuous Sea. He that despised not the cries and
sighs of men upon earth, how should he despise their cries who are the beloved
of his soul^ you may come into as much affliction as any other, passing through
the fire and water, Isa. 43. 2. but this is your comfort, Though you may want
compassions from men, you shall have bowels of mercy from Christ. In the day of
temptation and spiritual fear, then will he open his bowels to you, for he was
tempted, that he might succor those who are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. In the hour
of death, when you are struggling with those pains. He that prayed his Disciples
when himself was in that case, to tarry with him and watch, Mark 14. 34. will
show you the same compassion to watch with you. He was pitiful toward his
Disciples; when he saw them bewailing his absence, see how his compassions
roll, how his bowels work, John 14. init. you shall find him the same to daey
and for ever. 2. Its a great ground of lifting up the head under all your
troubles. He that commanded his Ministers to promise all the afflicted so much
in his Name, and he will make it good, Isa. 35. 3, 4. He will help you to bear
your burdens.

2. Its an encouragement to you, when you go to beg any thing of him by prayer.
A compassionate Savior will not cast out the desires of the afflicted. The
Apostle upon this very ground, invites you to come with boldness to his Throne,
Vid. Heb. 4. 15, 16. He was pitiful toward those who never made request to
him; healed many without a Petition, as you have heard; and will he be cruel,
and hard-hearted to those who cry after him? The prayer of the blind men here,
put such an impression upon him, that he can go no farther, till he has called
them to him; And he has now as much love to prayer as then, and is as sensible
of all your burdens, as he was of theirs. He will speak to the Father for you.

3. It gives you comfort to believe, that when you go to seek Reconciliation,
after any provocations and fallings out, that he will be easily entreated to
show you respect, and to turn his countenance toward you, and shine upon you.
Compassion will remove Clouds from his face, and forgive offenses, Vid. Mat.
18. 27. his compassion moves him to remission, Vid. Psalm. 78. 38. Harsh
dispositions keep anger long, but candid and tenderhearted persons are
persuaded.

He would have us to be so courteous, and compassionate as not to sleep in
anger: The Sun must not go down upon our wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. He will observe it
himself. Vid. Mich. 7. 18, 19.

2d Use. Exhortation.

(1) It should be an invitement to all sinners to come unto him. Lay your
diseased souls in the way of Christ, that when he travels, he may see them and
heal them. The first part of man's misery is, That he is fallen from happiness
to misery. The other is, that he is not willing to be helped out of his misery.
God calls, Christ entreats, the spirit knocks, but man is deaf. Jesus Christ
complains of man's untowardness, Ye will not come to me, that you may have life,
John 5. 40. If Jesus Christ were harsh, cruel, rugged as men are, something
might be said for your keeping off from him; but since he is so compassionate,
and ready to accept, why do you stand at a distance? you cannot please him
better, than to cast your distempered souls down at his feet. He will not send
you away with harsh answers, but will touch your blind eyes, and recover them;
your hard hearts, and soften them; your dead souls, and quicken them; he never
did, never will send any away, that come to him. He is compassionate toward
sinners, let not sinners be cruel to themselves. Try how tenderly he will deal
with you.

(2) Let us learn in this particular grace, to walk as Jesus Christ walked, 1
John 2. 6. Our Savior was full of bowels; if we be truly his Disciples, let us
walk in his steps, let his compassions move us to pity our distressed
Brethren, who are plunged into misery. This is a duty recommended in the
Scripture, in many places, Vid. 1 Pet. 3. 8. Col. 3. 12. Heb. 13. 3. And the
Servants of Christ have followed their Masters steps in this grace. They did
sympathize with others in their distress, Job professes it of himself, Job 30.
25. Hanani was thus affected, Neh. 1. init. Jeremiah, Cap. 9. 1. Isa. Cap. 22.
4. and generally, all the servants of God, let us be like affected.

1. Let us be compassionate to men's outward wants and miseries. 2. To their
inward and soul-miseries.
(1) To the bodily afflictions of men, never had this Doctrine need of more
serious urging, than in our days.

(1) Objects of Compassion, were never more, the necessities of men are great:
the Rod of God has layn long and heavily upon the Land, and upon our Brethren
abroad. It is the day of Jacobs trouble. Many rich Families impoverished. Those
who were clothed in Scarlet, embrace the Dunghill; never so many lean cheeks
and ragged bodies, etc. Poverty and want, as an armed man has seized upon
them, and sorrow as the pains of a travailing Woman, Prove. 6. 11. many
constrained to receive from others, who have been able to contribute formerly.

2. As Objects of pity are increased, so compassion and pity is much abated.
Men's bowels never more straightened than now. We have had a long winter of
affliction, and our spirits are frozen up by reason of it. War has made us
cruel and hard-hearted etc. Jehoram had a Disease in his bowels, 1 Chronicles. 21.
18. It Is an epidemical Disease in our times, never did men in affliction find
such incompassionatenes generally: the last day's sin is, unnaturalnes, or want
of natural affection, etc. 2 Timothy 3. init. This Doctrine therefore is necessary.

Two things I would speak to, in this Use.

(1) Show you how Christian compassion is to be showed.

(2) Give you some Motives to urge the practice.

1. Would you know how you must show compassion.

Consider these three things.
1. Kind language and condoling Carriage. 2. Fervent prayers, and Petitions for
them. 3. Actual relief and administering to their wants.
1. We must give kind and comfortable Language to them. So did our Savior. He
condoles with them. Jesus wept. John 11. 35. He washed their sores in his
tears, when he sees the lame man lie at the pool, he has friendly discourse
with him about his trouble. When these blind men come to him, he does friendly
discourse with them. What will you, that I do for you. As the Lord answers the
Angel that spoke to him about the troubles of the Church with good words, and
comfortable, Zech. 1. 13. This is that which Job blames his friends, and
shows, that if they were in his condition, he would speak to them after
another manner, Job 16. 4, 5. Harsh, rigid, and biting language heaped up to
men in distress, argues want of compassion. Good words are cordial, bitter
speeches are as Vinegar and Wormwood. We must not answer men in distress with
taunts and scorns, as Nabal answered David's Messengers, Vid. 1 Samuel 25. 10, 11.
Be of good cheer, Weep not, that was our Saviors word often.

II. Compassion must not rest and determine in words, but the condition of the
afflicted must be also recommended to God by hearty prayer: words are but dry
charity. Our Savior, he puts up requests to God, for the distresses of men. He
is praying for the Disciples, when they are tossed, Matthew. 14. 23, 24. And he
taught this act of compassion to his Disciples, vid. Mat. 9. 36, 37, 38. And
Zech. 1. 12; we have his prayer for the Myrtle Trees in the bottom. Thus Daniel
showed his compassion to the afflicted Jews, Dan. 9. per totum. And thus did
Nehemiah testify his pittifulness, Neh. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And this must be not
only in the public, but in secret also. Nehemiah's and Daniel's were private
prayers.

III. We must actually administer supply to their wants. Good words and prayers
are not sufficient without this. St. James tells us, how we must show
compassion, Vid. Jam. 2. 15, 16. So did our Savior, he does not only look upon
the wounded man, but binds up his wounds, and lays him upon his own beast,
etc. takes care of him, makes provision for him, Luke 10. 34, 35. Thus Job
showed his compassion, Job 31. 17, 18, 19. He fed the hungry, and clothed the
naked, and relieved the oppressed, and set at liberty the Captives, etc.
Drawing out of the soul to the hungry, and satisfying the afflicted soul, are
joined together, Isa. 58. 10. As Dorcas made Coats for the Widows which were
naked, Acts 9. 39. Bread must be broken to the hungry, and drink given to the
thirsty in soul, etc. Playsters must be spread upon the sore, etc. And all this
out of a fellow-feeling of others wants.

Motives to this are very many, viz.

(1) Consider the compassion that we have received from Christ, and from God.
The bowels of Heaven have melted over us in our mi^ery. Christ yearned over us,
when we were in our blood, Ezech. 16. init. we have lived upon Gods compassion,
ever since we were. This is our Saviors Motive. Vid. Mat. 18. 27. 33.

Explication. The Apostle makes this a strong Motive for brotherly love, 1 John
4. 9. 10. see the inference, verse. 11. and our Savior makes this very
Application, of that Act of compassion of his, in washing his Disciples feet,
John 13, 14. Consider it, Incompassionate men, forget Gods compassions to them.

(2) Consider what Relation there is between thy self, and every reasonable
Creature. There is a fraternity between man and man, a double fraternity
betwixt Christian and Christian; believers and believers, are fellow members of
one mystical body: therefore there should be compassion amongst them. This the
Apostle presses, 1 Cor. 12. 26. And man and man are related. There is Vinculum
Naturae. We are (...), Acts 17. 26. By this Argument, the Holy Ghost enforces
this duty, Isa. 58. 7. I know the hand must be stretched out first to the
Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. because there is Duplex Vinculum. They are not
only one flesh, but one spirit also, 1 Cor. 12, 13. yet the relation betwixt
man and man, is strong enough to unlock the bowels of compassion. All men are
Consanguinei. Every man in misery, is our Neighbor, etc. So our Savior
teaches, Luke 10. 29, 30.

(3) We are liable and obnoxious to the same sufferings and infirmities which
others are under. Our lot may be to endure the same miseries of every kind.
Quod cuidam cuivis. The Apostle speaks of (...). 1 Cor. 10. 13. Thou may be
as poor, as diseased, as dejected as any object thou beholdest, Job in one day
fell from the Throne to the Dunghill. Ergo, upon this consideration, this grace
is enforced in the Scripture, vid. Gal. 6. 1. and Heb. 13. 3. and Eccles. 11.
2. And if trouble befall any of us, that compassion which we have extended to
others, will be an Argument of singular comfort to us, in the evil day. Job in
his misery, draws exceeding consolation from this, Job 31. 17, 18, 19. Now
when he had scarce Clothes for his own back, his comfort was, that he had with
his fleece clothed many. And as it will be our comfort in an evil day, so it
will be a ground of comfort, that the bowels of others shall be turned toward
us at such a time, vid. Psalm. 41. 1, 2. Job sound the return of all that
compassion he had extended to others; The Lord made others to show mercy to
him. Judgment without mercy, is threatened to him, who will show no mercy, Jam.
2. 13. Vid. Psalm. 109. 12. 16. That Is a very serious Text in Amos 6. 6, 7.

(4) Incompassionateness argues want of love to God. Love to our Neighbor, is
the fruit and testimony of our love to God: where the love of God dwells, there
tenderness of heart to men dwells also. The Apostle is clear for this, 1 John
3. 17. i. e. the love of God does not dwell under that roof. Men may boast what
they please of high affections to Christ, but he is a liar, who says he loves
God, who hates his Brother, 1 John 4. 20. Nay, he that has not brotherly
compassion, is a stranger to Religion, vid. Iam. 1. ult. Jesus Christ tells
Peter, how he should express his love to him, John 21. feed my sheep, feed my
Lambs, Acts of compassion. It Is a sign of a converted man, vid. Acts 16. 33.

(5) Incompassion is a worse condition then any sufferings: better far to be
under the sorest trouble, then not to pity others in trouble, Hos. 9. 14. dry
breasts in this sense, is a sore judgment, unmercifulness is reckoned amongst
the worst of sins, vid. Romans 1. 31. Better to be in the sick man's condition,
then to look upon him in his sickness, without bowels.

(6) Compassionate persons are most fit for Church-employment, 1 Timothy 5. 10.

(7) Denying compassion to men in trouble, is a very great heightning of their
trouble, I may say, it is the sting which pricks them to the heart. Job
bewailes as much the want of compassion in men, from whom he expected relief,
as he did all his troubles. To him who is in trouble, pity should be showed
from his friends, vid. Job 19. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21. Incompassionateness is
as stripes to the naked body.

(8) Consider what sentence will be pronounced at the last day against
incompassion, vid. Mat. 25. ult. the mentioning of that sin is enough to show
the haynousness of it. Cruelty toward the afflicted, will send men into
eternal fire. Paul prays for One siphorus, that He may find mercy at the day
of judgment, 2 Timothy 1. 18.

(2) As, to men's bodies, compassion must be showed; so especially to the souls
of men. Jesus Christ (as has been said) was very tender toward men's souls, so
should we. This should be manifested by every Christian.

(1) By endeavoring to convince them that are impenitent of their sins, and
persuading them to forsake their sins, viz. by reproving, counselling, etc.
laboring for their conversion by all means. Its an evident character of a
true penitent and Convert, to seek the conversion of others. When thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren. The Woman of Samaria, John 4. calls all the
City to Christ, when she believed in him. This was in Paul, I could wish my
self accursed from Christ for my Brethren etc. Romans 9. 3. Set out Christ in his
beauty to their souls, as you have occasion. Andrew, when he has found Christ,
he brings Simon to him. Philip he brings Nathaniel, John 1. 40, 41, 45. Private
Christians might be very instrumental in the conversion of men, did they bear
such tenderness, as is meet to the souls of others.

(2) By mourning for the stubborn and obdurate, who will not be reclaimed. Thus
did David. Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, etc. I beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved, Psalm. 119. 136. 158. Thus did Jeremiah, If ye
will not lay it to heart, my soul shall mourn in secret for your pride. Ier.
13. 17. Jesus Christ, ye hear, was grieved for the hardness of men's hearts,
Mark 3. 5. We can perhaps reproach, scorn men, for their blindness, ignorance,
impiety, stubbornness, etc. but where is he that mourns in secret for ir?
perhaps your tears might prevail with God for softning grace, for the rocky
hearts of others.

(3) By comforting the afflicted in spirit, the troubled conscience, pouring in
Oil to supple, etc. holding out a light to them in the dark, reaching the
promises to their lips, putting our arms under them, etc. Thus did Jesus
Christ, he had cordials for languishing souls, Isay 61. 3. He would not break
the bruised Reed, etc. when his Disciples were overwhelmed with sorrow for his
absence, how does he revive them, etc. To Mary Magdalen, John 20. 15, 16. vid.
2 Cor. 1. 4.

(4) By endeavoring to reduce the erroneous into the right way again. We
generally complain against the Heresies, errors, which are taken up, etc. but
what means do we use to reclaim them? vid. Jam. 5. 19, 20.

(5) By helping up them who are fallen down, Gal. 6. 1. giving them a hand to
pluck them out of the ditch again. To set the bones that are out of joint in
their right places again.

All this was eminent in our Master, wherefore study the worth of a reasonable
soul: the soul has more of God upon it, them all the Creation besides. Its the
richest Jewel, next to God, Christ, and the Spirit, in all the World; the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, are but a Dunghill to the reasonable soul.

(6) By endeavoring to underprop them, who are wavering and staggering. Many a
one is fallen for want, (perhaps) of our hand. Jesus Christ stretched out his
hand to keep Peter from sinking, etc.

(7) By endeavoring to get and keep the means of salvation amongst others,
Mat. 9. 36. Cap. 10. init.

2d Motive, God will have honor by the souls which are saved. You will have
praise, Dan. 12. 3. You will be gainers by all you do for other's souls, both
in this life, and hereafter.

3. Let us show compassion to Jesus Christ, Christ stands in need of our
compassion. He is reproached in the World, crucified afresh by sinners,
despised in his Government, rejected in his Ordinances, etc. Much indignity is
done to Christ every where. Where is our Sympathy? who cares for the things of
Christ, whether he be exalted or no? That which was of old complained of in the
Jews, is too true of us, vid. Isa. 53. 3. He suffers in his Sabbaths, in his
Ministers, in his Ordinances, in his truths, etc.

Well, This is an undutiful thing, and it is an unnatural thing too, that we
should see our Master thus used, and not pity him. When Jesus Christ went to
the place of execution, the very Women followed him weeping, etc. Luke 23. 27.
Jesus Christ now goes to the place of crucifying, and that without weeping,
etc. Very little grief for his great sufferings.

Well, for a conclusion. I beseech you, study and practice this grace. Papists
upbraid our Religion, that it wants hands. Pudet haec opprobria nobis -- Et
dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli. Heathens and Infidels will rise up in
judgment against Christians. Pharaohs Daughter, she is moved with compassion
upon Moses his Tears, etc. Exodus 2. 6. We see Infants a weeping, and their
Mothers weeping, and yet our bowels are not stirred. Pharaohs Daughter will
condemn many a Christian; she wept for the poor Child, though she knew not
whose it was; and we hardly weep for the miseries both of soul and body, of
many of our Brethren.

FINIS.
Mary Wolnoth, October the 29. 1648. (...).
Luke 24. 27. Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them
in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself.
IN the former Chapter, we have the History of Christ's death, in this the story
of his Resurrection. His Death was not so ignominious, as his rising again was
glorious. The Churches Head received no loss by sufferings, no more shall any
of the members. The highest exaltation follows the lowest debasement, entering
into glory immediately succeeds suffering, verse. 26. The Crown of glory
follows the Crown of Thorns. We have in this Chapter, (1) The Narrative of his
Resurrection, verse. 1, 2, 3. (2) The several manifestations and proofs of it,
which are of two sorts.

(1) The Report of the Angels to the Women, and of the Women to the Disciples,
verse. 4, 5. ad 11.

(2) The Apparitions of our Savior himself, First, to Mary Magdalen, Mark 16.
9. Secondly, To these two Disciples in this place. Thirdly, To the eleven as
they were at meat, verse. 36. ad 49. where to put them out of doubt, he eats
with them, verse. 43. These are set down, Mark 16. 9. 12. 14. John 20. 26.
Fourthly, To Thomas.

(3) That which follows after the manifestation of his Resurrection, verse. 49.
ad finem, viz. The promise of the Holy Ghost, v. 49. The sending of them to the
work of the Ministry, amongst all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. Several instructions
which he gives them, for the ordering of the Church, which is set down, Acts 1.
3.

Lastly, His glorious Ascension in the sight of his Disciples, verse. 50, 51,
etc. The words which I have read, are apart of the conference which our Savior
has by the way, with the two Disciples, who were reasoning together about the
death of Christ, and the report of his Resurrection, which was made by the
Women. This Text is the Epitome, and compendium of our Saviors discourse, viz.
A summary Collection out of the Scriptures of the old Testament, of all those
places which speak of the Doctrine of his sufferings and Resurrection. These he
alleges, and expounds in order. Wherein we have two Parts.

(1) The matter of Christ's Discourse.

(2) The Text from whence he urges this Doctrine, or matter. I might observe
this Doctrine, That Moses and the Prophets have very much in them, John 5. 46.
concerning Christ: Not any thing can be named concerning Christ; but Moses and
the Prophets, have it in one place or another. Christ, never since the
Scriptures were, left his Church without a Gospel. Moses was the Gospel veiled:
the Gospel is Moses unridled, etc. Clearness. This is worthy to be noted,
against those who reject Moses and the Prophets, Antinomians, etc. And it is
worthy to be observed, to stir up Christians to the reading of Moses and the
Prophets, Christ is there, as well as in the New Testament. His Birth, his
Death, his Resurrection, Intercession, Ascension, etc. His Natures, Offices,
merit, etc. are Doctrines, not unknown to the old Testament. Moses and the
Prophets preach Christ as well as the Gospel; and the Gospel preaches Moses and
the Prophets, obedience as well as Christ.

But that which I would commend to you, is this, viz.

That our Lord Jesus Christ was very profitable and fruitful in those private
communions and converses which he had with men, while he was upon the Earth. He
overtakes two Travelers in the way, and see here what his discourse is, not
vain and idle talk, not discourse about the things of this life, nor is it
about novelties, in which many men spend their time; but it is about spiritual
matters, its Scripture-Discourse, he does here in a short space, run through,
and interpret all the Scriptures in the old Testament, which had any thing
concerning those excellent Doctrines of his death and exaltation. And as it was
here, so we shall find his practice in every company. In the 4th of John,
verse. 6. he, in his Travel, occasionally meets with a Samaritan Woman, and see
what his conference with her is, vid. verse. 10. ad 29. not about things
unprofitable, but about matters of salvation and eternal life: you may read
what a glorious Sermon he makes to that poor Woman. In the 14th of Luke, he is
invited to one of the chief Pharisees to a feast, verse. 1. what is his
discourse there? not that frothy and sinful discourse which usually attends
such meetings, but spiritual and heavenly talk.

First, He preaches to the guests, an excellent Sermon of humility, verse. 7. ad
12. observing their ambition, how they affected the highest rooms, he puts
forth a Parable to them, to teach them lowliness of mind. When he has done
that, he begins another Discourse with the Master of the house, and its the
Doctrine of right feasting and invitations, verse. 12. ad 15. namely, to invite
the poor and needy, etc. Not as though our Savior would condemn, or disallow
these friendly courtesies, showed to Allies, or rich Neighbors and Kinsfolks,
but that he might hereby refute that error of the Pharisees, who thought by
such acts, sufficiently to fulfill the Law of charity, whereas indeed this was
not charity, which extends it self especially to those who are in want, but
rather a covetous practice to bring in the like, or greater courtesies to our
selves, from others. Therefore our Savior tells him, feasts should be made for
the poor, as well as for rich Neighbors and friends. The Pharisees
entertainment and good cheer, shall not stop our Saviors mouth, but he will
tell him of his duty. Christ is no Trencher-Chaplain, he will not smother any
man's miscarriages for his great provision. Many would perhaps, think it
rudeness or incivility in our Savior, to fall thus bluntly upon guests and
host too, yet he does it freely. Shortly after, one of the Company begins to
break forth into the admiration of the happiness of those, who should enjoy
life eternal, verse. 15. hereupon, our Savior, verse. 16. ad 25. by an apposite
Parable shows unto him, and all the rest, how that happiness might be
attained, viz. by laying hold on, and receiving the offer of Christ, made in
the preaching of the Gospel, in which he does set out the obstinacy of the
Jews, in the refusing of this tender, and also lays down the great danger of
such refusal. Here Is the excellent Table-talk of our Savior.

And if you trace him from house to house, from Company to Company, you will
find him always speaking to the good of those who were with him, vid. John 5.
14. when he meets with the man, whom he had cured at the pool of Bethesda. When
he comes to the house of Mary and Martha, John 11. 25. Luke 10. 39. Christ
falls to work, as soon as he comes, his discourse is profitable, etc. When he
was private with his Disciples, his discourse is always edifying etc. either
he is expounding some Doctrine delivered in public, or else propounding some
new discourse to them for their good. Would you know why? He has commanded
men, Ephesians. 4. 29. He obeys his own Rule.

1. Resol. His work was to convert men to God, and to edify men converted.
Therefore he took all opportunities for the accomplishing of this end. This is
the reason he gives his Disciple for his conference with the Samaritan Woman,
John 4. 34. He was the great Seedsman whom God had sent from Heaven, to sow the
seed of grace in the hearts of men: therefore he would be scattering it abroad,
both in public and in private. The wise man gives counsel, which is exceeding
good, Eccles. 11. 6. Christ coming for this work, took all occasions to
perform it. He came for spiritual and Heavenly ends, therefore his discourse
looked that way.

2d Resol. Jesus Christ was full of all grace and perfection: therefore he
could not but overflow, wheresoever he came, vid. John 1. 14. Col. 1. 19. He
was an overflowing Fountain, The Spirit was not given to him by measure, as it
is to all his members, but above all measure, John 3. 34. The best of men have
received but their scantling and proportion, God has dealt to every man, the
measure of Faith, Romans 12. 3. and so of every other grace, they have but a
measure, and a small measure too, therefore they cannot give out in such
abundance; But Christ had an unmeasurable fullness, therefore in every Company
he came, he could not but cause something to flow out. He was so richly
perfumed, that his savor went abroad in every place where he set his feet
--.He had a full Heaven within him. Ergo.

3d Resol. His large affections to the souls of men, and his exceeding and
abundant love to, and desire of, the honor of his Father. He valued souls at a
high rate: his heart was set upon the glorifying of his Father. Therefore he is
always laboring for the advancement of him, both publicly and privately,
John 17. 4.

4th Resol. He knew he had but a short time to continue amongst men on Earth.
He was he knew within a very little while, to remove from whence he came:
therefore will he neglect no opportunity, wherein he may be useful to men.

This Consideration has put forward the servants of Christ, to use all
diligence, vid. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14. And this also made our Savior so
careful, vid. John 13. 1. 3, 4. etc. in a particular case.

5th Resol. Our Savior knew the worth and preciousness of time: therefore he
would not lose one moment. He was acquainted with the rareness of opportunity:
what a Jewel it is. It Is true, he could make opportunity whenever he pleased.
He was the Lord of time and opportunity. But being man as we are, he would
teach us how to husband time, and how to lay hold upon, and improve opportunity
when it is offered. He has given men a Command, to redeem time, Ephesians. 5. 16. And
by his own example, he will put us upon the work, and show us the worth of
opportunity.

Use of this Doctrine is two fold.
Conviction. Exhortation.
1. Use. Conviction and reproof.

(1) To those who are not able patiently to bear any such discourse from
others. Many there are, who are in a Prison, or little-ease, when they are in
the company of such as would gladly speak something of God. They use all their
endeavors to silence such language. The discourse of Christ and salvation, and
grace, etc. these are as smoke to the eyes, and Gravel stones to the Teeth,
unpleasant, bitter, undelightful. They are soon weary of such conference,
either that must be laid asleep, or else they must be withdrawn. Vain and
unprofitable discourse, merry stories, discourse about novelties, etc. in this
they can willingly spend days, etc. but conference about things Heavenly,
makes them very melancholy and heavy. There is nothing which discovers a heart
more unlike to Christ, then this. He was never pleased better, nor so well, as
when he was speaking of Heaven, etc. and they are never discontented more, then
when they are hedged in with such Discourse. Such as these would have been
mavelous unfit to have attended upon Christ, when he was on Earth, and they
are as unfit, and more, for Heaven. There is nothing but the Language of
Canaan, speaking of God, and admiring of him; discourse which their souls
account very unsavory.

(2) Others there are, who not only neglect this duty, but on the contrary, are
very destructive, and (...).
corrupt in their private discourse: they speak but things as do putrify the
hearts, heads, and lives of the hearers. The Apostle speaks of some words which
are not only unprofitable, but also do subvert the hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14.
(...). The Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 3. 6.
to some, who creep privily into houses, and by their private conference do
(...), instead of edifying them in the faith, they lead them headlong to error,
etc. Jesus Christ never came into any house, but all the Family were, or might
have been better for him; others, their private conference is only to tempt men
to sin and profaneness, etc. to quench their zeal, to take them off from
godliness. These are not the members of Christ, they walk not like their
Master. Christ's Discourse was of Heaven, and the Scriptures, etc. their
discourse is about sin, and wickedness, etc. what the Apostle says of some in
his time, concerning their private actions, that they did such things as was
even shame to speak of, Ephesians. 5. 12. we have cause enough to say, concerning
many in our days, etc. every place, where they come, keeps some infection,
receives prejudice from them.

(3) It blames the best of us all, for our dissimilitude to Christ, in this
respect: where is the Christian much regards this duty? How unprofitably are
many hours spent in private Communion, even by the Servants of God, wherein
there is scarce a word spoken for God, or which may edify? The Servants of God
heretofore, were otherwise minded; They spoke much one to another, about the
things of God, Mal. 3. latter end. God was set up in the hearts of Luke 24. 14,
15.
one another, etc. But now even many of Gods own people, have as little of God,
and Religion in their occasional conversings, as other men. This is one reason,
why the power of godliness is so much abated, etc. to what, it was in former
times. What Is the reason of this neglect?

1. Pride may be one hindrance: some have high parts, they will not stoop.

2. Want of heavenliness of mind, and largeness of affection to spiritual
things. Christians are grown more worldly, then heretofore.

3. Want of affection one to another. There is not that care in Christians, one
toward another, and one over another, which should be. Whatever the cause be,
it is utterly a fault, and that which Satan rejoices at.

2d Use. Exhortation. Let every one, who abides in Christ, walk in this, as
Christ walked, 1 John 2. 6. Improve your private converse with men for their
good. Edify one another. Never meet together, but let something be said and
done, that may tend to Gods honor, and the good of men. Supporting words to
the weak, reproving sin, etc. comforting words to the distressed, etc. set up
God where you come, etc. I would I could say something to persuade you to it.
Consider, two things are much omitted by the godly; frequent meetings, and,
improvement of meetings.

(1) The things of God and salvation, are of the greatest worth and moment.
There is no other thing so absolutely necessary as these things. Indeed, there
is nothing so deserving of your time, as the things of God are. One hours time
is of greater value then the World, time is too precious to be consumed with
other discourses. If the worth of it were known, it would be improved. A
Christians breath is too good to be wasted about other things. -- vid. Luke 10.
42. Mary gets to Christ's feet, resolves to have something out of him.

(2) This is the only way to make society honorable and comfortable. This is
the chief and principal end of Communion. Take away this, and there is not much
difference between the society of Christians and Beasts.

They can eat together, and drink, and they can walk together, etc. I am sure,
take away this, and there is no advantage more from the society of Christians,
then of other men. This sweetens society.

(3) God takes notice, and especial regard of such discourse, vid. Mal. 3. 16.
They lived in days of trouble and distress, when profaneness was promoted,
etc. and they, when they met together, used to exhort, and comfort one another,
etc. and God hearkens to them, and makes them a gracious promise. They shall be
mine, etc. and I will spare them, as a man spares his own Son that serves him.

(4) God will call all men to account, for the improving of their Communion
with others. God never casts his people into any Company, or society, but he
either sends them to deliver something from him to others, or to receive
something from others for their good.

(5) Men of all Employments, when they do meet together, will be discoursing
about the things which belong to their own Calling and kind of life. Your
Lawyers will be putting Cases. Physicians about Cures, etc. Statesmen of
Politics, etc. Yea, even wicked men, when they come together, will be
reasoning, consulting, their wicked projects, etc. And should not a Christian
be discoursing about his Trade?

(6) There is sometimes a greater liberty of speaking in private then in
public. Christians have greater liberty in private, then the Minister in the
Pulpit.

(7) You will exercise your own Talents much by this means, warm your own
hearts. There is that scatters, yet increases; he that waters, shall be
watered himself.

(8) By this means, you may prevent much sinful speaking. Grace and Piety has
a majesty in it, even amongst wicked men; a few who are godly and religious,
may by speaking of holiness, stop the mouth of profaneness.

(9) Consider how much hurt you have done in many Companies heretofore: perhaps
you have deaded many a heart, etc.

(10) How greatly God has blessed the endeavors of many of his Servants, in
matters of this nature. Our Saviors Discourse in private, was the first
conversion of that Samaritan Woman, etc. John 4. and in this place, verse. 3 2.
he sets his Disciples hearts on fire: many have found a Reproof in private,
carried home by God, and an Instruction brought to the heart, etc.

The very presence of some good men has restrained swearers, etc. and
restrained sin, Mark 6. 19, 20.

11. All those Motives which moved Jesus Christ, may be as goads in our sides.
Was it his work to convert men, and so should be ours: -- did this argue grace
in Christ, that he was full of grace; so it will argue, thou have grace: this
will evidence thy affections to the precious and immortal souls of the Brethren.

When thou hear a swearer, etc. thou may die before thou see him again, or
death may snatch him away, etc. do all the good whilst you may.

When others get Play-books, Newes-books into their hands, or Sr. Philip
Sidney, etc. Do you take Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles, and read them
together, etc.

This would recover the decayed power of godliness, bring a new spring after a
long winter, and be very much to the honor of God and Religion.

The Trade of godliness would be driven on, and profaneness will wither, and
go down exceedingly. -- The Trade of error is driven by peoples jangling and
disputing, this course would drive on the Trade of godliness.

You are to have a care of others, as well as your selves. Thy Brother is thy
charge, and thou art his charge, etc. Heb. 10. 24.

Others have a share in your gifts, etc.

A Minister in a private Family, may do as much good sometime, as in the Church.

It is a sad thing to consider, that many a Christian Minister is very familiar
with this, or the other great man, but the family gets no good by their
coming, etc. Elijah did good in that Family, where he lay in his sojourning.

Objection. Let none put off this duty with this excuse, I shall be but scorned
and slighted, and hated for my endeavor, etc.

Sol. 1. He that observes the wind, shall not sow. Eccles. 11. 4, 5, 6. Success
belongs not to thee, but to God, meddle not you with that. Duty is thy work,
every good work has its difficulties.

2. Whether they will hear, or whether they forbear, thou have delivered thy
soul, and they shall be left without excuse, Vid. Ezech. 2. 5. 7. Chap. 3. 11.

3. As our Savior says to his Disciples in another Case, so say I, Thy peace
shall return into thine own bosom, Matthew. 10. 13. Vid. Psalm. 35. 13.

4. If some one get but benefit by thee, if God incline but the heart of the
meanest in the Company, to hearken, etc. Thy labor is abundantly recompensed,
etc.

5. Though they regard not for the present, yet God may perhaps afterward
awaken Conscience, to remember and regard what thou have said.

Prove. 28. 23.

He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that
flattereth with his lips.

FINIS.
Mary Wolnoth, December the 10th, 1648. (...).
Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth,
etc.
THis Prophet is well styled by one of the Ancients the fifth Evangelist,
because there is so much Gospel in his Writings. He that does exactly consider
these Sermons, shall find Jesus Christ in his Person, Natures, Offices,
Doctrines, Sufferings, Glory, Benefits, Effusion of his Spirit, etc. almost as
clearly described, as by those who had been Eyewitnesses of them all.

This Chapter is the Model and Compendium of the whole Gospel. Here we have
both the Humiliation, and the Exaltation of Christ, his low debasement, and his
high advancement. The former is from Verse. 1. ad 10. The latter is from verse.
10. ad finem.

In the (...), we have two things especially.

(1) A sad complaint of the Worlds rejection of Christ, ver. 1. Who has
believed, etc. or, to whom the Arm of the Lord revealed, i. e. the Gospel in
the preaching of it, Romans 1. 16.

Few of those who heart the Gospel, do truly receive and embrace it. The Arm of
God is stretched out to many, its revealed effectually to a very few. Many are
called, few are chosen. It was so in the Apostles time, in Christ's time, it
will be so in our time. It may be a support to the Ministry and Ministers, when
their labors prove succesless: if the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles was
fruitless to many, why should we be dejected?

(2) The Reason of this Rejection, viz.

1. The meanness of his person, and Kingdom outwardly in the first Original of
it, verse. 2. He shall grow up, etc.

2. His sufferings and afflictions, verse. 3. etc. his Kingdom was but mean, and
his sufferings were great; his cross was a scandal to many.

The Exaltation, verse. 10. ad finem, has many things in it. Christ's exaltation
in his seed, v. 10, 11. His exaltation in his person, v. 12.

In the Text, we have two things,

1. A Description of the great sufferings of Christ, in these words. Oppressed,
afflicted, brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, as a Sheep to the Shearer. In
voce [Pecudis] forte allusio est ad legales victimas; quo sensu alibi vocatur
Agnus Dei. John 1. 29. 36. Calvin. in Locum.

2. His carriage under those sufferings. He was dumb, he opened not his mouth:
so he opened not his mouth. Expressions of his patience, and contentment, which
is amplified by the resemblance of a sheep.

Here are two Lessons in the words.

1. Doct. The Lord Jesus did suffer very much of men, while he was in the flesh.

2d Doct. Jesus Christ, did with great patience and contentedness, bear those
sufferings which he lay under. I made choice of this Text, because of this
second Doctrine, that I might speak to you of our Saviors patience, which is
another virtue for our Imitation. But because the former is very profitable, I
shall spend this hour about that.

1 Doct. The Lord Jesus did suffer very much while he was on Earth. He was a
very great sufferer. He is called here, by this Prophet, vir Dolorum, peritus
infirmitatis, verse. 3. We read here, of despising, rejected, stripes, smitings,
wounds, sorrows, bruising, chastizement, oppression, affliction, cutting off,
putting to grief, and pouring out his soul to death. Gather all these together,
and they will make up a very great sufferer.

I shall do two things for explication.

1. What Christ suffered, the kinds of it.

2. Why he suffered, the causes of it.

1. For the Nature of his sufferings, he suffered every kind of way. He
suffered from men. And he suffered from God. He suffered in his Body, in his
Soul, in his Name, etc.

1. He suffered Revilings, and Reproaches, He was a scorn of men, and despised
of the People, Psalm. 22. 6, 7. How often shall you see him laughed to scorn in
the Gospel? how often do you read of his deridings? Mark 5. 40. Luke 16. 14.
Luke 23. 35. Friend of Publicans. He was called Beelzebub, Deceiver, Matthew. 27.
63. He suffered derision in every one of his Offces.

1. In the Kingly Office. They put a Scepter in his hand, a Crown on his Head,
bowed their knee, saying, hail King of the Jews.

2. In his Priestly Office. They put upon him a gorgeous white Robe, such as
the Priests wear.

3. In his Prophetical Office, when they had blind-folded him, Prophecy, say
they, who it is that smites thee. Sometimes they said, Thou art a Samaritan,
and he has a Devil. Sometimes, He is beside himself, why hear ye him?

2. He suffered stripes, spittings, buffettings, Isa. 59. 6.

3. He suffered false accusations, from suborned witnesses. He said, Destroy
the Temple of God, and in three days I will build it up, and Luke 23. 2.
that He forbad men to give Tribute to Caesar.

4. He suffered stoning, John 8. 59.

5. He suffered Death it self, a shameful, painful death, crucified between two
Thieves, as a malefactor.

In his soul he suffered from God. Desertion, sweated blood, etc. Temptation,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? In a word, he suffered the whole
wrath of God. And then, He suffered from all sorts of men, from friends, as
well as enemies, John 13. 18. Psalm. 55. 14. Matthew. 26. 47. From Military men,
Luke 23. 11. From them in the Ministry: From Magistrates.

Why he suffered?

1. That he might satisfy for our sins, and pay the price of our Redemption
This is made by this Prophet, the main end of all he endured, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
He was our Surety, and he could neither satisfy for our sins, nor reconcile us
to God, without these sufferings, etc. He endured nothing for himself; for he
had no spot of sin upon him, etc. but the just for the unjust, vid. 1 Pet. 3.
18. This was the prime end.

2d Subordinate ends were, That he might sanctify suffering to us, and take
away the sting and curse of it. Therefore he underwent all kind of sufferings,
that he might sweeten all: he was oppressed, that he might sweeten oppression.

3. That he might be able experimentally to succor, comfort, sympathize with
us in our sufferings, vid. Heb. 2. 17, 18.

4. That he might be prepared for glory, vid. Luke 24. 26.

5. That he might be a Conqueror over sufferings. Conquest is one piece of
Christ's. Honor. He could not have overcome, if he had not been a sufferer.

1 Use. Information. These Corollaries follow hence.

1. Take notice of the preciousness of our Salvation and Redemption. It Is
called in Scripture, by all Names which intimate preciousness. A weight of
glory, 1 Cor. 4. 17.

An Inheritance incorruptible, immortal, undefiled, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 4. Every
grace has an unspeakable worth in it, Precious Faith, precious promises, 2 Pet
1. 4. The worth of things are known best by the price paid for them. I note
this for two Reasons.

1. Because these things are of so little value, so despicable to men,
Justification, Sanctification, Heaven, the Promises, are undervalued, men
reject them, as if they were trifles, as vile things.

2. That those to whom they belong, may have them in higher esteem and value
them the more. It Is an Argument which the Apostle uses to press careful
inspection in the Elders over the Church, Acts 20. 28. He who despises any of
these, despises the sufferings of Christ.

2. Take notice of the haynousness of sin. There are many glasses, wherein the
sinfulness of sin may be seen; as namely, the Judgments which it draws down
upon the committers of it, look upon the old World, drowned in water: look upon
the flames and ashes of Sodom, Gomorah: behold the Graves of the dead. See
Angels and men in Chains of fire, etc. But this, above all, discovers its
vileness, It could not be expiated without Christ's sufferings, and those
deadly: the haynousness of Covenantbreaking in Israel, appears from the
judgment inflicted for it, vid. 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 6. Our sins could not be done
away, without Christ's sufferings, Heb. 9. 12. Thy lying, swearing, cheating
could not, without this, be done away.

3. Take notice from hence of the exact Justice of God, and his perfect hatred
of sin. Nothing in the World, can so clearly demonstrate this, as the
sufferings of Christ. God loved his Son, with an entire affection, his very
soul and heart was upon him, and yet when he had taken upon him the sins of
men, the Father would not acquit him without sufferings. Justice would not
forbear one stripe. Neither the prayers of Christ, Matthew. 26. 31. nor the
groans of Christ, nor his tears would prevail, till all were satisfied: That
expression Isa. 53. 10. would be considered well, vid. Romans 11. 21. You who
doubt of Gods justice and rigor against sin, look upon Christ's oppressions, and
receive satisfaction.

Object. But you will say, how could it stand with the Justice of God, to lay
affliction upon Christ, who was an innocent person, that the just should suffer
for the unjust?

Sol. We are to consider two things in the guilt of sin.

1. The Desert or merit of punishment. And this is always inseparable from
sin, in this respect, The soul which sins, is liable to personal suffering.

2. Designatio ad poenam. Now it is not absolutely necessary, that the same
person which is liable to punishment, should be designed to suffer; but it may
be inflicted upon another, who is (...), if these four things concur.

1. If all parties be agreed, as they are here; for,

1. God is well pleased; He gave his Son. 2. Christ is well pleased, Psalm. 40.
8. 3. The sinner is well pleased, Psalm. 110. 3.
2. If all parties be glorified. Now it is so in this case.

God is glorified, he has the obedience of his Son, John 17. 4.

Christ is glorified, he has his purchase, John 17. 10.

The sinner is glorified, John 17. 22.

3. If the party which suffers, have an absolute power, and Sovereignty over
his own life: so had Christ. We cannot lay down our life for another, because
we are not Lords of our lives.

4. If the party who suffers, have ability to reassume that life again, and
to raise it up to glory: so had Christ, John 10. 18.

2d Use. Exhortation to the godly.

1. Do not think it strange, when you are oppressed and afflicted, vid. 1 Pet.
4. 12. When burdens are laid on your backs, trouble upon your loins: you cannot
be used so bad as Christ was. You do but fill up the sufferings of Christ in
the flesh: vid. Col. 1. 24. The Apostle Peter, would have Christians rejoice in
this respect, 1 Pet. 4. 13. vid. Phil. 3. 10.

2. Arm your selves for sufferings, 1 Pet. 4. 1. expect to be like Christ in
this respect. It is the will of God, that all the members of Christ should be
made conformable to their head in sufferings. So the Apostle, Romans 8. 29. he
speaks of sufferings. Christ's oppressions are a great comfort to Christians in
their sufferings. He has drank up all the bitterness of the Cup. We have but a
few drops left for us. If you will be like him in glory, you must be like him
in sufferings.

2d Doct. That Jesus Christ did with great patience, bear and undergo all the
afflictions and oppressions which were laid upon him. As his sufferings were
greater then any, so was his patience remarkable. He opened not his mouth, he
was dumb, as a sheep before her shearer. As he was contented to do the will of
God, Psalm. 40. 8. so was he also contented to suffer his will. We do not read
of a discontented word, of an angry look falling from his lips or eyes, in the
greatest of his sufferings. Vid. 1 Pet. 2. 23. His Cross was very heavy, and
yet he bare it with patience. He was mediis tranquillus in undis. When they
buffetted him, when they spat upon him, when they reproached him, when they
pierced him and crucified him; the worst word he uttered, was, Lord lay not
this sin to their charge, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke
23. 34. When Peter in his heat and Zeal, drew out his Sword in his Masters
defense, our Savior presently commands him to sheath it, Put up thy Sword,
etc. Mark 14. 47. when they had arrested him, and were leading him to the High
Priests Hall, he went with them patiently, made not the least resistance. When
Judas comes to betray him, he suffers him to kiss him, and says nothing but
this, Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss? when they gave him Vinegar
and Gall, etc. He was in all his sufferings, a mirror of patience.

In this Doctrine, I shall show,
1. Why he was so. 2. What use we may make of it.
(1) It was not for want of power, Mat. 26. 53. He could by his own hand have
smitten them Neg.
dead, he made them fall to the ground, when they came to arrest him, John 18.
6.

(2) Nor was it because he was insensible of his sufferings. He was true man,
and no man in the World was ever more sensible of any sufferings then Christ
was. My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Mat. 26. 38. he was in an
Agony, he felt all the pains, both of soul and body, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

(3) Nor was it to move his oppressors to pity him, to moderate their fury, or
to purchase his release. Our Savior knew they would not abate one drop; he
knew what was determined by the Lord, for him to undergo, and that that which
was determined, must be done. It was not to procure favor, or for fear of
their rage.

(4) Nor was it from sense of any guilt; for he knew himself to be an innocent
person, he knew all their accusations to be false and unjust, Which of you
accuses me of sin? John 8. 46. that which Samuel said, our Savior could much
more truly say, both in regard of the Act, and of the Principle, Whose Ass
have I taken, etc. 1 Samuel 12. 3. Nay, he knew that his Accusers and Judges were
convinced of his innocence. That their Objections were false and malicious, etc.

(2) Positively.

But (1) It was from Duty to God. A principle of obedience to his Fathers will.
Our Savior knew very well, that all his sufferings were ^^yd upon him by his
Father, who had Authority over him, as he was Man; and as he was in all other
things obedient and subject, so he would be in sufferings. This is that which
we may clearly gather from his own words. The Cup which my Father has given
me, shall I not drink of it? John 18. 11. He was in all things, obedient to his
Earthly Parents, Joseph and Mary, Luke 2. 51. and he would not be disobedient
to his Heavenly Father. God had not only enjoined him to suffer, but to suffer
patiently. This is that which the Apostle lays down in Heb. 5. 8. his holy
life and conversation, was a part of his obedience to the Father: but his
obedience in suffering, was obedience in an higher degree, vid. Calvin. in
locum.

(2) It was from the consideration and certain knowledge of the benefit which
would redound and accrue to his Elect, by his sufferings. He knew his
sufferings would accomplish the Salvation and Redemption of his people, it
would save them from their sins, and reconcile them to God, who were enemies by
Nature. Ergo, he did it patiently, out of mere love to man's salvation. He
considered the Seed which he should see, and be satisfied withal, Isa. 53. 11.
He was in Travel for our salvation, etc. as a Woman in Travel, endures grief
with patience, out of love to her fruit, which she hopes to see, etc. His
imprisonment would let many out of prison; His oppression would be our
Redemption; His death would be our life; His wounds our healing; and His
bruising, our strengthening, etc. Ergo, He knew his being cast overboard, would
calm the wrath of God to us ward: therefore he did silently throw himself into
the Sea.

(3) That he might set us a pattern of bearing our crosses with patience: our
Savior knew, that afflictions and troubles abide over all the Servants of God,
while they are in this time. He knew that those whom his Father foreknew, them
he predestined to be conformable unto his Son, Romans 8. 29. He oftentimes
foretold his Disciples, what usage they must expect to find in the World. Ye
shall be brought before Rulers and Councels, etc. and ye shall be hated. And he
knew also, how hard it is to flesh and blood, to be patient at such a time.
Therefore he would not only by his Command, but by his own example, teach them
this lesson. This is that which the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23. And
hence it is, that the Apostle does so often press this grace, from the
patience of Christ.

The use of this point is twofold.
Reproof. Exhortation.
1. Use. It is a just check to those, who in any affliction are filled with
rage, murmuring discontents against God, like the raging Sea, they are ever
casting forth mire and dirt, venting choler, spleen, the bitterness of their
own hearts against God. The Servants of God have been much overtaken with this
infirmity, Job a mirror of patience, Iam. 5. 11. yet he is wonderfully
discontent, vid. Job 3. init. and thou will find very many unsavory speeches
in that book. Moses, a very meek man, yet how does he quarrel with God many
times. Lord, why is it that thou have sent me? Exodus 5. 22. and at another
time, If thou deal thus with me, kill me, I beseech thee, Numb. 11. 15. And
Jonah, he speaks nothing but thundering and ^ightning against God, vid. Jonah 4.
per totum. This is not a Christ-like spirit, he was dumb in his sufferings, and
will thou rage? He opened not his mouth, and dare thou speak? This is a very
sinful frame. It Is a charging of God, and how sinful is it for Creatures to
impeach their God? he that reproves God, let him answer it, Job 40. 2.

1. It accuses Gods wisdom, that he knows not how to order things better.

2. It accuses his Justice, That his proceedings are unequal, Job 40. 8.

3. It accuses his holiness, It is in effect, as if we should say, God is
wicked. And see what he says to Job, Job 34. 18.

4. It accuses his mercy, That he is severe, harsh, rigorous, etc. that he
delights to make his Creatures miserable, etc.

2d Use. Exhortation, That we all of us would learn to be like Christ in this
respect, 1 John 2. 6. This is a necessary lesson in these times, we are as a
Sheep before the shearer, etc. as Christ was silent, and dumb, as he opened not
his mouth, so let us be, etc. we may speak against the wickedness of men, etc.
I shall show here,

1. What this is to be dumb, and not to open our mouths in affliction.

2. Give some Motives.

3. Add some Directions how to attain to it.

To be dumb under afflictions, etc.

(1) It is not any sinful dumbness, or shutting 3. Neg: Rules.
the mouth. There is a five-fold sinful dumbness, viz.

1. A sullen dumbness, a crabbed froward silence. When the perverseness of a
man's spirit will not suffer him to speak, many men are of such harsh, rugged
dispositions, that if any trouble be upon them, their dearest friend, or
nearest relation, cannot procure one word. They are peevishly silent. If God
should deal with such as he did with Zachary, Luke 1. strike them dumb, it
would be just.

2. There is a stupid dumbness. When a man, though he be sorely afflicted and
oppressed, yet is like a stock or stone, stupidly dumb. God would not have our
mouths shut in this manner, vid. Isa. 26. 11. Isa. 42. ult. for this Ephraim
is reproved, Hos. 7. 9. This is like Ionahs silence, when he was asleep.
Balaams Ass reproves this dumbness, 2 Pet. 2, 16.

3. There is an overwhelming despayring dumbness. This arises from
infidelity. When men under some affliction apprehend it irreparable and past
recovery, and so in an incredulous manner, give themselves to dumbnes and
silence. This is sinful. To be swallowed up of affliction. This questions Gods
power, wisdom, etc. Of this, see Psalm. 42. ult. Psalm. 43. ult. A Christian
should rather be as David, Psalm. 27. 3. or as Job, Though he kill me, etc. or
as Jonah, Chap. 4.

4. There is a proud dumbness, when a man, though he be under great pressures,
yet out of height and gallantry of spirit, scorns to complain; Thinks it too
effeminate a thing, etc. to complain, when we have to do with God: this is a
sinful silence. God would not have such worms as we are, to think to outbrave
his judgments. Such Iron sinews, God both can, and will subdue, vid. Isa. 2.
12, 13, 14, 15. This is to harden the heart against God: and shall Iron break
the Northern Iron; and that Steel? Ier. 15. 12.

5. A timorous silence, when men do not open their mouths under afflictions
and oppressions, for fear lest their yokes should be made more heavy: an
Issachars silence. I grant, that every Christian should use all holy prudence
to preserve himself from sufferings. No affliction is joyous, etc. and, Thou
shall not murder, commands all care and diligence, etc. for self-preservation,
and it is not prudence to exasperate the spirits of men, etc. if it may be done
without neglecting a duty. But if Gods honor lie at stake, then the mouths of
men, who have a Call, must be open, and let come what God will. Anathema est
esse patientem, says Luther, in such a case, It Is a brave Heroic Resolution of
Luther to this purpose, Inveniar Impius, homicida, avarus, etc. modo non impii
silentii arguar, cum patitur Dominus. He cared not what he was reputed, what he
suffered, so he might not be sinfully silent in Gods dishonor.

Object. What say you to that in Amos 5. 13. The prudent shall be silent, etc.
The evil of that time, see verse. 10.

Scorning of Magistrates. For those are they who reprove in the Gate, who used
to keep their Courts by the gates of the Cities, 2 Samuel 15. 2.

Scorning of Ministers. Those are they, who speak uprightly. And in such days
its said, the prudent shall be silent, Ergo.

Sol. Most Interpretors expound, that in respect of God, they shall be silent,
i. e. not murmur against God; and in this respect, whatsoever troubles arise,
we must be silent. It cannot be, to be silent at sin: vid. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Calvin expounds it thus, Propheta hic non loquitur de prudentibus, quidnam
facturi sint vel omissuri; Potius significat quoties loqui incipie^^, tantam
fore superbiam judicum ut repellant omnes objurgationes. The meaning cannot be,
that their sins shall not be reproved by the Ministers. Hoc enim non esset
honimis cordati praeterire silentio tam gravia scelera; etiamsi Tyranni
minitentur mortem centies, quibus tamen incumbit docendi ne^essitas, illi non
debent obmutescere. And again, non intelligit sponte tacituros: quia turpis
ignaviae esset ita prodere veritatem and bonas causas. Quid igitur? Nempe
tantam fore improbitatem, ut ne finant quidem Tyranni verbum unum proferri a
prudentibus. Tantam audaciam grassari, ut sublata sit prorsus omnis libertas
cordatis viris. Coguntur ergo tacere quia nihil proficiunt loquendo; imo non
est illis liberum loqui; and quanquaem praestare officium conantur, tamen
statim compescit eos tyrannica violentia. Tyranni isti ad silentium omnes
cogent, and compescent Doctores: and nunc conjicient in carceres, nunc vero in
exilia extrudent, nunc etiam denunciabunt mortem, nunc mulctabunt aliqua poena,
vel convitiis repudiabunt, and habebunt ludibrio, ut sint contemptibiles. This,
says he, is the meaning of the Prophet. Esa. 53. 7


2d Rule. This silence, or not opening of the mouth, does not exclude prayer,
or the use of lawful means to remove it, e. g. A man may be dumb under a
Disease, and yet may keep days of prayer, to deprecate it, and send for the
Physician to apply his skill to cure it, vid. Psalm. 39. 9, 10.

This is a duty as well as patience. Our Savior prayed, Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass. He indeed prayed with subordination to God, and
so must we. And we must not use any indirect, or unlawful means to remove it.
That Is worse than any affliction can be.

It excludes not complaining against unjust 3d Rule.
dealings, in being Authors of our oppression. Our Savior complains of Judas,
Pilate, etc. Psalm. 69. 21. Psalm. 109. David complains of Doeg, etc.

2. Positively. To be dumb, and not to open the mouth, etc. implies these 4.
things.

1. A holy calmness of heart and spirit under Gods hand. No inward frettings or
quarrellings against Gods providence, etc. No heat of heart, no distempered
heat. No anger in spirit against God. Jonah was angry. No boiling within Psalm.
39. 3. My heart was hot within me, his spirit did boil with impatience, though
his tongue was silent.

2. Resignations surrendering and referring our selves to God, to be yet further
and longer afflicted, if he please. Thus David, 2 Samuel 15. 26. God had put a
heavy yoke upon his neck already; yet, if he please, he shall add more weight
to it. So Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. So David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Abishai would gladly have
been about his ears. No, says David, Let him alone.

3. Satisfaction of Spirit. When a soul is well pleased in his heart, with the
affliction which God has laid him under, as Paul, Acts 21. 13. He was not
displeased, but well satisfied with that Prophecy of Agabus. He had never the
worse thoughts of God for it, or for any other of his sufferings.

4. A patient waiting upon the Lord under his hand, till deliverance come. When
a soul is willing to stay the Lords leisure, and not surripere liberationem,
steal a deliverance, before God would have him free, vid. Psalm. 62. 5. and
Psalm. 37. 7. Thus the Church manifests her patience under troubles, Mich. 7. 9.
So in Lam. 3. 26. Contrary to this, is that frame of Spirit, which will not
suffer a soul to wait; but rather use any foul shift to be freed, then wait
till God call off the Disease* vid. 2 Reg. 6. 33. vid. Heb. 11. 35. (...), not
accepting of deliverance.

This is the first thing what it implies, what this duty is.

The 2d thing is to give Motives, to this patient and silent bearing: for which
consider these.

1. Motive. Consider, that all conditions are ordered by, and according to the
will and providence of God, vid. Matthew. 10. 29. Job 5. 6. This was that that
silenced Job, under very heavy pressures, Cap. 1. ult. Not the Sabeans, or
Chaldeans, but the hand of God.

This very consideration silenced Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. and so David, Psalm. 39. 9.
and in another case, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Abishai looks no farther then Shimei, and
therefore he is all on hot fire, let me go, and take away his head from him.
David sees a Commission in his hand from Heaven, Ergo. Vid. Acts 21. 13. they
took on very much at first hearing; but when they were once persuaded that it
was from God, they did acquiesse, the will of the Lord be done. And the great
Motive which kept our Savior so silent under all his sufferings, was this. The
Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink of it?

Consider 1. Gods Sovereignty and Regality. He has an absolute right to order
of things, as he pleases, to set us higher or lower, to bring us into bondage
or freedom. Ergo, vid. Job Cap. 38. per totum. Cap. 39. Cap. 40. 5. There Is no
man has such power over his beast, to put him to a fat or lean pasture, as God
has over man, vid. Job 11. 10. Not to be silent, is either to deny, or at
best, to question and dispute Gods Dominion over him. It Is as much as to say,
He is his own, not the Lords.

2. Consider his wisdom. All the works which God does, have rays of Divine
wisdom in them, Psalm. 104. 24. Eccles. 3. 11. Even the most confused and
seemingly disordered ways and works of God, are wrought most wisely and
artificially. Now not to be silent, is to lay to the charge of God folly,
bungling, etc.

2d Motive. Consider, that you have deserved many times more and heavier things
from the hands of God. Art thou in poverty? thou have deserved beggary. Art
thou in sickness? thou have deserved death. Art thou in a prison? Hell is not
beyond thy demerits? vid. Lam. 3. 39. Mich. 7. This consideration was that
which did silence that good Thief upon the Cross, Luke 23. 41. A Man who has
deserved hanging, drawing, and quartering, may well be silent to undergo
whipping, or burning in the hand. He who had confiscated all his Estate, by
some illegal Act, has no reason to speak, because the Offcer comes to demand 6
d. or 12 d. for a fine. Just thus it is with us, we have deserved the loss of
all, and the Lord only takes twelve pence as it were, from us. The wages of sin
is death, Romans 6. ult. and that eternal. And this is the wages of every sin.
Now we have committed an innumerable number of sins, beside that unfathomed
Fountain of corrupt nature which has all sin in it, in the principle; And yet
God comes but with small rods to whip us, and that in measure too: we may well
hold our peace indeed.

3d Motive. Consider the great good of this silence, and patience under our
afflictions.

1. It Is in it self, a very excellent and precious grace, full of beauty and
glory. It renders us most like to Christ.

2. It Is very precious in the effects of it. I will show you these four effects
of it.

1. It renders the heaviest burden tolerable. That which will bruise the back of
another, will lie very light and easy, upon the shoulders of a patient
Christian. Levius fit patientia Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Yea, it does take
away the whole weight of the burden. For when the spirit is in such a frame,
it is all one, whether poverty or riches, whether freedom or restraint, etc. A
patient spirit, has the happiness and comfort of his condition still.

2. It makes a soul Conqueror over all conditions. The impatient complaining
spirit is vanquished under every small suffering, his spirit Romans 8. 37.
is quite overcome, whereas the patient Christian does triumph, and gets the
Victory over all distresses. Job by his patience, did conquer all his troubles.

3. It preserves and keeps a Christian from many snares and temptations; which
affliction and distress, puts a man upon. There is no condition, but it has
its peculiar temptations. Poverty, reproach, persecution, etc. As it is a hard
thing, so it is a happy thing to be preserved from these snares. Not to steal
in poverty, not to apostatize in persecution, etc. Now patience is the best
Antidote and Preservative to keep us from these. The patient Christian, will
not think of any shifts which are sinful, to deliver himself. The faith and
patience of the primitive Martyrs, was that which kept them from accepting of
deliverance upon sinful terms, Heb. 11. 35.

The answer of that Martyr to his friends, when they would have had him to make
an escape out of Prison, was wrought by his patience. No, He would stay Gods
time. He would not come out when his friends desired, then he should come out
too soon; nor when his enemies would have him, then he should stay too long,
but when God would have him, that was the best time. So Paul and Silas, Acts
16. 26. The Prisondoors were all open, etc. yet they would not stir. Patience
prevents many such Temptations. It prevents sinful complyances, etc.

4. It fortifies the soul against the fear of troublous conditions, when
threatened or imminent. It Is a happy thing, to be freed from fear of evil, and
it is promised to the godly, Psalm. 111. 7, 8. Now nothing is more likely to
support the soul against the fear of such storms, then this grace of patience.
The patient Christian is provided for the worst storm. Patience is his Tower,
his Anchor, etc. It Is a settling grace.

4th Motive. Consider, that the present condition is also simply the best
condition for thee, if thou art a true Christian. Poverty is better then
riches, sickness then health, bondage then freedom, Winter then Summer, etc.

It Is best for thy self, it is best for thy graces, it is best to bring thee to
Repentance, it is best to humble thee, etc. It Is best, considering the distemper
which is in thy heart.

Consider 1. Gods Wisdom, that he knows what is best.

2. His goodness, that he will not put any Child of his, out of a better
estate, into a worse.

God sees thou have a proud heart, God knows thou have an ambitious heart;
therefore disgrace is better then a state of honor. A tender Father would
never correct his Child, but that he thinks that correction is better at that
time, then cockering and indulgence: he would never deny him a meals meat, but
that he sees that fasting is better then food, etc. so God, vid. Heb. 12. 10.
The Apostle teaches us, that God does aim at his Childrens profit, and
advantage in all his dispensations. Now if one State or Dispensation, were
better then another, and God should cast him into a worse, out of a better,
then it could not be true, that God in all his dealings, aims at their benefit.

5th Motive. Consider, that there is a far greater good in patience and
Christian silence, then there is, or can be hurt or evil in the forest Cross.
For man's happiness, lies not in comforts, but in a compliance in his will, to
the will of God. Patience is absolutely a grace, affliction is not absolutely a
curse. Ergo.

6th Motive. Consider, that God will put a good issue to all your sad
conditions. The end will undoubtedly be good, vid. Jam. 5. 11. The hopes and
expectation of this, prevailed upon the Church, to be silent under all her long
and tedious darkness, vid. Mich. 7. 9. When I sit in darkness, the Lord will be
a light unto me, therefore I will bear, etc. Your reproach shall end in honor,
your disgrace in glory, Isa. 61. 7. yea, your glory shall exceed your shame;
yea, it shall be double to your shame. And your Cross, shall bring you to a
Crown, vid. Isa. 66. 5.

It may be in this World, they who reproached you, shall change their Language,
and bless you. It sometimes falls out so. You have a promise of this, made to
the Church, vid. Isa. 60. 14. and Rev. 3. 9. We have examples, and instances of
this. Haman, and the confederates with him: and so did Jobs friends. Cap. ult.
Job. However, death will take away the remembrance of all your sadness, vid. 1
Cor. 10. 13.

There are three great Arguments in that one Text. Explain it.

7th Motive, Consider the evil of Impatience.

1. It Is a mighty torment to the soul. It Is a worm at the heart, which gnaweth
continually. It weakens the Spirits, and renders a man more unable to bear his
cross; yea, impatience and discontent, is heavier then the burden it self. The
nayl in the yoke is much more oppressing then the yoke it self, and galls more.
Impatience is as a nayl in the cross: What Solomon says of the cruel man,
Prove. 11. 17. we may say of the impatient, its a degree of self-murder, it
wastes and exhausts the Spirits, what the Apostle says of worldly sorrow, that
it works death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. is true of impatience.

2. It does exceedingly indispose the heart, for those holy duties which an
afflicted and distressed condition calls for.

There are four things called for in a state of distress.

1. Prayer, Jam. 5. 13. Psalm. 50. 15. Hos. 5. ult. Now a wrathful impatient
spirit is not fit to pray. The heart must be composed in prayer. One principal
qualification in prayer is, That it be, (...), 1 Timothy 2. 8. See how Jonah
prays when he is angry, vid. Iona. 4. in it, a mere quarrelling and scolding
with God.

2, Accepting the punishment of our iniquity, and lying low at the feet of God,
vid. Lev. 26. 41. Repentance, self searching. Impatience hinders all this, the
calm Spirit will see the cause and bewail it, when the discontented mutinous
passionate soul passes it by, vid. Lam, 3. 39. 40. Complaining hinders
selfe-judging, vid. Mic. 6. 9. This will not be done in an angry passion, fury
will not hear any message.

3. Teaching and instrusting others in affliction. This is a duty; sick men's
words have a sharp point. Paul writes many excellent Epistles to the Churches
in his bonds, Gal. Ephesians. Phil. Col. 2 Timothy etc. Philem, etc. He begat Onesimus
in his bonds, Philem. 10. we are to discover our supports, our encouragements,
etc. Now impatience will take us off from this duty. Impatient and angry men
are very bad Tutors; men can ask them no questions, Nabal.

4. Hearing and receiving comfort from others. This is a duty in affliction, to
have our ears opened to instruction, etc. Job. 36. 9. 10. Now impatience
hinders us from this. Physicians will not give Physic in a fit. The seed sowed
in a storm is lost. Pearls before swine. Impatience is as bad a Scholar as a
Master.

(3) It provokes God to smite harder, to add to our misery. As a father by a
spiritfull angry child, he will beat him into a calm. Iona Psalm. 107. 17.
got nothing by his contending and discontent, cap. 4. 8. The bleak East wind
blew but the harder, had he been quiet, he had kept his screen, and not been
exposed to that violent blast.

(4) It provokes God to deny or remove those inward comforts which might
support us, and sweeten our Cross. Jobs impatience lost him many a lightsome
look, which he might have had, had he been calm. A man's frowardness in
sickness hinders himself of many a good word which friends present; and of
many a visit which absent friends would give were his spirit quiet.

(5) It will provoke God to keep on the burden longer. No man ever got off his
load by kicking, it makes it the more snarld and entangled. A wild Bull in a
Net. Esa. 51: 20. God does not usually take off the burden, till the spirits of
men be willing to bear it, when Job was out of his hear, then did the Lord
remove his Cross, Job. 42. 3, 4, 5. ad ver. 10. Contentment of Spirit is the
best way to get rid of any trouble, many of Gods servants have found by
experience, both in the troubles of conscience and other griefs, that when
they have been brought to such a frame of spirit, as to be contented, to be in
the dark, then has light shined forth; when the wound is healed, the plaster
drops off of it self.

(6) Impatience will put the soul upon unworthy unwarrantable ways of being
freed and delivered: An angry Spirit will not stick at any thing, so he may
remove the cause of his discontent. If Rachel be impatient of barrenness, she
will not stick to give her Maid to her Husband, so she may have issue, Genesis
30. 3. so ver. 1. If the unjust Steward know not how to work or beg patiently,
he will steal, Luke 16. 3, 4, 5. If Eliah cannot bear persecution, he will
flee from his work, and pray God to take away his life, 1. Reg. 19. 4. so
Moses, Number. 11. 7. 15. If a man cannot bear sickness, he will flee to Witches,
or any body or help, 2 Reg. 1. 3. Ahaziah. Or lay violent hands on himself with
Saul, 1 Samuel 31. 4. If Peter cannot be content to dye, he will deny Christ. Any
Casement discontent will fly out at. vid. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Will is opposed to Content, ver. 8. he that will have liberty, health, etc.
and not be content wirhout them, is hurried into many and dangerous snares.

Three Directions or Helps unto Patience. Take this medicine which consists of
these ingredients.

(1) Get self-denial, Matthew. 16. 24. Could we deny our selves in point of
honor, we would not storm at reproach. So of Bondage, etc. He that cannot
deny himself will deny Christ. Self-love hinders from suffering or from
patience, Eccles. 7. 8. self denial is to lay self aside.

(2) Labor for humility, consider the opposition patient in Spirit is opposed
to pride of Spirit. Price is the mother of murmuring and discontent. Pride
makes the Spirit furious: vid. Pro. 13. 10. A proud man will contend with God.
Pride thinks all the good he has too little, all the evil he endures too
much: humility, contrary,

(3) Labor for a life of Faith. To make up all wants in God, Phil. 3. 20. This
quieted David, psalm 42. 11. This kept the Apostles from fainting under their
trouble, 2 Cor. 4. 18. This was that which kept David quiet under great
afflictions, 1 Samuel 30. 6. It was a very sore trouble, that his own guard
should now set upon him, etc.

(4) Consider often the patience of Christ, vid. 1 Pet. 2. 19. 20. 21, 22.
This, if it were well studied, would alone allay all discontents. Afflictions
had a sting in them to Christ, and yet he was meek in enduring. They were full
of Divine wrath, Christ's sufferings were scorpions, yours are but rods of men;
Christ's were unjust, yours are just; Christ's were for others, yours are for
your selves: we should not be such lions, as we are, if we could but get our
hearts upon the meekness of this Lamb. If this copy be out of our eyes, our
hearts will rise.

(5) Consider how many present comforts you yet enjoy. If superfluities be
gone, you have conveniences still, you have peace within still, etc. vid. 1 Samuel 1. 8. we have our eyes still poring upon what we want, or upon what we
desire. This mercy is removed, this mercy cannot be attained, etc. This heates
the heart and makes it mutiny, whereas if we would but set before our eyes our
present enjoyments, we would be quiet, for we shall see that what is removed,
is justly taken away, and what is denied, is not only justly denied, but in
mercy: we want nothing but that the presence whereof would be for our
disadvantage, neither do we lose any thing, but that the presence whereof would
annoy us. We are like Haman in this respect: All he had was nothing, while
Mordecai the Jew was at the Kings gate, and would not bow to him, vid. Est. 5.
13. one discontent deprives us of the sweetness of our comforts. Rejoice in
what you have still.

(6) How little improvements you have made of any prosperous condition or of
any mercy you have enjoyed, vid. Neh. 9. 35. the misery was great, ver. 37. yet
this quiets them. They had long lived in a good land to no purpose. He that
shall well consider what little use he has made of his health, while he
enjoyed it, will not rage against God in a time of sickness, so for strength
in a time of weakness, for liberty in a time of bondage, what good use did you
make of your liberty while you had it? so for riches in a time of poverty. Did
not you use all these for Gods dishonor, for your brethrens hurt, for your own
prejuddice?

(7) Consider the patience of Saints. Their spirits were quiet under as great
sufferings as yours can be. Look upon Prophets, look upon Apostles, see their
carriage. This is the Apostles direction, Iam. 5. 10. Thus were men highly
honored of God; so much is intimated in that expression, Who have spoken in
the name of the Lord. They suffered much, and they suffered quietly. Now the
argument is strong, Shall a holy Prophet, shall one who came in the name of the
Lord to the world, shall they be patient under their sufferings, and will you
speak? Thou who art far behind the meanest of the Prophets in worth, in grace,
in knowledge, etc. will you be unquiet? Shall such as Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel, and other great Prophets be so silent, and will you rage? Nay, we may
not only take the Prophets for an example of patience, but the Apostles too.
They suffered not only silently, but joyfully.

8. Consider, How much better it is with you, then with others. Are there many
above you? well, but there are more below you, etc. If thou were the lowest of
all the Sons of men, it were thy duty to be quiet; but there are 1000. above
thee in grace, in service, in obedience, who are yet very far below thee in
misery in sufferings. Art thou weak? others there are, that lie bedridden, art
thou in fear of a prison? There are better then thou in close bondage? Do
thou drink thy tears? others there are, who drink blood. Art thou in the fire
of persecution? There are many in the fire of Hell. It Is our fault, we are
always looking to them, who are above us, such and such, they have friends,
they have liberty, they are in high places, they have not my crosses, they feel
non of my pains, etc. well, but are there none in the World, think thou,
that esteem thy condition as happy in respect of theirs? It Is very good
counsel, the Apostle gives us, That we would make our selves equal with them of
low degree, vid. Romans 12. 16. If we would do thus in this matter, it would
(through God) go very far to the quietting of us.

There is much difference between the comparing of our spiritual and our
outward condition with others. In comparing our spiritual condition, we should
measure with the highest, that we may be excited to growth; but in comparing of
our outward condition, we should measure with the lowest, that we may be
preserved from repining.

9. Frequent Prayer. He that is seldom in prayer, will be frequent in repining;
and he who is much in prayer, will be very little in murmuring. Prayer will
allay heates of spirit. Prayer will expel the venom of impatience. David's
Prayer to God, made his soul so silent under his sufferings, vid. Psalm. 39. 9,
10.

In Prayer, the soul has a view of God, which does much quiet.

In Prayer, the soul has an interview of it self, and a view of sin.

Prayer, lays the soul low in it self.

Prayer, kindles faith, etc. which sees an issue out of trouble, etc.

10. Be much in the Duty of Thanksgiving. It is the Duty of a Christian, to
give thanks in every condition, 1 These. 5. 18. Now he that abounds in
Thanksgiving, will be preserved from impatience. Impatience will take us off
from hearty giving of thanks; and giving of thanks will drive away murmuring.
Does a Fountain send forth sweet waters, and bitter at one place? out of the
same mouth proceeds there blessings and cursings? Jam. 3. 10, 11. He that
sees cause why he should give thanks, will see no reason why he should murmur;
and he that can find in his heart to murmur, will hardly ever bless God so
heartily as he should: where there is much of due blessing of God, there will
be little, or none at all, of murmuring; which indeed is no better then cursing
and blaspheming.

11. Consider the Divine Calling. Christians are under no troubles or
sufferings; but if they can see that they are called thereunto by the Lord, the
very Call of God may quiet their hearts. This Direction the Apostle gives as a
Help to patience, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Obj. But when does God call a man to suffer?

Sol. When a man is in this Dilemma, that either he must suffer, or sin, then
does God call him. Vid. Job 36. 21.

12. Consider, That if you do not suffer patiently, you will lose all the
benefit of your sufferings. No suffering is acceptable with God, but the
patient suffering. Vid. 1 Pet. 2. 20. No Christian would undergo sufferings,
and yet lose the benefit and acceptance of them.

13. Meditate much upon the day of Death, and especially, of the Day of
Judgment. This the Scripture makes a very great Argument to quiet our hearts:
especially, in such sufferings as are for the Cause of God. Vid. Heb. 10. 36,
37. Vid. Jam. 5. 7, 8.

14. Take heed of anger and passion. Passion will set the tongue on fire. Vid.
Eccles. 7, 8. The help to patience, is Verse. 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to
be angry.

Anger is the bane of patience; and such passionate ones, are so far from this
silent frame of heart, that they are clamorous; for anger and clamor are joined
together, Ephesians. 4. 31.

Object. 1. But my afflictions are not single, but many: if it were but one
affliction, etc. wave after wave.

Sol. 1. They are not so many as God could have laid.

2. They are not so many as thy sins.

3. They are not so many as the sufferings of Christ were, etc.

4. If they be many, do not make them more by impatience. This is the way to
increase them.

2d Object. But I suffer from my friends, from whom I have well deserved.

Sol. So did Jesus Christ. These are the wounds I received in the house of my
friends.

3d Object. I know not how long they shall last, Ergo. I cannot see to the
further end of them, etc.

Sol. 1. Let this the rather make thee silent. Impatience does but lengthen out
your sufferings. Every impatient Word or Act, adds one link more to the Chain.

2. Thy sufferings do not last so long as thy Glory: that shall be eternal, 2
Cor. 4. ult.

3. Thy sufferings shall last no longer, then shall be for thy good.

4th Object. But my affliction is in such a thing, which is so dear and
precious, etc. Any thing else I could have endured but this, etc.

Sol. 1. If it were not in something very dear, it would not amount to an
affliction.

2. Thy sins have been of the highest Nature, Color, the deepest Dye. Thy
iniquity has reached to the heart.

3. All that God requires of us, is to suffer what he inflicts. We are not to
choose our Cross, but to take up our Cross. That which God lays before us,
That is our cross, and we must bear it.

Jan. 21. 1648.
Mary Wolnoth, February the 11th, 1648. (...).
Heb. 3. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him.
-- (...).

THis Epistle was written to the scattred Hebrews who through grace had
believed in the Lord, and were now scattered by reason of persecution, so the
inscription shows, (...). For the Author of it, interpreters are of several
judgments, some referring it to Luke, others to Barnabas, others to Clement,
others to some other of the Apostles. The most general and probable opinion,
is, that it was written by Paul, and that he suppresseth his name on purpose,
lest it should hinder the success of his writing. The Name of Paul was odious
to the Jews who were not converted, they looked upon him as an Apostate from
their Religion; and he was also much suspected by some of the weaker believing
Jews who were yet too much addicted to the ob^ervation of the ceremonial law,
therefore he does de industria conceal his Name. Amongst other reasons which
do probably evince Paul, to be the Author of this Epistle, these two are
cogent. (1) The conclusion of this is agreeable to the conclusion of his other
writings, Cap. 13. 25. This salutation is Paul's mark to all his Epistles, 2
These. 2. 17. vid. Davenant. Col. 4. 18.

(2) And that which is most strong is the Authority of the Apostle Peter, who
writing his second Epistle to these very Hebrews, makes mention of an Epistle
written to them by Paul which was then received by the Church as Canonical 2
Pet. 3. 15. 16.
Scripture. This Epistle was now in their hands, and by them acknowledged to be
Paul's. Now we do not find any Epistle written by the Apostle Paul, to them
besides this. And it is not likely that through negligence they would lose such
a rich Jewel recommended to their study by two such Apostles; or that they
should lose that of Paul, and reserve and keep this of Peter's which makes
mention of that,

The matter of this Epistle is threefold.

1. He labors to take off these believing Hebrews from the observation of the
Leviticall ceremonies, whereunto they were too much inclined, and to persuade
with them to entertain the Gospel in the simplicity thereof. This he
endeavors to do, by setting before their eyes the excellency of Jesus Christ
in his person, and in his Prophetical and Priestly office. This he does from
the beginning of the Epistle to the 23. v. of Chapter 10.

2. To encourage them to stand fast in the profession of the Christian
Religion. That albeit persecution should arise for the Truth, yet they should
not prove Apostates and Renegado's, but as that Cloud of witnesses which he
sets before them had done, so they should be constant to the death. This is
from cap. 10. 23. v. to the end of the twelfth Chapter.

3. To exhort them to the practice of many necessary Christian Duties, Chapter
13. v. 1. ad finem.

In this third Chapter he exhorts them that from all that discovery he had made
of Christ's Person and prophetical office in the two former Chapters, they
would be persuaded to embrace him, and to take heed that they did not fall
through unbelief and hardness of heart, from the profession of the faith they
had received, ver. 1. Wherefore, etc. He uses many arguments in this Chapter,
amongst others this is one in the Text, drawn from the fidelity of Christ;
which that he may ensorce the better, he makes a deliberate comparison of
Christ and Moses. They had high opinions of Moses's fidelity in appointing the
Legal services; but for Christ they had not such high thoughts of him as it
was meet they should have had; The Apostle therefore compares Christ and Moses
together, and p^oves, that as Moses was faithful in the appointment of the
Typical worship under the law, so Christ was faithful in the abolishing of
that, and appointing Evangelicall worship in the place of it; yea he tells them
there was great difference between Moses and Christ. Moses was faithful as a
Servant, Christ as a Son over his own house, ver. 3. 5, 6. Thus you have the
Text.

It Is a glorious commendation of Jesus Christ and his Apostleship.

In which we have two things.

1. The thing commended, He was faithful.

2. The specification of the person to whom this fidelity was showed, (...),
namely to the Father, for he made him both Priest and Prophet to his Church. Or
if you please, you may observe rather.

(1) Christ's call to his Apostleship, he was constituted, made by his Father,
(...).

(2) His careful execution of that work to which he was called. (...).

Two things are necessary (as Reverend Calvin upon this Text) ad comparandam
doctrinae authoritatem.

A Divine Call from God.

A faithful Execution of the trust committed.

Both these meet in Christ. Therefore is he to be observed. This is the
Apostles Argument in this place.

Faithful is taken:

1. For one who believes the Gospel of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 11.

2. For one who keeps his promises, 1 John 1. 9.

3. For one who performs a trust faithfully, Col. 4. 9. Rev. 2. 10. Thus its
taken here.

To him that made him. viz: To God who ordained and consecrated him Priest.

Here are two Doctrines.

1. Doct. That Jesus Christ was appointed and made by the Father, the Apostle
and High Priest of the Churches profession. Here is a (...) in the Text. He had
a Divine call to the execution of all those offices which he sustained as our
mediator. He did not run before he was sent, he did not act without a due
Commission and Warrant. He was lawfully conssituted by him who had power to
undertake that great charge which he has over the Church.

2. Things. 1. That Christ is made. 2. How he is made.

(1) That he is appointed.

He has both mission and commission for this great service. (1) This is that
which the Scripture holds out clearly in general. He is made to us of God,
says the Apostle, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption 1
Cor. 1. 30. there is his constitution, God has given him to be the head of all
things to his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. He did not unduely usurp this jurisdiction
and dominion, and headship over the Church. God gave it him. All power is given
unto me, both in Heaven, and in Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. God has put all judgment
into the hand of his Son, Joh. 5. 22. and God has given him Authority to
execute judgment, because he is the Son of God, ver 27. when the fulness of
time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. And our Savior in
the Gospel does many times make mention of his Fathers sending, My Doctrine is
not mine, but his that sent me, Joh. 7. 16. The Father that sent me, bears
witness of me, Joh. 8. 18. As my Father has sent me, so send I you, Joh. 20.
21. We read in Scripture of his anointing, Esa. 61. 1, 2. The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
meek, etc. Therefore he is called the Servant of the Lord and his elect, Esa.
42. 1.

(2) This we shall find asserted of every particular branch of his office.

(1) For his Priestly office. He was made a Priest by an immediate call and
ordination from God, vid. Psalm. 110. 4. and Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6. The scope of the
Apostle in that Chapter is to set out the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, by
comparing it with the Leviticall: his Priesthood had a concurrence of all
things necessary to the Leviticall, and it had many excellencies about that:
amongst other things required in the Priesthood of Aaron, this was one, there
must be a Divine regualr Call. This was in the Priesthood of Christ. He was
called of God an high Priest after the order of Melchisedech.

(2) For his Kingly office. He is lawfully created. The Scepter is given into
his hand, the Crown is put upon his head, by God himself. God has his Throne,
and God has set him in his Throne. I have set my King upon my holy hill of
Zion, Psalm. 2. 6, 7. I will declare the Decree, etc. The Government is put upon
his Shoulders, vid. Esa. 22. 20, 21, 22, 23. Eliakim was a figure of the
Kingdom of Christ, and if you look into Dan. 7. 13. 14. after that abolishing
of the four Monarchies we have the establishment of Christ's Monarchy, and we
see the Ancient of days gave his dominion, etc. Christ did not thrust himself
into the Throne as many do, though they leap over the heads of the right
heirs; no he stayed till Authority was given him, vid. Heb. 1. 8. 9. Psalm.
110. 2.

(3) For his Prophetical office. He has his thority from God for this also.
Moses preached this long ago, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. he did not raise himself, God
raised him to this great office. He was anointed of God to preach glad tidings,
Esa. 61. 1.

In a word, whatsoever work belongs to Christ as mediator, it is put into his
hands by a power Divine. The Father loves the Son and has given all things
into his hand, Joh. 3. 35. He has ordained him to be Judge of quick and dead,
Acts 10. 42.

(2) How he is made and appointed. Here are three things.

(1) There is a Divine Decree, by which Jesus Christ is from all eternity
appointed for this service, Psalm. 2. 7. Yea there is the oath of God, Psalm.
110. 4. vid. Heb. 6, 20. 22.

(2) By Covenant, There is a firm Covenant, and stipulation passed between God
and Christ, vid. Esa. 53. 10. Christ was to undertake an office of service and
obedience for the good of men. To take man's nature, to offer himself up a
Sacrifice, etc. and for this, God was to prolong his days, to give him a seed,
the uttermost part of the earth for his inheritance, etc. to divide him a spoil
with the great, etc. to set a glory for him, Heb. 12. 2. vid. Heb. 10. 9. 10.

(4) There is a very solemn and public Promulgation of the eternal Decree by
God himself, first to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. Then at the Baptism of Christ; by
virtue of which Christ is declared to be appointed for this work, We read of
it, Math. 3. 17. and repeated again at his transfiguration, Math. 17. 5. and 1
Pet. 1. 17. And afterward by his Apostles who were commanded to testify, that
he was ordained of God, etc.

(3) By Divine unction, which was the work of the holy Ghost, Heb. 1. 9. The
holy Ghost formed him in the womb, anointed his humane nature, etc.

1. Use.

Information. (1) That the work of our salvation, is a work which God does
exceedingly approve and delight in, as well as Jesus Christ. It Is the Father's
work, as well as the work of Christ, My Meat, says Christ, is to do the work
of him that sent me, Joh. 4. 34. He that appoints another for a work, is as
well the Author of it, as he that does the work appointed. It Is called the
pleasure of the Lord, Esa. 53. 10. though it be put into the hands of Christ.
We only look at Jesus Christ in the work of our salvation, etc. seldom or but
little at the Father, etc. we are to look at the Father's appointment, as well
as at the Son's accomplishment.

(2) That those who reject Jesus Christ, they reject God himself, by whose
Authority and power Christ is made Lord, King, Priest, Savior. Our Savior
oftentimes in the Gospel hints this, My doctrine is not mine but his that sent
me, and he that rejects me, rejects him that sent me, etc. It Is a great
aggravation of the rejecting of Christ because he is Authorized by a Commission
from the Father, vid. Exodus 23. 21.

(3) That the Salvation of the Church of God by Jesus Christ is bottomed and
builded upon a sure and stable foundation. Its builded upon Christ, and Christ
is appointed to that work by the supreme Authority of all. All those who have
laid hold on Christ, are fled to a sure refuge and Sanctuary. He is verily
that Messiah, in whom all the Patriarchs and Prophets believed, vid. Heb. 6.
18. Gods call is man's comfort.

(4) That all the Laws, Ordinances, and Administrations appointed by Jesus
Christ, are of Divine Authority. Baptism, Ministry, Government, Censures, and
every thing he has appointed in the Church, are of God. Thus are all according
to the instructions given him by God.

All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth. Go ye therefore, etc. Matthew.
28. 18.

(5) That God will most certainly uphold maintain and defend all the dominion,
power, administrations of Jesus Christ, against all who oppose them or incroach
upon them. All his Kingly dignities, all his Priestly and Prophetical
dignities. Ministry, Ordinances, Government, etc. God who has called him to
the work, will uphold him, and all he does by virtue of his offices. Though
Satan and men storm, etc.

Behold my servant whom I uphold, Esa. 42. 1. he does all by Gods appointment,
ergo, God will maintain what he does, vid. Psalm. 110. 1, 2. There is Gods
appointment, see what follows, ver. 5, 6. God will stand by him, vid. Esa. 45.
13. he will maintain Christ's right in thy soul.

2 Use. What can those say for themselves who intrude themselves into offices
in the Church without any due and regular appointment. Those who are not afraid
to do ministerial acts, Preach, baptize, etc. and yet were never made by God,
or by them, whom he has Authorized for that purpose.

There is a double call to the work of the ministry. Neither of man; nor by man.
(1) Immediate, such as were the calls of the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
etc. of this Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 1. 2. and Gal. 1. 1. This call was accompanied
in them who had it with extraordinary gifts, etc. This is not to be pretended
to, by any now, when the Church is settled, and the Scripture complete.

2. Mediate, by men whom Jesus Christ has put apart, and Authorized for that
work Of God by man.
and employment, viz. Those who are Pastors and Teachers in the Church, who are
by prayer, fasting, imposition of hands, to set apart those who are fit and
called, to these employments.

Now what an act of boldness and usurpation is it in any to undertake such a
work as this of their own accord, though they have gifts, etc. when Jesus
Christ would not without Gods appointment? I would have such to consider,

1. What became of Uzziah who usurped the Priests office, vid. 2 Chr. 26. 18.
19. 20.

2. What God pronounces against those Prophets who run without being sent,
Ier. 14. 14, 15. The people are threatened for hearing them, vid. Ioh. 10. 5. 8.

It Is an act of high Treason against Jesus Christ, his Crown and dignity, to
take such employments, uncalled of him. It Is as if a man should make himself an
Ambassador, and go to some foreign Prince, without letters of credence from
the King.

3. Use. Exhortation. (1) Let us learn from A general rule and direction, not
to act without a lawful call
hence, not to take any office or public work upon us, in Church or State,
without lawful appointment, by those who have lawful Authority, no not in
civil things, 1 Cor. 7. 20. 1. It Is sinful. 2. It Is dangerous.

(2) It Is a dangerous thing to take any work without a due appointment. What
do you hear Elijah? Christ would not be a judge, Man who made me a Judge?

(1) Such can expect no success or comfort Pro. 3. 6. Ps. 91. 11. Promise is
made to Saints in their own ways.
in what they undertake. They cannot go to God to beg a blessing upon their
labors. They are none of his Servants. Who has required this at your hands?
Nay they may expect the curse of God, etc. for their usurpation. They confound
Callings.

(2) If the work they have in hand do miscarry, they have nothing to support
their spirits in such a time. It Is a man's call which encourages him in case of
disappointments he meets with, in his work, etc. Jacobs call was his comfort,
when he was waylaid by his Brother, vid. Genesis 32. 9. 10. 11.

If they suffer, they will suffer as busy bodies in other men's matters.
Gods-call arms men against any inconveniences: we must row in a storm if God
calls. Abraham Heb. 11. 16.

Qui habet certum Dei verbum in quacunque vocatione, credat tantum and audeat,
and dabit deus hand dubie secundos successus, Luther.

(1) Nor is it enough that the work in it self be lawful.

Uzzah's work was lawful enough, To keep the Arc from falling, 2 Samuel 6. 6.

(2) Nor will it serve that they have a good intention.

Uzzah had a good intention. Saul had a good intention in sacrificing, vid. 1.
Sam. 13. 7. 8. etc. And so in sparing the Amalekites cattle. 1 Samuel 15. 21.

Its a maxim, Malum factum excusatur Stock on Mal. cap. 1. p. 84.
per bonam intentionem, opposed by all our Divines.

(3) Nor is it enough that you have abilities to discharge the work of the
place.

Vzzah had abilities enough for what he did.

As the danger is great, so is the sin great, to act without a call; for, it is a
despising of Gods power, who has right to set men where he will. Its a casting
off of Divine Dominion.

There lies a Quo warranto? against all such persons, vid. Minsheus dictionary,
p. 598.

(2) It Is a despising of Gods wisdom, as though he knew not who were fittest
for every employment.

Christ would not act in this kind, Man who made me a Judge, Luc. 12? Let
Christ's call be a general rule for you, not to step out of your place to any
work, without a warrantable commission. He that breaks this hedge, a Serpent
will bite him, Eccles. 10. 8.

(2) Let us thankfully acknowledge this appointment of Christ to this work.
Bless God for this designation of Christ. All the good you have or expect by
Christ, is made over to you, by virtue of the Fathers appointment: he is made
unto us of God, wisdom, etc. vid. To. 7. 25. he thanks God as well as Christ.
so vid. Phil. 2. 11. he mentions the glory of God. When we read of the
Privileges purchased by our High Priest, as we are to be thankful to Christ,
so let us not forget, that we are as much engaged to God for his designation
and appointment. He has made us accepted through the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. God
has done it. And God, says the Apostle, was in Christ reconciling, etc. God
did it, 2 Cor. 5. 18.

4. Use. Consolation. (1) It gives us comfort that Christ is no impostor,
deceiver, etc. but he of whom the Prophets foretold. Tuto acquiescant in eo
fideles, Calvin. in Textum.

(2) It gives us a ground of great comfort and assurance that God will readily
accept of all that which Christ has done for us; and that he will readily and
freely put us into possession of all that which Christ has purchased for us,
and which he has promised in Christ, Since he was made our high Priest, by
Gods appointment and ordination, nothing surely of all the good purchased shall
be kept back. This is the first doctrine from Christ's Call.

2. We come to the Execution of this trust. (...).

Doct. Christ did very faithfully discharge all that trust which was reposed in
him by God, as the Apostle and high Priest of our profession. As he was free in
undertaking, so he was very faithful in accomplishing, Heb. 2. 17. Rev. 1. 5.
Esa. 11. 5. By his Prophets of old 1 Pet. 1. 10. 11. Heb. 3. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 19 By
himself and his Apostles, afterward.


Fidelity appears in all his Offices.

(1) He was faithful in his Prophetical office.

(1) He did exactly and plainly reveal and make known to the Church, the whole
Counsel and will of God. He kept nothing from them which was necessary for
them, and which was given him in Commission to unfold for their benefit, vid.
Ioh. 15. 15.

Though he was flattered by some, and threatened by others (as the Gospel
witnesses) many times in danger of his life, and at last actually died for it;
yet he would not, from a thread to a shoe latchet hide any thing from the
Church: For this cause was I borne, and for this cause, came I unto the world,
that I should bear witness to the truth. Joh. 18. 37. When the Scribes and
Pharisees had corrupted the doctrine of the Law, by their false glosses. Our
Savior, Math. Cap. 5, 6, 7. in his Sermon upon the Mount, vindicates the law
from those false glosses, and expounds it in the spirituality thereof. Nothing
concerning doctrine, worship, government, discipline, necessary and
fundamental, but Jesus Christ has faithfully discovered.

(2) Inlightning the minds of his elect inwardly, by his spirit, John. 6. 45.
Act. 16. 14.

(3) As he revealed the Truth, so did he confute all false doctrines and
opinions, which were opposite to Truth. This was a part of his prophetical
off^ce. Not only to lay down Truth positively, but to oppose all Heterodox
opinions. How many times shall you hear him publicly, confuting the false
Tenets of the Scribes and Pharisees, of the Saduces, Herodians, etc. vid. Math.
22. 29. vid. ver. 23. ad. 34. and other Sects in those times.

(4) He appointed a standing ministry, qualified with Authority, and furnished
with gifts, graces, and abilities to teach publicly in his Church. Prophets,
Priests and Scribes under the old Testament, vid. 1 Pet. 1. 11. 12. and 1 Pet.
3. 18. 19.

By Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers under the Gospel, Math. 28.
18. 19. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.

This belonged to the Prophetical office of Christ.

2. He was faithful in all the parts of his Kingly office, viz.

1. He gave laws, according to which his people ought to live and demean
themselves, both toward God and men. He is the Churches Lawgiver, Esa. 33.
22. yea he brings them into obedience to these Laws, by writing them in their
hearts; Ezech. 36. 27.

(2) To gather together his elect, which are his subjects out of the world into
one body or Church. This Christ has done in part, and does daily by his word
and spirit, vid. Ioh. 12. 32. Ioh. 11. 52. Math. 28. 19.

3. To subdue and vanquish all the enemies of his Church. Thus Christ has done
in his own person, Col. 2. 14. Ioh. 12. 31. he has overcome sin, Satan, the
world, and he does continually repress them by his word and spirit, 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5. and will perfectly do it at last, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26.

4. To communicate and convey unto his subjects all those good things which are
necessary for them, for this or another life. This Christ has done.

5. To appoint and establish Governors, and a settled Government in his Church,
whereby it might be rightly ordered, according to his mind. This Christ has
done, vid. Acts. 1. 3. and Math. 28. 19. 20. vid. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 29. vid. Esa.
9. 6. 7.

3. He was faithful in his Priestly office.

There were two parts of this office.

Satisfaction.

Intercession.

(1) Satisfaction is that whereby Jesus Christ having taken our nature upon
him, did in that Nature make full satisfaction to divine justice for the sins
of man, paid all our debts, and so set us free from the curse.

This was done two ways.

By his perfect obedience,

By his sufferings for our guilt.

Now Jesus Christ did faithfully do both these. 1. He did by his righteousness
and obedience, perfectly fulfill the Law.

He did fulfill all Righteousness, Romans 5. 19.

2. He did faithfully suffer, and undergo all that punishment which was due to
our sins. The Apostle speaks of both these parts of his satisfaction, Phil. 2.
5, 6, 7, 8. and Esa. 53. 5, 6.

(2) Intercession, is that part of Christ's Priestly office, whereby he appears
before the Father, desiring, that for the perpetual virtue and merit of his
sacrifice, all his members may find acceptance with God, and may enjoy the
benefit of his obedience and sufferings.

Now this Christ faithfully began on earth, Heb. 7. 5. Ioh. 17. per totum. And
is faithfully continued still in heaven, Heb. 7. 25. and Heb. 9. 24.

In the opening of this doctrine, I shall show you,

1. That Christ was faithful.

2. Why he was so.

(1) That Christ was faithful in performing what service was appointed him,
will appear.

(1) By the many public Testimonies which God gave to him, when he was on
earth. At his Baptism, at his Transfiguration. This is my wellbeloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased, Math. 3. 17. and Math. 17. 5. The Testimony of God is
according to truth. God would never thus have borne witness to Christ, if
there had been in him the least unfaithfullness. He could not have been
satisfied and well-pleased with him, if there had been the least failure: yea
before his incarnation, God bears him witness, vid. Esa. 42. 1. 2. 3. 4.

(2) By the exaltation of Christ to the right hand of God in glory. He should
never have had either Crown or Throne from God, if he had not faithfully
discharged every thing which he undertook: for his glorification was upon that
condition, that he should faithfully discharge every part and parcel of what
he undertook, vid, Esa. 53. 12. The Apostle says, he was taken from prison,
Esa. 53. 8. the prison of the grave. Jesus Christ could never have risen out of
the grave, the prison-doores would never have opened, the Jailer, Death, would
never have let his Prisoner out, if he had not faithfully performed all, The
Heavens would never have opened to him, or given him any entertainment, had he
been in the least unfaithful. Therefore our Savior demands his glory from
God, upon the faithful discharge of his duty, as that which by compact and
covenant was due to him, vid, Ioh. 17, 5. When you read that Scripture, 1 Timothy
3. 16. conclude that Paul was faithful.

(3) By all those commands which are given by God to all sinners to believe in
Christ, And by all those promises which God himself has made of acceptance of
all those who receive Jesus Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel. Many
commands are given by God. This is my beloved Son, hear him. This is the will
of God, that ye should believe in him, whom he has sent. And for promises of
acceptance of us in Christ, how does the Scripture abound? vid. Ioh. 3. 16. Yea
we know that all the Patriarchs before Christ's incarnation, they were accepted
and saved by virtue of Christ's satisfaction to be made. God accepted of Christ's
intention. There would have been no such thing as reconciliation between God
and man, or salvation, if Christ had not been faithful. No promises of pardon,
etc. or Adoption, etc. No giving of the Spirit, etc. if Christ had been
unfaithful.

1. Consider the Father who imposed the trust.

2. Why Christ was faithful.

Consider 1. The person trusting. 2. The trusted. 3. The trustee.

(1) For the honoring of his Father who had entrusted him. The work which he
had to accomplish, was a work which would bring great glory unto God. It was a
work with which God was marvellously delighted. It Is called the pleasure of the
Lord, Esa. 53. 10. Therefore out of that respect which he had to Gods honor,
he would be faithful. God would have been disappointed of his end, if Christ
had not been faithful. He would promote his Fathers joy. This is in the Text,
(...).

(2) For the honoring of himself. Its the honor 2. The Trustee.
of an Ambassador, to be faithful in the discharging of his trust:
unfaithfulness is one of the greatest stains and blots which can be fastened
upon a person: faithfulness is a Crown of glory, Prove. 13. 17. The work was his
own, as well as his Fathers. This is in the Text, Heb. 3. 6. John 10, 12, 13,
14.

(3) From that love he bare to those, for whom 3. Those for whom he was trusted.
he was entrusted and employed. The work which was put into the hands of
Christ, was a work which exceedingly pleased him. The saving of souls, the
reconciling of men to God, the Redemp. of his Elect, from everlasting
destruction, etc. The Scripture speaks very clearly of the affection of Christ,
to the work he undertook. I have a Bapt. to be baptized with, and how am I
straightened, etc. Luke 12. 50. (...); he was (as it were) in prison, till the
work was done, he was in pain till he was delivered, vid. Esa. 53. 11. That
travel of his soul, pleased him, Ergo.

1. Use. Confutation and Reproof, to all those Doctrine and opinions which deny
faithfulness Christ, and overthrow it.

(1) The Papists, by establishing their unwritten Traditions, and humane
Inventions, they do derogate from the faithfulness of Christ in his prophetical
Office. Jesus Christ was not faithful in revealing the will of God, necessary
to man's salvation, if there be need of their unwritten Traditions; if Christ
was a faithful Prophet, then they are unfaithful Impostors, to obtrude their
unwarrantable Traditions upon men, instead of Scripture, vid. Rev. 22. 18, 19.

2. That opinion of the Enthusiasts, who not contented with the written word,
depend upon immediate Revelations from Heaven, above the written word. These no
less then the Papists, by their Traditions, do enervate and overthrow the
fidelity of Christ, in his prophetical Office.

They think the teachings of Christ are not sufficient. These are no better
then the younger brethren of Papists.

3. The Papists in their daily offering up of sacrifice for the quick and the
dead, they overthrow his faithfulness in his Priestly Office, vid. Heb. 10. 14.

4. The Papists by joining other Mediators with Christ, thy overthrow the
fidelity and sufficiency of Christ in his Priestly Office of Intercession. If
Christ was faithful and sufficient, we need no other Intercessor.

5. They who are of opinion, that there is no settled Government in the Church,
etc. They deny the fidelity of Christ in his Kingly Office. His work as a King,
was to appoint Laws, etc.

He had not been so faithful as Moses was else; for Moses gave Laws, for the
governing of the Jewish Church. According to all that which God showed Moses in
the Mount, so did he.

2d Use. Consolation to the Servants of God, and that 1. in general, 2. in
particular.

(1) In general, it lays down this comfort, That all the work of your
Salvation and Redemption which Christ undertook, is fully and really
accomplished. Consummatum est. Against all despaires, doubtings, against all
their own unfaithfulness, and distrust. You may live upon the joy and comfort
of this Truth in all your fears. When Conscience accuses, when Satan tempts
you to despair, you may cling to this Doctrine, as a sure refuge. And the
rather, because thy salvation is builded and bottomed upon the fidelity of
Christ, not upon thy faithfulness, but upon Christ's. Now as God laid help upon
one that was mighty to save. So he laid help upon one, who was faithful in
saving.

Thy Salvation is most certain.

(2) That God will give thee all thy good which Christ has purchased. See the
Covenant, Ezech. 36. 25, 26, 27.

2. Particularly, Here arises comfort from every Office of Christ, to all his
members.

1. From his Prophetical Office, these four comforts.

(1) That Jesus Christ will open thy heart to understand, and believe, and
apply those truths which are held out, in, and by the Ministry of the Word.
Thou have a blind mind, darkness clouds thy understanding, etc. Thou want
memory, etc. well, Christ has undertaken this, as thy Prophet, to teach thy
heart, etc. to anoint thy eyes, He is able to remove all the blindness,
rudeness, intractableness, indocibleness of thy soul, etc. Vid. Esa. 54. 13. He
can teach irresistibly, infallibly.

(2) That Jesus Christ will teach thee to put a difference between truth and
error. We live in erroneous times, etc. many false lights, etc. are risen up,
many seducers gone out, etc. well, Christ is a faithful Prophet. And by virtue
of that Office, he has undertaken to lead his Children into all truth, John
16. 13. Ye have an unction, etc. 1 John 2. 20. Esa. 30. 21. To deceive (if it
were possible) the very Elect, that is impossible, Mark 13. 22. For a time,
they may go astray; but Christ their Prophet, will reduce them.

They went out from us, because they were not of us, etc. 1 John 2. 19.

(3) Jesus Christ will at last, root out of his Church error, Heresies, and
false Doctrines, etc. This belongs to his Prophetical Office. He has in all
Ages, done so. He overthrew Arrianisme, etc. All those old errors which
overspread the face of the Church, in the beginning of the Gospel, they are
all routed and scattered. Vid. Rev. 12. 15, 16. They are not the Anabaptists in
Germany. They are not. etc. We may live in hopes, now Toleration is endeavored.

(4) That Jesus Christ will endue his Ministers with gifts of teaching,
governing; and that he will preserve and continue them in his Church,
notwithstanding all the malice of men, and Devils against them, vid. Rev. 2. 1.
2.

The Devil has labored in all Ages, to rout the Ministry. Chariots and
Horsemen, 2 Reg. 13. 14. Antesignani: all shoot at the Colors. I will smite
the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.

Antichrist could never yet put out these Lamps, Stars, vid. Jer. 33. 18, 19,
20. A Gospel-promise.

2. For his Kingly Office, comfort arises, in these five particulars.

(1) That Jesus Christ will settle the Government of his Church, He will not
suffer the Laws he has made, the hedge he has set up, to be always
demolished, vid. Esa. 54. 11, 12, 13, 14. A Gospel-promise. He will fit men
with gifts, and hearts to be Rulers in his Church. Though some should fall off,
after they have put their hands to the Plough. Luke 9. 62.

(2) That he will vanquish all the enemies of thy soul. Corruptions, passions,
etc. These invisible enemies, vid. 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5. vid. 1 John 3. 8.

(3) That He will destroy all the visible enemies of his Church. Antichrist,
etc. the last great enemy, vid. Psalm. 2. 9. Psalm. 110. 5. Rev. 8. init. vid.
Zech. 1. 19. 21. vid. Mich. 4. per totum, especially verse. 9. 13.
Gospel-promise.

(4) That He will communicate, and convey into thee, those gifts, graces, which
are necessary for thee, for all thy Relations. Of his fullness we have all
received, John 1. 16. Col. 1. 19. Jesus Christ is a Feoffee, or Guardian,
entrusted with thy Patrimony of grace. He has no need of thy grace, he has
enough of his own, he will not pocket up any of that which belongs to thee.

(5) That he will effectually gather all his sheep together, vid. John 10. 16.

(3) For his Priestly-Office, much comfort arises.

(1) In reference to the satisfactory part, thy comfort is,

(1) That Jesus Christ has left nothing upon the score, which God can exact
from thee. All that thou did owe to Divine Justice, is faithfully discharged.
The Law, Satan, Conscience, can lay nothing to thy charge, vid. Romans 8. 33, 34.
Heb. 10. 14. vid. Col. 2. 14.

(2) That thy person is accepted through him.

(2) In reference to the Intercessory part of it, thy comfort is,

(1) That he will faithfully present thy Prayers and procure acceptance with
God for them, through Rev. 8. 34.
the sweetness of his incense, though they be rough, harsh, smoky in themselves.

(2) That He will appear, and suffer no plea to fasten against thee in Heaven.
Satan is continually preferring Inditements and Accusations against thee. He is
the accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10.

We may see by his suggestions against Job, Cap. 1. 10. Cap. 2. 4.

As fast as he brings Accusations in, so fast does thy Advocate cast them out,
vid. Zech. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. When Satan shows to God, the filthy Garments of thy
pollution, then does Christ show the glorious Garments of his righteousness,
and so non-suites Satan presently, and casts out the Bill.

And this thou may the rather be confident of, because he is always present
in the Court. Nothing can be entered or done, without his knowledge.

He lives for this very work, Heb. 7. 25.

He is yet in the habit of the High Priest, vid. Rev. 1. 13. He has his Robe
on him, and his curious Girdle, even now in Heaven. Steephen sees him in his
mediatory posture, standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7. 56.

3d Use. Exhortation. 1. That you would believingly and fiducially trust Jesus
Christ with all your concernments. He is able, and besides, he is faithful.
Cast all your cares upon him, and that without wavering, vid. 1 Pet. 5. 7.
venture all upon him. It was spoken to the Church in scattered times. So Psalm.
55. 22. There are many burdens.

1. A burden of sin. 2. A burden of duty. 3. A burden of suffering. 4. A burden
of success. Throw all these upon him boldly.
(2) Make that use which the Apostle commands, vid. 1 John 2. 6. Let us be like
to him in faithfulness, let us be faithful to God, to men, to our selves, in
all matters of trust reposed in us. It was the honor of Jesus Christ, that
Righteousness was the Girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the Girdle of his
reyns, Esa. 11. 5. Let us get this Girdle about us: Faithfulness is one of
Christ's Names, Rev. 19. 11. Let it be our Name also. As we are Christiani a
Christo, so let us be fideles from him, who is Faithful.

(1) We are fallen into unfaithful times, Necessity of urging this Doctrine
threefold.
David's Complaint may be ours, Psalm. 12. 1. or the Prophets complaint, Mich. 7.
5. Every Brother is a supplanter. Treachery is one of the last days sins, 2 Timothy 3. 4. (...). Every where, you may hear sad complaints of unfaithfulness.
Masters complaining of their Servants. People of their Ministers, Subjects of
Rulers, Orphans of their Guardians, Clients of their Advocates, etc. Jer. 9. 2.
therefore very necessary to press this Duty of fidelity.

(2) We all of us have some matter of trust reposed in us, some way or other,
though some more then other; yet all in some case or other, some one Talent or
other. As we are Christians, God has trusted us with our souls, (a great
trust) life, health, time. As we are particularly related, something of trust
is committed to us: Ministers are trusted with peoples souls: Magistrates, they
are trusted with the Laws, etc. Governors of Families, they are trusted with
Children, Servants, etc. There Is no man, but he has some Feoffeship or other.
Stewardship is committed to us all, Ergo, necessary; And the less the trust,
the greater the treachery, because its easy. Your Prentices are trusted in
your hands, by their Parents, for education, nurture, etc.

(3) We have all of us, the same seed of unfaithfulness, which is manifested in
any, who do betray their trust; Ergo, treacherous hearts in the best.

I shall handle this, only in a general way. And herein I shall,

1. Show you wherein fidelity consists. 2. Give some Motives to it. 3. Give
some helps or means.
(1) Fidelity in discharging any Trust or Office, has these three things in
it, which makes it up, viz.

(1) All and every branch, and piece of work belonging to that Office; must be
done, respect must be had to every part of the Commission. Equal respect. These
things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Universality
in respect of the Object of the charge enjoined. You often read in Scripture,
of keeping the Charge, Zech. 3. 7. Partiality overthrowes fidelity. To instance
in particulars, A Minister that is faithful, must deliver the whole Council of
God, Acts 20. 27. He must teach every truth, reprove every sin, confute every
error which is crept abroad in the age he lives in: if he keep back any thing
of that which he is enjoined to deliver, he is an unfaithful Minister, vid. 1 Timothy 5. 21.

A Servant who would be faithful, must perform every piece of his Masters work;
if he do one thing, and leave another undone, he proves unfaithful, vid. 1 Samuel
2. 35.

An Ambassador that would be faithful, must deliver the whole Message of him
who sent him, vid. 1 Samuel 3. 18.

A Magistrate that would be faithful, must discharge every piece of his Duty.

An Executor that would be faithful, must fulfill the whole will of the
Testator, pay every debt, discharge every Legacy, perform every pious and
charitable work.

An Agent or Factor, who would be faithful, must observe all his instructions,
pay every penny enjoined, deliver to him that employed him, every penny he
receives.

An Advocate must plead every part of the Cause, urge every Argument, etc. look
how far any part of our task is omitted willingly, so far we fail of fidelity.

(2) Fidelity must have diligence in acting, and exactness in fulfilling what
is undertaken. All that is done, must be done, as well as is possible, as
seasonably as can be, with all the skill, strength, knowledge we have, or can
attain to. A Minister that is faithful, must not only preach every truth,
confute every error, reprove every sin, but he must do it convincingly, as
powerfully, as fully as he can. A Servant must do his Masters work, as
carefully, perfectly as he can. To this purpose is required, a very diligent
use of all means, helps to fit a person for his employment undertaken, that he
may be able to manage it, with all exactness and dexterity. vid. Genesis 24. 33.
He would not eat, till he had delivered his Embassage. So Jacob, Genesis 31. 6.
and verse. 40. Let him who has an Office, wait upon his Office, vid. Romans 12.
7, 8. A man may be as guilty of an unfaithfulness in a careless and negligent
doing, as in a total and careless omission. As good never a whit, as never the
better, vid. 1 Reg. 20. 33. and 2 Cor. 8. 23. Faithfulness is set out by
diligence, we have often proved diligent in many things.

(3) All that which is done, must be done out of a sincere respect and love to
him that has entrusted, and to those for whom we are entrusted and employed.
Self-seeking and faithfulness have no agreement, they are not consistent. If an
Ambassador discharge all his trust, and that with all exactness, yet if he aim
not at the honor of him who sent him, but at his own honor, he is not a
faithful Ambassador. If a Minister be exact, in discharging his whole trust,
yet if he aim at his own applause, profit, etc, and not at Gods honor, and the
peoples good, he is not faithful. If Job had kept the Crown of Rabbah to
himself, and had not put it on David's head, he had been an unfaithful General:
therefore he sends to David, to come and take the Crown, 2 Samuel 12. 26, 27, 28.
If Abraham's Servant, when he had used all his skill to get Rebeckahs consent,
had kept her for himself, and not brought her to Isaac, he had been an
unfaithful Servant. In this only, Jehu fails of faithfulness: he did every
thing which God had commanded, and he used much exactness and diligence in
doing it; but he acted not for Gods honor, but for his own greatness, 2 Reg.
10. 16. He pretended to act for God, but it was really for himself. If an
Advocate should be diligent in pleading for his Client, and when he has done,
should keep the Inheritance recovered to himself, he would be a treacherous
man. John Baptist shows his fidelity in this, he had been a careful Preacher,
had converted many souls, but he surrenders them all to Christ, and that when
the people had so good an opinion of him, as that they would have adhered to
him, rather then to Christ, vid. Joh. 3. 26, 28, 29. And so our Savior
testifies his own Faithfulness. I seek not my own glory, but the glory of him
that sent me.

If a Servant should toil and sweat about the sowing of his Masters ground,
and the gathering of it in, and then should sell it for himself, and keep his
Master out of possession, would this be faithfulness? If Soldiers sent out
to subdue a City, etc. Should lay a hard siege to it, etc. and after all should
keep it as their own, would you call this faithfulness? would it not be
Treachery, perfidiousnesse?

Thus for the requisites of faithfulness,

(2) By way of motive, much may be said, consider. (1) The excellency of
fidelity, (1) Its a very glorious virtue in it self, in its own Nature. Its
reckoned by our Savior amongst the great matters of the Law of God. vid. Math.
23. 23. By faith is meant fidelity. It has one of the highest Thrones amongst
Christian virtues Magnalia Legis.
and graces. Justice is said to be the Queen or Foundresse of all other
virtues. Fidelity in discharging trust, is no small piece of Justice and
Righteousness. The Law of Justice is violated, when fidelity is nor observed:
there are Righteousness and faithfulness put together very often, as Esa.
11. 5. Hos. 2. 19. 20. A man cannot be just, unless he be faithful. (2) Its
excellent in the use of it. It is one of the great bonds of humane Society;
fidelity is as the very nerves and sinews of all societies, by which they are
tied and kept together. It Is the ground of all commerce between man and man,
Nation and Nation, Kingdom and Kingdom. If you untie this knot, if you cut
this sinew, there is nothing but broils, contentions, fires, strifes,
dissentions in the world; unfaithfullnesse does dissolve and disjoynt all
humane societies.

Mot. 2. Consider the many promises made unto faithfulness, the great reward
which are designed and set apart for it. (1) God has promised to fill him with
blessings, vid. Pro. 28. 20. (...) a man who carefully fulfills every kind of
engagement, and is true to every trust he shall abound with blessings in this
life, he is right heir to all the blessings of God. Solomon in these heavenly
Proverbs, crosses the politic Proverbs used amongst men. They say Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit vivere, faithfulness they think, is the way to beggary.
Solomon here confutes this opinion, assuring us that fidelity is the high way
to prosperity and external happiness.

(2) God has promised eternal happiness unto them who are faithful, vid.
Luc. 12. 42. Luc. 19. 17. and Rev. 2. 10. Paul upon this consideration believes
and hopes for the Crown of Righteousness. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Though he had done
many things weakly, yet he did act in every thing faithfully, Math. 25. 20, 21.
23.

Mot. 3. Consider how honorably the Scripture makes mention of the
faithfulness of men. Pro. 13. 17. a faithful Ambassador is health,
unfaithfullness is sickness, weakness, death, vid. Pro. 25. 13. As the cold of
Snow, etc. And how carefully the faithfullness of men is recorded in the
Scripture. Eliezers faithfullness to Abraham, Genesis 24. Jacobs faithfullness to
Laban, Genesis 31. vid. 2 Reg. 12. 15. how is that to the praise of those workmen,
the Holy Ghost has taken their account, and 2 Reg. 22. 7. and 2 Chr. 34. 12.
vid. Neh. 7. 2. and 2 Chr. 31. 12. Consider this, Ephesians. 6. 21. Col. 1. 7. Col.
4. 7.

4. Consider the odiousness of the sin of Treachery and unfaithfullness,
falsifying of trusts. Its a sin against the very light of Nature. Heathen
Infidels are not guilty of this infidelity. Heathens have blushed at it, Its a
sin which is very scandalous to Religion. Its a sin which causes very great
discusions and breaches. Its a sin which is branded in Scripture, with many
marks of dishonor and reproach. As there is an infamy fastened upon every
sin, so upon no more then upon unfaithfullness. Every man hates the Name of
Perfifidiousness, vid, 2 Sa. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. Treacherous Ziba, Who does not
loath him for his unfaithfulness? vid. Cap. 19. 26, 27. Perfidiousness is a sin
of a double dye, because its a sin against engagement. And its a sin which God
will certainly punnish, both here and hereafter. Many instances in Scripture of
Gods severe hand, against violation of faith.

(1) Of faith in covenants, and promises, vid. 2 Sa. 21. init. though 400.
years afterward, and Jer. 34. 17. 18. ad finem, and Ezech. 17. per totum,
concerning Zedechiahs unfaithfulness in his engagement to the King of Babylon,
vid. ver. 16. 27. etc.

(2) Of Faith in trust.

In all Nations, men who betray trust are accounted more worthy of punishment
then professed enemies. And usually God punnisheth this sin, lege talionis,
Esa. 33. 1.

(3) I shall give something by way of Helps.

If you would be faithful in your trusts, Some things are to be taken heed of.
Some things are to be done.

There are four things to be taken heed of by him who would not be unfaithful.

(1) Be sure that you undertake nothing of trust which is above your ability,
beyond your power. Let this be the first question; Am I able to carry on such a
work? Is the burden proportionable to my Shoulders? Quid humeri valiant quid
far recusent: we must not lay upon a Servant more then he can bear. If it be
too heavy for your strength, if it be longer then your fathom, let it alone;
better, not to act at all, then to act unfaithfully. Many out of Pride, Self
confidence, etc. stick at no undertaking. It was David's wisdom and piety,
that he did 1 Cor. 10. 13. Privilege. Number. 11. ^4, 15, 16.
not aim at, nor ambire any employment, which was higher then his arm could
well reach, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. It is impossible that that should be discharged
faithfully, which is beyond the strength of the undertaker. Our Savior gives
this caution, No man, when he goes to war with a great King, but will consider
first whither he be able, etc. with 10000 to meet him that comes with 20000.
Luc. 14. 31. Every arm is not fit for every work, nor every head for every
employment: every man who is fit to row, is not able to steer the ship; every
Soldier who is fit to fight, is not fit to command. Its a very direct tempting
of God for a Child to take upon his shoulders a heavy-burden, vid. 1 Sa. 17.
32. If Phaeton will mount his fathers Chariot, he may burn himself and the
whole world.

In charity a man may not give beyond ability, Deuteronomy. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 2. much
more in this.

(2) Undertake no charge or trust rashly and inconsiderately, usually he that
is rash and precipitate in undertaking, is unfaithful and tardy in fulfilling.
It Is that expedient, which Solomon propounds, as a help to faithfulness in
promises, Eccles. 5. 2, 4, 5, 6. Consider well before hand, all circumstances,
all conveniences, inconveniences etc. which afterward may arise, vid. Pro. 29.
20. vid. Pro. 25. 8. that which is said of striving, holds as well in all other
matters of undertaking. vid. 2 Samuel 18. 22, 29.

(3) Undertake nothing against your will and judgment, upon any solicitation,
persuasion, etc. This will certainly lay a foundation of unfaithfulness in
discharging; that which is undertaken by an overruled and overpowred will,
cannot be carried on without a failer in execution. There is an unwilling
willingness, vid. 1 Pet. 5. 2. (...): when that which forced the will, or the
practice at least, is taken off, there will either be an utter cessation or a
remissness in acting, vid. To. 14. 5.

(4) Nothing without a fair call. Trust not your selves.

(2) There are things which must be observed.

(1) Be often times looking upon the matter of your undertaking. Acquaint your
selves duly and thoroughly with the matter of your trust, what belongs to your
office, calling, employment, etc. Many men are to seek what belongs to their
office. They do not know their charge, etc. Ger a Table of the particulars,
with which you are entrusted, that ye may know your work; without this it is
impossible you should ever be faithful in any place. Masters, what is your
work to your Servants? Servants, what is your work toward your Masters?
Parents, Children, etc.

John Baptist's converts, vid. Luc. 3. 10. 11. 12.

(2) Be much in prayer, for a faithful and trusty heart; beg this grace of
God, and he will not deny it you: He gave Moses his faithfulness, Number. 12. 7.
He gave David, Samuel, their faithfulness. Solomon first looks upon the
greatness of his charge, and then begs for a wise and faithful heart, 2 Chr.
1. 9. 10. If you lean upon your own strength and neglect, prayer, you will
warp, and be faulty: selfconfidence, is dangerous, Pro. 3. 5, 6, 7.

(3) Frequently remember the account you must give of all your Stewardship:
Think of that Text, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no
longer Steward, Luc. 16. 2. We are but Stewards, and it is required of a
Steward, that he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. vid. Luc. 12. 42. 46. 47. 48.
Consider that your Lord will come to cast over your accounts very shortly.

(4) Meditate much upon the faithfulness of Christ for thee, in every thing he
undertook, he prayed faithfully, and suffered faithfully, and dyed faithfully
etc. and is still faithful in interceding, communicating of grace, blessing of
ordinances, etc.

(5) Think upon the joy of thy Lord, into which the faithful servant shall
enter, Math. 25. 23. A faithful Servant is a good Servant, and that is
accounted well done, which is faithfully done, though it be done with infirmity
and frailty.

Faithful, and called, and chosen, are they which walk with the Lamb, Rev.
17. 14.

(6) Consider the eye of God upon thee in all thy actings, he sees thy
fraudulency and falsehood, etc. his fear will make thee faithful, vid. Neh.
7. 2. Hanani.

(7) Take heed of and keep watch over thy own heart, trust not thy self too
far, Pro. 28. 26. vid. Mal. 2. 14. 15. Watch over your Spirit.

(8) Desire thy Christian friends to have an eye to thee, an over-seeing friend
is a good help.

When you consider the gain of unfaithfulness, remember these things, Gehezi
may by his Treachery, get two Talents of Silver, and two suites of apparel,
but the leprosy shall go along with his gain, 2 Reg. 5. 26. 27.

I might urge this in particulars.

(1) Servants be you faithful to your Masters in all your trust. Do not wrong
nor defraud them. Remember good Eliezer, Genesis 24. read that Chapter often and
study it well: And Jacob, Genesis 31. 6. 40. read that Chapter well.

(1) You are your Masters goods.

The Civilians say, a Servant is not persona, but res. You are his money, Jobs
Servants is reckoned amongst his estate, Job. 1. init.

(2) It Is the way to be rich, Jacob grew rich by his faithfulness, Genesis 31. 8.
9. you may grow rich as Ziba, but you will have a curse with it as he had, and
the brand of Treachery, vid. 2 Samuel 16. init. vid. 2 Reg. 5. 26, 27.

Gehazi got two Suits and two Talents, and the Leprosy with it.

(4) It Is your honor, Pro. 14. 35. the Kings favor is toward a wise Servant.

Do not think it enough to excuse you, that your Masters deal deceitfully with
you. Laban dealt so by Jacob, Genesis 31. 7.

(3) It Is the way to provaile with God for Servants to be faithful to you.

2. Masters, be you faithful to your Servants, perform your Trust.

You undertake to

1. Diligently instruct them in yuor Trade, do this.

2. Have care of their good education, look after their souls. Motives

(1) You have a Master in Heaven.

2. You are Loco parentum to them.

(3) It encourages them in their duty to you: your breach with them, does not
excuse them of any unfaithfulness, yet it will make you guilty of their sin.

(4) They are the spring of the City, may do much good or hurt hereafter.

(5) You can never make them and your Parents recompense, for the breach of
this trust.

(3) Parents: God has entrusted you to see to the education of his Children.
Be faithful in this trust. Motives

1. Preciousnesse of souls would be considered.

2. You have been instruments of conveying poison into their Natures.

3. It will be the renown of your family when you are dead.

4. You shall perish with them and for them, if you fail this trust.

When God shall say, What is become of the Childrens souls I gave thee, what
will you answer?

Mary Wolnoth, April the 8. 1649. (...).
Luke 23. 34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.
(...).

IN this Chapter, we have the saddest Tragedy, that ever was acted upon earth
by the Sons of men, the cruel and bloody murdering of Jesus Christ, by the
Jews his own Contrymen, for whose salvation he came from heaven, the best
of Kings put to death by his own subjects. We may divide this Tragedy into
these five acts, which are the parts of the Chapter. Five Acts of this Tragedy.
1. His Betraying, Cap. 22. v. v. 3. ad 54. 2 His apprehending and arraignment,
Cap. 22. 54. Cap. 23. v. 1. ad 23.


(1) His Betraying. This Act is in the 22. Chapter, ver. 3. etc,

(2) His arraignment and apprehending, ver, 1. ad. 23. in which there are many
things very observable, both concerning the Judges, Herod and Pilate, they post
him from one to another Pilate sends him to Herod, and Herod, when he had made
sufficient sport with him, remands him to Pilate; Neither of them find any
fault in him worthy of death, and yet neither the one, nor the other would
deliver him.

And concerning the prosecutors and witnesses, we see their violent fierceness
and eagerness after his blood.

Though they were told once and again, that neither Pilate nor Herod had found
any thing done by him, worthy of death, yet they would not be satisfied, but
like furious bloodhounds, rather then reasonable men, they cry out for justice
and execution, and would not be appeased with any thing less then this, ver.
5. and ver. 23. Barabbas is released, Christ destroyed.

(3) His Condemnation or sentence, ver. 23, 24, 25. Pilate washes his hands,
Math. 27. 24. 3 His Cond^mnation ver. 23, 24, 25.
Knowing that for envy they had delivered him, ver. 18. pronounces Christ
just; and yet to please a giddy headed multitude, gives a sentence against him.

(4) His execution, ver. 26. ad. 50. in which 4. His execution, ver. 26. ad. 50.
there are many very remarkable thin^s.

(1) Concerning the action. It was done after the most cruel savage,
reproachful and deriding manner, that was possible to in^ent on their parts:
Two thieves with mocking, scorning, etc. And at a great public feast,
Passover: public place, Calvary, Math. 27. 51, 52. etc. a place famous for
execution.

(2) Concerning the Concomitants. There were a concurrence of many strange and
wonderful miracles on Gods part, the Sun darkened, veil rent, etc. the Earth
quaked, Rocks rent, and which was great, One of the malefactors converted, etc.

(3) Concerning Christ, his patience, his piety, ver. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. As
he went to the place of sexecution. And 2 at the time of his execution, ver.
33. etc. mild, candid patient, etc.

(5) His buryall, ver. 50. ad finem. This act 5. His Burial, v. 50. ad finem.
only has something of mercy, love and piety in it. Joseph of Arimathea, who
had not consented, etc.

The words of the Text are within the third part; The prayer of Christ for his
bloody adversaries.

3. Parts. 1. The person to whom he prays, (...): though he was now under
Torment, wrath, etc. Yet he sees Fatherly love in God. However God afflict his
people, yet he is still their Father.

2. The matter of his prayer, (...).

3. The person for whom he prays, (...), the Jews, the Soldiers, Pilate,
etc. all who had a hand in his Death.

A quibus vulneratur illis medetur, vitam procurat illis a quibus occiditur;
illis compatitur a quibus patitur, etc. Aust: Tract. 111. in Ioh.

Doct. Jesus Christ did heartily and freely forgive the worst of his
adversaries, he prays that God would forgive them, who did maliciously embrue
their hands in his innocent blood, the Soldiers who spit in his face, the Jews
who unjustly prosecuted him, Pilate who condemned him, etc. he forgives them
freely, and whilst they are busily employed in the taking away of his life, he
is petitioning the Father for their pardon and forgiveness. It was prophesied
of him long before his incarnation, Esa. 53. 12. and here it is accomplished by
him. As he taught this lession of forgiving enemies unto others, so he did
carefully practice it in himself. He does not break forth into reviling or
raging passion, he does not curse and reproach them, as they did him, but from
his heart entreats for mercy, and begs remission from God for them.

In the opening of this Doctrine I shall show,
1. What is meant by forgiveness, 2. Why Christ begs for this mercy for them:
3. Whether they were all forgiven.
(1) The word (...) does properly and strictly signify a se amovere, ab (...)
mitto, so Math. 4. 20. They presently leaving their nets followed him; (...).
It is used also for to set a man free; Debitorem per acceptilationem, libero,
Budaeus in comment. Gr. Ling. fol. 370. it also signifies Manumitto. It is
especially used for pardoning of Debts and Sins, Math. 6. 12. and Math. 9. 2.
and Math. 12. 31. when God removes a man's sin from him; when God gives the
sinner an acquittance and discharge; and when he breaks those bonds and fetters
in which he is held; then is he said to forgive their sins, vid. Psalm. 103. 12.
pardon is described by removing sins far from us. Job. 10. 14. pardon is
described by acquitting and discharging: so Nah. 1. 3. Romans 6. 22. pardon of
sin is described by making free from sin, so that the meaning of our Savior
is, Father, these sinners have in the taking away of my life brought upon
themselves a great sin; They have contracted a very great debt to themselves,
etc. but do not require this debt from them, let them have an acquittance from
it, remove their sin away from them, etc. I desire no revenge, therefore Father
please to pardon them.

2. Why Christ prays for forgiveness of this sin?

(1) That by this means they might be convinced of their own sin and pray for
themselves, that it might be forgiven them, Christ begs of the Father that he
would give them an acquittance, that so their consciences might be awakened to
ask God forgiveness. This reason Austin gives. oravit miserecordia, ut oraret
miseria: oravit medicus, ut oraret aegrotus; oravit Judex parcere desiderans,
ut reus indulgentiam quaerat. Jesus Christ intended to mollify and pierce their
hearts by this means -- and to bring them to repentance.

(2) To testify his great love and kindness to the sons of men, how unwilling
he was that sin should be their ruin: he did bear a great good will to the
whole Nature which he had assumed, it was a trouble to him to see that any
misery should befall them. Therefore he forgives them, and prays the Father to
do so likewise, it was an act of compassion. Pity moved him to it: He looked
upon them as a company of ignorant people that were doing they knew not what;
and his soul is troubled for them. Therefore he desires it might not be imputed.

Illis compatitur a quibus patitur, Aust.

(3) That he might be (...) an example and pattern to us. That we might all
learn to be willing to forgive them who have done us injury. This is the
reason which the Apostle renders, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. Christ would not only give
us a precept but a pattern too, to this great duty --.

(4) That he might instruct them for what cause his blood was shed; viz. that
it might be a propitiation for the sins of man --, that it was powered out to
purchase pardon, and atonement for all them who should by faith apply it to
themselves, vid. 1 John 2. 2. [Explica], This Christ hinted by this prayer,
better things then Abels blood, Heb. 12. 24.

Ill is petebat veniam a quibus adhuc acci piebat injuriam; non enim attendebat
quod abipsis mordebatur, sed quod pro eis moriebatur, Aust. Tract. 111. in Joh.

(5) To show the willingness of his death, he suffered without the least
regret. He had not so much as the least grudge in his heart, against those, who
caused his Death; he could embrace them in the arms of love, etc. Had he died
involuntarily, he would never have passed by the occasioners of his Death so
freely.

(6) To signify, that the greatest of sinners, are capable of pardon, upon
true Repentance and Humiliation. Of all sinners, those who committed this
murtherous Act upon Christ, are worthily accounted the greatest; and yet there
is place of pardon for them: yea, we read, that even of these, 3000 at one
Sermon of Peter, were upon their Repentance received to mercy, vid. Acts 2. 37.
41. Multi ex populo qui sanguinem fuderunt, postea fide biberunt.

(3) Whether they were all pardoned. The Affirmative may seem to be held,
because God heard Christ in all things which he prayed for. I know thou hear
me always, John 11. 42.

And Christ's intercession is effectual, to save and procure acceptance with
God, for all those for whom he intercedes.

Sol. We read, that many of those who were guilty of Christ's Death, were
afterward converted, and saved by that blood they shed, as has been said,
Acts 2. 37. 41. and is prophesied, Zech. 12. 10. But that all those who were
guilty of his blood, were forgiven; we have no reason to think, yea, the
Scripture hints the contrary. And yet the mediatorious Intercession is not in
vain to any, for whom it is made, but all such for whom he intercedes as
Mediator, shall be saved.

Divines do very well distinguish of the Prayers of Christ. There are two sorts
of Prayers which Christ made.

Those which he made Ex officio mediatoris, as he was Advocate, and Mediator of
the Covenant of Grace, between God and Man; such is that Prayer which is
recorded, John 17. Cap. that Prayer was instituted by Christ, in order to his
mediatory Office; And all those for whom he thus intercedes, shall certainly be
saved.

Those which Christ made Ex Officio hominis privati. Now this prayer in the
Text, belongs to this latter sort, where Christ, as a man made under the Law,
prayed for his enemies, as other of the Servants of God have done. Such was
that Prayer which Christ made against Death, Father, if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me, etc. Mat. 26. 39. 42. 44.

1. Use. I shall only make this one use of it, viz. That we would all learn to
imitate our Savior in this grace, vid. 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides
in him, ought himself so to walk as Christ walked. It Is a very difficult and
hard Lesson, but it is a very glorious Lesson, to be willing to forgive them,
who have done us injuries -- Did Christ pass by such an Act as this, and wilt
not thou?

Obj. But may not a man in any case, require reparation for injuries received,
from the hands of the Magistrate?

Sol. Yes certainly, The Servants of God have done so, and not blamed for it,
vid. Luke 18. 3. And Magistracy is an Ordinance of God for this purpose, vid.
Romans 13. 4. and Deuteronomy. 25. verse. 1. only we must carefully observe these Rules
in such cases, viz.

1. We must not seek this remedy, for every small and trivial offense, we must
not be litigious.

2. This Remedy is not to be sought, till all private means have first been
used, vid. 1 Cor. 6. init.

3. This Remedy must be made use of at last, not so much for the satisfying of
our private wrongs, as for other public ends, as

1. That God may receive honor.

2. That the offender may be reclaimed, amended, etc.

3. Out of love to justice.

4. There must be all possible willingness to surcease from such impleadings
upon the parties willingness to give reasonable satisfaction.

Nor does this hinder the public justice of the Magistrate against others.

So in lawful War, a man may kill his Adversary, and yet forgive him, etc.
And a man may lawfully demand his debts, etc. 2 Reg. 4. 7. But from this
Example of Christ, we are bound to forgive our enemies, so far forth, as
justice may not be prejudiced, or offenders be not encouraged. We must not have
an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, we must study forgiveness, and
forgetfulness; we must forgive.

I would give (1) Some Motives.

(2) Some helps.

Motive 1. Many of the Servants of God, have attained to a very great measure
of this grace. Stephen the Protomartyr, the first that followed his Master this
way, died with a Prayer in his mouth, for the pardoning of his Persecutors,
Acts 7. 60. He suffered very innocently, and very cruelly, and yet he freely
forgave them, while they were casting stones at him, he was casting up prayers
for them; he was pouring out petitions, while they were pouring out his
guiltless blood. Moses, he forgives Miriam, and when the hand of God was broken
forth upon her for his sake, he begs for a plaster, Heal her now O Lord, I
beseech thee, Numb. 12, 13. Joseph, he forgives his Brethren, Genesis 50. 17. 21.
and shows much compassion to them. Philemon, he forgives the injurious dealing
of Onesimus, upon the entreaty of Paul and his submission. These are rare
examples.

Motive 2. This is one of the highest Acts of Christianity. And it is one of
the best evidences that our sins are forgiven of God, vid. Mat. 6. 12. forgive
us as we forgive. Our forgiving of wrongs is not indeed a Cause of Gods
forgiving us; There Is no Cause of forgiveness, besides Gods mercy, and Christ's
merit, but its a sure fruit and consequence of it. Its a Testimony, that God
has been, and will be very indulgent to our offenses, if we find this
disposition in our hearts: and while we retain rancor, and enmity in our
spirits toward others, we can have no confidence or assurance to think, that
God will be propitious to us, vid. Mat. 18. 23. ad finem.

Motive 3. It Is the way to melt and mollify the hearts of injurious dealers. A
soft tongue breaks the bone, Prove. 25. 15. A hard flint is sooner broken upon
a soft Cushion, then upon a hard Marble, vid. Romans 12. 20, 21. This is Gods way
of overcoming a wrong Doer. David's forgiving of Saul, melted his rocky heart,
Thou art more righteous then I, and he wept over him, 1 Samuel 24. 16.

Motive 4. The peaceableness and calmness which follows in a man's spirit, that
is able to forgive. Your forgiving Christians, are the quietest Christians.
Endeavors of revenge, they torment the soul, heat and boil the heart many
times more then the injury received. When a man shall be studying how to
satisfy his fury, the very gathering together, and sharpening these stones of
Revenge, they make more deep wounds in the spirit, then 1000. offenses
received. -- The envious, and the revengeful man, troubles his own flesh.
Injuriarum remedium oblivio. He that has but learned perfectly this Lesson of
forgiving, has a salve against the greatest injuries.

Motive 5. It Is a very honorable frame of heart. He that can thus overcome his
own spirit, is better then he that overcommeth a City. You know him of whom it
is said, That he never forgot any thing but injuries.

Anger may fall into a wise man's breast, but it lodges in none but the bosom
of fools, Eccles. 7. 9.

You know who says, Its the glory of a man to pass by transgressions, Prove.
19. 11.

Its the brightest Crown a man can wear.

Helps are of two sorts,

(1) Negative.

(2) Positive.

1. Negatively, you must take heed of four things.

(1) Take heed of pride, and haughtiness of spirit. Pride of heart, foments
revenge, Prove. 28. 25. Should such a one as I, be so injuriously dealt with?
This keeps out thoughts of forgiveness, and gives strength to animosities, vid.
Romans 12. 16, 17.

(2) Take heed of passion and rash anger. If anger lodge in the bosom,
forgiveness will not be suffered to enter, vid. Romans 12. 19. He that yields
much to wrath, will never yield to any motion of forgiveness. The Apostle, Ephesians.
4. 26. gives this direction; Put away anger, etc. and then, Forgive, etc. It is
good Advice, Rebeckah gives Jacob, to this purpose, Genesis 27. 45.

(3) Take heed of envy and malice. This is the Apostles Counsel, Ephesians. 4, 31,
32. put away anger, malice, etc. Malice is nothing else but festered Anger.

(4) Take heed of harkening to the Counsel and advice of whisperers and Tale
bearers. These will put the Javelin into the hand; these are the Devils
bellows, who go about to kindle sparks of variance.

(2) Positively. Observe these Directions.

1. Look upon all wrongs, injuries, violences, oppressions, etc. done by men,
as coming out of the hand of God. Messengers, they bear no blame. He that
looks upon Gods hand, drawing the Bow, will be easily persuaded, to forgive the
Arrow, which is but a dead Instrument in it self, and could neither put it self
upon the string, nor make such violent impression, if the hand of him that drew
it, had not been in it. If thy name be unjustly blasted, say, God has moved
the tongue of such a one to reproach: if violence be done to thy person, say,
God has given thee a blow by the hand of an Enemy. Though he had no reason to
smite thee, yet God who lifted up his hand, had, etc.

The Executioner is but the Judges hand, he should be forgiven, though the
Judge and witness have both done wrong, etc.

This no doubt, was one thing, which moved Joseph to forgive his Brethren: You
sent me not, but God, Genesis 45. 8. Though they were cruel, yet they were Gods
Arrows.

(2) Consider this, that if you belong to God, good shall betide you, for all
injuries, and from all injuries and offenses done to you: Will you not forgive
a man, who runs at you with a Sword to kill you, and by that thrust, only
breaks an Impostume in the body, which would destroy you? Surely yes, All the
violence, injuries, men do to you, are no other, etc. You may well forgive them
therefore, vid. 2 Cor. 12. 13.

(3) Believe, and be persuaded, that God is indeed a God of Recompenses. God
will requite, if thou forgive; but if thou forgive not, God will not plead thy
cause. This was that consideration which was in our Savior, 1 Pet. 2. 23. he
committed himself to him, who judges righteously, vid. Romans 12. 19.

(4) How much evil thou have done to others, vid. Eccles. 7. 22. vid. Tit. 3.
2. 3. we are all habitually injurious, and if thou had the temptations, etc.
which others have, thou would do as they, or worse.

(5) Meditate very much upon all the wrongs which God has freely forgiven
thee, vid. Ephesians. 4. ult. and Mat. 18. 28, 29. ad finem.

This will answer all Objections thy heart can make, against forgiving others.

If it be objected,

Object. 1. He is a vile person, etc.

Sol. Not so vile as thou art, in respect of God. Job 19. 19.

Obj. 2. I never did him hurt, but much good, etc.

Sol. Did God ever do thee any hurt? Mich. 6. 3. Jer. 2. 31.

Obj. 3. He has multiplied wrongs to me.

Sol. Not half so many as thou have against God.

Obj. 4. He pretended friendship to me.

Sol. Did not thou pretend friendship to God?

Obj. I have often threatened, and yet forborne him.

Sol. Does not God do so by thee?

Obj. My wrongs are public.

Sol. And are not the wrongs thou do to God, as public, etc?

(6) Get a Spirit of brotherly love. Love will cover a multitude of sins, vid.
1 Pet. 4. 8.

This is a Gospel Grace, labor for it.

But what manner of forgiveness must it be?

(1) It must be, ex Animo. Cordial, not complementall. Mat. 18. ult. from your
hearts, forgive not one another your Trespasses. Such is Gods to usward.

(2) There must be forgetting, as well as forgiving. Those who forgive, and
will not forget, do not forgive at all.

When God forgives, he forgets.

God casts them behind his back, and blots them out, etc.

(3) There must be a manifestation of all Acts of friendship afterward, as
though the offense had never been committed.

God holds familiar correspondency with the sinner, when he has pardoned him,
so must we --

Thou shall lift up thy face with joy, Thou shall not bear any grudge, Lev. 18,
19.

I shall conclude with that of our Savior, Luke 17. 3, 4.

It Is the Duty of them who have done wrong, to submit and repent, and then
though he offend often, the injured is bound to forgive.

Quest. But you will say, What shall we do to Psalm. 140. 8. Ps. 7. 9.
the enemies of Christ, and the Gospel? may we not pray against them? must they
be forgiven?

Sol. 1. We may pray against the Plots of the enemies of God, and of our own
enemies.

Sol. 2. We may pray against the persons of invincible enemies of Christ, God,
the Gospel, the Church, as they are Gods enemies, and as they incorrigible and
implacable enemies: so the Servants of God have done, Psalm. 74. 22, 23. vid.
Psalm. 49. 23. Psalm. 10. 1, 2. Psalm 58. 6, 7 8. 9. and Psalm. 59. 5. etc. Christ
did so, Psalm. 109. init, and per totum. Only herein we must take care,

(1) That we do not particularly conclude of this or that person, that he is an
incorrigible enemy. This is a secret, with which we must not meddle: the
Prophets, they had this revealed to them by God, we have not. And we must be
very careful,

(2) That when we pray against such, nothing of personal private revenge, lie
at the bottom of our prayers, nor come into our minds with liking that we do
not pray against their persons, as they have, or may do us personally hurt; but
merely,

1. Out of true affection to Gods rule, and which we would have preserved, by
the destruction of its enemies. And

2. Out of zeal to Gods glory, that it may be manifested by this means, to the
ends of the Earth, Psalm. 59. 13. and Esa. 37. 17, 18. the reproaching of God,
was more to him, then his own reproaching.

2d Use. Consolation, from hence, arises to every true member of Christ, viz.
If Christ as man, prayed for the forgiveness, and for the good of them, who
shed his blood, etc. he will much more now, as Mediator, make constant and
careful intercession for thee, who desire to be his friend, and preserve his
honor: if a man can forgive an enemy, he will certainly forgive a Child's
miscarriage, whom he knows to love him, and not willingly to offend. See what
is promised to all the godly, Mal. 3. 17. as a Son who serves him.

Mary Wolnoth, April the 29. 1649. (...).
Mark 3. 5. Being grieved for the hardness of their hearts.
(...).

IN this Chapter, we have a great miraculous cure, wrought by our Savior, upon
a man, who had a withered hand. We may take notice of four things in this story,

(1) The place where, in the Synagogue.

(2) The time when, on the Sabbath Day.

(3) The Cure, and the manner of it, he only spoke the word, and it was healed.

(4) What passed between Christ and the Jews, before the Cure.

1. On their parts, we may observe these two things.

(1) They question with him, about the lawfulness of healing on the
Sabbath Day; for Math. observes that 12th Matthew. verse. 10.

(2) They did carefully observe, what he would do, that they might maliciously
accuse him, so verse. 2.

(2) On Christ's part, we may note these two things, viz.

1. His expostulation with them, to convince them of the lawfulness of this
matter, verse. 4. which is further amplified by a like instance, Matthew. 12. 11.
What man amongst you having one sheep, if it fall into the ditch, etc.

2. His just indignation and anger against them for their malice and blindness,
verse. 5. together, with his grief for them.

In the words I have read, we have these two things.

(1) The sinful malady and distemper of the Jews, hardness of heart, (...).

(2) The compassionate carriage of Christ, toward this their distemper, (...).

I shall not much meddle with their distemper, only give you this Note from it,
and a word of Use.

Doct. That naturally there is great hardness, blindness, and benummedness upon
the hearts of men. Men's hearts by nature, are very brawny, Chemn. harm. in
locum.
very hard, (...), proprie significat callosam concretionem, instar Tophi, ut
in artieulis podagricorum, quae in membro callo obducto, non facile admittit
tactum, and sensum; sed duritie sua quasi repellit, ut non sentiatur. This is
the natural frame of every man's heart; steely, flinty, benumbed, and senselesly
obdurate: the Prophet Zech. calls it an Adamant, Cap. 7. 12. which is the
hardest of all stones. The Prophet Jeremiah sets it out by the hardest of
Metals, Jer. 6. 28. and so the Prophet Esa. Cap. 48. 4. This hard skin is
spread over the souls of all men naturally. This is an hereditary Disease.

1. Use. This shows the reason, why the preaching of the Word, and all the
Dispensations of grace, are so ineffectual, and do so little good upon the
hearts of most men: why there are so few converted and brought home to God: the
heart is hard, hard by nature, hardened more by Custom in sinning. It Is not so
easy a matter, to work in marbles, to mollify steel, etc. Rocks are not so
soon softened: rather we may admire, that any one heart should be broken, and
brought in to God, when as by nature they are so obdurate; that water should
come out of the flint.

2d Use. The Ministers of God should, from hence, learn to use all their might
and skill, in dispensing the word of Gods grace to the Sons of men. They must
cry aloud, and lift up their voice like a Trumpet, Esa. 58. 1. They must not
only smite it softly, but use all their strength, and all little enough. Those
who would soften ^^el, have need of the hottest fire, and heaviest Hammers, and
the strongest Arms. Chips will not do it. Ministers, they work in stones:
therefore have need to use all their strength. The hearts of men are baked and
crusted with sin; nay, they are dead in sin, and without very much stirring,
very little good is like to be done upon such Subjects.

But I pass this. And I shall now only speak to the second. Our Saviors
affection toward them in this Condition. He was grieved.

(...). Condolesceus. The preposition (...), has in this place, as Beza notes,
peculiarem vim quandam. It does not signify the same that pati or compati,
with the Latins; as one, qui aliorum dolor ad Commiserationem commovetur: Nec
enim isti obdurati suam vicem dolebant, sed adversus Christum frendebant: sed
hoc verbo significatur, Christum fuisse quidem graviter illorum desperata
improbitate offensum, sed ita ut illorum etiam misereretur. He was so angry
with them, as that he was also grieved for them. That Lesson which I would
learn from hence, is this.

Doct. That the sinful Distempers and miscar, riages of other men, was a matter
of grief and sorrow to the soul of Jesus Christ. They did not only provoke his
Spirit to Anger, but to grief and sorrow also. He could not only chide, but he
could also sigh and weep, to behold their desperate wickedness. As he was moved
oftentimes to sorrow, because of the poenal evils of men; so was he moved to
grief, because of their sinful evils. He knew no sin in himself, he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. He had no sinful venom
within, nor was ever guilty of the least sinful Imagination, word, or thought,
yet could his heart break within him, to behold the woeful miscarriages of
others. He could power out tears, when he saw men pouring out their
abominations. The unbelief, the blasphemies, the prophanesses which he observed
amongst the Sons of men, were a cause of grief, vexation, and trouble to his
righteous soul, from day to day.

And this is grounded upon these Considerations, viz.

(1) Reas. From that hearty respect and affection he bore to the honor of God
his Father. As the Father had a singular affection to the Son, so the Son bare
a singular love to his Father. He did every thing for his Fathers glory, Joh.
8. 49. He lived, he died, he wrought, he prayed, he preached for the glory of
his Father. He rejoiced, when he saw his Father glorified, and he mourned when
he was dishonored. Now he knew that the sins and impieties of men, did deface
his Fathers glory, therefore he was both angry, and grieved for them, vid.
Psalm. 69. 9. That this Psalm was penned concerning Christ, will appear from
hence, that it is cited in the new Testament, as relating to him, vid. John 2.
17. and Romans 15. 3. He saw that his Father was reproached by the sins of men,
therefore did they fall so heavily upon his Spirit. A dutiful affectionate
Child, is troubled to see, or hear his Fathers Name blasted.

(2) Reas. From that love he bare to the souls of men, our Savior knew the
price and worth of a soul: how it was created, how it was redeemed, what the
saving of it would cost; and he knew, that sin would be the ruin and
destruction of precious souls. Therefore did his heart bleed within him, when
he saw men do any thing which would ruin their souls. These Jews did not know
what the sad consequence of their malicious hardness against Jesus Christ would
be, but Christ knew whereto it must necessarily tend, to the destroying of that
Jewel, in comparison of which, all the World was nothing worthy: therefore he
mourned for them. He saw such invaluable things as souls, ready to fall into
the pit of everlasting perdition, and he could not behold it, without sighs
and tears.

(3) Reas. From the Antipathy and Hatred, which the soul of Christ bare to sin.
It was a thing which he loathed with a perfect hatred; he could not look upon
it, without displeasure and grief: what a man hates naturally, he cannot behold
without trouble. Now whether we look upon Christ as God, or as man, we shall
find sin to be abominable to his soul.

Its contrary to his very Nature.

(4) Reas. That he might teach them what they should do, he expresses grief,
that he might set them a grieving. His eyes drop, that he might open in their
hearts, the sluices of godly sorrow. In Nature, one mournful countenance, has a
great influence upon others, to make them mourn. They must needs think, that
there was something more then ordinary, in sin, which did so affect the heart
of Jesus Christ. Our Savior had a design upon them, to persuade with them, to
look more narrowly into the Nature of sin, than they did before. The tears
which Christ shed for sin, does discover the odiousness of it, as much as any
thing. Next to his blood, nothing discovers sins vileness, more than his sighs
and tears. Fools make a mock of sin, Prove. 14. 9. But the holy wisdom of God,
who understands it better then we do, he laments it.

(5) Reas. Particularly, for those Jews he was grieved, to consider their
great unkindness toward himself: how all his miracles, all his preaching, and
all his love toward them, was slighted, vilified, contemned, could not
reclaim them, could not convert them to God. Though he had spent his strength
amongst them, though he had done such miracles, as never were wrought, yet
their hearts were hardened against him, and against his Doctrine. They had from
their very infancy, been exercised in the Law of Moses, they had known the
Writings of the Prophets; and besides this, they had enjoyed the Ministry of
Christ himself, and yet were hardened. This causes grief in Christ, it was
wilful blindness.

1. Use. Information 1. That to sorrow and mourn for sin, is not an
Anti-Evangelical frame of spirit. Its most suitable to a Gospel-frame of heart
to bewail sin. It does not derogate from the grace of Christ, or the Gospel;
yea, it honors Christ, and honors the grace of the Gospel. Jesus Christ, who
brought grace into the World, he bewailes the sins of the Jews; and whosoever
is like Christ, will be affected as he was: the purest times of the Gospel will
be the most sin-lamenting times, Ezech. 12. 10, 11, etc.

(2) The truth of the humane Nature of Jesus Christ. He was very man, as well
as very God. He was made like unto us, in all things, sin only excepted. He had
the very passions belonging to humane Nature. Anger, love, hatred, fear, joy,
sorrow, etc. It Is true in us, these passions are not without sin, because our
Natures are corrupted: therefore our passions exceed their due bounds, and
overflow the banks; but in Jesus Christ, there was Naturae Integritas:
therefore passions in him, were without the least irregularity. He could sorrow
without excesle, he could be angry without sin, etc. whenever we read of any
mention of these passions in Christ, let our Faith from hence be established in
the truth of the Doctrine of his Humanity against all those soul-destroying
opinions which would deny this, and overthrow our Faith. As some deny the
Divinity of Christ, so others there have been, who have denied his humanity.
The Familists make the Incarnation of Christ a mere Allegory: the Manichees,
the Eutychians, the Marcionites taught, that Christ really, and indeed, had
neither body nor soul, but was man only in appearance. Therefore let us be,
from hence, strengthened against all such: he was (...), as its said of Elias,
Jam. 5. 17. therefore, very man.

2d Use. Exhortation (1) To that Duty enjoined by the Apostle, 1 John 2. 6.
This is a Duty not much cared for by Christians.

(1) There are very many, who can reproach others for their sins. They can
revile and rail upon the iniquities of others, but very few who lament them.

(2) There are many, who encourage and tempt others to do wickedly, such are
those in Prove. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. This was the sin of Jonadab, 2 Samuel 13. 5. He
did blow up those sparks of uncleanness which he discovered in his heart; he
whets the knife which was too sharp already. This also was Jezebels sin, 1 Reg.
21. 7. 11. 25. This was the sin of those Jews at Antioch, Acts 13. 50. and
Acts 14. 2. the Jews at Iconium.

(3) There are also very many every where, who are glad to hear of the haltings
and miscarriages of others, they can rejoice over their defilements. And

(4) There are not a few, who mourn and lament, because of the piety and
forwardness of others, in that which is good, and labor to quench and put out
their graces. Such were those of whom we read, Acts 16. 19, 20. and those, Acts
17. 5. and those in Acts 19. 25. 27. But every few, who do indeed lay to heart,
the sins of others. Its very necessary there, to urge this point, we live in a
sinful Age, wherein iniquity abounds. The present age is stained with the sins
of former Ages, besides all the new sins committed. Oppression, profaneness,
Covenant Breaking, Covenant-despising, Heresy, Apostasy, etc.

I would (1) lay down some Motives. (2) Subjoyn some helps.

(1) Motive. Consider the practice of the Servants of God. They have been like
Christ, in this respect, vid. Lot. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. there are two words, which
set out this frame of his heart, (...), verse. 7. and (...), verse. 8. the things
which he saw and heard amongst the Sodomites, were the very breaking of his
heart. So Neh. Cap. 13. 8. and holy Ezra, Cap. 9. 3, 4. is put into a deep
Agony, upon this occasion. David, Psalm. 119. 158. 136. His eyes were like
Floodgates, because of the transgressions of other men. Daniel he was grieved
in his Spirit, in the midst of his body, etc. Dan. 10. 2, 3. the Apostle Paul,
(...), for the sins of the Athenians: and, Phil. 3. 18. he could not without
tears, mention the sins committed by others: and those Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Ezech. 9. 4. These are noble Presidents for our Imitation.

(2) This frame of heart, will evidence all our anger, and passionate
exclamations, and bitter cryings out against the sins of others, to be real,
sincere, and Christian. Every where, a man may hear very loud cries, (and not
too loud for such astonishing stupendous wickedness) against the iniquities
committed. Now I dare pronounce against every man, who only clamours against
others sins, but does not grieve, etc. that all such fiery indignation is not
against the sins done, but against the men that do them; for wherever anger
against sin is right, there will follow grief. I need not go out of the Text to
prove this. Our Savior has put Indignation and grief together. He is not
truly angry at other men's sins, who does not (...). Thou would certainly be
as vile, as desperately wicked, as any are, had thou their Temptations, etc.
If thou do not from thy heart, bewail their misdoings. Haec vera est zeli
moderatio, quum de hominum impiorum exitio sumus anxii and pro impietate
condolescimus. Calvin Textum? All your fury and zeal against sin, is but
distempered rage, if it do not end in grief.

(3) All the sins of others, which thou do not grieve for, will be made thy
own sins, and required at thy hands. The Apostle gives us very Christian
Counsel, not to be partakers with other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. And Ephesians. 5.
11. that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. Now it is
a most certain Truth, that all the iniquities of others, which do not work us
to grief, will be in the day of Judgment laid to our charge. For this, see 1
Cor. 5. 2. He lays that sin of incest, to the charge of the Church, if they
should not lament it. Who would become accessory to all the great iniquities of
the Kingdom!

(4) By this means, thou shall obtain the assurance of the Remission of thy
own sins, from the hand of the Lord. As David found in his own bosom, the
benefit of all the Prayers he made for others, Psalm. 35. 13. so will you find
the benefit of all thy sighs, for the sins of others. Daniel, when he was
lamenting the sins of his People before, the Lord had an Angel dispatched to
him, to give him certain Intelligence of his own acceptance with God, Dan. 9.
20, 21, 22, 23.

(5) However God shall please to deal with others sins, thou shall have a seal
of preservation set upon thy forehead, when the evil day comes. Josiahs
mourning for the wickedness of his age, procured peace for himself all his
days, vid. 1 Reg. 22. 19, 20. And those who wept and lamented for the
abominations done in Jerusalem, were marked by an Angel, against the Day of
Gods public visitation, vid. Ezech. 9. 4.

(6) It Is an argument of Sincerity, and of real Hatred of sin. Men may mourn
for their own sins, out of self-love, etc.

For helps, take these six.

(1) Labor for a public Spirit. A narrow selfish Spirit, as it hinders men
from rejoicing at the graces of their Brethren, so it keeps men from bewailing
the sins of their Brethren. Look not every man on his own, but upon the things
of there is also. Phil. 2. 4. What is that to us? say the Jews to Judas, when he
told them of the great sin he had committed in crucifying Jesus Christ, Mat.
27. 4.

(2) Get your hearts truly, and thoroughly broken for your own sins. If the
heart have not yet been even pricked to the quick for thy own sins, it is not
possible that thou should ever truly grieve for the sins of others. Josiahs
heart being mortified for his own offenses, is so much affected with the
Transgressions of his Brethren, 1 Reg. 22. 19.

(3) Be well studied in the Nature of sin. How much vileness it has in it, and
how much evil arises from it. What odious names are put upon it in the
Scripture. Filthiness, Darkness, Abomination, Davus omnia perturbat: what
Confusions, Desolations, has it wrought in the World?

(4) Consider the venom and poison of thy own Nature. Thou have in thy heart,
all the abominations which others act. They have them in the fruit, and thou
have them in the root. And if thy temptations were as violent as others are,
and the grace of God restraining, or renewing were not more powerful in thee
than in others; thy feet would run in the way, in which others walk, and thy
hands would act as great and as horrid wickednesses as others do.

(5) Get thy heart affected with Gods honor.

(6) Get thy heart affected with the love of souls.

(2) This should persuade all of us to abstain from sin for Christ his sake. Do
not voluntarily put him to grief. Be not occasion of sorrow to him, who is the
cause of all your joy. Hardness of heart will still grieve him, your
impenitency will put him to grief. The Apostle speaks of crucifying afresh the
Son of God, Heb. 6. 6. (...). Not as if Christ in glory were capable of
suffering, but by so doing, they put themselves into the same Predicament with
Judas, and the rest, who crucified Christ, etc. They do by Apostasy from
Christ, allow and approve of the crucifying him as just, etc. so Jesus Christ
in glory, is not capable of any mourning, etc. yet the Scripture speaks of the
trouble which our sins are both to Christ, and Psalm. 55. 18.
to God, and to the Spirit, etc. Therefore we are forbidden to grieve the holy
Spirit of God, etc. Ephesians. 4. 10. Methinks we should not find in our hearts, to
take any pleasure, in doing that which made our Savior grieve. Thou that
take pleasure in sin, art as unlike Christ, as light is to darkness, Who
would grieve his friend?

3d Use. Consolation.

(1) That he will, if thou desire, give thee power and strength against thy
sin; he will subdue thy sin for thee, and help thee to overcome it. He that
grieves to see another fall into misery, will not deny him his assistance, to
get out of his misery, vid. Esa 63. 9. because their afflictions were his
trouble, therefore he redeemed, assisted, and helped them out of their
afflictions: if Christ be grieved to see Mary and Martha mourn, he will be
persuaded to remove the cause of their mourning, John 11. 33. 38. We may be
more confident of his assistance against our sinful evils, because those are
absolutely and directly against us. Therefore go to him for power, to mortify
sin, and make this thy Argument, Say to him, in prayer, after this manner,
Lord, sin is a cause of grief to thy soul, and it is likewise, a trouble to the
poor Creature; why then, Lord, is it not put to death? Arise, dear Redeemer,
and rid thy self and thy servants, of that which puts us to grief, etc.

(2) That Jesus Christ will be avenged of Satan, and of all such as tempt men
to sin.

And as I would entreat you to sorrow for all sins; so particularly, for this
which Christ bewailed, The hardness of men's hearts in standing out against the
Gospel. In that so many maliciously oppo^e and reject Jesus Christ with so much
obstinacy.

Has the Ministry any better entertainment now, then Christ's Ministry had?

Many only watch them, that they may accuse them. They lay a snare for him that
reproves in the gate, Esa. 29. 21.

Many rage, and even gnash their Teeth at them, are filled with Indignation.

If they preach the Duty of men in Authority, then the great Statists of the
times are up in a hurrey. Ministers must not meddle with State-matters.

If against Toleration of errors, then they are Incendiaries, etc.

If they preach Repentance, then they are legal Preachers.

If they preach zeal, then they are too fiery.

Neither John Baptists severity, nor Christ's Comity, could please the Jews,
Matthew. 11. 17, 18.

If they preach up the Kingdom of Christ, then they preach up their own Power.

Well, you who are godly, even you, make up all in grieving, etc.

Mary Wolnoth, May the 20. 1649. (...).
Romans 15. 3. For Christ also pleased not himself.
(...).

THe Apostle having spent the former Chapter in giving exhortations to stronger
Christians, how they should carry themselves toward their weaker brethren,
about the use of Christian liberty, in things indifferent, viz. that they
should neither be censorious in judging one another, nor should put a stumbling
block in the way of one another, to occasion their falling; does go on with the
same subject in this Chapter, ver. 13. In which he lays down the Doctrine, and
confirms it with some more arguments.

The Doctrine is laid down in the 1. ver. we then that are strong, ought to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to pelase our selves.

The arguments to press this Doctrine, are reduced to two heads.

(1) From the command and injunction of God laid upon every Christian, vor. 2.
Let every one please his Neighbor for his good, to his edification. God has
given to every Christian a charge over his brother, as well as over himself,
therefore he must not only look after himself and his own concernments.

(2) From the example of Christ, ver. 3. he did not please himself; Therefore
such as profess faith in him, must study to be as he was. Now that Jesus
Christ did not please himself is proved farther, ver. 8 and 9. ad. 13. he
sought the benefit both of the Jews, and of the Gentiles. Therefore both Jews
and Gentiles converted to the faith, should by his example learn to please,
and to seek the edification one of another; This the Apostle urges from the
general end of the Scripture, ver. 4. And concludes with a prayer and
exhortation, ver. 5, 6, 7. for them, That they might be of the same mind
toward one another.

In the words I have read, we have two things.

1. The glorious commendation given to Christ, he pleased not himself.

2. The Inforcement of this Example upon these Christians. For Christ, etc.

1. What self-pleasing is? There is a good self-pleasing, viz. when a man takes
pleasure in good, Pro. 21. 15. And a sinful self-pleasing.

1. When a man takes pleasure in sin, Esa. 2. 6.

2. When a man looks no farther then himself, so in the Text, its opposed to
the pleasing of our Neighbor, ver. 2. and what he does.

I shall first handle the grace it self by way of Doctrine. And then enforce
the imitation of it, in the application.

The doctrine is this, That Jesus Christ did not please himself. Nothing was
more remote from Jesus Christ, while he was upon the earth, then self-seeking
and self-pleasing. This we shall find made good two ways.

(1) By his professions. He does many times publicly profess against
self-pleasing, and self-seeking; And we are sure that his Testimony is true.
Men's bare expressions, especially concerning themselves, are not valuable.
Their tongues and hearts many times are contrary: But Jesus Christ, neither did
any sin, nor had any guile found in his lips, 1 Pet. 2. 22. he was not
acquainted with fraudulency; nothing but truth lay in his heart, and nothing
but truth came out of his lips, therefore we may subscribe, yea we must
subscribe to his Testimony. Now we have this Testimony, Joh. 5. 30. Joh. 8. 50.

(2) If we look upon his practice, we shall find it, yet more clearly, his
actions answered his words. Men they often profess against self-pleasing; that
they my please themselves more securely: self-denying, votes make but more way
for self-seeking practices, but Christ did not only profess self-denial, but
practice it, we shall find self-denial written upon all his actions --.
Self-detriment and self-losse, and self-shame, was all which Jesus Christ
gained.

(1) In taking our nature upon him, he lost his glory; the beauty and
brightness of the Divine nature, was shadowed and hid under the rags of our
flesh, the ashes of the humane flesh did obscure the shining beams of the
Divine Nature, therefore the Apostle says, he emptied himself, Phil. 2. 7, 8.
he made himself of no reputation, (...). He fell from the height of glory, to
the depth of shame, from the Throne to the Dunghill.

(2) When he had taken our flesh, what advantage of his own did he look after?

(1) He denied his own ease, his life was full of labor, watchfullnesse,
painfulnesse, weariness.

(2) He sought not his own honor, he was exposed to shame, reproach, contempt,
disgrace, etc. he was vilified by every tongue, scorned and stigmatized by
every mouth.

(3) He sought not his own profit, he had no lands, no houses, no revenues:
Foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, the Son of man has not
where to lay his head, he was (...), 2 Cor. 8, 9. he begd a draught of water,
Joh. 4. 7.

(4) He sought not his own pleasure, he lived a retired, obscure life.

There Is a twofold pleasing of men.

(1) A sinful pleasing of them.

(1) When men are humord, and flatterd in their sin: of this the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 1. 10.

(2) When we act only for the applause of men, (...), Ephesians. 6. 6. Col. 3 22.

(2) A ^o^y pleasing of men.

(1) When we apply our selves to their weakness, in things lawful, for their
salvation, 1 Cor. 10. 33.

(2) When we seek their profit, Romans 15. 2.

(5) He sought not his own life, he submitted himself to the most vile,
shameful, painful, cursed death of the Cross. If you trace him from his
birth to his grave, you shall find nothing that can be called self-pleasing, or
self-seeking. All he acted, all he did was out of respect to others: he was
borne for others, he labored, he wept, he preached, he prayed, he lived, he
dyed, not for himself, but for others.

He might have had all the honors, glory, preferment, etc. the world could
afford, but he sought none of these things, he would leave any thing of
self-concernment, when he had opportunity to do others good.

The reasons are these. The (...)


(1) Self-pleasing was not suitable to the stae and condition which Christ had
taken upon himself. He took upon himself the form of a Servant. Now Servants
are not to seek themselves, but them for whom they are employed and entrusted.
This is the reason which the Apostle gives for this very thing, Phil. 2. 4, 5.
7. he speaks, ver. 5. how Christ looked not at his own things, etc. and the
reason is hinted, ver. 7. he took upon him the form of a Servant. And this is
the very reason which he gives his Disciples of that self-neglect, which they
saw in him, Joh. 4. 34. my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work. Christ in his word, requires of all Servants, that they look
not at what is of advantage to themselves, but at what may be for the benefit
of those that Tit. 2. 9.
have chosen them, 2 Timothy 2. 4. Even Soldiers; they must please them, who have
chosen them, not themselves. And having taken upon him the office of a Servant,
he would act as became a Servant, vid. Joh. 6. 38.

(2) From the strength and Ardency of the affection which he bare to the glory
of God, and the good of men. The honor of his Father was precious to him, the
advantaging of his Church was the delight of his Soul. He could neither have
brought glory to his Father, nor been beneficial to men, if he had pleased
himself and sought himself, therefore he looks off himself, and looks to
others. The seeking of himself would have been the losing of the world; the
pleasing of himself would have been the destruction of others; his ease would
have been his Churches torment, his pleasure would have been their pain, etc.
Paul he was so far in love with the Churches good, that he can be content to
neglect himself, for their advantage, vid. 2 Timothy 2. 10. if self and Church
stood in competition, as many times they did, he would displease self to please
the Church. The love of Christ is stronger then the love of 10000 Paul's. --

(3) That he might teach us the sinfulness and danger of the sin of
self-pleasing and prevent us from falling into it, what the Apostle speaks of
the patient suffering of Christ, we may say also of this, vid. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Therefore we find that when the Apostles endeavor to take off Christians, from
this they ordinarily urge the example of Christ. As there are two ways,
whereby the excellency of duty appears, viz. Gods command and Christ's example;
so there are also two ways whereby the evil of sin appears, viz. the
prohibition of Gods law, and the care of Christ in declining it.

(4) From that humanity, curtesy, and comity, which was in Jesus Christ, where
there is sweetness of nature, there will not be self-pleasing, usually
self-pleasing is found in morose, rugged, harsh natures; such as Nabal was.

But Nature in Jesus Christ was in its perfection. The Scripture makes mention
of the grace of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 9. i. e. the goodness of his
disposition. There was no soureness of nature in our Savior. Grace is powered
into thy lips, Psalm. 45.

(5) Our Savior knew well that the end of his coming into the world, was of
public, not of private and personal concernment, therefore his desire was to
please, to seek others not himself. The wisdom and happiness of men is to
know their end, and to serve their end; our Savior had this wisdom, we shall
find him very often arguing in diverse cases, from the end of his coming into
the world. I came not to do my own will, Io. 6. 38.

1. Use. Information.

(1) We may from hence take notice of the very great humility of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he was so lowly and so full of condescension, that he would stoop to
the meanest of the sons of men. Though he was the excellent glory, yet he did
not so far insist upon his own greatness, as to the disregard, and overlook
the concernments of others; He did undervalue and pass over (as I may say) the
things of personal concernment, that he might take care of the things of
others. Great men they think it too far below themselves, to take into their
thoughts the things of others, to look to them in their actings, etc. they
judge it a disparagement, but Jesus Christ did not so. If they may please,
profit, advantage themselves, they matter not though many be ruined, undone,
destroyed, -- Jesus Christ was of another mind; He would not do any thing,
which might scandalize anorher, though he might have done it: he paid tribute
to avoid scandalizing of others, Math. 17. 27,

(2) We may from hence see the reason of several Acts of Christ.

(1) Why it was that our Lord Jesus did so contentedly pass by and disregard
all the indignities, all the hard usage he receives from men, sometimes he was
called Beelzebub a Samaritan, and, has a Devil a Wine bibber, and riotous
person, yet we do not read that he was much moved, etc. when he was reviled, he
reviled not again, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 23. The cause is, He did not please himself.

(1) It lets us see the reason also why he was so little taken with popular
applause. The Euges, Hosannas of men did not much affect him, when he had
wrought great miracles, to noise his fame, he would retire into the
wilderness, he acted his greatest works often in corners, When his brethren
importune him to take a public stage to act upon, he slights them, etc. Joh.
7. 4. he rejects it.

(3) Why his converse was with men of lowest condition, etc. he came as readily
to the poor Cottage, as to the Centurion's house.

(4) Why he did bear so many weaknesses in his Disciples.

How (...) breeds these following lusts,

(1) It breeds Covetuousnesse: (...) will 2 Timothy 3. 2.
be (...), he that seeks himself, will rake all things to himself; such a man
will never make an end of heaping up, and that by any means, direct or
indirect. Covetuousnesse is the root of all evil, and self love, is the cause
and root of that.

(2) (...) boasters. (...) est mendacium quo nob^s plura arrogamus and
tribuimus; quam revera possidemus, Keck. Ethic. And (...) is one that boasts
of what he has not, a great sin. Self-seekers, they look upon themselves, as
men of great worth: therefore there will be arrogating, boasting of their
excellencies, and Deserts: its an Epithet of the Peacock, (Lee Critic). They
arrogate to themselves, the Names of Saints, etc. high Titles, etc.

(3) (...). Proud. Praeferentes se aliis, cosque praese contemnentes --.
Self-love will bring in this sin.

(4) (...), Blasphemers. Qui bonorum famam non morantur laedere. Self-admirers
must needs cast dirt upon all Faces, that they may shine alone.

(5) (...). Despicientes legitimam authoritatem. Anti-magistratical.
Self-seekers cannot endure any Superior, they must Regnare soli --

(6) (...), Unthankful. It Is against the Nature of self-seeking to acknowledge
any receipt, or to recompense any courtefies, etc.

(7) (...), Unholy. Profane men, without holiness, not caring for the study of
it. He that seeks himself, cannot study holiness, that checks his lust, bids
him seek others, therefore he turns profane, etc.

(8) (...), Without Natural Affection. Respecting no Relations. All Relations
of consanguinity, affinity, are swallowed up in self.

(9) (...). Covenant-breakers. Self-seekers will never make Covenants, but upon
selfish respects; and upon selfish respects, they will violate all again.

(10) (...). False accusers. Qui co^fictis criminibus aliorum innocentiam
onerant. They must make all others Devils, that they themselves may appear
Saints. They must brand others, that Self may be clear.

(11) (...). Incontinent. Men that wallow in all kind of voluptuousness. A
self-seeker will deny himself in nothing. Self must indulge it self.

(12) (...). Fierce. Cruel as Beasts, without meekness or humanity.

(13) (...). Despisers of them that are good.

(14) (...) Traitors. Qui amicos benemeritos periculis vitae objiciunt, who
expose their friends, that have well deserved of them, to danger of their life.

(15) (...). Heady. Men that have no other guide but will. Rash, inconsiderate,
sumpta metaphora ab avium pullis qui implumes dum vola^e conantur humi
decidunt. A Metaphor taken from the young-ones of Birds, which endeavor to
fly, before they are feathered.

(16) (...). High-minded. Pleasing themselves with an opinion of their own
worth and excellency. Inflati, puffed up with the thoughts of their own glory.

(17) (...). Lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God. A self-seeker, will
at any time cast Gods commands behind his back, to take up his own pleasure.

(18) (...). Having a form, etc.

This is the Colors, or Ensign of this black Regiment. They have an appearance
of godliness.

Their Colors are white, though their actions are very black.

The Cup is gilded, that the poison may be less suspected.

God is set up in the Banner, that the Devil may lodge more quietly in the Camp.

2d Use. Exhortation. Let us imitate our Savior in this grace, vid. 1 John 2.
6. This Doctrine was never more necessary, then in our times. Self-pleasing,
and self-seeking, is the Epidemical Disease of the present Age. Every one seeks
himself, and not the things of Jesus Christ, was the Apostles complaint of old,
Phil. 2. 21. We may take up the same Complaint now, too truly. The greatest
part of men look no further then themselves; if they be pleased, they care not
who be displeased; if they be advantaged, they care not who be prejudiced; if
their Houses be builded, they care not if all others Habitations be pulled
down: if they can but swim, they matter not if all others sink. Look to thy own
House David, etc. Shake off this frame of Spirit, all ye who pretend to Jesus,
etc.

I shall (1) give you some Motives.

(2) Propound some Helps, or Directions.

Motive 1. Consider the many pressing Commands of God to this purpose. The
Scripture is very frequent in commending the care and respect of others to us,
vid. Phil. 2. 4. (...), to look as to the scope or mark we aim at, Look not
every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. And
Joh. 13. 14. Ye ought also to wash one another feet, i. e. not to look after
your own welfare, but after the welfare of others also, Gal. 5. 13. By love,
serve one another, Gal. 6. 2. 1 These. 5. 11. Edify one another, even as also
ye do. Heb. 10. 24. Consider one another, (...), to provoke unto love, and to
good works. The care of others welfare, is commanded no less then our own.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Mat. 19. 19. 1 Cor. 10. 24.

Motive 2. You have the examples of the Saints. They have displeasured
themselves to please others. The Apostle Paul, he could be contented to be
vilified, abused, imprisoned, etc. any thing, so he might do others good, 1
Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. in rebus mediis. Yea, when his own personal glory, and
the good of his Brethren, came into competition, though he was in a strait for
a while, yet does he set aside his present glory, that he might advantage
others, Phil. 1. 22, 23, 24. He rather chooses to live a laborious life, to be
instrumental for the good of the Church, then go to Heaven, and take his Crown.
Its a famous commendation which Paul gives to Timotheus, Phil. 2. 20, 21. and
so Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 29, 30. vid. 1 Cor. 10. 33. Consider that of Moses
and Paul, Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3. They laid their souls to pledge.

Motive 3. Consider the danger of self-seeking and self-pleasing. See it in a
few particulars. These 4.

Consider (1) Its the inlet to many other sins, 2 Timothy 3. 2. (...) Self-love
marches in the front, and see what a black Regiment follows in the rear;
Covetousness, Pride, Boasting, etc. its a fruitful breeder of lusts. It
ingenders pride, its the nurse of covetousness, its the rise of boasting, and
vain glory: its the stirrup of blasphemy, its the root of Disobedience, its the
ground of unthankfulness, its the spring of unholiness, its the bane of natural
affection, its the Midwife of Covenant Breaking, its the womb of false
accusations, its the fuel of incontinence, its the kindler of fierceness, it
casts contempt upon good men, its the key of treason, its the high road to
headiness and ambition, its the gate of voluptuousness and hatred of God. These
Children will follow the Mother. A sinful self-pleaser will in time stick at no
wickedness.

Consider (2) It is the cause of jars, dissentions, quarrellings, it dissolves
societies, it breaks concord. The Apostle looks upon this, as the sluice of
division and variance, and therefore enjoins, that for the preventing of
Discord, this sluice may be stopped up, Phil. 2. init. 1, 2. There is the
exhortation to unity. As a help to this, he cautions against three things,
which will unty the strongest knots in the World, viz. vain glory, pride, ver.
3. and this Incendiary of self-seeking, verse. 4. when men look at their own
things, and neglect others, they will raise up flames. Luther upon Psalm. 127.
Ego plane in ea opinione sum, Monarchias long diutius duraturas, si Monarchae
hoc unum pronomen (Ego) omnisissent, if Self were left out. Those who are
neglected, will think themselves wronged, and from hence will proceed
bitterness, envying, malignities, and at last deadly hatred and division: where
self-pleasers rule the Roast, there discontents and variances, will grow and
heighten. Self-pleasers hate every one, and all others hate them; and from
hatred, arise animosities, oppositions, contradictions, and at last, downright
contentions.

Consider (4) Its the way for a man to lose himself, and to displease himself.
No men lose themselves more at the long-run, then such as make it their
business to se^k themselves. None do more cross themselves, then such as study
only the pleasing of themselves. Jonah saved himself, by sacrificing himself
for others, Jonah. 1. 12. 17. And so did David, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Me me ad sum qui
fe ci, in me convertite ferrum. Bur. Divis. p. 117. Gods way of punishing
self-seeking, is by self-undoing. It does take off the care and tuition of God
from such, and it does enrage, and set men against them. God will not seek the
good of a self-seeker, and all men seek his hurt: therefore his condition must
needs be dangerous: What our Savior says in another case, in Matthew. 25. is as
true in this.

Consider (4) What a great sin it is in it self, its to make self an Idol, its
to make self our end, which is a breach of the first Command: None of us, says
the Apostle, lives unto himself, neither does any of us die to himself, says
the Apostle, Romans 14. 7. He makes it an Argument against self-pleasing.
Self-seeking, is an absolute shaking off the Authority and Dominion of God over
us. It is the professing of our selves to be sui juris, which is not allowable
to any created Nature. Its Gods excellency, that he cannot act any thing, but
out of self-respect; For men to do so, is to make themselves Gods.

Motive 4. In all the Creation, there is no Creature which is made for it self:
the Universe, say the Philosophers, is maintained by union of one Creature with
another. A Vacuum would dissolve all: Heavy things, will ascend to prevent a
Vacuum. Draw air out of a Pipe, and water will ascend to fill it. The Sun
shines to others, the Fountain is filled for others, the Earth brings forth
Fruit for others, the Trees feed others, the Fire warms others, etc. The Angels
they serve others, they are (...). Heb. 1. ult. Yea, the very beasts, they are
for the use and service of others. And shall man the noblest Creature, shall
Christians the noblest men, be only for themselves? The Heathen man could say
long since, Non nobis solum nati sumus, partem parents, partem patria, partem
amici vendicant. And many of the more generous Heathens, have contemned and
slighted self, for the good of others. They have sacrificed their own lives, to
save their Country. They have drowned themselves to preserve their Brethren
from drowning. They have pulled down their own Houses, to repair the public.
Decius, and Nuntius, and Codrus, and Curtius, for this very act, are called
piac^^ares homines, or sacri homines. St. Austin speaking of their Acts, says,
that it was strenue magis factum, quam been. But it should teach Christians in
a religious regular manner, according to the Scripture, to disregard self, for
the good of others. Should a Christian burn whole Cities and Kingdoms, to save
their own Houses, when as Heathens have set their own on fire, to preserve
others from the flame? This is shameful and abominable.

(2) For Helps or Directions, consider these following,

A Receipt of seven Ingredients.

(1) Take heed of Pride and Vain glory. As self-seeking ingenders pride, so
pride does much foment and nourish this sin of self-pleasing. Humility makes
men stoop to others, and take their good into consideration; but pride fastens
a man's eyes only upon himself. A proud man scorns all others, and all others
scorn him. Where there is most condescension, and humility, there will be the
least self-pleasing. The Apostle prescribes the Physic of Humility, to prevent
the Disease of self-pleasing, where it is not; and to cure it, where it is,
vid, Phil. 2, 3, 4.

In the 4th Verse, we have the duty enjoined, Look not every man on his own
things, etc. in the 3d Verse, he does removere prohibens, Let nothing be done
through strife and vain glory, etc. Could we but think meanly of our selves,
and highly of others, we would please others though by our own displeasure.

(2) Beg for, and labor to attain unto a very great measure of Brotherly love.
Self-love is the breeder of self-pleasing; and want of brotherly love, is the
rise of brother-neglecting. The truth is, uncharitableness is the Foundation of
self-pleasing; you must dry up the Fountain, if you would have the streams to
cease. Were there more love, there would be less self-pleasing. The Apostle
describing the Nature of Charity, makes this one property of it, (...), 1 Cor.
13. 5. Charity, it begins at home, but it does not end there. It has two eyes,
one for it self, another for the Brethren: if it work with one hand for it
self, it works for the Brethren with the other; yea, it will go naked it self,
rather then pluck the covering from off others. Self-seeking is so scalding hot
in our days, because brotherly love and charity are so Icy-cold.

(3) Often read over, and think upon that golden Rule of our Savior,
whatsoever ye would, that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, Mat. 7.
12. Its a very equitable, and a very comprehensive Rule. The remembering and
observing of this one Rule, would sufficiently help us to discharge all the
Duties of the 2d Table, if there were no more said of them. There Is not a man
upon Earth, but would have his concernments cared for by others; he would have
himself, and his affairs, taken into thought by others: how unreasonable and
unjust is it then, that any man should only seek, and act for himself, when as
he would have no other to do so?

(4) Consider often of the Union and Conjunction there is between thee and
others. There is Vinculum Gratiae, between Believers and believers; They are
members of one mystical body. There is Commune vinculum Natura, between man and
man; They are one Communi humanitate. There is Vinculum Nationis, and
Cognationis, and Amicitiae, we shall find ties enough upon us, to take in the
care of more then our selves; yea, to leave out the care of none: if one member
of the body seek it self only, the rest will soon wither, and come to nothing:
You know the fable of the Hands and other members, which would take no care of
the Belly; they thought the belly was given to pleasure, etc. The hands would
not procure any more sustenance, etc. the issue was, Both the belly, and the
rest of the members were suddenly wasted, etc. vid. 1 Cor. 12. 26.

The like may be said for the members of political societies, etc.

(5) Often think of the meaness of self, what a low, unworthy, and mean end he
propounds, who confines his care, thoughts, etc. only within the narrow
compass of Self. Noble Spirits aim at high ends. Now the more that are
concerned in your actings, the more noble your actings are. Ronum quo communius
e^ melius. And I may say further, he seeks himself most profitably, who does
not seek himself solely, but lodges with others. Every man's self, every man's
interest lies truly and properly more in Community, then in Unity; more in the
general, then it does in his particular good. Self is a shadow, a nothing.

(6) Often consider of that of the Apostle, the Ministration of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. God has given nothing to
any man for himself alone; neither parts, graces, comforts, etc. others have a
share in them, vid. 2 Cor. 1. 4. it may be applied to all things received, as
well as comforts etc.

And as no man should please himself, so especially, those who are in places of
public trust. Magistrates, they are for public good, Romans 13. 4. They are
Fountains, Pilots, Stars, etc. Self-seeking in a Magistrate, is the
transgressing of his main end, which is to be for others. They are to stitch up
the breaches of the Commonwealth, nor to share it in parts amongst themselves.
What was said to Shebna, should be minded by such, Esa. 22. 15, 16. etc. Wise
Citizens, would choose such into no public employment.

(7) Seek your selves spiritually, that you may be taken off from sinful
self-seeking. Did but men seek pardon of sin, seek to make their Calling and
Election sure, seek salvation, as they should, etc. They would have no time,
nor no heart to seek such poor things as self is.

I shall conclude all with this one Consideration, That its just, that God
should leave such to themselves, who seek only themselves, vid. Ezech. 22. 16.
Thou shall take thine Inheritance in thy self, in the sight of the Heathen.
It Is a threatening, as verse. 14, 15. shows. Self will do a man more mischief,
then all the Devils in Hell. Eripe me a meipso, should be our prayer, vid.
Prove. 14. 14. To be given up to self, is worse than to be given up to Satan. To
do what is right in our own heart. To walk after the sight of our own eyes, how
sinful is it?

Mary Wolnoth, July the 8th. 1649. (...).
Mark 3. 5. Joh. 2. 17. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up.
(...).

WE have a prophecy of the Messiah by Malachi, the last of the Prophets, that
the Messenger of the Covenant should come to his Temple, and sit as a refiner
and purifier of Silver, to purify the Sons of Levi, that they may offer unto
the Lord, an offering in righteousness, Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. And in this Chapter
we have the accomplishment of this prophecy. Jesus Christ, as was foretold,
beginning his prophetical office, comes to purge his Temple of those
corruptions, which through the ignorance and profaneness of the people, and
the covetousness of the Priests and Scribes had been introduced and continued
in that place.

In the Chapter we have two great miracles.

(1) The turning of water into wine at a marriage feast in Cana of Galile, ver.
1. ad 12.

(2) The reforming and purging out of the abuses of the Temple, ver. 12. ad
finem. It is Jerome in Math. 21. 12.
the opinion of Jerome, that this was (all circumstances considered) one of the
greatest miracles which Christ wrought.

Multi arbitrantur maxima esse signorum quod Lazarus suscitatus est, quod
caecus ex utero lumen accepit, quod transfiguratus in monte gloriam ostendit
triumphantis: mihi autem inter omnia signa quae fecit Dominus, hoc videtur esse
mirabilius, quod unus homo, and illo tempore contemptibilis, and in tantum
vilis ut postea crucifigeretur, Scribis and Pharisaeis contra se saevientibus
and videntibus lucra sua destrui, potuerit ad unius flagelli verbera tantam
eijcere multitudinem, mensasque avertere, and confringere cathedras, and talia
facere quae infinitus non fecisset exercitus.

There were at that time a very great multitude of people come from all parts
to observe the Passover. The Scribes, Priests, and Pharisees were sufficiently
enraged against Christ, and the Tower called Arx Antonia, wherein were the
Soldiers of the Temple, was near at hand; and yet that no man should dare to
oppose Christ in this act; that one man under tempt and scorn, not with sword
and arms, but with a whip made of small cords, which they who brought Sheep
and Oxen, had laid there for their use, should drive so many out of the Temple,
and not one of the Merchants or people, so much as speak a word in opposition,
this is miraculous, and more then prodigious

In this miracle we have these two things.

1. The miracle it self: in which,

(1) The time when. A little before the Jewish passover, ver. 13.

(2) The place where: the Temple. Not that part of it, into which the Priests
only entered, but the Atrium, or outward Court, in which the people prayed,
were taught, and offered sacrifices, ver. 14.

(3) The occason of this miracle, this is ver. 14. The original of this
custom, is from that which is written, Deuteronomy. 14. 24. The Jews were at this
time scattered throughout almost all Nations, now that they might not at their
repairing to Jerusalem for worship, be constrained to run up and down to
provide sacrifices, it was agreed by the Priests and Scribes, etc. that those
things which were necessary for sacrifice, should be sold about the Temple
--.This was their pretense, but that which really caused this, was the
covetuousnesse of the Priests, who made great gain by these merchandizings.

(4) The manner of it, ver. 15.

(5) The reason rendered, ver. 16. make not my Fathers house, etc. The Temple
was a shadow and type of those things, the lively Image whereof is in Christ;
therefore it was to be applied only to spiritual uses, for this reason our
Savior denies it to be lawful to convert it to such a common use as a Market
place.

(2) The effect or consequence of this miracle.

1. The effect it wrought upon the Disciples, ver. 17. Not that they presently
remembered this; but afterward when they had been better instructed, then God
brought this Scripture to their minds, as the reason of this act of Christ;
with which they were satisfied.

2. The effect it wrought upon the Jews: this is twofold.

(1) Some quarreld with him, ver. 28, 19, 20, etc.

(2) Others did seemingly profess faith and subjection to him, ver. 23, 24,
25. upon this and other miracles; whom Christ did not trust. The Text is the
effect which this great Heroic act of Christ wrought on his Disciples. They
remembered, etc. This Scripture is Psalm. 69. 9. where David writing of himself
as a Type of Christ has these words, The zeal, etc.

I shall handle them distinctly, as spoken of Christ.

In them we have two things.

(1) An excellent virtue or grace of Christ, 1. Grace in the Habit
the zeal of thy house.

(2) The operativenesse of this grace, has eaten me up, the activity of it.
Grace in exercise.


Zeal, (...). If we consider the word, it comes from a verb that signifies to
boil (...), 1. Wh^t* zeal is.
it signifies the hissing noise of water when it boyles. If we consider the
Nature of the thing, we find it used both in a good sense, and in a bad sense.
There is a zeal which is a fruit of the Spirit. And there is also a zeal
which is a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. The fruits of the 2 Cor. 7. 11. (...)
flesh are manifest, which are these, Adulteries, etc. Emulations, (...). When
it is used in a bad sense it signifies,

(1) Envy. Acts 5. 17. (...), and Acts 7. 9. the Patriarchs moved with envy
(...), Jam. 3. 14. If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory
not, (...). vid. Bezam in textum de zelo distinguentem

(2) For misguided blind zeal, Phil. 3. 9. concerning zeal, persecuting the
Church, (...), Gal. 1. 14. being more exceedingly zealous of the Traditions of
my Fathers, (...).

(3) For contentiousness of spirit, Jam. 3. 16. where strife and envying is,
there is confusion (...).

(4) For pretended jealousy and affection toward another, Gal. 4. 17. They
zealously affect you, but not well, (...).

When it is used in a good sense, it signifies,

(1) Godly jealousy, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy, (...).

(2) For a good Emulation, when we desire to be followers, and imitators of
others, in that which is good, Gal. 4. 18. It Is good to be ze^lous always in a
good matter, (...), 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet earnestly the best gifts, (...).

(3) For the violent fervor of all the affection toward others, whom we love,
Gal. 4. 13. I bear him record, that he has a great zeal for you, (...). And so
it is used here in the Text, (...). Some of the Schoo^men there are, who only
place this in the affection of love; others make it to be a mixture of love and
anger: but its clear, that it has place in every other affection, as well as
these, and the height and intention of every affection, is called zeal. The
height of anger is the zeal of anger: the height of pity, is the zeal of
pity, and the height of love, is the zeal of love, etc. Of thy house. This is
the Object of Christ's 2. What Gods House is.
zeal, the house of God, which by a Synechdoche, does comprehend the whole
worship and service of God, appointed to be observed in the Temple. All matters
of Religion and Worship. Has eaten me up, (...). This 3. What to devour, is.
shows the fervor and heat of Christ's zeal, it was not any ordinary heat, but
an extraordinary and violent, which put forth it self by such an heroical Act
as this was; Christ was even as if he had had fire in his bowels, he could not
refrain himself. The Lesson which we may learn, is this,

The Lord Jesus Christ, was exceeding zealous Doct.
against all manner of Corruptions and defilements in Religion, and in the
worship of God. He had in his breast a very hot zeal for his Fathers house, and
all the Ordinances and Services thereof. As it was prophesied of him, that he
should come as a Refiner to his Temple, and should be very hot for the worship
of God; so was his carriage from his taking upon him the public Ministry, to
the day of his Death and crucifying.

There are three things, wherein Christ manifested (...), proved 3. ways.
his zeal this way. (1) He did very zealously assert the purity of Religion and
Gods worship, in his public Ministry, and zealously defend it against the
corrupters of it. In the 5th 6th and 7th Chapters of Matthew. in that excellent
Sermon upon the Mount, we shall find many Instructions given by our Savior,
both concerning matters of Doctrine, and concerning matters of worship, as
Chap. 5. verse. 21. ad finem, and Chapter 6. concerning prayer, fasting: vid.
Chap. 6. v. 5. ad 16. concerning prayer: and v. 16. ad 19. concerning the right
manner of fasting. And Mat. 15. v. 1. ad 21, Christ preaches against their
Traditions, which they had brought into the Church. And Matthew. 19. 3. ad 10.
preaches against the Doctrine of Divorce, which they had introduced. And Chap.
22. v. 23. he cleares the Doctrine of the Resurrection against the sadduces.
And he that reads seriously the Evangelists, will find, that there was no
corruption, either in Doctrine, or worship, but Christ boldly, and zealously
refuted it in his Ministry.

(2) As he had zeal to reprove, so he had zeal to reform the corruptions which
he had reproved. We read of two solemn Reformations of things amiss, in the
worship of God, which Christ made with his own hands. One we have in the Text.
Another we read of Mat. 21. 12, 13. They are two several stories. This is John
was done in his entrance, upon his Prophetical and Kingly Office, as appears
John 2. 11. That in Matthew. was toward the end of his life. In this of John,
Christ drove only the sellers out; but in that of Matthew. he proceeded farther,
and cast out both them that sold, and them that bought. Here in John, our
Savior speaks only of the deceit of their Merchandise; but there in Mat. he
speaks of a Den. of Thieves. First, he rebukes them mildly, then afterward
more severely, so that twice Christ took this work into his own hand.

(3) His zeal for the worship of God, will appear by his care in the
institution of Gospel Worship, when he had abolished the Jewish, vid. Mat. 28.
19. 20. and Mat. 26. 26, 27. And Acts 1. 3. those 40. days which he spent in
the World, after his Resurrection, were passed in giving them order about
worship, and other matters of the Church. He gave them punctual Directions for
every piece of worship, and binds up their hands, that they should exactly
keep to the Rule Mat. 28. 20.

The Reasons hereof, are these.

(1) The work of reforming corruptions in the (...).
Church, did appertain to Christ, by virtue of his Offices. As the Prophet and
King of his Church, it lay upon him to remove all the Rubbish which was in the
worship of God. Jesus Christ was the great Reformer, and the great visitor of
the Church, sent from Heaven for this purpose. John Baptist, the immediate
forerunner of Christ, describes the manner of his coming, Mat. 3. 13. whose
Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, etc. He could not
have been a faithful King, if his soul had not been stirred within him, at the
beholding of such corruptions. All the Prophets which foretold of him, speak of
that glory which he should bring to the Church, Hag. 2. 7. vid. Zech. 6. 12,
13. and Mal. 3. init.

(2) This proceeded from that love, and dutiful Respect he bore to his Father.
There is nothing, by which God is more dishonored, then by corruptions in
worship. The Name of God is in his worship; and the soyling of Gods worship, is
the defiling of his Name. Now Gods honor was very dear to Christ; therefore
his zeal burned within him, to see such abuse done to his Father. This is that
which is in the verse before the Text, verse. 16. Make not my Fathers House, an
house of Merchandise. The Temple was the House of God, the place of his rest,
the place where he had set his Name, etc. It was the Court of God upon Earth,
etc. Therefore was our Savior so offended, to see it polluted.

(3) From that love and affection he bore to Religion, and to the worship of
God. Jesus Christ saw a great Beauty in the holy Institutions of God in the
Church. The Ordinances of God were glorious in his sight: therefore was he so
zealous against the corruptions which were in them. Vid. Mat. 7. 6. Holy
things, Pearls: those words, testify what our Savior thought of the
Institutions of God. They were Pearls in his sight, they were holy things in
his esteem, and the corruptions of men, would soil these Pearls, would
profane these holy things, etc.

(4) From that love he bore to the souls of this People.

1. Some amongst them, who loved the worship of God, were without question,
much grieved to behold such defilements. And for their sake, did our Savior
now act so vigorously, vid. Zeph. 3. 18. Its spoken there, of the ^educing of
the Captivity. God would do it for their sakes, who were grieved for the solemn
Assembly, etc. Now its not to be imagined, but many were grieved, especially
after Christ, had the first time acted about it, Ergo.

2. All of them had loss by it. This must needs cause an Intermission of those
things which were to be performed in this place. Both public Instruction, and
public sacrifices were to be performed in this place, etc. They had not then
liberty to sacrifice elsewhere, as we have now, etc.

1. Use. This is good news for us, and a ground of consolation, to all the
Sons and Daughters of the Church, that are so in truth; That the corruptions
which are now in the Church, shall at last be purged out, and reformed. It is
now many years, since we engaged our selves in a work of Reformation: where the
work has stuck, and still sticks, the God of Heaven knows very well; for he
can see clearly, through all the masks which the Sons of men shall put upon
their faces, who have hindered the sweeping out of corrupt and noysom
Doctrines, and who have impeded the removal of false Worships, and settling the
true. And the Lord Jesus has not lost one spark of his zeal, by ascending into
Heaven. And besides,

1. It belongs as much to him now, as it did while he was on Earth: he has not
laid aside any of those Offices which he had, when he was upon Earth. He is
still Prophet, and he is still King. He cannot be deposed, nor dethroned from
his Regency and Kingship over the Church, Psalm. 110. per totum. What charge he
had on Earth, he has still in Heaven.

2. His love to his Father, is not any thing abated: his affections are still,
within him, burning and boiling.

3. Nor is his love to the worship of God, and Religion cooled: the worship of
God, and the truth of Religion, is still as precious to him, as ever it was on
Earth.

(4) Nor are his bowels straightened in the least measure, toward his Servants on
Earth. He is still as sensible of their mournings for the corruption of
worship, and the defilement of Ordinances, as ever he was. And he is as careful
of their edification, as when he was on Earth.

The Reasons of his former zeal continue, and therefore his zeal also
continues.

And besides all this, he has given us many promises, which he will never
break, that his worship in the Gospel Church, shall be established in purity,
vid. Esa. 9. 7. Esa. 54, 11, 12. which refers to the Gospel Church, Rev. 21.
per totum. Most understand it of a Reformation of the Church in this World.

Therefore lift up your heads, O ye mournful Sons of Zion to whom the present
corruptions in the Church are a burden, Christ will at last free you from this
burden.

And let it not seem the less possible, or feisible, because of the small
power that is visible on the Churches part, or for the great visible power that
opposes it. Christ's whip of Cords is strong enough against all the power of
Creatures. If he do but take up his whip, he will soon put to flight all
opposers.

2d Use. How unlike to Jesus Christ, are the greatest part of Christians in our
days? we may take up sad complaints against sundry sorts of persons.

(1) There are some like Gallio, that care for no such things, as the worship
of God. They are Act. 18. 17.
indifferent, whether they have Religion amongst them or no: if they have the
worship of God, they can be content, and if the Tabernacle of God be removed,
they can bear it without grief, it does not much trouble their spirits, though
all the Synagogues of God in the Land be burnt up. So they may enjoy their
civil liberties, have free Trading, secure their Estates, raise their Families,
fill their Treasuries with the good things of this life, they are not much
solicitous for the concernments of Religion, or the worship of God. They will
not much dispute against Religion; neither will they contend for it with any
great life: the presence of Religion is no great burden to them, and the want
of it is no great loss. They will not repine, if they have the Ark, and they
will not be greatly offended if they have it not; if the Ordinances of God be
in the Temple, it is well; and if the buyers and sellers there be, it is not much
amiss. They stand in aequilibrio, as to these matters: if Religion dwell in
their Coasts, they will not thrust it out of doors, and if it be removing, they
will not lament after it, nor beg its continuance. They are affected with these
matters, as some men are with their ordinary friends; if they will stay with
them, they will not bid them be gone; and if they have a mind to depart, they
will not desire their stay, etc.

They are concerning Religion of that mind, which Paul commands, believing
Husbands to be of, toward their unbelieving Wives, 1 Cor. 7. 13. 15. If she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away; but if she will depart,
let her depart: so they say, and so they act concerning Religion, and the
Ordinances of God.

I have a few things to say to such. They are not like the Gaderenes, Matthew. 8.
34. Nor are they like the two Disciples, Luke 24. 29.

1. Certainly, they are not acted by the Spirit of Jesus Christ: his was a
fiery Spirit, but theirs is a cold Spirit; he had life, they are dead.

2. God has threatened, that he will spue such lukewarm Christians out of his
mouth, Rev. 3. 15, 16. They are just between Heaven and Hell. They are like
Ephraim, Hos. 7. 8. Halfbaked. The Prophet Elijah, chides such halters as
these, 1 Reg. 18. 21.

3. The Ordinances of God, are not very like to do much good upon the Spirits
of such Christians, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. Heaven must be stormed, or never entered.

(2) Others there are, who are zealous against the worship of God, and against
Religion. Some are very zealous for superstition: the Traditions of their
Fathers. Unsawful and unwarranted Ceremonies, and sinful Inventions of men in
the worship of God: such was Demetrius, and his Associates, Acts 19. 24. He was
as hot for the golden shrines for Diana as if they had been the golden Plates
of the Temple. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Such were those old Idolaters,
with whom the Prophet Jeremiah, had to do, Jer. 44. 16, 17. We will do as we
have done, We and our Fathers, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven. They are
grieved to see any endeavor to purge the waters of the Sanctuary from
defilements.

Others are zealous for errors in Doctrine. They would have an unlimited
Toleration of all opinions, and all kinds of worship in the Church of God. The
Woman Jezebel shall have liberty to vent her falsehoods, as well as the
Prophets of God to preach their Truths. Antichrist shall have his Throne as
well as Christ. Altars shall be set up to the unknown God, as well as to the
true God: the Ministers of Satan, shall keep as free Markets as the Ministers
of Christ: the envious man shall have Fieldroom to scatter his Tares, as well
as the Seedsmen of the Gospel their wheat. And if any of the Ministers of
Christ, out of zeal to Gods glory, endeavor to whip out these abuses out of
the Temple, they are looked upon as firebrands, Incendiaries, by them who are
the true Incendiaries. They are reputed worse then Thieves, because they
disturb this Den of Thieves, from nesting in the Temple of God. They are looked
upon as abominable, because they would sweep out these abominations, They are
thought unworthy to have a liberty in the Kingdom, because they will not
proclaim a liberty to all these false ways in the Church, the Kingdom of
Christ.

This zeal is certainly none of that which was in Christ. It is Diabolical
zeal, like the unruly Tongue, set on fire of Hell, James 3. 6.

Jesus Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple; and these lash
such as would whip them out. Jesus Christ was sore displeased with the Angel of
Thyatira, for suffering such corruptions, Rev. 2. 20. and they are displeased
with the Angels of the Churches, because they will not tolerate such
corruptions. Jesus Christ would not have any bid God speed to such, 2 Epist.
John 10: and they would have such embraced and encouraged. Jesus Christ says,
the mouths of such as teach false Doctrines, must be stopped, Tit. 1. 11. And
they are ready to stop the mouths of such as would have these disturbed. Jesus
Christ lays a Command upon Ministers and Magistrates, to apprehend these
Foxes; but they lay snares for such as would have them apprehended, vid. Cant.
2. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, etc.

Answ. By Foxes, there, we are to understand Heretics and false Prophets, as
Ezech. 13. 4. they are Foxes for their subtilty, therefore the Apostle calls
them deceitful workers, transforming themse^ves into the Apostles of Christ, 2
Cor. 11. 23. Now Christ would have these taken and rooted out. The Church is to
take them by censuring, confuting, and casting them out of the Church: and the
godly Magistrate is to take them by penal laws, civil punishments, etc. vid.
Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. which is again Zech. 13. 3. applied to Gospel Times. And
that Law was given by Jesus Christ, the Mr. Cotton, Bloody Tenet washed, etc.
p. 66. 67.
Angel of Gods presence, whom God promised to send with his People, Exodus 33.
2, 3. And that Angel was Christ, whom they tempted in the Wilderness, 1 Cor.
10. 9. Therefore Jesus Christ appointed the civil Sword for a Remedy in such a
case, and has not repealed it in the Gospel. And accordingly, the good Kings
of Judah exercised this power, Asa, Joash, Josiah, and are commended for so
doing. Nor are only the greater and the worser sort of Foxes to be taken; but
even the little Foxes, the lesser sort of errors, false Teachers, which also do
much spoil in the Church. And yet these men would have the Foxes nourished.
Those gins of penal Laws, which zealous Magistrates have made to take these
Foxes, must now be repealed, that they may devour uncontrolably.

And yet these men have the impudence, as to repute themselves the chief
Patrons, if not the only friends of Religion, and are displeased with those,
who account them otherwise. But wisdom is justified of her Children. If they be
the friends of Religion, Religion has no enemies in the World.

Is he a friend to his Patient, who knowing him to be full of mortal Diseases,
will suffer no effectual means to be used, which may remove them? then are
these men friends to Religion.

Is he a Friend to his Garden, who plucks up the hedge, and proclaims liberty
to all kind of wild Beasts, to come and tread down the flowers? then are the
Patrons of Toleration, friends to Religion.

Is he a Friend to a Garrison City, who would have all the watch Towers
demolished, all the Works slighted, all Guards removed, and proclaim License
for all enemies to come in, and plunder, and destroy at their pleasure? Then
are they friends to Religion, who contend for this universal Toleration.

If these be the Guardians of Religion, Religion is not like to be long lived
under their protection. God grant Religion better Protectors. How soon will our
Church be overflow^n, if liberty be granted to all Heretics, and seducers, to
spread their pernicious Doctrines? if all manner of Religions be let in, true
Religion, at least the power of it, will soon be destroyed. All you who have
any Interest in the Bridegroom of the Church awaken him by your prayers, that
he would scourge such defilers out of his Temple; who for sinful respects, and
private advantage, would permit all cheats and deceivers, to put off and vent
their abominable falsehoods in the Church of Christ: how soon would a City be
infected, if all rotten, unwholsom meats should be freely sold in an open
Market. This is the way to make a whole Church sick, not to make a sick Church
whole. God has told us of a better cure to recover a sick Church, Jer. 33. 6.
Peace and truth, not dissension and error, is the way to recover a languishing
Church, a dying Nation. And that which does most highly aggravate this
wickedness, is this. That its endeavored by a People, who have solemnly
promised, to settle purity of truth, and purity and unity of worship, and to
abolish all false ways of worship, and all things contrary to sound Doctrine.

3d Use. Exhortation, 1 John 2. 6. Let us be zealous for the House of God, as
Christ was zealous for the Doctrine, zealous for the worship of Gods House. In
this use, I shall,

1. Give Motives. 2. Some Rules. 3. Means.
Motive 1. It Is that which is commanded every Christian, vid. Jude 3. Contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, (...), the word notes a
holy heat, eagerness and violence, Rev. 3. 19. Be zealous therefore and repent.

Motive 2. The Saints of God, who are renowned in Scripture, they have been
zealous in these matters. The fire of God has sparkled out of their mouths:
we may see their hands, feet, hearts, lips, red hot with zeal for the house of
their God. Nehemiah, how zealous was he against the corruptions of Gods Courts,
he could not endure any filthiness there: when he understood that Elias^ib the
Priest had given to Tobiah his Kinsman, one of the Chambers of the Temple, for
his private use, where the things for Gods worship were wont to be laid; see
how his Spirit works against that corruption, Neh. 13. 8, 9. He cast forth his
Housholdstuffe out of the Chamber and commanded the Chambers to be cleansed,
and brought again the Vessels of the House of God with the meatoffering, and
the Frankincense. And when he understood, that the Levites and Priests, who did
the service of Gods House, had been defrauded of their portions, designed for
that work, see how zealously he contended with the Rulers, and so reforms that
corruption, vid. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. When he saw the Sabbaths of the Lord
profaned, see how he bestirs himself, verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Elijah
also was a man of zeal, for Gods House, vid. 1 Reg. 19. 10. 14. He has
reference to that zealous act of his, upon the Prophets of Baal, Cap. 18. 40.
David, Psalm. 69. 9. The Apostle Paul, Acts 17. 16. His Spirit was stirred
within him, when he saw them wholly given to Idolatry, Moses, how was his
Spirit set on fire, when he saw the Idol-Calf set up, and worshipped, Exo. 32.
20, 21, 22. And generally, all the Prophets and Apostles. So the primitive
Martyrs and Confessors, etc. All these should be as sparks, to set our hearts
on fire: and those holy mourners in Ezekiels time, Cap. 9. 4. they had a zeal
for Gods worship, vid. Cap. 8. see what those abominations were. Corruptions in
the House of God, defilements in Worship. Vid. Luc. 6. 15. Simon the Zelot.
They had a jealousy against the Image of jealousy, set up in the House of
God.

These are written for our learning and imitation.

Motive 3. Consider what a long and hot Summer we have enjoyed, of the
Ordinances of God. The Gospel of God has been preached amongst us, for almost
100. years, since the first Reformation. And are we still cold and careless?
This should put some life into us. We have had many burning Tapers, who have
wasted themselves, to heat us, etc.

Motive 4. Consider how likely we are to lose the Worship and Ordinances, and
the Truth, if our zeal do not keep them with us. Never was there more heat
against the Truth and Worship of God, then now there is. Some are zealously
undermining the very Foundation of Gods House, endevoring to take away all that
which has a tendency to support Religion, laying snares for Ministry, removing
all that which should maintain Ministry and Worship, that so the Levites may
flee every one to his field, setting up the lowest of Genesis 47. 22.
the People to be Preachers in the Church, opening a door to Idolatry, by
endeavoring to take away all punishments from Papists, and Idolaters, etc.

This is enough to turn Ice into flames, to make the coldest heart to burn
violently with zeal, for God. This was that which made Elijah so zealous; he
looked upon the Worship of God, as being in danger to be lost, 1 Reg. 19. 10.
They have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thy Altars, slain thy Servants
with the Sword, and I only am left, etc. The glory of the Lord seems to be
removing from the Cherubims, to the Threshold of the Temple; and if we be not
now more then ordinarily zealous, Religion will be gone.

Motive 5. Consider how zealous all People are for their false Worships.
Papists, what heat is there in them for their Idols? The Worshippers of Baal,
how zealous were they, 1 Reg. 18. 28. The Ephesians for their Diana, what
extraordinary zeal? when they perceived, that by Paul's preaching against gods
made with hands, was like to overthrow their Religion; they cried for the space
of two Judge. 6. 28, 29, 30.
hours together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. 34.

Motive 6. If you will be zealous for the House of God, God will be zealous for
your houses, vid. 2 Samuel 6. 10, 11. Obed Edom, he had a zeal for the Ark, when
others were afraid of it, God blesses him, vid. Hag. 2. 18, 19. If you will be
dead and cold for the matters of God, God will be cold for your civil
concernments.

Motive 7. Its one of the best ways, to take off, and abate the heat of
enemies, against the House of God. The colder you are, the more hot will they
be; and the more zealous you are, the more cold will they be in promoting their
designs.

2. Rules for zeal.

(1) Your Zeal must be universal, and that

1. In respect of things, you must be zealous for every part of Gods House;
for all and every part of Truth, against all and every kind of corruption in
Worship: some are zealous against Schism and Heresy; but they have no great
Zeal against superstition, and humane inventions; others have a Zeal against
Superstition, but they have not against Heresy, etc. This is not right heat,
vid. Psalm. 119. 104. Josiah his Zeal was against every Corruption, 2 Reg. 23.
4. ad 20. God commands him, verse. 25. Such was the Zeal of Christ also. He
leaves nothing behind, Sacraments, Preaching, Prayer.

2. In respect of persons, he that has a right zeal for Truth, will oppose
all; is contrary to Truth, in one person, as well as in another; in great, as
well as in small, etc. in a Friend, as well as in an Enemy. Zeal is like God
in this, there is no respect of persons with it. Whosoever defiles the House of
God, let his Profession, his Power, be what it will, Zeal will oppose him. Zeal
does not hate error in a Prelate, and love it in another, etc. Christ will
throw down the Tables of the Money Changers, whosoever they be that fit there,
etc.

3. In respect of times. True Zeal for Gods House, has no winter, it burns in
one Age, as well as in another. Many men were very zealous against corruption
in Worship and Doctrine, in the reign of Prelacie, which now are cold against
the same, or worse corruptions in the reign of Heresy. These were never truly
zealous for Gods House. Corruption of Truth and Worship, is as bad one year as
another, etc.

(2) Zeal must be joined with prudence and knowledge, Romans 10. 2. God has
given to man an understanding, as well as affection. Zeal without Discretion,
is rashness, like mettle in a blind Horse, or a sharp edged Sword, in a mad
man's hand. Those 4. Beasts, Rev. 4. 8. which represent the Churches of the
Gospel, they had 6. Wings, and they were full of Eyes: a Christian must have
Eyes, as well as Wings, Knowledge as well as Zeal. Zeal with Knowledge, says
one, is like an Unicorns Horn, in the hand of an Artist, very precious; but
Zeal without Knowledge, is as the Unicorns Horn, in the Beasts Head, very
dangerous. Zeal without Knowledge, is like Pegasus without a Bridle, or like an
Offering, without an Eye, which God accepts not. Lev. 22. 22. Mal. 1. 8. Its
like Phaeton in his Fathers Chariot, may burn himself, and the World too.

(3) Zeal for Gods House, must be confined within the Compass of our Calling.
The Minister in his place, the Magistrate in his, the private person in his
place. It Is a good gloss which Calvin has on this Text. All must imitate
Christ, all must as much as in them lies, preserve the Temple of God from
defilement; yet every man must take heed, that he go not beyond his bounds.
Non omnibus protinus licet flagellum arripere, ut vitia manu corrigamus, neque
enim eadem nobis potest as data est, nec idem injunctum munus. Zeal out of its
place, is like fire in the Thatch. Private Christians, they must express their
zeal by Prayer, Tears, Dispute, complaining to the Church, to the Magistrates,
where they are, if they be such as care for Religion. He that should, being a
private person, do as Phinehas did, and pretend zeal, would be a murderer; or
as Christ here did, would be seditious, etc.

(4) Our zeal for Gods House, must be for the glory of God; not either to get
our selves a name, or to oppose men, or to please others, etc. but merely
discharge of duty, respect to Gods Honor. This was the ground of our Saviors
zeal, make not my Fathers House, etc. Jehu lost all his zeal, for want of a
right end, vid. 2 Reg. 10. He did very much, and he calls it zeal for God,
verse. 16. but the truth is, it was merely for his own house; and therefore God
threatens, Hos. 1. 4. to avenge the blood of Jezreel, upon the House of Jehu,
etc. look well to this.

(5) It must be put out against private corruptions in your own case.

3. Means to get zeal for Gods House.

(1) Consider often the worth and excellency of Gods House, Truth, Worship,
they are glorious things, beauties of holiness, Psalm. 110. 3. the glory of
God: the glory is departed from Israel, etc. 1 Samuel 4. latter end: the
Tabernacle of God with men, etc.

(2) Beg much of the Spirit of God, that spirit of fire; the fire of the Altar
came down from Heaven, so does the fire of zeal; get much of that fiery
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, etc. vid. Acts 2. 3.

(3) Be much in the Company of zealous persons, he that kisseth the lips of the
Servants of God, who are zealous, will get heat from them.

(4) Take heed of too much carnal policy. This will make you but cold and
dead, for the Worship of God. He whose zeal is extreme hot, for outward things
will be extreme cold, at least lukewarm, for the Worship of God, a little
Earth cast on a hot fire, puts it out.

Mary Wol^oth, September. 30th 1649. (...).
Luke 19. 47. And He taught daily in the Temple.
(...).

THere are five principal Passages, or Stories, recorded of Jesus Christ in
this Chapter, which is the best division can be made of it, viz.

(1) The story of the Conversion of one Zacheus, a Publican, a little man, but
a very great sinner: this we have from the first verse, to the 11th. He came
out of curiosity, to gaze upon Christ's person, having heard the fame of his
works, and he did not only behold his Person, but was converted by his Power:
we may note from his conversion,

1. Its good to be in the way in which Christ travels. Zach^us being in Christ's
way, was apprehended by Christ's power, and made partaker of his grace.

2. Those who come to Christ, merely to look upon him, may possibly be
converted by him.

3. The calling of Gods Elect to (...), is often done, when the sinner does not
expect it.

4. When Christ calls effectually by his grace, he enables the soul to yield
present and cheerful obedience.

5. That Jesus Christ holds great corresponcy and familiarity, with converted
sinners, that own his Call; he dines with him, Rev. 3. 20.

6. The familiarity which Christ shows to converted sinners, is a scandal and
stumbling to proud Just^^^aries.

7. That (...) repentance and conversion to God, must be manifested by
restitution of things fraudulently taken from men. Non tollitur peccatum n^
restituatur ^b^atum.

8. When the work of Conversion is wrought upon the soul, then is salvation
come to the soul.

9. The end of Christ's Incarnation is the sinners salvation.

10. That there is no sinner so flagitious but he may be converted by the power
of Christ: this is from the whole story, he was the chief of the Publicans,
verse. 2. and yet converted.

(2) We have the Parable of the Talents depasited to the Servants to trade
withal, verse. 11. ad 28. In which we may observe these two things.

1. The occasion of this Parable, verse. 11, 12. The Disciples thought that
their Master should have possessed an Earthly Kingdom, and that he should have
presently entered upon the management of it, and that he should have been
immediately at Jerusalem, installed into it. Our Savior to confute their fond
Opinion, propounds this apt Parable, A certain Nobleman, etc.

2. The Parable it self, verse. 13, ad 28. in which our Savior would teach both
his Disciples, and all others, how they should carry themselves, and what work
they should mind, till his second coming, viz. employ their parts and graces
for his advantage, etc. And he also shows what the issue should be in the end,
both to those that do employ the Talents received for that end; and what shall
be the conclusion of those that misimploy them, and of such as will not have
him as their Lord and King, to rule over them.

(3) The triumphant riding of Jesus Christ into Jerusalem, verse. 28. ad 41. In
which we have,

1. The preparation to it, verse. 29. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 35.

2. The manner of his entrance into the City, verse. 37. 38. and then,

3. We have the effects following, upon the same, verse. 39. 40. He rebukes the
Pharisees, and approves the action of his Disciples.

(4) The sad lamentation made by Jesus Christ over Jerusalem, verse. 41. ad 45.
in which we may note,

1. Christ's Compassion to his Creatures, how near to his heart their punishment
lay, ver. 41.

And then 2. What a dreadful thing it is, to neglect the offers of grace, ver.
42. 43, 44.

(5) The famous Heroical Act of Christ, in reforming the Temple, verse. 45. ad
finem. In which we have these two things, 1. The work. 2. The event of it. The
work has two parts.

1. He purges out corruptions which they had introduced, v. 45. 46.

And then 2. He restores it to the right end, for which it was appointed, v.
47. He taught Tub. reformation
daily in the Temple.

2. The event of the work, and that has two things also.

1. The bloody attempt of the Priests and Scribes, with the chief of the
People; they sought to kill him, verse. 47. 2. the hindrance and prevention of
their wicked purpose, v. 48. The words of the Text contain you see, the second
part of Christ's Act, in reforming the Temple, he did not cast out the
corruptions, and then sell the Temple for gain, or alienate it to his own
private use, as the manner of some is; but when he had separated it from the
abuse they had made of it, he converts it to the right use, for which God had
appointed it, and makes a preaching-place; he taught daily in the Temple. To
handle the words distinctly, they have these two things in them.

(1) We have the work of our Savior, He taught in the Temple; and then observe,

(2) The assiduity, or diligence used in this work, (...). He taught daily.
That which it commends to us is, that, viz.

Doct. That our Lord Jesus Christ, was very diligent in following the work of
his particular Calling. He was a Minister of the Circumcision, as the Apostle
says, Romans 15. 8. And he was very industrious, and diligent, in fulfilling the
Ministry which he had received. He did not only take the honor of the work,
but he did also diligently perform the work, and task of his Calling. He did
not live idly in his Calling, working now and then for pleasure and recreation,
as many do; but he was very painful, and very constant in his work; he taught
powerfully, and also taught constantly. He did not preach only once a month,
or once a quarter, as the practice of very many negligent Preachers is; but he
preached daily, vid. Mat. 26. 55. I ^ate daily with you, teaching in the
Temple, and ye took me not: we find, that not only in the Temple, but in other
places also, in the Ship, in the Mountain, in the House, at the Table, by the
way side; wherever Christ came and had opportunity, he was still working at
his Trade, he was a most constant and assiduous Labourer, in his particular
vocation. He meets with a single Woman, at Jacobs well, and he falls a
preaching to her, John 4. 7, 8. 9. etc. and it was a very excellent Sermon. Its
said of him, Mark 6. 6. that he went round about the Villages, teaching, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom.

The Reasons are these.

1 Reas. To testify his obedience to his own Law. Jesus Christ knew, that God
had commanded labor and diligence to men; and as he obeyed the Law in other
things, so he would do it in this also. It is true, it was a voluntary
condiscention in Christ, to be subject to the Law; but having taken our Nature
upon him, he did voluntarily submit himself to the obedience of the same.

2. Reas. It was from that great Affection he bare to the souls of men. The
Calling which Jesus Christ had upon him, was a work which concerned the souls
of men. He was by his Luke 19. 10.
Ministry, to convert men from their sins, unto God, to bring them to saving
Faith, and sound Repentance: to gather, plant the Church, propagate the Gospel.
This Consideration, made him use all diligence in the fulfilling of his work.
As he testified his love to souls, by his Incarnation, and taking this Office
upon him, so the same love to the Salvation of men, excited him to diligence in
performing it.

3. Reas. He knew that he had but a short time to work in this World, He
considered, that his life was very shortly to be taken off from the Earth: this
moved him to be diligent in this work: he knew the light of his personal
Ministry, was to shine but a few months in the World, therefore he would lose
no opportunity; yet a little while, and the light shines, with you, says our
Savior to the Jews, John 12. 35.
work while ye have the light: as he would have you to improve his light while
it continued, so he was diligent to improve it to the Worlds advantage. And
then,

4. Reas. It was from the respect he had to his Fathers glory. His work was, to
bring souls into subjection to his Fathers Commands, to honor his Father, by
revealing his will unto men. This lay so close upon his soul, that he Ioh. 4. 34
wrought earnestly, and constantly, that he might accomplish it. And,

5. Reas. That he might set his Disciples, and the succeeding Ministry, unto
the end of the World, a Copy and example of diligence and painfulness in the
same Office, after his discease. He wrought, to teach them to work: He preached
daily, to teach them to preach frequently. And therefore, we read, that the
Apostles after his Ascension, remembering, no doubt, as well the Example, as the
Command of their Master, were very diligent in the same work. Its recorded of
them, Acts 2. 4. That they continued daily, and with one accord in the Temple:
And Acts 5. 42. that daily in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to
teach and preach Jesus Christ.

1. Use. Information.

(1) This lets us see the necessity lying upon all the sons of men, to have
some particular lawful calling; Christ himself was laborious in his calling,
therefore he had a particular calling, and that not only in the time of his
public life, but also in the time of his private life. Is not this the
Carpenter, the Son of Mary? Mark. 6. 3. They indeed spoke it by way of scorn
and derision, that a Person of so mean education as Christ was in his private
life, should pretend himself to be the Messiah, vid. Math. 13. 55, 56. but the
story shows clearly that our Lord, before he entered upon the public ministry,
did employ himself in that Calling. And so the Ancients have understood that
place. Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho against the Jews, testatur
Christum juga and aratra fabricavisse. Chemnit. Harm. in Mar. 6. 3
And Basil in his Book, de vita solit. Cap. 5. affirms, that Christ did
assiduo corporalium laborum exercitio victum sibi necessarium una cum
parentibus pauperibus comparare. And the Apostle would have all Christians to
have some lawful particular Calling, 1 Cor. 7. 20. When God had created Adam,
he put him into a particular Calling, Genesis 2. 15. The Lord took the man, and
put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress and to keep it. There should have
been labor, if sin had never entered into the World. Its true, that labor
would have been without toylsome painfulness, weariness, with which it is
accompanied since the fall; but Man should not have lived idly, though he had
not fallen from his innocence. We read also, that all the Patriarchs had
particular Callings. Noah was an Husbandman, Genesis 10. 20. Abel was a Keeper of
sheep, Genesis 4. 2. The Sons of Jacob were Shepherds, and keepers of Cattle, Genesis
46. 34. All the Apostles, before they were called to the work of the Ministry,
had their particular vocation. Men who live without a Calling, are useless and
unprofitable burdens to the Commonwealth, and places where they live. They are
well compared to ill humors in the Body, which are very pernicious and
destructive to the well being of the Body. They are like wandering Stars,
which have no certain station. Nay, those who have no particular Calling, they
will certainly make sin their Trade, either theeving, or else vain and sinful
pleasures and delights, as many do, or 2 These. 3. 11.
busybodies. He is ready for any work, which the Devil and his own wicked
heart can put into his hands.

Such cannot pray over that Petition, Give us this day our daily bread: he eats
that which is none of his own. All Divines make it a breach of the eighth
Command (Thou shall not steal) for any man to live without some lawful
particular vocation. The holy Servants of God, brought up their Children in
some Calling or other. Adam, who had a whole World to bequeath to his Children,
did dispose of them to several Callings, Genesis 4. 2. Cain and Abel.

(2) This is a good plea for frequent preaching. Some think one Sermon, or at
least a very few Sermons, are sufficient to serve a man's turn all his life, and
that often preaching, is but a needless and superfluous thing. Certainly, Jesus
Christ would not have been so diligent in a work, which had been unnecessarie,
and supervacaneous. Consider but these particulars, to show the necessity of
it, besides Christ's Example.

(1) We have the Command of God for it, Preach the Word, be instant in season,
and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Reprove, rebuke, exhort, etc.

(2) There Is very great need of frequent preaching; for,

(1) There are many Truths which are to be made known unto the People of God.
The whole Counsel of God is to be published: the Scriptures are a large and
fruitful Field, they cannot presently be gone over; the Body of Divinity, is
very large; many, and many steps, must be taken before all the paths, and
parts of it, can be unfolded. There Is a great deal of Treasure in this Cabinet,
which cannot be showed at once, many duties to be performed, many sins which
are to be avoided, etc. many Cases of Conscience to be answered, many scruples
to be resolved, etc. If it were possible, that a Minister could live 100.
years, twice told, and preach without interruption, yet there would be a
(...), something would be left undone which would have been necessary to have
been declared, etc.

(2) The Sons of men, even the very best are subject to forget many things,
which have been committed to them: man's memory is very lax and brittle, since
the coming of sin into the world; the same things had need be preached over and
over again, precept upon precept, duty upon duty, etc. frequent preaching is a
necessary help for a loose memory, vid. Phil. 3. 1. Which of you bear in mind
a Sermon of two or three years standing?

(3) The hearts of men are soon gone out of order, even, after the most kindly
working upon in a Sermon, partly from that corruption which works within, and
partly from Satan which tempts without; heats are soon cooled, impressions
wrought with much painfulnesse are soon worn out, etc. vid. Gal. 1. 6. they
were presently warped aside, even after Paul's ministry, vid. Hos. 6. 4. It was
the sad complaint of one of the Ancients, and it is that which all have cause
to lament, That a Minister can never find his work as he leaves it. Let a
Carpenter hew his timber, let a Mason polish his stones, let a Painter make his
draught etc. and if they come not a year after, they find it as they leave it:
but the work of a Minister is undone from Sabbath to Sabbath; the softened
heart, grows hard again, the tender conscience grows stupid, etc. Moses left
the Children of Israel pretty orderly, when he went up into the Mount of God,
but they had soon corrupted themselves, Exodus 32. 7. 8. so we find it in all
our hearts by sad experience, etc. the Iron which was glowing hot, is key cold
again, the affections which were extended, they are contracted again, etc.
Satan and a wicked heart, even unravell all which is done in one Sermon before
another Sermon, etc. It is with us in this case, as it is with little Children,
wash them never so clean, if the Mother leave them an hour or two, they have as
much need of washing as before, etc. Satan never cease tempting; ergo,
necessary to preach frequently. Many Ministers will not preach too often,
because of state; whereas indeed the Pulpit is the most honorable place for a
Preacher. Cum venerit Christus, inveniat me praedicantem, was the good wish of
Bishop Jewel; others think often preaching, is the way to cast contempt upon
preaching, whereas it is indeed the way to make it more glorious to a
spiritual heart; the vision is made more lovelie by frequent beholding, etc.
It Is true, all men's parts of body and mind are not alike.

(4) The lives of Ministers are very short, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14. The Fathers
are dead, and the Prophets are dead.

(5) There are some newly admitted and growing up in the Church daily, which
must not be neglected, ergo. And if you would have Ministers to be frequent in
preaching, you must encourage them by being frequent in hearing; thin
auditories occasion seldom preaching. Its said here in this place, our Savior
taught daily in the Temple, and its said in the very next verse, the people
were very attentive to hear him, (...). Thick Auditories should not be the
mark a Minister should aim at, where two or three are gathered together,
there God is as well as in a crowd; the conversion of one soul, is vvorth all a
man's pains: but forvvardness to hear is a great motive. If you therefore
would have your Ministers to do as Christ did, you must for your parts imitate
this people, and be attentive to hear them.

2. Use. Exhortation to that of the Apostles, 1 John 2. 6. let all Christians
answer Christ's coppie in this business, make the work of your calling, your
daily business, as your Savior did. In the prosecution of this exhortation, I
shall handle these three things, viz.

(1) I shall lay down some Rules from the right understanding of this diligence
in our particular callings. And then

(2) I shall give some motives to press diligence. And

(3) I shall add some helps or directions.

1. Rule. That diligence in our particular calling does not deny or forbid the
daily practicing of such things as do belong to our general calling, as
praying, reading the Scriptures, hearing of Lectures when we may have
opportunity on the week days, etc. There are some who either out of a profane
or ignorant spirit, think themselves so tied up to follow their particular
callings, that they must not in any time of the six days of the week,
intermeddle with any religious work, but spend it wholy about their
worldly business. I would have such to consider that,

(1) The same God which has commanded diligence in your particular calling has
also commanded daily prayer, and reading the Scriptures, and other duties of
worship. The Jews who were commanded to labor six days, yet were commanded
to offer the morning and evening sacrifice daily, vid. Exodus 29. 38, 39. and
Number. 28. 3. They had their morning sacrifice when they entered upon their
work, and they had their evening sacrifice when they ended their work. They
divided the day into three parts, the first, ad tephilla, orationem, to
prayer, the second ad torah, legem, for the reading of the Law: the third, ad
malacha, opus, for the works of their lavvfull calling: although Weemse, mor.
Law p. 223.
they were days appointed for work, yet they gave God his part of them every
day. And we know that all governors of families are enjoined, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7,
8. to speak morning and evening at least, of the statutes of God to their
Children and Servants. God has reserved to himself, who is the Lord of all
time, part of our time every day, and the particular calling must give way to
the general.

(2) Jesus Christ commended Mary, for setting by her particular calling, to
wait upon an occasion and opportunity offered to hear a Sermon, vid. Luc. 10.
ult. Christ justifies Mary for that holy neglect of her particular calling,
and reprooves Martha for her complaint, and for her own too much worldliness.

(3) These exercises of Gods worship, do not hinder, but further the works of
the particular calling. Its the way to draw down a blessing from heaven upon
the works of our hands, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Psalm. 128. 1. etc. Whet is no Let.
The travellor loses nothing by baiting his horse, and refreshing himself.
Prayer is like Jacob to Laban, it brings Gods blessing upon what we do, Genesis
30. 27. 30. Only this; diligence in our particular calling requires us not to
be quite taken off from it, upon pretense of praying, hearing, reading, etc,
Every one that is fit for labor, must labor as well as pray; the general
calling must not eat up the particular, nor the particular the general: As he
sins, who upon pretense of diligence in his calling, will neither pray, nor
read, nor hear a Sermon on the week day; So does he offend who being fit for
labor, does upon pretense of hearing, praying, etc. all the week long, neglect
his particular calling.

2. Rule. This diligence does not exempt us from setting days apart, for
public humiliation, and public thanksgivings, lawfully commanded upon lawful
occasions; These are enjoined by God to his people, as well as labor,
Jehoshaphat proclaimed a fast in a time of trouble, and the people are
commended for their ready attendance upon that service, 2 Cor. 20. 3. 4. So
Ezra, 8. 23. and Joel, 1. 14. Now in such times, upon such occasions, all
bodily labors are to be laid aside, and bodily delights, and it is to be spent
as a holy Sabbath, Esa. 58. 3. they are reproved for exacting their labors,
and finding their pleasure. And so for public Thanksgivings, when the Church
of God has received some notable mercy, etc. And 2 Chronicles. 20 26.
so for private fastings and thanksgivings, we are enjoined in all such cases,
to set apart our particular callings; that we may give our selves to the
worship of the Lord, vid. Lev. 23. 7, 8.

3. Rule. Diligence in our particular calling, does not take us off from doing
works of mercy, etc. We may leave, yea we must leave our particular callings,
if need be, to attend upon the sick, to quench houses on fire, etc. The works
of our general calling on the Sabbath day, may, yea must be left upon any such
occasion. I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. By this Scripture our
Savior warranted, and justified his Disciples plucking of the ears of Corn,
Math. 12. 7. though it was done upon the Sabbath day, etc. much more must the
works of our particular calling give way, to such acts. Paul leaves preaching
and the people hearing, to take up Eutychus fallen down from a window, Acts 20.
9, 10.

4. Rule. Diligence in our particular calling does not forbid the use of
natural rest, or of lawful recreation, both to our selves and to those under
our charge. God would not have the very beasts overburdened, or overwrought; a
good man shows mercy to his beast, Pro. 12. 10. much less would he have a
reasonable Creature overtoyled beyond his strength. There must be a time for
sleep, as well as a time for labor. Man goes forth to his work until the
evening, Psalm. 104, 23. To deny either our selves, or others, that rest which
God has afforded unto all living Creatures, is not diligence, but sinful
worldliness, and excessive labor, and indeed oppression. And so for
Recreation, diligence does not forbid the use of that. There is a time for
every purpose under Heaven, Eccles. 3. init. A time for work, and a time for
relaxation. Only in our recreations, we must observe these things;

(1) It must not be used, but when the body or mind are by weariness made
unfit to wait upon the particular calling, without hurt or prejudice.

(2) It must be of such things as are not scandalous, but lawful: now for
this, that Rule of the Apostle is well to be considered and carefully
practiced, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, etc.

(3) It must only be so much and so long, as till the body and mind be
repaired, the spirits and strength recruited, and so made fit for the following
of the particular employment, in which God has placed us, the end of
recreation is to fit for labor in our general and special vocation. And when
the body and mind are fitted for employment then the end of recreation is
accomplished; and it is a sin to use it any longer.

2. These Rules being premised, I shall now proceed to give some Motives, to
stir us up to be like Christ in diligence. And they are.

(1) Motive. From the mischief of idleness. And that,

(1) In regard of the sinfullnesse of it.

(2) In regard of the evil effects of it.

(1) Idleness is a great sin in it self. It is a sin,

(1) Against the Law of Creation. God created man to labor: before he had
sinned, he was put into the Garden, to dress it, and to keep it, Genesis 2. 15.
and after sin, this Law was put upon him; In the sweat of thy face, thou shall
eat thy bread all the days of thy life, Genesis 3. 19. Sweating labor is a fruit
of sin; but labor was imposed upon man, though he had not sinned. Now the idle
person does violate this Law of Creation, and does by idleness cast off the
Authority of his Creator, who made him for labor. God has given to man hands,
which are the Instruments of working, and a head furnished with understanding,
to contrive and find out employment for the hands: Now the idle person does
frustrate one principal end of God, in bestowing such apt Instruments of work
upon him. And its no small sin for a man to pervert the end of his Creation.

(2) Idleness is a sin against the Law of justice. Justice requires, that a man
should subsist and live on that which is his own. Now the idle person, like
lice and vermin, lives upon other men's sweat; and so, sins against justice.
Our Savior has commanded us to pray that God would give us our daily bread.
That bread which is not gotten by labor, either of body or mind, is not our
bread, but another: the idle person enters into other men's labors, whereas
justice requires, that every man should eat the labor of his own hands, Psalm.
128. 2.

(3) Its a sin against the Law of Charity. Charity requires, that every man
should be useful to that society, whereof he is a member. And there is no
Calling, that is lawful, so mean, but by diligence in it, a person may be
serviceable to mankind. Now, the idle person breaks this Law, he is telluris
inutile pondus; and like a dead member, in the natural body, confers no good,
but much prejudice to the whole body. Ambrose calls idle persons, Creaturas
Domini superfluas.

(2) Idleness has evil effects.

1. Sinful effects, and

2. Poenal effects.

1. Idleness is an inlet to many other sins. It is indeed, pulvinar Diaboli,
the Devils Cushion, on which he sits, and the Devils Anvile, on which he frames
very many sins. Toads and Serpents breed in standing waters, so in the idle
person.

(1) Its the door of lust, and uncleanness of body. Quaeritur Aegistus quare
sit factus Adulter: In promptu causa est, Desidiosus erat. The Scripture makes
this to be the cause of David's Adultery with Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11. 2. David
was out of employment, he was sloathfully lying upon his bed, in the day time,
and walking upon his roof, when he should have been employed about the matters
of his Kingdom; and now Satan takes this opportunity, and excites lust in his
soul.

(2) Its the way to theft, and purloyning; your idle person, is within a few
steps of this sin, if he have but a temptation, and a fair opportunity. You
know, how it was with that idle Steward, Luke 16. 3, 4, 5. He could not dig, he
had that foul Disease of idleness upon him, and therefore could not dig; and he
that cannot dig, will steal and cheat, and defraud. He that will not work, will
not stick to set down 100. for 50. etc.

The Apostle hints this also, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, etc. but let him
work, etc. And indeed, idleness is a degree of Theevery, in its own Nature; it
breaks that Commandment, Thou shall not steal.

(3) It brings in tatlings and tale-bearings, which is a great sin. The
Apostle, 2 These. 3. 11. puts these two together, as the Tree and the Fruit,
(...) and (...) He that is idle in his Calling, or lives without a Calling, he
will go up and down as a busie-body, either to hear news, or to tell news. He
that is idle, when he should work, will be sure to be busy, where he should
not meddle. 1 Timothy 5. 13.
And,

(4) To wrap many things together, the idle person is as tinder, to take any
spark of temptation, which the Devil, or evil Company, the instruments of the
Devil, shall let fall upon him: he sits at Satan's receipt of Custom, ready to do
the worst work Satan shall put into his hands. Drunkenness or gaming, or riot,
or any kind of wickedness, nothing comes amiss to his hands.

(2) It brings poenal evils, as well as sinful, viz.

(1) It ingenders Diseases, both of body and mind; idleness weakens the
endowments of Nature, and destroys the gifts of the mind, which God and
Nature has bestowed. Its the rust and canker, both of gifts and graces; it
worm-eats, marres, and, in time, utterly consumes all a man's excellencies, and
eminencies. Plutarch tells us, that Labor brings strength to the body, and
vigor to the mind. Exerci^e is the way to increase. Many a man by idleness,
has lost very excellent parts, which might have been improved for Gods honor,
and man's benefit.

(2) It brings poverty; idleness shall cloth a man with rags, Prove. 23. 21.
vid. Prove. 6. 9, 10, 11. The diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 4. 10. And that
property which is the fruit of idleness, finds no pity with God, nor
compassion with men; but scorn and derision from both.

(3) Its a sin which God punishes in this life; sometimes with destruction. It
was one sin which brought ruin upon Sodom, Ezech. 16. 49. The idle person may
fear the same hand of God upon him. And then,

(4) It brings condemnation at last, without repentance. Take the unprofitable
servant, and cast him into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 25. 30. Not only servum flagitiosum, but servum
inutilem. The reward of eternal life, is given only to the Laborers, Mat. 20.
8. Call the Laborers, and give them their hire, beginning at the last, even
unto the first.

(2) Motive. From the excellency of diligence, viz.

1. It sweeteneth all the comforts of life: the sleep of the laboring man is
sweet to him, Eccles. 5. 12. The meat and drink, and sleep of the loyterer,
cannot be sweet to him, because he does not enjoy them in the way of holiness;
they are not fruits of honest Labor, but fruits of idleness, vid. Prove. 12. 27.

(2) It does not only sweeten, but its one way to sanctify all the Comforts of
life; he may pray to God, for a blessing on what he enjoyes; whereas the idle
person, can have no confidence to pray for Gods blessing upon his enjoyments:
the diligent man, may look upon what he gets by labor, not only as a fruit of
Gods bounty, but as a reward of his obedience unto the Commandment of God,
which has enjoined labor and travel unto the sons of men. And then,

(3) Diligence used in a man's Calling, will exceedingly comfort and keep up his
spirit, if the providence of God cross him, and bring troubles upon him.

And then (4) Diligence keeps a person out of many snares and temptations.
Satan usually sets upon a man, when he is doing nothing.

3. To give some Helps to it.

1. Be often observing such as are diligent; look upon all the commendations
given in Scripture, to persons for their diligence, vid. Prove. 30. 10, 11, 12,
27, etc. All the Patriarchs, all the Apostles, all the Prophets, were men of
diligence in their Calling, etc.

(2) Consider the very brute Creatures, they are emblems of diligence. The Ant,
the Be, how diligent are they in their labors? Prove. 6. 6. And if you look
upon the inanimate Creatures, how diligent are they? The Sun, Moon, Stars, they
are always in their travel, doing the work of their places, etc.

(3) Consider, how God has honored diligence. Elisha was called to be a
Prophet, when he was at his labor, vid. 1 Reg. 19, 19. Christ called Simon
Peter, and Andrew, to be Disciples, when they were at their labor, Mat. 4. 18.
And so James, the Son of Zebedee, and John his Brother, Matthew. 4. 21. They were
mending their Nets. And Matthew was called, when he was following his work,
Matthew. 9. 9. And the first tidings of the birth of Christ, were published to
the diligent Shepherds, Luke 2. 8, 9.

(4) Study well the preciousness of time and strength. The idle person has not
a true esteem of the worth of time, else he would not spend it idly. Time
passes, strength wears away, old age and sickness are a coming, when you must
necessarily cease from laboring: the ship of the body, must shortly come to be
laid up in the Harbor, when it cannot fail.

(5) Consider, that others are interested in your labors, as well as your
selves. If you be servants, you owe both your parts, and labor unto them who
have employed you: the idleness of servants, is robbery to their Masters, if
you be Masters, your Family and Relations, which you are bound to provide for;
if you will not be worse then Infidels, 1 Timothy 5. 8. may challenge your
diligence; and if you have no such, yet the Commonwealth and Society of
Mankind, are much prejudiced by your standing still.

(6) He that is negligent in his particular Calling, will never be diligent in
his general: he that is negligent in his Shop, will be negligent in prayer,
etc. Working six days, and the observing of the Sabbath, are joined together,
Exodus 20. 9, 10. These two, help forward one another: he that is not faithful
in his Calling, will be unfaithful in the Sabbath; and he that is conscientious
in following his Calling six days, is likely to perform the duties of the
seventh also.

Mary Wolnoth, October. 21. 1649. (...).
Mark 4. 34. And when he was alone, he expounded all things to his Disciples.
(...).

IN this Chapter, there are five principal passages, which are the five parts
of the Chapter.

(1) The Parable of the Seed, propounded, and expounded, from Verse. 1. ad 21.

(2) An Exhortation to that necessary, and profitable Duty, of communicating
unto one another, of that light of spiritual knowledge, and other gifts
received from God, verse. 21. ad 26.

And (3) The Doctrine of the working of the Word, preached upon the hearts and
Consciences of men, illustrated by the manner of the growth of Seed, sown by
the hand of the Husbandman, verse. 26. ad 30.

(4) The growth and increase of the Gospel, set out by the Parable of
Mustard Seed, verse. 30. ad 35.

(5) The miraculous Act of Christ, in the sudden swelling of the Tempest, v.
35. ad finem.

The words which I have read, hold out a very excellent Act of Christ, toward
his Disciples, in reference to this Sermon: when he was alone, he expounded all
things to his Disciples, etc. In which words, we have two things.

(1) Christ's Action, He expounded (...), He untyed all knots, made all things
plain to his Disciples.

(2) The Circumstance of time and place, (...), when they were in private. That
which it teaches us, is this, viz.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus, in the days of his flesh, was very careful, in
teaching and instructing those which were under his charge in the things of
God. Jesus Christ was a Master of a Family, though he had no where to lay his
head; yet he had Servants, the Disciples were his Servants; and, as he did in
all other respects, carry himself as a faithful Master to them, so was he not
negligent in teaching them the things of God. We shall find our Savior, very
careful of them in this respect: he taught them to pray, Luke 11. 2. And upon
every occasion, he was dropping Religious knowledge and Instruction upon their
souls: he did not only preach publicly to them, as he did to others; but in
secret also, and in private: his use was, to repeat what he had preached in the
public Assembly, with Explanation, as need required: when he had reproved
the hypocritical and ceremonial washings, used by the Pharisees before meals,
and had uttered an obscure passage, Mat. 15. 11. we find, that verse. 16, 17.
He interprets that Doctrine in private to his Disciples, and makes them
understand the meaning of it more perfectly, Do ye not know, etc. That was in
private, vid. Mar. 7. 17, 18. So Luke 24. 25, 26. etc. to the two Disciples.
Mat. 24. 3, 4. Mat. 13. 16.

The Reasons are these.

(1) The Disciples were called to be Ministers of the Gospel. Therefore it was
necessary, they should be instructed. Vid. Acts 1. 8. Ye shall be witnesses
unto me, both in Judea, and in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and
unto the uttermost part of the Earth, both that they might have fullness of
knowledge, and might learn willingly, to answer scruples privately, to any that
should repair to them, as well as preach in public; so Paul did, Acts 20. 20.

(2) It, was out of sense and compassion to their ignorance. Our Savior knew
how blind the heart of man is by Nature, to receive the things of God; and he
had often had experience of his Disciples weaknesses in many things: this made
him so careful, to use all diligence in instructing them; and the rather also,
that he might convince them of their ignorance.

(3) To teach all Masters and Governors, what their duty is, toward such as
are under their charge, and that they might by his example, be helped forward
to do their Duty. Omnis Christi actio, nostra instructio, Christ intended man's
information by all he did.

Use 1. To exhort all persons, who have a charge over others, to imitate this
Example, 1 John 2. 6. Christ instructed his Servants, and if thou will be a
Christian, thou must walk after thy Masters Example.

I would here,

(1) Give some Motives. (2) Lay down some helps. (3) Answer Objections.
1. Motives are these six.

1. Consider Gods strict command, vid. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. The Law of God is
indispensable; every Israelite of God is absolutely bound to the performance
Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Psalm. 78. 5, 6.
thereof. Gods command is both the strongest reason, and the highest Motive of
any duty; and obedience is not pure and sincere, till Dixit Dominus prevail
with us.

2. Consider the practice of the Servants of God whose names are renowned, and
whose memories are precious in the book of God. I will begin with Abraham, Genesis
18. 19. David, Pro. 4. 4. and so Bathsheba, Pro. 31. 1. And it is not to be
questioned, but he also taught his Servants, as well as his Children. The
Parents of Timothy, they taught him the Scriptures of a Child, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
These are rare examples, and Joshuah 24. 15. he could never have undertaken for
himself and household, had he not been an instructor of his household.

(3) Consider the benefit of it.

(1) Your Servants will never do your work faithfully, if they be not
instructed how to do Gods work. Those are likely to have the best service from
such as are under the charge, who are most diligent to teach them their trade
of Godliness. Conscience is the surest and safest obligation in all the world;
and your servants will without doubt be faithful to you, if you can persuade
them to do your duty to God.

(2) For your Children, it is the way to preserve and keep up the honor of your
family. There is a natural desire in every man, that his family may be
renowned when he is laid in the dust. It Is Religion and Piety which builds up
and keeps up the renown of Families. Riches may be imbezeld, and titles of
honor may die, but godlinsse and piety can never die. Isaacs piety kept up
the credit of Abraham's family when he was in the dust. Ishmael was rich, but
he was wicked, Jacob preserved the memory of Isaac by his piety, Esau had
wealth, but his wickedness was a blot, both to himself and his Fathers house.
Its just that God should curse that man in his posterity, in his ways of
Religion, and its righteous with God that such Servants should become scourges
to their Masters as have not been taught by them the knowledge of the Lord.

(3) By informing of them which are under your charge, you will inform your
own souls. He that whets the word of God upon his Servants and Children, will
with that whetting set a sharper edge upon his own affections. By repeating a
Sermon to others, you will strengthen your own memories, and warm your own
hearts. As iron sharpens iron, so the heart of a man, his friend, Pro. 27. 17.

(4) You may benefit the Church of God for many generations. A good man would
have the Church of God to flourish not only while he lives, but after his
decease, he would have generations to come, to know and bless the Lord. This
is the way to propagate Religion after thine own decease. Children and
Servants are likely to survive Masters and Parents. And if they be not
instructed and taught in their youth, the next generation may for ought you
know, be atheistical and paganish. A good man lays up an inheritance for his
Childrens Children, Pro. 13. 22. Thou do not know in what place God may cast
the lot of thy Children and Servants. They may be instruments of spreading the
knowledge of God in remote parts.

(5) Consider the many present Errors that are sprung up amongst us. The
firmament of our Church is filled, and even darkened with the thick black smoke
of profane, and gracedestroying opinions. And every one of your Children and
Servants have a biasse upon their hearts which draws them violently this
way; they may bring the plague of Errors and Heresy into your families, they
may bring home the leaven of the Pharisees, and sadduces into your houses. The
best Antidote against this infection, is frequent prayer and instruction.

(5) Consider the great mischief of the ignorance of God and of his ways,
together with the happiness of this knowledge.

(1) Without Knowledge the mind is not good, Knowledge is the eye, the Candle,
the Pilot of the soul. A man without knowledge, is like a blind guide, is like
a ship without a Pilot, he is ready to stumble on every stone, he is apt to
run upon every Rock: he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes,
Joh. 12. 35. He is like Sampson when his eyes are put out, the Devil may make
him grind in any mill, use him for any kind of imploiment. He can do nothing
well, nothing acceptable.

(2) Ignorance of God is damnable, our Savior says, It is life eternal to
know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, Joh. 17. 3. And therefore it must
needs be eternal death, to be ignorant of God, and of Jesus Christ;
especially when sufficient means for this knowledge, is and may be enjoyed. It
is the complaint of God, that his people were destroyed for want of knowledge,
Hos. 4. 6. not only with temporal, but eternal destruction. And if any soul
perish through ignorance under your roof, through your default, his soul will
be required at your hands. What God says to the Watchman concerning his
charge, is as applicable to every governor of a family in his sphere. If you
give not the wicked man warning, he shall die, but his blood will I require at
thy hands, Ezech. 33. 8. Every Master of a family is as well and as truly made
a Watchman of God, to do all domestical duties within his sphere (where of
this is one) as the Minister is over the Congregation, and must as well be
accountable to God for the souls under his charge. And therefore God in the 4th.
Commandment, puts the care and inspection of all within the family, upon the
governors, Thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter, and thy Manservant, etc. Thou
might perhaps, be the instrument of saving thy Child or Servant from Hell,
were thou careful of doing thy duty.

(6) Consider the justice and equity of this duty. That you should instruct
those who are thy Children by Nature, is but Equity, in as much as the
blindness and ignorance which is in them, is from thee conveid, as the
immediate isntrumental cause. They drew their blindness from thy loins, thou
did beget and bring them forth in thine own sinful Image, whereof this
ignorance is a part, and therefore thou art bound by all rules of justice to do
what thou can to make restitution. And for adopted Children and Servants, by
contract committed to thy care by friends or guardians, the like obligation
lies upon thee in point of justice, to teach them the knowledge of the Most
Holy, according to thy power; for though expressly this clause be not put into
the engagement, yet virtuallie and implicitly it is intended: the parent or
friends commit their Children into thy hands, upon such terms that the soul
should be looked after as well as the body; and if They do not expect it, yet
Theologically, by virtue of thy place, as a Master, God expects it from thee;
and thou art not only uncharitable, but unjust also, if thou neglect this part
of the engagement. It will not be enough to say, I have instructed them in all
the parts of the mystery I profess, I have made them skillful in their Art,
but if they be uninstructed in the knowledge of God, the least half of the
Covenant is made good, and God will both judge and punish thee for a fraudulent
and unfaithful man that have betrayed thy trust.

2ly. Directions. Take these three.

(1) Thou must be careful to furnish thy self with a competency of knowledge
and understanding in Religion. To govern a small family, requires no small
knowledge. God would have a Master of a family to be able to instruct both
Wife and Children. Dwell with thy Wife as a man of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and
the woman is commanded not to speak in the Church; but, if she want, to ask her
husband at home, 1 Cor. 14. 35. If the Wife must ask, the Husband should be
able to resolve necessary questions. I doubt the want of knowledge in
governors takes them off from this duty; indeed renders them incapable to
discharge it. Therefore by studying the Scriptures, by reading good Catechisms,
and other good books, and by Prayer get sound knowledge.

(2) Pray for a good Conscience, and keep a good Conscience. As a good
conscience will keep men close to God in other Duties, so will it do in this,
and truly though a man have never such plenty of knowledge, yet if he want
Conscience, the work will fall.

(3) Get large bowels of affections to God, to the knowledge of God, and the
Souls of such as God has given thee inspection over. This will promote the
work. He that loves God truly, will disperse the knowledge of God freely; and
he who bears any affection to souls, will be willing to light his Candle, to
set them in the way to life and happiness. He that does not teach his Child,
I dare say has not a true Fatherly love, either to God or his Child: Love
will seek the best welfare of that which is beloved.

3dly. The Objections are these.

1. Object. If I should instruct thus my Family, and be so strict, repeat
Sermons, etc. I should be reproached, etc.

Sol. 1. No good man would reproach thee, no, they would love thee, and honor
thee: and if Michal scoff and reproach, it is no great matter, vid. 2 Samuel 6.
21, 22. It Is no honor, to be praised, no dishonor to be reproached by a
wicked man.

2. Such reproach is the way to happiness, vid. 1 Pet. 4. 14. The Saints of God
have gloried in reproaches for Christ's sake, they have worn them as a Crown.

3. If thou art afraid of reproach, be afraid of Gods reproach. He will
reproach thee, if thou neglect this duty; and that not only here, but
hereafter, vid. Dan. 12. 2. If thou neglect this duty, for fear of the Worlds
reproach; thou may lie down at last with the Worlds honor, but thou will
rise again to everlasting shame.

2. Object. But my Servants, they will not submit to instruction, they think
their Consciences are free, and that no such thing should be imposed upon them,
etc.

Sol. 1. And what if they should pretend the like freedom of Conscience, as
they call it, for the not doing of thy work in thine employment, would thou
think it a sufficient Salvo? and why will thou take it for a discharge from
doing Gods work?

2. I answered, they are not free by any Law of God; nay, they are bound: if
Abraham must teach his Household the way of Jehovah, surely his Household must
submit to be instructed, else the Commandment is void. And Joshuah took it for
granted, that his House should serve the Lord, together with himself, Josh. 24.
15. He should not dwell in Joshuahs House, that would not serve Joshuahs God,
whatsoever they pretended. The Rod of Discipline should teach such other
practices, if after admonition and conviction, they remain obstinate.

3. Object. But they are catechized, and instructed by the Minister, therefore
its needless I should meddle.

Sol. The Ministerial instruction, does not excuse Domestical instruction.
Christ taught his Disciples publicly as a Minister, and yet he neglected not
private instruction also; private instruction helps on the public, and the
public the private.

2. Use. This is a Doctrine of singular comfort for the godly. Jesus Christ
has a Family on Earth still, though he be in Heaven, and the Church is his
Household, Heb. 3. 6. And its his Office, to teach and instruct now, as much as
ever, when he was on Earth. And be confident, you ignorant Christians, that
Christ your Master, will untie all knots, which you cannot untie your selves.
Qui docet corda, Cathedram habet in Coelo. Carry your doubts to him freely.

FINIS.

