The Office of ADRESSES AND ENCOVNTERS: Where all people of each Rank and
Quality may receive direction and advice for the most cheap and speedy way of
attaining whatsoever they can lawfully desire.

OR, The only Course for poor people to get speedy employment, and to keep
others from approaching poverty, for want of EMPLOIMENT.

To the multiplying of Trade, the advancement of Navigation, and establishing
this famous City of LONDON in a more plentiful and flourishing Condition than
ever, as is earnestly desired, and shall be diligently endeavored by a
Wel-willer of Hers

HENRY ROBINSON.

London, printed by Matthew Simmons next door to the Golden Lion in Aldersgate
street, 1650.

To all such as sincerely desire the Relief of the Poor, with the accommodation
of the wealthy, and are truly cordial to the prosperity and welfare of the
City of London in particular, as no little conducing to the Security, Plenty,
and Glory of this Nation in General.
IT is easily apprehended what great advantage accures, and what multitudes of
businesses are daily dispatched by Merchants, and others, meeting upon the
Exchange; and speaking to one another about some particular businesses only:
but of how much more accommodation and dispatch, it would yet amount to, if not
only every one of those Merchants, but all others besides might know whether to
go to be satisfied concerning all manner of their Affairs, has not as yet
entered into our thoughts; much less been seriously considered on, otherwise,
it would never have been kept so long from being put in Execution; our own
exceeding benefit would have taught us the practice of it.

And yet all this is to be compassed by such a Register of Addresses as we
speak of; Oh the stupidity of this Nation, if not of Mankind, that boasts it
self to be Constituted an absolute Tyrant over the whole Creation: Certainly
it must be notoriously degenerated, if not besotted, that is become so unable
to help it self: The very bruit beasts in many respects apprehend better their
own Advantages, and are more dextrous at the practice of them. How many rare
discoveries have been long* since made unto this Nation, for better ordering
the Churches, and Government of the Commonwealth, which yet by most men are
held Heretical, and for the most part obstructed because so few are at leisure
to search into the depth and glory of them: But I will leave these high
Concernments unto such Persons for whose Sphere they are more proper, and fall
upon Considerations less troublesome, and more parallel to my own private
Condition.

We find by Experience that Multitudes of people, of all sorts, both
Handicrafts, Artificers, Manufactors, and others, are brought to poverty and
beggary, because they do not timely meet with any one to Set and continue them
at Work; And yet at the very same time, we like wise meet with multitudes of
others, both Merchants and Shopkeepers af all Callings, that cannot furnish
their Customers so cheap and speedily as were to be desired, because either
they cannot presently get Work-folk, or else not at such cheap rates as to make
a benefit thereof.

Now if such as have occasion or desire to set poor people on work: and poor
people that desire continually to be kept at work; knew where to find one
another at all times, they should never be necessitated to be idle; And being
all the week long set at work, they would earn more at a low rate, then in
working 3. or 4. or 5. days in a week only, at a higher rate, and so might
afford their work-manship cheaper unto the Merchants and Shopkeepers, and they
unto their Customers consequently, which would be the life of Trade.

And this great relief unto the poor, and advantage to the increase of Trade,
is infallibly secured by this Register of Adresses, this common Center of
Intelligence, from whence all persons may forth with be directed, and receive
satisfaction, and encounter in whatsoever they can lawfully desire; For
although so many several Arts, Trades, and Callings as are requisite to the
Constitution of Cities, and Commonwealths, as so many parts and members of so
great a Corporation, are purposely introduced, to be of mutual succor and
assistance to each others occurrences; Yet, since most of them are situate
some distance from one another, oftentimes unknown, and in number infinite;
There is more than a seeming want unto the perfection of humane society, that
as yet there never was any public place appointed which might have served as
a Treasury, or Abridgment of all Accommodations desirable.

And although several great Politicians of former ages, have touched hereon as
a thing they deemed necessary for completing their Commonwealths: yet it is no
where more necessary than in this of ours, so abounding in People, and so aptly
Situated for Trade and Negotiation; especially, in that the multitude of
Persons with whom our Affairs oblige us to deal, renders our dealing more
difficult, and confused, than in Countries or Cities less populous, and of
smaller Traffic; much of our time, for want whereof, being spent in making
search, through an indigested multitude both of Persons, and things, which for
the most part do least present themselves, when most sought after; even like
two men, who in seeking after, happen to follow each other, and so can never
meet, though at other times they meet often unexpectedly, when their bufinesse
requires it not: and all this comes to pass only for want of Order.

Thus we see how man, the only helpless creature of the whole Creation,
stands in need of so many several perquisites, in Order to his well-being,
whether in point of Security, Food, or Raiment, as that he is compelled unto a
Co-habitation with others.

He cannot make himself happy alone; he can neither protect, feed, nor cloth
himself alone; but must be beholding to others for each of these
Accommodations: And out of this respect, Mankind found it absolutely necessary
to live together in Cities, and other populous places, where each one might be
conduceable, and subservient unto an others necessities.

Now that Mankind, might not be longer thought constituted, in a more unhappy
Condition, than the Irrational and Brutish Creatures, after a Revolution of so
many Ages and thousands of years; It has pleased God, in these later times,
to make some men Instruments of very great discoveries, whereby the state of
Mankind has already, and may be much more meliorated; Amongst which, the
Invention of an Office, or Register of Adresses and Encounters, will not be
found one of the least; neither in relation to particular men, who thereby may
with the greatest expedition that this world affords, be satisfied concerning
whatsoever they desire. Nor as it regards the public Magistrate, the Powers,
who, I will be bold to say, may make thereof such an Instrument or Engine, both
for the securing of themselves, and the happy estating of a Nation in Peace,
Plenty, and Contentation, to perpetuity, as hitherto was never known to be
enjoyed by any: But this is Arcanum Imperij: It may yet a while rest in
reserve, and for the present, I shall only insist upon more inferior
Advantages, and those branched out but into some few Particulars, which this
Register of Adresses will undenyably gratify withal, both the poor and
wealthier sort, to the great increase of Trade, and facilitating all peoples
Negotiations.

The only way to prevent the multiplying of poor people, is forthwith to give
all opportunities, and improve all Advantages, that may be, unto all manner of
people, to relieve themselves by their own labor and industry, without loss
of time, or expense of money; the rather, in that we find a great cause of
beating down the price of poor men's labor, is, because such poor people are
not acquainted with other peoples wants, besides their own; they have hitherto
had no means to come to the speedy knowledge of such persons as stand as much
in need of poor men's labors, as the poor people do of rich men's moneys;
and therefore the poor men's seeking is rather a begging, than a bargaining for
employment; which rich men take advantage of, to the daily more and more
undervaluing poor men's pains, and labors: But when the rich, as well as the
poor men's occasions, and necessities, are equally known to one another, the
poor will be able to treat with more reputation, and get more indifferent and
advantageous prices, both for their worke-manship and labor.

And whereas at present, poor people, and others, spend much time, in running
up and down, from one place to another to seek employment, and sell their
work; If they repair unto this Office, they shall either be directed
forthwith to one that wants such Artificers, Manufactors, Laborers, and
others, or their Worke-manship; Or if they but leave their names, with the
place of their abode, what employment they desire, and upon what terms, in a
Ticket at this Office, so soon as their turn comes they shall have notice of
it; and till then they may keep at home, and employ themselves in such manner,
as may be most for their own benefit and improvement.

And to this purpose, in Threed-needle-street, over against the Castle Tavern,
close to the Old Exchange, in London, shall be kept particular Registers, of
all manner of Adresses, to which all persons are invited to repair, who desire,
either 1. To buy or sell outright; to mortgage, take or let out to Farm, by
Lease for term of years, or Lives, or otherwise, Lands, or Houses, in any
part of England. 2. To buy, or sell any kind of Wares or Merchandise. 3. To
take or deliver moneys at Interest, upon security of Bond, Land, or Pawnes. 4.
To take or deliver moneys by Exchange, for any part of England, or Foreign
Countries, 5. To take or let out Ships to Freight, by the whole, or in part;
or to lade piece Goods on them, for any Port or Ports of England, or Foreign
Countries. 6. To entertain, or to be entertained, Professors of the Liberal
Sciences, and Languages, Chaplains, Secretaries, Tutors, Schoolmasters,
Gentlemen-ushers, Stewards, Butlers, Cooks, Barbers, Servingmen, or as
Factors, Agents, or as Journeymen of any manner of occupations. 7. To
entertain, or to be entertained, waiting Gentlewomen, Schoolmistrisses,
Nurse-keepers, Nurses, Chamber-maids, Darie-maids, Cooke-maids, or for any
other kind of lawful services. 8. To buy or sell Bonds, or Bills of debt upon
rebate. 9. To buy, or sell Publique-faith money, of what sort soever. 10. To
buy, or sell Leases, or Annuities, whether in possession, or Reversion. 11. To
be sent, or send others abroad, into any of our Plantations. 12. To employ, or
be employed as Captains, Masters of Ships, Masters mates, Factors, Pursers,
Boat swains, Surgeons, Gunners, Cooks, Pilots, or common Mariners. 13. To
buy, sell, or hire Household stuff, Apparel, or any manner of Goods, at the
secondhand. 14. To take, or let out to hire, by Lease, or yearly Rent, Houses,
Lodgings, Ware houses, or Sellers, within the Cities of London, and
Westminster, as also Countrey-Houses, near adjoining. 15. To take, or deliver
moneys at Bottomarie, or upon return of the Voyage, or Shipp, for any Port of
England, or Foreign Countries. 16. Here likewise, may every one enquire
after any thing that is lost; and whosoever shall give notice of any thing that
is found, will not only discharge a good conscience, but be rewarded for his
pains, and in the mean time, shall see it Registered in a Book for that
purpose, and if he please, have a receipt thereof: and whenever he will call
at this Office, be made acquainted what is become of it, whether still
remaining, or returned to the Proprietor thereof, and know who he is, etc. 17.
Here, whosoever desires to travel, or make a Journey, may give in his name
before hand, and have notice what other company there is, for any of the
Principal Roades, or Towns of England, or any Foreign parts. 18. Here you
may know what Ships arrived lately from, and when any depart for any port of
England, or any Foreign parts, and with what goods they are laden. 19. Hither
may resort such poor people as desire relief, and to know what means and
Legacies are given to pious uses; and such as would willingly meet with fit
objects of their charity and Bounty. 20. Such as desire to dispose of
themselves, or friends in Marriage, may here likewise be informed, what
encounters there are to be had, both of Persons and Portions. 21. If any
person, have any manner of Wares, or Merchandise to sell, let him direct them
to this Office, and they shall be taken care of, and forthwith put to sale,
either for ready money, or at time, according as the Owner shall give order for
his most advantage; and in the mean time, if he please, be furnish^d with
moneys to serve his other occasions, at a reasonable rate: Finally, 22. If any
person, living in any part of England, desire to have any Merchandise, or
necessaries bought for him in London, any Lawsuit solicited, or any other
honest bu^^ne^se looked after, and taken care of in the said City of L^ndon, or
Country adjoining, let him only send the Particul^^^, of his desires, in a
letter directed to the said Office of Adresses, on Threed-needle-street, over
against the Castle Tavern, close to the Old Exchange in London, with promise to
pay the charg^s, his business shall be dispatched; and a speedy account
thereof returned him to his own dwelling, or according to his direction
without his coming up to London, troubling, or being beholding to any of his
friends.


The poor, together with all others, will likewise reap this benefit, by this
Office, in that it will much prevent retailing, which is but a higling of
Commodities, to a greater quantity and value; whereas, if the Buyer buys for
his use, and to serve his petty Customers only, and the Seller sels to put
himself into money: both the buyer pays less than he should get the same
Commodity for, from a Retailer; And the Seller also, sels for more than a
Retailer would likely give him.

In brief, the use of this Register may extend as far as humane necessity,
which is little less than infinite; and therefore,

If any person, sollicitous of public good, shall suggest any thing else,
which this Office may particularly undertake, either for relief of the Poor,
or accommodation of the Rich, it shall be gladly entertained, and the
Propounder reckoned amongst the Benefactors of this Office.

The Poor shall have all these services done for them in charity, and all
others for six pence a time, or entry, so often as their turn is served. And
for this purpose, the said Office shall be kept open every day (except the
Lords day) from 8. of the Clock till 12. at Noone, and from 2. to 6. in the
Evening, for entertaining all such as shall have recourse thereto.

FINIS.

