SIX PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED, By the Officers and Soldiers under the command
of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the Citizens of London. Wherein they
set forth, the Reasons of their near approach, and their advancing toward the
said City.

TOGETHER, With their Demands to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Honorable Houses of
Parliament assembled at Westminster, and the Enemies of this Kingdom who
endeavor to raise a second War*

Whereunto is annexed, The Answer of the Lord Mayor, to the Demands and
Desires of the ARMY.

Published at the desire of the Army, for general satisfaction to the whole
Kingdom.

London, Printed for G. E. June 14. 1647.

A Letter sent from an Officer in the Army, to a friend of his in London,
concerning the Letter which was sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the rest of the Commanders in the Army, to
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of London.
Kind Sir,
HAving by several Letters formerly, intimated unto you, the affairs and
proceedings of the Army, since their repossessing themselves of his Majesty, I
shall now in this small interim of time, once more communicate unto you, the
sense of the whole Army ingenerall, together with their real intentions and
resolutions, in their present design, for advancing and approaching near your
famous City of London; all which, (we do verily believe) will evidently appear
to the whole world, that our Engagement, (being so unanimously agreed upon) in
this present design, is not for any self or sinister ends, but only for the
preservation and safety of his Majesty's Royal Person, the full B^ing and
Privileges of our renowned Parliament, (in whose Cause we have been willing to
sacrifice our lives, for the preservation and defense of the same) the liberty
and propriety of the Subject, and the good of the Common weal of England:
Nevertheless, (notwithstanding all our faithful actions, and dangerous
engagements against the common enemy of this Kingdom, in the behalf of that
Cause, whom we so often adventured our lives to maintain,) diverse ill affected
spirits, have improved all opportunities, and advantages by false suggestions,
to make us odious to the Kingdom, by casting such a blot of infamy upon this
Army, for which it is determined by the Officers and Soldiers ingenerall, not
to cease in their present action, until such time that they have right and
satisfaction in these particulars and grievances, which they have so often
demonstrated to the public view, and that the Authors and Fomentors of the
same, may be brought to a legal trial, and justice executed upon them, which
is hoped, will not be denied: And to that end, His Excellency (our renowned
General) Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the rest of the Colonels in our
Army, has sent a Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, declaring the grievances
of the whole Army, and representing our desires and demands, concerning that
perpetual blot of infamy, which has been cast upon this Army. by some wicked
persons, who endeavor to involve this Kingdom in a second War, and so
overthrow both the privileges of Parliament and People.

Sir, We are now upon our march toward your hohourable City, hoping to find
redress for all our grievances; which if granted (I am consident) it will tend
much to the honor of his Majesty and his Royal posterity, the preservation
of both houses of Parliament, the good of the Common weal, and the safety of
the whole Kingdom ingenerall, by reason whereof, we do conceive the woole
Nation to be concerned in it, (having a long time suffered under the
blood-thirstie and merciless sword.) And therefore, for the prevention of a
second war, and the speedy effecting of a safe and well-grounded peace,
within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. It was resolved by the
Officers and Soldiers through out the whole Army, at a late Randezvouz, as
follows: I. That having some cause of suspicion, of a new design, lately
contrived by a false and self-seeking party, for the involving this Kingdom in
a new War, and to that end are very active, both in the City of London, and
several other parts of the Kingdom, to accomplish the same. It was resolved
(with one unanimous consent) by the Officers and soldiers, under the command
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, immediately to demonstrate, and represent
their grievances, and also to declare the grounds of their intentions,
concerning their approach and advancing toward the City of London; the Army
being now upon their march, from their quarters near Cambridge toward Ware, and
so to proceed on, as occasion shall require. II. Their desire is, to preserve
and not to spoil, and to that end, are determined both Officers and Soldiers,
horse and foot, not in the least, to be accounted the wicked of men, and
destroyers, but preservers of that remnant and talent which God has bestowed
upon those, who serve him in truth and sincerity. III. That although they are
now near approaching toward your vast and populous City, yet it is no ways
prejudicial to the State, but for the preservation and security of those
privileges, for which diverse poor soldiers have lost their lives for the
maintenance of the same. IV. That if there be an answer returned somewhat
suitable to their desires, and their reasonable requests granted, they shall
proceed no further, but retreat to any convenient place, which shall be thought
fit and convenient. V. That, their desire is, that they may receive a fair and
suitable Answer to their Requests, (professing that their intentions are real,
and not in the least, prejudicial, either to State or Commonwealth, but for
the advantage of the public good.) And that the Citizens of London with whom
they have so often hazarded their lives withal against the Common Enemy of the
Kingdom, may not in any ways stand in opposition against them, but really and
unauimously knit their hearts in one link, against all opposers and disturbers
of the public Weal of England, in which troublesome disasters, both the
Citizens of London and the renowned Prentices (of the said City) in the Army,
have w^ded through many difficulties. VI. And lastly, It is the desire of the
whole Army, that all things may be composed in love, and that all possible
means may be u^ed, for a safe and well-grounded peace, that so his Majesty's
Honor and Prerogative may be maintained, the Privileges and Being of
Parliament preserved, and the peace and welfare of the Kingdom defended,
against all Opposers, and Disturbers whatsoever.


These Desires and Demands were subscribed by diverse of the chief Officers in
the Army, and so to be communicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of
London. Thus for the present, I remain,

Your faithful friend R. Rishton.
Ware 11. 1647, Postscript.
SIR,
UPon the close of this Letter, we received intelligence, that His Majesty
(now residing at New Market) has a great desire to advance more Southwards,
but it is supposed he will remain there until such time that the body of the
Army advances further, which we conceive will not be, until an Answer be
returned, to His Excellencies Demands,

Vale, Vale.

Upon Friday being the 11. of this instant month, the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, and the Common Counsel of the City of London, had a large debate
upon the Propositions of the Army, but at length concluded that an Answer
should be speedily returned to them, declaring that they have a good affection
of the Army, and that their preparations at this present, is only for the
strengthening of the guards, and security of the City, and to that end are abo^^
sending of some certain Aldermen and Common-Counsell to the Army, to declare
the same unto them.



FINIS.

