THE RIGHT OF TITHES Asserted: by our old SAXON LAWS.

A Discourse proving them to be neither Popish nor Antichristian.

WHEREIN The Patrons ancient Interest is also briefly vindicated, and a word
likewise added for UNIVERSITIES.

By one that has no place in either of them: nor Incumbency upon Tithes.

ROMANS 13.7. Render to every one his dues.

1 Cor. 9.14. The Lord has Ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel should
live of Gospel.

Sacerdos sum, vivo de decimis, Hieronym.

T. 1. Ep. p. 13. Austin has an whole Sermon de reddendis Decimis, De Tempor.

Sermon. 219. Ex debito sunt, etc. London, Printed in the Year, 1653.

Old SAXON LAWS FOR TITHES.
MAny clamorous Invectives have of late appeared against Ministers, those very
Ministers, that gave the Writers their being in Christ, if they have any, some
of which Pamphletiers, under the specious pretense that their Maintenance by
Tithes is Antichristian and Judaicall, drive, at least obilquely, upon their
total extirpation. Their Jus Divinum has long ago been asserted in a
Theological way upon the occasion of famous Mr. Seldens History, by Doctor
Sclater, and others, and if that were now the Question, there be, it is said,
learned Men that can justify them in that sense. Some have sufficiently
declared, how this design kindly gratifies the men of Rome, who have had their
Hands even up to the Eboes in our troubles. Others have manifested the
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that attend the bringing of them into a common
Stock or Treasury, that will necessitate Ministers to frequent Markets, and
neglect their studies; Besides their vexations waiting upon Officers and
Pay-masters, to their great loss of time and money, the Ministers of
Augmentations, notwithstanding all the Care, and Love, and Faithfulness of the
Honorable Trustees, meet with many Obstructions, and the cry out of Wales is
loud, and exceeding grievous, and this Parliament, some say is Resolved to send
down, and see, whether they have done altogether according to that Cry. The
Incumbents right to this maintenance has been represented by the Statute
Laws of the Land, all along from Magna Charta, downward in a Catalogue of
well-neere 60 Acts of Parliament. The learned Counsel found some at first
dissatisfied, who went away convinced by their mentionings from Litletons
Tenures, Ld. Cooks Institutes and other Books, Pleadings and Judgments
concerning the Ministers just Right and Freehold in TITHES, by Usage and
Custom time out of mind, and other justifications from the Common Law,
concluding, that none have more legal right to any thing they do possess;
and if this breach be made, a wide door will be set open to undermine all
Civil Rights, and Proprieties.

Some sprinklings there were also spoken of from the Old Saxon Laws, The
endeavor of this Piece is to show that Tithes are not Antichristian, or
Judaicall, but first those ancient Saxon Records, not yet so obvious to English
Readers, shall be propounded from Lambard, that has published many such
Collections, and the Saxon Bid, together with Sir Henry Spelmans Counsels: De
4. Linguis. 1o. 142.
Mr. Somner it is like, gives some further light, for Dr. Merick Casaubon, after
his due commendations of that Kentish Gentleman's Abilities and diligence in
those Antiquities, affirms, that he has several Laws which Lambard cites
not. It were well worthy some good man's undertaking, to persuade those, and
other such labors of his abroad, and it would become some others to preserve
those Saxon Monuments at Canterbury, Worcester, Excester, and else where.

The first that I find is the Law of Offa King of the East Angles, Sp. Conc.
308.
about the year 793. by which he gave to the Church the Tithe of all his
substance. Ib. p. 352.
In the next Century is the most considerable, and free donation of Aethelwolph
at Winchester, in the presence of the Kings of Mercia and the East Angles, all
his Nobles and Bishops consenting thereto: He was heir and successor to that
Egbert King of the West Saxons, that converted the Heptarchate into a Monarchy,
the seven Kingdoms into one, and having gotten all the Lands of England into
his Possession, he conferred the Tithes of all upon the Church, and this so
famous a Record is not mentioned by one, but diverse Historians, as Sir Henry
Spelman observes in his Annotations upon the place, it is remembered by ancient
Asser also that wrote the Life of King Alfred.

In the next Century is the most considerable donation of Aethelwolph at
Winchester, in the presence of the Kings of Mercia, and the East Angles all his
Bishops and Nobles consenting thereto: Ib. p. 352.
He was heir and successor to that Egbert King of the West Saxons, that
converted the Heptarchy into a Monarchy, the 7 Kingdoms into one, and having
gotten all the Lands of England into his Possession, he conferred the Tithes
of all upon the Church. Alured and Guthurn Kings of the Saxons and Danes in
that mutual League of both Nations provided about 876. If a Dane pay not his
Tithe, let him be punished as a Transgressor by the Law, and the English must
be fined. King Aethelstan obliged himself, Ib. p. 378.
and all his Nobles and Bishops to pay the Tithes of Cattle, and of the Fru^ts
of the Earth. King Edmond with his Nobles and Ecclesiastiques about 946.
Pronounced a curse upon every Christian that did not religiously pay his
Tithes. King Edgar about the year 967. Lamb. p. 72. Spelm. p. 429.
Decreed that whosoever did not pay his Tithes should be pun shed, as is set
down in the Judicial book, adding, let the Kings Officer or Sheriff, the
Bishop and the Priest meet together and force him to pay his Tenth, leaving the
owner the 9th part only, and for the other 8. parts, Lamb. 78. Spelm. 445.
Spel. 517. Ib. p. 531. Ib. p. 544. Lamb. p. 98.
the Lord shall have four of them, and the Bishop the other four. King
Aethelred also about the year 1009. commanded that Tithes from the Plough, and
Cattle be duly paid every year. And the same King again about 3. years after
made this Law, we enjoin every man to pay his right Tithe, as was best done in
the days of our Predecessors.

Canutus King of England, Denmark, and Norwey about the year 1032. Ordained
that the Tithes should be rightly paid by all, and if any refused, the Kings
Officer, the Bishop, the Lord of the Soil, and the Priest of the place are to
assemble, and take from him the Tithe, leaving him only the 9th part, the
other 8 parts are to be divided into two medieties, of which the Bishop takes
the one, and the Lord of the Soil the other.

Of the Patron.
Fundi Dominus, or terrae Dominus as that law calls him, is the Patron, that
had in his power the donation of Tithes; the Sheriff comes in as the Judge,
the Bishop was the Almoner for the poor, and the Lord or Patron had also Title
and Interest some way in the Tithes, why is there else so large a Portion of
them designed to him, and if it be thus, the right of Patronage is ancient, and
no badge of the Norman Conquest. I know not the Age, nor Author of that Verse.

Patronum faciunt Dos, Haereditatio, Fundus.
But if I forget not, it is to be found in Lyndwood, and signifies, that the
possession of the ground, or inheritance, or dowry by marriage do make a
Patron; and in purchases where such a privileage is annexed, Part 1. p. 65.
the buyer pays as well for it, as for the Houses and Lands. Father Latyneers
Counsel was good, Patrons are charged to see the Office done, and not to seek
a lucre and gain by his Patronship. And again, well let Patrons take heed,
for they shall answer for all the Souls that perish through their default,
this is good Religion, and so is that also, at least it is right and reason, that
as many as come lawfully by that civil interest in Patronages, have them not
illegally extorted from them: considerable therefore is that Law of Edward 6.
Ao. 1. c. 9.
When some Churches in York were taken down to be united, and drawn into a
fewer number, there was due and just provision made, not only for the
Incumbents of those demolisht Churches, but that the several Patrons Rights
should be preserved, and they make their Presentations alternis vic bus, by
course one after another, and surely there will be as much Righteousness in
these days of greater Promises, as there was in the dawning of that other
Reformation.

But I return, Lamb. p. 126. Spelm. p 620.
for there is yet another, a Tenth old Law for these Tithes; and it is of that
good King Edward, as he is called, the Confessor; It says, of all provisions
the Tithe is due and must be paid, from Mares, Cowes, Swine, Woods, Meadows,
Mills, Parkes, Ponds, Trading, etc. of all that God gives, the Tithe is to be
paid, and he that refuses, may be compelled to it, these things were granted
by the King, Barons and people; and this Law, among others, was solemnly
ratified and confirmed by King William the Conqueror, after he had made
choice of 12. Noble English men in every County, men prudent, and learned in
those Laws. A foreign Conqueror excludes not, but calls in and follows the
Counsel of Native Lawyers for the establishment of this Kingdom, and engages
them by an Oath to declare their Laws and Customs truly, not turning to the
right hand, or the left, without omission, addition, or prevarication, and they
began with matters of Religion, knowing thereby King and Kingdom should have a
solid foundation, etc. It Is true, among those Laws there be some intermixtures
agreeable to those dark times, yet the greatest part of Romes Religion was a
stranger to the then Saxon Church; by which it will appear also, that Tithes
are not so Popish and Antichristian, as some conceive, a thing soon and easily
said, but hard to be proved, so hard, that I have not yet known any godly,
learned, and prudent man that has undertaken it. For indeed it must be
supposed that the Pope is Antichrist, that Antichrist, wherein the Assertor
will have all Papists his opposites, and those Protestants also that imagine
the great Turk to be the great Antichrist, there must then be a serious
disquisition when the Bishop of Rome became Antichrist, because in the
primitive times diverse of them were godly men, and well nigh 20. of them holy
Martyrs: and certainly Antichrist would not dye for Christ, but by a nearer way
they shall be evinced, by declaring first that the old Saxon Church that has
spoken so much for Tithes, was not so Popish and Antichristian, 2. Tithes not
Popish and Antichristian.
and that this Ministers maintenance was not such nor so accounted since the
Reformation; the Religion of the old Saxons is vindicated by two arguments in a
great measure from Popery and Antichristianisme.

1. By those Manuscript Homilyes extant in Bennet College Library in
Cambridge: when that incomparable Knight, Sir Henry Spelman, that has deserved
so well of all the lovers of Learning, and this Nation, was erecting his Saxon
Lecture in that University, he made choice of that unwearied Professor Mr.
Abraham Wheelock, a Master of that Language also, to be the first Reader, those
Homilies, he has said, do not only inculcate the sanctification of the
Sabbath, and other Pieties, but the greatest part, if not every one of the
Articles of Religion maintained among us, are in them asserted; if men have no
mind to be in this further inquisitive, they may judge of the probability
hereof by the

2. Thing propounded, which is from one of those Saxon Sermons, not only
recorded by Mr. Fox, but printed by it self in the very beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's days, more then fours score years since, and is attested by
fourteen or fifteen Bishops (some of which were Confessors and Exiles in Queen
Mary's time) to be agreeable to the Old Original; the Title whereof is, a
Testimony of Antiquity, showing the Ancient Faith in the Church of England,
touching the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord, here publicly
preached, and received also in the Saxons time, above 600. years ago, wherein
the Popish real presence is not only abundantly spoken against, but several
other points of popery, as the Merit of good works, and the worship of Images,
it calls for the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the sense of the Gospel in the
English tongue, it affirms the Housell, or Sacrament, not to be better at
Easter, then on other days, etc.

After this Nation recovered from Rome, 2. Since the Reformation.
and broak the yoke of Antichrist; Tithes had not been retained if they had
been Popish and Antichristian: King Edward the 6. made many Laws against the
doctrines of Rome, Ao. 1. c. 1.2.14
about the Scriptures, the Body and Blond of Christ, receiving it in both
kinds, against the usurped power of the Pope, the Bishops Seal, Style,
Jurisdiction, etc. many other Antichristian abuses are forbidden, Ao. 3. and 4.
c. 10.5. and 6. c. 6.
as Purgatory, Masses, Trentalls etc. Popish Books, and Images are prohibited,
and Popish Holy Days etc. surely the real endeavors then were to extirpate
Popery, Ao. 3. c. 1 3.
Root and Branch, and yet even then particular Laws are made about payment of
Tithes, and that addition of double and treble damages is not so formidable,
Ao. 4 c, 3.
because allowed also in other cases. That Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws
was begun in Henry the eighth's days, brought to some perfection while King
Edward the 6. reigned, it is commended by both their royal Epistles, and by
Mr. Jo: Fox his Latin Preface, a work first assigned to 32. choice men; King
Edward left it after to Archbishop and Martyr Cranmer alone, who cook unto him
three Assistants, Walter Haddon, Rouland Tailor, and Peter Martyr, who so
compiled it, as we have it, wherein there is a distinct Title of Tithes, and
19. Chapters: surely if those four godly and learned men, one pair of whom
were glorious Martyrs, had thought them to be Antichristian, they would not
have been so serious about them; they that dyed for Christ, would not have dyed
allowing any error of Antichrist. That good old Puritan, that loved so dearly,
and walked so persectly in the good old way, was no enemy to this ministerial
maintenance, his remembrance is precious still, Sermon, Aug. 25.
of him I presume Mr. Cradock spoke when he exhorted the Parliament to walk in
the good old way. I wish no greater happiness to my self, then that I may
live and dye in that Puritanicall, and most holy Faith: I wish no greater
happiness to this Age, and Nation, as to Religion and godliness, then that
they would universally set up his peaceable Piety in practice and power; surely
those quick-sighted men saw as far into that mystery of iniquity, as any other,
they were not wont to inveigh against Tithes, as knowing well that the
Universities and Colleges were maintained by them, as well as the Ministry,
and they allowed both, living in the former, and living upon the latter: Doctor
Chaderton was Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge, Doctor Reynolds was
President of Corpus Christion Oxford, and Mr. Knewstubs had for many years the
Parsonage of Cochfield in Suff. all three of them were slighted by the rest of
the Puritans of the nation to be Collocutors before King James, near 50.
years since, in the Conference at Hampton Court, beside many other of that
godly Generation, so living, in satisfaction and silence, which they would not,
could not have done, if Tithes indeed were Popish and Antichristian; and be it
added, they are not such: Ao. 2. and 3. c. 20. and Ao. 7. c. 4.
This were to Antichristianize the State, that from Edward the sixth's Laws
receive Tenths of the Ministers, and it is a considerable Revenue; and if Tithes
be turned into another channel, that, it is like, will run down another way.

Tithes have not their Original from the Jewish Laws, 3. Tithes not Judaicall.
being mentioned in the Scripture, not only before the Jews had any Law, but
before they were a people. Abraham gave unto Melchisedech, the Priest of the
most high God, the Tenth of all. Genesis 14.20. Jacob also engaged himself by a
vow, upon Gods blessing him, of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give
the Tenth unto thee, Genesis 28.22. and this, says Aynsworth, was given to the
Priests of the Lord, and some think Jacob performed this Vow at his setting up
an Altar, and calling the place El Bethel, Genesis 35.7. Tithes therefore do not
derive their descent from the Leviticall Priesthood, or the Ceremonial Law,
neither are they to be disliked; if they did indeed look like Judaisme, seeing
their Politiques and Judicialls begin every day to be more and more venerable.
The Objections that some Zealots make against Tithes, In forement. Scim.
must needs be weak, even in Mr. Cradocks judgment, who said so pull^quely,
The more zealous are the more weak etc. and therefore though these be the
times, that Universities and Tithes be so much decayed, for they stand and fall
together, yet the clamor is not so much from Piety and Wisdom, as from
weakness and Avarice. Nae tu aurum multos habes inimicos, Oh you golden
Tithes, you have many enemies, if they may be called such that love them so
dearly, and gape so wide after them, and can swallow multitudes of them
without check, or chewing. I thought to have added here, in the behalf of
Universities, Learning, Ministers, and their maintenance, some expressions from
Luther, and our own Martyrs, and holy Writers in the first Reformation, Barnes
Latymer, Hooper, Bucer, Leaver, etc. I would not, says Latymer, Letter to King
Hen. 8.
That your Grace should take away the goods due to the Church, but take away
evil persons from the goods, and set better in their stead. Two things more
consider from the Old Puritan: The first concerning Universities and Learning,
those that went into New England were such I know diverse of them to be so, they
suppress Errors, and Blasphemy, protect Ministers, and Ministry, they are
setting up an Academy and shall Old England pull them down? shall the Daughter
be more pious and prudent then the Mother? The good old Puritan here was of
another mind; so writes one in the name of the other Ministers of Devon and
Cornwall, I speak not against Vniver sities, nor against Degrees, I wish from
my heart, Remov. of cert. Imputat. p. 28.
that each College in both may be as Samuels was, even Naioth, 1 Samuel 19.18.
that is, Beauty it self, and that the Scholars may be as the Plants, etc.
Psalm. 144.12. An ill time therefore now, now to design their destruction, when
they are become as the old Puritan wished them. Ask Mr. Dell, Master of Ca^us
College in Cambridge, if the Governors be not all godly, learned, and
prudent, enquire of the Townsmen, formerly no friends, if the Scholars be not
so well ordered, that the Taverns and Tippling houses be empty and angry, it is
as well at Oxford also, and in some sense better, for there is never a Bird
there, that I know, defiling her own Nest, never a head that hammers against
it self. Again, 2. The old Puritan was so far from supposing Tithes to be
Antichristian, or unlawful maintenance for Ministers, that he did not only
acquiesce in them, and live upon them, as has been said, but they were buying
in Impropriations, and restoring them to the Ministers, it is known, who hindered
that good work, and what became of them; the revivall of this project an holy
piece of old Puritanisme, would well become this present Age, Parliament, and
Army; the late Parliament set in this a good Copy in their Augmentations to the
yearly value of well near 20000.l. that Parliament also gave a 5. part to
scandalous Ministers, as they were called; surely, this Parliament will not
take away all from those they know to be godly Ministers, and expose so many
righteous men and their families to inevitable beggary, which K. Henry the 8
did not to Antichistian Friars and Monks, but gave them maintenance for their
lives; surely this Parliament will provide better for Christ's Ministers,
Declarat. 1.
for they have declared themselves to be set by God for the good of all, and in
all to be as tender of the Lives, Estates, Liberties, Just rights, and
properties of all others, as we are of our selves and our posterities, and they
have heard it evidenced that the Ministers have as good, a legal, and civil
right and interest to, and in their maintenance by the Common Law of England,
as any Englishman has to his possessions. That is a weak Objection, and
people are importunate, and will have them taken away, for it is most certain,
the best and greatest part of the Nation are for their continuance, the good
old Puritan would have it so, it would be enquired, if it be not already
evident, whether Petitions against Tithes have not been gained by the design
of Jesuiticall and avaritious Projectors; I am more then confident, if a
Calculation were made, according to that of Worcestershire, there would be
many, very many more for them, then have, or can, or will appear against them.
At the building of the second Temple of the Jews the Heathen that were about
them strengthened their hands with Gold and Silver, etc. Ezra 1.6, 7.15. Godly
and Christian Governors will doubtless follow the examples of those good Kings
Hezekiah and Josiah, that encouraged the Saints and Ministers of the Lord in
the Law, and service of the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. and 35.2.

FINIS.

