KING SOLOMON'S DIRECTORY: OR, The REFORMED CATHOLICS RUBRICKE: Showing a
Christian how to demean and behave himself both in Prosperity and Adversity:
As it was set forth in a SERMON at St. Peter's Pauls-wharfe, London, July the 8.
1649.

By FRAN: RIDDINGTON, a loyal Subject, and long Sufferer for fearing GOD, and
honoring the KING.

Prove. 24. v. 21, and 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle
not with them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1649.

ECCLES. 7. former part of ver. 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider.


TO every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven:
says our Author the preacher at the 3 Chap. and first ver. of this his Book
styled Ecclesiastes. And amongst other times, for other things, he tells us at
the 4 ver. of that Chap. how that there are proper and peculiar times for Mirth
and mourning; Joy and Grief; Sorrow and solace. There is a time, says he, to
weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to Dance. And both
these times for both these purposes, are apart expressed, and particularly
applied in the words of my Text.

The time of Mirth and Music, of gladness and rejoicing, is the time of Gods
revealing his Mercies unto us, and bestowing his blessings favors, and
benefits upon us; the Day of prosperity as it is here termed in the Text,
wherein we are admonished and exhorted to be joyful. In the Day of prosperity
be joyful.

The time of weeping and mourning, of lamentation and sorrow, is the time of
Gods denouncing his Judgments against us, or executing them upon us, and
afflicting us with Wars, Famine, Pestilence, or such like Calamities; the Day
of Adversity as it is here also termed, wherein we are commanded to consider;
In the Day of adversity consider. In the day of prosperity etc.

In the words there is no such great difficulty as that I should need to
trouble you with much variety of senses and expositions: yet are they not so
very facile and easy neither to every capacity as that they may fully be
understood without, as well as with, this short paraphrase and explanation.

In the day of prosperity be joyfull] that is, enjoy thy portion of blessings
with cheerfulness.

In the day of Adversity consider] that is, be well advised, fall not to
impatient murmuring, or ungodly shifting, but stay thy self in expectation on
God.

In the day of prosperity] when thy affairs be prosperous, thy success (in
just undertakings) happy: when it goes well with thee, thy King, and Country,
be joyful and merry. But in the day of Adversity] in the time of any private
or common calamity consider, bethink thy self of the cause, and of the cure of
that disaster. Consider wherefore it is inflicted, and how it may be removed.

Use prosperity and adversity to the ends appointed by God unto thee: and be
thou a constant and conscionable observer of the Churches both Feasts and
Fasts. (...), Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep.

In the day of Prosperity send up joyful acclamations to the high Court of
heaven, in testimony of thy thankfulness for those free and undeserved favors
and blessings which thou do enjoy.

In the day of Adversity send up strong cries, and present thy Supplications
before the mercie-seat of Gods offended Majesty, in token of thy repentance
and contrition. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of
adversity consider.

So that my Text, I may term the School of a religious deportment. In it,
that great Master of all Arts and Sciences, that learned Doctor in all
Professions, Sol hominum Solomon, that Mirror of Men, Wisdoms eldest son,
reads all his Scholars a Lecture of Divine Morality, or Moral Divinity, (if I
may so say) teaching and instructing them, what their manner of behavior must
be at all times, and so what it must and ought to be at this present: how we
ought to demean and behave our selves now and always.

In it we have Oppositio and mutatio temporum. Oppositio and mutatio tonorum.


An opposition and change of Times. An opposition and change of Tunes.
And this latter fitted to the former, the tune to the time, the duty and ditty
to the day.

Weeping, Mourning, Sighing, Sobbing, and the like sad expressions of a
sorrowful spirit, are as unseasonable, and unseemly at a Feast, and on the day
of prosperity, as unnecessary eating drinking, laughing, playing, dycing,
dancing, and their like are at a Past, and in the day of adversity. And
therefore our Author the Preacher, the wisest of men, King Solomon, where he
tells us of different times, there also he tells us of the different tunes that
we are to observe and keep in those times. As in my Text.

Where we have two several and opposite days; The day of prosperity, and the
day of adversity.

There also we have the several and Apposite business of them both.

Joy of the former, Consideration of the latter. In the day of prosperity be
joyful, but in the day of adversity consider.

Which of these days, This day is, is easy (you will not deny) to determine.
It is well known far and near, that we of this Nation have nothing to do
this day, with the first day in the Text, the day of prosperity; these are not
days and times wherein it goes well with us, our King, and Country, and
therefore not days and times wherein to be so frollick, joyful and merry. We,
as if we had lived too long, have our-liv'd that day; and God he only knows,
whether we shall ever see it again before we die. O if we had known, even we,
at least in that our day, the things which belonged unto our peace! but now, ah
now, Quid nisi vota supersunt? what remains saving only prayers, that they be
not hid from our eyes? As our Savior said of Jerusalem, bemoning, and
prophesying its destruction. Luke 19.42.

This day, every day that now goes over our heads, is Hezekiahs day, such
another day as that day. 2. Kings. 19.3. A day of trouble, and of rebuke, and
of blasphemy: for the Children are come to the birth, and there is not strength
to bring forth. Such are the pangs of this Sin-sick-land, as of a woman in
travail, where the poor Infant is altogether unable to deliver it self, and
the pained Mother to be delivered of it. Such another day as the Prophet
Ezekiell sets forth with an Ecce at the 7 Chap. and 10. ver. of that his
prophesy. Behold the day, behold, it is come, the morning is gone forth, the
rod has blosomed, pride has budded, violence is risen up into a rod of
wickedness. Or such a day as the Prophet Zephaniah speaks of at the first
Chap. of his prophesy, 15. and following verses, A day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wastuesse and desolation, a day of darkness
and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness. A day of the Trumpet and
Alarm etc. Wherein the Lord has brought distress upon us, that we walk like
blind men, because we have sinned against the Lord, and our blood is poured out
as dust, and our flesh as the dung etc. A day wherein we may take up the
Prophet Jeremiahs wish, and cry out with him, Oh that our head were waters, and
our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day and night for the slain
of the daughter of our people. Jer. 9.1. and make use of his Lamentations as
too suitable to our times, with some alterations, but more aggravations: Our
JOSIAH, the breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, being taken in
the pit of his own sworn Subjects, who ought to have filled it up with their
own Carcasses, (had they known any such to have been dug for him) rather then
he should have fallen into it. But his Counselors turned Conspiratours, and
THEY, THEY took away his life, who for its preservation OUGHT both by the Laws
of God and man to have Sacrificed their own. Such a Viperous brood the Sun
never before saw, neither did the Earth ever bear. Iugratitude sublimated, and
Barbarity spun to the finest thread of Cruelty, Lam. 4.20.
that ever Mortallity was guilty of. The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed
of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall
live.

-- Ct jam maerentia tecta Lucan.

Caesar habet vacuasque domos, legesque silentes.
Yes, and now Servants rule over us; nay more, our Servants; and yet more, our
confessed and professed Servants at the same time that they rule over us: THEY,
THEY rule over us, and there is none that does deliver us out of their hands.
Lam. 5.3.
Such is our present condition, and worse, and worse indeed then I am able in
words to express. Such a day is this day, and every day that we now add unto
our days: A dismal, doleful day; a day of distress, and of perplexity, and
of treading down: the last day in the Text, the day of adversity, A day to
consider in. In the day of adversity consider.

Consideration is never out of season, and yet never more in then now. We may,
or we might have made use of it at other times for the prevention of Judgments
threatened. Now at this time we may make use of it for the removal of
Judgments inflicted: yea, we may at present make use of it for both purposes,
both for the prevention of those we fear, as the extirpation of Gods true
Religion, the subversion of the English Monarchy, a famine both of soul and
body. In a word utter desolation, and destruction of these late famous and
renowned Kingdoms. As also for the removal of those innumerable and
insupportable evils which we feel by means of this horrid, unnatural, and
accursed Rebellion.

Now these Judgments of God, both present, and imminent, both these that we
feel, and those that we fear, speak aloud, and tell us in plain terms, that
it is high time for us to be advised and Consider.

To Consider what may be the Cause, and what the Cure of the great and many
distempers, that make us thus miserable as we are. And in the search of the
several kinds of causes we may find, that the Efficient cause is God, the
Material finne, the Final repentance, as for the Formal we wave it.

They proceed from God, procured by sin, and inflicted to the end we should
repent and amend.

And so this consideration affords us this point of instruction, this
doctrinall conclusion, that

Gods indignation moved against sin calls for our repentance.

In the second place, after we have considered the cause of these spreading
evils, we are to bethink our selves of the cure, and the remedy we may find
upon easy enquiry to be Humiliation; and Reformation.

Humiliation under the mighty hand of God, Reformation of our evil lives, and
corrupt Conversations.

And from hence arises this observation, that

Humiliation and Reformation are the only means to pacify Gods indignation,
and to remove our afflictions. Thus in this day of adversity are we to consider:

But before I proceed to treat of these Considerations; give me leave to
interpose, and put in one by the way, it is this, and not altogether (I hope)
unworthy of your observation:

That neither Prosperity, nor Adversity, are for perpetuity; No, not of any
considerable permanency, duration, or continuance. They last both of them but a
very little while, they are but for a day, the day of Prosperity, and the day
of Adversity, or time short as a day, so short are they.

What would not man do should he always prosper? And what would he do if
never? What an elated meteor would he grow, did prosperity always besprinkle
him with her sweetning dews? what a dejected clod of clay would he turn to,
should she never smile upon him, but adversity continually frown in his face?
it is no small abatement to the sweetness of prosperity, and bitterness of
adversity to Consider, they are but for a moment.

Was I to day happy, I might be miserable before to morrow! and indeed how
happy were we but the other day, when all things were at peace and quiet to
what we now are? or how happy are many of us yet to what we might have been,
may be, yea shall be, if these times continue? Pax est omne bonum, says Saint
Austin: and if so, what can we expect from division and dissension? if peace be
so sovereign a blessing, what a cross, or rather curse is War? especially
such a War as this of ours, a most uncivil Civil War, the worst of all
Wars. A most unnatural War, a War betwixt the Head and the Members, a War
of the Members against the Head, a War wherein, and whereby the Members have
cut off their Head. Chams Curse, and Cains Mark be all the reward of the
Authors; let this branded Character remain upon them and their posterity for
ever, Vagi and profugi in terris, Genesis 4.12. Fugitives and Vagabonds let them
be in the earth. S. Bernard distinguishes of Pacidices and Pacifices; such as
in the Psalmists expression in words spoke of peace, but in deed make ready to
battle: Which speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their
hearts, Psalm. 28.3. and have we not many such firebrarnds of contention in
these Kingdoms? When Cataline had fired the City of Room with his
Conspiracies, he had no better Comfort then this,

Incendium meum ruina extinguam! I will quench the fire I have kindled with a
final ruin; I will add worse to evil, and leave the success of my
mischievous and ungracious actions to the extremest adventures I and have we
not some of his brood, who have fired 3. of the most peaceable Kingdoms in
Christendom? Imo habemus tales Catulos Catilinarios: We have but too many
whelps of that litter, and you know where. Yet these wars, no more then this
warfare of our life can last always, dabit Deus his quoque finem, God in his
good time will put a period to them, and there will (we may hope) ere long come
a day of refreshing: for the Lord will not cast off for ever, Lam. 3.31. But
though he cause grief, yet will be have compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies.

Adversity no more then prosperity is everlasting; were either of them so,
there would be no heaven or no hell hereafter; if both, there would be neither:
but there is both, both a heaven and a hell, Mat. 25. at the latter end, and
prosperity and adversity are here both but for a while, for a day or so and
away; In the day of prosperity, and in the day of adversity.

And this Consideration, that Neither prosperity nor adversity, are for
perpetuity, nor of any Considerable permanency, duration or Continuance; that
they are both but for a very little while, for a day, or time short as a day,
may humble us, and may Comfort us.

Consider first, That Prosperity is but for a day, and be humbled. Consider
secondly That Adversity is but for a day, and be comforted.

Why should prosperity which is but for a day make any one Proud, Lordly, and
Stately? Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? says Solomon. Who
had more to boast of then any man, either before or since his time, as you may
read Eccles. 2.9. will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for Riches
certainly make themselves wings, they flee away as an Eagle toward heaven,
Prove. 23.5. he that is this day, thy and my inferior, may to Morrow or next
day be our Superior; for both he may rise and we may Fall; either will suffice
to set him above us, and bring it to who would have thought this? the examples
and instances of this nature are so many and ready at hand, that it is a
business for me to make choice of them: only in the Lump, let me ask, have you
not of late seen many and strange alterations in diverse ancient and Noble
Families, yea of Towns also and Cities? have you not seen Folly set in great
Dignity, and the rich sit in low place, Servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking as Servants upon the Earth! Solomon observed it in his time,
Ecclesiastes 10.16. and 17. ver. and we may (if we please) much more in ours.

Quos dies vidit veniens superbes,
Hos dies vidit fugiens jacentes.
One Day the Valiant brood of Brutus sent to fight;
Thus sent, one Day did see them all lie dead e're night.
And how many brave and hopeful branches, have in some one Day been lopt off
by preposterous, and bloody hands, since the breaking forth of this intestine
and detestable rebellion? Yea and how many more may possibly be destroyed by
the undistinguishing bullet, and non-sparing sword, before this all-Devouring
war be ended, and a firm peace in these yet bleeding Kingdoms settled? Oh I
tremble to speak it! How have some amongst us in one day stopped their own
breath, and taken off his head who was ours? Like the fool in the Emblem, who
being in a tree, sawed off the bow on the which he sat. And are not men's
fortunes, and estates, in as much hazard and as little security, as their lives
and Liberties? The Grounds, Houses, Lands, Leases, Livings, and the like, which
now many of you call yours (if there be any such things as meum and tuum, as
property left) they (you know) have had many a one, and many another which
called them theirs; and may be soon again rent from you or your Posterity, by
some concussion, change, or prodigal heirs. Yea how many men's estates and
revenues, are at this present by force, and fraud detained from them, so that
they reap little or no benefit by them? When Craesus glorying in his great
riches, led Solon into his treasury, and showed him all his wealth, thinking
thereby to extort not only a bare applause and Commendation, but even wonder
and admiration; the wise man slighted, what the fond King so much adored, and
(if my memory fail me not) to this purpose replied. He that has better Iron,
will soon be Master of all thy Gold. And it was not very long after, that this
rich King proved his poor friends words true by woeful experience, another
King being a better Warrior, or more fortunate Soldier, taking from him all
his treasure. And who will not subscribe this with a probatum est, that knows
the proceedings of these times? Wherein not He that has most right, but they
that have most might carry the prize away. See Nebuchadnezar proudly walking
and vanting in his stately and new erected palace, and in the height of his
Pride puffed up with Prosperity, demanding, is not this great Babylon that I have
built for the house of the Kingdom, by the Might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30. And see him once within an hour expelled
thence, yea Driven from the society of men, and made a companion for beasts,
and then tell me (if you know) what a Day may bring forth? Such strange
alterations may one day produce, that he who is this Day the highest in this
worlds blandishments, may or ever the Sun salute the East again, be as low, as
low may be, in another worlds torments. Thou fool, this Night shall thy soul
be required of thee, and then whose shall those things be, which thou have
provided? Was, besides the exprobation, and objurgation, an unwelcome
intimation, and prediction, of a most strange and sudden change; and must needs
strike cold to his heart (you will say) who was at this with himself; Soul,
thou have much good laid up for many years, take thine ease, Eat, Drink and
be Merry, Luke 12.19.

O Consider then of this all ye that are troubled with the tympany of pride,
through a little worldly Prosperity; all ye that are therefore proud because ye
prosper in this world, and as some Translations read my Text, Use well the time
of Prosperity, and remember the time of Misfortune.

-- Scilicet ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini est: diciquebeatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
You know not what may happen before the night of your life come, some that
have been borne in a palace have died in a dungeon. Hear ye and give ear, be
not proud, for the Lord has spoken. Jer. 13.15. For the day of the Lord of
Hoasts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that
is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. Esaias 2.12.
Prosperity is but for a day, let this therefore even in the height of thy
Prosperity humble thee.

Neither secondly is adversity for any more, for any longer then a Day, and
this may comfort us in our misery.

Saeva noverca dies nunc est, nunc matter amica. Heaviness may endure for a
night, but Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5. and a good Day may make
amends for an ill night; I may after an ill fit be the better for it: Why then
should I sit disconsolate under so short a vexation?

Nubecula est and transibit! It is but a little shower, it will soon blow
over; though it wet me a little, it cannot drown me. Many a fair afternoon
follows a foul morning. There is a certain and continual vicissitude, and
interchange of day and night, of light and darkness; and shall I in adversity
despair of ever being happy? It is good that a man should both hope and
quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26. and shall I choose the
evil, and refuse the good? not hope, not wait for the salvation of my God?
The same that brings down high looks, will save the afflicted people, Psalm.
18.27.

O carry then the Lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart,
and put thou thy trust in the Lord, Psalm. 27 last. Was I in the dust, or which
is worse, on the Dunghill; there was no reason I should count my self a
castaway; some that have been taken from thence have been set among Princes,
and made to inherit the throne of glory, 1 Samuel 2.8. and if it be not my
fortune here, it will be, if it be not my fault, hereafter. For our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. for which cause we faint not, but though
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: While we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal. Adversity is but for a day; let this therefore comfort thee in the
depth of misery.

These things premised; we come now to handle the two maine things considerable
in this day of adversity; namely, the cause, and the cure of the great and many
distempers that make us thus miserable as we are.

And as for the cause, the efficient (I have showed you) is God: the material,
Sin: the final, repentance: as for the formal, I told you, we would wave it
for the present.

The evils which we feel proceed from God, procured by Sin, and inflicted to
the end we should repent and amend. And so this consideration affords us this
point of Instruction, That Gods indignation moved against sin, calls for our
Repentance.

In the second place, the cure, we have found upon enquiry to be Humiliation
and Reformation.

Humiliation under the mighty hand of God.
Reformation of our evil lives, and corrupt conversations.
And from hence arises this Observation, That

Humiliation and Reformation are the only means to pacify Gods indignation,
and to remove our afflictions.

And these are the things which we are chiefly in this day of adversity to
consider. Of which in their order, as briefly and plainly as possibly may be:
and first of the first, the cause of the evils under which we now suffer. God,
Sin, Repentance, God the efficient, sin the material, repentance the final,
they proceed from God, procured by sin, and inflicted to the end we should
repent and amend.

Gods indignation moved against sin, calls for our Repentance.

Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy name: Hear ye the rod and who has appointed it. As our sins cry to God
for Judgments, so his Judgments cry to us for repentance. Thus says the Lord
to the men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, Jer. 18.11. behold, I frame
evil against you, and devise a device against you, return ye now every one
from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good. Repent and turn
your selves from all your transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruin,
Ezekiel. 18.30.

What ever evils we suffer under, God is the author of them all, Lam. 3.37.
Who is he that says, and it comes to pass when the Lord commands it not?
out of the mouth of the most high preproceedeth not evil and good? yes
doubtless, evil as well as good proceeds from God. But here we must
distinguish of Malum poena, and Malum culpae, the former is from God, and the
latter from Man. No evil of punishment but from him, nor any but for the evil
of Sin. Sin is the procurer of all our woe. Woe, woe unto us, but why?
because we have finned, Lam. 5.16. Woe unto us that we have sinned; for this
our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim, ver. 17. All would be
well without us, were all well within us: From whence come wars and fightings
among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?
Jam. 4.1. cast but these with Jonah overboard, and the sea of our world which
now works, and is tempestuous, will forth with cease her raging, and be
calm. Sin with Acha^ is it that troubles all, let us but take away this
accursed thing from amongst us, and God will turn from the fierceness of his
anger, and return in mercy to the many thousands of his people. The REBELLIONS
are strengthened against us, yea, triumph over us, but how? by our multiplied
rebellions against our God; let us but make our peace with him, and he will
soon make them to be at peace with us. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7. We have
transgressed, and we have rebelled, and the Lord has not pardoned, but
punished us with many and sore evils; yet (we must believe) all for our good,
for our conversion, not for our confusion; for he has no pleasure at all that
the wicked should die, but that he should return from his ways and live,
Ezekiel. 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the
Lord God, and not that he should return from his ways and live? No, the Lord
our God desires rather our life and salvation, then our death and damnation; he
has no pleasure at all in this latter, but delights much in the former: yea,
there is joy amongst his Angels in Heaven, over one sinner that repents, Luke
15.10.

Give me leave then (I beseech you) to apply this that I have spoken, with the
words of Tertullian in his tract of repentance. Bonum est poenitere, an non?
quid revolvis? Deus precipit. At enim ille non precipit tantum, sed etiam
hortatur. Invitat praemio salutem, jurans, etiam vivo dicens, cupit credi sibi.
Tell me, is it good to repent or not? what do thou study of? God commands
thee so to do; nay more, he does not only command, but persuades, and exhorts
thee also: he invites thee to Heaven with a promise of a reward, swearing as he
lives, that he desires thy salvation, and he would have thee to believe him. As
I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye die O ye house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11.

O beatos nos quorum causa Deus jurat. O miserrimos fi^nec juranti Domino
credimus: as the Father beforenamed has it in the place before cited. O happy
and blessed are we, for whose sake God swears; O most miserable and wretched if
we will not believe him swearing: and if we do believe him, then let us repent
our selves of our sins, and return unto him. Every sin is an error, Nonne
errant omnes? Prove. 14.22. Do they not err that devise evil? We fall and
stray, peceardo, by sinning; we must rise and return poenitend^, by repenting.
It is not the falling, but the not rising, not our sinning, but our not
repenting that undoes us. Perpetuity and impenitency in sin makes sin out of
measure sinful, and renders the actors incapable of a pardon. As all Gods
promises pass sub condition obedientiae, on condition of obedience; so all his
threatenings, Sub condititione impenitentia, under the condition of impenitency.
If a righteous man revolt, he shall die for it, notwithstanding all Gods
promises: and if a wicked man repent he shall live, notwithstanding all Gods
menaces: You may see this clearly evidenced in that 33. Chapter of the
Prophecy of Ezekiel, at the 13. and following Verses. When I shall say to the
righteous, that he shall surely live; if be trust to his own righteousness and
commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be remembered; but for his
iniquity that he has committed he shall die for it. Again, when I say unto
the wicked, thou shall surely die, if he turn from his sin, and do that
which is lawful and right, be shall surely live, he shall not die. What can be
said more fully, more plainly, or more punctually? wherefore if we desire
rather to live then to dye, to prosper then to perish, let us repent our selves
of our iniquities, and return unto the Lord our God. who is ready to receive
and embrace us in the arms of his mercy. Esa. 55.7. Let the wicked, etc.

Repentance is nothing else but redire ad principia, to return to him whom we
have left by sin. And the practice of this duty consists in these two
things. Humiliation and reformation; humiliation under the mighty hand of God,
reformation of our evil lives and corrupt conversations, which are the cure of
the great and many distempers that make us thus miserable as we are.

Humiliation and reformation are the only means to pacify Gods indignation,
and to remove our afflictions; and this is the thing which we are in this day
of adversity to consider; and my last observation, which I shall dispatch in a
word.

Humiliation and Reformation have for these eight years and upward been the
common talk of the times. But what has been done in them? why indeed si
verbis audacia detur, such things as never were done before. That has been
done, Quod nulla posteritas probet, quod nulla taceat; Which posterity can
neither approve, nor conceal; no nor all Antiquity parallel. I Will give you
cases as near as I can to ours; we have had days of Humiliation wherein many
men have fasted, but as we read Isa. 58.4. For strife, and debate; and to
smite with the fist of wickedness, etc. and humbled themselves, but as it is
Psalm. 10.10. That the poor might fall by their strong ones. And such a
Reformation we have as Nebuzaradan Captain of the guard to Nebuchadnezer made
at Jerusalem, 2 Kings. 25. When he threw down the walls both of City and
Temple, and took away all the vessels of Gold and Silver, etc. And how should
it be better when the Devil of Rebellion has turned himself into this Angel
of Reformation? and the old Serpent held out new lights, to lead his followers
into outer Darkness. But to have done with these, who have undone us All.

The Humiliation which I am to speak to, and of, is a true self dejection,
joined with the confession of sin, contrition for sin, and an earnest
desire of pardon.

And as for Reformation, it is a conversion from sin, a change of all bad
actions into good.

The former duty is thus performed. A man touched with the sense of his misery,
humbly casts himself down before the mercy seat of Gods offended Majesty,
confesses from a sorrowful heart his forepast sins, condemns himself for
the same, and earnestly entreats pardon, and forgiveness of them at the
hands of God for the merits of Christ.

The latter thus. A man perceiving his error and folly, corrects and amends
what ever is amiss in him; sets himself in the right way, and proceeds, and
goes on in all virtue, of godliness of living.

And let every one of us but thus humble, and thus reform himself, and surely
then the controversy which God has with us all is ended, and a peace
concluded: for confirmation of which assertion the whole current of Scripture
is so clear, and the Character so obvious, that he that runs may read. I shall
therefore quote but two to avoid prolixity; and what need I more? when In
Scripturis non saepius dicta, sed tantum dicta sufficiant. Any one material
Text will serve to prove any one tenet to them that believe the Scripture. 1.
Then for Humiliation, take that of Saint James, at his 4. Chapter, and 10.
Verse, Humble your selves in the fight of the Lord, and he shall life you up:
do you but perform the duty of Humiliation, and God will confer upon you
the dignity of exaltation.

And as for Reformation, see thee 1. of Esaias, at the 16. Verse, where we have
this document no less consolatory then consonant. Wash ye, make ye clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, etc. and then come, and let us reason together says the Lord:
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the Land: If ye will reform your selves you shall be
received to mercy, no question to the contrary! but if ye will not, if ye
refuse and rebel, ye may read your destiny in the next Verse, the 20. of that
1. of Esaias, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. And if the mouth of the Lord has said it, the hand of the Lord will
do it. For nec verbum ab intention quia veritas, nec factum a verbo quia
virtus, says Saint Bernard. With God neither does his Word disagree, etc.

Let then so many of us as believe in God, as believe his Word, obey him, and
do as we are commanded. Humble, and Reform our selves; confess, and forsake
our sins, correct and amend what ever is amiss in us; redeem the time we
have vainly spent, and work out our salvation with fear and trembling: Fear
God, honor our King, and love as Brethren, and then we need never fear what
man can do unto us, Luke 12.4, 5.

Let all of us in the fear of God in this day, the latter day: the day of
Adversity thus consider, and God, it may be, may be entreated, and once again
restore unto us the former day, the day of Prosperity, wherein we may lawfully,
yea must, and ought, thankfully to be joyful and merry. To which purpose let
us pray.

This Prayer was omitted, because the Glass was run, and the Season then almost
as hot as these 8. years persecution; but being it was really intended, it is
therefore here verbatim inserted.
O Lord God of Hosts, God of the spirits of all Flesh, who for a long time have
sorely afflicted us with the devouring scourge of a most unnatural War: And in
the depth of thy displeasure have suffered us to proceed to that height of
impiety, as unsatisfied with the blood of our fellow members, to cut off Him
who was our Head; and to take away His Life, for the preservation whereof, we
ought all of us both by the Laws of God and Man to have sacrificed our own. O
Lord, we do confess that we be even astonished, and confounded with the
apprehension of our most sinful, and most miserable condition. O who can lay
his hands on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? Had He been a Saul, and His
Subjects David's! Had He been rejected, and they elected! They Righteous, and
He Wicked! yet had they sinned against their own Souls, and been guilty of the
highest Treason for defiling their hands with the Blood of their Sovereign. Of
how much greater condemnation does this sinful Land stand guilty, who have
laid hands upon a David, and are themselves Shimea's and Shebaes; who have
slain a most pious, prudent, and peaceable Prince, and are themselves a most
perfidious, rebellious, and wicked People. Yea, and to fill up the measure of
our iniquity, that their might be nothing wanting to make our sin complete;
we have usurpt thy Authority, who art the only Judge of Kings, and committed
this horrid Murder under the specious color of Justice. We have (if we may
make use of His own Expressions) added the mockery of Justice, to the cruelty
of Malice: So that, now we may seem even ripe for destruction, and thou may
justly thrust in thy sickle, and cut us down, destroy us, root and branch as in
one day, and lay our Land waste into a Wilderness, or give it unto Strangers
to be inhabited. Thou may sweep us away with the beesome of Destruction, and
give us our portion with the Devil and his Angels, as the worst of Hipocrites,
in the hottest place of that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone.

But Lord in Judgment, we humbly beseech thee, to remember mercy; and thou that
take no delight in the Death of one single sinner, spare merciful Lord,
spare a great, though most sinful Nation. Pity a despised Church and
distracted State; heal up those Wounds which our sins have made so wide, that
none but thine own hands can close them; and in the tenderness of thy
unspeakable compassion, set up the Sun in his Fathers Throne, that he may
restore thy worship, settle Peace, and purge the Land of the Guilt of that
innocent, Loyal, yea ROYAL blood, wherewith it is Defiled, which cries aloud
for Vengeance in thine ears. O Lay not this sin of bloud-guiltinesse, unto the
charge of this whole Nation, which is committed by the hands of a handful, in
comparison, to the whole! Neither let the Cry of that horrid murder committed
upon the Person of thine Anointed, by those who have graspt all power into
their hands, outcry the cry of their prayers whose Loyal hearts abhor the
very thought of such a Heinous, Treasonable, Damnable fact, and mourn in
secret for it. O Let it pity thee to see so flourishing a Church and State, as
this but lately was, to be thus rent and torn in pieces by a rude rabble of
Seditious, Sacrilegious, Rebellious, Traiterous Men, who have embrued their
hands in the blood of King, Priest, and People: Who have Usurpt all authority,
trampled upon all Religion, Violated all our Laws, infringed all our
liberties, and destroyed our properties, and Father all their impieties upon
thee, because for our sins thou suffer success to attend their actions,
which have neither warrant, nor president in thy Word. But Lord we beseech thee
for Jesus Christ his sake to be reconciled unto us, to pardon our sins, and
heal our Land, which for its transgressions has many Princes, yea Servants
that rule over it: And give us Him thy Servant, our true, and rightful
Sovereign CHARLES, Son and Heir to his deceased Father, to be our King,
maugre all the power, and malice, of thine, his, and our inhumane, barbarous,
and blood thirsty enemies; Arise O Lord, maintain thine own cause, Remember
how the Adversary has blasphemed thy Name, profaned thy holy places, Murdered
thine Anointed, butchered his Subjects, and now gee about to disinherit his
posterity, and convert a well-tempered Monarchy, into a popular Anarchy. This
thou have seen O Lord, and because thou hold thy tongue, they think
wickedly, that thou art even such a one as their selves, but do thou reprove
them, and see before them the things which they have done. That thou may take
the matter into thy hands, the poor commiteth himself unto thee, O be thou the
helper of the friendlesse, and break the power of the ungodly and malicious.

Infatuate their Counsels and divide them; Infeeble their forces and Disperse
them; Impale their hearts, weaken their hands, and command Salvation and
deliverance for thy Church, the King, and his people; That thy worship may be
restored, Thine ANOINTED inthroned, and Truth, and Peace re-established in all
our Borders; and that for his sake, who is the Prince of peace, and that shed
his most precious blood to purchase our peace, even Jesus Christ the righteous,
To whom with thee, and the blessed Spirit, be ascribed as is most due, All
Honor, Power, Praise, might, Majesty, Dominion and thanksgiving, for ever, and
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

