JOHN the BAPTIST, Forerunner of CHRIST JESUS: OR, A necessity for LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE, as the only means under Heaven to strengthen Children weak in
faith; to convince Heretics misled in faith; to discover the Gospel to All
such as yet never heard thereof; and establish Peace between all States and
People throughout the World: according unto which, were both our Saviors
Commission, and the Apostles Practice for the propagation of it Peaceably: As
appears most evidently By sundry Scriptures digested into Chapters, with some
Observations at the end of every one; most humbly devoted to the use and
benefit of all such as are zealously inquisitive after truth; piously disposed
to embrace it, and constantly resolved to practice it in their lives and
conversations: to the Honor of God, the edifying of their Brethren, and their
Own salvation unto eternity.

The Contents of the Chapters follow in the next leaf.

Gal. 4.28 29. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.

But as then, he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne
after the Spirit, even so it is now.

This is licenced, but not permitted to be entered according to Order.

Persecution is displeasing both to God and men. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.16 THe Jews
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and
they please not God, and are contrary to men, forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles, that they might be saved. (But)

But. Peaceable edifying one an other is acceptable to God and men. Romans
14.17.18. The Kingdom of God consists in Righteousness, Peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved of men, let us therefore follow after the things which make
for Peace, and things wherewith we may edify one an other.



Contents of the Chapters.
1 Chap. Christ's Commission and the Disciples practice for propagating of the
Gospel with the peoples duty, and a charge for submitting unto such as were
over them in the Lord. (...) Christ's order and the Disciples practice
concerning the Ministers maintenance, and relieving of the poor, whereby the
forcing of tithes or any thing instead thereof appears to be contrary to the
Gospel. 3 Chap. Christ's instructions and the Apostles practice for tendering
and holding forth the Gospel only in a peaceable way. 4 Chap. Christ's
instructions and the Apostles practice concerning Christian Liberty. 5 Chap.
Christ's and the Apostles testimonies concerning Gods free grace, and man's
natural incapacity. 6 Chap. Christ's and the Apostles testimonies concerning
the certainty of the Elects salvation. 7 Chap. Christ's own testimony that his
Kingdom was not of this world, neither did ^e exercise Civil jurisdiction. 8
Chap. Christ's commands against the Apostles lordlinesse and dominion, with
their submission thereunto and practice. 9 Chap. Christ's foretelling his
Disciples that they should be persecuted, his preparing of them, with their
obedience thereunto. 10 Chap Christ and the Apostles testify that the true
Church and Saints must be persecuted, in consequence whereof persecution must
be a true mark of a false Church and enemies of God. 11 Chap Christ and the
Apostles testify that there should arise heresies, and false Christ's, together
with their commission how they were to be proceeded against. 12 Chap The
Apostles warrant for examining of the Spirits and their doctrines, and holding
fast the truth. 13 Chap Christ's and the Apostles testimonies of Christians
being weak in faith and how they ought to grow therein bearing with one
another weaknesses and infirmities. 14 Chap Christ's commands and the Apostles
practice are both against persecution for conscience sake. 15 Chap Certain
testimonies which God, through his divine providence, directed to be uttere^ by
unbeleeving Jews and Gentiles, in favor of the Apostles and the Gospel
recorded by the Holy Ghost as a witness against all persecuting Christians. 16
Chap Certain acts of justice and favor, which the unbeleeving Magistrates and
Officers of the Gentiles did unto the Apostles, recorded in the Gospel as a
witness against the corruptions and cruelties of Christians. 17 Chap Six woes
denounced by our Savior against the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; all
which are applyable to them and all others, abetters of persecution.
Our Saviors Commission concerning Unbelievers.
Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Mark. 6.11. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust from under your feet for a testimony against them.

Christ's and the Apostles instructions concerning Mis-beleevers.
Mat. 24.24.25. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets; behold I
have told you before hand.

2 Timothy 4.2.5. But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the workeof
an Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry: reprove, rebuke, with all long
suffering and doctrine.

The Apostles instructions concerning Weak believers.
Romans 14 1.3. Him that is weak in the faith, receive: but not to doubtful
disputations: Let not him that eats, despise him that cateth not: and let not
him that eats not judge him that ^ateth, for God has received him.

Gal. 6.1. If a man be evertaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one with the spirit of meekness.

And of these three sorts together, viz. Unbeleevers Misbeleevers, and Weak
believers, whereunto all people of the world may be reduced, Paul says, 1.
Cor. 10.32. Give no offenc^ neither to the ^ewes, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God: If it be possible, as much as (...) i^ y^, live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12.18.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AFter the death of Joseph, though the Jews the Church of God was contemptible
for number in respect of the Egyptians, whom they served as slaves to do their
drudgery, there being nothing to be seen in them to provoke envy and revenge,
besides Gods giving them ability to endure so great afflictions; those of Egypt
notwithstanding murmured against them because they differed in Religion, and
still sought accusations, multiplying their service, and exasperating their
bondage, Exodus 1.

In Mordeca's days likewise a Haman was sufficient to prevail with Ahasuorus
that the whole Church of God in that Kingdom, men, women and children should
be persecuted to death, because they served God in a manner differing from that
Country, Est. 3.8.13. all manner of hardship and evil outreating was the lot
of the Prophets: our Savior himself fared no better, and all such as will
live godly must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

Oh, but some will say, must seditious heretics be suffered to preach and
teach new doctrines contrary to the established Laws? I beseech all such to
consider a little, whether Paul was not accused as a heretic, Act. 24.14. as a
seditious pestilent fellow, a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, v. 5.6.
and one that taught contrary to Law? Act. 18.12.13. Did not Ahab tax Eliah as a
troubler of Israel? 1 King. 18.17. Did not the Princes accuse Jeremiah to King
Zedechia for having weakened his men of war, moving that he might therefore be
put to death? Jer. 38.4. Was not Daniel accused as disregarding the Kings
decree, because he prayed three times a day? Dan. 6.5.13. Did they not call our
Savior de^eiver, conjurer, blasphemer? Matthew. 27.63. and 10.25. and 12.24.
Joh. 12.36. Was not Paul termed an Idolater, because he preached Jesus and the
resurrection? Act 17.18. Was not the profession of Christianity of the Gospel
held a sect, and every where spoken against? Act. 28.22. whilst our Savior
himself was disallowed and judged of men? 1 Pet. 2.4. Did not both the
learned, wise, devout and honor able generally condemn Him and his Apostles?
Luke 9.22. Mark 8 31. Did they not raise tumults and commotions against Paul
and Ba^nabas? Act. 13.50. and 18.12.13. Did they not seek and set up false
witnesses? Act. 6.10.11.13. Were not Peter and John forbad to teach? Act.
4.17.19. Joh. 12.42. Was not Paul silenced? Act. 18.6. Were they not required
to depart the Country as our Savior was by the Gargazenes? Matthew. 8.24. or
banished as Paul, Barnabas and John? Act. 13.50. Rev. 1.9. Were not such as
confessed Christ, or received the brethren thrust out of the Synagogues? Joh.
9.22. and 3. Joh. 10. Were they not imprisoned? Act. 5.18. and 12.4. and
16.23.24. Were they not beaten and scourged? Act. 16.22.23. and 22.25. 2 Cor.
11.23.24. And lastly, Were they not put to death as evil doers? Act. 7.58. and
12.2. Heb. 11.37. In contemplation whereof it is no false doctrine nor
presumption to tell thee, Dear Christian, whoever thou be, that if the
current of the Gospel tell truth, Gods people must be persecuted, therefore no
persecuters, Joh. 15.19. and 16.20. Mark 13.13. 2 Timothy 3 12. and that whatever
molestation or disturbance thou give to any one for differing from thee in
opinion, be it more or less, although him whom thou thus persecutest be in thy
apprehesion as great a heretic as ever breathed, yet it is possible that even
such a one in Gods reckoning may be as glorious a Saint as Stephen, unto whose
death Paul implies himself to have consented: consider with thy self in the
fear and love of God, whether it be safe for thee to continue persecuting upon
this hazard, which can neither be avoided nor excused.

Innumerable are the absurdities, and ridiculous are the extravagancies which
the Spirit of persecution, the exercising dominion over the consciences of
others, leads men into; we may have seen the proof thereof not long since
amongst our selves.

The first and loudest cry of our Reformers was against a Common-Prayer-Booke,
Printed Homelies, and customary or curtal'd Pulpit prayers, all of them as
Antichristian and abominable; but against Bishops as yet more abominable, not
only for approving, but enjoining them: would any think then that these very
Reformers, even before they can be certain how far their endeavors shall
be approved throughout the Kingdom, much less confirmed, should have the
resolution to go about or make show of an intention to erect a greater Idol
of the self same Fabric, their own imagination? and yet upon indifferent
and due enquiry it may be found so; for whereas they have heretofore so much
exclamed against Episcopacie for stinting of the Spirit, in some part or
particulars only of Gods worship; they now thinking themselves sufficiently
qualified, being to take upon them to establish a Dagon on his throne in
stinting the whole worship of the Great God of Heaven, in manacling the
consciences of his Saints their brethren, and not suffering them to pay their
very tythings, or perform the least parcel of their duty unto the only Creator
of the world, save in such manner as they allow of, and impose upon them: Stand
amazed oh Heaven and Earth; judge, but in mercy, good God, between this
generation and their brethren, not suffering the blessed first f^nits of thine
own handy reformation to be blasted through this obstinate
selfe-conceitednesse and preposterous zeal of theirs.

If the Commandment for rooting out Idolaters, and under that notion all such
as differ from us in Religion, in opinion, be moral, be universal; then does
it belong to Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Brownists, and Anabaptists, all
alike; no one of them may pretend to have better title to it then the other, if
any besides themselves be judge: with what reason and justice then have
Protestants exclamed so loud against the Popish Inquisition? the Churches of
New England against the National Church of Old England? and the Puritans, so
termed heretofore, against the High Commission Court, if a Presbyteric when it
has got the Militia or Civil Magistrate at a beck may do the like? Tell me,
Good Reader, what difference do thou make betwixt being persecuted by an
Episcopal or Presbyteriall Clergy? whether had thou rather enjoy the
Liberty of Conscience in some measure, under a Popish French King, than be
persecuted by any Protestant government or discipline whatsoever? nay, deal
freely with me, it is no time to mince it or dissemble: had thou not rather
the Great Turk should rule over thee than either? shall I take thy silence for
consent? but what are thy reasons for it? shall I guess at some of them? is it
not because thou look upon the Presbyterians with tenderness of affection
as thy fellow sufferers heretofore, and even at present as thy brethren, thy
misled unhappy brethren, to whom thou art forced to take up Jacobs words,
saying, Genesis 49.5.6. Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. Oh my
soul come not thou into their secrets, unto their assembly, mine honor be not
thou united, for in their anger they imprison, plunder, and with protracted
torments and vexations cause to dye daily, not a lustful Shichem, but all that
differ from them in opinion, how dear soever in Gods account: Christ himself
if he were on earth could not escape them, did he but set footing within the
dominions of an omnipotent classical Presbytery: gross miscarriages of such
I know thou look upon with extremest grief of soul, as such to whom once
thou so willingly gave the right hand of fellowship: Secondly, I observe thou
have spared neither purse nor person for the public cause, but been amongst
the forwardest to join with those who now are building the Presbyteriall
Throne, which even before hand, too publicly, though not so politickly,
threatens thy banishment, thy ruin: the thought hereof no doubt perplexes the^
not a little, whilst thou considerest how thou have spent thy estate,
turmoyl'd thy person, and distilled away thy brain, out of hopes to enjoy that
freedom which not only the most flourishing, and yet more Christianlike States
of the united Provinces, but a Popish French King, or an unbeleeving Turk would
not only grant thee gratis, but be beholding that he might have the honor of
ruling over thee in Civil matters only: Oh, how will such disciplin^ and
government prove a Devil, a Legion of temptations to weaker Christians? how
apt will they be in imitation of Jobs wretched counselor, Job 2.9. to curse
these earthen gods and dye? when they shall consider how Protestants, even the
best of Christians are persecuted (for to be persecuted is the absolute and
eminent character of the best) in Spain, Italy, and in some Protestant
Countries, more then in Turkey; will they not be apt to think it better for
the state of Christendom, the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, that such Princes and
Magistrates were all Mahumetans, or any thing rather than such pretending
Christians, or persecuting Antichristians?

If all people in Christendom were intentively looked upon and considered,
there would be found no two so totally like one another, which being (et
together might not easily be distinguished to differ: But if the judgments,
opinions and thoughts of men could possibly be unfolded unto the public view,
far more difficult would it be to find out any two which held parallel,
agreement and consent in any considerable proportion; the opinions and thoughts
of men being endued not only with a bare capacity, but effectually multiplying
varieties far above all things under heaven, and in such manner, as it is not
in the power of the whole creation to prescribe rules capable of bringing them
to a strict consent and harmony.

But that I may not be over tedious to my Reader upon the entrance,
recommending the ensuing Discourse unto his Christian consideration and
censure; since it is granted that Antichrist had overrun the whole Christian
world, insomuch that God had no visible Church (except Popish) even for
hundreds of years together, and so corrupted the very Scriptures, that the
truth was near quite overgrowne with errors of carnal ordinances, man's
inventions, whilst the Reformers the Protestants, (who are said to have above
40 differing Translations of the Bible,) diffent amongst themselves to the
damning one another; whilst we may have understood that even Paul did once
persecute the best Christians, and Christ himself, with as much zeal as ever
he preached him afterward: for these respects I crave leave to querie, w^ether
all such as shall propound their thoughts touching any part of the Discipline
and l^ctrine of Gods worship and Man's salvation, ought not only to be permitted
freely, but also to be countenanced and cherished, though they seem never so
strange and novel: and this until God Almighty shall piease by some infallible
sign and demonstration to declare himself, that he has discovera unto us his
whole will and pleasure concerning both.

JOHN the BAPTIST, OR LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE: The only forerunner to make way
for the GOSPEL.
CHAP. I. Christ's Commission, and the Disciples practice for propagating of the
Gospel: together with the peoples duty, and a charge upon them for submitting
unto such as were over them in the Lord.
MA^th. 28.19.20. Go and teach (1) all Nations to observe whatsoever I have
commanded y^u.

Luke 10.2. The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few, pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He should send forth laborers into the
harvest.

Matthew. 24 6.14. The end of the world is not yet: This Gospel of the Kingdom
shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto the Nations, and then
shall the end come.

Mark 13.7 10. The Gospel must first be publ^shed among all Nations.

Mark 13.27. Then shall ^e sen^ his Angels and gather together his elect from
the four winds from the utter most part of the earth.

Romans 1.16. The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation.

C.16 25 26. The Gospel of Jesus Christ, which according to the Revolation of
the mystery was kept secret since the world began, now is made m^nif^st and by
the criptures of the Prophets, according to the commandment of the eve^lasting
God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of faith.

1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let
him acknowledge that the things which I write unto you are the commandments of
the Lord.

2 Pet. 1.3. According to his divine power, God has given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him that
called us to glory.

Gal. 1.12.13. The Gospel which was preached of me is not after man, for I
neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of
jesus Christ.

Act. 20.20.27. I have kept back nothing which was profitable unto you, I have
not stunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

2 Pet. 1.19.20 21. We have also a most sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do
w^ll that ye take heed, as unto a l^ght that shines in a dark place, until
the day down, and the day star arise in your hearts, knowing this that no
Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, for the Prophesies
came not in old: me by the will of man, but holy men spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost.

Romans 15 4. Whatsoever things were written aforet me, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

2 Timothy 3.15,16.17. The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto
solvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus: All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruct on in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Rom 10.14.17. Faith comes by hearing, how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?

Rev. 2.24,25. I will put upon you no other burden, but (2) that which ye have
already, hold f^st till I come.

Act. 22.32. When thou art converted (3) strengthen thy brethren.

Matthew. 10.27.28. What I tell you in darkness speak ye in light, and what ye
hear in the ^are, that speak ye on the house tops.

Mark 5.18,19,10. (...) Jesus s^d unto him that had been possessed with the
devil [legion] go ^ome to thy fr^as, and tell them how great things the Lord
has done for thee, and has had compassion on thee; and he departed and began
to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him, and all men
did marvel.

Matthew. 10.32,33. Luke 12.8.9. Whosoever shall confess m^ before men, him will
I also confess before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny
me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Mark 8.38. Luke 9.26. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer we shall also reign with him: If we deny him, he
will also deny us.

1 Cor. 9 16. A (4) command is laid upon me, and woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel.

2 Timothy 2.2. The things that thou have heard of me amongst many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

C.4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove,
rebuke with all suffering and doctrine.

Acts 14.18,19,20. And they commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in
the Name of Jesus, but Peter and John answered and said unto them, whether it
be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye;
we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

C.5.27,28,29. The high Priest asked them, saying, Did not we strictly command
you that you should not teach in the Name of Jesus? and behold you have filled
Jerusalem with your Doctrine: then Peter and the other Apostles answered and
said, we ought to obey God rather then man.

Gal. 1.15,16,17,18,19. When it pleased God who separated me from my mothers
womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach
him among the heathen, immediately (5) I conferred not with flesh and blood,
neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me, but I
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus, then after three years I
went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and I abode with him 15 days, but other of
the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords brother.

Act. 24.14,15,16. I confess unto thee that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship ^he God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets. And have hope toward God, which they
themselves also allow* that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of
the just and unjust: and herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men.

C.26.22. Having obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying no other things, than those which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come.

1 Timothy 1.3. I besought thee still to abide at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might (6) charge some that they teach no other doctrine.

Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him which speaks from heaven.

2 These. 1.6.8. It is a righteous thing with God to take vengeance on them that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord jesus Christ.

1 These. 5.12,13. We beseech you to kn^w them which labor among you, and are
^ver you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem of them very highly in
love for their works sake.

Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule ^ver you, and submit your selves: for
they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy and not with grief.

1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they that labor in the (...) and Doctrine.

1 Cor. 16.15.16. I beseech ye brethren ye know the house of Stephanus, that it
is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves unto the
ministry of the Saints) that ye (7 su^mit your selves unto such, and to every
one that helps with us and labors.

2 Thessalonians. 2.15 Brethren stand fast and hold the (8) tradition which ye have
been taught by word or by our Epistle.

C.3.6. Withdraw from every brother that walks not after the traditions which
he received of ^.

Col. 4.3.9. Pray for us that God would open to us a door of utterance to
speak the mysteries of Christ.

Ephesians. 6.19. Pray for me that utterance may be given unto me that I may open my
mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel.

2 These. 3.1.2. Pray for us that the word of the Lord may have a free course,
and be glorified even as it is with you; and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men.

Gal. 2.11. When Peter was come to Antioch, I (10) withstood him to the fac^,
because he was to be blamed.

Col. 4.17. Say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

Act. 11.2,3,4 18. When Peter came up to Jerusalem, they that were of the
circumcision contended with him, saying then we^test in unto men uncircumcised,
and d^d^st eat with them* but Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning,
and expounded it by order unto them: and when the Apostles and Brethren heard
these things, they held their peace and glorified God etc.

C.15.1.2.4. Certain men which came down from Judea taught the Brethren* and
said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and d^sput^tion with
them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question:
and when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of
the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God had done with
them.

C.17 10,11,12. Paul and Silas coming into Berea, went into the Synagogue of
the J^wes. These were more noble then these in Thessalonica in that they
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, therefore many of
them believed.

Rev. 22. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou
can not be (...) them that are evil, and the have tried them which say they
are apostles, and are not, and have found them liars.

Observations upon CHAP. 1.
(1) THe Gospel ought to be taught to all people throughout the world in their
successive generations, for the gathering together such as are elected to
salvation, and to serve as a witness against others that refuse it, Joh. 1.8.
c.3.11. Act. 1.8. c 23.11. c.5 3^. c.26.16 Rev. 1.5.3.14. Therefore it
concerns all States and People in their respective callings to consider
whether the Gospel according to our Saviors Commission, has been and is still
proffered and held forth unto all Nations, whether every man according to his
gift and station, has contributed his mite hereunto, where the fault lies, in
case of defect (than which nothing surer) and how it may be remedied: it is not
enought to say we are willing and ready to teach all Infidel Nations that
never heard of it, to instruct and undeceive all Heretics which have been
taught amiss, but we had need examine seriously how true that is which we
avouch herein; for unless we have endeavored to hold the Gospel out unto them
in such a manner, as men of reason and understanding might, or could give ear
unto it, and by Gods providence embrace it, they will so far forth be excused,
like such as never heard it, that we shall be condemned as those that never
tendered it, in such a rational way, as was likely according to the
proceedings of man, or the institution and will of God to take effect* The
Disciples of our Savior we know, went from place to place, from one City and
Country to another, have we done the like? if not; ^ave we at least encouraged
them to come into our own Country to learn the Gospel of (...)? have we
improved such opportunities as at some times have been given us to gain such,
who for their worldly business and occ^sions came amongst us? The Disciples of
Christ gave audience to people of all Sects and Nations; answering such
questions as they demanded, and informing them further, as they saw occasion,
in the whole mystery of salvation: and our Blessed Savior did still answer
those that came unto him, though with captious questions, that even thereby
they might learn somewhat and be edified, if possi^le: have we done the like?
have we sought the conversion of Turks, Indians, Mores or other Heathen
people? or have we endeavored the rectifying and bringing to the truth such
Heretics as at any time have lived amongst us? or have we not wished them in
New England, desiring them as the Magistrates of Philippi did Paul and Silas to
depart the City, Act. 16.38.39. Or as the Gargasenes did our Savior to be gone
from their coasts? Matthew. 8 34. Nay have we not rather with threats, finings
and imprisonments, forced multitudes away, because they would not conform to a
few ceremonies, which we our selves held but indifferent, before they could be
convinced in conscience of the lawfulness thereof? as though it were in their
power to be co^verted at their pleasure, whether God would or no; or as if we
were able to judge when they were wilfully ignorant, or reprobately hardened: If
then we have neither taken the pains to go into the Countries where these
Infidells and Heretics inhabit to preach the Gospel to them nor allured them
to come unto us; no nor suffered them when they were here to live peaceably
amongst us, that they being without the word might be won by our conversation,
1 Pet. 3.1. How have we, or can we possibly hereafter, unless we change our
method, discharge this trust, or obey this command of our Saviors, in
preaching the Gospel unto all Nations? till when the number of the ^lect cannot
possibly be accomplished.

Wherefore I can only wish that all gainsayers would set their wisdom and will
a work to contrive and propose any rational way, or so much as a possibility
how the Gospel should be propagated, or but propounded unto all people in such
a manner, as can leave the refusers inexcusable, unless you presuppose a
license, a liberty and freedom unto such as are to teach and learn it, as in
all likelihood was signified by that peaceable condition the known world
enjoyed at that time, which the all-seeing and wise eye of Providence had
foreordained as the fullness of time, wherein our Blessed Savior should come
into the world, Gal. 44. not unfitly intimating, that his birth was accompained
with a universal peace unto the body, without which regeneration or his second
birth could not be fulfilled in the propagation of the Gospel to the true
peace and liberty of mind and conscience: And that all doubts and gainsaying
might be removed, which the troublers of Gods peace in future times were like
to raise, either out of a wrangling disposition, or an ambitious desire of
power and greatness, it pleased the Holy Ghost to tell us that at such a time
when the Churches had rest throughout all Judea, Galilee and Samaria, they were
then edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied, Act. 9.31.

(2) We find recited in Matthew. 3 22. out of Deuteronomy. 18.15. Moses truly said unto
the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you, so that whatsoever Christ commands must be submitted to, what he
says must be believed, and all this upon trust, upon his own word, without
examination, whether it quadrade with our own reasons, much less our wills;
for we are told before hand that the Gospel seems foolishness to carnal man's
wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.23. and the will of man is enmity to God, To. 8.7. it is only
Christ's prerogative royal to challenge faith in whatsoever he shall, say: And
that we may see he never parted from it, nor bequeathed it to any man, in his
Commission to the Apostles, we find him restraining them to teach all Nations
to observe only what he had commanded them, Mat. 19,20. and conformable
thereunto Paul says, the Gospel which was preached of me, I received it by
revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. Try the Spirits, 1 John, 4.1. Prove all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. and though Paul himself, or an Angel from heaven should
preach any other Gospel let him be accursed: and, Hold fast that which is good,
Gal. 1.8.

All the indefinite Commissions we find in Scripture, that every thing be done
in order, and decently, 1 Cor. 14.4. The rest will I set in order when I come,
1 Cor. 11.34. Standfast in the Traditions which you have been taught, whether
by word, or by our Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. and the like: whatever they
signify, since it is not expressly mentioned, it must not upon pain of not
adding, nor taking from the word of God, be otherwise interpreted than
according to what we find therein mentioned, by which we are only warranted,
and may safely judge and understand the mind of God, just as Paul says, that
the invisible things of God from the creation of the World, are clearly seen
and understood by the things that are made, Rom 1.20.

(3) It is not sufficient for us to search out and embrace the truth our
selves, for our own private satisfaction and contentment, but we must
communicate it, and instruct others therein: God did not enlighten any man's
understanding, that it should like a candle put under a bushel, Mat. 5.15.
give light to no body else; nay, it is an infallible sign that we are not
conver^ed nor regenerate, if we fla^ter our selves to keep close and smother it
in our own bosoms, without imp^oving it, by endeavoring what we can the
conversion of others. Moses that man of God, desired God would blot him out of
the b^oke of life, rather than the Israelites sin in making to themselves gods
of gold, should not be pardoned, Exodus 32.33. and we^find Paul's heavines and
(...) of heart to be so great, that he could even have wished himself accur^d
from Christ for the spiritual good of his brethren, his kinsmen according to
the slesh Romans 9 ^, ^. whereof he had so strong a testimony of conscience,
that he du^st say of himself, to have labored more abundantly than all the
other Ap^stles 1 Cor. 15.10. and in (...) place, In labors more (...), in
(...) measure, in pr^sens more frequent, in deaths often, of the Jews fiive
times receiv^d I forty stripes save one; thrice was I beaten with rods, once
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the
deep, in journeying often, in peri^s o^ waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own co^ntrimen in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city,
in perils in the wild^n^es, in weari^es and (...), in watchings often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings aften, in cold and nakedness, 2 Cor. 11. from v.
23. to v. ^7. and all this for the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and converting souls to him. Paul might have been as worldly politic as
another, and desirous to save his own skin; He had as great a temptation of
temporal preferments, but he feared no colors, still making it his meat and
dri^ke, in imitation of his Savior, to do the will of God, and finish the
work of him that sent him, Joh. 4.34. No carnal respects must cause us ^o
deny, or so much as be ashamed of our profession; but as true Christian
soldiers, having put on the whole armor of God, which is spiritual, Ephesians. 6
11,12. come life, come death, we must keep our station, so exercising our
selves, as that we may always keep a good conscience both before God and men;
and (...) comforted, that God is both able and willing, very pitiful, and of
tender (...), to deliver, reward, and save all such as shall endure unto the
end, Jam 5.11. Psalm. 34.17. Math. 10.22.

So that if such as do not agree with us about the true sense and meaning of
some Scriptures, or differ from us in some opinions, conc^ive themselves
notwithstanding bound in conscience to endeavor the gaining proselites unto
their cause, here we see they have as full a warrant for it in their own
judgments and apprehensions, as we our selves can possibly allege, the very
self same Scriptures and arguments with us; neither can we produce one tittle
(if they may be the Judges, or other indifferent men which hold with neither
side) why our reasons should more prevail with them, than theirs bear sway
with us: Wherefore we ought to be so far from prohibiting them in a coercive
way, from discharging of their conscience, as rather to approve and take
example thereby to do the same; like those who may now have learnt, that it is
not in clubs and staves, or such like carnal projects to vanquish Spiritual
wickednesses, nothing but the Spirit of truth in a Spiritual way of warfaring,
can cast out and overcome the spirits of Heresy and Error.

(4) This precept or command of preaching the Word, was imposed upon all the
Ministers of Christ in their successive generations, upon no less necessity or
woe to such as disobeyed, than unto Paul himself; and Timothy was required to
commit the same things unto others which Paul had said unto him, that they
might do the like unto the end of the world, every man being obliged and bound
to improve his talent to the utmost of his power, for building up the mystical
body of Christ, until we come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure and stature of the
fullness of Christ, Mat. 25.23.27. Ephesians. 4.11,12,13.

(5) Paul as soon as he had his call from God to preach the Gospel waited no
attendance upon man's ordinances, but suddenly went about his business, which
he could not have done, if a Civil Magistrate o^ pretending superior power
should have prevented him by a coercive jurisdiction: And how can frail man
know, but God does still set apart others from our mothers womb for his
service as well as Paul? or how can they tell who they are? for the very
Disciples of Jesus were afraid of Paul at first, and did not know that he was
become a Disciple.

(6) This charging of men to teach the truth only which Timothy was to use,
appears to be out verbal, in that if they obeyed not, he himself was charged
to turn away from them, 2 Timothy 3 5.

(7) This subjection to the house of Stephanas could be no other than
voluntary, nor signify any thing else than reverence and honor to such as
labored in the vineyard of the Lord, giving heed to what they said, and he are
it willingly, receive it respectfully, and apply it to our selves making such
use of it as God intended: but to imagine that this subjection were called for
by the Apostle as unto those which have a coercive power and jurisdiction were
incongruous, because it cannot be equally performed unto an household, nor
possibly to every person thereof, according to this Scripture; besides the
women, children and servants, which are part of the family, and might all
assist in some respect of edifying or administering to the Saints, were
incapable of such authority, whether for sex, years, or condition in relation
to the master of the family, but might give just cause unto the Brethren to
reverence and be subject to the whole household in the Lord Jesus.

(8) It is granted that many of Paul's Epistles and other works may be lost,
but unless we keep close unto the word of God which is conveyed unto us, we
must necessarily run into an inextricable laborinth on the other side, for
every man will pretend to be his own interpreter, and well he may, at least
accept of no other than he himself approves of, since it is his own
business, which he ought to understand best* and concerns his own soul,
whereof who himself must give account, Romans 14.12. and so of those other
places, Let all things b^ done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. and the
rest will I set in order when I come, C.11 34. Though it be not specified,
perhaps, how Paul ordered afterward that which was there resting, yet certain
it is, that being acted by the same s^rit it could not vary, much less
contradict that po^tion of holy Scripture which is revealed, and the most
secure way for u^ i^, not to exceed in ordering any thing substantially (...)
from what we find expressed already; for if we grant liberty for exceeding,
it will be lawful to all alike since each man can best judge, and must have
the ordering of his own conscience, which he neither may nor can submit unto
another: it is very fond to think that we may take this freedom to our selves
of adding, as if we wanted clear evidence sufficient* for settling such a
government and order as God requires; for even the same Paul said, that he
rejoiced beholding the Colossians order, C.2 5. which must have been after
that passage to the Corinthians, if they be well ranked in our printed Bibles,
but whether it were so or no, the matter is not much, it is sufficient for us,
that the Colossians order was complete: He tells Timothy, These things write I
unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly, but if I tarry, that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.14,15.
To the Romans he says, the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach, Romans 10.8. and the
Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith in Jesus
Christ; all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is prositable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect. 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. And since the Lord has been
so bountiful to bestow upon us means sufficient to attain perfection of a
man of God, we should be too ungrateful, and sacrilegiously officious to run
idolizing after others of our own inventions; so that most plain it is by
comparing these Scriptures together, that though Paul intended to come again,
yet in the mean time he instructed Timothy in what was necessary, and so
doubtless dealt he with the Corinthians, whom he acknowledges to have been
inferior to no other Church, 2 Cor. 12.13. The like may we presume of all
other Christians, if they would keep close unto the Scriptures, not standing
peremptorily on any thing either in Discipline or Doctrine, but what we find
in the very letter, or by undeniable consequence consented to on all sides, not
compelling others to conformity until they be convinced; for it appears
plainly that it was Paul's so exceedingly being transported with traditions, and
not sticking close unto the Scriptures which caused him to persecute the Church
of God, Paul himself insinuates so much, Gal. 1.14. Phil. 3.6.

(9) We know how often the Jews stirred up the people and made insurrection
against Paul, how many assaults and attempts were made against him, which held
him in continual danger of his life, and yet he did not require or ex^ort the
Christians to fight for him, but to pray for him, not war after the flesh,
but after the Spirit; to put on the Armor of God which is mighty to the
pulling down strong holds, and every thing which exalts it self against
God, 2 Cor. 10.4.5. expressly telling them that they did not wrestle against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, Powers, Rulers of the darkness of
this world, spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians 6.12. which carnal
weapons cannot reach, nor were ever sanctified for rulling of them down.

(10) Peter who was a Jew being at Antioch, did of his own accord conform
himself and eat (meat consecrated to Idols in likelihood) with the Gentiles,
compelling the Gentiles notwithstanding to live according to the custom of the
Jews, which was to be circumcised, etc. Paul reproves him for it publikly,
that Peter at such times as he pleased, should take to himself a liberty, to
live or not to live after the manner of the Gentiles, and deny the same liberty
unto the Gentiles, to live or not to live after the manner of the Jews, which
was meant in such things as were then held indifferent for compliance with the
weaker brethren both Jews and Gentiles, viz. the eating meat offered unto
Idols, circumcision and some other ceremonies not as then quite abrogated, 1
Cor. 10.27,28,29. Act. 24. from v. 21. to 26. and to aggravate the matter,
fearing he should be taken notice of and reprehended, withdrew himself,
dissembling the business as if it had been nothing so, Gal. 2.12,13. But if
Peter had granted the same liberty which he took unto himself, or if it had
not been a very great error in him not to preach Christian liberty to all such
in general who did embrace the Gospel; doubtless Paul would never have
rebuked him so in public: And since Peter, such a pillar of the Church, so
great a Saint of God, must thus be made ashamed before the people, let us rest
assured it was for our sakes, either as a warning to keep us from the like
offense, or for a witness to aggravate our punishment hereafter: And if Peter
the chief of the Apostles (if there were any in chief or superiority amongst
them) was thus openly rebuked, how can the Papal holiness, or whatsoever
other Spiritual greatness, which claims no surer infallibility than Peter's,
nor are possessed of a more sovereigne or arbitrary dominion than Peter,
according to their fancies, had good title to, expect to escape scotfree, and
not be sensurable by their brethren, if they give just offense, as they, who
assume unto themselves such Spiritual prerogative and power, are to subject,
even in matters of far more concernment? And whereas it is said, Against an
Elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy
5.19. and this Elder, for all that I know, may be one that labored in the Word
and Doctrine, who then was worthy of double honor, v. 17. it follows
necessarily, that before two or three witnesses an accusation may be received
against such a one, and he consequently be liable and subject to sensure
Ecclesiastical as well as other Christians; and thus all free alike, and all
alike subject, we all learn at last to become subject to one another in the
Lord, and clothed with humility, as is required of us, 1 Pet. 5.5.

CHRIST'S ORDER, AND THE Disciples practice concerning the Ministers
maintenance, and releeving of the Poor: whereby the claiming Tithes, or any
thing in stead thereof, appears to be contrary to the Gospel.
Matthew. 10.10. The workman is worthy of his meat.

Luke 10.5.7. Into whatsoever house ye enter, remain eating and drinking such
things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his hire.

1 Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good things.

1 Cor. 9.7.14. Who goes to warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth
a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Even so has the Lord ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel, should live by the Gospel.

Act. 6.2,3,4. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them,
and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve
Tables: wherefore Brethren look ye out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business,
but we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the
word.

C.2.44,45. All that believed were together and had all things common, and sold
their possessions and goods and parted them to all men, as every man had need.

C.4 32. Neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed
was his own but they had all things in common.

Romans 15.26,27. It has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain
contribution for the poor which were at Jerusalem: It has pleased them
verily, and their debtors they are: For if the Gentiles have been made
partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to administer unto
them in carnal things.

2 Cor. 8.3,4. To their power (I bear record, yea and beyond their power they
were willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would
receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of administering to the Saints.

C.9.5. I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren that they would go
before unto you, and make up beforehand the bounty, whereof ye had notice
before, that the same might be ready as a matter of bounty, and not of
covetousness; every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him
give, not grudgingly.

1 Cor. 9.11,12,13,14. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing if we should reap your carnal things? If others be partakers of
this power over you are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this
power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do
ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar? even
so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should have of the
Gospel.

V. 15,18.23. But I have used none of these things, neither have I written
these things that it should be so done unto me, for it were better for me to
dye, than that any man should make my glorying vo^d. What is my reward then?
verily that where I preach the Gospel I may make the Gospel of Christ without
charge that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. And this I do for the Gospel
sake that it might be partaker thereof with you.

C.4.14. I write not those things to she me you, but as my beloved sons to
warn you.

2 Cor 4 5. We preach our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

1 Cor. 4.11 12. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and
are naked and bu^eted and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working
with our own hands.

Acts 18.3. And because Paul was of the some croft be abide with Aquila and
Priscilla, and wrought for by their occupation they were Tens ma^s.

C.20.33.34,35. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold or app^d yea you your
selves know that these hands have (...) unto my (...), and to them that were
with me: I have showed you all things, how t^ so laboring ye ought to support
the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, it is more
blessed to give than to receive.

2 Cor. 11.7,8,9,10. Have I committed an offense in ^basing my self that yea
might be exalted? because I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely? I
have robbed other Churches to do you service. When I was present with you and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man, for that which was lacking to me, the
brethren which came from Macedonia supplied, and in all things I have kept my
self from being burdensome unto you, and so will I keep my self, as the
truth of Christ is in me, no man shall step me of this boasting in the Regions
of Acha^a.

Act. 3.6. Peter said silver and gola have I none, but such as I have give I
thee.

2 Cor. 12.13,14. What is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches,
except it be that I my self was not burdensome unto you? forgive me this
wrong: behold the third time I am ready to come unto you, and I will not be
burdensome unto you, for I seek not yours but you, for the children ought not
to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.

V. 16,17,18. I did not burden you, nevertheless being crafty I caught you
with guile. Did I make a gain of you by any of them which I sent unto you? I
desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother: did Titus make a gain of you?
walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?

Phil. 4.15.16,17. Now ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the
Gospel when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me as
concerning giving and receiving, but ye only, for even in Thessalonica ye sent
once and again to my necessity, not because I desire a gift, but I desire
fruit, that we may abound to your account.

1 Thesl. 2 9. Ye may remember our laboring night and day, because we would
not be chargcable unto any of you.

C 4.11,12. Do your own business, work with your own hands (as we
commanded you) that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and
that ye may have lack of nothing.

2 Thessalonians. 3.8 10. We did not eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought with
labor and travail night and day that we might not be chargeable to any of
you; for even when we were with you this we commanded you, that if any would
not work he should not eat.

THe best Christians of the Primitive times had all things in common, and
without all dispute and controversy, we ought* to hold nothing so proper and
peculiar unto us, but that we should see out selves obliged to part with it,
not only for Gods more immediate worship and service, but also for sustenance,
relief and comfort of the meanest brother upon the face of the earth. We are
but Stewards of what we have, and are all one day to give account thereof to
the Great Master of the Household, and of such as have had most, of them shall
be required most, Luke 12.48. Who think we then must answer for so many as
have fallen into sicknesses, and at last died in our very streets and prisons
of penury and want, whilst we have surfetted with abundance? But to such as
labor in the Ministry, to such as dispense unto us of the heavenly Manna,
toward these we have a stronger tie, not only that their necessities may be
releeved, but that thereby they may be more free from worldly care and
temptations enabled to be hospitable and bountiful unto others that stand in
want, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.8. There is an obligation hereof in respect of God,
but it was voluntary and ought not to be compulsive in respect of man: And
therefore Paul, whether in regard he feared his Disciples would not relish
the Gospel so pleasantly, if in any manner it became chargeable, or because he
saw that contributions toward his maintenance would come heavily from them, or
for what other respect soever, rather than he would put it to the hazard, he
does not only forbear to press for the reward which was due unto his
Ministry, but yields diverse exceeding pregnant reasons, why others ought and
are obliged to do the like, Act. 20.35. 2 Cor. 11.14. and 1^. 14. And as of
two evils we are to choose the least, so of two good things we are bound to do
the best: we must rather preach the Gospel gratis, than insist so much upon our
maintenance, that it become distasteful.

But of far diff^rent temper are such, who yearly, quarterly, or the like,
require of the people certain set sums of money, or Tithes, as the hackney wages
of their ministry, forcing them that have resisted in such violent manner, as
the whole Parish, though at first they approved their doctrine, became at last
a weary and in hatred of their persons: It Is true, they had prescription, and
certain Civil Laws to justify their proceedings, but were they not enacted
at first by Pop^ie, the mystery of iniquity, and by them for their own ends
conveyed unto us? Let us examine how they agree with the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, who against such times prepared and sent forth his Apostles, and in
them all Ministers successively, with a freely ye have received, freely give,
Mat 10.8. Or have they any resemblance with the spirit of Paul, who said it had
been better for him to dye, than that he should want the glory of not making
the Gospel chargeable to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.15.18. On how ought they to
tremble who have gone point blanck against the evidence of such a truth?
Besides, may we not justly fear these Popish badges, remaining still in Gods
just judgment, may prove a sovereign bait and temptation to entice those slow
bellies to us again, who first established them? But is it not most evident,
that throughout the whole Gospel there is not one word found to countenance a
forcing of the people to contribute unto the poor, or to the ministry any
thing, but what they please themselves? if tithes or such like maintenance were
due now under the Gospel by virtue of the Mosaicall Law, doubtless our Savior
and his Apostles would have signified so much. It Is true, that certain
passages of theirs are mistaken by some, as if they seemed to glance thereat, 1
Cor. 9.13. 1 Timothy 5.18. but that was only so far forth as we are still bound
by the equity thereof in fore conscientia, not to the literal observance in
foro fori, as no ways suiting with those several expressions of Paul's, in
urging it only as voluntary in those which were to give it, and his own
practice in not requiring it as a legal duty: for his own behoof, and
instructing others to do the same, 2 Cor. 12.17.18. Again, if it were legally
due, why did not Paul compel them to the payment of it? Did he want means or
power so to do? Surely such as have the gift of miracles cannot be said to
want help to right themselves, and vindicate Gods portion? and we may see Act.
5. in the beginning, that Peter knew full well his own strength, and made use
of it in such a case; when Ananias and Saphira having put themselves into the
number of the Disciples, to show they did, at least, desire to seem like the
rest, sold a possession, and made as if they had laid the whole value thereof
at the Apostles feet, but secretly withheld part thereof; for which gross
hypocrisy Peter punished them no less miraculously than severely with death,
saying, Whilst it remained was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it
not in thine own power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart?
thou have not lied unto men, but unto the holy Ghost, Act. 5.4. From whence we
may gather a clear argument, that they were not forced to any allowance of
Tithes, or ought else in stead thereof, for had there been any such like duty
due to God in his Ministes according to the Letter, (I say not according to the
equity thereof) it was as much due before the possession was sold, before it
was laid down at the Apostles feet devoted to the service of the Saints, as it
was afterward; the civil proprieters consent gains neither unto God nor to
his Saints under the Gospel ever a whit the better title to any earthly goods
in respect of the right or thing it self* but in respect to the manner of
receiving it in a legal compulsive civil way, if the interessed having once
given consent, may afterward continue (but refuse) payment of it without
defilement to their consciences. Ananias and Saphira were not struck dead for
denying alines unto the poor Saints, or maintenance unto the ministry; but
because they played the hypocrites so grossly, seeking to be thought more
liberal than their covetous desires would give them leave: And yet we may not
think that denying alms and maintenance were a lesser sin than hypocrisy; or
that hypocrites may now be punished with death by Civil Magistrates: but as in
the yielding of such maintenance and alms there must be so much spiritual,
and consequently voluntary as made them acceptable unto God; so will God
himself have the punishing of the nonperformance, because man cannot possibly
be a competent Judge thereof: and hypocrisy in like manner being not
discernable by man, and the punishment of Ananias and Saphira miraculous; none
can possibly, much less may justly claim to do the same, unless they have
the same power of miracles and discerning.

But Peter's professing that what Ananias and Saphira did possess was their
own, as before; and our Savior in the Parable, Math. 20.15. makes it lawful
for us to do what we will with our own; I query by what Law we can be
compelled to part from that we have without our own consents? If Tithes, or
whatsoever like them, be either Gods or Caesar's, I know a warrant for them: but
as Caesar's Image entitled him to the tribute money, Math. 22.19. so does God
chiefly aim at the tribute of our consciences, on which he stamped his own
image and likeness in our father Adam at his creation Genesis 1.26. But if the
Tithes be the Ministers, why do we still commit sacrilege, withholding them
in so many places of the Kingdom? Do we not fear what befell Ananias and
Saphira, if ou^ sin be the same with theirs, as is by all tyth-masters
pretended? But if there be nothing due to them by that Law, why do we give
them the gleanings under such a Jewish notion? If we be justified in one, we
condemn our selves by the other.

And whereas it is alleged, that if they which attend upon the ministry must
be bound to live on such alms only as shall be voluntarily given them; it may
likely prove a great temptation to frame their doctrine according to the
peoples ca^es, for the farther enlargement of their maintenance. I answer, that
we have found it by experience a far^e greater temptation with many men who
^eing sure of such ^a^ Benefices and yearly Incomes, esp^cially for their
lives, (...) little care of often preaching, and how le^ne souls the people
^ad; but when Chu^ches shall be gather^d and constituted according to ou^ (...)
(...), and the Apostles p^ctice; we need not by Gods blessing to doubt of a
powerful Ministry, nor they of liberal maintenance; o^ in default thereof,
that the denouncing of Gods threats and judgments, which are his own
ordinances, should not sufficiently prevail upon the consciences of men, if we
had but faith therein, and forbore the persecuting of their persons, which is
the unwarrantable device of man: And as it would not have been justifiable in
the Apostles, if it lay in their power to prevent it, to be taken off from the
Ministry to serve Tables, to spend time in seeing the poor provided for, Act.
6. beginning; so now may not Christians put the Ministers of the Gospel to get
their living by working with their hands, it would be as great a sin and
sacrilege in us now, as withholding Tithes was under the Law; they ought to be
liberally provided for, that they may live comfortably on the ministry of the
Gospel, as on their Altar, that they may, being void of all distractions, more
freely employ all thoughts and studies on their ministry; but what ever
extremity good Ministers should be reduced unto, through the hardness of the
people, or Gods intention to try their patience in this respect; it were far
more Apostolical and Christianlike for Ministers to labor as Paul did with
his own hands, than to force or require a subsistence in such a manner, as
being never appointed nor sanctified by the Lord Jesus, makes the Gospel seem
wearisome and chargeable.

Our Savior, we know, told his Apostles that the workman was worthy of his
hire, bidding them remain eating and drinking in whatsoev^r house they came:
and Paul knew his right thereto so well, that he exhorts all Christians to
communicate unto such as taught them spiritual things, informing them that the
Law of Moses prohibited the very musting of an Ox that trod out the corn, and
inferres what greater care God takes of those that labor in his vineyard, 1
Cor. 9.9,10. Nay, though he tells us that other Apostles enjoyed this benefi^,
and that he was inferior to none of them; yet it was better for him to dye,
than so live as to make the Gospel be thought chargeable. My brethren, what
think we was the meaning of Paul's proceeding thus? No Minister can at present
have better title unto Tithes or such like maintenance, than Paul ^ad in those
Primitive times, and yet he waved both all such title and pretending, so often
as his Disciples were unwilling to be at charge thereof.

Under the Law God required expressly the tenth of all the people had, Lev.
27.32. and how such were punished that denied or sought evasions, let these
Tyth-masters produce, and justify it to be their own cause by their activity
in doing of the like? But in the Gospel we find nothing but The workman is
worthy ^f his meat; The labourer is worthy of his hire; The Ox that ^rod the
corn was not to be mus^; No man plants a Vineyard, or goes to warfare at his
own cha^ges; They which minister about holy things, live on the things of the
Temple; and they which wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar: This and
the like (...) we find to this purpose throughout the Gospel; and what can be
inferred from thence, but that in equity the Gospels Ministers should be
provided for? The Tithes are only due unto the Tribe of L^vi (and that to
certain purposes, most whereof are void, abolished) which had no other
inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18.1. It Is they only that can plead for them even in rigor
of the Law, if it were now of force: But if that Tribe be dead, dispersed, not
to be found, or appear not to receive them; such as have possession both may
and ought to keep them, as being they only who must give a strict account
thereof hereafter: And what account this is, would easily be learned, if we
did but take Paul and the other Apostles for our study and imitation. They
tell us we must communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal.
6.6. and accordingly we find that the believers had all things in common, Act.
4.32. So that if any thing of this nature may be infert'd as a standing law,
from our Saviors commands, together with the Apostles and other Christians
practice, it must be community of all things. And as it may doubtless be a
great perfection in some particular Christians to be so liberal in
distributing their whole estates, even whilst they are living, unto the
necessite of the Saints; so far better were it for the Civil State in
general, that there were a community of all things, than that a pretended
Tribe of Levi (which though they had a rightful title, are not the five
hundredth part of people) should surfeit on the tenth of all Gods creatures, and
their increase.

Paul tells the Philippians that they only in the beginning of the Gospel
communicated unto his necessities, Phil. 4.15,16,17. letting them withal
understand it was but their duty so to do; and yet ( mark) he terms not
what they gave him a reward of his deserts, but as a gift from them; neither
required he it at any time so much for his own advantage and necessity, as a
fruit of Gods grace in them; as an odor that smells sweet; as a sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing unto God, from whence such power proceeded, ver.
18. And as he tells the Corinthians upon the same eccasion, I write not these
things to shame you, but as my belovedsons to warn you, 1 Cor. 4 12,14.

Oh the blessed spirit of Paul that knew thus to beguile men of their souls,
by a sanctified craftiness, and win them unto God by wiles! 2 Cor. 12.16. Some
few now adays who are ashamed to stand upon these Tithes, to sue for them out
of covetousness, or their private ends, as if they valued them for themselves,
but say they do it to uphold the right thereof, and that they may not
pr^judice the title of their successors; but consider, dear Christians, and
you will find even from the persons and manners of such proceedings, that all
these are mere excuses to color their own corruption (a crime no whit
inferior to that of Ananias and Saphira's) most rashly censuring their
successors with the idolatry of covetousness (as if they knew who should
succeed them after death) and ought not to judge otherwise than charitably of
them beforehand, what e're they prove afterward: but yet there is a president
of Paul's to teach such better, even against this palpable evasion of theirs;
Paul who it seems was so far from thinking it fitting to set out to sale the
ministry of the Gospel, that even by his own commandment and law (as I may
say) was contented not to eat, unless he did his days work with his own
hands, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. did in conformity hereunto not only for bear to require
wages of his Ministry from the Corinthians for himself, but as is
insinuated, 2 Cor. 12.18. desired Titus to do the like, and so questionless
would have required of others, if he had seen cause, or imagined that men
would have been extravagantly covetous; which is an undeniable argument that
Pastors, Ministers, and all other Church Officers, ought not to force
maintenance, rewards or gifts from such as will not pay them willingly.

I know we are taught and bid distinguish times and seasons, as though such son
I distinctions could as easily reconc^le Christ and Antichrist, as it does
furnish all Sects and Heresies with flourishes and shelterings for their most
confident respective inventions of will worship: But consider, I beseech you,
you that cry out so much for distinguishing of times, will you make no
distinction between types and antitypes? Is not God a Spirit, and will he not
be served in spirit? even under the Law when God stood so strictly upon his
Sacrifices and Ceremonies* yet David the man after Gods own heart tells us,
that praising and magnifying of his name, with other spiritual worship, was
then more acceptable than sacrifice, Psalm. 69.30,31. But now under the Gospel
there is no sacrifice, no worship, no service beside spiritual; what ever he
requires of us, or what ever we perform unto him, it is only the spiritual
part thereof which he regards, which is accepted of him: Now as he looks only
at the spiritual part, and as spiritual means can only prevail in working
and disposing people to spiritual service; so it were preposterous to think
that God should approve or allow of any course which were not suitable, much
less not capable to conduce unto such spiritual ends and service: amongst the
rest, the communicating of our earthly substance unto the poor, and such as
stand in want, especial^y to those of the housh ld of faith, Gal. 6 10. unto
the Saints, particularly for maintenance (as was said before) of such as
minister to us in the Lord; even this I say, as all other duties of a Christian
must be spiritual; but how compelling men by compulsive courses to pay tithes
or such like duties, can be a spiritual way of making men to pay them
willingly, as if there were no compelling; or how the paying them unwillingly
through threatening, or imprisonment, or other civil punishment, can possibly
become a spiritual duty, and sweet smelling sacrifice acceptable and
well-pleasing unto God, as Paul tells us, such contributions ought to be; me
thinks any one that were not tempted as a sharer of such unrighteous Mammon,
if they did but never so little consider in the fear of God, would easily
perceive and be convinced.

Which, that it may better prevail upon them with Gods blessing, amongst
sundry other evidences of Scripture, I will crave leave to reduce unto their
memories this one of Paul's, who exhorting the Corinthians to such like
contributions, distinguishes, and sets those that were not done grudgingly, but
as matter of bounty, in opposition to those of covetousness, 2 Cor. 9.5. And
whether such as are drawn from us by compulsion against our wills, can prove
matter of bounty; how we may warrantably be constrained to sacrifice the
effects of covetousness unto God; or how such involuntary and abo^ive fruits
can possibly (...) as a sweet savor into His nostrils; I leave together with
this Scripture and the rest, to their more sad and serious consciences to
ponder on,

Since then the compelling men to pay tithes cannot cause that such as are
compelled, by so paying against their wills, to do a spiritual duty or
acceptable service unto God: perhaps some may say, Why may not men be forced to
these as well as any other contributions or taxations which are rated and
levied by order of the Civil Magistrate? I answer; that these other
contributions are expressly warranted by the Word of God, as Subsidies of
Customs, Tolls, or any other taxes, whether for defense or honor of the
Estate, or maintenance of the Civil Ministers in service of the Estates,
wherein each inhabitant participates and has a benefit. Secondly, such
cessements are merely civil. Thirdly, these tithes and maintenance may be
required for such a spiritual ministry, which perhaps some may, 1. not
approve thereof: 2. they may likely thereupon scruple at it: 3. God will not
have the ministry of the Gospel to seem cha^geable to any: 4. he never
ordered any compulsive means to be used against those that denied such Gospel
maintenance and contributions: 5. such as neither approve nor participate of
such ministry, may likewise be exempted in the contributions or charge
thereof without any damage or injury to others; in that the Ministers, for
number, may be regulated according to the Ministry; and the Laborers
increased only according to the harvest; and lastly, it were neither equity
nor justice to compel this or that man to contribute maintenance for the
service and ministry of others, with whom he either cannot, or desires not to
join himself: Holy David was so far from such a practice, that when Ornan
the lebusite proffered to give him his Threshing, floor to build an Altar, Oxen
for burnt offerings, threshing instruments for wood, wheat for meat offering,
and all for nothing; David would needs pay for them at the full value; saying,
I will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings
without cost, 1 Chronicles. 21 2 23.24.

But if any thing be now due in the nature of Tithes, and men be justly forced
to make payment thereof; it must be Tithes precisely; the tenth of all what
ever we possess; for we find not so much as a shadow in Scripture for any
other warrant: and according to this proportion, either the tenth man should be
a Minister of the Gospel, or else the Ministers being never so few, and the
fewer the better cheer, sharing among themselves the tenth part of the revenues
of all the Kingdom or Christian world, each of them would have a yearly income
larger than that of Canterburies: surely this is such a temptation, that if
such as expect the sweetness of it may be judge thereof, as doubtless they
will never more away with Bishops; so they will as certainly be desirous, and
no ways be prevailed upon, till God turn their hearts, not to enjoy such
large estates, which through pretense of enabling them to become hospitable and
attend upon their ministry, will as infallibly make them degenerate into
drones and dumb Teachers as ever were Bishops of any Country.

But if perhaps they should be so modest for the present as to say they barely
aim at maintenance; 200. or 300. pounds per annum shall be the height of
their ambition, etc. I answer, 1. that what e're the maintenance be, whether
more or less, our chief care ought to see it settled in such a way as were
warrantable from the Apostles practice here on earth, and sanctified by God
above: If we want this groundwork, the foundation which we build on being
sandy, no marvel if we attend a blessing thereof in vain. 2. I answer, that
for such as are not spiritually minded, 200. or 300. pounds per annum, and a
far less revenue certain, is as great a temptation to those whose ancestors
perhaps were never worth the tithes thereof; I say it is as great a temptation
and altogether as sufficient to make such intrude into the Ministry for love
of the maintenance, as a more corpulent fat Bishopric: it is the lazy but
constant Benefice which for the most part does first corrupt their younger
thoughts and actions: from whence according to the same depraved principles
they afterward aspire unto a Bishopric, which perhaps their more inferior
aims did never think upon before. But it should be the love of God and not
of Mammon which winnes men to the Ministry of the Gospel. Dear Christians,
let it not be offensive to you, nor give occasion to think I want charity
toward the Ministers of Christ, that share unto us of their spiritual things.
1 Cor. 9 11. (I dare call God to be my witness to the contrary) if I ask how
few there are who take Orders and apply themselves unto the ministry out of
pure zeal unto the Gospel? and how many on the other side, chiefly out of a
design to live upon it, as if it were the easiest way to grow rich and get a
living by; making the ^inistery a mercenary trade, and as ^uch as in them lies
endeavoring to buy and sell the gifts of the Holy Gh^st, for which Simon Magus
was deemed by P^ter to be in the gall of bittern^sse, in the bond of iniquity,
and doomed to perish together with his money, unless he did repent thereof?
Act. 8.20,22,23.

Good Reader, resolve this question in thine own heart before thou pass on
farther: does not thine own experience inform thy conscience, that even too
great a part of Ministers, however God may since upon their repentance have had
mercy on them, have heretofore, by what appears, been too too much prevailed
upon in this respect? nay do not such scroules and Catalogues of scandalous
Ministers even at this day fully demonstrate so much? and can a Synod, a
Parliament, a Kingdom, after so great light of Reformation permit the same
temptations unquestioned, wherein our predecessors so shamefully miscarried?
Forbid it good God in anger, if not in love, and that with speed; lest this
enormous sin having helped to fill up the measure of our iniquities, thy just
wrath and indignation burst out upon us as hot as fire, until it quite consume
the disconsolate remnant of this unhappy Nation.

What is it to partake in other men's sins by laying hands suddenly on such as
take upon them the ministry of the Gospel, which Paul to Timothy forbid? 1 Timothy 5.22. if it be not what was practiced heretofore in England: I wish I
could hear of some means taken for preventing it hereafter.

A young Scholar (and how reproveable young Scholars are is well known to those
that live near them) having already, or intending to make love unto a fat
Parsonage, or some pretty parcel of Tithes, applies himself unto One or more;
a Bishop or Presbytery of which he was seldom or never seen before in all his
life time, desiring to be admitted into the Ministry of the Gospel upon
payment of certain fees: perhaps they used heretofore, and may again
hereafter examine such a one some few questions, and give him a Text to try
whether his Commonplace books, with such like ready helps can furnish him
with a Sermon. Alas my Brethren, neither your questions, though they were
multiplied, with his answers, nor yet a Sermon or two are competent trials of
his gifts; they must be such as have known his conversation; such as have eat
and drunk with him; and been witnesses to the integrity of his life, and
seen his studies, with the fruits thereof, that are only able to judge of his
abilities, whether he be capable of so high a calling. How woeful then must it
needs be when none may call him, save they who for the most part, if it may be
said a calling, call, or rather lay hands on, they know not who?

I dread to think how usual it is with many to rush themselves most
Simonically and sacrilegiously into the Ministry, and yet with greater
wondering and amazement that this arch-temptation and grand stumbling-blocke of
Tithes. which so many of our blessed Martyrs have even to death so much
inveighed against, should yet remain the greatest Idol and hindrance of
Reformation.

And as Tithes or other maintenance to the Ministers are no Civil Legal debt;
so neither are alms to the poor, but both alike are to be made partakers by a
voluntary communicating to them of what we have, according as their respective
necessities shall require: we are bound in equity to both, and sin damnably if
we come short with either: but no warrant or Law of God does authotize any man
to compel such as will not willingly comply therein; the producing such order
out of Gods word to be now of force under the Gospel, lies on them which must
in such case be plaintifes, and make claim thereto: no man being bound to part
from any thing which is his proper goods, and afterward be put to sue for it
again: Prescription bears sway no longer when the paying or parting from any
thing is discovered to contract a guiltinesle of conscience.

But for such whom it concerns not in point of conscience, it is yet better to
acknowledge and make payment of such Tithes, than confessing some such debt or
duty to be due, leave it to the determination of those who are to have the
benefit thereof what proportion of their estates they will require; it is far
better to be at a certainty of a harder measure, than trust unto their mercy.

Call to mind the two shillings and nine pence, remember with what vehemence
and diligence it was prosecuted: God was pleased to blast it notwithstanding:
But had it once been settled, and men's purses with their consciences brought
under contribution of their prerogative, as they might as legally have doubled
or trebled it upon any occasion afterward, and that not without pretending
full arrerages: So we may be certain, this only privilege of theirs would
have a quite devoured the subjects whole propriety: and this consequence have
thereupon succeeded: that afterward there would have been little need to
trouble Parliaments with granting Subsidies, the Clergy, for continuance of
their greatness, might likely have been no less willing, than it would have
been able to supply such trisling sums out of their boundless Revenues.

I know it will be objected, that such and such great Clerks and Doctors are
all with greatest might and maine for Tithes.

To every one in particular, and against them all in general (save one to whom
I crave leave to speak a word a part, beseeching God it may prove seasonable)
with whole Cathedralls full, how many soever there be of them: I will oppose
only the blessed Scriptures, and such despised Christians as most exactly bare
witness to them; as they whose foolishness will yet in time appear of
deepest wisdom, their poverty of greatest value, and their weakness of such
invincible strength, that they, and only they will at last infallibly overcome
and judge the world, with all their vain imaginations.

The Discourse entitled A new discovery of personal Tithes, or, The tenth part
of men's clear gains, pretends "the tenth part of whatsoever any person of any
profession does any ways lawfully advance, to be due unto the Minister of the
Gospel both by the Law of God and man, unless some special custom,
composition, or privilege of the place allowed by Law exempt him, page 1 Now
we know that amongst several others, the public practice and profession of
Usurers is neither of the rarest nor least gainsome in Christendom, (to the
shame of all such be it spoken) no one trade produces such certain nor so much
gain throughout the world: But by what Law of God the tenth hereof, and of a
thousand other unwarrantable, I may say damnable increasings, becomes due unto
the Clergy, I know not, unless by their conniving, in not reproving us in
these sinful courses, out of a design to wrest that Scripture to prove it,
where we are required to make us friends of our unrighteous mammon, Luke 16.9.

But if any one shall say that Usurie or such unlawful gains were not
intended. I answer, that since none are exempted but by special privilege,
the words infer all gains to be lawful which the Laws of the Land
permitted, or could not punish, innumerable particulars where of the Law of God
abominates: and though many professions of themselves be lawful, yet the
greatest part of all their gains is otherwise most commonly. But can we justly
blame these men that are so good accountants? that have such care of themselves
and families? They require not only the tenth part of all the four Elements
produce, as Corn, Fruit, Fish and Foul of all sorts; the tenth part of all
increase in Cattle, and of Poultry; the tenth of all house-rent; but also the
tenth part of what is gained by Handicraft, Manufactures and Metchandize, or
any kind of bargaining, etc. which yet is more than double as much as all the
rest in value: surely we may well answer these men with Ye know not what ye
ask, Matthew. 20.22. as our Savior did those two Disciples, not more ambitious
than these are a varitious. And yet the Author of the said Discourse prosessed
that he thought himself bound in conscience to make discovery how due these
Personal ^ithts are, chi^sly to pull sundry honest Christians out of a
^an^able sin: lest through his silence he should be both guilty thereof and
of their blood, page 3. But since on the contrary (as I hope) he is by this
time fully informed now many men's sin and blood he may have been deeply
accestory to, though himself never thought thereof, in publishing ^o
unjustifiable, so unhappy in Discovery: O^ how acceptable would it be to all
rightly informed conscientious Christians, si^ce the Father of mercles has
given so la^ge a (...) to see so great a mistake retracted? Such public
offenses require no less than public acknowledgement and ^morce, if perhaps
the gu^ ^esse may be forgiven, Atl. 8

Thus I doll, this golden wedge of (...) was execrated in most, if not in all
other Countries by the first Reformers, only Episcopacy has thus reprived
worshipping of it so long in England; and unless these gods of their be sent
away packing with them, as it is impossible that either of them can chastely
long observe a voluntary withdrawing from each other, much less an unwilling
parting; so may we be as certain, that where ever such a car keis is, there
will be the Eagles (of spiritual prey) gathered together, Math. 24 28. if not
the worst of ravenous carrion Crows.

And in regard this is a subject, which through the successive iniquity of the
times has not been permitted to be treated on; as it cannot be expected but
much will be omitted which might be produced against it: so if any thing which
is superstuous, or that might have been spared is yet alleged; the well
affected Reader as he is bound in charity, so is he requested in all courtesy
to seek to salve it by Christian admonishing and reproof. It cannot upon due
trial be found unseasonable at such a time when Civil and Church estate are
both to be reformed, to have said somewhat about this Cankerworme, which with
such pestilent influence reflects and feeds upon them both. Under the Law two
witnesses were as good as twenty even in case of Civil death; and if but two
be found to witness against this monster, such as are wanting may be the
better spared; but through Gods gracious assistance we are sussiciently
provided, if the Gospel of truth it self wherein we have a complete Jury of
Apostles, and our blessed Savior not disdaining to be fore^an, may be
believed, and prevail with us in a cause which so much conternes our selves,
the interest of all Estates.

Our Savior in his Commission to the Apostles for preaching of the Gosspel,
inserts this Injunction, viz. Freely ye have received, freely give Math. 20.
from verse. 5 to 8. Into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you, eat
such things as are set before you, Luke 10.8. In obedience whereunto Paul says
unto the The ssalonians, Ye may remember our laboring night and day, because
we would not be charge able unto any of you, 1 Th^ss. 29 and in that respect
tells the Corinthians, It were better for him to dye than that any man should
make his glorying void, 1 Cor. 9,15. My Brethren, have we not the express
commands of God concerning his Ministers maintenance, and Paul's conforming
thereunto, both related to us by inspiration of the blessed Spirit? and will
we yet from a typical prohibition only of not musling an Ox that trod out
the corn under the Law, Deuteronomy. 25.4 presume to leavie maintaintenance by force
of arms for the Ministry of the Gospel? when it appears plainly by Paul in
the beginning of that Chapter where he quotes the same words 1 Cor. 9.9. that
we are now only bound the equity thereof: that is, Christians are now obliged
in conscience to order matters in such manner that Ministers of the Gospel
might live comfortably of the Gospel, verse. 14. and Paul and this power as well
as other Apostles, v. 34. to require it by exhortation; and yet he never used
it toward the Corinthians, lest he should hinder the Gospel of Christ, v. 12.
But what power is it which Paul says he never exercised toward the
Corinthians? not a Civil power^ for we do not find in any place that ever he
had such a power; but a power he had to eat and drink such things as were set
before him, 1 Cor. 9.4. with Luke 10. ^. And as the believers were bound in
conscience to give them a competent allowance to live upon, so the Apostles
both might and ought to press it upon their consciences, receiving it as a
gift, not to satisfy their coverousnesse, nor yet so much for supplying their
own necessities, as out of a (...) that the (...) thereof might abound to the
Donors accounts, Phil. 4.17. I know the exceptions will be, that if Ministers
must have no other maintenance but what good Christians will give them of their
own accords; the Universities will become solitary, Learning of no account, and
the Ministry of the Gospel grow contemptible and quite deserted. To this
seeming threefold cord of objections, I will only answer, that these are all
but fears and jealousies of moortall men at best, which may not be put in
competition, much less make void our Saviors (...) and Paul's practice, both
which proceeded from the infallible Spirit of God for preaching of the Gospel
freely; which whilst it was practiced in the Primitive times proved so
successful, and amongst other blessed effects wrought so powerfully upon
their spirits, as that we find not a few only, but even all that believed had
all things common, who selling their goods and poss^ssions parted them to all
men as they had need, Act. 2.44 45 Do we think the Apostles or other
Ministers could want amongst Christians that were thus all of one mind, no man
saying that any thing was his own which he possessed, Act 4.32? Or do we
distrust Gods providence, and think his O^dinances have not the same blessings
both spiritual and temporal accompanying them, ^f we be alike faithful in
submitting unto them? o^ if a Minister which truly labors in the Gospel
shall really want maintenance, may he betake himself to requiring it by
compulsive means, ^r else not preach at all, or preach unwillingly, for which
he has no p^sident in Scripture, neglecting Paul's example, who wrought with his
own hands, that he might make the Gospel without charge, and yet think to
share reward with Paul in heaven? 1 Cor. 9.17.18. he may ste^le as well (for
it is a robbing them of that Gospel which was directed to them if he withhold it
totally, set such a price on it, or in such a manner as God never gave
commission) and though he escape on earth, his finnes will follow after him to
judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. He that walks in darkness knows not whither he
goes, John 12.35. he may be in hell before he be aware. Since then light is
come into the world, let us not be found to love darkness rather than light,
John 3.19. the Bpidemicall corruption throughout all Christendom, of men's
thrusting themselves into the Ministry merely to m^ke a g^ine thereof, which
Paul disavowed, 2 Cor. 12.17. and not sincerely for the Gospels sake: For as it
cannot be denied but such are more swayed with the love of lucre than of
Christ, so is it an undoubted cause that their endeavors ever since have
proved so unprofitable unto the people, still remaining for the most part
without any power of godliness, secure in ignorance, dead in sin: whereas we
observed before the great successefulnes wherewith God was pleased to bless the
contrary practice in the Apostles times; and i^ yet we shall apply ourselves to
follow them in this particular, God can no more be wanting to second us with a
blessing, than to deny himself in suffering his own Ordinances to be
in^ff^ctuall, injurious to his people, and prejudicial to his Gospels cause.
Oh let us try our good God herein before we cen ure Him of unfaithfulness:
and the Lord in much mercy prevent, that this temptation remain no more
amongst us, to the great scandal of our Brethren of Scotland, and other
Protestant Churches; not without great sh^me unto our selves in this world, and
imminent danger of rifing up against us in the world to come.

FINIS.
CHAP. III. Christ's Instructions, and the Apostles practice for tendering and
holding forth the Gospel only in a peaceable way.
Matthew. 12.19. Christ shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall they hear his*
voice in the streets, a bruised reed shall he not broake, and smoking slax
shall he not quench, until he send forth judgment unto victory.

Matthew. 8.3 4. and C.9.1. And the whole City of the Gargasenes came out to meet
Jesus, and when they saw him, they be sought him that he would depart out of
their coasts: And he entered into a ship and passed over, and came into his own
City.

Luke 9.52.53.56. Jesus sent messengers before his face into a village of the
Samaritanes to make ready for him, and they did not receive him: And they went
to another village.

Luke. 3.16.17. One mightier then I comes, whose fan is in his hand, and be
will thoroughly purge his flore, and will gather the wheat into his garner, but
the chafe he will burng with fire unquenchable.

Joh 12.47 48. If any man hear my words and believe them not, I judge him not,
for I am not to judge the world: he that rejects me and receives not my
words has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him in the last day.

Luke 10.5 6.10 11. Into whatsoever house you enter, say, Peace be to this
house; and if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not,
it shall return to you again: If they receive you not, go your ways out
into the streets of the same, and say, even the dust of the City which cleaves
on us, we do wipe off against you as a witness, etc.

Act. 13.50.51. The Jews expelled Paul and Barnabas out of their coasts; but
they shook off the dust from of their feet against them, and came unto Iconium.

C.16.39.40. The Magistrates besought Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and
desired them to depart out of the City: And they went out of the prison, and
entered into the house of Lydia; and when they had seen the brethren, they
comforted them and departed.

C.18 6.7. And when the Jews opposed themselves and blasphemed, Paul shook
his raiment, and said unto them, your blood be upon your own heads, I am
clean, from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles; and he departed thence,
etc.

Psalm. 50.16.17. God said unto the wicked, what have thou to do to take my
Covenant into thy mouth, since thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee?

Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls
before swine, lest they trample them under your feet.

C.15.26. It is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast unto dogs.

Act. 2.41. They that gladly received the word were baptized.

Romans 1^. 34. Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
counselor.

C.14 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant, to his own master he
stands or falls? yea he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand.

1 Cor. 2.15. He that is Spiritual discerns all things, yet he himself i^
judged of no man.

C.4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come who will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness.

Tit. 1.7. A Bishop must not be soon angry, no striker.

2 Timothy 2.24,25,26. A servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil.

1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause I [ Paul] obtained mercy, that Jesus Christ might
show forth all long suffering.

Observations on CHAP. III.
IF our Savior will not break a bruised reed; what think we of they that make
a profession of tormenting the broken hearted, and use violence to tender
consciences? If Christ whilst he was on earth preaching of his own Gospel
declares that he was not to judge such as did not believe it; what is man that
he dares torment and judge the people before the time, Matthew. 8.29. If Gods
word must do it, and that in the last day; whence are these Consistories,
Inquisition houses, High Commission Courts, with all their humane Ordinances
and Canons which anticipate or antidate Gods judgments? Who art then O man
that judge another whom God that is able to make him stand will hold up? Rom
14.4. as if he should say, some are so prejudged who yet shall stand, as if set
up on purpose to show the depth of Gods power and counsels in condemning the
rashness of such other forward judgments.

Our Savior told his Disciples, saying, As my Father has sent me so send I
you, Joh. 20.21. and if you will hear how he was sent, he says of himself, I
am not sent save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24. And I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mark. 2.17. The Son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56. He has
sent me to heal the broken hearted, C. 4.18. And according hereunto we find
so many sweet qualifications of a Bishop recommended by Paul to Timothy and
Titus, which had they been well reflected on in our choice of Ministers, we
should not have had so many pious people driven out of the Country: they ought
not to be soon angry, no strikers, gentle, apt to teach, patient, meek,
instructing even those that do oppose, each where of is so opposite to
persecution, and all so sweetly sympathising and combining, as were they found
in Ministers, being according to Gods avouched Ordinance, they could not choose
but miraculously conduce to the propagation of the Gospel: It says
indefinitely, they must instruct such as oppose: how dare we then give over
instructing so long as they are willing to hear it? nay they must yet go
somewhat further, in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. ^. and with such long
suffering as may recover Paul from the fire of persecuting others, Jude 23. and
receive a good thief from the cross, Luke 23.43. But how necessary and
considerable this meekness is for instructing all opposers, we may clearly
learn by way of a similitude, from such as have seen how little execution the
fiercest Canon shot point blanke, can do against mud-walls or wool-sacks.

And since, besides the spotless example of our Savior, we find the Apostles
were contented to keep themselves to the foolishness of the Gospel, and only
shake the dust from off their feet against such as rejected the Gospel: shall
we be excusable that undervalue and slight the simplicity of Gods Ordinances?
will we be wiser than God himself? or have we a stock of superogation to
return unto God more then we owe him, or he requires of us? But to argue with
such in the sphere of Politics wherein they think themselves so active: is it
not the highest indiscretion to make our selves more work then needs? and has
not God continually declared himself, that obedience is better than sacrifice,
1 Samuel 15.22.

When Elisha had bid Naaman wash himself seven times in the River Jordan, and
his flesh should return whole again, Naaman thinking this an unlikely way
because easy, forbore to make trial of it until his servants said, What if
the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
how much rather when he says only, Wash and be clean? 2 King. 5.10,11,12,13.
May not God in like manner justly reprehend, and even with much justice
confound these hotspurs of Persecution, who when our Savior orders them only
to exhort with long suffering, reprove, rebuke, and shake off the dust as a
witness against such as will not receive the Gospel; decline these ways of God,
and betake themselves to their own inventions of imprisoning, fining,
banishing, and putting to death? will not God say, who has required these
things at your hands? Esa. 1.12. and because they have not been faithful in a
little, cast them with the unprofitable servant into utter darkness? Matthew.
25.30.

When Paul had provoked the Jews to embrace the Gospel by all fair means,
and they resisted it; he conceived his Commission and trust was discharged,
taking himself to be clear from their blood, Act. 18.6. whereas we think
nothing will clear us in such cases, unless we shed their blood: for though a
miraculous power wore ceased, (which I nothing doubt whether it be otherwise
ceased than on our part, through want of faith in us to exercise it) yet this
is not ground sufficient for us to fly unto the Civil power; there must be
both a lawful calling to it, and an express warrant toward whom to use it.

I know the Prophecy of Esaiah is much stood upon, that Kings and Queens
shall be nursing Fathers and nursing mothers unto the Church, Isa. 49.23. but
the meaning thereof is; by subjecting themselves to the Churches Spiritual
Power, not by giving power to any to suppress the visible Church, as appears
by the context: it is by granting the Church a liberty of profession, not by
imposing on them a ^aldome of Conscience* by favoring and countenancing all
such as follow after Godliness, not by pretending to know it better then the
Church it self, and so woorry lambs in stead of wolves. In the 10. of John, our
blessed Savior gives us many properties both of good and bad Shepherds, saying
of himself, I am the good Shepherd, and the good Shepherd lays down his life
for his sheep, ver. 1 1. Now if we do but take a little notice of this
supereminent character of a good Shepherd in laying down his life; we cannot
choose but see the Persecuter must necessarily be the worst of Shepherds, and
principally contradistinguished from the best, in this; that he takes away the
lives of his sheep: Had this case been brought before the wise King Solomon,
he would as certainly have declared such persecuters* who continually perplex
and hunt the sheep, to be hirelings, and no true shepherds, as he did that
woman to be the feigned mother, who cried out for dividing of the child, 1
King. 3.25.26.27.

The Israelites by the Law of Moses were forbid to vex a stranger, because
they were once strangers in Egypt, Exodus 22.21. And wives are commanded to be
subject to their husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may without
the Word be won by the conversation of their wives, 1 Pet. 3.1. And for the
some cause Paul requires us to give no offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor
to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. and Peter bids us have our conversation
honest amongst the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against us as evil
doers, they may by our good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12. Thus are all Christians called upon to be
courteous, gentle, meek, long suffering, ready to give a reason to every one
that asks, and all other good works which may make their conversation
acceptable and winning: But how it should be possible for the conversation of
Persecuters to become pleasing, or less than hateful, and driving men from
God, will oppose that arch enemy of mankind to make appear for justifying of
his instruments at the dreadful day of judgment; when amongst other hideous
stories, shall be ripped up, full many not unlike to that which is reported of
certain Americans, who (amongst millions) being condemned to death by
persecuting Spaniards, and pressed upon by the silly Popish Priests, that they
would suddenly bethink themselves now they were in the midst of slames ready
to expire the last, and leave this world; asked where the Spaniards went after
death, that they might desire to go rather any where else then thither.

Now as this is no good way of preaching, much less of winning all Nations; so
it is granted by all Christians, that the Jews in their posterity shall
infallibly be converted unto the acknowledgement of the Gospel: but if all the
world else had been Christian, and all Christians held for persecuting of them,
the whole Nation must have been long since cut off by the Magistrates sword for
blaspheming of Christ Jesus, and thereby have falsified so many clear
Prophecies throughout the Law and Gospel for their conversion. This is so
evident, that the Pope himself, the Grand Inquisitor, throughout his Civil
Dominions both in Italy and France, permits the Jews to live and enjoy exact
proprie^ie of goods, freedom of persons, and as great a liberty of Conscience
in worshipping God after their own way, as they themselves desire: Several
other free Princes in Italy and Germany, as also the United Provinces,
vouchsafe them so large protection, that we may well agree with Peter Martyr.
loc. com. class. 2. c. 4. how God has set a kind of mark upon the Jews, as he
did on Cain; that though they had been never so obstinate and rebellious, yet
he would not have them put to death, but rather live; that Christians cut out
of the wild Olive tree by nature, and grafted into the good, by this
hard-heartednes of theirs might take example, and be so much more watchful of
continuing in Gods goodness, lest He also cut them off again, Romans 11.22.24. so
that as Paul says, Romans 11.12. if the fullness of the Jews be the riches of
the world; and the diminishing of them the rickes of the Gentiles: how much
more the permitting them still to live a continual warning-piece and
remembrancer whilst they persist in obstinacy? and how most of all will their
fulness at conversion be a greater cause of joy unto the Gentiles, and as it
were another life from death, ver. 15. If these and such other reasons as are
alleged, will not prevail to suffer them and other tares until the harvest;
we had need seek out some other warrant than any extant in our Bibles; or find
some better gloss to excuse us at the day of trial, than any which hither to
have been produced.

And since Paul foretold us that the conversion of the Jews will be such joy
and riches unto the Gentiles, Romans 11.12.15. I humbly crave leave to propound
it as a Querie which may justly inject no little scruple into the minds of
Christian States; Whether all the Gentiles shall fare well alike in the Jews
returning; or such only, and they proportionably, to what they have contributed
thereunto, by permitting them to live amongst them, and furthering their
conversion by a godly conversation, with all other means prescribed by our
Savior and his Apostles for alluring them unto the Gospel?

In the Acts 2.41. we find it said, That they which gladly received the Word.
were baptized: and according unto that example it will follow, that such as do
not gladly receive it, should not be baptized, much less enjoined to come and
participate in the Communion of the body and blood of Christ (according to
certain orders in that behalf) whether they be fit or willing: this is to
offer violence unto the souls of such, and no better than forcing dogs and
swine to eat the childrens bread against their stomachs, rather than they will
be beaten for refusing.

But with what appearance of reason can it be imagined that since our Savior
gave unto his Church a liberty to use miraculous power, he did not also order
them upon just occasion to use the Civil power, if such had been his pleasure?
as mere men they might likelier prevail with men, in whose hands the Civil
Power was, for their assistance; and God was able to give them power over both
alike: had it been Gods will, the means for executing Civil Power, must have
been as subject to them as was that of miracles: But since he was totally
silent concerning their employing of the Civil power; it is an undeniable
argument that God never meant they should usurp it.

Since then Christ is the God of Peace, Romans 16.20. nay he is our Peace it
self, Ephesians. 2.14. He came not to send sword or war, otherwise then heresies:
and the like woe betides them that bring whether heresies or wars. Christ
brought us Peace, Luc. 2.14. and his Word is the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10.15.
God has called us unto Peace, 1 Cor. 7.15. We are commanded to follow after
the things which make for peace, Romans 14.19. and that if it be possible, we
should live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18. Having seen and heard of the
firings of so many famous Cities, the devastation of so many spacious and
fruitful Countries, the ravishing of so many Virgins, and the inundation of so
much Christian blood; let us at last in the fear of God, endeavor to be the
sons of Peace, beati pacifici, the blessed peacemakers, in full assurance
that it does no where appear that God ever sanctified the Sword to cut out a
passage for the Gospel; nor that it was ever propagated by War, otherwise then
in judgment to them that disturbed the proceedings thereof in Peace.

We find our Savior and his Apostles did first instruct the Jews in the
duties and mysteries of the Gospel, before they declared void the duties of the
Law, or exhorted them to suspend observance thereunto: nay we see expressly that
they permitted them to conform unto many Ceremonies of the Law, even after the
Gospel had been tendered to them some years together, Act. 21. v. 22. and 27.
for Paul was above 3 years after his conversion, before he went to Jerusalem,
Gal. 1.18. at which time the Apostle James and the Elders of Jerusalem advised
Paul, and he accordingly conformed himself to certain Jewish Ceremonies, to
take away offense from the weaker brethren of the Jews, as in that place of
Acts above quoted: and even afterward when both they and the Gentiles had had
a copetent time to be thoroughly informed in, yet not being convinced by reason,
nor by the Word, they left them to be won unto the Gospel by the peaceable and
blameless conversation and example of such as did believe, 1 Pet. 2.12. and
3.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4 12. and could it rationally be otherwise? can we raise a new
building more strong, handsome or commodious in any place, without pulling down
the old, and carrying away the rubbish? or without rectifying also and
repairing the very foundation it self, if need require? for want of which due
proceeding, and liberty to exercise it freely, it may have been observed, that
great Reformations for the most part in Germany, Netherlands, Scotland,
England, and other Countries, have been brought about in a tumultuous and
disorderly way, not without great dishonor to God, offense and scandal unto
his dearest servants: and it may likewise as easily appear, that God so
permitted it in judgment to those States and Princes, who through persecution
of his Saints that witnessed against the errors and superstitions of the times,
denied entering and admittance unto the Truth in Peace.

Such as derive their Calling and Commission from our Savior, may not be
governed in the execution thereof by any other order or direction than what He
himself gave them; much less by such as are repugnant or inconsistent with
our Saviors. Now we are so far from finding in the New Testament any warrant
for using of coercive power, that if we read from one end unto the other, it
will appear that neither our Savior nor his Apostles did so much as lay any
of their commands o^ charges upon any person or persons capable of putting a
coercive civil power in execution; Nay it may be affirmed without blaspheme
both of our Savior (in that sense wherein he said, My Kingdom is not of this
world) and of the Apostles, that (they had it not of themselves) they could not
give such a power unto any man; a spiritual power, a power of miracles, Gods
prerogative, and dispensable to his people only by his indulgence, they had and
made use there of according to occasion: But to be Lords and Princes,
exercising dominion over their brethren in spiritualibus, was expressly
forbidden them, Mat. 10.42,43,44,45. Christ's throne must be erected with
spiritual and peaceable proceedings, his Church and Kingdom must be governed
spiritually and peaceable: The Apostles had Peace given them for their motto,
which they were to publish and hold out like a banner or white ^lug of truce
even to every house, or wheresoever they came, Luc. 10.5. and all Christians
both generally and particularly are required to live peaceably with all men,
Romans 12.18.

CHAP. IV. Christ's Instructions, and the Apostles practice concerning Christian
Liberty.
Christian Liberty is here meant not carnal liberty; liberty of Conscience
from the rudiments of the world, not of the persons subjection to Magistrates
and Powers: Christ is our Head, Ephesians. 5.23. and the Powers are Gods Ministers,
Romans 13.1 6. both of them may, and must be obeyed, and that with active
obedience, until they command contradictions, in which case Peter tells us
it is better to obey God then man, Act. 4.19.

2 COr. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord [the Gospel] is, there is (1)
liberty.

Gal. 2.4 5. False brethren brought in unawares came privily to spy out our
liberty in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage, to whom we gave
place by subjection no not for an hour.

C.4 9. Now that ye have known God, or rather are known of him, how turn ye
again to the weak and beggarly elements whereunto ye desire again to be in
bondage?

C.5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made ns free, and b^
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Matthew. 23.8,9,10. Be not ye called (2) Kabbi, for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all ye are brethren: call no man your father upon the earth, for
one is your Father which is in heaven, neither be ye called masters, for one is
your Master, even Christ.

1 Cor. 14.29,30,31. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other
judge: If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace, for ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be comforted.

1 Cor. 7.22,23,24. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

Gal. 5.13. Ye are called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion
to the flesh.

1 Pet. 2.16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes,
but as the servants of God.

Matthew. 23.1,2,3. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude and to his disciples,
saying, the Scribes and Pharisces sit in Moses seat, whatsoever therefore they
bid you observe, [ according to the law of God] that observe and do, but after
their works do not, for they say and do not.

Rev. 18.4. Come out of Her [Babylon] my people, that ye be not partaker of her
sins, and that you receive not of her plagues.

2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord.

Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat and drink, or in respect of an
holyday, new Moons, or of the Sabbath days, all which with diverse washings,
and all carnal ordinances have been imposed only on them until the time of
reformation.

Col. 2.20.22. If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why
as though living in the world, are ye subject unto Ordinances, after the
commandments and doctrines of men?

Rev. 13.16,17. The Beast causes all both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond, to receive a (3) mark in their right hand, or in their
forehead, and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark or name
of the Beast, or the number of his name.

C.14.9.10.11.12. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his
mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, etc.

Matthew. 6.24. Noman can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and
love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other.

Romans 6.16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey.

Joh. 15.14.16. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I have commanded you,
ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that you should go and bring
for the fruit.

Observations upon CHAP. IV.
(1) John the Baptist was sent into the world as a forerunner to exhort the
people unto repentance; to exalt the valleys, and make low every hill and
mountain, to make straight the crooked places, and plain all such as are
rough, Es. 43.4. to turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready the people, and prepare
them to receive the Lord Christ Jesus, Mat. 3.1.2. Luke 1.17. And as this was
ordained from eternity by the infinite wisdom of the Almighty; so is a
freedom and liberty of Conscience absolutely necessary for the further
propagation of the Gospel, as well in respect of those that never yet heard
thereof, as of such who are but children and weak in faith* and of all others
which are at present, or shall be at any time hereafter erroniously instructed,
for illuminating their understandings, and rectifying their judgments.

(2) In this sense it is that we must neither call, nor be called Rabbi, master
or father, no relations must cause us to swear in verba Magistri, contrary to
our own conscience: 'twas the Lord of life who with the price of his own
blood redeemed us from death, and purchased for us freedom not to be subject
unto men, further then we can concur with our own consciences and
judgments; but Christ is Lord Paramount, and him we must with faithful
Abraham believe and obey, even against hope, and in some sense against our own
reason, Romans 4.18. for his service and devotion, must our conscience be
reserved chaste, and undefiled, to his Scepter only must that yield, it cannot
serve Christ and Mammon, Matthew. 6.24. He will share stakes with no creature;
all, or none for him. Oh! how jealous should we then be of endeavoring to
conduct this Virgin immaculate and untainted through the pollutions of this
seducing world, unto her Bridegroom in heaven? Had it not been for that
blessed liberty of Printing which this Kingdom has enjoyed some two or three
years together after the first sitting of this Parliament, we had yet remained
in ignorance of much saving truth, and amongst other mischiefs been still as
deeply engaged for Episcopacie, as ever; but since God thereby has already
given so great a blessing to us, as an earnest of his greater bounty hereafter,
why do we stifle it in the birth? such as perceive the usurpation of
Episcopacie, are not yet satisfied that Presbytery has a better title; or, that
if Bishops may not rule over us without our own consents, why Presbyters
should do the same against consent: If such a Presbytery be Gospel proof, why
is it afraid to come to trial? Let men and Angels speak freely what they can
both for it and against it; else, how shall we be able to distinguish, when to
bless the feet of them that bring glad tidings of good things? Romans 10.15. or
curse such as preach other doctrine? Gal 1.8. And if you say that through this
freedom twenty damnable errors have been spread for every saving truth: I
answer, that these errors, heresies and offenses must needs have come, if we
may believe the Blessed Spirit, that they which are approved might be made
manifest, 1 Cor. 11.19. neither are you further accessory to their coming,
than in not restraining them by a coercive power, which Christ or his Apostles,
not only never gave you warrant for, but have at least clearly insinuated (if
you should not yet see an express commanding of) the contrary; and the woe is
pronounced on them by whom they come, Matthew. 18.17. not on those that could not
keep them out by other means than such as were unjustifiable, and must at same
time have withheld the truth, 2 Cor. 8.12. If such as participate of the body
and blood of Christ unworthily receive to themselves damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
If preaching the word of God be a savor of death unto death to such as perish,
1 Cor. 2 15,16. What wonder is it then, that, if a Christian or Civil liberty
in matters of conscience only be granted; such as were never of us, should go
out from us? when the Spirit of God says, they went out from us for this very
reason, that we might know they were not of us, 1 John 2.19. and Peter tells
us, there should arise false prophets teaching damnable heresies, and denying
even the Lord that bought them, bringing upon themselves damnation, and that
many shall follow their pernicious ways by reason of whom the truth shall be
evil spoken of; but (mark what he says) that notwithstanding all this, the
Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and reserve the
unjust to be punished at the day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2.1.2.9. What if God who
was willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, enduring with much
long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, shall say there
must be offenses? Has not the potter power over the clay to make vessels of
dishonor also? Rom 9.21,22. will we be wiser then God Himself? Gods will and
commandment as it was to Abraham for sacrificing Isaac, Genesis 22.23. should be
reason enough to require and find obedience from all good Christians; and yet
the necessity of suffering erroneous opinions to be published, lest truth
thereby should be stifled, is so clear and necessary to the eye of reason, as
it is for him that has lost any thing, to seek it where it is not, as well as
where it is, if ever he mean to find it; but you will say you have not lost
truth, and perhaps you have not; perhaps you never had it to lose; you make men
jealous thereof in that you are so loath to show it by your works, James 2.18.
so backward in giving a reason and account thereof in bringing it to the
touchstone, 1 Pet. 3.15. But most certain it is, you have not the whole truth
according to the measure and stature of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. you have not the
fullness of perfection to be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Mat.
5.48. If you do but think so, it is a certain sign you are not so; and
because you come short thereof and know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. for the love
of that which is still wanting* you must make search and enquiry even where it
is not to be found: Our Savior says, Seek and you shall find, Matthew. 7.7.
but it would be an improper speech to say seek, if we could go readily where
it were; and what need we examine that we learn, if we could be sure it were
the truth without examining? or what profits it to have found out the truth,
if we have not liberty to embrace it, and make profession of it? But as the Law
entered, that the offense might abound, and where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound, Romans 5.20 21. so must erroneous doctrines be permitted that the
truth may shine more glorious; so must you not suppress such, unless you will
at same time run hazard to suppress the truth: what then? must we sin that
grace may abound? Romans 6 1. must we cherish heretics for exercising the
patience of true believers? or that when they get strength enough they may
persecute them to death? No: But if we learn of God who is long suffering, 2
Pet. 3.9. and would not permit the ta^es to be pulled up till harvest, Mat.
13.29.30. If we follow the Apostles steps as they did Christ's, 1 Cor. 11.1. in
exhorting us to show forth all long suffering, 1. Tim. 1.16. and lastly, if
observing others who have the Apostles for an ensample, Phil. 3.17. we reach
forth unto those things which are before, pressing toward the mark for the
price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ; then will God protect us
whilst we obey his Ordinances, and reveal unto us, even that truth which
before we were ignorant of and wanted, Phil. 3.13,14,15.

I conceive it may appear upon enqui^y, that most of the points controverted
between Protestants and such as are termed Puritans of all sorts, will be
granted by the Protestants, to be of matters in themselves indifferent; and
that the decision and injunction only of the Church or State, makes them
necessary to be believed or observed; as first, a set form of Prayer, the
Cross in Baptism, bowing at the name of Jesus, a Surplesse, a Parochial or
Diocesan Church, with a hundred others, concerning which the most deserving
Protestants will generally acknowledge, that Puritans may be saved without
believing in them, or rendering conformity thereunto, if the Church of England
did not impose it on them, and require obedience from them: The like may be
said concerning most of the differences betwixt Protestants and Papists; as the
Papists denying marriage to the Clergy, the cup in the Eucharist unto the
Laity, their vows for poverty and single life, neither of them necessary in
themselves, and all dispensable by the Pope; nay, the most learned and moderate
Papists generally, cannot only choose but grant through strength and evidence
of reason, that men may go to Heaven and not trouble their thoughts with
Purgatory, that great Dianah and Craftsmistris which inveigles and nourishes
them all up in idleness and ignorance; but their very principles conclude it:
for since they hold it in their power to do what good they will, even to works
of supererogation; it follows undeniably from the same ground, that they can
work out their own salvation with much more ease then a Journyman does his
daily task, and may possibly have no need to pray to God for any thing in all
their life time, or stand in need of a Jesus to be their Savior or Mediator,
much less of a fantastical Purgatory to purify them a little, before they
can get admittance into heaven: and for their grand stumbling block of
Transubstantiation, what understanding and considerate Papist almost will deny,
but that a Christian may possibly be a worthy receiver, who shall
notwithstanding acknowledge before hand that he finds not evidence enough in
those words, Mat. 26.26. This is my body, to convince him of
Transubstantiation, but in regard it is so far controverted on either side,
determines neither in his own thoughts, but humbly submits himself to apply
them implicitly in such a sense and meaning, as our Savior understood
thereby, when he uttered them to his Apostles: so that both with Protestants
and Papists it is the Churches and States determining and imposing them on
others, that makes many points necessary to salvation, which of themselves were
but indifferent.

And whereas it is objected that in matters indifferent, Christian liberty
giving us leave, either to conform, or not conform; we are moved to conform
thereto, because many would be offended in our nonconformity: I answer that as
there are many offended through nonconformity; so on the other side many are
scandalized by such conformity; and since there is offense on either side, it
will not suffice to shuffle off the business by distinguishing that such
conformity is cause only of an offense taken, but nonconformity would justly
give offense; for besides that this distinction for the most part is applied
contrarily to what it should, it availes no whit toward a reconciliation: But
secondly, I say, such as are offended in this nonconformity, hold the things
of themselves indifferent unto which conformity is required; and so may easily,
dispensing with what they apprehend to have no obligation to, be reconciled;
but such as are offended at conformity, hold the points in controversy (how
slightly soever esteemed by others) abominable, damnable in the sight of God;
and since the one cannot submit upon peril of imminent damnation, Romans 14.23.
the other is bound to yield, that we may all arive to a unity in Christ, Ephesians 4
13. and according to Paul's rule, that no man seek his own, but every man
another wealth; to please all men in all things, not seeking our own profit,
but the profit of many that they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10.24 33.

But if you will say, though such things were indifferent in themselves at
first, yet being once imposed either by Protestant or Popish Churches, they do
afterward become necessary, as well through certain oaths which the people
may have taken to be conformable; as also in being commanded in Scripture to
obey the Powers: I answer, that a bad oath is better broke then kept; and such
an oath must needs be bad, which not only abridges us our Christian Liberty,
but hindering us from ever coming to a unity in faith, engages us still further
to offend the weaker brethren by our conformity which might have been forborne
as no ways necessary, but absolutely in it self indifferent before the taking
of such oaths; and since God commands us not to offend our weak brother 1 Cor.
8.7. etc. C.10.23. etc. and the respective States or Churches (which are but
men) command conformity unto their Canons which puts us in a necessity of
giving such offense unto our brethren: I refer all good Christians to what the
Apostles said in such a case, viz. Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye, Act. 4.19.

And whereas it may be said, that though we were not engaged by oath, yet we
ought to obey such Canons or injunctions, in that we are required to be subject
to the Powers, Romans 13.1. etc. 1 Pet. 2.13. etc. I answer, that by subjection
in those and all such other sexts, it is only understood unto the Civil
Powers; and that the Civil Powers neither had then, nor were intended to have
afterward in succeeding times any command over Christians in matters merely of
Religion, for that would not only thwart the Scripture before alleged, Act.
4.19. but render it impossible for such a case to happen, that the Magistrates
command might be truly said to be the command of man only distinguished from
that of God, for it was the Magistrate, the Rulers of the people, and Elders of
Israel, Act. 4.8. that commanded Peter and John to teach no more in the Name of
Jesus, v. 18. when they answered, they were rather to obey God then man, v. 19.
this was the Christian Liberty so much spoken of in the Gospel, one only breach
whereof, to wit circumcision, is able to make Christ Jesus of no effect unto
us, as Paul told the Galatians c. 5.2.4. this is that Liberty which we are
called to stand fast in, Gal. 5.1. not using it for a cloak of maliciousness,
1 Pet. 2.16. nor a stumbling block unto the weak; and will easily so appear,
if we but cast our eyes on the 1 Cor. 8.7. to the end, and c. 10.23. to 30. in
both which places Paul does not only set forth unto us in expre^e terms, the
self same case before propounded concerning things indifferent in themselves,
though controverted between Protestants and Puritans; but requires every one to
forbear to use their Christian Liberty, and not conform themselves to the
customs of the Gentiles, rather then offend the weaker brethren, which
Scriptures in regard they are very pregnant, and if well considered, might
clearly compose the greatest controversies of Christendom (being most commonly
for matters of this nature, in pretense at least) and prevent the shedding
whole rivers of blood, being also not very long, it may not be amiss to insert
them here: Paul says 1 Cor. 8.7. etc. Some with conscience of the Idol unto
this hour call it as a thing offered unto an Idol, and their conscience being
weak is defiled. But meat commends us not to God: for neither if we eat are
we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse. But take heed lest by
any means, this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are
weak. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols
Temple: shall not the conscience of him which is weak be imboldned to eat
those things which are offered unto Idols? And through thy knowledge shall the
weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed? But when ye sin against the
brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ: Wherefore if
meat make my brother offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest
I make my brother to offend. And in c. 10 23. to 30. All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful, but all things
edify not. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. Whatsoever
is sold in the shambles that eat, asking no question for conscience sake. For
the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. If any of them that believe
not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before
you eat, asking no question for conscience sake. But if any man say unto you
this is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it,
and for conscience sake. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.
Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the others: for why is my liberty
judged of another man's conscience? For if I by the grace of God, be a partaker,
why am I evil spoken of, for that for which I give thanks?

Dear Christians, consider with your selves, I beseech you in all meekness,
and suppose the using of a Surplesse, or Cross in Baptism were lawful, but
indifferent in themselves, and we neither better nor worse for using them, as
Paul says of meat consecrated to Idols, 1 Cor. 8.8. ought not a brother
(according to this president and precept of Paul's) who pretends to be strong in
Christ, abstain, though not for his own conscience sake, c. 10.29. yet lest
some which are weak should use the like Cross and Surplesse as necessary to
Gods Worship and Ordinances, c. 8.7.10. and others be offended thereby, as
conceiving the use of such Surplesse and crossing to be Idolatrous and
Antichristian? c. 10.28. I cannot imagine a greater proof and evidence for
convincing the consciences of those which still oppose, and therefore do
humbly beseech the Father of Lights to touch the hearts, and illuminate the
understandings, of all such as are ordained to the knowledge of this truth,
hitherto so persecuted and trampled under feet.

It is granted, that the Scripture in the letter, does not contain all things
which are and may be used for decency and order, because they may be changed
and vary according both to time and place; but such course must be taken
concerning all circumstances of decency and order, as nothing be imposed on
men which may infringe or take away their Christian Liberty, which cannot
possibly subsist without a liberty of conscience, that is, whosoever shall
conform himself unto any such ceremony or discipline which is established in
any Church against his own conscience, though in it self never so warrantable
and just, he has not only parted with his Christian Liberty, but defiles and
offers violence unto his own conscience, to be ranked amongst sins of
highest nature, next to that against the Holy Ghost.

There is no Christian but will yield that all things ought to be done decently
and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. but when that which has been consulted and agreed
on in a dogmaticall way, may in the opinion of a third person or party be
thought comely for a whole City or Country to join in, yet if it offend the
tender conscience of any Christian, God will have mercy and not sacrifice, he
will rather dispense with the uniformity, though so glorious in the eyes of
man, then that the inward peace and quiet of minds, wherein his Saints enjoy
and serve him more transcendently, should any ways be disjoynted or
discomposed; God only may prescribe laws unto the conscience; and men on earth
of like passions with our selves, Act. 14.15. though never so many in number,
though never so wise and learned, until the Spirit of truth which cannot lie,
shall share unto them of his own infallible Spirit; they have no better right
or title of imposing laws, though in such things which they take to be never
so much indifferent, then to force a point of Popery of other heresy upon
their (...) for what is it to me if all the world should think this or that's
ceremony or thing indifferent, if the observance of it to me seem damnable?
until you can make Peccadiglioes, diminitive sins, until you can corrantly
pass the Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins; nay until you can
make sins to be no sins, it is in vain to think men will trust you with
their consciences: If the Scripture and such reasons as they produce, through
my infirmity and weakness, cannot satisfy my conscience; has frail mankind
the infinite power of God at their disposal, to rectify this misled
conscience of mine, as is pretended, in a supernatural way? or taking this
away to give me another in exchange thereof? or be accountable for me, excuse
and bear me harmless from the dreadful Judge of Heaven and Earth? till then,
it is a vanity beyond all vanities which the wisdom of Solomon forewarned us
of; it is folly of all follies the most ridiculous, for a man to put out his
own eyes, renounce his own reason, infatuate his own understanding, and
proscribe the Holy Ghost himself (for the Spirit of God cannot long bear
witness together with our spirits, Romans 8.16. save according to our own eyes,
reason and understanding) that he may be beholding to others to let him see and
understand by proxy, who though they were millions are no more infallible then
the single sight, reason and understanding of any particular man or woman.

It may be granted that the Apostles according to that of Paul, 1 Con. 11.34.
did settle many things of decency and order in the Churches which are not
registered Scriptures, because they might be changed as occasion should require;
but we do not find any where that the Apostles themselves engaged Christians
unto such decrees of deceneie, or order otherwise then they themselves did
voluntarily submit unto them remiuing such as were refractory to be punished by
their Grand Master to whom they stand or fall, Romans 14.4. so much less will it
follow from hence, that Christian States Churches which have not the same
infallible Spirit of the Apostles may establish such ceremonies and canons as
they thinks requisitc, requiring an absolute subjection and submission, which
was only due due unto the Apostles; this is both beyond their bounds, and
contrary to the Christian Liberty of their brethren.

(3). If we desire to be found Christ's hereafter, we must live like his at
present, to him only must we give tribute, no less then our whole souls will
serve his own; and therefore in the least tittle we comply with the (...) or
his Image in any of his imps that would bring us into spiritual tyranny and
bondage: it is a sighe we have ease off our Master Christ Jesus, and are no
longer his friends, but become outcasts, enthralled to the Egyptian
Taskmasters of this world, and reserved to eternal bondage and torments in
the world to come.

CHAP. V. Christ's and the Apostles testimonies concerning Gods free Grace, and
man's natural incapacity.
IOh. 6.44. No man can come unto me except the Father draw him.

V. 65. No man can come unto me except it were given unto him of my Father.

Matthew. 16.17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven.

Joh. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing.

Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure.

2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God.

1 Cor. 3.6. Though Paul plant and Apollo water, it is God that gives the
increase.

C.2.5. Your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in demonstration
of the Spirit.

C.3.7. Neither is he that planteth. or he that waters any thing, but God
that gives the increase.

C.2.7,8,9,10. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom, which none of the Princes of this world knew, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him,
but God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit.

Ephesians 2.2.4.5. In times past ye walked according to the Prince of the power of
the air, but God has quickened us together with Christ: by grace you are saved.

Joh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh prositeth nothing.

1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

Matthew. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God
for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Romans 8.7.8. The carnast mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be: so then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.

Joh. 3.27. A man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven.

C.14.17. The world cannot receive the Spirit of truth, because it sees him
not, neither knows him.

Observations upon CHAP. V.
It Is said in Paul's Epistle to the Romans, that we know not what to pray for as
we ought, Romans 3.26. how much less do we know how to believe as we ought? and
yet least of all are we able to believe as we would. Oh! but some will say, if
you know not what, or how to believe, you must learn, you shall be taught; and
so desirous are they to make a proselite of you, that they will furnish you
with a Cate chife, which tells you all they say is according to the word of
God; that it is Gods absolute will and pleasure you should believe it, and that
you must necessarily believe it upon peril of damnation: yea, answers a weak
Christian that is wearied with their importunity, tired out of their vexations,
and made fearful of longer imprisonment or death, you say well: but how shall
I prevail with my self to believe what you say? Thus reply these instructers
like Jobs miserable comforters, Job 2.9. c.16.2. yield obedience to what is
taught you, meditate on it often, desire to believe it, practice and live
according to it, and God in time will bring you to believe it: But is this the
way? Then poor Popery! why art thou spoken evil of? like Paul who though he
preached Circumcision, was persecuted as if he had taught the Jews to walk
after other customs then those which Moses learnt them, Act. 21.21. Gal. 5.11.
poor Popery! surely this is thy beloved doctrine, and very injurious are they
who will not acknowledge the pedigree thereof from thee from Antichrist: But
how truly Canonical it is both thou thy self, and all the world may know by
this short history. A merry companion (as the world calls him) or smelfeast,
next to his fresh supply of news, had furnished himself with certain strange
but ingenious conceited satyricall, and for the most part scurrilous profane
jests and stories, in such abundance and variety, that upon all occasion of
common discourse, which generally is idle and vain, he was still able to
insert some one or other, with such dexterity and applause that thereby he did
ingratiate himself into all company, and got many a good morsel gratis: Now
although these stories were merely of his own invention, and nothing below the
degree of supernatural could prove them possible: yet having related them so
often, and being many times of course constrained to assert the truth of them
with change of oaths, by degree forgetting they were the fancies of his own
fond headpeece, became at last to take them so far for verities, as if he
himself had seen them acted, or had relation from such as were eyewitnesses:
Thus if you will take up upon trust the tenets of Poperty or any erroneous
doctrine (though at first with much reluctancie) complying and conforming there
unto without a preceding examination, whether they be of God or no, 1 John 4.1.
it is just with him, through the delusions of Satan, and your own corruptions,
to give you up that you may believe a lie, as Paul told the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians 2.11. But these are none of those teachers which Christ gave for building
up his mystical body, Ephesians. 4 11.12. They tell us it is the Spirit that teaches
us to pray, which in our hearts cries Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. and together with
our spirits makes intercession for us, Romans 8.26. They tell us that of our
selves we are not able so much as to have a good thought, such sufficiency is
of God, 2 Cor. 2.5. Faith is the gift of God, thereby we are saved through
grace, Romans 9.16. so that such as teach men to take up a Religion without
trying of it, that men if they themselves will, may believe this or that
opinion which is taught them of their superiors, or prescribed by the State,
censuring all such for reprobates or obstinate that say they cannot; this is no
other then the absolute groundwork and corner stone, whereon the Papists soly
build, and without which they could not possibly have so long upheld their
selfe-loved doctrine of merit and supererogation. But since man by nature is a
child of wrath inclined to fulfill the desires of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.3. and
merely of his own strength incapable of discerning the things of the Spirit;
have we not just cause and grounds from reason, besides these clear Scriptures
to think, that prayers unto the Father of lights, and Christian-like
instructions of such as are Spiritual would prove more powerful to reclaim a
sinner out of his natural estate, or reduce heretics unto the truth, then the
bloody hands of cruel executioners? the spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.2. and as nothing but a diamond will cut a diamond; so
nothing but that which is spiritual can prevail upon the spirit: we see that
Paul tells the Corinthians their faith must not be governed nor stand in the
wisdom of men 1 Cor. 2.5. much less in their dominion and power which may be
void of wisdom.

CHAP. VI. Christ's and the Apostles testimony concerning the certainty of the
Elects salvation.
IOh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me, and him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

C.17.12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost save
the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

Matthew. 18.14. It is the will of your Father which is in heaven, that not one
of these little ones should perish.

Matthew. 24.24. If it were possible they should deceive the very elect.

Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in Christ Jesus shall not perish, but have
everlasting life.

2. Cor. 4,8.9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, yet not in despair; persocuted, but not for saken; cast down, but
not destroyed.

Act. 5.39. If this work be of God, you cannot over throw it.

C.11.17. Forasmuch as God gave them the like gifts as he did unto us, who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that I could withstand God?

C.23.9. If a Spirit or an Angel has spoken unto Paul, let us not fight
against God.

2. Cor. 13.8. We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for the truth.

2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this scale, the Lord
knows who are his.

Rev. 7.17. The Lamb shall lead them unto the living fountains of waters, and
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Joh. 10.28. I give unto my sheep eternal life, and they shall not perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

1. Joh. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had
been of us, they Would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out that
they might be made manifest that they were not of us.

Observations upon CHAP. VI.
IF Gods Elect could totally and finally fall from grace, and possibly milcarry
eternally, then were it like wise possible that none at all might have been
saved, and consequently that Christ's intention of man's salvation might have
been quite frustrated, and his death in vain* but since neither of these are
true, why are we so fondly jealous and preposteriously careful, lest the
people of God should be misled and carried away with every wind of doctrine?
That rather then not suppress each opinion which is but supposed erroneous;
we will run the hazard of silencing the most saving truths, of putting to
deaths Gods dearest Saints, and resisting his blessed Spirit, reducing our
selves into such a posture and condition, that if we be in ignorance, we must
necessarily continue so ^ and if we be in error, we must be incapable of
ever coming out of it.

I confess, it is as true on the other side, that such whose names are not
from eternity recorded in the book of life, what ever means be used, shall
notwithstanding live and die unregenerate: and if it be therefore objected,
that we may be the less pensive about using of the means; I answer, That God
has fully declared his will and pleasure to save his people, only in the use
of means, and to reject such only as do neglect them: secondly, we find it
said in the Parable how that servant which knows his masters will, and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes; and be that knows not his will, and
does ought worthy of stripes, shall yet have fewer stripes, because he knew not
his masters will: much being required from him that received much, Luke
12.47.48.

Since then God will have the means used, and that by every one, according to
his own light and knowledge, that he may be fully persuaded in his own
conscience, Romans 14.5. since we have not been of Gods cabinet counsel,
c.11.34. and no man knows the things of a man, save the spirit which is
within him, 1. Cor. 2 11. Since we cannot be competent Judges of another
conscience, nor privy to his gifts, further then he himself acquaints us: and
lastly, though sects and heresies should multiply never so much, since, if that
one saving truth can but get liberty to show it self, it will at last
infallibly vanquish that many headed monster of errors without so much as
hazarding the weakest Christian in Gods act of foresight and providence from
eternity; we cannot abridge other men the freedom of their own conscience,
without a most palpable infringing of Gods greatest commandments, without
crossing the whole course of the Gospel, without a notorious character of
greatest folly, without the highest injury to Christianity, and through the
consequence of our unsound principles become accessory to the final loss of
all those souls that perish for want of truly saving knowledge.

CHAP. VII. Christ's own testimony that His Kingdom was not of this world,
neither did he exercise Civil jurisdiction.
IOh. 6.15. When Jesus perceived that they would come and take him by force to
make him a King, he departed into the mountain himself alone.

Luke 22.49,50,51. When they which were about Jesus saw what would follow, they
said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? and one of them smote the
servant of the High Priest, and cut off his care; and Jesus answered and said,
suffer ye thus far.

Matthew. 26.52. Put up again thy swordinto his place, for all they that take
the sword shall perish by the sword.

Joh. 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of this
world, then would my servant fight that I might not be delivered up to the Jews.

Luke 12.13,14. One of the company said unto him, Master, speak unto my
brother, that he divide the inheritance with me, and Jesus said, man, who made
me a Judge or divider over you?

Luke 22.29.30. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

C.23.42. The good thief said unto our Savior, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. Christ was not as then in His Kingdom.

V. 50.51. Joseph of Arimathea, a good and just man, waited for the Kingdom of
God.

C.24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so have entered
into his glory?

Observations upon CHAP. VII.
I Would feign know who in the Primitive times were these superintendents as
Bishops, or superior Courts and Churches, as combined Presbyteries, Synods or
Councels, that had or exercised coercive power: it is said in Act. 1.15. That in
those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and like enough might
be a Chairman or Prolocutor to the rest, when any business was to be
agitated, to prevent confusion if many should speak together, or any one out
of order; yet we see Paul who was but one, withstood him to the face, upon
occasion, Gal. 2.11. which would have been irregular punishable if Peter had
had a superior coercive power over all the Apostles: in like manner, Paul was
said so be a chosen vessel to bear the name of Christ Jesus before the
Gentiles, Act. 9.15. c. 13.47. and he says I magnify my office in as much as
I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans 9.13. yet we know that other of the
Apostles had their sickles in Gods harvest for ^inging in the Gentiles; Paul
was neither the only chosen vessel for this purpose, neither did he use
jurisdiction or superiority over other Disciples and brethren that labored
with him in that ministry, otherwise then what they themselves did voluntarily
submit unto: John was a fellow labourer as (...) in his Revelation to the
Churches of Asia, c. 1.4. and his first Epistle which is entitled General; so
was Jude by his to all that were sanctified by God the Father, v. 1. and Peter
in his first Epistle to all the scattered strangers of sundry Nations, c. 1.1.
whom as was said before, Paul withstood in that he compelled the Gentiles of
Antioch to live after the custom of the Jews, Gal. 2.11. and Paul though he
had a particular charge and call to go unto the Gentiles, yet we find he
added the catalogue of his many sufferings for the last, though not the least,
because it came upon him daily, the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28. and
in that place of the Acts 9.15. we may see Paul was not sent as a chosen
vessel unto the Gentiles only, but he was also to bear the Name of Christ
before Kings, and the children of Israel; so that if well examined, it may
appear the Apostles were equally bound to teach the Gospel unto all Nations
all alike; and the power given to them all in general, was equal to every one
of them in particular, though some of them, as their faith was more eminent
might perhaps do more miracles then others, and were likely received with more
reverence and obedience, as well amongst the Apostles, as all other Believers:
but since they could not all of them be present in every place, the Holy Spirit
directed them to agrae in di^er^ng of themselves into distant Cities and
Provinces, as might be best and most condueing for the work which they were
sent about; and when Paul would not take Mark with him again, because he had
before left them at Pamphilia, not going with them to the work; and though the
contention was so sharp, that Paul and Barnabas did for that cause part
asunder, Act. 15. from 37. to 40. yet we see no authoritative power made use
of, which doubtless would have been most necessary, according to the
principles thereof, for the reputation of it, and advancement of the cause, if
God had ever ordained and sanctified it to such a purpose: But on the other
side, though Paul found that Omfirous might be helpefull to him in his bonds
for the furtherance of the Gospel, yet Paul would not retain him without the
consent of his master Philemon; but if the Church had had a superior
jurisdiction over men, all our Civil relations and respects must have been
subordinate, and Paul in this occasion for the credit thereof, and advantage of
the Ministry, ought to have withheld Onesimus from his master, whether he had
been willing thereunto or no, which would contradict Paul's doctrine to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.21.

Since the Lord says he will destroy the mystery of iniquity with the Spirit
of his mouth, which is his word, 2 These. 2.7,8. how dare we trust in and employ
the arm of flesh, fining, imprisonment, and banishing with the whole regiment
of the Civil sword, which in this respect are all opposite to the Word which
is the Sword of the Spirit, plainly expressed in this Scripture by the Spirit
of Gods mouth? Jesus says I am the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6. if
we then frame unto our selves other unsound and unwarrantable truths of our
own inventions, making Christ when he was on earth a King of this world:
(which smacks of Judaisme, save that the Jews forbear to acknowledge him
their Messiah, because he had not the power of an earthly King to deliver them
from the Romans, but such Christians make his Kingdom to have been of this
world, and affirm he wanted the power thereof, which of the two may be found
the greater reproach unto our Blessed Savior) Again, if Christ be the way,
and we must walk in that way, Esa. 30.21. and he himself says, He is a
Prince and Savior to give repentance and forgiveness of sins unto Israel,
Act 5.31. and I came not to judge the world but to save it, Joh. 12.47. where
he tells us not only negatively what he came for, not to judge the world; but
also affirmatively, to save the world, that we might be sure to understand him
right: judging and saving are set here in opposition, and until we can make
them both one, and that taking away men's lives be saving of men's lives, for
which our Savior professes to have come into the world in the place before
quoted, as also in Luke 9.56. such can never approve themselves to be Christ's
Disciples, who take unto themselves a power which Christ never did, destroying
men's bodies (and souls too, as much as in them lies) in stead of saving them,
because they will not against their own consciences embrace the truth of the
Gospel, as they say that impose it on them, though in other men's judgments as
wise and pious as themselves, the truths they so much stand on, may be
accounted enmity both to truth and godliness: If then we neither know, nor
have Christ as he is the truth; nor walk in him as he is the way: how can we
ever imagine to attain him as he is the life, for which end we were not only
created, but make profession, and would be thought to have employed the utmost
of our endeavors to arive thereat?

The powers of the Civil State and Church may not be confounded; but each of
them must have the absolute sovereignty within its own precincts and
jurisdiction: The Civil Magistrate, as such, may not proceed against a member
of the Church for any matter which merely concerns the Churches peace; neither
may the Church (save only with Church and Spiritual weapons) interpose against
any member of the State in things which only touch the Civil peace: And though
there be no breach committed by any one against the Civil peace, but what may
give offense, or tends remotely toward a disquieting of that Churches peace,
whereof he is a member, yet there may be many breaches against the Churches
peace, without any the least disturbance unto the Civil peace: In this respect
the Civil State has so much the less cause to be jealous of any attempting to
discompose it and ought to be so much the more backward in taking of offense at
any thing but what does primarily assault its Civil peace: But if either State
or Church shall take upon them to usurp the weapons, or intermeddle in matters
which concern the other; it will not only disturb the peace of both, but
bring them infallibly by degrees to take up arms upon pretense of defending
their respective bounds and jurisdiction: and that which is of greatest
consequence, even the most eminent destruction both of Church and State, is,
that if the Civil Magistrate may at any time proceed against Church offenders
(whom the Church will not resolve to censure, or having censured does not
prevail) inflicting Civil punishments of imprisoning, fining and putting them
to death without the Churches coment, then will the whole Church both officers
and generality one after another be subject to the Civil sword in matters
merely of Religion for conscience, and for such only as concern the Church
estate: or if the Civil State proceed to punishing such offenders out of duty
which it should seem to owe unto the Church, or by order from the Church; then
will it necessarily follow, that the Church has a supremacy over the Civil
State, and may when she sees good, require the Civil sword to be employed
even against the whole Civil State, both Magistrates and Generality, causing
all of them, one after another, to be banished or put to death, until they, or
such of them as the Church shall please, be executed and destroyed.

The Principles of persecution are of equal latitude with all Church censures
which must have no respect of persons: If the King himself be a member of the
Church (as subject to the Church as I may say with reverence) he must be
subject to the censures of it, and consequently be liable to be persecuted in
such a State and Church as hold for persecuting, though only of erroneous or
obstinate offenders; for whom they judge such, whether they be so or no, they
must be persecuted for such; and let them understand it as they please, there
is no middle betwixt these two: In such States where civil punishments are
inflicted on men for matters merely of Religion, for cause of conscience;
either the whole Religion must be resolved into the Civil Magistrates
determination, and the whole Church by consequence be subject to it, and in
case of dissenting be liable to be cut off at the pleasure of the Civil
Magistrate; or else the Civil Magistrate, whether King, Aristocracie, or other
government, in whom the Sovereignty is contracted, must be liable to be
persecuted even unto death, whenever the Church shall think fitting or give
order, and that for matters which concern the conscience only.

The Italians have a Proverb, Chi ui fa piu charezze che non suole, o ui ha
ingannato ui uuole: He that courts thee more then ordinarily, either has
deceived thee already, or intends to do it afterward: and much according this
Machia vilian saying, we may observe that all Roman Catholic States and
Princes who so much idolize the Pope, do it only out of sinister and
by-respects, with a design to make the greater use of him in their own
occasions: amongst the rest, we may pitch upon the King of Spain, who desires
to be accounted, and at least professes himself to be the most dutiful son
of all: This Catholic King in matters of difference betwixt the Pope and
other Princes, has continually interposed, and been still able to oversway them
to the Popes favor and advantage; but such as have knowledge of their
respective interests, and been acquainted with the managing thereof, cannot be
ignorant, that the Kings of Spain not only when ever their ends were
different, but at all other times have generally made such benefit of that
Supremacy which they seem to ascribe unto the Pope; that the Popes have been
heretofore constrained for the most part to be at their devotions, until they
met with the spirit of this present Urban, whom all their stratagems could
neither win nor vanquish: Let us but consider that one selfe-interest of the
Spaniards concerning the Kingdom of Naples (the most rich and delicious
Country of all Europe) whereunto the Popedom lays claim, pretending the King
of Spain usurpes possession of it; for which cause his Catholic Majesty is
yearly excommunicated, and upon presenting of a mule with about 20 pounds in
gold by his Ambassador in the nature of a tenant-like acknowledgement, is at
same instant restored again.

Neither are the Popes void of their interests in such compliance, who having
so large a portion of Civil and Spiritual jurisdiction colleague themselves
with other Potentates, the better to inthrall their subjects, and by
encroaching to devour up petty neighboring States and Princes, as Ahab did
Naboth's vineyard, 1 King. 21. according as they lie most commodiously situate
for the purpose.

But what think we of some Protestant States and Churches? do not they the
very same? did not our English Bishops at beginning of the Reformation give
Henry the eight the Popes title formerly, of supreme Head and Governor of the
Church, that they themselves might share (at least) in the power and wealth
thereof? and have we not heard it often affirmed, No Bishop, No King; when the
contrary thereof is the very truth it self? that is a King, and a persecuting
Bishop, a Bishop (or any Clergy disciples) that passes the pale of spiritual
censure and jurisdiction are incompatible, one State is too narrow for them;
they must contract till one has got the victory of the other: And for
Presbyteries which pretend to ascribe so much unto the Civil Magistrate,
making him Lord Keeper of both Tables; is it not that they may engage him to
employ this power they give him, when they require it? and may it not be
suspected, or prove an employing of the Civil Magistrate in punishing their
delinquents, the better to keep the peoples odium, and disrellishing from off
themselves? obliging the whole State to persecute one another at their request?
this is very much suspected as clearly evident to those that seriously consider
the nature of this controversy; wherein I beseech God to instruct all such as
may any ways conduce to the better managing and illustrating thereof hereafter
unto his further glory.

CHAP. VIII. Christ's Commands against the Apostles lordlinesse and dominion,
with their submission thereunto and practice.
JOh. 13.12.13,14.15,17. After Jesus had washed his feet and had taken his
garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, know ye not what I have
done unto you? ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am: If I
then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one
another feet: for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have
done, unto you: If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them.

Matthew. 20.25,26. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them and
they that are great exercise authority over them, but it shall not be so among
you.

C.23.11. He that is greatest amongst you, shall be your servant.

2 Cor. 1.24. We have not dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy.

C.10.4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal; though we walk in the
flesh, we do not war after the flesh.

V. 8. Our authority the Lord has given us for edification, and not for
destruction.

C.13.10. I write these things being absent, le^t being present I should use
sharpness according to the power which the Lord has given me to edification
and not destruction.

1. Pet. 5.2,3. Take the oversight of Gods flock, not as being Lords over Gods
heritage, but as ensamples to the flock.

1 Cor. 3.9. We are laborers together with God, y^ are Gods husbandry, ye are
Gods building.

2 Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead be you reconciled to God.

C.10.1.3. I Paul my self beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ.

^al. 6.1. If a man be over taken in a fault, you which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted.

Observations upon CHAP. VIII.
SInce the Apostle Paul thinks it no disparagement to bring in the Great God,
even Christ Jesus himself, beseeching his people, 2 Cor. 5.20. surely such as
are his true Disciples should not be weary of their Masters example, or
arrogate to themselves what Christ never practiced.

If Peter tells us, that in Paul's Epistles there are some things hard to be
understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. and if Paul ravished with admiration cries out so
pathetically, Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding ou^ ^ Romans
11 33. who are we that we should pretend beyond these eyewitnesses unto our
Blessed Savior? or expect that our self acknowledged weaknesses and coming
short, should be obtruded as oracles upon the consciences of others? were it
through bad translation only, or what other respect soever, that the
Scriptures prove obscu^e, and yield occasion of so different interpretations,
as that man cannot possibly even at best, work out his salvation without fear
and trembling, Phil. 2.12. may we not be certain that in regard of such
obscurity, God will the rather bear with so many different and erroneous
opinions which destroy not the foundation Christ Jesus? Nay what if we should
conceive, that God out of an especial providence should have permitted the
Scriptures to be conveyed unto us in a capacity of being thus controver^ed in
many places, to make us more diligent and inquisitive in the search of truth,
that we might not be over confident and presumptuous of our own opinions, but
have greater cause and trial of exercising our love and charity in bearing
with our brethren that differ from us? and in this respect above all others we
ought to make appear, that we love our neighbor as our selves, on which hangs
our state of the whole Law and Prophets, Mat. 7.12. doing unto them as we would
be done to, Luke 6.31. Nay the whole Law is fulfilled in this one word, To love
thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5.14. not abridging others the liberty of
conscience, or using the eyes of their own reason and understanding, since we
would not be contented that any body should take from us the use of ours.

I know there are very many men even of the Episcopal party, who approve
exceedingly of self-denial and meek spirits in all Christians, especially in
Ministers of the Gospel, conceiving they ought not to seek or embrace any
Church preferment out of carnal expectation to be called Rabbi, have the
uppermost places in all assemblies, and rule over their brethren; but merely
deem such superiority to be necessary, as if withcut it, there could be no
government, but all must necessarily run headlong to Independencie, which
they account very Anarchie and confusion it self, disposing Gods Church of its
own accord to fall a pieces into infinite heresies and schisms: for
satisfaction therefore of such in this particular, I shall need only entreat
them to consider, whether a superiority of power with a coercive execution of
it in the Church, for matters merely of Religion, do not render Christians
liable to be compelled into heresies, and by this means every particular
congregation, becomes not only subject unto such heresies as shall arise within
it self, but unto all such as any other Church or Congregation which has
attained a sharper sword then their own? and though the warrantablenesse which
the Independent Government of particular Congregation has from evidence of
Scripture, were set apart; let any godly and understanding Christian judge,
which of the two hazards and inconveniences be the greatest, and whether the
Papacy has more advanced the propagation of the Gospel by persecuting all
true Professors with their compulsive weapons, and Inquisition torments, or
the States of the united Provinces by tolerating of them? Can it possibly be
imagined that whole Nations, all the Inhabitants of Italy and Spain (amongst
which are many as wise, learned, conscientious and zealous too (I am sorry to
say so much, but the truth compells me) as most Reformed Protestants) should
all live and dye in Popery, were it not for that execrable tyranny and dominion
which by force of the Civil sword they practice upon the consciences of men.

We know what Peter said to Simon Magus, because he thought the Holy Ghost
could be purchased with money, Act. 8.20. and may we not justly think their
sin to be greater who conceive that faith may be beat into men with blows?
surely if Simon had been of this belief, he would have chose to save his
money, and rather have beaten the Apostles to death, unless they had given him
the Holy Ghost.

The Presbyterians seem to pretend no other then spiritual jurisdiction and
the utmost bounds thereof to be excommunication, disclaiming all coercive power
which they leave unto the Civil Magistrate; a goodly office indeed as some
would have it, to be executioners of such as the Presbytery shall point at as
designed for the correction or slaughterhouse: But do the Papists persecute
or put Gods Saints to death in any other manner? surely they are altogether as
choice and dainty, not to foul their own singers therewith, and as politic
in deluding ignorant people lest they should seem to be men of blood; but will
this excuse them, think we, in the dreadful day of judgment? or shall that
servant be ever a whit the more approved, because he promised to keep his
masters hests, and did not? Nay, did not the Jews say, It is not lawful for
us to put any man to death, Joh. 18.31. but yet because they sought to take
hold of our Saviors words, and so deliver him to the power and authority of
the Governor, Luke 20.20. the Blessed Spirit by Steven tells them that they
were betrayers and murderers of Christ, and Peter says, they had crucified and
slain him, Act. 2.23. c.7.52. Dear Brethren of the Presbytery! bethink your
selves a little, I beseech you in the love of God, nay, judge your selves that
you be not judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. can your proceedings according to the orders
and government which you acknowledge, justify you for that which you condemn
in Papists? or will they make you less accessory to the perplexing, fining,
imprisoning, banishing and murdering Christians, then the Papist who manage
their Inquisition in the self same manner? then the very Jews who confessed
they had no Law for it, they might not put any man to death, but proceeded and
dealt with the Civil Magistrate just as you do, in crucifying of our Savior
and his Saints? Act. 25.24. Pilate you know washed his hands, Mat. 27.24. and
said he found no fault in Jesus, Luke 23.4. bidding the Jews judge him
according to their Law, Joh. 18.31. yet they, though the chief Priests and
Pharisces would willingly have killed him, but that they feared the people,
Luke 22.2. do now in policy refuse this hateful office, and deliver him up
to the power and authority of the governor, Luke 20.20. But you will say perhaps,
you do not deliver men up unto the Powers, the Civil Magistrate, to be
corporally punished and put to death: to which I answer, That, such a Civil
Magistrate must either do such justice according to the judgment of the
Presbytery, and so be your executioners only; or else be able to judge of good
doctrine and heresy better then the Presbytery; and have power when they see
cause, to judge and do execution in point of heresy, or the like, upon the
Presbyters themselves, which yet claim to be the only competent judge thereof;
or last of all, if the Civil Magistrate cannot better judge of heresies then
the Presbytery, then are they no fit judges thereof, being expedient that such
only should be judges thereof, that are best qualified for such a charge: But
may it not be feared, the Civil Magistrate is so observant to comply with the
Presbytery in this respect, that every little notice or advertisement may
possibly prove too powerful a temptation to them, to punish and put men to
death sometimes against their consciences, when their judgments do not concur
therein, but only in observance to the Presbytery, as Pilate did in passing
sentence against our Savior, because he would be thought a friend to Caesar,
and gratify the J^wes, Joh. 19.12.13.16. and unless our Brethren of the
Presbytery have the Spirit of infallibility, how can they be more certain then
the Papists or Jews in crucifying again our Savior in his Saints? But lest
such as offend against the Civil Magistrate should hence assume encouragement,
let them take notice that we have not only express warrant for punishing and
putting Civil offenders to death, but are directed by God Himself how we
should proceed therein: The Law says, at the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one
witness he shall not be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17.6. yet this was matter of fact,
and though the witnesses should prove false, yet were the Magistrates clear in
the sight of God, because it is his own Ordinance: But if a man should say he
is of this or that heretical opinion, where find we that two witnesses shall
condemn him? or that the Magistrate can be clear for passing sentence if the
witnesses were corrupt? or if a man acknowledge that he were of such an
opinion, and conceived he were bound to be so upon peril of his damnation, and
talk to others thereof with their consent out of the abundance of his own
heart, Mat. 12.34. where find we commission for tormenting of his body for his
conscience sake, or because he discoursed with his neighbor with such
harmless words and matter as his own heart was able to furnish him withal,
as not having power of other men's? Oh! let us be wary of claiming such coercive
power, which does not only tempt, but necessarily engage us to the offending of
Christ's little ones; otherwise, as our Savior threatened the Jews therewith, we
must inevitably become accessory and guilty, not only of all the blood shed
from righteous Abel to Zacharias the son of Barachias, but of all the Saints,
which have been or shall be martyred from the beginning of the world unto the
end, because it was and will be still shed by no other principles then what we
our selves approve of and practice, Matthew. 23.34.35. Luke 11.48.

John in his Revelation directs himself unto the 7 Churches of Asia, Rev. 1.4.
and though he takes occasion to find fault, rebuke and threaten them with
severest judgments, yet he lays not the blame upon any Metropolitan or other
Churches which might have had superiority over them, but taxes every one in
particular, which would have been a great error, unless the whole blame had
lain upon themselves; or that they had not the sole power under Christ, of
redressing such errors as are there mentioned; and yet if such subordination of
Churches had been necessary; nay, if it had been but expedient, or any ways
conducing to the edifying of those Saints in particular, or building up the
whole mystical body of Christ in general; doubtless so many eminent
Churches, (...) number distinguished by names, some of which were not distant
above 12 miles, and all so near situated to one another, as the two farthermost
were not above ^20 miles a sunder, besides famous Antioch where the Disciples
were first called Christians, Act. 11.26. with several other Churches which
might likely be within that compass of ground: all which would in such case no
doubt have drawn themselves into such a subordinate state and government, as
might in some manner have countenanced a Natural Dioc^san, or other subordinate
Church government and jurisdiction; which not being done* or in any resemblance
insin^nuated by John the ^loved-Apostle; our Saviors besome friend, Joh.
13.23. to whom ^e sent the Revelation by an extraordinary messenger, an Angel;
it is a most convincing argument, that neither Christ, nor his Apostles did
then approve thereof, much less intend it to be put in practice afterward.

CHAP. IX. Christ foretelling his Disciples that they should be persecuted, his
preparing of them, with their obedience thereunto.
LUke 2.34. This child Jesus is set forth for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel, and for a sign that shall be spoken against.

C.20.20. The chief Priests and Scribes watched Jesus, and sent forth spies
which should feign themselves just men that they might take hold of his words,
and so deliver him to the power and authority of the governor.

Mark 14.1. The chief Priests and Scribes fought how they might take Jesus by
craft, and put him to death.

Luke 19.47. The chief Priests and Pharisees, and chief of the people sought
to destroy him.

Matthew. 12.24. This fellow Jesus does not cast out devils, but by Beelzebu^
the Prince of the devils.

C.27.63. We remember what that deceiver Jesus said whilst he was yet alive.

Matthew. 10.17.18,19. Beware of men, they will deliver you up to the Councels,
and they will scourge you in their Synagogues, and ye shall be brought before
governors and Kings for my sake: but take no thought, it shall be given you in
the same hour what ye shall speak.

V. 24.25. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
Lord; If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household?

Joh. 15.20. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

Matthew. 10.16. I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves.

Mark 13 13. You shall be hated of all men for my names sake.

Rev. 2.10. The devil shall cast some of you into prison that you may be
tried, and you shall receive tribulation.

Joh. 16.2. The time comes that whosoever kills you, shall think that he
does God good service.

Luke 9.23. If any man will follow me, let him take up his cross and follow me.

Act. 5.41. And they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus.

Col. 1.24. I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake which is
the Church.

2 Timothy 2.9. I suffer trouble as an evil doer.

Romans 12.14. Bless those that curse you, do good to those that hate you, pray
for them which spitefully use you and persecute you.

1 Cor. 4.12,13. Being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer, being
defamed we entreat.

2 Cor. 11.23,24,25. In labors more abundant, stripes above measure, in
prisons more frequent; of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save
one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, etc.

Matthew. 10.21,22. The brother shall deliver up the brother, and the father the
child; and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to
be put to death: but he that endures to the end shall be saved.

Matthew. 5.11,12. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you falsely for mysake.

James 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, count them happy that
endure.

Rev. 14.12. Here is the patience of the Saints, here are they which keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

Observations upon CHAP. IX.
DAvid who had experience both of prosperity and affliction, tells us, he is
blessed whom the Lord chasteneth, Ps. 94.12. and Solomon the wisest of all men
makes it a chief love-token of a tender parent to chastise his child betimes,
Prove. 13.24. This the blessed Spirit from whom Solomon received his wisdom,
confirms, saying, Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives; if ye endure chastening, God deals with you as
with sons, for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? but if ye be
without chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not
sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of the flesh which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father
of Spirits and live? for they verily for a few days chastened us after their
own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. from v. 5. to
11. In which respect, since chastisements of all sorts are so necessary to Gods
people for keeping them watchful lest they fall into temptation; and yet in
that they seem wearisome and grievous to man by nature, especially persecution
for conscience sake, which many times endangereth either liberty or life: Our
Savior, lest his Disciples should be taken unawares, unprepared to improve and
make advantage thereof, tells them before hand that they must expect to be
persecuted as he himself was; and would it not be a character of a proud
presumptuous servant, to be over solicitous of faring better then his master?
but so gracious is our Savior that he comforts us to undergo persecution
willingly and cheerfully, by his promise to be with us, and assist us, Matthew.
28.20. If Christ then who suffered death for us, tells us we must be persecuted
for him, and that if we suffer with him, we shall likewise be glorified
together with him, Romans 8.17. If we must render good for evil, 1 Pet. 3.9. and
not be ashamed to suffer as Christians for well doing, c. 4.16. but even bless
those that persecute us, what color can we have to go to Law, and spend more
money in charges then the difference amounts to? to quarrel and engage our
selves in shedding blood, and endangering of our lives for a fancy of repute
or money matter? Nay, what heavenly ravished and blessed Spirit will tell me
what these Scriptures mean? Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek,
turn to him the other also; and if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; and whosoever shall compel thee
to go a mile, go with him twain; give to him that asks of thee, and from
him that would borrow turn not away, Matthew. 5.39,40,41,42. Consider seriously,
dear Christians, whether there be not more in this then we use to practice;
nay, more then our corruptions will suffer us to acknowledge? are we wronged in
person, estate, good name, or for Christ's sake, which is our conscience? it is
no more than whereof our Savior and his Saints have drunk, both the first
fruits and ^eriest dregs: we must not swerve from their example by resisting or
retur^g evil for evil 1 These. 5.15. but bless and pray for those that
persecute us, Romans 12.14. a hand l^sson it is no doubt; and will be long a
learning; nay, (...) part I must freely acknowledge, I apprehend no more of it,
then Paul (...) of the Law, Rom 7. to see mine own sinfulness in the breach
thereof, me^ing with few to teach me better in this particular; ^d therefore
with the Publican in the Gospel, do humbly beseech God to be merciful unto me
a sinner, Luke 18.13. The unbeleeving Gentiles did use to reproach the
Primitive Christians, that their Religion was towardly and slavis^* subjecting
them to be injured by all others, because they might not ^im^i repellere; yet
they, good Christians, gloried therein so much more, because it brought them to
a nearer resemblance with their Savior, who though he might have had legions
of Angels to rescue him from the persecuting Jews, Mat 26,53. chose rather to
suffer death igno^iously, but innocently; and what was the fruit thereof? no
less then the salvation of all the Elect, whereunto they could not have
attained, unless our Savior had been crucified unjustly; 'twas his being a
Lamb without spot or blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. his doing good which caused those
enemies of truth to seek his death: in like manner must our sufferings be for
righteousness sake; if we suffer as evil doers, where is our reward? but i^
we submit our selves, and will with Paul expect to fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh, for his bodies sake which is
the Church, Col. 1.24. then must we show our patience and valor in suffering,
not in perfecuting or resisting: Had Christ suffered for his own sins he
could not have been our propitiation, 1 John 2.1,2. how much less, think we,
can we glorify our Savior in suffering for our own offenses? Let Christians
therefore bless whilst others curse; let them rather receive then offer
injuries; let them in stead of persecuting, rejoice as the Apostles did, in
being persecuted, Acts 5,41. and know that they only which so doing endure unto
the end, are happy, Mat. 24,13. Let them meditate on this, that though Paul was
accused of Heresy, Act. 24.14. of Sedition, v. 5.6. of Idolatry, c. 17.18. and
that he persuaded men to worship God contrary to the Law, c. 18.12.13. and all
this was true, if Paul had been to be tried by the Jewish laws, or by the
Romans according to the principles of persecuting Inquisitors, and that either
of them had had power from God to impose a Religion or Laws upon Paul's
conscience: But notwithstanding all these heavy accusations laid against him,
because he knew it was only for preaching Christ Jesus, he confidently
affirms of himself, saying, Neither against the law of the Jews neither
against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar have I offended: If I be an
offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die,
Act. 25.8.11. as if he should say, Though I preach Christ Jesus, which to the
Rulers and learned of the world seems foolishnes, or that you take it to be
Herefie, Idolatry, Sedition, or contrary to your law: I have commission for it
from the Law of God, the King of Kings: what is this unto your privileges, the
politic jurisdiction, or Pretogative of Caesar, which reaches to the body
only? If I have disobeyed the Civil laws, offended any one in word or deed, or
committed any thing worthy of death, let me be judged accordingly.

CHAP. X. Christ and the Apostles testify that the true Church and Saints must
be persecuted, in consequence whereof persecution must necessarily be a mark
of a false Church and enemies of God.
GAl. 4.28.29. We brethron as Isaac was, are the children of promise, but as he
that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit,
even so it is now.

1 John 3.10. He that loves not the brethren is not of God, Cain was of that
wicked one, and slew his brother, and wherefore slew he him, because his works
were evil, and his brothers righteous?

Matthew. 10.16. I send you as sheep in the midst of w^lves.

Joh. 5.15.16. The man departed and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had
made him whole, and therefore did the Jews persecute him.

1 These. 2.15,16. The Jews both killed the Lord Jesus, and persecuted us, and
they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding as to speak to
the Gentiles, that they might be saved.

Joh. 15.19. c.17.14. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own,
but because you are not of the world but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

C.16.20. Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice.

1 John 3.13. Marvel not my brethren if the world hate you.

Mark 13.13. You shall be hated of all men for my names sake.

2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly must suffer persecution.

Luke 3.19.20. Herod for all the evils that he had done, added yet this, that
he shut up John in prison.

Act. 4.17.19. They straightly threatened Peter and John that they should speak no
more in the Name of Jesus.

Act. 6.10,11. When they could not resist and gainsay the Spirit wherewith
Stephen spoke, they stirred up the people, suborned and set up false witnesses
to accuse him.

C.13.50. And the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable women, and the
chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and
expelled them out of their coasts.

C.18.12,13. The Jews mad^ insurrection with one accord against Paul, and
brought him to the judgment seat, saying, this fellow persuades men to
worship God contrary to law.

C.17.18. Paul seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods, because he
preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.

C.24.5,6. We have found this Paul a pe stilent fellow, and a mover of sedition
amongst all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the se^ of the
Nazarenes, and has also gone about to profane the Temple.

Observations upon CHAP. X.
It Is very strange that Christians having been so studious in multiplying of
signs and tokens to know the true Church by, should yet reflect so little on
persecution, since it cannot be so visibly distinguished by any other mark or
character, if we will but keep close to the Scriptures! Therein find we
expressly how the Head of the Church Christ Jesus was persecuted from the
manger, his cradle, unto the cross; and is it possible for the Head to suffer
thus, and the members of the Body be at ease? or that a persecuting Body can
belong to a persecuted Head? The chiefest and hardest lesson which our Savior
taught his Disciples (it appears so by the pains and time he spent therein)
was to prepare them for suffering persecution, because that if this bitter
morsel did but down with them, all the rest would prove manna, milk, and
honey: Not to be large in quotation of other Scriptures, I will only say that if
we turn over the whole Bible, we shall find nothing therein so clear and
frequent, as persecution to be the portion of Gods people: But in regard this
spirit of persecuting, in some degree more or less, is almost as defusive as
original sin it self, though every body pretends to persecute or punish men
as evil doets only, and most evident it is that malefactors ought, and do many
times suffer according to their, evil deeds; yet still it is no less
apparent, that Gods Church and people are only to be found amongst the
sufferers and persecuted; and if all sufferers we make two parts only,
separating from the rest, all such as suffer for conscience sake, since none
are so impudent to a affirm, they kill, rob, steal, commit a dultery, or any
other heinous offense against the Civil laws, in reverence and honor to God
Almighty; we shall then find his people amongst the sufferers for conscience
sake: and now, as is usual in Seafaring, the nearer they draw unto a land or
channel to meet with greatest difficulties: so do we want a larger measure of
Gods discerning Spirit to carry us farther on, which may He please to grant for
his Son Christ Jesus sake, that we may yet at last discover, who they were
that first persecuted him in person, and in his chosen ones ever since: The
persecuted then for conscience sake may yet be distinguished into those that
are persecuted only; or else into such, who both persecute others and are yet
persecuted themselves: but is it not strange that any man should be so plunged
in ignorance, and passionately transported, as to make a conscience of doing
that which himself confesses to be evil in others? I never yet met with any,
who after he had bethought himself, would say in plain terms, that men
ought to be persecuted merely for conscience sake, and yet how few are there
amongst all such as profess Christianity, but are seduced to practice it
through sophistical distinctions, and corrupted, though specious principles of
a National Church and uniformity taken upon trust? but such will say we
persecute heretics only, and others persecute us because we believe and live
according to the truth: Oh fond objecters I how long will you be in love with
your own fondness, so much distastefull to every body but your self? where
find you a warrant that any one may persecute for conscience sake? or what
reason can you allege within the capacity of man (if any body may be judge
beside your selves) why that opinion for which you your self are persecuted,
should be more like the truth, then that which you so persecute? but to clear
the point yet further, by Gods assistance, having made it appear, as you have
seen, how the Church of God must needs be found amongst such as are persecuted
for conscience sake, whereof there are but two sorts; the one of them being
both persecuters and persecuted in different respects; it follows by
undeniable argument, That such others as are only persecuted, and totally
disalow all persecuting for matters of Religion, as the greatest stumbling
block to the propagation of the Gospel, must necessarily be the true Church
and Body of Christ, none else having a capacity (without Gods infinite mercy
and dispensation) of being ever hewn out and squared as members suitable to
such a Head: Contrariorum eadem est ratio: Since the true Church must needs be
persecuted, that must needs be a false Church which persecutes the true one; so
though this false Church be persecuted likewise, yet in regard it cannot be
both true and false, that persecuted Church must needs be the only true
onewhich does not persecute others: But that the argument may be complete and
full, as in the mouth of two witnesses; unto this evidence of reason, let me
add a Scripture proof, viz. We brethren [true Christians] as Isaak was, are
the children of promise; but as he that was born after the flesh persecuted him
that was borne after the Spirit, even so is it now, Gal. 4.28,29. yet since it
is better, if the will of God be so, that we suffer for well doing, then for
evil doing, 1 Pet. 3 17. however these Ismalites are powerful, prosperous,
prevail against us, and have the world at will for present, yet let us comfort
our selves, that God has chosen the despised poor, rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom, though mighty men oppress and draw them before the judgment
seat, Jam, 2.5.6. whilst we close up this Chapter of persecution with Paul's
words, which will prove both their final doom and ours, to wit, Nevertheless
what says the Scripture? cast out the Bondwoman; for the son of the Bondwoman
shall not be heir with the son of the Freewoman: So then we are not children
of the Bondwoman, but of the Free, Gal. 4.30,31.

CHAP. XI. Christ and the Apostles testify that there should arise Heresies
and false Christ's, together with their commission how they were to be proceeded
against.
Matthew. 24.24. There shall arise (^) false Christ's and false Prophets.

Ephesians. 4.11,12,13. Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Tit. 1.9.11. A Bishop must hold fast the faithful word, as he has been
taught that he may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the
gainsayers, whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole families.

Act. 20 28,29,30,31. Take heed unto your selves, and to the flock for I know
that after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter in among you not sparing
the flock: also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things,
to draw away disciples after them, therefore watch.

2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse deceiving and
being deceived.

2 Pet. 2.1.2 There shall be false Teachers amongst you who privily shall bring
in damuable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swist damnation, and many shall follow their per^itio^s ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

1. Joh. 4.1. Many false prophets are gone out into the World.

Gal. 1.7. There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ.

2 Timothy 4.3.4. The time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but
after their own lust shall they heap to themselves teachers having itching
ears, and they shall turns away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables.

1 Cor. 11.19. It is necessary there should be heresies, that they which are
approved might be made manifest.

1 Timothy 4.1.6. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, if thou put the Brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ.

Jude 17. to 23. Remember how the Apostles told you that in the last (...)
there should be makers of sects; but keep your selves in the love of God; of
some have compassion making difference, and other save with fear pulling them
out of the fire.

2 These. 2.7.8. The mystery of iniquity does already work; only be who now
lets, will let until he be taken out of the way: and then shall that wicked
one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

1 Tit. 10.11.13. There are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,
especially they of the circumcision, whose mouths must be (2) stopped who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not for filthy ^ucre
sake, wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be found in the faith.

2 Timothy 4.2.5. But watch thou in all things, endure asslictions, do the work
of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry; reprove, rebuke with all
long suffering and doctrine.

Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

Tit. 2.15. These things speak and exhort with all authority, let no man
despise thee.

2 These. 3.14. If any man obey not our words by this Epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, yet count him not as an
enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

Romans 15.1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also
be temped.

Tit. 3.10. A man that is a heretic after the first and second admonition
reject.

1 Cor. 5.5. Deliver such a one [a fornicator] unto Satan for destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus.

2 These. 3.6. We command you brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ that
you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly.

Matthew. 18.15,16,17. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee thou have
gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of one or two witnesses every word may be
established; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church;
and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an heathen man
and a Publican.

Joh. 16.2. The time comes that whosoever kills you shall think he does
God good service.

Romans 10.2. I bear them record they have a zeal of God but not according to
knowledge.

Gal. 1.14. Phil. 3.6. I Paul profited in the Jews Religion above many of my
equals in mine own Religion; being more exceedingly zealous of the (3)
traditions of my Fathers, I persecuted the Church.

Acts 26.9. I Paul verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many
things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.

Gal. 4.17,18. They zealously affect you but not well, but it is good to be
zealously affected always in a good thing.

Phil. 1.9. I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and
in judgment.

Observations upon CHAP. XI.
(1) THese breaking in of wolves upon the flock of God, and daily multiplying
of new heresies is granted to be understood of our times as well as of the
Apostles or any other; and yet we have here no other order, then, Take heed and
watch, nor in any other passage of the Gospel, then exhort, reprove, rebuke,
with the like spiritual proceedings, this is all the Ministers of the Gospel
have warrant for; if it be too little, our Savior and his Apostles must excuse
us at the throne of God, for leaving us no larger; and if we exceed it, we
shall doubtless be found guilty of adding to the Word of God, and must expect
that God will add unto us the plagues which are threatened in the Revelation^,
c. 22.18. ^ neither do I apprehend how Civil Magistrates can interpose
otherwise then Ministers of the Gospel, their most glorious title being but
nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto the Church of God, Esa 49.23. and all
of us are, or ought to be Ministers in or for the Gospel, though one may have a
more excellent calling then an other, according as God has given him more
excellent faculties and gifts: But if any Christian go beyond his calling,
beyond his gift, he is blameable, and if the disturbance be only
Ecclesiastical, the censure is to be the like; if a breach of peace, the
Civil powers ought to redress, 1 Timothy 2.1.2. but for the Magistrate to
interpose in matters merely Ecclesiastical, otherwise then Spiritually, and as
a Minister of the Gospel, I find no warrant for it in all the Gospel.

(2) This stopping of mouths was not silencing as has been used of late, and
appears so, in that the Apostle afterward, v. 12.18. having proved them to be
guilty by the confession of one of themselves, explaines himself, prescribing
them to be punished by a sharp rebuke; so that by stopping of their mouths,
can be signified nothing else but convincing* them by instruction and reproof
in demonstration of the Spirit, and as the same Paul says v. 8. by sound
doctrine, that their own fond fancies being overcome and satisfied, might not
have further matter to suggest, or their mouths words to utter wherewithal to
gainsay the truth, Romans 3.19.

(3) Here we see that Paul's adhering so much unto traditions, was the cause his
knowledge could not keep company with his zeal, which in that respect seduced
him to persecute the Church of God: would not the enraged zelots of our times
(oh, it grieves me to use the word zeal or ze* lot to its least disparagement
or blemish!) if they had heard Paul say, he found himself bound in conscience
to oppose the Name of Jesus, and hale his servants up and down the streets
from one Magistrate unto another, at last into the prisons, reply, Paul thou
lie; thou art wilfully malicious and reprobately obstinate: Oh! let them
bring it home unto their own hearts, and consider whether many poor Brethren,
who never flew so high as Paul's extravagancies, but only differ from them in
some few opinions, (which yet like enough will agree together in Heaven) may
not be interpreted to continue in them merely out of conscience: and whether if
Paul a vessel of election so fiercely persecuted the Saints of Jesus, they
themselves so much inferior gifted in comparison of Paul, may not have been
subject to the same temptation, 1 Cor. 10.13. and plunged into the self same
error? Oh that God of his infinite goodness would be pleased to sanctify the
thought thereof, and work them to sobriety!

A man that wants judgment, the more zealous he is, the more he resembles
one gone astray that has lost himself in some bypath, who the longer or the
faster that he goes, is still more out of his way, and has the farther to
return again; and yet I dare not say that it is better to have no zeal, then
to be in some smaller measure zealous in a bad cause; for he that has no zeal
at all, can never have it in a good cause; and perhaps it may be observed, that
such as have none, are at best but lukewarm Laodiceans, Which God will spue
out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. and even the best Christians zeal at first does
most commonly exceed their knowledge; but what I chiefly aim at, is, that we
be not rashly carried away by every breath of zeal, without examining whence
it springs, and whereunto it tends.

This avoiding and withdrawing of our selves from such as walk inordinately,
and will not obey the word, is the last means, and utmost extent of power
(except miraculous) which our Savior left to his Apostles, and they unto the
Church successively for government of his people; if any take it to be too
remiss or mild, do not such make themselves wiser then God, conceiving
better of their own fancies, then his Ordinances? it is no marvel, if they both
seem and prove ineffectuall to such as have so little faith in them: is not
this to distaste Gods government, because he does not rule us with a rod of
iron? full wanton are we that thus grow sick of His clemency and gentleness,
importuning him far more foolishly then did the Israelites, that he would
give them a King to reign over them, although that Samuel by Gods express
command imparted to them, how cruel and tyrannous a King would prove, 1 Samuel
8. yet the Israelites might be thought thus engaged as overswayed with novelty,
and a vehement desire to be like other Nations, as not having had the
experience of a Regal power themselves, v. 20. But we who have so long
together, and even so lately felt the Spiritual bondage of Episcopacie, which
yet we are not freed from neither, are notwithstanding not much unlike to
people suddenly waked out of a deep sleep by the hideous crying of fire, fire,
whose eyes being dazzled with the sight thereof, and their understandings
furprised with the near approach, forth with cast themselves down stairs, or
out at window to their destruction, which in appearance might have been
prevented, had they been but thoroughly wakened and kept their wits about them:
in like manner, we having been so tyrannized over by the Bishops, our
consciences enthralled by their Canons, and our persons hunted up and down,
and baited by their Courts and Beagles in such an intolerable manner: being
quite tired out, are apt to think a bart exchange will eas^us, and so without
examining safficiently what it was which enabled the Bishops to torment us;
conceiving we have now gained a full opportunity, are desirous in all haste to
be enthralled again to any body, that will but for the present secure us from
the first captivity.

Dear Countrymen and Brethren, let not me, though the meanest of you all, be
thought presumptuous, if with some importunity I beg of you, as you value the
quiet and welfare of three Kingdoms, and hope that other Nations may be from
thence enlightened with purer and clearer beams of the most precious Gospel, to
consider only, whether if Bishops had wanted a coercive power, they could
possibly have prevailed so far against the Saints and saving truths of Jesus
Christ; whether the same sovereignty and power be not as effectual (I forbear
to say far more) to bring a people unto Popery, Turcisme or any other
Religion except the right? and for such as must be whipped into the faith,
whether so many lashes more, will not easily whip them out again? If this be
so, as surely it cannot be denied by men of reason; why do we not free our
selves for ever, in stead of seeking ease only for the present? what mean we
then to take this sword or staff of Sovereignty from the hand of one
Metropolitan usurper to put it into many? are not Presbyters men as well as
Bishops? are they not all subject to the same passions and infirmities? Act.
14.15. may not a power to punish and persecute others tempt them as well as
Bishops, to satisfy their own lust and affections, and being many become a
Hydra, a brotherhood of iniquity? may not they possibly err as well as
Bishops, and being many prove more confident and obstinate in imposing such
errors upon subordinate Churches by force of their coercive jurisdiction? it was
miraculous for Aarons rod to bud, but this which you put into the Presbyters
hands, will naturally and of its own disposition sprout out so fast, and
furnish rods enough, as in stead of the exchangers which defiled the Temple,
may quickly whip Gods best servants out of Country: Corruption optimi est
pessima: If a Presbytery grow tyrannical, as by nature mankind is prone to
evil, they have more heads to manage it then Episcopacie, and so may become
more formidable, more remediless: If then God shall by any means restore us
to such a condition wherein we may enjoy a liberty of conscience to serve God
according to his own Ordinances, if we our selves desire so to do; let us not
give or sell our selves into such slavery, as that it may be in the arm and
power of others to say, you shall not serve God at all, or in any other manner
then we approve of: proscribe but this coercive power (which else will
infalliby drive God from us, or us from his service) in matters merely of
Religion; and then you shall quickly see, men will not be so ambitous of
Christ's crown of thorns; nor press with so much carnal violence unto his
Kingdom, and then being clear of such temptations as the importunate suitors
of this Diana come laden with; we shall be better able to judge indifferently
after what manner Christ would have his servants governed: Have not our
prayers, petitions, and preparations, been all for Reformation? has God
suffered some hundred thousands of men to be slain, and three Kingdoms almost
laid waste, that those which still survive might only have a breathing time,
and then be subject to a harder bondage? surely God expects a larger
improvement of so many talents, a better account of so great a trust: Oh! let
us not tempt God, nor frustrate the fullness of his good intentions which he
has so largely discovered to us, and still proffers to put us in possession, if
we will but take hold thereof; which the same God of his infinite mercy grant
unto us, that we may do so effectually, who are otherwise unlikely, and
altogether unable to serve him as we ought, or deliver our selve front our
oppressors.

But whereas we find it said in the Revelation, I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls herself a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants, to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols, Rev 2.20. It must be considered in what manner the
Angel of the Church of Thyatira was said to suffer it: for a man may well be
said to suffer any thing to be done that forbore to forbid it, when a word of
his mouth would have hindered it; this might have been the Church of Thyatira's
fault; or else perhaps the Angel did not inform and instruct the people
better, nor admonish her to forbear seducing the weak Christians with her
specious delusions, and in several other respects the Angel might be said to
suffer Jezabel, thereby becoming accessory and blameable: But it cannot be
hence inferred, that the Angel or Church of Thyatira had dominion over the
peoples faith, or any coercive jurisdiction to take Jezabel and banish her,
clap her up in prison, and put her to death, for teaching the people contrary
to the established doctrine of that Church and place, this may not be
understood to be the meaning, since it is alleged by those that stand for the
coercive power, how the Angel could not have the approbation or assistance of
it to this purpose; and besides, such a sense or inference upon this text,
would render it repugnant to diverse others in the Scriptures, and appear quite
contrary to the Presidents and Precepts of our Blessed Savious and His Apostles
in like manner all other places which are not fully cleared, or may, though
probably, admit of diverse interpretations, as Let every thing be done in order
and decently, 1 Cor. 14.4. The rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor.
11.34. Stand fast in the traditions which you have been taught, 2 These. 2.15.
and the like, what ever they signify, since it is not expressly mentioned, it
may not, upon pain of not adding nor taking from the Word of God, be otherwise
interpreted then according to what we sinde more clearly expressed in other
places, by which we may sully judge, and sufficiently understand the mind of
God, just as Paul says of eternal things such as were not made, that the
invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen and
understood, by the things which were made, and now art visible, Romans 1.20.

When Peter and John were threatened and forbid to speak in the Name of Jesus,
they went and teported all that had pasled unto their own company, who
thereupon betook themselves with one accord to God in prayer, acquainting him
what great opposition the child Jesus found, and what they had further
determined to do in their own hearts, desiring God to strengthen them with
boldness against their threatenings, that he being pleased to stretch forth
his hand, they might heal and do great signs and wonders by the Name of his
holy child Jesus, and immediately they were all filled with the Holy Ghost,
and they spoke the Word of God with boldness, Act. 4. from v. 23. to 31. since
then we do not only find this to be the Scripture course, viz. to strengthen
our selves in the Spirit of God, not by the power of man, but do withal see
the good succesle upon it; what ground or color can we have now adays to
proceed otherwise? I know 'twill be answered that miracles are ceased, and the
Christians in the Apostles times had no force of arms: I answer, that we find
v. 32. how the Believers were a multitude, and questionless far more then
those, that not very many months since went to Paul's Cross in the strength of
their numbers and imaginations (as is reported of some of them, otherwise the
more they were the more commendable) and how can any make it appear, that the
not working miracles at present does not chiefly proceed from the obstinate
applying our selves to the arm of flesh, and such other inferior means of
our ownce inventions, or that ceasing of the miraculous power is warrant
sufficient for Christians to make use of the Civil Sword? But what wonder is
it to see Powers and Armies employed in opposing one an other? it is connaturall
to carnal men to do so; and just with God in judgment to permit it should be
so: I say not this for encouragement of any to do the like, for God will burn
such rods when he has done with them, Act. 7.7. but to dissuade all others from
giving the first occasion, from tempting them unto a second blow: I am certain
it has often been said, and Printed too, That the Bishops endeavoring to bring
the Church of Scotland unto a uniformity with England, was the spring head, and
first beginning of all these Wars which have shed such streams of blood: Oh
may the Presbyters of Scotland take warning by it, lest their attempting of the
same, mutato nomine, in the self same manner prove cause and instruments to
prolong the Wars; or may God for his infinite wisdom and mercies sake, bring
so much more good and comfort out of this second enterprise, as he did out of
the first, unto all such as desire to worship him in Spirit and in truth, Joh.
4.24.

Our Savior says, It must needs be that offenses come, Mat. 18.7. and Paul
tells us, There must be heresies, 1 Cor 11.19. But why think we must there be
heresies and offenses? Paul gives the reason thereof in the same place, That
they which are approved may be made manifest amongst us: Now though murderers
and adulteries come to pass by the same providence of God, yet not in the same
manner, nor for the same end; for we do not find that God ever said there
must be murders or adulteries, and though they do come by the same permission;
yet it is no ways said that murders should come for the manifestation of
peaceable men, or adulteries for the justifying of chastity: and lastly, God
appointed such punishment for murder and adultery, as being put in execution,
it both might and ought to have put all murderers and adulterers to death, for
Gods will and pleasure was there should not any of them escape: But for
Heretics and other offenders in spiritual matters, since God has said they
must be, had he withal required the Church, or the Civil Magistrate to put
them to death, the Blessed Spirit would have contradicted it self; for how
could they be and yet not be? how could they live for manifestation of the
Saints, and yet be put to death by the Civil Sword, which possibly might have
been so soon as they began to be Heretics if the Civil Magistrate had but
the power to do it, and so they could not have lived sufficiently to manifest
those which were approved.

Some perhaps will object; But if Heretics and other spiritual offenders do
God such good service, how can he in justice punish them hereafter? or why is
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira blamed for suffering Jezabel the
Prophetess to seduce Gods people? Rev. 2.20. I answer, that though the Blessed
Spirit says there must be heresies and offenses; yet at same time it says
likewise, Woe to them by whom they come, Mat. 18 7. and good Christians will
not doubt the equity thereof if they reflect but upon the Scripture. Secondly,
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira was not blamed for not putting Jezabel to a
Civil death; for first, the Church had no such Commission from Christ: and
secondly, it had no power from the Civil Magistrate to execute it: But as was
said before, the Church was justly taxed in that Jezabel was suffered to preach
false doctrine incontrolably without examining of the doctrine, and reproving
her; in that they permitted her to seduce weak Christians without cutting her
off by the Sword of the Spirit, the power of excommunication: for God required
the Church to be as diligent in exercising their spiritual weapons, for
convincing and compelling spiritually all Heretics unto the truth; as he did
that the Civil Magistrate should have cut off every adulterer and murderer:
only the difference is this, that since the means to be used against
spiritual offenders being spiritual, such as would not be willingly convinced
thereby, but obstinately persist, Gods pleasure was, not that they were cut off
by the Civil Sword as every murderer and adulterer, but that these should
survive until the day of judgment the end of their life, Mat. 13.39. Eccl.
11.3. for the manifestation of those which were approved, and we by putting
them to a civil death, do contradict this, and many other such like
Scriptures by endeavoring to render them of no effect.

But lest any should ask, Does not God then as much desire that Heretics and
all other spiritual offenders should be convinced in demonstration of the
Spirit and reduced unto the truth, as that all murderers and adulterers should
have been put to death? if so, then one being to God as possible and easy as
the other, it would follow, that all Heretics might possibly be convinced, and
none left for manifestation, as is pretended, of those which are approved: I
answer, that God expects the Church should employ all spiritual means, and
use as much diligence in convincing and reducing them to the truth, or else, if
they persist in cutting them off from the communion of Saints which is the
spiritual death; as he does that the Magistrate should put all murderers and
adulterers unto a Civil death: and secondly, as the spiritual punishments
prevail only on such as are spiritual, I mean, on such as in times past were
Heretics like Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13. but now are ripe unto conversion; so in
consequence, the obstinate and perverse, who stop their ears at the voice of
the charmer, charm he never so well, Psalm. 58.5. necessarily persisting
unconverted, are they which God will have still to enjoy their Civil
livelihood for the manifesting of those which are approved.

But suppose it were Christianity to put spiritual offenders to death; on what
part of Scripture will we ground it, or whence can we deduce such laws, but
they will prove ridiculous, and be voydable by any heretic that scruples not
to play the hypocrite, and pleads but as all delinquents do at the Bar of
Civil Justice in answering not guilty, and that whatever he was heretofore he
is now converted?

The Lord says, You shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer
which is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death, Numb: 35.31. and
it is just with God so to do, to require this Civil death, though the
murderer should afterward repent unfainedly, and be absolved from eternal
death, as the good thief whilst be hung upon the cross, Luke 23.43. But if
any one dye a Heretic, a spiritual offender of so heinous a nature as
deserves eternal death, there remains no redemption; his Civil and Spiritual
death are inseparable concomitants, the former necessarily implies the latter,
which is contrary to Paul's rule, who required only the destruction of the flesh
that the soul might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus 1 Cor. 5.5.

But as concerning mere Spiritual offenders (however you call them
soule-murderers to scrue up their punishment above Gods commandment) at what
time soever such a sinner repents him of his sin, the Lord forgives him; and
we are required to forgive him seventy times seven, even as often as he shall
offend us, Mat. 18.22. But suppose a convinced Heretic who going up the
ladder cries out for mercy, and says he is convinced, can any Christian Law
deny him mercy, who is then no more a Heretic then our selves? as Peter said,
Can any man forbid water that these Gentiles should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10.47. A murderer though he repent
him of his fault, yet since it is impossible to restore the murdered to life
again, dies a murderer though a penitent one; but he that is convinced and
leaves his heresy cannot be said to dye a Heretic; and being now no longer a
Heretic, what ground is there to put him to death or otherwise to punish him?
this pretended convert being thus got free, discovers himself to be the same
Heretic still, until he be apprehended and brought again to the Gallows,
where he then pleads as hard for his second conversion, or as often as the
Civil Magistrate shall put him to it; and I know no reason but that his
reprivall must be as often granted him if it were to dooms day. To say he
plays the hypocrite only to save his life, and that he is not really
converted: I answer, that he cannot then possibly be obstinate, who both
affirms himself not only to be willing, but says also that he is really
converted; and we may no more judge of his conscience, who, for the present,
both affirms to believe the same with us, and is conformable withal, then he
may judge of ours. If you demand why a law may not as well be made for
punishing Spiritual offenders though they should have repented as well as
murderers and adulterers: I answer, That such a law would yet be more repugnant
unto Scripture, which in express terms requires. the incestuous person upon
his sorrow to be forgiven, comforted, and received to love again, 2 Cor. 2.
and that we are not borne murderers, adulterers, etc. but in regard o^
Spiritual offense of unbeleefe, we are all by nature aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
many such unbeleevers are as bad and worse then some Heretics; and some who
are borne of Christian parents, not only come to the knowledge of the Christian
faith more slowly, but also fall from the truth to heresy before others have
learnt so much as to give a reason of their faith; and these latter deserving
punishment, and even death no less then the second sort, and the first in some
measure of comparison; and and it being well near so long with all of us
before any true fruit of our Regeneration appears; if we were proceeded
against concerning this unbeleeving, this unregenerate state of ours according
to such laws; few of us should be able to clear our selves for being condemned
as unbeleevers unregenerate, or as bad as Heretics, if not the very same, and
may be put to suffer death as well as such though we had then repented from
dead works, and were become good Christians.

CHAP. XII. The Apostles warrant for examining of their spirits and their
doctrines, and holding fast the truth.
1. Joh. 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be
of God, or no.

1. Cor. 4.6. Think not of men above that which is written.

Gal. 2.6. They who seemed to be somewhat in conference, added nothing to me.

C.1.8. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

Jude v. 3. I exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the faith.

2. Tim. 1.13.14 Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of
me, in faith and in love which is in Christ Jesus; that good thing which was
committed unto thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us.

Romans 14.15. One man esteems one day before another, and another esteems
every day alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

V. 22.23. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that which ^re
allows: he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

2. Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your
selves.

Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself.

1. Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him.

Gal. 6.5. Every man shall bear his own burden.

Romans 14.12. Every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

Observations upon CHAP. XII.
THis warrant for examining of the spirits and their doctrines, is of such
grand consequence, as that if we do but suppose it to be suspended, 1. we
cannot cho^se but upon the very apprehension thereof, to see how in such case,
if men could possibly be of the true Religion, which I much doubt, yet it would
not a veil them any thing at the day of reckoning; since God Almighty is
nothing beholding to them for being so: because they never examined it; it was
no act of theirs, they took it upon trust. Secondly, it would either make men
indifferent, entertaining that which first they met withal, or else those such
a one as best suited and agreed with their licentious dispositions, and by
degrees work them to be quite Atheists, and of no Religion. But as we have
Scripture for it, so if you grant it reasonable, not to think so highly of men
or canons, 1. Cor. 4.6. but that we may make trial of them before we hang our
faith on either; it follows by the same light and evidence, that we can only
judge thereof by our own eyes and understandings; and that if by the talent
which God has blessed us with to be imployd, we find what they hold forth unto
us to be quite contrary or dissonant to Holy Writ, which his infinite wisdom
bequeathed unto us, to be the only touchstone of our faith; in such case we
must absolutely, but soberly, refuse it, though it brought Letters of
recommendation from the greatest Potentates or most learned Doctors upon earth:
nay, if it were countenanced with miracles and came from heaven, it may not be
entertained, it must be accursed Gal. 1.8.

Mark tells us, that our Savior began to teach them, that the Son of man
must be rejected of the Elders, Chief Priests and Pharisees, Mark 8.31. and
John says the Rulers and Pharisees believed not on him, Joh. 7.48. whereof
Paul gives the reason, saying, There are not many wise men after the flesh, nor
many mighty, nor many noble called, 1. Cor. 1.26. And Job the servant of God a
competent witness, tells us, That great men are not always wise, neither do
the aged always understand judgment, Job. 32.9. Wherefore when such will
interpose their wisdom or learning to make the Gospel foolishness, the same
Paul out of a holy zeal has them in derision, saying; Where is the wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this World? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this World? God has chosen the foolish things of the
World to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the World
to confound the things which are mighty* and base things of the World, and
things which are despised has God chosen, 1. Cor. 1.20.27.28. We must not
therefore be overswayed with any carnal respects or interests, but impartially
desiring Gods assistance, in all sincerity and uprightness seek after truth:
and if through the conduct of the blessed spirit which guides into all truth,
Joh. 16.13. you have been enlightened and brought to the knowledge of the
truth, it follows necessarily that you both ought to have such freedom, and
are bound to make profession of it. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation: for the
Scripture says, Whosoever believes shall not be ashamed, Romans 10.10.11. Es.
49 23. c.54.4. to what end does our Savior say, Ask, and it shall be given;
seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened, Matt. 7.7 Unless
when it be open, that we have found the truth, and God be pleased to give it
us, we may still keep it and make use thereof: to what end does he bid us,
Search the Scriptures, because we acknowledge to have eternal life therein,
Joh. 5.59. If we may not lay hold when it is proffered us? and certainly it
will one day prove a Jury of witnesses against such, who in word grant the
Scriptures to be our spiritual patrimony, and the searching of them with the
trying of all doctrines deduced from thence, to be the best part of our
Christian Liberty, and do notwithstanding so contrary to the Scriptures
themselves, the spirit of truth which bears witness to them, and the bright
sunshine of our own reason, deny both the one and the other, in not
suffering us to reap and enjoy the fruit of either, when yet the Gospel it
self is not able to save us, if that we doubt thereof; how much less the
differing opinions of frail men subject to the same weaknesses and passions
with our selves* Act. 14 15. why shall any one hinder me to do my Masters will
in such manner as I believe he requires it to be done? it is I that must be
beaten with double stripes if I do it not; whereas if I know it n^ or mistake
it ignorantly, as Paul whilst he persecuted, 1 Timothy 1.13. I should escape with
fewer stripes, Luke 12.47.48. it is I that must be accountable for my self,
Romans 14.12. and stand or fall unto my Master only, v. 4. but such as take so
much upon them, and abridge others, the benefit of Scripture and their own
reason, had need be very careful, left one day they be found censurable
(notwithstanding their pains and travel by sea and land for gaining
proselites) to have made them twofold worse the children of Hell, Mat. 23.15.
and I desire they would take this into their serious thoughts, that if a people
be bound to submit unto whatsoever the Magistrate or Church shall put upon
them, without first examining, and fully satisfying their own consciences,
whether it be agreeable to the Word of God or no, that then in such case this
absurdity would follow, viz. The subjects of Spain, Turkey, or any other
erroneous State in point of faith, could not be punishable by the justice of
God, for believing such heresies and blasphem^es as the respective States held
out unto them, and they made to believe they ought in conscience to submit unto
out of obedience they owe unto the Powers; and besides, the Scripture where our
Savior says, If the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch,
Mat. 15.14. would not only be frustrated, but made a lie.

But for a conclusion, to convince all gainsayers in this behalf; we find
the Blessed Spirit enabling the Christians of Berea before those of
Thessalonica, in that they searched the Scriptures daily whether that which was
delivered them by their teachers was so or no, Act. 17.11. and unto the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus it says, I know thy works, and thy labor and thy
patience, and how thou can not be are them that are evil, and thou have
tried them that say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liers,
Rev. 2.2.

CHAP. XIII. Christ's and the Apostles Testimonies of Christians being weak in
faith, and how they ought to grow therein bearing with an others weaknesses and
infirmities.
IOh. 16.12. I have (1) many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them
now.

Mark 4.33. And with many such parables spoke he the word unto them as they
were able to bear it.

2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things?

Romans 6.19. I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your
flesh.

Heb. 5.11,12,13,14. We have many things to say and hard to be uttered, seeing
you are dull of hearing, for when for the time ye ought to be t^hers you have
need of one to teach you again, which ^e the first principles of the oracles
of God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat; for
every one that uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness for he
is a babe: but (2) strong meat belongs to them that are of full ag^, even
those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil.

1 Cor. 3.1,2,3. I could not speak unto you brethren as unto spiritual, but
as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ; I have fed you with milk, and
not with strong meat, for hitherto you were not able, neither yet are you able,
for you are carnal.

C.13.9 11. We know but in part, when I was as a child, I spoke, I thought,
and understood like a child, but when I became a man I put away childish
things.

Phil 3.12,13 14. Not as though I were already perfect; but forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before,
I press toward the mark.

1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere ^ilke of the Word that they
may grow thereby.

Ephesians. 4.13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall
be done away.

Romans 14.1,2,3. Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to (3)
doubtful disputations, for one believes that he may eat all things, an other
that is weak eats herbs, let not him that eats despise him that eats
not: and let not him that eats not judge him that eats, for God has
received him.

Romans 15.1. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak.

Gal. 6.1.2. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted: Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Romans 11.13,14. In as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine
office, if by any means I may provoke to emulation, them which are my flesh,
and might save some of them.

1 Cor. 9.20,21,22. Unto the (4) Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain
the Jews, to them that are under the law as under the law, that I might gain
them that are under the law, to them that are without law, a^ without law,
(being not without law to God but under the law of Christ) that I might gain
them that are without law: to the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak: I am made all things to all men that I might by all means save some.

Romans 14.13. Let no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way.

V. 17,18,19. The Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, (5) peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost, for he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of men: let us therefore follow after these
things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify an other.

C.12.18. If it ^ possible live peaceably with all men.

1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor
to the Church of God.

Col. 4 5. Walk in wisdom toward them which are without.

Romans 14.22. Have thou faith, have it to thy (6) self.

V. 15.16. If thy brother be grieved, now walk thou charitably, destroy not
him for whom Christ dyed, let not your good be evil spoken of.

C.15.2.3. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification, for even Christ pleased not himself.

Observations upon CHAP. XIII.
(1) THose many things which our Savior and his Apostles afterward could not
impart unto the Primitive Christians by reason of their weakness, according to
the rules of persecution, must never be revealed, but remain buried unto
eternity; for such as have this jurisdiction in their hands, make themselves
judges of whatsoever the Blessed Spirit should reveal unto any of the Saints,
whether he shall believe it and instruct others therein or no, and being
carnal, are not only subject to apprehend the greatest truths of God to be
unrighteousnes, etc. but even their very principles and grounds by which they
are to exercise this dominion, tell them plainly, that unless every further
measure and degree of facred truth above the meridian of their Canons be a
novelty, and consequently herefie, they cannot possibly be infallibly certain
how to discover any heresy at all, and less then infallibility they abhor
to sale by: But how destructive such positions are to the building up the
mystical Body of Christ: I humbly beseech in all tenderness of affection,
that all which are of these opinions may seriously consider, for the love they
profess unto the Head Christ Jesus, how injurious they are unto him,
withstanding what in them lies, the completing of his glory, in filling up,
and perfecting the number of the Saints which are His Body.

(2) God accepts a willing mind according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

(3) If we must not receive such as differ from us to doubtful disputations,
how much less may we punish, or go about to force them from what their
different but weak faith leads them to? we must receive such because God has
received them. The putting a difference between meats, the Apostle terms a
weakness of faith, no heresy; so neither ought we to aggravate matters, but
to mollify and sweeten all such like differences with the same spirit of
gentleness and meekness: as Romans 14.6. He that eats eats to the Lord, and
he that eats not to the Lord he eats not, because whether eating or not
eating, both of them give thanks to God.

(4) This example of Paul's were a sufficient rule how to direct our selves in
all occasions toward men differing from us in opinion; his practice in this is
both precept and warrant enough for us to do the same: what then do we
scruple at, and why choose we rather to follow our own inventions? erroneous
tenets or opinions which destroy not the foundation, are but weaknesses, Rom
14.1,2,3. let us then with Paul be weak with all such, and we shall be
certain with Paul to save many of them, whom persecution sends headlong to
destruction.

(5) Such as persecute cannot possibly live peaceably themselves, or permit
others to do so, but resist and oppose this parcel of holy Scripture as
absolutely and flatly as any can be opposed; for whereas we are required, if it
be possible to live peaceably with all men, we will not suffer others so much
as a possibility of living peaceably amongst us, unless they will give way and
enthrall their consciences in a thousand fold worse bondage then that of
Egypt, by being subject to believe and live according to whatsoever we shall
put upon them, and that to change and alter at our pleasure.

(6) It Is a man's own faith that must save him, not an others; miserable were
we, if we must expect to be saved by the faith of others: we are commanded to
make our own calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and Paul would rather
never eat meat whilst the world stood then offend his brother, 1 Cor. ^. 13.

We are all by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. this is all the portion
we bring with us into this world; and unless we get another, Christ will never
take us for his Spouse: They which are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans
8.8. nay, it is impossible to please him without faith, Heb. 11.6. and however
God have secret paths, and unknown ways whereby he directs infants to his
glory that never did actually offend him, yet such as he brings to ripeness
of understanding, from them he expects a lively faith, by the righteousness
whereof we must apprehend Christ and all his sufferings, Phil. 3.9.12. and this
is so necessary, that though it were possible for us to keep the whole law of
God, yet without this faith we can never see the face of God: original sin
which we derived from our father Adam, without faith in Christ, were abundantly
sufficient to condemn us; since then we are at the same time both borne and
dead in sin; if ever we expect salvation, it is necessary we be regenerate
through grace, and live unto repentance: But since Gods goodness cannot be
limited by an hour glass, being pleased to call men differently at the 3,9,
or any other hour, as he thought good to let us see by the Parable in the
Gospel, Mat. ^0. and that to magnify his power and patience, he expected the
good thief upon the cross till the very last minute of his life, Luke 23.
from v. 40. to 43. and since as the natural, so is the spiritual man first a
child in Christ, and so growing from one degree of grace unto another, until
he come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to
be a perfect man according to the measure and stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12,13. how can we then that are such gypsy Astronomers, such
strangers to the New Jerusalem and covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.12. far from
being of Gods counsel, Romans 11.34. what are we I say, that we should take so
much upon us to calculate the Calling and Salvation of Gods chosen people,
which with the degrees and growth thereof were ordered and disposed from all
eternity? had Paul been put to death when he consented to Stevens death by
holding the garments of those that stoned him* Acts 7.58. c.8.1. he must not
only have dyed in his sins, but the several Nations of the Gentiles, and all
the Churches of Christ would have wanted that good service which he did
afterward in converting so many souls unto the faith: and you misguided
zealot who ever you be, that warm your self with heats and thoughts of
persecuting others, every smillest measure whereof is a degree and step to
death of thousands: were not you once in your natural condition, in the gall
of bitterness? Act. ^.23. may you not say with Paul, When I was a child, I
thought, spoke, and did like a child? 1 Cor 15.11. can you not see in the
looking-glass of your own conscience, and say, I now know and believe that,
which once I was ignorant of, and strongly possessed I should never have
apprehended or acknowledged; if this be not thy present condition, assure thy
self thou have taken little thought or care to make thy calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. but if thou be so happy in finding this to be thy present
state, and see how far forth thou have profited in the School of Christ;
consider then whether thou thy self would have been contented, or how
desperate thy condition must needs have been, if others had cut thee off by
persecution in the midst of all thy sins: Dear Christian, if the love of God
cannot yet pierce thy stony heart, let the fear of his judgments begin to
terrify thy conscience, he will be contented to win thee either way; but if
neither can prevail whilst thou art so encompassed with jollities of this
world, remember that for all this thou must one day come to judgment, and then
stand at his Tribunal when thou have nothing but thy sinful nakedness to
hide thee: nothing but the horror of thy guilty conscience to comfort thee; and
none to speak for thee, but the terrible, yet just Judge, whom thou have
persecuted in his Saints, to condemn thee unto eternal torments: Oh! suffer
me I beseech thee in the meekness of our Savior, whilst there is yet time
(and who knows how near it is expired?) to importune thee at the sight thereof,
to be serious a little while, and consider, that since according to these rules
of persecution, thou thy self must have been persecuted and perished
everlastingly; how unsafe it is for thee still to harbor them in thy thoughts,
approve them in thy judgment, and countenance or assist the practice of them;
and whether thou do not now run a greater hazard by being accessory to
offending, vexing, troubling, and putting to death of many Saints, then at the
first when thou could but have been a patient in thine own person, or else
a stander by, no ringleader: Renounce therefore these bloody doctrines,
bearing thy brethrens weaknesses, and therein thine own, that both may live,
and grow up together, edifying each other in true piety and godliness.

CHAP. XIV. Christ's Commands and the Apostles practice are both against
persecution for conscience sake.
Mark 9.38.39. We saw (1) one casting out devils in thy Name and he follows
not us, and we forbad him because he follows not us; but Jesus said forbid
him not, for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my Name, that can
lightly speak evil of me: He that is not against us is with us.

Phil. 1.16,17,18. Some preach Christ even of (2) envy and strife, and some
also of good will, the one preach Christ of contention, the other of love; what
then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is
preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice.

1 Cor. 12. from 4. to 11. There are (3) diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit, and there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord; and
there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works all
in all: but the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal: for to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to an other the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to one faith by the same Spirit, to an
other the gift of healing; to one the working of miracles, to an other
prophecy; to one discerning of spirits, to an other diverse kind of tongues,
and to an other the interpretation of tongues, but all these works that one
and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will: and v.
23. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

Romans 12.3,4,5,6,7,8. I Paul through the grace of God given unto me, say unto
every man that is among you not to think of himself more highly then ye
ought to think, but to think soberly according as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith, for as we have many members in one body, and all members
have not the same office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every
one members one of another. Having then gifts differing according to the grace
which is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith; or Ministry let us wait on our Ministry; or he that
teaches on teaching; or he that exhorts on exhortation.

Acts 18.24,25,26. A (4) certain Jew named Apollos instructed in the way of
the Lord, and being fervent in the spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the
things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John, and he began to speak
boldly in the Synagogue; whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took
him unto them, and expounded unto them the way of God more perfectly.

Acts 19. from 1. to 6. Paul came to Ephesus, and finding certain (5)
Disciples, he said unto them, have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed? and they said unto him we have not so much as heard whether there be
any Holy Ghost; and he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized? and
they said unto John's baptism; then said Paul, John verily baptized with the
baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on him
that should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus, when they heard this they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and when Paul had laid his hands
upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and
prophesied.

Luke 9.52,53,54,55,56. And Jesus sent into a village of the Samaritans to make
ready for him, and they did not receive him; and when his Disciples James and
John saw this, they said Lord, will thou that we command (6) sire to come down
from heaven to consume them as Elias did, but he turned and rebuked them,
saying, ye know not what spirit ye are of, the Son of man came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them.

Matthew. 13. from v. 24. to 30. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man
which sowed good seed in his field, and while the man slept, his enemy came and
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way; but when the blade was sprung
up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also; so the servants of
the householder came and said unto him, Sir, Did not thou sow good seed in
this field, from whence then has it tares? he said unto them, an enemy has
done this: the servants said unto him, will thou that we go and gather them
up? but he said, nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the
wheat with them, let both grow together until the harvest: and in time of
harvest I will say unto the reapers, gather ye together first the tares, and
bind them in bundles to burn them ^ but gather the wheat into my barn.

1 Cor. 7.12.15. If any brother have a wife that believes not, and she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away, but if she will depart let
her.

Observations upon CHAP. XIV.
(1)IF he that did this miracle had been a true servant of Christ, it is very
probable that our Savior would have vindicated him from the contrary opinion
which the Apostles had of him, because he did not follow them; notwithstanding
Christ gives command that he may enjoy Christian Liberty saying, forbid him
not, because the miracle, how ill soever otherwise, was done in his name; a
full argument that such as are acknowledged to have any one good gift, ought
not to be silenced because they want some others: But whereas we find our
Savior avouching in these words, Many will say to me in the last day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and cast out devils, and in thy Name
done many wonderful works? and then will I profess unto them, I never knew
you, depart from me ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.22,23. which being compared
with Mark 9.38,39. it is most evident, that our Saviors pleasure was that
such workers of false miracles, whom he intended to judge in the last day,
should not be hindered in the mean time by a coercive power; much less such
as have known good gifts, and are acknowledged to exercise them merely for
conscience sake: and in that our Savior says then, or in the last day will I
profess to know them not, it will easily follow that frail mankind should not
be so confident of their ability to distinguish them before hand, much less of
having authority to prohibit them, in that Christ, from whom, in such case, it
must have been derived, gives license, and commands them to employ their talent.

(2) This preaching Christ not sincerely, nor in truth, may well be meant not
in respect of the manner only, but of the matter also, and in what kind
soever, it was done out of envy, strife, contention, and on purpose to add
affliction unto Paul, yet he in stead of silencing or punishing the offenders,
rejoiced thereat; so may we suppose a godly Minister, who is acknowledged to
have eminent gifts, but withal infected with some one or other erroneous
opinion which destroys not the foundation: would Paul think we have
prohibited this godly man to preach Christ, because that even whilst he did
preach Christ he sometimes used to intermingle leaven of error? his preaching
Christ might save the souls of such as heard him, whilst his error being mixed
therewith, might make himself a castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27.

(3) This Scripture tells us of multiplicity of gifts which God distributes
amongst his servants, not, to some all, to some none at all; but to one he
gives this gift, to an other that, with express advertisement, that the
manifestation of the Spirit, be it in how small measure soever, is given to
every man to profit withal, that is to profit and edify others withal: now
how can a weak servant of Christ, to who God has distributed any one portion
of his Blessed Truth, employ it to the honor of the Doner for the service of
his people, if he shall be silenced or imprisoned by a superior power, for
wanting some other parcel of truth, or interweaving therewith some erroneous
doctrine, in the opinion of the Rulers where he lives? and how can they
justify this doing evil that good may come of it? the interring a good gift
together with a bad one? or how can they be so certain that such opinions are
erroneous, when their Ancestors perhaps declared them to be orthodox, and
their successors will have power to the same again hereafter? whilst other
Nations and People, whom in other respects they acknowledge as wise and
conscientious as themselves, do hold the same at present? This is not
alleged to hinder any severe or pious inquiry after truth, the most eminent
of all Gods gifts; or the holding fast thereof when it is found; but to temper
and qualify the fierce zeal of such who deny to others the same Christian
Liberty which they assume unto themselves: Are we not all alike commanded to
try the spirits? 1 John 4 1. and is it not required of us all alike to buy the
truth and fell it not? Prove. 23.23. to what purpose need I take pains to try
the spirits my self, when I am certain that my neighbor who is stronger then
I, will impose his spirit, what ever it be, upon me? to what purpose should I
buy the truth? or how can I possibly hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. when a mightier then my self pretends he may take it away at pleasure?
but is it so? Do we think the Spirit of God requires such impossibilities? Is
he become an Egyptian taske-master, and as if he would purposely pick a
quarrel and destroy us, require what lies not in our power to perform? Oh far
be from us all such blasphemy and profaneness, let God be just and every man
a liar, Romans 3.4. Does he command us to prove all things and hold fast the
good? Does he command us to buy the truth and sell it not? then certainly he
intended we should have means and power conducing thereunto; may such
therefore in their most retired thoughts consider how heavy a doom betides
them that hinder men in the search of truth, or plunder them of it, when they
have found it: And since he that refusing to employ his one talent, ^id it in
the earth, was condemned to utter darkness, Mat. 25.25 28.30. what think we
will their lot be, that will not suffer men to improve that one talent or gift
which God has given them, because they have not all the rest, or so many
perhaps, or in so great perfection as they themselves in their own apprehension
suppose to have? whereas Gods practice and promise is to give greater abundance
afterward, to such whose faithfulness he has first had experience of in a
little, Mat. 25.23. We find in the Acts. c. 10.46.48. that when Cornelius with
many of the Gentiles spoke strange tongues, Peter forth with baptized them,
which those of the circumcision found fault with; but Peter informing them of
the whole matter excused himself, saying, forasmuch as God gave them the like
gifts as he did unto us who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I that
I could withstand God? And when they heard these things they held their peace,
and glorified God saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life, Act. 11.17.18. Now if Peter could not withstand God in his servants
which had but the like, or more inferior gifts to himself; how unwarrantable
is it for us that come short of Peter's spirit to oppose our brethren, who
perhaps have yet more excellent endowments then our selves? and how can they
judge them to be otherwise, since such only as are Spiritually minded can judge
of Spiritual gifts? and such as are less Spiritual have not a capacity to
judge of those which are more Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.14. but if an Angel or the
Blessed Spirit has revealed any further truth unto a brother, Act. 23.9.
(despicable perhaps in the eyes of the world) as it is not safe for me to be
over credulous at the first noise upon his bare report, without examining it by
Gods word, the only touchstone of all truth; so is it altogether as
unjustifiable for me to silence or suppress this brother with his revelation,
because God gave me not faith enough to believe it; and though it should prove
counterfeit, yet am I excused in leaving it to Gods discovery by such
Spiritual means as he appointed, because I could not infallibly be assured
the falsity thereof, but in oppositing it, for all that I could judge, might
possibly have resisted God therein.

(4) Here we see one teaching publicly, who yet himself had need, and was
afterward farther and more perfectly instructed by a man and woman, whom yet
we do not find to have had any extraordinary or miraculous gifts: and the
Centurion who though he had committed Idolatry in falling down at Peter's feet,
and worshipping him (but ignorantly) with divine worship; yet through Gods
infinite mercy, and pardoning him as is presumed, he suddenly thereupon
received the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.25.26.44.

(5) These were twelve proselite Gentiles Disciples and good Christians who yet
professed themselves not to have heard whether there were a third Person in
Trinity; and so doubtless many a godly Saint may live and dye, into whose
thoughts never entered one of hundreds of tenets and points in Christianity,
which when once started, certain Spirits are so carnest after, as by and by,
in all post haste and speed they make the study and knowledge of them necessary
to salvation, when yet they might for the most part, as well have lain still
in silence; since controversies do chiefly make breaches upon the bond of
love, disturbing the practice of true piety and godliness, rather then further
us in the way to Heaven.

(6) Such as say most for a coercive Power and Jurisdiction, do levy their
maine strength and forces from the Old Testament, acknowledging that what they
find in the New, is only by consequence and probability, no express command
or president of persecuting for conscience fake: And in my slender judgment,
the controversy is stated, debated and decided in this very place of Scripture
by our Blessed Savior and his Disciples James and John: Elijah having
delivered the Word of God unto the messengers of Moab King of Samaria, that
because the King had sent them to enquire of Baalzebub, he should not come
down from his bed but dye, which the King having notice of sent a first and
second Captain with their fifties to fetch Elijah, with an intention as may
probably be conjectured to punish him for obeying Gods command and telling
truth: Elijah prayed, and fire comes down from heaven consuming both the
Captains with their fifties, 2 King. c. 1. the former part. And here we find
that our Savior having sent to a certain village of the Samaritans, and
commanded to make ready for him, which they refused; James and John would have
had fire from heaven to consume them as Elijah did, whereunto our Savior
answers, not telling them that the case was different, but that he came not to
destroy men's lives; as if he should have said, though the Israelites and people
of God under the Law, had order to invade the Nations, disposesse them of their
Country, and put such to the sword as were Idolaters or did oppose them; yet He
came not to destroy men's lives for refusing of his Gospel, and so went to an
other village, Luke 9.36. nay in John 12.47.48. He said, He was not to judge
such then, but that they should be judged in the last day: In like manner when
the Gargasenes desired him to depart out of their coasts, forthwith he took
shipping and went away, Mat. 8.34. c.9.1. and so if he of Belphage that owed
the Ass for which our Savior sent, had refused to let it go, Mat. 21. in the
beginning, or if he who was ordered to make ready for our Saviors eating the
Passover in his house, had given denial, Mat. 26.18.19. doubtless our
Savior, of whom Isaiah prophesied, c.42.2. Mat. 12.17.19. He shall not strive,
nor cry, nor lift up his voice in the streets: would have left them as he did
the Samaritans and Gargasenes, and sought another Ass, another house: And
though it be said there, that the Prophecy must be fulfilled, Behold thy King
comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon an Ass, a colt, a foal of an Ass,
Mat. 21.4.5. yet the Prophecy says not, that it must have been fulfilled in
the consent of the proprietor of this Ass; neither do I find that those of
Samaria, or the Gargasenes were more excusable for not receiving our Savior,
then he of Jerusalem should have been, if he had not obeyed our Saviors
desire in making ready of his house to eat the Passover in: But if our
Saviors intention had been to have gone through with any thing wherein he
found opposition, He had the Prerogative of miracles, and legions of Angels
ready for his assistance, Mat. 26.53. or if he had meant that his Disciples, or
their succe^ours should strive and use coercive means, question esse he would
either have given such Commission, or insinuated so much in one place or other
of the Scripture, and they at some one time have practiced it, to be seen
afterward as a president upon Record to after ages: Nay, when our Savior, who
had all power in heaven and earth, Mat 28.18. gave his Disciples power to heal
the sick, cleanse ^apers, raise the dead, or cast out devils, Mat. 10.8. may
we not justly think he gave them so much, as they at any time should have
cause to use or stand in need of? surely if the Spirit of Christ and his
Apostles, had so meant it and seen occasion, this commission was ample enough,
and could as well have justified the Apostles sending for a band of Soldiers,
and prevailed for their coming, as it did Petter in the miraculous judgment
which he passed upon Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. in the beginning, for all they
did was in virtue of that Commission* but since it is apparent, that all the
gifts and power given them were miraculous and spiritual; how dare we only,
(unless we derive title from the Papacy herein) who are but their
successors, of the youngest house degenerated, after so many generations,
presume to exceed commission which gave us miraculous power, and rather then
want dominion, descend and snatch at civil power, because we have not faith
enough to use the other. It Is not unknown to me that such as stand for this
coercive Discipline in the Church of Christ, acknowledge that our Savior did
not prescribe so much expressly, nor the Primitive Christians practice it,
because the Civil Magistrate was heathen, and would not lend them the Civil
sword, and the Christians being few in number could not command it; I answer,
it is pity such quarrelsome Christians are so many in number (for there would be
never the fewer good Christians, if such Christians would part with such
opinions) and that it is yet more pity that better Christians (such as will
rather suffer then offer violence, and sooner turn the other cheek to those
that strike them, then strike again, Mat. 5.39.) do not live in such Countries
where the Magistrate is content to confine the Civil sword to ^ill uses, for
which purpose only it was ordained and sanctified by God Almighty: and lastly,
for a full solution, I may reply, that the children of Israel were few in
number and weak of force in respect of the Nations, Deuteronomy. 7 7. and this
consideration we find did often terrify them, even when they were to enter
and take possession of the promised Land, Numb. 13. and 14 chap. neither did
they overcome and vanquish their enemies the Nations by their own strength or
numbers, so much as by the miraculous power of God, Numb. 14.8.9. and in same
manner, if it had been Gods good pleasure to command that Christians should
invade Nations and People differing from them in Religion, God would infallibly
have assisted them until their enemies had all been utterly rooted out.

But to omit other differences for matters of Religion amongst the Jews
themselves, the then people of God, was not the Sadduces denying the
resurrection, Mark 12.18. as great as any among the Christians? and yet we
find no directions in all the Old Testament to persecute or punish them; we
do not find that ever the Church of the Jews did persecute or punish them,
nor any of the Prophets condemning their omission of it; nay, doubtless our
Savior and his Apostles would have blamed them for omitting it, if they had
been blameable, making use of it as a great and strong argument against them,
in that they forbore to persecute the Sadduces for holding there was no
resurrection, which makes void the faith and hope of all Gods Saints, and yet
set themselves to persecute the faith of Christ without which they could not
possibly have salvation: I suppose no man will say but the Jews had as much
power to punish the Sadduces for this erroneous opinion of theirs, as they had
to crucify our Savior, and persecute his Apostles, they might have had
recourse unto the Civil Magistrate, and made the same complaints against the
Sadduces which they did against Christ Jesus and his Disciples; and when men
will set themselves on mischief, the devil is still ready to furnish them
with instruments and means of all sorts to accomplish their desires: but it
may suffice for all, that we find God in many places charging them with the
blood of his Prophets which they had shed, but never reproving them for not
putting any to death for matters of Religion, except certain Idolatrous
Prophets and others expressly named unto them, and were so warranted as they
could not mistake one for an other, whereas had the Commission been general
for persecuting all such as they thought differed from them and the truth, it
might have some what excused them to cry out unto the Lord for pardon, and say
they were mistaken, supposing those Prophets had been misbeleevers, they
thought they might safely have persecuted them by virtue of such or such a
warrant, meaning to do him good service in putting them to death; but since we
find not any authentical presumptions, much less such full commission as can
justify the torturing, fining, or taking away the lives of men for conscience
sake, it is a notorious sign we sympathise too much with those stiffenecked and
cruel Jews the first executioners of persecution, for which the whole Nation,
after so many hundred years, remains still dispersed in slavery to all people
of the world amongst whom they live, and outcasts from the promises of God.

But since neither the wrath of man, his wisdom nor his zeal fulfill the
righteousness of God Jam. 2.20. since we must not speak wickedly nor
deceitfully for God, Job 13.7. as though his cause needed or could possibly be
advanced by indirect means, the safest course is to make use of such only as
are expressly warranted.

It was the custom of our Savior to speak to the multitude in Parables and
dark sayings, That seeing they might not see, and bearing they might not
hear, Mat. 13.13.14.34. and answerable unto his own practice, he commanded
the Apostles that they should not give that which was holy unto dogs, nor cast
their pearls before swine lest they trample them under feet, Mat. 7.6. but
that we may not think our Savior might as well have held his peace and not
speak at all, as so obscurely; we find recorded, that he descended
notwithstanding unto the capacity of his chosen ones, to w^m it was given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.11. and to them he spoke
from time to time as they were able to apprehend and practice, Mark 4.33. But
blessed be thy infinite wisdom, and glorified be thy infinite mercy, Dear
Savior, that in a matter so much concerning thy beloved ones, the peace and
quiet, life and death of thy Saints, wast pleased through the inspiration of
thy blessed Spirit to move the Disciples, that they should desire Thee to
declare unto them this Parable of the tares, Mat. 13.36. and to the great
comfort and advantage of thy people, with as great confusion to such as hearing
hear not being left so inexcusable, have even with a Sunne-beam of thy
glorious Gospel, which as it were fixed in our Hemisphere, shines both day and
night, engraven in every street and house, that it is thy eternal decree and
pleasure, the Sun should shine upon the bad for good men's sake, and the tares
be permitted to grow, out of thy love unto the wheat, Mat. 5.45. c.13.29.
because if the Sun should forbear to rise again, good men would be wearied
out with uncomfortable darkness, and by pulling up the tares, the wheat it
self would be endangered: If we will then believe our Savior expounding of
his own Parable, He that sows the good seed is the Son of man: the field
is the World: the good seed are the children of the Kingdom, but the tares are
the children of the wicked one: the enemy that sowed them is the devil: the
harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the Angels, Matthew.
13.37.38,39. It rests only to be decided, since this wicked one is so fruitful
in his off spring, which of his children are not to be rooted up before the
harvest, but let alone till the end of their life, which to them is the end of
the world, Eccles. 11.3. And in regard we have express warrant in Holy Writ
for rooting out and putting to death several children of the wicked one,
transgressors in the Civil State; it must necessarily be understood, that by
these tares are meant, offenders, transgressors in the Church, such as corrupt
and defile the innocence and purity of Gods Ordinances and Doctrine in the
Gospel; these are those, or rather those which are taken for these, so hardly
distinguished and known; not that truth and falsehood be so like one another,
but because carnal men cannot but judge carnally: and it will be granted on
all sides, that Gods people, being so few in number in comparison with the
children of the world they must needs (though they were never so upright both
before God and man, for the better, the worse in this respect 1 Cor. 15.19. if
matters were to be carried by voting) be taken for weeds and tares, and
consequently be rooted up, if any to be rooted up at all. But Christ kno^ing
how far forth men's understandings were depraved, whereby they would be carried
to mistake wheat for tares, with an intention to do God good service in
pulling of it up, Joh. 16.2. He tells them plainly, Nay, I will not have them
pulled up as yet, let them both grow together till the harvest: and then
likewise has he appointed other reapers, Angels, who are better able to
distinguish between good and bad; and yet their commission too is limited; they
must first gather the tares together, then bind them, and afterward they are
to be burnt, v. 30. he will not have his affairs done hand over head, no order
or circumstance must be omitted, if the welfare of his little ones may be any
ways endangered.

For further evidence of this Scripture according to the aforesaid sense and
meaning, we have that place of 1 Cor. 7.12.15. which makes it still more
concluding and undeniable: An unbeleeving wife is not to be put from her
husband, much less put to death; and if an unbeleever must not be rooted up,
nor separated from a believing yoke-mate, then much less may such as are
called Heretics, Schismatics, because they differ from us only in some
opinions: Paul advised the Corinthians that they should not keep company with a
brother that was a fornicator, covetous, extortioner or Idolater, he said not
put him to death, 1 Cor. 5.11.

And because I know it will be again objected that the Christians being few
and weak in strength could not have the assistance of the Civil Magistrate to
put this unbeleeving wife or an Idolater to death; I answer, that the force of
the argument lies not in that, whether the Christians had then power to do
execution on them; but whether or no, in justice before God they might, and
would if it had been permitted: Secondly, it is likely this believing husband,
if the Civil Magistrate had interposed, had no more power to put a way his
unbeleeving wife, then he had to put her to death, but the Holy Ghost, by '
Paul, directed the Corinthians what their duty was in conscience, without
discoursing how far the Civil Magigistrate would approve thereof, and Paul
knew what power of miracles had been given them, which through strength of
faith would have carried them on, against all obstacles and opposition in
whatsoever they had undertaken upon good ground and warrant: but thirdly, and
lastly, if the unbeleeving wife was worthy of death, and should by tight have
dyed, if the Christians had had power to do justice on her; it is very strange
that Paul should not only require the believing husband to retain her still as
his wife, but insinuates that he ought to do so in hope she might be converted
by him, 1 Cor. 7.16.

Suppose a man sick of some deadly disease whereof he cannot possibly recover
without applying thereunto the leaves or flowers of a certain herb; a friend
tells him he has some of the seeds, and 19 several sorts besides, but not
knowing one from the other, gives him all 20, assuring him that there is
amongst them, that very seed which he desires: I querie, if this sick man
cannot infalliby be informed which of the 20 is the right, whether in reason
and discretion he ought not to take all these 20 several seeds, and sow them
in his garden, that they may grow up together, and himself with the help of
others if need be, better distinguish after wards which was the true seed, and
which is the leaf or flower that he has need of? and since he cannot be
infallibly assured that any one is more likelier then the other to be the
right, if he should sow only one of them and cast the other 19 away, whether
were it not 19 to one, but he had thrown away the true seed which should have
saved his life?

In like manner, every man in his natural condition is sinne-sicke even unto
death eternal: if he be borne in Spain, it is told him that nothing but Popery
can cure him, neither is he permitted any other Spiritual physic: If he be
borne in Germany, Lutheranisme in most plac^s is there held as sovereigne, and
all other opinions interdicted though not with such severity: and so in most
Countries, men are only suffered to be instructed in the Country Religion (be
it good or bad) where they are borne and bred; and how great a hazard this is,
any man may be able to judge, that will but set his thoughts thereon.

If you ask any man where it were best to be borne and educated in this
respect; every one, till he be enlightened, will say in his own Country, or in
such another of the same Religion; but if you ask him in what other Country of
a different Religion, did he but consider with himself, he would quickly say,
in Holland; because there is some possibility a man may there come to knowledge
of that Religion which he accounts to be the true one: So that if men will but
put themselves into a posture of indifferency, and wave all sinister and pre
judicial thoughts, the very light of nature will force him to acknowledge
truth. Summon up twenty several opinions, supposing that amongst these twenty
you have that true one which can only save all such as are to be saved: If
twenty professors of these twenty different opinions respectively, should
agree in any one of these twenty to be the best, second to that which is
peculiar to every one of them a part; might not that, by standers by, which
adhere to none of all the twenty, be probably thought not only the second, but
the very first and best of all the twenty? And if any State or Country where
any one of these twenty opinions or religions, call them what you will, were
established by Law, should put to death all such as were of the other nineteen
religions or opinions, would not it be nineteen to one but they had put all
Gods Saints to death, and as much as possibly they could, rooted up the truth
it self, and banished it from off the earth never to return again? and yet
such as hold with persecution cannot possibly avoid this rock on which they
run such danger to split and ruin themselves eternally.

Again, a Turk desiring to turn. Christian comes to Amsterdam, and because
he may have heard there are Christians of twenty different opinions, suppose
every one of them damnable but the true one; this Turk a worldly wise man,
(for better he cannot be as yet) will not entertain either of the twenty
opinions upon trust, but informs himself fully of them all, and at last fixes
upon one: Most men may now say, that in regard of his natural propensity to
evil, it is nineteen to one, but he has missed of the true Religion; but had
he gone to any other City where one of the twenty only had been permitted,
besides the taking up a Religion at hap hazard, the wager had been nineteen to
one, that he should not so much as have heard of the true one, and
consequently, according to the same odds impossible for him to have met with
it and embraced it: Now which of these two propositions is the best, or more
agreeabel to common sense, will easily appear, if we consider, that in the
first a man is certain the truth is present, and certain to hear what the
truth can say for it self; but in the other, there is no certainty of either,
and yet it must be accepted at adventure without examination or trial, not in
judgment.

But to return a little: There was no commission given by our Savior to his
Disciples, or by the Disciples to the Primitive Christians, but they were
either to execute it in their own persons, or else to recommend it unto
others; now it is granted that the employing of the Civillsword was not meant
unto the Apostles nor to the Primitive Christians in their own persons,
because they neither had, nor could have it in their power to make use there
of, though they should have desired it; so that in effect it must be inferred
by the abetters of perfecution, that our Savior or his Apostles must have
given some anticipated order, that when ever the people of God could get the
Civil Magistrate to friend, that then they might make the best improvement
thereof they could to whip men into the truth: But it concerns such to produce
this New Gospel with a second Order or Commission, that take upon them the
execution of it: And whereas they pretend likewise to employ this Civil power
against such only as are obstinate in wilfully shutting of their ears against
the truth, which they say has been held forth unto them in such a rational
way, as if they themselves would, they might have been convinced to the
acknowledgement thereof; and that not succeeding accordingly, it appears
plainly they sin against their own conscience: from hence it would follow, That
if the Gospel were proffered unto all Nations and to every man in the world,
that it should be in every particular man's power to receive it, be enlightened,
and embrace the truth at his own pleasure, which yet I conceive will not be
owned by these who bring themselves into the labrinth of this inextricable
consequence; for doubtless Paul even when he was a persecuter had heard more
of the Gospel then thousands which were converted before him, some of them even
at first sight and hearing of the Apostles: so that according to this rule, he
ought to have been persecuted to death in his obstinacy before he had lived
long enough, and till the accomplishment of time, which God had appointed for
his conversion; Secondly, if the Gospel had been tendered unto Paul in such a
way of sufficiency for converting all men that are willing to use means (as
doubtless it was tendered unto him in the same manner as it was unto other
Primitive Christians) then Paul could not have excused himself and said he
persecuted the Saints ignorantly, and that therefore the Lord showed merey on
him, 1 Timothy 1.13. but he would rather have aggravated his own obstinacy and
sinning against his conscience, so much more magnifying Gods excessive
goodness in his pardon.

But what do these persecuters gain, or how do they extenuate their own
fault, or not justify the Turks and Papists in the same, by saying they
reject and punish only such as sin against their own knowledge and
conscience? do not even Papists profess the like? I have known some kept in
their Inquisitions for years together, nay, so many years as we count a term
of three or four lives, and yet suffer them to dye a natural death at last in
prison because they would not conform; and the Inquisitors thought them not
sufficiently sinning against their own conscience to lofe their lives before
hand by the hangman. But you will say perhaps, that Papists or other heretics
cannot justly pretend to have proffered the truth in such a way as might
infallibly convince all such as were not obstinate, but willing to receive it;
because they cannot tender that truth to others which they themselves have not:
I answer, that this is no reason to bear sway with Papists, no more then when
Papists allege the like to Protestants: If it be lawful for any People or
Religion to persecute or keep Inquisition houses, alleading the truth has been
sufficiently held out unto them, it is lawful to all alike; neither can any one
word be spoken which in the judgment of rational indifferent men such as are
not concerned in the quarrel, but will decide the controversy indifferent,
either to be let alone, or practiced by both alike, and so it must remain
until the great day of judgment, as not being to be determined by any less
Oracle then of God himself.

But suppose you had tendered the Gospel in a powerful and all-sufficient way
of convincing all such as were not perverse, and could likewise distinguish who
were thus malignantly obstinate, sinning against their own consciences as you
allege; if God be pleased to let such still survive, who besides the hangman,
such as are authorized thereunto, may without being guilty of their blood, put
malefactors to death at any time, much less before the time? before the
sentence be decreed or published by God the highest Judge? but me thinks I see
it still more clear, that though such wilful heretics could easily be
distinguished, yet it is Gods will and pleasure they should be permitted to
live out the days which he has given them to repent in, or aggravate their
sin; and I beseech the Christian Reader in all tenderness of affection,
impartially to join with me in the trial of it.

In the Parable of the Tares above quoted out of Matthew. 13. we find the
Reapers to be Angels, whom I presume we may sa^ely grant able to distinguish
Tares from Wheat, and the Householder was God himself who could instruct his
Reapers wherein they had been ignorant; and notwithstanding God will not have
these tares pulled up, lest they should also pull up the Wheat therewith; and
yet the difficulty lies not so much in distinguishing betwixt the children of
the Kingdom, the good seed, good Christians; and the tares Antichristans the
children of the wicked one, Matthew. 13.38. for this difference is fully known
to both; either of them knows how opposite is to the other, each of them loves
their own, and hates the other, Joh. 15.19. which could not be, if that they
did not clearly know in what they were distinguished: But the difficulty lies,
in that the tares take themselves to be the wheat; and therefore if pulling up
of tares were not prohibited unto all in general, but made lawful unto any,
even unto those that could infallibly distinguish them, our Savior knew the
tares would have assumed this liberty to themselves, and so have pulled up the
wheat instead of tares, which I humbly conceive to the reason of the
Householders prohibition not to have them rooted up at all, submitting in all
meekness to every pious Reader to be instructed better, desiring them to
consider in their meditations on this Parable, how careful the Blessed Spirit
was in declaring both the persons that should not pull up the tares, and those
that should: Secondly, the time when the tares should not be pulled up, and
when they should: They that should not pull up the tares were the Householders
servants, such as pretended, and meant to do him good service by this
officiousness of theirs; and whether they were meet pretending servants only,
as perhaps some may conjecture in being distinguished from the Angels, Matthew.
13.41. yet they were such as might be mistaken in distinguishing the tares
from wheat; not the great difference which was betwixt them, for it they knew
but one, the other was quickly discerned; but in that they were apt to take the
tares to be wheat, and consequently the wheat to be tares; and in this respect
(though they might otherwise be accepted) they pretended above their strength
if they themselves were tares, or gave occasion unto the tares to err in
imitation of them though they themselves were wheat, for which cause they are
commanded to let the tares alone; the Angels must be both weedors and reapers:
and doubtless as the text insinuates, that as the servants might be mistaken,
not certainly knowing which was tares, and which was the wheat; so does it
follow that the Angels are infallibly informed thereof, and cannot be mistaken.

Again, the Lord declares himself about the time: He will not have these
tares the children of the wicked one, the Heretics pulled up so long as the
World lasts, that their life; but that the time for pulling them up shall be
the harvest, the end of the World, v. 39. And lest any one should say those
servants were forbid because they knew not sufficiently to distinguish one from
the other, but that the servants of God know the truth, and so the true
professors and may therefore root out Heretics: I answer no; and that the
Angels were likelier to know Heretics then the very Saints on earth; and yet
these Angles must not go to rooting up the tares until the day of judgment;
but the use of the Parable lies not so much in applying the prohibition unto
the true Church for not rooting up the tares; but rather unto a false erroneous
Church, that such might be withheld from rooting (though every Church so far
forth as it persecuteth others is false) for if God had given leave unto the
true Church to pull up the tares, each false Church pretending to be the only
true one, would have appropriated the commission to her self, and so have gone
to work pulling up more wheat the tares.

CHAP. XV. Certain Testimonies which God through his divine providence
directed to be uttered by unbeleeving Jews and Gentiles in favor of the
Apostles and the Gospel, recorded by the Holy Ghost as a witness against all
persecuting Christians.
ACt. 5.33,34,35. When the Jews were cut to the heart, and took counsel to
stay the Apostles, them Gamaliel a Doctor of Law and in reputation among all
the people, said unto them: ye men of Israel take beed to your selves, what you
intend to do touching these men.

V. 38.39. Restrain from them, and let them alone, for if this counsel or this
work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow
it, lest you fight against God.

C.23.9. The Scribes that were of the Pharisees part, arose and strove, saying,
we find no evil in this man [ Paul:] but If a Spirit, or an Angel has spoken
to him, let us not fight against God.

C.18 12,13,14,15,16. The Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul,
and brought him to the judgment seat, saying, this fellow persuades men to
worship God contrary to the Law: But Gallio said unto the Jews, if it were a
matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should
bear with you, but if it be a question of words and names, and of the law,
look you to it, for I will be no judge of such matters: and he drove them from
the judgment seat.

C.23.27.29. This man Paul was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed
of them, then came I with an army and rescued him, whom I perceived to be
accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing said to his tharge
worthy death or bonds.

C.25.24,25. Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here present with
us, ye see this man Paul about all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with
me, both at Jerusalem and also here, crying that he ought not to live any
longer, but I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death.

C.26.30,31,32. And when Paul had spoken, King Agrippa rose up, and the
Governor and Bernice, and they thas sat with them, and when they were gone
aside, they talked between themselves, saying, this man does nothing worth of
death, or of bonds. then said Agrippa unto Festus, this man might have be one
set at liberty.

Observations upon CHAP. XV.
I Know there are many, who altogether slight the testimonies of these
Unbeleevers, as if there were no weight in them at all, nor no more to be
reflected on, than the fondest fancies of their idolizing imaginations: but we
shall find them in a higher degree regardable, if we consider; 1. That they
were all spoken in favor of the Gospel: 2. That being Unbeleevers, they could
not be induced thereunto for conscience sake, as if they had been in love with
Christianity, but merely constrained by force and evidence of reason, as Paul
says of them upon another occasion; that though they had not the Law, they did
by nature the things contained in the Law, and so not having the Law, are not
withstanding a Law unto themselves, Romans 2.14.3. That God prospered each of
these instruments and made them successful to preserving of the Apostles
persons and propagation of the truth: for we find that the Jews were so
convinced with Gamaliels arguments, that they all agreed in stead of killing,
to beat the Apostles only: and so being let go, they taught daily in the
Temple, not ceasing to preach Christ Jesus, and the number of the Disciples
were multiplied, Act. 5.41.42. c. 6.1. By means of the Pharisees party that
sided for Paul against the Sadduces, the chief Captain with his soldiers,
gained oppottunity to releeve and bring him into the Castle; thence was he
conveyed for Cesarea, and so for Rome, where he lived two whole years in his
own bired house, receiving all that came unto him, and teaching those things
which concerned the Lord lesus, with all confidence, no man forbidding him,
Act. 28.30.31. which how effectually it wrought, appears by that testim any
whieh the Spirit of God by Paul gave of them, that their faith was spoken of
throughout the whole world, Romans 1.8. And lastly, by the event of what is come
to pass, we may clearly see the wise providence of God in so disposing,
together with his approbation of what succeeded.

If then these Unbeleeyers, by the law of Nature, did the things contained in
the law of Moses; how will they condemn us in the day of jadgement, who having
had the advantage of both Tables, and been so long instructed in the Schools
both of the Prophets and Apostles, do yet walk point tlanke, as if we were
desperately hardened against the Law of Nature, and strength of reason? The
Jews being swollen big with envy, and enraged to the highest resolutions of
putting the Apostles to death for conscience sake, for obeying GOD rather then
man, Gamaliel a stranger to the promises of grace, without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. cries out, Ye men of Israel, Suspend a little: look about you:
take heed what you do: engage not your selves in a possibility of fighting
against the Lord of Hosts. The Scribes that were on the Pharisees side,
perceiving that Paul was a Pharisee as touching the Resurrection, Act. 23.6.9.
that they might rescue him from the fury of the Sadduces, profess, saying, We
find no fault in Paul, but if a spirit or an Angel has spoken to him, we may
not, we cannot, let us not set our selves to sight against God. Canthere be any
thing more full of truth than either of these sayings? Has not the blessed
Spirit recorded them for such in sacred Writ? Do they not exactly quadrate
with common sense and reason? Will not so ample a truth in the mouth even of
these unbeleeving witnesses, condemn us Christians, whom Paul may tell unto our
shame, that there is not a Wise man amongst us, not one able to judge between
his brethren, 1. Cor. 5.6. But Christian persecuteth Christian, and that not
barely to the scandal of unbeleevers, but to the keeping them from ever
coming to the knowledge of the truth. Paul is accused of the Jews for
teaching to worcester ship God contrary to Law: Gallio the Deputy of Achaia, tells
them he thought it no wrong to any man, or wicked lewdness, which in such case
he would have judged and done reason, but being rather matter of words or
names, some difference in their religion (wherein he thought men might have as
much liberty to differ, and no more subject their consciences to the commands
of others, than if it were only for matter of words or names) he refused to be
judge thereof, and drove them from the judgment seat. More than forty men made
a vow not to eat or drink till they had killed Paul, Act. 23.13.14. bu
Claudius Lysias rescues him, v. 27. The multtude both at Jerusalem and Cesarea,
exclaim against Paul, saying, he deserved to die, and dealt with Festus how
they might compass it: yet he testifies that Paul had committed nothing
worthy of death, Act. 25.24.25. And to sum up all his charge, though Paul was
accused as a heretic, an Idolater, teaching to worship God contrary to Law,
and a mover of sedition, because it was well known, that the preaching Jesus,
the differing from the Jews in Religion, was the only reason which incensed
them so much against him, both Gallio, Claudius Lysias, Festus, and King
Agrippa, all Unbeleevers, attest they find no matter of death in Paul, but
that he might enjoy his liberty, Act. 26.32.

CHAP. XVI. Certain acts of justice and favor which the unbeleeving
Magistrates and Officers of the Gentiles did unto the Apostles, recorded in the
Gospel as a witness against the corruptions and cruelty of Christians.
ACt. 17.9. When they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let
them go.

C.19.38,39,40. If Demetrius and the Craftsmen which are with him have a matter
against any man, the Law is open, and there are Deputies, let them implead one
an other; but if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be
determined in a lawful Assembly, for we are in danger to be called in question
for this days uproare, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of
this concourse.

C.22.25,26,27,28. And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the
Centurion that stood by, is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman
uncondemned? when the Centurion heard that, he went and told the chief
Captain, saying, take heed what thou do for this man is a Roman: then the
chief^ Captain came and said unto him, tell me, art thou a Roman? he said,
yea: and the chief Captain said with a great sum obtained I this freedom:
and Paul said, but I was free borne: then streightway they departed from him
which should have examined him [with scourging] and the chief Captain also
was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman because he had bound him.

C.24.23. And Felix commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have
liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come
unto him.

C.25.16. Festus answered, it is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any
man to dye, before that he which is accused, have the accusers face to face,
and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.

V. 27. It seems to me [ Festus] unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not
withal to signify the crimes laid against him.

C.27.3. And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go to
his friends to refresh himself.

C.28.16. Paul being brought prisoner to Rome was suffered to dwell by
himself, with a soldier that kept him.

C.16.36.37. And the keeper of the prison told this saying unto Paul, The
Magistrates have sent to let you go, now therefore depart and go in peace,
but Paul said unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans,
and have cast us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily? nay
verily, but let them come themselves and fetch us out, v. 39. and they came and
besought them and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the City.

Observations upon CHAP. XVI.
THe Machivilian policy which has infected too many, does so far transport
us to the suppressing any thing which springs up against our own opinions and
understandings, that if but one blossom thereof appear in any man, though to
our own knowledge he have never so good gifts besides, we suddenly malign and
metamorphose them to become so much venom and poison unto him; so much
aggravating of the matter, as though he had purposely applied himself and
attained to such abilities the better to play the hypocrite withal, and make
way for this mustardseed of error (as they conceive it) to grow up more
securely until it equalize a Cedar, a complete Champion strong enough to defy
all opposers: but should the God of mercies deal so with mankind, could any
thing betide the universe less then another Noah's flood? Christ taught us only
to pray for pardon of our trespasses, as we pardon those that trespass against
us, Matthew. 6.12. and I conceive this to be such a lesson, as we shall be
chastised for no one in all the Bible so much as this; not that I apprehend it
harder then the rest (for what mortified soul might not easier forgive all the
offenses done unto himself, then sometimes not to have given just offense to
others? we have premeditation to help us in the one, when many times we fall
into the other unawares) but rather be cause this lesson is so much more
slighed, so little regarded; so prone are we to be revengefull, spightfull, or
unquiet, till we satisfy our own desires, even toward such as never offended
us except in differing from us in opinion, that we are apt to think we may
justly persecute both in thought, word and deed what ^re we dislike in them and
yet pretend to love their persons deerly: we have learnt to distinguish betwixt
their vices and their persons (which were possible enough but that we commonly
go to near the quick) and say we aim at their errors, at their vices only,
and ought in justice to see justice do upon them; but because the Devil is
too often too crafty for us, and I will only say thus much: That as we pray and
practice persecuting men's errors, as we allege, with love unto their
persons; so will God one day find as good a distinction to pardon our sins,
and yet punish us soul and body in hell fire eternally. But amongst all those
against whom we vent our spleen and malice, it may appear that such as had
offended only in tenderness of conscience, have had the greatest share: If we
will but call to mind the stories we have heard, the examples we have seen,
and what we have been consenting to our selves; we shall easily find that no
offenders of any sort soever have felt more harsh proceedings in the whole
managing of their arraignment, then such as suffered for conscience sake; such
must be kept close prisoners in very dungeons, denied the visitings of their
wives and children; whilst others for gaining opportunity to see them only,
were brought within the compass of being punished. Those unbeleeving Romans,
as Paul said of the Bereans upon another occasion, Act. 17.10,11. were far more
noble, more just, may I not say more Christian-like? Vnicuique suum tribuere
belongs to Christians; and though the best had all things in common, Act. 4 32.
and none of us ought to regard propriety when Gods cause requires what we have;
yet such as shall abridge us of this privilege, of this propriety, and take it
from us without our own consents, will be never a whit the more excusable at
the great day of reckoning. When the chief Captain understood that Paul whom
they had bound uncondemned, was a Roman, he suddenly not only unbound him, but
sought to ingratiate himself and curry favor with him; nay the very
Magistrates of Philippi, understanding that Paul was a Roman after that they
had beaten him, not only sent forthwith to let him out, but because Paul
desired it, and would not be dismissed in huggermugger, they came in person to
the prison, and besought him to depart: surely those Magistrates had very me^ke
spirits and dispositions, or else were subordinate to very just superiors whom
they endeavored to give a good account to: many a Christian would rather have
said, what! Paul a Roman, change his Religion, or be of such an opinion? his
fault is so much greater, one would have thought he should have known better,
he deserves double stripes, and forthwith without further examination, stripped
him of all he has, and would upon such an occasion be like God himself, that
they might plunder and take from men even what they have not, Matthew. 25.29.

But it were better, and a far safer way in being too remiss than but a little
over severe, especially having to do with such, who, however abject in the eyes
of men, may possibly be dear to God, like the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8.
whom for any one to offend, is worse then to have a millstone hung about his
neck, and cast into the sea, Matthew. 18.6. and however the world revile them
for the present, they are they that shall judge the world hereafter, 1 Cor 6.2.
Paul tells the Romans, that salvation was come unto the Gentiles to provoke the
Jews to jealousy, Romans 11.11. as though God used that as a means to win
the Jews again into his sheepfold; as though Paul thought such an argument a
most prevalent motive to regaine them: Dear Brethren, I beseech you let not us
give the Saints of God to see, there is less hopes of us than of the Jews;
let us by these favors which God in his providence, stirred up those
unbeleeving Gentiles to express unto the Gospels cause, provoke us to treat
all Christians more mercifully hereafter, not forgetting that our Savior
requires us to be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. and
if any one shall say it is impossible to be merciful as our heavenly Father is
merciful, and so grow regardlesse of this command of our Saviors, like the
slothful servant who having received one talent, and being to give an account
thereof, said, Lord, I know that thou art an hard man reaping where thou have
not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed, and I was afraid and went
and hid thy talent in the earth, lo, there thou have that is thine: His Lord
answered and said unto him, thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knew
that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed, thou
ought therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my
coming I should have received mine own with usury; take therefore the talent
away from him, and cast the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, Matthew.
25.24,25,26,27,28,30. In like manner, if it seem hard that it should be
required of us to be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, we have so
much more reason to strive all we can, and press toward it with all might and
main, not questioning how possible it is to be so, lest we be checked with
Sarah, Genesis 18.15. or struck dumb with Zacharias, for not believing, Luke 1.20.
many things are impossible to men, but nothing is impossible to God, Mark
10.27. wherefore when God requires any thing of us, our best way is, as Paul
did when he was cal^'d to go unto the Gentiles, Gal. 1.15. etc. not to
confer with flesh and blood about any difficulties and doubts which make
against the service, but immediately to set our selves to work, with an
intention to make still forwards, what ever obstacles we meet withal; and God
who requires of us only according to what we have, 2 Cor. 8.12. will not fail
to give us what we want or he expects to find: If we do not for the present
apprehend how we should be so transcendently merciful as is required; if we
do not so clearly see what will make for it, yet by examining our selves, we
may easily find what will make against it, though we do not know what means
to attain to such perfection, we may quickly see many ways which will hinder
it, and so avoid them, with full assurance that it can least of all subsist
with persecuting, maligning, and evil entreating one an other who are forced
to differ from us merely for cause of conscience.

CHAP. XVII. Six woes denounced by our Savior against the Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, all which are appliable to them and all others, as
abetters of persecution.
Matthew. 23.13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men: for ye will neither go in your selves,
neither suffer ye them that would enter to go in.

Observations upon CHAP. XVII.
THus do all they who take upon them to give rule to others in their
devotions, not suffering them to serve God in any other manner than themselves
are pleased to prescribe unto them; they think nothing well done but what
their fancy leads them to practice and allow of, which so far transports them,
that at last it brings them to sin against their own consciences, as we may
observe in Act. 4.16.17. When the Jews though they knew and acknowledged there
was a great miracle done, yet they endeavored what they could that it might
spread no further among the people, and according to the custom of such
politicians, Joh. 9. they set themselves to examining upon intergatories
reiterated the better to entrap him who having been blind from his birth was
now restored to his sight, and finding that Jesus had done the work, and that
the patient was won unto the says, they begin to revile the man, and vilify
our Savior, saying, We know that God spoke to Moses, but for this fellow (
Jesus) we know not from whence he is: the man replied, It is a mavelous thing
that you should not know whence he is that has opened my eyes who was borne
blind, the like whereof was never done before since the world began: They
thereupon slye at him more fiercely, and proceeding according to their carnal
principles, say, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and do thou teach us? out
being better at domineering by virtue of their humane ordinances, than debating
and convincing in demonstration of the Spirit, they cast him out of the
Synagogue. Thus, and worse must all men fare who will speak truth and
endeavor to keep a good conscience toward God and man, so long as a coercive
power shall be suffered to usurp the Throne of Christ, and give dominion unto
any one or more, in what manner soever over the faith of their other brethren,
for whose Christian Liberty Christ suffered but once for all alike, Heb. 9.28.
c.10.14.

I know it is often objected, and much stood upon, what a monstrous sight this
many headed Hydra of opinions would seem; but would it be any worse then that
sield (whereof we touched, chap. 14) in which our Savior expressly ordered
the tares should be permitted to grow together with the good corn until the
harvest? and is it any otherwise than we see yearly experience of in the course
of Nature? does not every spring cover the whole earth with weeds, which as
they came up of themselves, so for the most part do they fade and wither quite
away? so must it necessarily be in times of Reformation; if you desire and give
liberty to have the truth discovered, you can no more hinder errors from
springing up, and that amongst good people too, than you can possibly keep the
weeds from growing, or pull them up being grown, without destroying the wheat
it self, or being at greater charges in pulling of them up, than the good
corn^ is worth: experience does evidence the one to husbandmen; and our Savior
in the Parable of Matthew. 13. does far above all demonstration confirm the
other; yet this advantage Truth has of error (above good corn in respect of
weeds) that Truth being once grown up to its fullness and perfection, has an
infallible and miracuious power, in Gods good time, to beat down all strong
holds of heresies and errors, which of themselves do not moulder away before
hand.

Matthew. 23.15 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass
sea and land to make one proselite, and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the child of hell then your selves.

Observation.
THus do all such who force men contrary to their conscience to conform unto
another religion or opinion, which they themselves through ignorance may sinde
mercy in, 1 Timothy 1.13. When others complying doubtingly must needs be damned,
Romans 14.22,23. I confess that many do acknowledge it unlawful to invade
foreign Nations compelling them to receive the Gospel by force of Arms, in
that Paul says, What have I to do to judge them which are without? Them which
are without God judges, 1 Cor. 5.12,13. but such as have entered into Church
Covenant and fellowship, they think are subject to them, and may be censured
upon all occasions, even unto Excommunication; and then if they persist to
instruct others, though willing to learn in the same opinions (which they
find themselves no less bound in conscience to do, then Peter who being
converted was commanded to strengthen his brethren, Luke 22.32. or the same
Peter and John who being forbid by the Elders, were afterward required by an
Angel to go and speak boldly in the Temple, Act. 5.20.28.) the Civil
Magistrate may proceed against them to the taking away their lives: I answer,
That no man can reasonably be supposed so far to enslave himself both soul
and body, when he enters into fellowship or covenant with any congregation, as
that he intended at same time to consent, that if ever afterward any point of
Discipline or Doctrine should oe moved, which he found himself in conscience
not able to yield unto, that in such case he would be willingly banished,
imprisoned, fined, or put to death. Secondly, Though he had entered into such a
vow and convenant, it being altogether unlawfu^, and contrary both to the Law
of Nature, and of the God of Nature, that a man should implicitly oblige
himself to conformity and belief, of what, it may be, never any man in the
Congregation, not perhaps in the whole World for hundreds of years past had
ever thought on, and whether it were true or false, (for the congregation must
be judge thereof, and they may possibly all err, and he be only in the truth)
I say, such a vow and covenant was then altogether unlawful to be made, and
now better broke then kept; because he did not only covenant to believe and
conform unto what he himself knew not what, but also in regard it was not in
his power to believe what he would, and ought not willingly to conform unto
what he does not steadfastly believe upon peril of damnation, Romans 14.23.
Thirdly, such a tenet is obstructive to the Gospels passage, for who, think
we, that understands himself, and has his wits about him, will enter into such
a servitude, the depth whereof is not fathomable by all the Engines in the
World? This is like to making of a pit, and strawing it over with most sightly
and fragrant herbs and slowers, that men may be alluted to turn Christians,
and fall into it to their greater destruction and danger of being beaten with
double stripes; giving them all liberty that can be imagined until they be
entered into fellowship, and there hold them bound in chains as falt as any
Popish Inquisition; I will not say but that they may expect with a little more
long suffering until I come to submit unto them; but sooner or later, a little
more or less, I am sure to fare no better, then if I were a prey in the talons
of Spanish or Roman Vultures: and the reason which the Reformed Persecuters
give, is the very same with Papists; and if it were a good one, it were good
alike to all religions and opinions; that is, that if men have been several
times admonished of any point of faith (which must reach to any thing wherein
in men differ in opinion) in a meek and sober way, that they must necessarily
yield unto it, and show they are convinced by conforming thereunto; or else
that such do both say and do against their own consciences and knowledge,
the truth, as they pretend being of such infallible efficacy and force to that
effect: But little do such think that every sect or heresy obtrudes her
errors with as great vehemency, as the professors of the truth it self, and
neither can allege one tittle advantage, wherefore any one in humane reason
should rather yield or be convinced by the other, until the evidence of truth
prevail upon the conscience: But do not such who take upon them to say that
this or that man by name, who does not believe the truth, (that is, their
opinions whether true or false) and conform unto it, sins against his own
co^ence, enter into the secret closet of Gods eternal predestination? and if
any will lay claim to, and pretend to exercise with this Spirit of profoundest
Prophecy; may not all Christians which acknowledge the Scriptures, appropriate
to themselves the same respectively, and so upon one and the self same ground
make reprobate and anathematize one an other until the Civil sword devour
them all? If the Protestants of Old England use the same means and patience to
convince those of New England, may they not as lawfully persecute them for
being wilfully obstinate if they will not submit, as be persecuted by them for
the very same reason^ If the Protestants of New England will not grant a
toleration unto the Protestants of Old England; with what equity can they
expect it in Old England, unless from the highest perfection of Christianity
in doing good for evil? but what reason is there, why any one of a New England
congregation, or any other of reformed Protestants may not afterward turn
Brownist or Anabaptist, and there in the same City, etc. make profession
thereof as freely as any Pagan, or as he him self did before, in case he had
first been converted from Paganism or Heresy amongst them? Can the Civil
sword in one Country distinguish truth better amongst them, then it does in any
other Country? if not, why should it pretend more right thereunto, or expect to
be reverenced or worshipped in this respect above the other?

Paul in his Epistles to several Churches takes notice that there were
contentions and divisions amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.11. that the
Galathians were fallen from their first faith, saying, I marvel that you are so
soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel, Gal. 1.6. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you that you should
not obey the truth? c.3.1. Are you so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are
ye now made perfect in the flesh? have ye suffered so many things in vain? v.
3. I am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain? c.4.11. Ye
did run well, who did hinder ye that you should not obey the truth? c.5.7. and
in fine their condition was so bad, that Paul wished they were even cut off
which had troubled them, Gal. 5.12. yet I do not find that ever he went
further then delivering up the offenders unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 55.
How comes then the Civil Magistrate to trouble it self in matters when they
can do God no service? Spiritual errors and sores, must have spiritual
cures and redresses; and Paul says, the weapons of our warfare are spiritual,
but mighty through God, for bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10 4. and if the Civil Magistrates weapons are the
like, and can do the same effect, the force of (...) argument would not only
be quite dashed, and his expression improper, but we should not longer need
any such distinction of Civil and Spiritual armor.

Henry the 4. of France, though he had outwardly conformed himself to the
ceremonies of the Church of Rome, because he thought he should not otherwise be
able to possess the Throne in peace; yet the Pope and Spain knowing he did it
not out of zeal to their religion, not only kept themselves some years from
being reconciled unto him, but intended to war against him in earnest,
because they took him to be a reprobate, they meant a Protestant in heart;
(and they might as well know a pretending Papist to be a Protestant in heart,
as any Reformed Protestant to know a Lutheran or Brownist were such a one
against his own conscience:) The French King by example of his Predecessor,
treats, and enters into league with the Great Turk, capitulating that he
should invade Italy with many thousand men; the Pope thereupon begins to
acknowledge his Majesty to be Christianissima, that he might the freer chide
him as a son, for seeking to bring in such cruel Tygres to worry, Peter's
flock. The French King told his Holiness (forsooth) that for his part, he
only endeavored as a faithful shepherd, understanding that his sheep might
be endangered through the multiplying of unmercifull wolves, to provide
himself of mastive dogs to rescue them: and the Venetians have of a long time,
by the same stratagem, not only preserved themselves, but all Italy besides in
likelihood, from the inundation of the Papalines: yet this was in their own
defense against powerful adversaries when they had no safety nearer hand: But
for a Protestant Church government to require or countenance the Civil
Magistrate (and whether it be Christian or otherwise it varies not the case)
against a private person or an other Protestant congregation, which neither
does, nor can offend their Civil peace, much less their Spiritual, the best
part whereof should be in heaven out of reach, is so far from countenancing in
Scripture, so contradictorie to reason, and destructive to its self, as that
for wise and conscientious men to be transported thereunto, makes me more
wonder, then at any other erroneous tenet whatsoever: But praised be for ever
Gods infinite goodness in subduing daily so many to this truth, the contrary
whereof has so long together withheld the Gospel of truth in miserable
captivity and invincible ignorance.

But to return again unto Church fellowship and covenant: I would very feign
know, whether such a Covenant as before was mentioned, does not oblige us to
the same which we call Canonical obedience, and do so much, so justly upbraid
the Papacy and Episcopacie withal? nay, is it not yet worse then the vow of
single life wherein all Nuns and Friars entrap themselves? for they do not
run so great a hazard of being tainted with bodily pollutions, as such Church
covenanters do in respect of spiritual: nay, they, when they enter into that
vow, are certain for the present of being in the most desirable condition of
life according to Paul's judgment, 1 Cor. 7.38. and as certain that they shall
ever do best to continue in it: which infallibility of certainty no man can
possibly have in respect of his Church fellowship and condition: but on the
contrary, these Church covenanters acknowledge to want light, and profess to
seek it that they may be better enabled to serve God as they ought, non
progredi est regredi, and that it is required of them to grow in grace and
godliness from one degree and measure thereof unto another; which; who so
enters into such fellowship, may not do, much less make profession of,
unless the major part of the same congregation approve and join with him
therein. I have oftentimes known it objected unto such as were engaged for
Celebrate, what it was should make them so precipitous in vowing to live all
their life time singly and chastely, when they themselves acknowledged they
could not possibly know so long before hand, how well they should be disposed
twenty years after to the performance of it, perceiving it did not little
trouble them to satisfy this querie; for though they conceive it absolutely as
much in their own power to live singly as soberly, yet they acknowledge a far
greater temptation in the former then in the latter; but being transported with
the excellency I once heard a Roman Catholic Gentlewoman (whose piety and
devotions, in her own way, I could justly and willingly extol, might it not
chance become of greater offense then imitation unto many) who had made a
private vow for single life, after many years experience, seriously say, she
did not think God Almighty had any reward in store for single life, in that it
was so abundantly reward unto it self.
and advantages of a single life, they confessed to be much moved to the
vowing of it; not only because God, as they thought, approving thereof, might
the better enable them to go through with it; but also, that it might never
after be in their power to decline or withdraw themselves from so meritorious
and selfe-pleasing a condition, wherein they had none to take care for besides
themselves below, and God above: But to enter into such a Church covenant,
which shall inevitably oblige them never to part, but be engaged to believe and
conform unto all, both in doctrine and discipline neither more nor less, but
what such a congregation. which may add and diminish when they will, shall
incontrolably judge fit, is such a blind engagement, as that I cannot find in
any proportion, nay not so much as any though so light a reason as that before
alleged in behalf of Celibate, and its professors, whereby they might so
colourably be moved to enter into such a dangerous, such an unsearchable Church
covenant.

I deny not but a Church covenant may be necessary, and drawn out so briefly
and clearly, as they which are to enter into it, may fully understand, and
perfectly remember at all times to what they stand engaged; and yet little can
or ought to be put into covenants which men were not obliged unto without them;
we see no president for them in the New Testament; and in the Old, they were
such, as both Pharisees, Sadduces, and all other different believers of the
Jewish National Church, might freely proffer themselves unto without any the
least doubt of conscience; but I humbly propound, if the Pharisees had approved
of the Church government established, the Sadduces practiced another; and the
Herodians approved of neither; whether in such a case, they could all three
have vowed jointly the extirpation of the first, the maintenance of the second,
and yet agree all three in the nearest uniformity according to the Word of God
(and the best reformed Churches if there had been any thing to make it more
impossible.) though they satisfied their own consciences, without giving
offense to others?

Matthew. 23.23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay tyth
of mint, anise, and commine, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
judgment, mercy and faith, these ought you to have done, and not leave the
other undone.

Observation.
SO do they, who insist more upon certain ceremonies and circumstances which
perhaps may be lawful, and they themselves hold but indifferent, then the more
effectual means to increase faith, strengthen hope, and the exercise of
charity, on which the Law and Prophets hang, Matthew. 20.40.

Matthew. 23.25. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye make
clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess.

V. 27. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like unto
whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full
of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanesse.

Observation.
Such are they who regard the outward form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. that stand more upon exacting a conformity of the outward
man, then seeking to preserve the Ordinances of God in purity and unperverted
to the edifying and strengthening of the inward man* such as regard more the
time, place, manner and other circumstances, then the saving truths of Jesus
Christ, that are so much in love with uniformity, that they will run a hazard
of forcing others into an erroneous way, or unto the true in such a manner as
may lead to condemnation, because it is accompanied with doubting, Romans 14 23.
rather then leave them in a possibility, or at liberty of working out their
own salvations with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. and all such, to uphold
the Great Diana of their several advantages, to magnify the Idols of their
own imaginations, when fair means will prevail no longer, they forthwith
fly to their instruments of persecution.

Matthew. 23.29,30,31. We unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; because you
build* the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous,
and say, if we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: wherefore ye be witnesses
unto your selves, that ye are children of them which killed the Prophets, etc.

Observation.
OUr Savior was but once crucified in his Person, but such as crucify him in
his Saints, do multiply the sin; and by so persecuting him in his Saints
whom we have seen, we express how much greater our malice is to Christ whom we
have not seen, 1 John 4.20. but behold our sentence, If they escaped not who
refused* Christ when he spoke on earth, how much less shall we escape if we
turn away from him that speaks to us from heaven in his Saints on earth?
Heb. 12.25. thousands are now persecuted under the Gospel, for every one that
suffered under the Law, and many adhere unto such exquisite Inquisition
principles and government, as that if all the Prophets that ever were, or if
our Savior himself should come upon the earth again, they must of necessity
be conformable, or according to these rules* be persecuted; but how can such
escape the damnation of hell, as our Savior said unto the Jews? Matthew. 23.33.
and we find in 1 Thessalonians. 2.15,16. The Jews killed the Lord Jesus, and their
own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are
contrary to all men: forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might
be saved. And if we look well upon the words, we shall find, not pleasing
God, and being contrary to all men, enclosed by persecuting the Apostles, in
the 15. v. and forbidding the Gospel to be preached unto the Gentiles, in the
16. v. relating unto them both: As if Paul should say, the Jews do not only
displease God by persecuting Gods Saints, and forbidding to preach the Gospel,
but are therein contrary to all other people of the world: They were the Jews
which put our Savior and the Saints to death, they and not the Nations were
guilty of all the bl^udshed, from the blood of righteous Abel to that of
Zacharias, Mat. 23 35. they were the Jews which forbad the Gospel to be
preached unto the Gentiles, not the Gentiles themselves* and yet according to
the poli^ies of these times, one would think, it should have more concerned
Caesar, then any body else to have his native subjects seduced by preaching of
the Gospel, as they apprehended it; however we do not find that in those days
the Powers and Magistrates did so much hinder the propagation of it as the
Jews, once Gods chosen people; but is it not strange that the Jews who then
lived in a kind of bondage, having no King but Caesar, the Roman Emperor,
Joh. 19.15. and therefore might have been in continual fear of having the
freedom of their goods and consciences impaled by their own example toward
others, should yet be ringleaders and fomenters of persecuting the persons and
consciences of such as differed from them? no doubt they did it out of zeal;
and like enough the Gentiles did not love themselves, nor one an other so well,
as to take any care at all of what Religion they were of, a desperate
condition, no indeed; and yet we may gather from this passage of Paul's, as if
the Gentiles were in the better of the two: th^s character which Paul gives the
Jews, of being contrary to all men in that they persecuted and would not
suffer the Gosp^l to be preached unto the Gentiles, over whom they were so far
from having any command, that they had not so much* as any relation, besides
living in a degree of subjection to them, was so peculiar to the Jews, and so
strange a one, as Paul had not such another remaining for any other people; and
if he were now on earth would wonder so much more that such as profess
Christianity, should have learnt this discipline of the Jews, and that
Christians only by their example should have taught it unto all other Nations
which are known to practice it in what proportion soever: but it is alleged
that necessity constraines them thereunto, and men will not be otherwise
reclaimed, as less fearing the keys of Heaven then either of the stocks or
prison: I am tired with this objection* but yet to shut up all, I answer:

The Lord says, He that offends one of these little ones, it were better a
millstone were hung about his neck and cast into the sea, Matthew. 18.6. The Lord
says, When ye depart, shake off the dust from under your feet as a testimony
against those that would not receive you nor hear you: for I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment for (...) City, Luke 10.11.12.
The Lord says, If thy brother shall (...) thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him (...) thou have gained thy brother; but if he will not
(...) or two more, that in the mouth of two or (...): and if he shall neglect
to hear them, tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican: Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matthew. 18.15,16,17,18. O
my Brethren, are these Gods Word and Ordinances? where have they been so long
exiled? how came they to be so sacrilegiously banished from us? why have we not
practiced them amongst us? was this say you, too mild a course, and did it
work no good upon the people? but tell me, fond Christian, where does it
appear that these means prevailed not so long as they were applied according
to the purity of their institution, and not adulterated by Antichristian
inventions and additions? or what commission have thou to use other means if
these prevail not? what more fearful judgment can befall a sinner in this
world then to have a millstone tied about his neck and be flung headlong into
the sea? certainly thou know not any (for what worse then sudden death unto
a sinner?) yet God has prepared a greater for all those that offend his little
ones, wherewith thou art not content, but wilt needs use another of thine own
coining: God says, the dust* shaken off as a testimony against those that will
not hear his Gospel shall aggravate their case worse then Sodomes in the day
of judgment; and even those offending believers which will not be reformed by
private admonishings of their brethren, nor be humbled with the censures of the
Church which casts them out, shall be likewise cast out of heaven: But thou, as
if thou were master of Gods household, or wiser then he that made thee,
declinest the merciful Laws of God, who in long-suffering and meeknes,
preseribing such a course only to be taken for destruction of the flesh that
the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.5.
intrudest into Gods throne, and in the room of his sacred Ordinances thrustest
in the daily more and more adultered offspring of Antichristian traditions, or
the unclean conceptions of thy more poluted phancie, by imprisoning, fining,
banishing, dismembring, and death; as though these, even according to thine
own carnal principles, were not far less capable of prevailing upon the
spirit, then those spiritual which God prescribes to work upon the body; when
yet, besides daily experience, we have a divine Oracle for it, that over much
godly sorrow may swallow up, 2 Cor. 2.7. and that even carnal sorrow may bring
death, 2 Cor. 2.10. whereas it is impossible to be made appear to common
reason, that corporal or outward punishments have any the least capacity, much
less were ever commanded, sanctified or connived at by God to work upon the
spirits of men, which is a most pregnant and invincible testimony, how grossly
Satan deludes us to practice his lying suggestion so long together, that the
true Ordinances having been so far strayed, and through Gods divine providence
brought home again; though by reason of the Majesty of truth which still rests
in them, they be acknowledged agreeable to the Word of God, and what we
practice to be inconsistent with those Ordinances; we should not yet be able to
weane our selves, and cast away the one as menstruous rags, that we might be
reconciled to God again in cleaving to the other.

But may He please, who is the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. and only able to
illuminate the darkness of our understandings, pardoning our innumerable
infirmities and sins, in his own due time to lead us into all truth, for his
only Son Christ Jesus sake; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost in
Trinity and Unity be ascribed all power and praise unto eternity: Amen.

ERRATA.
THe Reader will doubtless find the benefit of it in reading, if he first
please to rectify such errors as have been committed in the Printing, viz.
Page 10. line 4. read their. ^b. l. 30. be. p. 12. l. 3. too. p. 22. l. 17.
with. p. 23 l. 38. discerning. p. 25. l. 6. death. p 27. l. 30. texts. p. 28.
l. 17. eat p. 37. l. 19. to the. p. 40. l. 2. a subject. ib. l. 18. O ingannar
^i ^ole. p. 41. l. 16. Discipline. ^b. l. 17. contrast. p. 43. l. 17. one
scale. p. 52. l. 32. against the Civil Laws for which they suffer. p. 53. l.
4. into two sorts, viz. into such as. r. and ibid. l. 18. selves. p. 63. l. 1^.
they were to be. p. 66 l. 20. choose. p. 68. l. 22. ennobling. p. 76. l. 36.
whom. p. 77. l. 5. power to do. p 94. l. 8. done. p. 99. l. 26. than.


