A Funeral Elegy upon the most Honored upon Earth, and now glorious in Heaven,
His Excellency Robert Devereux Earl of Essex and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord
Ferrers of Chartly Bourchier and Lovaine, late General of England.
portrait Robert Earl of Essex his Exellence Lord General of the Parlimts:
Army etc: Lately deceased

winged skull



IS valiant Essex dead? it is sure a story!
Since none do die who gain eternal glory.
No, he is only vanished from our sight,
And made a star; to give these Isles more light
To see the way to peace, and to direct
Their erring judgments from each idle Sect,
Which trouble both Religion, and the State*
And are indeed the limen of that gate
At which our miseries and mischiefs enter,
The very spring of all our woes and center.
But whither run I? oh! see! observe the Spears,
How they bewail our Essex loss in tears:
For with this light and airy shadow we
Of fame and honor must contented be;
Since from the vain grasp of our Wishes fled
Their glorious substance is, now, he is dead;
And speaks again louder, and louder yet;
Else while we hear the sound, we should forget
What is delivered; let hoarse rumors cry
Till it so many echoes multiply,
To waken our deaf sense, and make our ears
As open and dilated as our fears,
That we might feel the blow and feeling grive
At which fain we would not, but must believe,
And in this horrid faith behold the world
From her proud height of expectation hurled;
Stooping with him, as if she strove to have
No lower center now, then Essex grave.
Oh! could not all thy purchased victories
Like to thy fame, thy flesh immortalize!
Could not all these protect thee, or prevail
To fright that coward Death, who often grew pale
To look thee and thy battles in the face?
Alas they could not! destiny gives place
To none: nor is it seen that Princes Lives
Can saved be by their Prerogatives.
Yet since it is decreed thy life's bright sun
Must be eclip'st; thy race it being run:
Be proud, thou dye'st in thy black obsequies
With greater glory set, then others rise.
For in thy death and life thou heldest one
Most just and regular proportion.
Look how a circle drawn by compass meet
Invisibly is joined head to feet:
So does thy fate and honor now contend
To match thy brave beginning with thy end.
And for thy name, it stands in crimson groun*
Edg-hill and Newbrey-marsh thy fame to sound.
For in those fields thou did triumphantly
Conquer the enemy, got'st the victory.
Therefore thou will have for thy passing bells
The drums and canons thunder forth thy knels.
Then famous London shut your shops a space,
And mourn for him who was your Islands grace.
I should proceed, but sorrow wets my eyes;
And while some Muses write, mine only cries.
Written by him who does with much grief here
Speak of brave Essex, Englands Phoenix Peer.
Josiah Ricraft
of London Merchant.
FINIS
LONDON Printed in the year one thousand six hundred forty and six In which,
SEPTEMBERS fourteenth day deceased brave ESSEX. Are to be sold by JOHN HANCOCK,
in Popes head Ally near the Royal Exchange.


