A WORD of PITY to the PROFANE and to the UNRULY RULERS in this GENERATION.
OH People! when on your behalfs sorrow had filled my heart; the Word was unto
me, Write: And, what shall I write? God has pitied, God has spared you till
many thousands of you have sinned out the Day of your Visitation; and now there
is no Remedy. In your unspeakable wickedness you have outdone the former
Generations, and the mighty God of irresistible Power is suddenly to plead with
you.

Oh! Is there no room among you to receive his Testimony, who has felt the
Wrath of God, revealed against the Man of Sin, in his own particular? who would
now cry out among you in the ardour of his Soul, Repent, Repent, yet Repent,
before ye be cut off: For, this I declare unto you, in the Name, and Authority
of the Living God, and from a measure of his Counsel opened in me, That a
shorter Day has rarely remained to any Generation, than the little breathing
that is now allowed you; And neither Hills nor Mountains, Corners nor secret
Chambers, shall be able to hide any this day from the Wrath of the Lamb:
wherefore come down, come down; you high ones, come forth, come forth, you
covered and not with the Spirit; all People come forth quickly to this bright
Day of God.

Oh! hear, fear, and tremble, you tall, you sturdy Oaks: for he who is God over
all, will level you with the Earth: Lo, I have seen the dreadful Day that is to
be revealed upon you. A Fire shall enter into your Bowels, and burn, and there
shall be no remedy; yea, a Day of blasting, and mildew; scattering, scattering,
scattering, says the Lord God of Hosts, shall enter among the Heathen; a Day
of my Vengeance, and Fury, and my Recompense upon them, says the mighty God.
They have scattered my Heritage, and slain my living Witness in them, which
called them to Repentance. And now, who will stand up and plead? Though my
Servants should, them would I justify, yet I would not hear, for the Day of my
Vengeance is in my heart, and the Year of my Redeemed is come, wherein I will
render Fury to my Adversaries, Recompense to my Enemies, that I may save my
afflicted People, that the springing Tree may grow, (known in my Beloved to be
the Tree of Life) and bear Leaves and Fruit; whose Leaves shall heal the
Nations, and its Fruit shall be Food to my Children. Then hinder this if you
can, ye swarms of Locusts, now crawling up from the Pit, to devour our Harvest.
But lo! you shall not; for, a Wind from the Lord shall drive you away.

Oh! hear you Rulers of the Nations, (for, and through whom, a mighty Burden
has been upon me) forasmuch as your wickedness is now beyond utterance. This
is the Message I am to declare unto you; That He, who is wonderful in Counsel,
and excellent in Working, is arising in his Power, to raze your Foundation; And
your Day shall be short, your End shall be notable, and the shame of your Fall
shall triple the glory of your Rising; you shall leave your Houses desolate,
and you Widows shall mourn.

This is the Word and Testimony that wrought in me mightily the seventeenth day
of the tenth Month, 1662. even in me, who am in Peace with God, and called of
men, Andrew Robeson.


