LONDON, Printed according to Order, by Thomas Pain, for William Ley, at
Paules-Chaine, 1646.

The Peoples Plea: Fully vindicating The POWER and PROCEEDINGS OF THE
PARLIAMENT.

Occasioned by a defense of the COVENANT.

Written by a reverend Divine.

That Rule is eternal,
Salus Populi suprema Lex:
The Peoples safety is the highest Law.
Jos. Nor. The Peacemaker. Sect. 22.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT BOSTOCK, at the Kings Head in PAUL'S Churchyard.
1646.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader:
LEt me desire thee not to mistake. This small Tract was not written so much
out of desire to persuade one Minister, as out of hope that such motives
wherewith my self was satisfied, may prevail with others also, rational men,
which are so doubtful. I know it will appear but as a little Skeleton, a few
sinews and bones, without that filling of flesh* and ornaments of learning,
which a better accommodation for books might have afforded: Not many (perhaps)
of my calling have been more verst in this argument, or more averse from
popularitie than I have been. But I have ever held my course according as mine
own interest did seem to lead me with the tide of that time; nor did I want
reasons out of Barkley, Blackwood, Bodine, Hayward, King James, and others, to
work me into a belief of some truth in those opinions. For Facile credimus,
quod volumus. Especially two Achillean arguments, as they appeared then, the
one from a Kings Supremacy, which in a true Monarchy did seem unquestionable,
much more in such a Monarchy, where it was sworn to. The other argument from a
Kings immediate dependence upon God: But in these great differences of the
State, seeing so many wise and religious men of a different belief, and being
resolved to sacrifice to the Public, all mine own poor private interest in
Church-preferments; I took off my self a while from those pre-conceptions, and
freely examined all from the very original and groundwork of all government,
and compared it with the practice of our own State; where I found things much
differing from what I did imagine before. For indeed neither I, nor many
others, did ever truly understand the nature of an English Parliament before.
It is very true, the King is supreme, and we do swear it in these two
respect: First, in the ordinary administration of the Government, and
execution of the Laws and Customs of the Realm, he is the Supreme, the
Primuin Mobile, the first Wheel that sets all the rest a going. Secondly, in
relation to all other foreign Princes and States (especially the Pope) he is
supreme, Independent, holding from none, nor owing subjection or fealty to
any, and this is the ground of our oath. The Duke of Normandy heretofore, and
other free Princes of France, were supreme in their own Dominions in the
former sense, but were not so by the latter; because they did owe homage, and
held in chief from the Crown of France. So does not the King of England from
any foreign Prince or Potentate in the world. Yet upon examination, I found
all this Supremacy too short for our purpose, and too weak a foundation to
bear all that building, which was raised upon it. For I am persuaded, his
Majesty out of his wisdom will not deny, for all this, but that there is a
greater and an higher Power within this Realm, than his own single. For there
is a Power that can oblige the whole Kingdom by Laws, that can dis-oblige them
again from Laws, that can levy what taxes they shall think requisite, that can
take away the life, liberty, and estate of any man, by a Legislative Power,
without any written Law. I am confident his Majesty is more just and wise,
than to pretend of himself alone to this Power and Supremacy, which is the
high^st in England. Beside the argument from Supremacy, I did imagine as many
others do, that Kings hold their authority immediately from God: But upon a
review, I cannot find any one Text in all the Scripture that does avouch it.
Let me then entreat thee, if thou be any way scrupulous in this point, to lay
aside all prejudicial conceits, and to examine the matter from the Original
sincerely and impartially, no doubt but our good God, being duly called upon,
will open thine eyes and heart, to understand the very truth, which shall be
my hearty prayer on thy behalf.

The Peoples Plea.
To my reverend Brother, etc.
SIR;
I Was troubled not a little, to hear that you are so much troubled with the
Covenant, as that your taking thereof and leaving all your means are put in
the balance. Your particular doubts if they were known, might no doubt
receive particular satisfaction. Now at large, I conceive that as the public
difference of the State, so your private scruples may concern, either the
Ecclesiastical Government, or the Politic power of king and Parliament. In
the former, you are loath perhaps to vow the extirpation of the Prelacy; In the
other, you may stick at preserving the Rights of Parliament, and Liberties of
Kingdom (which are your own) with your estate and life; which as some
interpret, is by a war against the King that may seem unlawful.

To begin with the former, give me leave to ask, whither you do think our
Hierarchy to be prescribed by Gods Word, as alone necessary for the Church; or
only the best and most convenient, but that other forms of Church government
be lawful and allowable as well as that. If you conceive out late form,
absolutely necessary and alone,

1 You will find it impossible to make good the whole frame of that
Government, by any Scripture. Episcopacy it self, Diocesan Episcopacy does
labor much in proving its Original Title to be divine. And the reverend
Bishop who Jos. Nor. The Peacemaker, Sect. 6.
undertook that proof, does now acknowledge this form not to be essential
to the being of a Church, though much importing the well or better being of it.
As for Deanes, and Chapters, Archdeacons, Chancellours, Commisseries, etc. much
less can they plead any warrant from Gods Word.

2 It is too evident, that this government has been very much abused, by the
pomp and pride, the avarice and sloth of the Clergy, by their too near
complyancy with the Idolatrous Church of Rome, by their meddling too much in
Civil and State aff^ires, improper for their calling; but especially, by the
abominable corruption and foul dealing of Chancellours, Commissaries,
Registers, Proctors, and Apparators in Ecclesiastical Courts. To say nothing
of the Clergies dependence upon, and flatterng service to the Kings Court, in
raising the Kings power to the prejudice of the Kingdom, as it is generally
conceived.

3 By that opinion of the divinity of our late Government, you must needs
condemn all other Protestand Churches, especially those which are best
reformed, and most agreeing with us in Doctrine, for want of that Government
and Discipline, which alone, you say God has appointed in his Church. But I
hope you will be advised better, then to entertain such a conceit, as may
occasion so great a breach between us and all the true Churches of God, as if
we alone were to set up ladders and go to heaven; other Nations, some for want
of true Doctrine, others of Government and Discipline excluded all.

But if you do allow of other forms of Government as no way crossing, but
agreeable to the Word of God, why should it be any scruple of conscience, in
such an indifferent case, to join with the maine body of this Kingdom, in
pulling down the Prelacy as an old decayed house, which is no way necessary,
but has been much abused and given great offense to many, yea conceived to be
inconvenient for the safety of the Kingdom, and in setting up another form,
agreeable to Gods Word, more safe and pleasing to the people of the Land, and
more complying with the best of the Protestand Churches abroad? for you may
observe how ever you vow your best endeavor, to extirpate the Hierarchy which
the better and more religious sort of the whole Land, have much and long
distasted; yet you do not vow to set up any other particular form, but only
in general, the best according to the Word of God, and example of the best and
Reformed Churches, Which me thinks every good man should desire and endeavor
of himself, though no Covenant were proposed, much more should he join with
his whole Country, going before him, and calling for his assistance

Perhaps you may think (to come unto the other maine point) that there wants
authority sufficient in these proceedings; you may scruple at joining in a
Covenant, much more in Arms, and there to hazard your life and state against
the King, as it seems to many. And here indeed, there will be some work to
persuade you to a right understanding of things; so much hereto sore has the
Kings power been cried up, especially by the Clergy, the choicest flowers of
whose preferments did only grow at Court, and the Parllament cried down as
fast, especially by such as were desirous to prey upon the Kingdom without
control.

Now then first I say, that neither the Covenant nor the Arms are taken against
the King, but for him both. In the Covenant it is expressed, To defend the Kings
Majesty's person, and authority. And the Arms do speak as much, being styled
for the King and Parliament; however the king being mis-advised by evil
Councillors, do seem in person to appear against them. But had there been
any evil intention against his Majesty, there might have been set up another
Majesty before this time: For my part, I am undoubtedly persuaded, if he
should really and fully comply with his Parliament, he should have as glorious
a Government, but far more easy, contented and sweet, then hitherto he has
ever enjoyed. A Physician gives his Patient a potion that seems bitter, and
he is very loath to take; and if the disease be unruly, he is bound too,
without any evil will or meaning to wards him, but only for his health and
good. Ears that have been long acquainted with the descanting music of
flattery, will at first much distaste the harsh and plain notes of truth,
though indeed more truly harmonious.

I know very well, there is no passing for me thus. It will be demanded, Who
made the Parliament the Kings Physicians? Or how may any Subjects take up
Arms, though not against his Person, yet against his will? Yes: If truth may
be spoken without offense, whereunto the Statutes for Treason heretofore gave
small freedom. The Parliament may be called the Kings Physicians, and may also
take up Arms, especially in their own defense, against his will, for his or
the Kingdoms good.

Take we that common Axiom for the ground of all, that Rule eternal, as the
Peacemaker Sect. 22.
says, which in a Kingdom, where tyranny prevails not, is unquestionable;
Salus populi suprema Lex: The good and safetle of the people, and Kingdom, is
the most fundamental Law of all government. There cannot be well conceived any
other aim or end, wherefore people should choose them Kings, or any other
form of Rule, but only for their own defense and welfare; and certainly not
for the good of their Kings or Governors primarily, but only in relation to
their own, and as it is involved in the common good of all. What Tyrants aimed
at, who forced men under their subjection, as Nimrod and the like, it is no way
material to speak of, when we deal upon lawful and just Governments, such as
our own. A learned Doctor, Dr. Fearne in Conscience satisfied, Sect. 5.
pleading the Kings cause, though he has heaped many errors about the
original of Government, which as occasion is offered, I shall discover, yet
seems ingenuously to grant this Axiom, That the safety of the Commonwealth
is the highest end; and unto that end all other are means, and that the Higher
Power ought to minister unto that end. And the Apostle Romans 13. 4.
does plainly speak as much, He is the Minister of God for thy good, that is,
the good of the Subject, of the People. The Minister of God he is called,
because of Gods general Ordinance; the Minister of man also he may be called,
because of the particular, whereof St. Peter speaks, Submit your selves unto
all manner Ordinance of man. To say Kings are the ordinance of man subjective,
or for the qualification of their power, may seem rather a shift, than a
credible exposition or answer. It is not likely St. Peter did dream of either.

Now this being granted, that the welfare of the People governed, is the
original and final cause of all Government and Governors, even of Kings; see
what building may be raised upon this foundation, what consequences depend upon
it in general: and so we will descend to our own particular.

First, it follows hence, That the Kingdom is not ordaided for the Kings
use, benefit, or good; but the King is ordained for the Kingdoms use, as the
chief and supreme ordinary means, to precure the Peoples welfare and
safety. For that millions of men, of the same mold and temper, should be
ordained for the benefit of one, as it is most unnatural and unreasonable, so
does it relish too much of the Tyrant and Slave.

Secondly, If the Kingdom or Peoples safety be the highest end, and the King
only the chief ordinary means provided for this end; as the end is more
noble Keckerm. System. Log. lib. 1. cap. 18. Canon. 5. de fine primario, ex
Aristot. mag. mor. 1. 7.
and excellent, and to be preferred before the means, as they are means; so is
the whole Kingdom superior to the King, and the King, though Singulis major,
universis minor, Less than all in general, though greater and above all in
particular. And therefore in case it were necessary, either for the King
alone, or the whole Kingdom to be destroyed, who will not think it more just
and reasonable, that one should save all, being ordained for their safety,
rather than all should perish to save one? Thou art worth ten thousand of us,
say the people 2 Samuel 18. 3.
to King David; but not worth thirteen hundred thousand, 2 Samuel 24. 9.
for all that. It is true, the means materially may be better than the end:
But I say as means, they are subordinate and inferior. Now a King or
Governor in his best notion is but a mean for the Subjects happiness. It was
indeed our Saviors infinite, but voluntary goodness, that being in the form
of God, etc. he would so far empty and debase himself, as to be the mean of
man's salvation. Let us hold to humane, or natural means. I know it is
objected, the King is the Head and Highest, therefore no way inferior. How the
King is the Head and Supreme, is elsewhere declared. But a politic Head is
much different from the natural. This being taken off, the body dies. Till
that all government be taken away, the politic body dies not. However the Head
be highest in place, the Body is above it in dignity, especially because it
bears the Heart, the principal part by Aristotle's Philosophy, Fountain of
Life, Mint of the Spirits, and prime Seat of the Soul.

Thirdly, if this were the condition of Government at the first institution, it
must be the condition of all just and lawful Governments unto this day, the
Rule being eternal of Salus Populi: and wheresoever there is any failing or
defect herein, there is so great a declination to Tyranny, more or less. And
therefore it is most considerable how a Kingdom began, or what prerogatives
and authority the King had allowed him from the beginning; if all be employed
and referred to this maine end, all is well, and the Government good, otherwise
it does regenerate, and may be corrected, however it began.

Fourthly, the natural end of Government needs not be set down in a written
convention or compact, as some Consc. satisfied, Sect. 3.
would have it; For beside, that when Government began in most Nations, they
had no writing at all: It is impossible to imagine or conceive, that reasonable
creatures should submit themselves to the rule and command of others, for no
end, or any other end, beside their own good. This cannot then but be supposed
in all Governments, though no such convention appear in writing.

Fifthly, if this end be disappointed, and they which have authority and power
given them by the people, for the peoples good, impugn, cross, and hinder the
same, by spoiling, oppressing, and destroying them, that power and authority
cease ipso facto; there needs no resuming of it, as some would have: For
being given in relation to an end, that end failing, the means do fall of
themselves. Nor can it be supposed, that any reasonable creatures would give
authority and power against themselves, and to their own hurt, or intended at
first to continue the same to their owns destruction, which was given only for
their defense and preservation. It fares too often with States, as with the
Horse in the Fable,

Non Equitem dors^, non froe^um depulit ore.
He took the saddle for defense,
But has been jaded ever since.
Men are not tied to the ordinary Law of Horses, but if Bellerophon will drive
his Pegasus up to Heaven an unnatural course, Pegasus may be bold to turn off
his Rider upon the earth.

Sixthly, the peoples safety being the end of all just Governments, if that
should be invaded by the Governors or Kings themselves, whom they have trusted
over them, some means must needs be allowed them, to preserve and recover the
some. Otherwise mankind, may easily be frustrated by fraud or violence, of the
maine end, for the preserving whereof, they subjected themselves to Rulers, and
that without all remedy: which as I conceive, ought not to be supposed. Now in
such Kingdoms or Governments, as have Parliaments, Diets, and such full
Assemblies of the States, these means of preserving Salus Populi, are more
plain, easy, and expedite, then elsewhere, because such general Assemblies
can both judge truly of such wrongs, and breach of common Liberties, and
readily provide remedies for the same* both which are more slowly and hardly
done, where such public Assemblies are wanting: and therefore they be much
more subject to tyrannies and oppressions, then the others are. But whenever
it appears unto the Kingdom or Body of the people clearly, that the
Governors in stead of procuring their good and safety, do spoil and oppress
them, as the obligation of rule and and subjection is presently void, the end
failing upon which it was grounded, so they have liberty to provide for their
own welfare, either by reforming what was amiss, or by limiting and
qualifying the Authority and Prerogitives of those Rulers, or removing that
Government, or those evil Governors (in case of extreme necessity) and
placing others is more hopeful means for the public good; In all which, they
may lawfully make use of their own Strength, Power, and Arms, or any other,
as occasion shall require. For that the chief end of all Government ought not
to be frustrated and dis-appointed. D. Fearne argues, because elect Monarchs
did succeed Paternall Government, therefore they succeeded in the same right
and condition free from coertion, and removalls as fathers were, and so meant
under the names of fathers in the fifth Commandment. But how follows it,
because they followed Fathers, therefore they did follow in the same condition
every way. Fathers have a natural obligation, and a natural affection;
strangers have not so, Fathers have no other Interest but their childrens good,
strangers have, no it is certain that never Fathers had any jurisdiction and
power of the sword, or if ever they had, and grew tyrannous, its as certain
their children might cast off their Government, though not their Fatherhood. As
for the fifth Commandment it belongs no more to Kings then other Governors,
yea, and Teachers, Masters, and other Superiors, whereof none so unmovable as
Parents.

Seventhly, and last of all, That end must regulate Reckerm. System. Log. lib.
1. cap. 18. Canon. 4. de fine ult. ex Aristot. Polit. 1: 6. and de Caelo 2.^.74.
all the means so, as they may best conduce for the attaining of the same. The
King then being but a means, his Authority and Power must be regulated
accordingly, as the people shall think meetest for their own safety; and
therefore in our State as the Kingdom or people have 1. Entrusted their King
with the change of seeing the Laws executed, and obeyed, which are provided
for their safety: so they have given Authority to the Parliament, by a nearer
trust, both to devise and make new Laws, abrogating the unusefull, and
declaring the doubtful and obscure, with the Kings consent in all, who is the
chief Minister in executing the same. 2 So likewise to visit and correct all
abuses in the State, yea to examine the Kings own proceedings whether he has
rightly discharged his great trust, and to control his actions in case they
swerve or decline from the bias of the public good: and here is the Physic I
speak of. 3 Which controuling, if it be withstood, and find strong lets and
opposition, they may lawfully take up Arms without and against the Kings will,
upon occasion. Fourthly and lastly, in case there should fall a difference
between the King and his Parliament, upon or concerning the Premises, it is
the safest way for a subject both in conscience and common wisdom, to adhere
unto the Parliament.

I know you may doubt of, and question all these four particulars according to
those principles of Divinity and State, which a great faction of your shire and
some other places have ignorantly followed. I will therefore endeavor to make
them all good, and clear severally thus:

That the King is entrusted by the Realm with his Authority, does appear
partly, because from thence he has his power: partly, because he cannot
receive his Authority or Power from any other: and lastly, because the
Kingdom has received a Superior Authority to examine and control his
proceedings.

The first reason is, The King has his Power from the Kingdom and therefore
his Authority. I must crave leave to distinguish these terms, which commonly
are confounded and obscure this whole business. Authority then, is a right or
lawfulness to command, and to challenge obedience; such as all Governors and
Magistrates have, more or less. But Power is a lawful ability to force
obedience, if upon challenge and command it be denied. These are two different
things, because they may be, and are many times separated; One may have a just
and lawful right to command, that wants compulsive means for coertion. Others
may have great strength to force, commonly called power, that are destitute of
authority to command: and power is that which in all Governments bears the
greatest sway; and therefore in the Scripture Romans 13. and elsewhere, it is
taken concretively, for the Governors and Magistrates themselves, which have
power at command, to force obedience unto their commands. Now there is no
doubt, but the King has full authority to command according to law, all such
as by law are subject into him. But if upon his commands obedience be denied,
whence I pray, has he* a lawful ability to force it? whence has he power to
make his authority good* but from the people? of himself he cannot have it,
being but one man, not having the strength of any more; whereas this ability
does require the strength of many. Vis unita fortior, vis om^ium unita
fortissi^, many hands are abler then one; but the hands of all, ablest of all.
To keep a strong guard for this purpose, especially of strangers, Aristotle and
all that write of Polity will tell you, that it is the property of Tyrants;
nor is such ability P^test^s but Vis, violence not power, because unlawful.
And to keep an Army on foot continually, under other pretenses thereby to
affright and force his subjects, is little better: Therefore the Kings power
must needs come from his own peoples hands, and strength, and from the same
people must needs come his authority therefore. If any other should give him
authority, that were not able to make it good by power, it were given him but
in vain; nor were the people bound to make that good, which themselves give
not. Whence he has his power then, from thence he must needs receive his
authority also, even from the Kingdom.

Nor indeed can he receive it from any other. I hear some speak, and preach,
and write also, but see no proof, that Kings have their authority and power
immediately from God. And sure, if they could fetch down fire from Heaven, as
Elias did, or strike men dead with the breath of their mouths, as S. Peter did,
for disobedience; I should grant their power descended immediately from Heaven.
But we neither see, nor hear of any such miracles wrought by Kings. No power
then immediately from God, and therefore no authority, otherwise than all
other Magistrates have. For as by Gods wisdom Kings do reign, and Princes
decree justice, Prove. 8. 15. Even so by the same, do the Nobles rule, and all
the Judges of the earth, ver. 16. And Romans 13. 1. There is no Power but of God,
that is, as it is expounded in the same place, not only ordained, but ordered by
God, secundum sub and supra, in several ranks, higher and lower. Kings then
have their power from God no more than inferior* Governors, Caesar Ioh. 19. 11.
no more than Pilate. So far as God approves of, and has ordained all
Societies of mankind, and Governments and Governors, both high and low, so far
all authority, and all power that is employed in discharging and maintaining
the same, is in general from God; but immediately from the People, executing
the Ordinance of God. And therefore S. Peter, Ephesians. 2. 13. says plainly thus,
Every Governor, both high and low, supreme and subordinate, is (...), an
humane ordination, or creature. Now then to answer as the Doctor does, that
this is taken subjectively, in regard of the power it self, which is from God
causally, and placed in man as the subject, or else to be understood of the
qualifications, and several ways of executing that power in several terms
of Government. These may seem rather shifts* then solutions or expositions, the
former being strained against the former meaning of the words; the latter such
as (it is not likely) S. Peter ever dreamt of, being both against the strain
of Interpreters. For were it so that God immediately gave unto Kings their
ruling power; First, no other form of Government were lawful, so that
Aristocracies, and Democracies, being humane inventions, as Dr. Feanne Consc.
satiffied, Sect 3.
says, would have no* warrant from God for their proceedings* and for want of
such divine authority and power, as many ^elons as they executed, so many
murders they committed; and as many fines or mulcts as they levied, so many
robberies. Me thinks our neighbors, the States of Holland, the Swissers,
Grisons, and free Cities of Germany, should not* rolish well this new doctrine.
Secondly, if Royal Authority came altogether from Heaven, it should by right
be the very same upon all the earth* But we find it far otherwise; no two
States in the world allowing their Princes the very same authority, in all
points. In some things (perhaps) the Spanyard has* more than the* English, in
some others the English more than he, the French more than both, the Dane,
Swede, Polander* and Scottish* less than any of them. The Turk, Chinoys, and
other such* absolute Princes, more than all these. Yet all Kings* Do some (I
pray) take less authority than God allows them, or do others* take more? How
may it be known, how far Gods allowance goes? No Scripture does resolve it.
And I presume, there came no Angel from Heaven to order it. These limitations
and qualifications of power, Dr. Fearne Consc. satisfied, Sect. 3.
says, are mere inventions of men. But is it lawful for men to limit, or
qualify that, which God himself has otherwise, and more fully ordered?
Certainly, if this be unlawful, as it cannot be otherwise, if God himself be
the immediate Author of Royal Authority, then all the Realms in Christendom
do very much offend. For in all, the absolute power of Kings is limited,
though in all diversely. This is acknowledged to proceed from the People, as
correcting Gods Ordinance, which without all doubt, is not in any Peoples power
to do. And therefore all Kings may take upon them, nay ought indeed to take
upon them, an absolute and arbitrarie power, nor is it any treason to persuade
them thereunto, if that be from God, and these limiations and qualifications,
mere inventions of men. I know not whither we shall run anon, by following
this new doctrine. Yet some where I have seen thirteen, I cannot say, proofs,
(they were so weak) but offers, to make good the immed^ Commission of Kings
from heaven; all so short and wide from the mark, that I should wrong the
Reader to repeat them. For either in general they show, that Kings and all
Goveronrs indeed are authorized by Gods general Ordinance, and the particulars
of them assigned by God his especial providence, or else they concern Moses and
the Kings of the Israelites, which does no way concern other Kings: when I
hear such an express testimony for others, as I read Deuteronomy. 17. 15. for those
Kings, Thou shall make him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose,
it will be credible to me, that God has an immediate hand, if not in their
authority, yet in their personal assignement: And till we have some more
likely proof then hitherto I have seen, give us leave to suppose still, that
those men who have limited the authority of Kings (by their own confession)
did first give the same. I find no proof at all, that such authority comes
from God: till then I may well suppose, that those men who have limited the
authority of Kings, did at first give it.

Last of all, if the King were not entrusted with his Command, by the Kingdom,
how could the Kingdom have Authority, to examine and control his proceedings,
in the discharge thereof? But this Authority they have, and do entrust the
Parliament therewith; as now I am to prove upon the second point; upon which
the former point will necessarily follow.

Secondly, that the Parliament has full Authority from the Realm, to examine
the Kings proceedings, and to control them if irregular, that is, either
trespassing against the known Laws, or otherwise encroaching upon the Subjects
liberty and safety, common experience, and the continual practice of
Parliaments does make it evident. Indeed his Person they do not strike at, and
to blemish his dignity and honor, they do spare all that may be, in the eyes
of Subjects and strangers; that he may still retain his full glory and luster,
both at home and abroad. And it is presumed, that he does nothing personally,
and therefore nothing against the Laws, but only by Ministers and Agents. But
all his unlawful acts by such Ministers, they do reverse, and punish the
Instruments themselves, though immediately commanded by the King. Now this they
can no otherwise do, but as they are authorized by the Kingdom; whereof the
Noblemen are a part themselves, the House of Commons, chosen by the Commons of
the Land. Nor indeed can they well have any other abuses to reform, but such as
the King either commands, or approves, and connives at. For all others
commonly, are redressed by the King, and ordinary Courts of Justice. But such
enormities, as grow at Court, either by command, or toleration and connivence,
the Parliament only can redress. And therefore have Courtiers so much possessed
His Majesty against Parliaments, as if they did eclipse his Glory, because they
may not themselves grate upon the Subjects, and play Rex quietly, without
question and censure of Parliament. Dr Fern, Cons. satisfied. Sect. 4.
seems to allow the Parliament no Authority, but only an assentin making Laws
with His Majesty. But this power of visiting the public abuses, both in Court
and Kingdom, is every whit as great, and as necessary a Power, for maintaining
of Salus Populi. And beside the command of the Subjects purses, in granting of
Subsidies, which only belongs to the Parliament, is a great and very
considerable Authority. As for making Laws, if we will speak properly, the King
does rather assent to them, who bring the Acts ready penned and Voted, then
they to him. Certainly a great providence and blessing of God it is, that we
have the benefit of Parliaments, to purge out such corruptions, as will daily
grow, in so great a politic body. Otherwise, in a few years (as by dear
experience we have lately found) by the flattery, and craft of mischievous
wits, working for their own covetous and evil ends, the liberty of the
Subject, and the safety of the Realm, would be quickly undermined and
overthrown.

Thirdly, But if the Parliament should be withstood, or disturbed; if
opposition made to hinder them, in reforming the abuses of Court and Country,
and providing due means for the safety of the people, (which was my third
point) must they sit still then, and quietly suffer such abuses as they can not
reform? And shall the safety of the State suffer, through their weakness and
disability? No doubt but Salus Populi, the welfare of the Realm, which is the
chief end of Government, ought to be better provided for, then so. If such
obstacles come in their way, as can not be removed by ordinary means, no doubt
but the Kingdom is to allow them power, to make the Authority good, where with
they have entrusted them, and to preserve their own safety. Otherwise the
Authority is all in vain, because every opposition and disobedience may hinder
the execution and discharge thereof; and so the public weal may suffer without
all remedy. As Philosophy says, Frustra est potentia, que nunquam reducitur in
actum: Such a natural faculty is in vain, which cannot be actuated; so is that
Authority in a State, which every disturbance may frustrate and disappoint.
Now as Aristotle says of God and Nature, so it is to be presumed of a Kingdom,
that it does nothing in vain; and therefore, that together with Authority, it
gives power also (having all the power in its own hands) to enable the
discharge thereof. This power can be no other then Posse Regni, the Militia of
the Kingdom; Quid enim contra vim, sine vi fieri potest. Forcible opposition
must have forcible resistance. This Posse Regni then in case of necessity, the
Parliament may, and ought, to raise and employ, even without the King, if he do
cross himself, or join with such as disturb them in their proceedings.

I know here comes in a great outcry, against Rebellion; as if it could be no
less, for any to take up Arms, without, or against the Kings will. And true it
is in some sense. Understand the right thereof, and then judge. For private
men, of their own heads; nay more, for Magistrates, Officers, Governors, be
they never so many, never so great, which derive their Authority from the
King, and therefore in respect of him are as private men, to raise a War by
their own Authority, without him, much more against him is legal Rebellion.
But the Parliament derives their Authority, not from the King, though he be
entrusted with assembling and dissolving them: no more then a Trumpeter gives
authority to fight, when he gives the Signal. But all their Authority does
come from the Kingdom; whereof one part is present personally, the Nobles, and
the other part by their choice Atturneys. And all these, have so much a nearer
trust from the Kingdom, then the King himself, as all their private Interests,
are more concentrick to Salus Populi, the public good. For the King has a
proper center of his own to move about; he has private ends, and different
Interests from the people, for his Prerogatives, and Family. In regard whereof,
though he has a very great trust, yet may they not in any discretion, give him
so near a trust, as to the Parliament. And therefore the Parliament taking up
Arms, and authorizing others, for their own defense, being threatened, hindered,
and disturbed in their proceedings, and Salus Populi, the common Liberty not
yet secured, which had lately been so much wronged, they are no ways liable to
the charge of Rebellion, nor any that join with them to vindicate the Kingdoms
Interest; but those rather, who presume to turn the Arms of the Kingdom against
it self, and against the Parliament, for discharging faithfully and zealously
that trust, which the Kingdom has reposed in them. Now against the former,
private men, and others of Authority, that hold from the King, the Scriptures,
which are alleged commonly out of Romans 13. and other places, may have place;
and the Statutes of the Realm also. But against the Parliament, who themselves
are of those higher powers, whereof St Paul speaks, no Scripture does speak,
nor has any Statute force.

You may demand perhaps, why the Parliament never took up Arms before, if it be
a thing so lawful. It Is true. Though in behalfs of Parliaments much blood has
been shed in this Land, yet has it not been usual for the Parliaments
themselves to manage a War, because it has been hitherto in some sort
impossible. For the Kings having the trust of calling and dissolving, have ever
used, to call slowly, and dissolve speedily, upon the least offer of distaste.
I remember an old ryme to this purpose, Much complained of, little amended.
Subsidies granted, Parliament ended: so that many of the common sort believed,
there was no other use of, nor business for a Parliament, but to grant
Subsidies. No thinking for them of a War, that were so uncertain of their own
continuance. Now these present Arms were begotten by Necessity, and brought
forth by Opportunity. The Parliament intending a through-reformation, and
corruptions being grown to a great head, through so many nullities, and so long
discontinuance of Parliaments, they were not able to compass their intents,
without the discontents of many. For to redress public Inconveniences, it
could not be, but many personal mischiefs must be endured in private. This
bred great store of Malignants; and they threatened great storms of danger to
the Reformers: At last, the King himself was drawn away, with intent to disturb
all by Arms; as did appear by the L: Digbies Letter, by the Kings guard (as
some * call it) raised at Ysrk, and other discoveries. Now unless the
Parliament, would suffer the wheel to carry all back again with violence, which
they had done, and expose themselves and heirs to utter ruin, for their good
service, they must needs defend themselves and their proceedings, and secure
their own and their Countries safety, with the Arms and power of the Country
which had entrusted them. Yet had they undertaken this all in vain, if Gods
providence, and their own wisdom, had not extraordinarily provided them an
opportunity. For if things had stood as heretofore, the King might have
suddenly dissolved the Parliament, and exposed them all, to the fury of
discontented Malignants. But they seeing at first, what a Hydra of corruptions
they were to encounter withal, in a through-reformation, obtained of His
Majesty an Act, for continuation of this Sitting, until they had finished all
their designs. Having this assurance, they resolved to venture the hazard of a
War, rather then to betray their own, and the Kingdoms safety. 'Twas not their
desire, but fear; Being unwilling and forced thereunto, according to the
goodness of their Cause, God has prospered their endeavors, and judged on
their side. And it may be well hoped, this short War, will occasion a long and
a happy Peace. It is the travail of our Kingdom, for the time painful. But
when the Man-child is born into the world, and the thorough-reformation
perfected, no doubt, but there will be much and lasting joy over the whole
Land, for the short sorrow that it has endured.

Fourthly, Now to come unto that which was proposed in the last place; In such
a difference between the King and Parliament, as now is fallen, that it is
safer to trust our selves on the Parliaments side, both in conscience and
wisdom, thus it may appear. 1. Though it were doubtful or obscure, on which
side the justice of this Cause did stand; yet let us consider, that the highest
point of Supreme authority in this Kingdom does consist in repealing and
making of Laws. As for executing them after they are made, with other
circumstances of government, calling Assemblies, Dr Fearne Cons satisfied.
Sect. 4.
Treating with foreign Princes, sending Embassies, Appointing officers of
state, and Judges of Courts etc. In all which the Parliament also may
interpose, if they sinde it expedient for the common safety, these are but
small matters in comparison of enacting obligatory Laws. This highest and
Supreme authority of the Realm, is placed in a full Parliament; though for
the execution of Laws, and ordinary Administration, the supremacy be in the
King alone and also in relation to the Pope, to foreign Princes and States as
the oath of Supremacy and Alleagiance do declare. And this full Parliament
does consist of three parts, the King, the Peers, and the House of Commons.
But they must all agree, and go together. Neither the King and Commons without
the Nobility, nor yet the King and Nobles without the Commons can do it. Now
in such equal and coordinate powers, if upon a difference one should stand
against two, is it not safter in Conscience for a subject, to join with two of
them against one, then with one against two? especially to join with those
two, which have the nearest trust, of preserving our liberty and safety
recommended to them? Secondly, The Parliaments cause, does clearly appear to
be more justifyable. For all their proceedings have been warrantable, as by the
first ground of all government, in maintayning populi salutem, the public
good, so according to the settled constitution of this kingdom, in reforming
grand enormities; and when they could not otherwise secure themselves or the
kingdom; in taking the power of the kingdom, which had entrusted and
authorized them, to make their Acts good against Delinquents and Malignants;
and all such as went about to reverse or disturb their proceedings, and
destroy their persons. On the other side, the King deserted them, purposely, to
join with such Delinquents and Malignants, in arms against them, to hinder
them, and in them the public good. What then can there be safer for a man's
conscience to rest upon, then the goodness of a cause in such a maine
difference? The Parliament did but their duties; and for doing that, were in
danger of utter undoing. The King voluntarily forsook them, with intention (as
it is conceived) to have destroyed them, had He prevailed. Was it not just then
for them to defend themselves, with the power of that kingdom, in whose cause
and service they were like to suffer? Lastly, in ordinary wisdom, is it not
fitter for one of us, ordinary subjects, to adhere unto those, who maintain
our Interests and liberty, and of whose Assemblies our children may be members;
then to venture our lives and fortunes for the Prerogative, wherein neither we,
nor our children have any hope of Interest, but is rather prejudicial, and to
the great disadvantage of us and ours, as it has been managed? Nay more; for
us to desert the Parliament by neutrality, who do hazard their lives and
estates for us and our good, without any private hope or end of their own;
much more to appear against them, to the hazard of our own lives and
fortunes, can it be any thing better then foul unthankefulnesse, and extreme
folly? By this time, I hope, Sir, you have received so much content and
satisfaction, to the principal doubts, that petty scruples shall not work
upon you so far, as to make you liable to those two illiberall vices. It Is true.
They are not many years, since you left the University, where young wits, do
use to dream of nothing but Bishoprics and Archbyshopricks. But you are
become a man and put away childishness; you are settled in a place, where to do
God, his Church, and your Country service. I know your meekness and
ingenuity, is far from their ambitious humor, who relish nothing, but
Dignities in the Church, and Court preferments: contemning the mean rusticity
of country ministers. I pray let these men themselves enjoy their humor. Do
you but follow your own quiet and mild temper, I doubt not, but what I have
written may prevail, though for want of time and books not written with that
diligence, as the weight of the matter did require. Let me entreat you,
seriously to consider of these things; And the All-wise God give you a right
understanding in them all.

So prays, Yours, etc.

FINIS.

