portrait of John Rainolds See here, th 'effigies, lovely, lively face,
Of reverend Rainolds, full of faith and Grace;
Oxfords renowned Doctor of the Chair,
Acute, mellifluos Orator, most rare!
T. Cross sculp


THE PROPHECY OF HAGGAI, Interpreted and applied in sundry SERMONS

By that Famous and Judicious Divine, JOHN RAINOLDS, D. D.

Never before printed, Being very useful for these Times.

HAGGAI Chap. 1. verse 7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your
ways. Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house, and I will
take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. Ye looked for
much, and lo, it came to little: and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon
it: Why, says the Lord of Hosts? because of mine house that is wast, and ye
run every man unto his own house.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for William Lee, and are to be sold at the
Turkes-head near the Miter Tavern in Fleetstreet. 1649.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Reader,
I Shall promise a few words concerning both the Author and work. For the
Author of it, it was Doctor JOHN RAINOLDS, a man eminent both for learning and
piety. No man me thinks (says Dr. Hall De Cade First Epist. 7.
one) is happy on Earth to him that has grace for substance and Learning for
ornament. This verse is written about Dr. Rainolds Air picture, In^ertum est
fuerit, doctior an melior. It is doubtful whether He were more learned or
pious. When Bellarmine came out first, both the Universities chose one in each
Academy to confute him. Oxford (for I must ever give that the pre-eminence)
chose Doctor Rainolds for their Champion. Cambridge, Doctor Whitaker for
theirs. Whitaker was more nimble, for he went over a great part of Bellarmines
Controversies, and so solidly consuted him, that it is credibly related by some
Englishmen that traveled into Italy, that Bellarmine himself procured his
Picture out of England, and placed it in his study, secretly admiring him for
his great learning; and when he was asked by another Jesuit his friend and
companion, why he would have the Picture of that Heretic, he was wont to
answer, that although he was an Heretic, and an adversary, yet he was a
learned Adversary. Whitaker, that Honor of our Schools, and Angel of our
Church, Learned Whitaker, then whom our age saw nothing more memorable; Dr.
Hall ibid.
what clearness of judgment? what sweetness of style? what gravity of person?
what grace of carriage was in that man? who ever saw him without reverence, or
heard him without wonder? Doctor Rainolds (whom a very reverend Divine compares
to a pen too full of ink) thought at the first, that in two or three years he
should have been able to have gone over all Bellarmin^ Controversies, but he
was 7 years about the very fir^^ of (...) de ^bris Apocryphis, which yet he
finished not neither, insomuch that one Mr. Walter Travers jested with him, and
told him, he was so long in reading the Apocrypha here, that he would read the
Canon^cals in Heaven. Yet his conference with Heart* and that work together,
do amply discover his great abilities, and he Parkerus in praefat. ad lib. de
descensu C^^ ad Inferos.
is justly styled by one of our own writers, Pontificiorum malleus, and
patriae suae dulcissimum decus, the hammer of the Papists, and most sweet
ornament of his own Country. Doctor Rainolds alone was a well furnished
Library, Dr. Hall ubi. supra. Rainoldus fuit, doctrinae and omne genus
eruditionis Oazophylacium dix^ris. Scriptores opinor omnes, prophanos
Ecclesiasticos, sacros* concilia, Patres, Historias evolver^t; Li^guarum quae
cunque Theologo, vel adjumento sunt, vel ornamento, callentissimus: Ingenio
acer agilisque, judicio gravis and maturus: labor magis quam Adamantius ipse
in defatigabi^is: sic in omni disciplinnarum genere versatus, quasi in singulis
operam suam omnem posuisset. Crakanth* Defens. Eccles Anglic. C. 69.
full of all faculties, of all studies, of all learning: the memory, the
reading of this man were near to a miracle. For this work of his, it was
reviewed and perfected by that Reverend Divine Master William Hind, sometimes
Preacher of Gods word at Bunbury in Cheshire, whose intention was to have
printed it in his life time, he having set forth some other of the same
Authors works, as that on Obadiah, these Sermons immediately following
thereupon, to be handled in the Doctors ordinary course of Preaching, as
appears in the first page of these Sermons. This Copy therefore being left
with me (by Master Nathaniel Hind, a Minister in Staffordshire, and Son to
the forementioned Master William Hind) with a desire also of the publication
of it: I thought good to preface thus much in the behalf both of the Author
and work. It is (I suppose) the best Copy that is extant; and though he wholly
finished not the second Chapter of Haggai, yet because the maine subject of
that Book is the building of the Temple, it will not seem unseasonable for
these times, wherein Reformation should be the aim of all; and in another
respect also this work may be suitable to the present season, because this
learned and religious Author in this Book seems to favor the Presbiterian
way. What ever it be, I commend it and thee to Gods blessing, and rest,

Thy hearty well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

AN EXPOSITION Upon HAGGAI.
Sermon the First.
CHAP. 1. verse. 1. In the second year of Darius the King in the sixth month,
the first, day of the month came the word of the Lord by the hand of the
Prophet* Haggai unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, a Prince of Judah, and
to Jehosuah the son of Jehozadak the high Priest saying, Thus has the Lord
of hoasts charged me to say, This people say the time is not yet come, the time
that the Lords house shall be builded. Then came the word of the Lord by the
hand of the Prophet Haggai saying* Is it time for you Sirs to sit down in your
seiled houses whiles this house lies waste?
YOU have heard in the conclusion of the Prophecy of Obadiah, the promise of
deliverance made by God unto the Jews, and in them, to all his chosen, that
their enemies should be overthrown, and they restored to their ancient
inheritance which should be performed by Saviors, which should come up to
mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau, and that the kingdom should be the
Lords, which that you might see how it was in shadow, performed to the Jews,
and in truth to all the chosen of God, I thought good to entreat of this
Prophecy of Haggai, wherein the same is delivered unto us. In which we are
taught, that the Temple having been begun to be built long before, and the
work intermitted, was with much ado continued by Zerubbabel and Jehosua, who
were thereunto moved by the ministry of Haggai, prospered by the assistance of
the godly, encouraged by Gods word, and grace of his spirit, which represents
un o us Heb. 3. 6.
the frame of the spiritual house, the Church which Christ built by his
Apostles, which were sent from Sion as was prophesied of 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10.
them. The doctrine shall come from Sion. Next if we consider the circumstances
of the times, letts, helps, the persons, people, Princes, Priests, dealings, it
may be an example unto us, and to such Isa. 2. 2. Mic. 4. 2.
as are to deal any way in the building of the church, how to behave
themselves therein. Moreover by the consequence that once more he would shake
the heavens and the earth, bring the desire of all nations, and fill that house
with glory, he comprehends the fulfilling Hag 2. 6, 7
of all his promises made to his church in Christ Jesus, Finally he lays
down the everlasting destruction of the heathen. when he shows that he will
destroy the throne of kingdoms, and the strength of the kingdom of the
heathen, etc. and set Zerubbabell (that is Christ of whom he was a sign) as a
signet, for I have Hag. 2. 22.
chosen thee says the Lord of hosts, whereby was signified the princly Hag. 2.
23.
estate of the kingdom of the Jews, under the king of kings, and utter ruin
of all those that should set themselves against Christ and his church. So the
words of the doctrine touched darkly by Obadiah shall be opened more at large
in the expounding of this prophet Haggai.

The Prophet, first by commission from God reprooveth the people for neglecting
the building of the Temple, convincing them of sloth, which he does, partly,
by rebuking the care which they took, every man in building his own house,
and partly, by the Chastisements which God had for their sins laid upon them.
This that we may understand the better, we are to remember out of the 4. of
Ezra, that whereas by the appointment Ezr. 4. 1, 2 3, 4, 5.
of Cyrus they had laid the foundation of the Temple in his days, the building
of the Temple, was hindered by the people of the land, who discouraged the
Jews, troubled them in building, and hired accusers to accuse them to the King
of Persia, so that in the days of Ahashuerosh, and Artaxerxes, they were
stayed for going forward, Artaxerxes decreeing that they should cease. When
Artaxerxes was dead, and Darius reigned in his Ezr. 4. 21. 24.
stead, they ceased also from the work, pretending that having* been often
forbid before by Cambises and Darius Histaspis, and not receiving any license
from the new King, they might either be hindered as before, or accused of
Treason for breaking the former Kings commandment; and lastly, that it was not
yet time to do it. The Prophet in the 1 verse notes diligently the time, the
year, the month, and day when he received this commission from God. In the 2
he proposes their fault, which in the 4 verse he reproves, both which are
uttered by mentioning the messenger, with the commandment of God in the 3
verse; and in the 1 verse the two persons by whom chiefly the work was to be
set forward, the times are especially noted, to show what just cause the Lord
had to reprove them, having so long neglected his will, and the just cause of
punishing them for their neglect.

In the reproof we may note 5 things. First, the time when this commandment
was given to the Prophet. Secondly, the Author thereof, the Lord. Thirdly, the
persons by whom the thing was to be done. Fourthly, the fault that was
committed by them, they said the time was not yet come. Fifthly, the reproof it
self, Is it time for you Sirs? Which circumstances, as they are first to be
considered of us, so shall we make our best profit by them, if we compare our
Church with theirs: For as the Jews were long in bondage in Babylon, but at
length were brought back by Cyrus; so our Ancestors were held long under 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23.
the bondage of the spiritual slavery of Rome, which is spiritual Babylon,
whence by the means of H. 8. as they by Cyrus, they were Ezra. 1. 1, 2, 3.
Revel. 18. 2. 21.
delivered. The Jews being restored, laid the foundation of the Temple, but
were not able to go further by reason of enemies that procured them
displeasure with the Kings of Persia. God has dealt more graciously with us,
to whom he has granted gracious Princes to set forward this work; yet
notwithstanding are not we so forward as they: For, whereas they had laid the
whole foundation in the days of Cyrus, we in many places have not laid that:
For what is the foundation that is first to be laid? The Apostle teaches, even
the Doctrine of the beginnings of Christ: as the Doctrine of repentance from
dead works, and of Heb. 6. 1. 2
Faith toward God; the Doctrine of Baptismes. Now how far the people are
from these things in many places, we may hear of those that speak out of
experience; for sundry there are, who when they hear tell of these things,
wonder at them, as the Athenians did at Paul, and mervaile what so strange
doctrine means; which is a lamentable thing, confidering how mercifully Act.
17. 18 20.
God has dealt with the Churches elsewhere. And as it is said by the Prophet,
He has caused it to rain upon one City, and not Amo. 4. 7. 8.
to rain upon another: So two or three Cities wandered to one City to drink
water, but were not satisfied The word of God, and doctrine of Religion is in
Scripture compared unto rain, the Isa 55. 10. Heb. 6. 7, 8 Ezekiel. 21. 2.
preaching thereof unto the dropping and falling down thereof; for which cause
the Prophets are commanded to drop their words. Some Cities amongst us have
had this Rain to drop upon them, others have not: yea, it has dropped upon
one part of a City and not upon another, yet have they had clouds hanging over
them; but clouds without water, laborers that have seemed Jude v. 12.
to put to their hands, and yet but seemed only; Ambassadors without tongues,
without the tongue of the learned Builders, without hands, hands to lay the
foundation; yea the Doctrine Esa. 50. 4.
of Baptism is strange to many, that long since have been baptized, and hands
laid on them, as justly may be feared to no great purpose.

Many there are again, which have stayed at the foundation, but have not held
on to build the walls, they have not been led on to perfection, and instructed
in the wisdom of Christ. For we are not always to be sucking of milk, we
must at length be acquainted Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
with strong meat, there is the beginning and the perfect knowledge also.
Wherein again appears the fault of many, who as though they were only
appointed as Nurses to feed their children with milk, are able to do no more,
whereas they should be stewards, fit to deliver a portion to every one of the
family, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
not only to lay the foundation but to raise up the walls also Howbeit yet God
has dealt more mercifully with some, that the foundation has not only been
laid, but the walls also built, and they raised, even to the Roof: but that
has wanted: that is the Doctrine of Christ has been preached, but there has
wanted asistance of such, as by discipline should correct the unruly, admonish
the faulty, suspend the offenders, excommunicate the stubborn, and absolve
the penitent, Such as were among the Sigon de Rep Hebr. lib. 2. c. 8. Mat. 18.
15, 16, 17, 18.
Jews the Archisynagogi, by whom notorious offenders were excluded from the
society of the faithful; Such our Savior spoke of when he commanded that if
our brother had ought against us, we should first admonish him privately, if he
would not hearken to us to take two or three with us, and to tell him his
faulti, f he would not hear them to signify it to the Church, if he would
not obey them, to hold him as a heathen or publican. Such as the Apostle
appointed in every City, that small faults Tit. 1. 7.
might be by them reproved, grievous offenders excommunicated, Act. 14. 23 1
Cor. 5. 6. Tertull. in Apolog.
as the incestous person was dealt withal among the Corinthians, such as were
in the Primitive Church, as appears by the practice thereof. The necessity
and commodity whereof in the Church of God, if it appear not by that which
Divines and Protestants have taught; by the use of the Jews; by the
commandment of Christ and his Apostles; the practice of the Primitive Church:
as Paul wills the Corinthians to their shame, to set up 1 Cor. 6. 4. 5.
those which were least esteemed in the Church, if there were not one wise man
among them to judge betwixt brother and brother: So will I send them that are
not satisfied with that which has been said for this point unto a popish
Lawyer; his words are these, Illud apud Genevates laudabile, si quid usquam
gentium, quodque Rempublicam efficit, si non opibus, et imperij magnitudine,
certe virtutibus, ao pietate florentem: Illa scilicet pontificum censura, qua
nihil Bodin. method. Hist. c. 6. p. 220. and p 378. 379 Paris. Edit Anno 1572
This latin you shall find it Englished at the latter end of the Book.
majus, aut divinius cogitari potuit, ad coercendas hominum cupiditates, et ea
vitia, quae legibus humanis a^ judiciis emendari nullo modo possunt: haeo tamen
coertio, ad Christi normam dirigitur, tacenter primum et amice, deinde paulo
acerbius, tum nisi parcas, sequitur interdictio sacrorum, gravis et efficax.
Interdictionem animadversio magistratuum: ridiculum est enim ut ait Seneca, ad
legem bonum esse. It a fit, u^ quae legibus nusquam vindicantur, illic sine vi,
et tumultu coerceantur ab ijs censoribus, qui summam virtutis opinionemde
seipsis excitarunt. Igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrietates, nullae
saltationes, nulli mendici, nulli otiosi mea civitate reperiuntur. This
testimony is much, proceeding from a papist, bighly commending this divine
order, and thereby reproving the want thereof in their Church. But is it to be
hoped that in other places we should find no dancing, when there are
dancing-schooles in the chief Cities? that there should be no idle persons
among us, where there are so many so ill occupied? that there should be no
gamesters, while there are diverse publicly permitted, not only in houses of
the Town, but also in Halls and Colleges of the University? I am loath to move
this sink any more, therefore I leave it to the consideration of that which
has been said; how necessary it is to lay the roof upon the building, to
preserve the work, and to keep out the snow and rain, that is, all manner of
vices that hurt and injure the Building, and cannot otherwise than hereby be
redressed; as idleness, riotousnesse, drunkenness, swearing, which for want
hereof swarm among us, not only to the discomfort of Gods servants, but also
to the destruction of them that are pestred with them: So then if we compare
our Church with that Temple of the Jews, we see that in some places the
foundation is not yet laid, in some the walls not built, finally that the Roof
yet wants to the perfecting of the work, which I would the rather wish you to
mark, For that through the whole Prophecy, I will speak nothing but what
shall necessarily appertain to some part hereof. Now let us come to consider
the Circumstances and first the time. It is said in the second year of Darius,
in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, who this Darius was there
is some difference in judgments amongst the learned, some think it to be
Histaspis some Artaxerxes etc. But not to stand upon the refutation of those
opinions, or naming of them that were of that mind (who are ratherto be
commended for their diligence, in laboring to find out the truth, than reproved
for not meeting with it) I will set down that which seems best to agree with
the course of the Scripture, and verity of the History. It seems therefore
that Darius here mentioned was he that was surnamed Nothus, the bastard, as may
be gathered by the fourth and seventh chapters of Ezra, in the fourth chapter
it is said that Artaxerxes, who for had the building of Ezra 4. 5. 11. 24. Ezra
7. 1.
the Temple, reigned before Darius, in the seventh it is said, after the death
of Darius in the reign of Artaxerxes, the Jews had leave by him to build the
Temple. This then must be that Darius which came between the two Artaxerxes: of
whom the former was surnamed Longimanus, father to this Darius, and the other
Mnemon, who was his son, so that it appears by the course of the Hystory
written by Ezra, that this Darius was he whom Hystories call Darius Nothus,
Darius the Bastard. Now from the time of Cyrus king of Persia, when the
foundation began first to be laid, unto Ezra 3. 10.
the reign of this Darius is accounted of some 100. years, but because it was
a custom amongst them when their Kings went to war to appoint their sons
kings in their room, it comes to pass that the same years may be accounted
in the reign of the son, which are in the fathers, as Artaxerxes is said to
have reigned 62 years, whereas he reigned 18 years before his father died:
wherefore happily the number of those years was less, than that number. But
suppose it were 80 or 60, and if you will somewhat above forty as the Jews
seemed to have received by tradition, when they said in the Gospel 46. years
was this temple Joh. 2. 20.
in building. It was a long time no doubt from the laying of the foundation to
the perfecting of the work. Which may be a lesson for the godly and zealous
Preachers of Gods Word, not to be discouraged, though all things succeed not
according to their desire and hope, and not to faint in their ministry, taking
for their example the Prophet, who, though the word had ceased a long time, yet
was not discouraged, despairing that his exhortation would take no success.
Rome (as they say) was not built in one day: No mervaile then if Jerusalem be
not; for it is easier and sooner done to build the Tower of Babylon, than the
Tower of Sion; the Chapel of the Devil, than the Church of God; therefore
such as desire, and wish for building of the Church, are not in any case to
cast away all hope, though things be not done with expedition: For if we
consider the times, there are no more years passed since the laying of the
foundation among us, than these which were past from the reign of Cyrus, to
the time of Darius. Wherefore as the Prophet and other godly persons did, let
us also wait the good leisure of our God, continuing each one in his calling to
further the work, and pray unto God that he would stir up the spirit of
Zerubbabel and Iehoshua; that is, all such as be put in authority to perfect
this holy work.

This Darius was not for his civil behavior, so virtuous a Prince as many of
his Predecessors, but noted to be faulty in sundry things, yet did he suffer
the Jews to build the Temple; yea, when their enemies accused them, he caused
the monuments to be searched, and found out the grant of Cyrus, which he
ratified; giving them besides out of the Kings Revenues money toward Ezr. 6.
1. 8.
their expenses; yet this Darius that dealt with them so religiously, did marry
his Fathers Sister; through perjury deprived his elder Brother of the Kingdom,
and put him to a most cruel death, as Ctesias, who lived in his days has
written* This is noted against that naughty Jesuit Al^^^, who in his infamous
Libell against the defense of the execution of justice, would allege it as
some stain and discredit to our religion, because the restoring thereof
amongst us was wrought by H. 8. a wicked man (as he says) by King Edward a
child; by her Majesty a woman. I will not speak any thing of the persons, what
a man, what a child, what a woman, let us suppose they were defiled more than
any slanderous person can say, yet that hinders nothing but that they might
set forward and promote the truth, and God^ religion: For even Darius, an
incestuous person, perjured, ye even a murderer of his own Brother, set
forward the building of the Temple, yet it was no discredit to the work, nor
to the godly that labored with all their might therein. No man can be a
discredit to the Gospel, neither does the truth of Christ's religion depend
upon the person of each one of them by whom it pleases God to prosper it.
Solomon the best King, even he that 1 King. 11 7.
first built the Temple of God, did raise up a high place to C^emosh, the
abomination of Moab, and unto Molech, the abomination 2 King. 10 27.
of the children of Ammon. Jehu, that was worse than he, pulled down the
house of Baal, etc. Constantino, that christian 2 King. 10 25. 28.
Emperor was not without some blemish for the murder of his Son. Wherefore,
as the Temple in Jerusalem was not to be refused because the Persian Kings
furthered the building thereof; So, no more is our Religion and Church to be
abandoned, whatsoever they were that furthered the promotion thereof* And as
Darius the bastard was no discredit to Haggeus Prophecy; So may we note
against the Jesuits slanders, that to the truth no discredit can come by them
that favored it; for whatsoever the Princes are whom God stirs up to
maintain it, the Gospel is to be reverenced and embraced for it self. The
month also is noted, The time 6th Month
when it is said, In the sixth month, because that it is the custom of the
Scriptures not to give the proper names to the month whereby they are called
but to note them by their order, as the first, second month etc. There are some
which mislike that this use is no^ rather observed, than that which we have
for the profane use of the months and days of the week, but chiefly they
mislike the recayning of the names of Feasts, as Christmas, Michaelmas,
Candlemas, where the use of the names of Mass derived from that abomination
seems to savor of some superstition and profaneness: To which, though
happily it might be said that some of those names might seem not so to have
been framed, but rather to have come from the old Saxon language, as in the
names of Lamonds, etc. Yet if we grant that thence they were derived, i^
follows not that we may not note or call the days or months otherwise than
after the manner that is here used. For as I acknowledge a godly mind in them
that desire to speak in more religious sort, and to banish as much as in them
lies the remembrance and names of all Idolatry; So of the things I say as St.
Paul does to the Carinthians, Art thou called being a servant, care not for it?
but yet if thou may be free, use it rather. If we 1 Cor. 7. 21.
live amongst them that use no other names for these times, we may (seeing
otherwise they cannot understand us to whom we speak) use these words and
names, and care not for it: But if Does Nationum nominari lex prohibet non
utique nomina ^orum pronunciemque nobis ut dicamus conversatioexorque sed ho^
precepit n^ deos vocemus illos. Tertul. d Idolat. cap. 20.
we be amongst those that have left the use of them, we are to use the other
rather. As for the manner which is mentioned in the Scripture, not only the
Jews named their months after their order, as in this place, but sometimes
they also used their proper names also, as in Moses, the month of Abib etc. And
after their return from Babylon they did not still follow their number and
order, but sometime they used the Chaldean language, and the names which they
gave their months; as appears in the books of Nehemiah, Ezra, Esther; where
are mentioned the months of Nisan, Zinan, Elul, Shepat, Tebet, Adar, Cisleu,
seven of the Chaldeans months, the names of some of which came perhaps from the
Idolatry of the Chaldeans, which may appear by one of them called Tammuz, of
the solemn Feasts of Tammuz, which they celebrated with weeping and
lamentation yearly in the 4th month. Of which superstition the Prophet speaks
when hoe. Sigon. de Rep. Hebrae lib. 3. c. 2. Ezekiel. 8. 14 Neh. 6. 15.
mentions the women that wept for Tammuz. Wherefore, although the Prophet
calls it here the sixth month, it follows not that we may not, or they might
not call it by any other name; for in Nehemiah the same month is called Elul.
And this liberty have the children of God used, not only in the names of
times, but of places also and persons. Daniel was called by the name of
Belteshazzer, Dan. 1. 7. and 4. 8. 19. and 5. 12.
which name was imposed upon him by the Idolatrous King, and was derived from
the name of Bell, the Idol which the Chaldeans worshipped; yea Daniel speaking
of himself, gives himself that very name. St. Luke mentions Appollonia,
where through St. Paul passed, which City had its name of Apollo: Act. 17. 1.
Strab. l. 2. Geogra. in fine and lib. 7.
Neither did St. Paul care to enter into the Ship the badge whereof was Castor
and Pollux (which yet were Saints of the Heathen which they worshipped) knowing
that it was lawful to use that vessel in a civil sort which was in some sort
dedicated Act. 28. 11 Alex. Gental. Dier* l. 2. c. 12. l. 3 c. 18. and 22.
Diod. Sic. l. 5. c. 3.
to the use of an Idol. It is true that by Moses the people of God were
commanded not to use the names of the Idols of Canaan, or take them in their
mouth. And David, inflamed with a zeal of Gods honor, protested that he would
not take their names in his mouth: But this was, that the names should be used
not in any honor of them, but detestation; not to swear by them, or Psalm. 16.
4.
any way to reverence them. Howbeit when for necessity we must needs use them
to open our minds to them that hear us: when we cannot otherwise be
understood, no doubt we may use them, Durand. Rat. l 7. c. 7. Diony. Halycar.
l. 1. Annal. Romans Beat. Rhen in Annat. in l. 5. Tertul. con. Marcion. Bristow.
Moti. 32. p 131. b.
as the Prophets and holy men of God have done, both in the names of times
places and persons. The name of Candlemas comes from a double solemnity, the
one of burning candles, a superstition derived from the Heathen; the other from
the Mass, the Idol of Popery. It is no more unlawful for us to use that name,
than for the Jews the name of Tammuz.

And hereby also shall we know how to answer another argument of the Papists:
Look (says Bristow) on the names of Shrovetide, Candlemas, Christmas etc.
speak they Lutheranisme? Which argument, if it be good against us, what is it
against the Prophets? For the names not only of one day, but of whole months,
the names of Elul, Shepat etc. Look what religion they speak, whether
Judaisme or Paganism, or what if the heathenish Romans should so speak to the
popish Romans. Look on the names of your Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 12. Bacon.
in Notis ad Martyrol. Romans Hospin. de Festls Chr. fol. 40 b. Eckius. tom. 3.
hom 3. de purif Dundand. Rat. l. 7. c. 7. Varro de lingu. lat. l. ^. p. 53.
vide Tu^. neb. in eundem. Jacob. de v^rag. Ser 82. de Sanctis. D^cand. Rat. l.
7. c. 7. Moresin. de Depravatae Religionis Origin. Hospinian. de Fostis Christ.
Men's. Jun. fol. 89. 90.
own months, do they not speak our Religion: January, of Janus the two-faced
God; February, of Februo, which signifies to purge, for that twelve days of
this month the people was exercised in kindling tapers and candles, and
offering sacrifices for the rest of the souls departed; March of Mars; May of
Maj^, Jupiters whore; July and August of Divus Iul. and D. August. What speak
these names, Christianity or Idolatry? And what can the use of the name of
Candlemas make more against us, than the name of February against them? save
that it very well fitteth them, agreeing in their ceremonies then used,
merve^lous well with the Gentiles: For as they use candles and tapers, so did
the heathen: As they offer for the rest and quietness of the dead, so did the
heathen: As they did indeed agree with them in many other of their Rites; as if
you compare the carrying about of their Idols with the papists carrying about
their bread, or breaden God, on Corpus Christi day: etc.

Wherefore let us rather when we hear or remember any of these names,
consider the goodness of God, and his great mercy toward us, which has
delivered us from the superstition which these names signify: And as the Jews
by the name of Nisan, EElul etc. which they used having received them from the
Chaldeans, were brought in mind of that slavery and captivity under which they
were held, and so occasioned the more to praise the mercy of God in their
deliverance; So likewise should we by these names consider that great
captivity wherein we were held, much more greater and grievouser than that of
Babylon; and thus much we may mark considering the circumstance of the time.

The Second Sermon. Apr. 19. 1586.
THis parcel opening an entrance to the Exhortation to hold on the building of
the Temple begun, contains many special points, which being therein
comprised, have been heretofore laid down, and out of the first such
necessary lessons delivered as made for our understanding, concerning the time,
year, month and day of this Prophecy. The rest of the points convenient and
fit to be noted concerning this message, as yet remain, and are these,

1. From whom this message comes, The Lord of Hoasts. 2. By whom it is sent,
By the hand or ministry of Haggeus. 3. To whom, To Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel Prince of Judah; and to Jehosua the son of Jehosadac the high
Priest. 4. In what sort, by noting the peoples fault, and reproving it; This
people say the time is not yet come that the Lord etc.
In the first appears the singular favor of God, and his goodness toward
his children, who by the ministry of his word 1.
calls them to life, and thereby stirs up their minds to be careful of
it, as he dealt with Abraham, whom he called out of Ur of the Chaldeans, with
whom afterward he made his covenant, Genesis 11. 31. and 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. Genesis
15. 5. 6, 7.
and even so has he dealt with the the children of Abraham according to that
promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; which how he has
performed, I need not by the several examples of the Prophets, Patriarchs and
Apostles to make manifest unto you: when Elipbaz and Elibu note even among the
Gentiles that God speaks by dreams and visions, revealing (...) the Job 33,
14
ear of man, and sealing his correction, that man may remove his work, and
that he may hide the pride of man, which he also used before the severing of
the Jews and Gentiles, as in his Genesis 2. 16, 17. Heb. 1. 1 Psalm. 23. 1. Mal.
1. 6. Exodus 3. 15. and 4. 12 15. 22.
dealing with our first parents, to whom by his word he opened his will. So
that whosoever is, or has been of his Church, to him has he revealed his
will by one means or other of what age, state or condition soever, for God is,
and always has been to his people a Pastor, Master, Father and Teacher.

In the second we learn of the heavenly ministers who they are by whom this
message is sent; it is sent not to them in elder time, by voice, dream, or
sight in trance, but by the hand, that is, the ministry of Haggeus. Which
manifestation, though it may seem less, in that men are the messengers; yet
if we consider the matter, we shall find it far greater: for when as their
ancestors at the giving of the Law, heard the Lord speak unto them from mount
Sinai, they were so dismayed, that they said unto Moses, talk thou with us,
and let not the Lord Deuteronomy. 5. 24 25. 28 31.
talk with us lest we dye: upon which speech God approved their words, and
said, they had spoken well; whereupon he promised them that he would raise up
a prophet like unto M^ses, into whose mouth he would put his words. Wherefore
to Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. Dan. 7. 28. Rev. 1. 17.
relieve our weakness, and deliver us from this fear (wherewith we understand
how greatly Daniel and John were stricken and astonished) it pleased God of his
abundant mercy and favor to raise up of our own flesh of our brethren and of
our sons, men like unto our selves, as more familiar teachers; for he has
ordained 2 Chro. 20 20.
and given to his Church Prophets, and them either ordinary, or extraordinary.
Ordinary, such as were then before the Ephesians. 4. 11. 2 Chro. 15 3.
coming of Christ, the Priests and Levites; since, Pastors and Doctors:
Extraordinary, such as then and since have been sent by especial authority
from God to teach his Church. Of which sort Aggeus was, I cannot certainly
pronounce, for the Scripture tells us not of what Tribe he was, but we know
that God had given him an extraordinary gift to foresee and foretell the
coming of Christ. Hence we may learn how much they are bound to Gods gracious
mercy, who sent unto them his word by so fit a messenger; by nature, a man; by
affinity, their brother; in quality, like unto Moses. Which benefit though it
be great, yet behold a greater, where it is declared to whom this message was
sent; namely, To Zerubbabel Prince of Judah; and to Jehoshua the son of
Jehosadac the high Priest: where we may see how it pleased God not only to
make the Prophet Aggeus, but the Prince and Priest also messengers of this
errand which was sent to the people, to the end that if it should be the less
regarded because of the person of the Prophet, the authority of the
Ecclesiastical and civil governor giving it countenance, they might the
sooner be moved to hear it more reverently, and obey it more readily. For
although it were partly sent to them to stir them up (as the godly are slow
enough) yet because the fault is noted especially to be in the people (as
their reproof argues) it seems therefore that this was sent unto these
Governors, chiefly for their sakes, that the power of the Prince and Priest
might the rather move them to go forward in that which they had begun. Wherein,
as the Lord dealt graciously with them; so has he, and does he with us: His
word has come by the preachers thereof to our governors of all sorts and
states, to the end that this whole Nation would agree to set forward the
building and work of his House, the edifying of his Church, the glory of the
Word; which that it may be the better furthered by every one in this assembly
(as God gives grace) I am heartily to request such amongst us that are set in
place of government, as namely our Heads, that by the example of Zerubbabel
and Iehoshua, they would vouchsafe to countenance the message of Aggeus, by
their presence here, and Jesus and Joshua, as Ezra 3. 2. or Joshua comes of
one root (...) as may further appear by
in such places. For indeed the message is not ours, although it be brought out
by our hand; but he is in heaven, from whence he fills all things with his
power and Majesty, whose word it is. We are sent by the like authority that
Aggeus was, though not furnished with the same measure of grace. The treasure
that he brought and we bring, is the same, though the vessel wherein it is
carried be less precious: Neither are you, (Fathers) equal to those
Governors to whom this message was sent, for Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel was
Heir apparent to the Crown of Judah: Iehoshua high Priest and chief
Governor in matters touching God. Zerubbabel, Lord President of Jury under
King Darius: Jehoshua, high Priest by his fathers stock, descended of Phineas,
both figures of our Savior Christ. Zerubbabel of his Kingdom, Heb. 4. 8.
of whom also he descended according to the flesh: Iehoshua, of his
Priesthood, whose name also he bore, both very aged and reverend persons,
having held this room and place near a hundred years. Now if such as these
men disdained not to hear of one so inferior in dignity, in years and
experience also (as may be thought;) none of you will, I hope: sure I am you
should not disdain to hear what God speaks to you by us, how inferior
soever, either in dignity, in years or experience; 1 Cor. 4. 1. Isa. 9. 2.
though there were nothing else to be considered in us than that we are
stewards of his House. But chiefly, since the gospel and ministry thereof
excels the ministry of Aggeus so much as the clear Sun-light the light of
any of the stars; So that we may, without pride, for our message-sake,
prefer our selves before him. For John Baptist, our Savior testifies to
have been greater than any Prophet that was borne of woman; yet he says, Mat.
11. 9.
The least in the Kingdom of Heaven should be greater than he. Mat. 11. 11


I wot well that you are better able to teach, than they who speak unto you;
neither speak I this for that I think you have such great need to learn. (As
Daniel, albeit furnished with merveilons* wisdom and knowledge from God, yet
excercised Dan. 9. 1. 2
himself, and took profit by reading the prophecy of Jeremy) So the best
may gather some commodity by the labors of those that are inferior to them.
But I make this exhortation to them, that they would vouchsafe us their
presence for examples sake; that they by so doing, might seem to say as the
Princes did of Ieremin, This man speaks in the name of the Lord. And that the
commandment of Paul might be the better observed, Let no man despise* thy Jer.
26. 16.
youth; For so I doubt not but their presence would cause, that 1 Timothy 4. 12
they who come would hear and mark more carefully, and that some would come
who now refrain. The judgment of Rulers Isa 24. 2. Ex ancillarum moribus
Domine judicantur.
and Governors prevail much with the multitude, but their private and public
example more. In which case the common proverbes are often true; such Prince,
such people; such Master, such man; such Mother, such daughter.

But if this be not sufficient to move them, let them consider Hierom. ad
Salvinam devirgin. servanda.
further, that although Zerubbabel knew how to build the Temple; yet was not
his heart, nor the heart of Jehashua so zealous; their hands so ready, their
minds so prepared as they ought to have been. In consideration whereof, they
needed to be exhorted; for when they heard this message, their hearts were
stirred up. Agg. 1. 12. 14.
Let us not be ashamed to acknowledge the want that is in us, or slack the
means that may remedy it. The words of the wise (says Solomon) are like to
goads, wherewith our laziness and ^ccles. 12. 11. Mat 26. 41
sluggishnesse is pricked forward, and we stand in need of them; for howsoever
the spirit be willing, the flesh is weak, which is a thing that* touches all
christians. So therefore desiring God that we may teach faithfully, and you
hear diligently, I will proceed to the next point, which is the message it
self.

Thus has the Lord of Host* charged me to say* This people say that the time
is not yet come, the time wherein the House of the Lord etc. 4.
When Adam after he had broken the commandment of the Lord, heard his voice
in the garden, he hid himself, and feared: The cause whereof he says was,
for that he was naked; so he said indeed, but fa^^ly; for the cause was not
his nakedness, but his wickedness, in that he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit. Since which time, it has been a custom amongst the sons of Adam, to
cover iniquity with hypocrisy, and cloak their offenses with excuses. As in
this place, the cause why the people did not build the house of the Lord, was,
that every man was wholly set to the building of his own house; to the regard
of his own private profit and ease; yet laid they the cause on the time; The
time is not yet come, the time to build the house of the Lord. Wherefore as it
pleased God to deal mercifully with Adam, and to the end he might bring him
to the acknowledgement of his transgression, demanded of him, Have thou eaten
of the fruit? So likewise here he deals with this people, when he says, Is
it time* for you Sirs to sit down in your seeled houses, while this house
lies waste? Where he shows the true causes indeed to be not the time, as
they pretended, but Worldliness and Idleness, in that they took so great
care to build and furnish their own houses, and that not only for commodity,
but for pleasure also; for they built their houses and seeled them also.
Idleness, in that they sat them down to take their rest and ease, for that
does the hebrew word in this place properly signify. This fault therefore was
showed them, to the end they might acknowledge it, and amend it; that indeed
their pretense for want of time was but hypocritical, the true cause being
their Worldliness and Idleness, that they might confess their offense,
repent, and in time amend it. Which fruit also, that you may take hereby, it
has been heretofore showed you in the general argument of this prophecy, in
what points our estate may be compared with theirs; that as it fared with
them, so does it with us* As they were delivered from the bodily captivity by
Cyrus; So we have been delivered from the spiritual captivity by King Henry
the 8. another Cyrus: And as they, though having received a grant and
commission from Cyrus, etc. yet built not up the material Temple in such sort
and speed as was given them in commandment; So also we have not been so
painful and diligent in building up the spiritual Temple and Church of God.
The foundation of this work was said to be the beginnings of the doctrine of
Christianity, the which the Apostle Heb. 6. 1. 2
calls the laying of the foundation. The raising of the 1 Pet 1. 12
walls is the perfect understanding of those mysteries of Christ which the
Angels desire to behold. The Roof to be laid upon this building, to keep them
that are within the house from the annoyance of rain and weather, of heat and
blasts; that is, from sins and offenses, is Ecclesiastical discipline; which
according to the example of the Jews, Christ commanded, his Apostles
constituted, the Primitive Church observed, the Reformed have restored to the
singular commodity and good governance of the places where it is received, even
in the judgment of a Papist: By reason that a learned Pastor joined to a
sufficient number Bodin. Method Hist. cap. 6.
of grave and sober Elders, has the oversight of the congregation. First, to
admonish privately offenders; then, if they amend not, to proceed forward etc:
So to keep them from such sins as civil Laws partly do not, partly cannot
punish, and yet are such as shut out the committers from the Kingdom of Rev.
21 27 1 Cor. 6. 10.
God, into which, no unclean, adulterous, or covetous person can enter.

Wherefore, seeing that in many places of this Land the foundation is not yet
laid; the congregations being not catechized; in others, if there be
catechizing, yet no preaching, and so the walls not built; in others no
discipline excercised, and therefore the roof not laid upon the building. It
is manifest that the Temple of the Lord is not built amongst us as it ought,
and so that our case and fault is like unto theirs, whom the Lord by the
Prophet here reproves, for so his House lies waste among us: somewhere less,
somewhere more, but lie waste it does; not indeed as the Temple when Daniel
prayed, and said, thy sanctuary lies Dan. 9. 17.
waste; but as God says here that it did, when there was an Altar built. But
is this fault defended by us, with such excuses as it was maintained by them?
in some part no doubt it is: For although Ezra 3. 2, 3
I cannot say of this people in general as the Prophet does of the Jews, for
there are many that confess the time to be come to build the Lords House (God
increase the number of them) yet some there be that say the time is not yet
come, as has appeared by the open reproof of that which in this matter I have
heretofore spoken unto you: Wherein first I would advise you diligently to
beware that you stumble not at their offenses, neither conceive worse of the
Church because of the jarres that happen in it. Paul and Barnabas disagreed,
yet were they of the true Church, as these were of whom the Prophet speaks.
He with the Prince and high Priest dissented from the people, the people
thought and held that the time was not yet come to build the House of the Lord;
But the other were of a contrary judgment, yet were they of the true Church,
which note also confuteth a foolish motive of our adversaries concerning
discord and universality, for here we see that the greater part held the false
opinion, and that the true Church dissented from it self. Next let us remember
who they were that said, The time is not yet come, namely, the people, for even
so they who say among us the time is not yet come, are of this people, of the
people of God indeed, yet of the people only. For they that are in the place of
Zerubbabel and Iehoshua say that it is high time; in the book of ordeining
Bishops and Ministers, there is granted unto the Minister authority to preach
the Word, minister the Sacraments, exercise Discipline, which more at large
appears in a learned discourse of Bucers, whence into that book they have
translated that point. The 32. Commissioners in King Edwards days, appointed
to set down orders for the redress of Ecclesiastical matters, set down this
order, that the Minister with others according to Christ's commandment should
first deal by brotherly admonition, and so to proceed according to Christ's
rule in this case. Master Nowel, whose praise Matthew. 18. 15. 16. 17. In
ecclesia si probe instituta fuerit, certus gubernatio nis ordo, and modus,
disciplinaeque Ecclesiasti. cae ea ratio observabitur. p. 92. Deligebantur
Seniores. i. Magistratus
is great in the Gospel, has written more fully and largely in his latin
Catechism, that every Church well grounded ought to have a sufficient number
of Elders, who together with their Pastors should exercise Church Discipline,
and so avoid all those offenses and faults which happen in the congregation.
This catechism by authority from the Bishops in their convocations is
authorized, as the only latin catechism to be read in all schools throughout
the Realm, and appointed also to be translated into the vulgar tongue, to be
read and understood of all: whereby we may perceive that the Queens Majesty
her Brothers of blessed memory, Bishop Cranmer, Master Bucer, Peter Martyr,
Master Nowel, the 32 Commissioners, eight Bishops, eight Divines, eight common
Lawyers, eight Counselors, with the Parliament have thought it time fit to
build the house of the Lord with doctrine and discipline; wherefore it is not
Zerubbabel nor Jehoshua, but Ecclesiastici, qui Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam
tenerent, etc, Hi ad h^bito pastore, etc p. 155. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 4. 5. Mat. 18 15
16. 17. Act. 14. 23 and 15. 4. 6. 22. 24. Act. 20. 17 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Tit. 1.
5.
this people that say it is not time to build the Lords house though the people
of God indeed, yet but of the people, who, if they entered into their own hearts
should find, I doubt not, whatsoever excuse they allege, that it is but a
mere pretense like to this which is here reproved; the truth is, there is some
other fault in them which they would with this excuse cloak, which I will not
now deal with, nor enter into a particular confutation of the pretenses they
allege. I leave it to your particular considerations, wishing, that as the
fault has been discovered, it might be amended, so it may be by every one of
us, so far as it concerns each particular man's person.

Wherein first to you I need not say so much for the laying of the foundation,
if the good order already taken for catechizing in every house were diligently
and carefully looked unto, but albeit the foundation be laid yet in building
the walls, there would be somewhat added. I have heard, and so have others, of
strangers of godly zeal and good credit, who coming into our University, have
made complaint that on the Sunday in the afternoon there has not been a
serm^n in all Oxford, which were a special service for the sanctifying of that
day, when there were fewer preachers among us than now there are, yet were
there more sermons than now adays there be; so that it might truly be said,
the people is increased, but their joy is diminished: although I nothing doubt
but there would enough be found voluntarily to perform this work, yet think I
it more convenient, and likelier to continue, if the public Readers, the
Heads of the Colleges with the Prebends of Christ-church will take the charge
of it, that whereas now they are to preach once, they would vouchsafe to do it
twice, which might be done with little increase of their pains, and great
profit of the University. This thing I doubt not but it would be established,
if it would please God to stir up his spirit that is in the room of the
Magistrate to propose it in the convocation, by the godly disposition of the
Doctors in commending it to the house of the Proctors to gather the voices, and
of the body of the University to agree to it.

But howsoever the foundation and walls are built among us, in other places
certainly they are not, for which, such as do it not, but indeed ought to do
it, are in great fault. I mean the mere non-resident, that stays here from
his charge without any just or necessary occasion, whereby it comes to pass
that in many places of this land they are so far from laying on the roof,
that the foundation is not laid. This offense is so great, that not the people
and the Prince, but even their own consciences also (if they be not by Gods
judgment seared) confess that it is time to amend it, which is laid down
more plain in the Synod but now alleged, wherein the Bishops affirm this
non-residence to be a thing foul and unhonest in it self, shameful and
detestable among the people, pernicious and hurtful to the Church of God; I
do but english their own words, foedo in se, odiosa in vulgus, pernitiosa
Ecclesiae Dei. The 32. Commissioners before mentioned, appointed that none
having the charge of souls elsewhere should continue in the University, and no
mervaile because in the book of ordering of Ministers, each one at the time of
his ordering solemnly promises before God and his elect Angels, to give all
diligence, to teach his people with all care, etc. Which book being
established again, such as are ordered, being made by this order, yet abide
many of them among us breaking this solemn promise and vow to almighty God,
and yet are not ashamed to look men in the faces, as though God had not said,
perform thy vows, and that he delights not in fools, etc. yet we, for all
they be such men, honor them, bestow graces on them, give them great
commendation of learning and honesty, whereas by this breaking of their vow and
promise they declare themselves to be sacrilegious persons. A great fault in us
regentes, if not also in non regentes: if we have not learned that this is a
sufficient cause to deny graces, but grant them to such persons, to the shame
and obloquie of the University. And here I am sorry that I cannot touch this
fault, but that I must you also (Reverend Fathers) who although you be called
to the same office and duty that the others be, yet are not in the same measure
of sin that they are; howbeit these are strengthened in their offense by your
example. Let no man think that when we speak of this fault to have it
redressed, that we cast daggers into our Fathers bosoms, but let them consider
the cause that moves us thus to do. In the Persian story written by Herodotus
and Trogus, we read that after the death of Cambises, the Magi got the Crown,
seven of the Nobility conspired together to slay the Magi: and as Darius and
Gobrias made at one of them, Darius staying to strike, Gobrias asked what he
meant that he slew not his enemy, for fear (says he) lest in the dark I slay
thee; to whom Gobrias answered, stay not for that, but heartily run us both
through. Gobrias was content, if it could no otherwise be done, that himself
should be slain, so that the sorcerer, the usurper might die also. Some think
you should be content that we strike you, if no otherwise, that these
sorcerers may be removed. I call them so justly, for God has said that
disobedience is as the sin of sorcerie. This sin of non-residence is a
sin of disobedience, and a mother of as many trasgressions as ever was
Sodom. Be content therefore if to the end, to slay them, we touch your
bodies and credit, seeing it may be that as the sorcerer was slain, and
Gobrias escaped; so you may escape though they be slain. Would to God we might
see your diligence to cast out these sorcerers as Saul did out of Israel, and
so to cast them out, as withal to take heed that you follow not his example
who afterward went himself to consult with a soceress with one that had a
familiar spirit, because that God answered him not otherwise, this was a
perswasible reason to flesh and blood, God does not answer me, therefore why
may I not ask of a witch? and shall not yours be like if you thus gather? God
does not otherwise provide for me, therefore will I rob Churches, etc. But
how far from this mind was St. Paul, and how far from his are such men? he
was content rather to betake himself to a base occupation, wherein he had
been before trained up, tha^ he would but then the Churches; which he might
nevertheless 1 These. 2. 6. 8. 9.
have done lawfully: and better were it for you to return again to the teaching
of Scholars, than to provide for yourselves by such means, though I hope you
shall not need to do that neither: God having provided that you may live
honestly by other means if you can be content to bear a lower sail
remembering the heathen man's rule Ingens vectigal parsimonia. Abraham, when God
called him, forsook a fruitful and plentiful soil, to go he knew not
whither. Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the children of God than
to enjoy the delights of Egypt. When David was to fight with Goliath, Saul
furnished him with his good armor, but when he had them on he saw they were
not fit for 1* Sam. 17.
him, wherefore he said I cannot go with these for I am not accustomed?
wherefore he put them off and took his staff in his hand which was fitter for
him: verily fathers these livings which you cannot discharge are like the
helmet of brass the brigandine and sword wherewith David was furnished, if you
will fight you must be content to forgo them, Christ says he is not worthy to
be his disciple, who forsakes not all even his own life to follow him: will
you not be content to forgo these things for his sake who for yours did forgo
his own blood? no doubt if we would earnestly regard and reprove these things
here, it would move godly Patrons to send hither for able and fit men to
discharge their room, or God would move her Matie to procure that better order
may be taken in this case, that it may not be lawful for patrons to prefer
such beggarly creatures as often they do the very filth and rascality of the
people, Jeroboam Priests.

Concerning the last point, which is the setting up of the roof upon the
building, let us remember the commandment of Christ, If our Brother trespass
against us to tell him his fault between thee and him, and if he hear thee not
do it before two or three, if he vouchsafe not to hear them, to tell it unto
the Church, who^ if he refuse to hear, to count him as a heathen, let us
consider one another to provoke to love and to good works, and use all means
to recall sinners from their ungodliness to which purpose let us join one to
another in this work as Paul to the Gal. joyneth himself with all the
brethren, and to the Thessalonians with Timotheus and Silvanus, as Barnabas
joined himself to Silas, etc. so let us join together our strength and use
one another help to the forwarding of Sincerity, In which respect I thought
it necessary to speak of this matter at this time and in this place, for
though it may seem that it were fitter to be delivered in other places yet it
is not amiss also here, for there are many here that may come to those places,
and therefore it is necessary they should know the truth of this doctrine:
there are some here that may stand before the Prince as Nehemiah did before
Artaxerxes.

But where it may be said that the Universities are not sufficient to send
forth so many as may furnish the land, it is true indeed, where it lies on
them that are in authority to set forward another thing ordered by the 32
Commissioners before mentioned who mention three Seminaries which should serve
for this purpose whereof the one is the University, another Bishops houses,
wherein they appoint that men should be trained up in learning that they may be
fit for such charges to which end they required that the Bishops keep no idle
persons in their houses but that (besides their necessary servants) all about
them should be brought up in learning, For this say they is another means
whereby the Church may be furnished with able ministers concluding, sic
instituta fuit Augustini domus, etc. the third they appointed in Cathedral
Churches where they ordain to retain a Scholar and an instructor to train up
youth in knowledge whereunto makes that which Bucer has in his treatise de
reformatione Canonici collegij: where he shows that the first end of the
ordaining of such Cathedr. Chur. Bucer de reformatione. Canonici Coll.
was this, that therein men might be brought up in good learning, now if there
were a learned Ministry settled in each place of this land, that the people
might be Catechized and instructed the rest would soon follow, wherefore such
whom it has pleased God to enable in the building of his Church, I beseech or
rather charge as Paul did Timothy to be careful of that which they are put
entrust withal, and withal their diligence to set forward the building of the
Lords House, by procuring the establishing of a learned Ministry, and whereby
the foundation may be laid, says walls built, and the roof laid upon, even as
God has appointed.

The Prophet says not here without cause that the Lord of hoasts charged him
to speak, even he who is able to revenge the contempt of the commandment and
to reward the keeping of it which God grant that we may also earnestly
consider, and thereby be moved more effectually to the doing of our duty and
his commandment.

The Third Sermon. Jun. 7.
Ver. 5. NOw therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your own ways in
your hearts. 6. Yea have sown much and ye bring little in, ye eat but ye
have not enough, ye drink but are not filled, you put on Clothes but ye be
not warm: he that gets wages, gets wages, and puts it into a broken
bag. 7 Thus says the Lord of Hosts. 8 Go up to the mountains and bring down
wood, and build this house, and I will take delight in it, and I will be
glorified says the Lord. 9 Ye looked for much but lo you got little, and
when you brought it home I did blow upon it, and why says the Lord of Hosts,
because of my new house that lies wast and every man runs to his own house.
10 Therefore the heaven over you staid it self from dew, and the earth her
fruit. 11 And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, upon all that the
land should bring forth, both upon men and upon cattle, and upon all the labor
of the hands.
AS the good Samaratane (of whom our Savior speaks) Luke 10.
taking compassion on the man that had fallen amongst thieves, bound up his
wounds, and powered into them, not only sharp vinegar to scour but also mild
oil to supply: even so the prophet, meaning to heal the wounds of his
people, who had suffered the temple of the Lord to lie waste, has first
sharply reproved them in the former verses, laying open their faults, and here
mildlyexhorting them to that which they had omitted, that by all means they
might be brought to do this which God commands the^, and first he shows
his warrant and letter of credance for his message, that the thing he
commands them might be esteemed, not by the worthiness of the man by whom
but rather of God from whom it was sent, wherefore he wills them to consider
with themselves, that is deeply and thoroughly to weigh and mark their own
ways, that is their works and behavior, for if they did so, they should
perceive the greatness of their sins, and transgressions, at least if they
would endeavor the punishments which God had laid upon them, and consider the
scarcity in their goods, and want of natural heat and strength in their
bodies. In that they sowed much and brought in little, they eat, but were not
satisfied; clothed themselves but were not warmed, etc. which punishment God
had laid upon them to the end they might perceeve their sin and acknowledge
it, which he wishes them to amend by building the house of the Lord, whereunto
he would stir them up the rather, by setting down the promise of grace and
favor, by blessing of their labors and graciously receiving their service,
But because the promise of good does less move, than the fear of evil,
especially the stubborn, and froward sinner: therefore the Prophet tells
them again of that rodd which God held over them, namely of the want and
scarcity which they suffered, and least they might imagine, that albeit they
suffered these things yet happily they might come from some other causes and
not from God, he brings in the Lord protesting so much (I did blow upon it)
or if they would suppose that albeit it were the hand of God; yet that it might
come for some other cause than this, it is also added all this came on them
because of his house, that was waste while every man rann to his own house.
This is the substance of the exhortation whereby he inciteth them to continue
the building of the Lords house, which they had so long neglected, wherefore
they were punished of God by scarcity and need in their goods, and by want of
strength in their bodies.

The first point to be noted is that the Prophet says nothing unto the people
but what the Lord has given him in charge, for which cause he does so often
put them in mind that this is the word of the Lord, for both the exhortation
in the 5. and 7. verses have the same annexed, and the two reasons adjoined to
strengthen them in the 8. and 9. verses, wherein he shows himself a wise and
faithful steward in dispensing the mysteries of God: faithful, in that he
goes not beyond his charge, wise, in that he fasteneth the thing which he
would teach them the more deeply in their minds, by sundry repetitions. For
such is the frowardness of man's perverse nature, that if we be any way crossed
we believe not, at the least seem not to believe the message therewithal
sent us, but persuade our selves that the Ministers rather speak out of
affection. Example whereof we have in Johanan and the rest etc, who when
Jerusalem was taken by the Caldeans, came to the Prophet Jeremiah beseeching
him to pray to God for them to teach them the way in which they should walk,
promimising very earnestly to do according to all things for which the Lord
should send him to them; but when Jeremiah had told them, that it was the
commandment of the Lord that they should dwell in the land and not go up into
Egypt, etc. them Johanan and all the proud men said unto Jeremy thou speak
falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee to say go not into Egypt to dwell
there, but Baruch provoked thee against us, etc. A man would have thought that
they who made so solemn promise would not have so disobeied the commandemen^
of God. but Jeremiah so behaved himself in this message, that they were
ashamed to lay the blame (which they pretended) on him, But said that he was
thereto persuaded by them to cast off the Word of the Lord, as it had been a
lie devised against them by the malice of man: and that which increased the
mischief, they said it was done to the end that the Caldeans might destroy
them; whereas indeed it was only for their good. We are therefore diligently
to beware of these enchanting Sirens, flesh and blood, not to hearken unto
them: and howbeit the message delivered us by Gods Ministers serve not our
humor of pleasure and ease, yet to receive the same not as the words of man,
but as they are indeed, the words of God: for although we speak not by
revelation as the Prophet did, yet we speak by knowledge; and the very same
which they saw by extraordinary, do we know by ordinary. The godly Ministers
are called to the same Office that were the Priests of the Law, as Malachi
says, to be the Messengers of the Lord of hosts: and Paul speaks not only
of himself, but of others also, such as Apollos and Sosthenes were, Let a man
so think of us, as the Ministers of Christ, etc. Whatsoever therefore the man
be, so long as he preaches the truth, let us account thereof as of the
doctrine of God himself; and so often as the Word of God is alleged, so often let
us think that this sounds in our ears, The Lord of Hosts.

Upon this rises another point to be likewise observed, That the Preachers and
dispensers of Gods word in all their office behave themselves faithfully
according to the function wherewith they are put in charge: and so Paul having
taught the Corinthians their duties toward Gods Messengers, straightly adds
the duty of the Ministers: Now, says he, it is required of the stewards, that
they be found faithful; which faithfulness concerns not only the matter
which they are to handle, but the manner also, that they deliver the truth of
God with all reverence, discretion, and soberness; which Peter teaches also,
when he says, If any speak, let him speak as the words of God; wherefore he
must say nothing but what he may warrant by this which the Prophet speaks,
Ezekiel. 13.
Thus says the Lord. But if hereunto the commandment of Christ and his
Apostles move nothing, let the curse threatened against the breakers of this
commandment move us. In the Prophecy of Ezekiel mention is made of two sorts
of them that break this commandment, prophesying out of their own hearts,
following their own spirit, when they had seen nothing: the one, of such men as
saw lies, saying, The Lord says it, when the Lord has not sent them: One
(says the Prophet) built up a wall, and the other daubed it up with untempered
mortar; and because of that, the Lord says his hand shall be upon them, they
shall not be in the assemblies of his people, etc. The other sort were of the
Prophets that sowed pillows under all arm-holes, etc. soothing up the wicked
with promises of all happiness, telling them of peace, peace, as if all things
were well, when as the Lord had threatened heavy plagues against them; for
which cause there is a Woe threatened them: which judgment is therefore said to
be pronounced against them, because they spoke and prophesied, when the Lord
commanded them not: whereby we are put in mind to be careful in behaving our
selves faithfully, as Moses did in all his house, not to sooth up men in their
sins, nor to flatter the breakers of his Commandments.

In which point I was desirous to satisfy them who have a care how the Church
may be builded; which causes me to call to mind a point mistaken by some,
wherein I have been thought to have sown cushions under the elbowes, and
pillows under the arm-holes of some Non-residents, when by accasion heretofore
I spoke against that sin; whereas I indeed, if my words had been generally of
them who multiply Living upon Living, and have no care to discharge any of
them, that I had justified the incomparison of the mere Non-residents, who stay
here having no charge at all, or calling in this place, I might have been
justly condemned of this fault: but speaking in respect of some that were
present, who have a good care to build the Church of God, though they do it not
in every place with that diligence and assiduity they ought; and comparing them
with others that having no charge in this place follow only their pleasure,
not doing so much on any of their charges, as these do on all, I trust I shall
be cleared from this suspicion: wherefore I would you did consider, that when I
put a difference in the degrees of this sin, I meant not to deny that all of it
was wicked and to be condemned, and that you would also receive the message
with such equity as it was delivered. I should come to the Exhortation, but
that somewhat is to be first said of the repetition, namely, why so often this
is added, Thus says the Lord; no doubt to give this lesson to Teachers, not to
be grieved to teach the self-same things oftentimes, if they be necessary to
the hearers; not to think it loathsome to be taught the same matter, if it be
profitable and expedient for them: If Paul said that it grieved (...) safe
there, caused them to cast off the word of the Lord as it had been a lie
devised against them by the malice of man, and that which increased the
mischief, they said it was done to the end that the Caldeans might destroy
them, whereas it was indeed only for their good; we are therefore diligently to
beware of these enchanting Sirens flesh and blood, not to hearken unto them,
and howbeit the message delivered us by Gods Ministers serve not our humor of
pleasure and ease, yet to receive the same not as the words of man, but as they
are indeed the words of God; for although we speak not by revelation as the
Prophet did, yet we speak by knowledge, and the very same which they saw by
extraordinary, do we know by ordinary. The godly Ministers are called to the
same office that were the Priests of the Law, as Malachy says to be the
messengers of the Lord of Hosts, and Paul speaks not only of himself, but
of others also such as Apollos and Sosthenes were; Let a man so think of us as
the Ministers of Christ etc. Whatsoever therefore the man be, so long as he
preaches the truth, let us account thereof as of the doctrine of God himself,
and so often as the word of God is alleged, so often let us think that this
sounds in our ears The Lord of Hosts.

Upon this rises another point to be likewise observed, that the preachers and
dispensers of Gods word in all their office behave themselves faithfully
according to the function wherewith they are put in charge: and so Paul having
taught the Corinthians their duties toward Gods Messengers, straightly adds
the duty of the Ministers, now says he, It is required of the stewards that
they be found faithful, which faithfulness concerns not onel^ the matter
which they are to handle, but the manner also (...) they deliver the truth of
God with all reverence, discre^^ (...) soberness; which Peter teaches also
when he says; (...) let him speaks as the words of God; wherefore he (...) but
what he may warrant by this which the (...) Thus says the Lord. But if
hereunto the (...) Christ and his Apostles move nothing, le^ (...) against the
breakers of this Commander (...) Prophecy of Ezekiel mention is made (...)
break this commandment, prophesy (...) following their own spirit when (...)
one, of such men as saw lies, (...) Lord has not sent them, one (says the
Prophet) built up a wall, and the others daubed it up with untempered mortar,
and because thereof the Lord says his hand shall be upon them, they shall not
he in the assemblies of his people, etc. the other sort were of the Prophets
that sowed pillowes under all arme-holes etc, soothing up the wicked with
promises of all happiness, telling them of peace, peace, as if all things were
well when as the Lord had threatened heavy plagues against them, for which cause
there is a woe threatened them: which judgment is therefore said to be
pronounced against them, because they spoke and prophesied when the Lord
commanded them not; whereby we are put in mind to be careful in behaving our
selves faithfully as Moses did in all his house, not to sooth up men in their
sins nor to flatter the breakers of his commandments.

In which point I was desirous to satisfy them who have a care how the Church
may be builded, which causes me to call to mind a point mistaken by some,
wherein I have been thought to have sown Cushions under the elbowes, and
pillowes under the arm-holes of some non-Residents when by occasion heretofore
I spoke against that sin, whereas I indeed if my words had been generally of
them who multiply living upon living, and have no care to discharge any of
them, that I had justified the incomparison of the mere non-residents who stay
here having no charge at all, or calling in this place. I might have been
justly condemned of this fault, but speaking in respect of some that were
present who have a good care to build the Church of God: though they do it not
in every place with that diligence and assiduity they ought, and comparing them
with others that having no charge in this place ^llow only their pleasure, not
doing so much on any of their (...), as these do on all; I trust I shall be
cleared from this sus(...) therefore I would you did consider that when I put a
di(...) ^he degrees of this sin, I meant not to deny that all of (...) to be
condemned, and that you would also receive (...) such equity as it was
delivered. I should come to (...) that somewhat is to be first said of the
repe(...) often this is added (thus says the Lord) no (...) to teachers, not
to be grieved to teach (...) times, if they be necessary to the hea(...) to be
caught the same matter if it (...), if Paul said that it grieved not not him to
write the same things, and that it was for them to I hill. 3. t.
whom he wrote a safe thing, how much less ought it to grieve us, how much
more safe is it for you, being a warrant by the example of the Prophet in this
place who repeateth the same words in his exhortation in the 5 and 7 verses,
and the reason of his exhortation to the same effect, and in the 6 and 9 verses
which considering the Prophets set down their sermons in fewer words than they
preached, confirms more that which has been said, for if the Holy Ghost
thought it necessary in so brief a rehearsal to set so often in the same words
the exhortation and reason of it: we may well know that it is also needful for
us often to keep the self same things, how often is this one speech repeated in
the Prophets, show the house of Israel their sins, how 1 John 2
often does S. John iterate that commandment, Love one another? this is that
old Commandment, etc. this is that new Commandment, etc. How often does our
Savior by diverse similitudes teach one Matthew. 13.
and the very same thing, the seven Epistles in the Apocalips are Revel. 2, and
3 cap.
all shut up with one Court answer, Let him that has ears hear what the
spirit says, etc, Which point I would they did consider who are greived that
we speak so much of that sin of the negligence of careless pastors: For if
skillful Surgeons after Mat. 9.
they have lanced imposthumes put in new tents day by day, should not we also
whom God has called to be the Physicians and Chyrurgeons of your souls after
we have lanced your wounds, daily also put in new tents, that at length they
may be healed. The Lord by Ezekiel reproves such Prophets as rose not up in
the gappes, and stood not in the breaches where he uses Ezekiel. 22.
a Metaphor drawn from the manner of Warriors, who are wont to join their
force together and to make a head against their enemies in such places as they
had made a breach: this fault of the negligent pastor, is one of the greatest
breaches whereunto if we run not and stand not up in it: what may our
General and Captain think of us? When Coesar besieged Avaritium in France,
his soldiers raised a Bulwark against it, the Citizens set it on fire, which
when Caesar's soldiers labored to quench, one stood in the gate to whom was
brought such matter as might be cast into the Fort to continue the flame, he
that first was there placed, was shot through with a Scorpions bone and so was
slain, in whose place came the second who being so served, there followed the
third and the fourth, neither was that place left without a man while there
remained any hope to do good: there has been a fire kindled to consume this
hold of sin, God forbid it should be quenched, nay it cannot indeed, for it
is nourished by Gods spirit. The Papists themselves at their council of Trent,
after they had long debated the matter, they were enforced by the clearness of
the truth to conclude, That the Pastor by the law of God is bound to be
resident on his charge, what the law of man permits, it is for the heardnes of
men's hearts, whereunto that may be replied, that from the beginning it was not
so; wherefore although we be shot through with speeches as sharp as arrows,
yet let us show ourselves no less valiant than did the Citizens of Avaricum,
chiefly seeing they fought but for a corruptible City for the safguard of the
body, and that with uncertain hope: but we fight for an incorruptible crown
of glory, for the eternal salvation of the soul, and that under undoubted
hope. But we persuade our selves better things of you brethren, whom we desire
to remember that the wounds of a friend is better than the kisses of an enemy.
Of my self I know, and I conceive the the like of others, that I only reprove
this sin for the salvation of your souls, and of them that are committed to
your charge: and why the same is done so often we have example and warrant of
the Prophet using so many iterations of the same thing, and of the good
Chyrurgeons, who cease not to apply their medicines till such time as they have
cured the wound.

Now to proceed, the exhortation is laid down in the 8 verse Go up to the
mountain and bring wood and build this house, the reasons hereof are because
the Lord had already corrected them, ver. 6, 9. 10, 11, Where, as he threatens
them punishment if they do it not, so on the other side he promises that he
will take pleasure in them, etc. verse. 8 and bestow his blessing on them if
they do his commandment: but for that you have heard sufficiently already in
the exhortation* I will come to the reasons. It is first set down for them to
consider, that because of the neglect of Gods commandment he had chastised them
with dearth, famine, scarcity: wherein, the first point to be observed, is,
that the Joh. 5. 17.
Lord did send these punishments on them, for it is said, I blowed on it, I
called for a drought. For as God has by his power created all things, so does
he continually by his providence govern and dispose of them. So that it is
verified that our Savior says my Father works hitherto, and I also work.
For all things are his work and come from his power, though it be true that he
Heb 6.
works most by secundary causes, even as it is here said, that to cause a
famine among this people, he called for a drought upon the land and upon the
mountains etc. for the heavens are appointed to water the earth, to make it
fruitful that it may yield seed to the sower, but neither can the rain make
the earth fruitful, nor can the earth bring forth her fruit without his
blessing and providing: which the Prophet by occasion of the mention of Gods
blessing to his Church does lay open. In that day I will hear, says the Lord,
I will hear even the heavens and they shall hear the earth and the earth shall
hear the Corn and the wine and the oil, and they shall Hos. 2. 21.
hear Israel. By which is signified that all creatures shall labor with
common consent for Israel for such as fear and serve God: that as they wish to
have necessaries from the earth, so the earth shall look for rain from the
heavens etc, But all this the Lord says he will hear, that we may learn to
lift up our eyes from these second Acts 3. 12.
causes, to him; For men that regard not this, would go no further than to
say, this dearth came from want of rain etc. as though it were not the Lord
that rules these things: which Seneca might teach us when he says, what thou
call nature, is God for nature created the heavens earth and corn: may say
to us as John and Peter said to the people, Why look you on us as Amos 3. 6.
though by our power and strength we had done this. A sparrow falls not to
the ground without his providence. There is no evil in the City, (.i. no
punishment of evil) which the Lord has not wrought. The want and need in
goods, the weakness of the body, the punishments here mentioned are said to
come from him; for sometimes Deuteronomy. 3. 8.
he withdraws the things themselves from them, sometimes the power and
faculty of them, though they remain. For sometimes he works by these means
and second causes, sometimes without them, yea also against them: as he
teaches us when signifying how wonderfully he preserved them in the wilderness
and fed them, he yields this as the reason, that he might teach them, That
men lives not by bread only, but by every word Deuteronomy 8. 4.
that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord: that is whatsoever he Dan. 1.
enforces or commands to feed us. Yea by the same power he caused their
raiment to endure and not to wax old, and kept their feet that they swelled
not. Daniel appointed to be fed with the Kings ordinary; fearing lest thereby
he should be defiled, therewith, besought his governor that he and his fellows
might feed on pulse instead thereof: but the governor feared least so they
should be in worse taking than the rest who fared on finer meats, but through
Gods blessing they looked better with their diet than the other with the Kings
ordinary. Pulse is but a homely meat, and by the Physicians judgment but of a
bad Juice yet with Gods blessing it is better than a Prinoes fare; contrariwise
without this when the people looked for much it came to little, and when it was
brought home the Lord blowed upon it and it dispersed and vanished as it had
been nothing, they drank but were not filled, they did eat but were not
satisfied, put on clothes but were not warmed, because these creatures wanted
that secret blessing, by which God gives force to the clothes to warm, bread
to nourish, drink to quench the thirst: as when he pleases, he sometimes
takes away the things themselves, in both to teach us to cast up our eyes from
the earth to heaven, from the the creature to the creator, which let us do and
when such things befalls us, Remember the speech of Job, who when his goods
were spoiled, etc. Considered not the Sabeans but looked directly upon the
first cause which ruled and governed the second, and therefore said The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken; which that we may so much the more, let us
also Job 1. 15. 21.
consider the next point that follows, which is the benefit that arises to
the Church by these punishments, for as the Physician ministers a bitter
potion to his patient and draws away his meat to the end to heal and cure
his malady; and as the father chastises his child who he would have
reclaimed: so the Lord corrected this people that they might leave their
sins, which is taught them when the Prophet says that this was done Heb. 12
6.
because each man ran to his own house and suffered the Lords house to lie
waste, and so also would it fare with us when we neglect God, we would even
perish out of the way, if God called us not back by his correction, which Elihu
also notes to be one means whereby God does recall men from sin: he also
strikes him with sorrow on his bed, and the multitude of his bones with Job.
33. 19
a soar grief etc. If there be with him a messenger, and Interpreter one of a
thousand who can show man his equity etc. And the Prophet Psalm. 107.
at large in the Psalm opens the same by sundry examples of such as wander
up and down, and them that are in prison or tossed on the sea and that inhabit
barren grounds, etc. Noting this of them all, that when they cry to him out of
their distress he hears them and helps; as he did Jonah out of the Whales
belly: this should we consider to be the cause of wars and other
chastisements and not refer them (as some are wont) to the Eclipse of the Sun
or Moon, or conjunction of some planetts, or to the sextile or quadrate aspect
of them: No: plagues, wars, sickness, famine, they are not effects of these
causes, the eclipse is in us, not in the Sun or Moon that causes these
things: It is for that the moon, whereby (in the Apocalips) are signified all
changeable things, is not trod under our feet as it should be, Revel. 12, 1, 2.
but is lifted above us, and does eclipse the light of Gods grace that it
cannot shine upon us: men's unchaste and unnatural conjunctions, their greedy
and covetous aspects, their cruelty and extortion, these are the planets whose
conjunction and aspects cause wars, plagues and famine; which I do not speak
as though the heavenly bodies did not work at all, I know and confess they
have their Physical effects (though the division of heavens into the houses
and parts, which the astrologians set down, be most fantastical and
blockish) but to teach us to cast our eyes from the second causes to the first,
and that we would have our eyes fixed on our own sins for which God lays his
chastisement upon us, whereof the Jews had experience, Judge. 2 8. etc.
who were then punished by tyrants and oppressors when they fell from God and
renounced his religion; which the Prophet shows when he says, that war
taught them that Judge 3. 2.
which they could not before learn in peace. When Elies sons through their
wickedness caused the service of God to be despised, the Lord sent war
amongst them, and the Arc was taken, etc. when the Jews would be by no means
reclaimed, the Lord tells them by the Prophet that he would do unto them as
he had done unto Shilo for the wickedness of his people, to Jer. 7. 14. Jer.
26. 5, 6 7.
the same effect also the same Prophet. Chap. 26. 5, 6, etc. threatens the
like curse to all the Cities of Judah, etc, whereby we may gather that the Lord
calls his servents by war, dearth, etc, at such time as they are as you
would say provender pricked.

But leaving them let us apply these things to our selves, Remember the
exhortation which the Prophet uses to the building of the Lords house, and you
have heard the proportion betwixt their temple and our Church. The time
admonishes us even as it did them to consider our ways for we are visited
with scarcity even as were they, but behold when as by reason hereof we should
be humbled under the mighty hand of God, to call our ways to remembrance and
to mend our naughty manners, we are wanton and give our selves to sporting and
pastime, The which is by the sound of the trumpet signified, not the sound of
atrumpet to proclaim a fast, as the Lord commands by the prophet: but to
proclaim idle and ungodly plays, as though we were resolved to verefie that
which the Prophet says, I called (says the Lord) to weeping and mourning, and
behold eating and drinking, etc. which is also so much the worse that these
plays have been condemned by statute of our university, yea worst of all for
that at this time there is an order appointed by authority for extraordinary
prayers to be used, whereas we not only take no such order but rather the
quite contrary by this disorder, which is Isaih 22. 12, 13, 14.
such that the cry thereof is carried from one side of the town to the other,
and though that cannot be said of it as of the cry of them that sat them down
to eat and drink and rose up to play. It is not the sound of them that have
the worse, etc. yet not far unlike may it be said. It is not the cry of
warriors but of wantons. And here the Prophet sets it down that they sowed
much etc. and lays down the cause for that the Lords house did lie waste,
let us also consider, as the Prophet commands, our own ways I will not
descend to particular persons, but let every man consider it on his bed,
whether there be not some who having many Ecclesiastical livings and much
coming in yearly into their hands thereby, yet may count it so as though it
had been put into a bottomless purse: and whether many that live on pulse be
not in as good liking as they that feed on such variety: I leave it to your
own consideration. In ancient time the Pastors had good livings allotted
them, but they waxed careless, negligent and slothful in discharging their
duties, insomuch that certain hundred of years the fault of Nonresidency was
spoke against and misliked, as Edward 3 his Epistle to the Pope does testify.
What ensued hereupon? were not the livings hereupon so abused, taken away by
little and little? And they, who were put in trust to dispose them, did they
not make merchandise of them, that so the Church was spoiled on each side; and
of them that should feed others it might be said, you feed your selves. Now
because Pastors cannot feed others unless themselves be also nourished, and
that there might be a continual supply when any failed, our ancestors provided
nurseries for learning, as Abbeys, Bishops-houses, Cathedral-Churches,
Colleges in sundry places of this realm, beside our universities. The Abbeys
they fell to idleness, pleasure, pampering of their bodies etc, wherefore God
has done unto them as he did unto Shilo, their dwellings were wasted, etc.
Shilo was destroyed for the wickedness of the priests from whom iniquity (as
the Prophet says) went forth into all the land, and is it not to be feared,
lest the same also happen to our Bishoprics? nay would to God it were not past
fearing: for are not Bishops impoverished? Cathedral Churches also, and but
very few Colleges except these in our universities, but they have been brought
to the same decay that Abbeys have been, and shall not the like happen to our
Colleges? I am sorry to say it, but the Lord has said it (and not one of his
words shall fall to the ground) if we hear not his word to turn from our evil
ways, and leave our transgressions, he will do unto us as he did to Shilo.
God has provided a nursery for his Church by these means to the establishing
of doctrine and discipline amongst us, but seeing that the Jer. 26.
means for this end appointed have not been so used he will no doubt even
deal with Bishoprics as he has done with Abbeys for the word of God is gone
out of his mouth and shall be certainly accomplished: he that is neither
Prophet nor prophets child may see this. All men know what forwardness the
thing was in in K. Edwards days, when so many things went to wrack not through
his fault, but theirs, who in his minority were put in trust with the matters
of the Realm, whenas the dissolution of the Bishopric of Durham was brought
about which had been so continued, had it not pleased God to send Queen Mary
to dissolve that dissolution, as he sent the Philistims to deliver David, else
had a Bishopric (so necessary for the Church) been quite lost and had come to
the same end that Shilo did, God he praised our Prince has been careful to
preserve these, and give us grace Livi. Lib. *z. in oratione Menenij Agrippae.
to use them to his glory, least that happen to them which the ungodly wish
for* who in their minds have devoured them. The only way to turn away these
plagues is for us to do our duty in that vocation whereunto we are called.

The history of Agrippa and his fable for the belly and other members. If they
shall see these things so well bestowed and necessarily as he proved to them,
and will be as well content as the Romans to maintain the Senators.

Sermon the Fourth, June 11. 1584.
Verse 8. Go up to the mountain and bring timber and build this House and I
will take delight in it, and I will be glorified in it, says the Lord.
THe Prophet Haggai, being sent by special Commandment of the highest to
preach to the Jews that were returned from the captivity of Babylon and to
stir them up to the building of the Temple, the foundation whereof was laid
before, because they were faulty herein, does first reprove them for that they
were so careful to seel their own houses, but suffer the Lords house to lie
waste, and next does advertise them to call to mind the punishments, which
they ^uffered, in sowing much, and bringing home little, in eating, and not
having enough, in drinking but not being filled, in clothing themselves but not
being warm, in earning of wages and putting it as it were into a bottomless
bag, showing that all this did light upon them for this cause, Because they
left the house of the Lord waste and every man ran to his own house. Thirdly,
he exhorts them that they would go up to the mountain, and bring timber and
build the house, and so promises he will accept thereof and be glorified, etc.
Of the former parts and namely of the reproof and advertisement, I have spoken
heretofore, It follows that I now speak of the exhortation in this 8 verse,
in the which there are two things to be observed. First, who it is that
exhorts, Secondly, what he exhorts unto. First, who exhorts, the Lord
himself, signified in the last words of the verse (says the Lord) Secondly to
what he exhorts, that they go up to the mountain and bring timber to build
the house: The which exhortation that it may be more effectual he adds
thereunto, two reasons to stir them up to that, he exhorts them, First that
he will accept of it, Secondly, that he will be glorified, So that in the
substance there are three branches commended to us in these words to be
considred First, who exhorts; Secondly, the thing he exhorts, Thirdly the
reasons for which he exhorts them the reunto. For the first, it is the Lord,
for though the exhortation be delivered by the voice and ministry of the
Prophet, yet is it indeed the Lord that exhorts them, even as it is added
(says the Lord) and this as the rest of the Prophets are wont often to
mention, and that to raise up the hearts of the people to the dutiful
consideration of that which is uttered, for Haggai also mentions the same
both in the former words, and here again, and likewise afterward, having
thought it good to put them still in remembrance hereof, thereby to move them
to obey and believe the Commandment and promise delivered from the Lord, The
which the very name of God which the Prophet uses, does therefore recommend
more effectually to them, because it lays before their eyes the Majesty of
him that speaks and the truth of the speech. For whereas in the language
which the Prophet spoke there are diverse names attributed to God, some of them
betokening his Almightinesse and Alsufficiency, some his Majesty and power,
some his authority and judgment, one there is above the rest that most lively
expresses his eternal essence, (...)
the constancy also and the truth of his word, as the which is derived from a
word that signifies to Be, betokening not only the eternal essence of the
Lord of Majesty, as John shows in his Revelation, where he opens the
meaning of that name when he says. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending says the Lord, which is, which was, and which is to come, even the
Almighty: Apoc. 1. 8.
as it were interpreting that which he spoke of himself by the Prophet. Moses
demanded by what name he should call him if the people of Israel enquired who
sent him, I am, says he that I am; For when our Savior said of himself,
Before Abraham was I am, he meant to show the eternity and everlastingnesse of
his Godhead that was from the beginning, or rather indeed without any
beginning or end, being the same yesterday and to Ex. 3. 14.
day and for ever. Neither thereby is the eternity only of his Ioh. 8. 58.
Majesty noted, but the truth also and certainety of his word and Promise,
which in the 6 of Exodus is signified so plainly, that Heb. 13. 8. Exo. 6. 3.
the words could not be interpreted, unles the name Jehovah were there
retained, I apeared unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of
Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them, whereby he
signifies that as afterward himself expounds it, that unto them he made
the promise of giving them the land of Canaan but that he had not made his
promise to be, as a man would say, therefore afterward he adds to tell the
children of Israel, I am Jehovah I will bring you from under the burden of
Egypt, I am Jehovah, I will make that to be which I have promised to your
Fathers who relied on my promises, as knowing me by my Name Almighty, and
beleiving that I Exo 6. ver 6, 7, 8.
would do it, but not by my name Jehovah that I did it indeed. But after the
430 years were accomplished (which was the time prescribed to Abraham) then
performed he, that which before he had promis^d, And this the Apo^tle declares
when he, speaking of the hope of eternal life, says, That God which cannot
lie has promised before the world began. As if he would* say that if it E^.
12. 41 Genesis 15. 3 Gal. 3. 17. Acts 7. 6. Tit. 1. 2.
be his promise then must it needs be performed, for he is not a man that he
should lie, nor as the son of man that he should promise and not perform. So
that by the name of Lord of Majesty, which the Prophet uses in his language,
betokening him that was from everlasting that is and is to come, the same for
ever, who is most true in his word, most constant in his promises, God which
cannot lie, The prophet would stir them up to be careful to receive the
message delivered with faith to his promise, adjoined to the precept and
obedience to the precept Numb. 23. 19.
established by the promise, and this is the holy preparation which we also
have need of, that the message delivered from God may with faith and obedience
be received of us, as of them. This though I need not to stand upon here
because it has been oftentimes handled in your hearing, yet because the
Prophet again and again repeateth it I cannot pass it over, chiefly seeing
that the Prophet though sent immediately and instructed 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
of God, uses to warrant his message by these words, the case being not alike
in us who although we be sent of God, yet are we sent by men also, neither have
we our commission from his own mouth immediately, but by writing in the
Scripture, but you that have learned that the whole Scripture given by
inspiration of God is profitable to teach, convince, correct and instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute even thoroughly absolute and
made perfect unto all good works, I say you have also learned that the message
therein delivered us, is the same message sent before by the Prophets and
Apostles, to whom the Lord himself spoke immediately, neither did he only
ordain in his Church Apostles and Prophets, but gave also Pastors and Teachers
for gathering together of the Saints for Ephesians 4. 11, 12.
the work of the ministry and for the edification of the body of Christ.
Therefore we also have Commission from God to deliver his will unto you, and do
his message so long as we can soundly profess that the corrections,
exhortations etc. which we use are deduced from the writing of the Apostles,
and prophets which he has delivered to his Church and appointed us his
servants to cut his word aright and thereby to feed your souls; It 2 Timothy 2.
15. 1 Pet. 4. 11 1* Joh. 4 1.
must be therefore our care, that the words we speak be as the words of God,
and you brethren should be likewise skilful in the scriptures to discern the
spirits of them that preach unto you, but the doctrine we preach being rightly
delivered, you are no otherwise to receive than if the Lord himself by his
Prophets and Apostles did speak unto you: And this being the substance of that
which I thought to nete briefly in this first point, namely that both we which
teach are to learn, that what we teach we must deliver unto you as the word
of God, and you that hear are to ^eceive and hear it as it is indeed, not the
word of man, but of God. I come to the doctrine comprehended in the 2 point
(with the matter of the exhortation) delivered; first to 1 These. 2. 13.
the Jews by the Prophet, 2ly by consequence to us all.

Go up (says the Prophet) to the mountain, bring timber and build this house:
where first for the better understanding of these words, that is to be
observed, that this house of God in Jerusalem was built on a mountain, even on
the mountain or hill of Moriah, as it is apparent out of 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. which
2* Chron 3* 1.
place being chose by the Lord himself for the seat of his sanctuary, the
Jews returning out of captivity, came by direction of Zorobbabel and Jehoshua
to set the Temple on her former seat, that is to say upon her old foundation,
as it is declared in the Book of Ezra, chap. 2. and as they came to set it on
the old foundation; so they began in the 3 Chap. though hindered by diverse E^ra
2. 68
devises of the adversaries all the days of Cyrus, and unto the second year
of Darius the Prophet therefore now in the second year of Darius stirs them
up to go forward with the work begun, and to build up the whole work upon the
foundation, exhorting them to go up to the mountain and bring timber and
build the house: but because the work was paineful E^ra 4. 5. 6 23, 4.
and laborious and the people of the Jews as all of us are by nature had
rather to play for nothing than work for nothing, therefore the Lord by the
Prophet stirs them (...) hereunto by adjoining his promises, 1 Of his grace
and favor, 2. with his gracious blessings, 1 I will take delight in it. 2 I
will be glorified.

Touching the former it may seem strange that God promises to take delight in
the Temple, for if he takes no pleasure in the strength of a horse neither
delight in any man's legs, how much less likely is it that he should take
delight in an heap of stones and timber? But we must consider the temple not
nakedly in it self but in such sort as respects the use and signification of
it. First the signification, in that it betokened Christ Jesus, of whom it was
a figure and shadow, Secondly the use Heb. 10. 1. Col. 2. 17.
and end whereunto it was directed, namely to serve God. For the signification
you know that the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews as also to the
Colossians both plainly teach that the things under the law were shadows to
represent Christ: they were shadows but he the body; even so the whole temple
was a figure and a shadow of Christ, and that nor of himself only, but of his
Church also: of him, as the head, of it as the body So the parts thereof
shaddowed him as the Apostle in the 9 and Heb. 10. 20.
10 to the Heb. teaches: the verse signifying his flesh whereby he entered into
heaven as into the holy of holyes: so the altar of incense, the sacrifices, the
blood which were offered, the table whereon they were offered, etc. all these
things appertaining to the Leviticall services, were so many mysteries to
represent and shadowed out unto us the person of Christ in whom the light 1
Cor. 3. 17 1 Cor. 6. 19 Mat 3. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 16
and truth of them all shines. Neither hereby only was the head figured, but
the whole body also, for so says the Apostle to the Corinthians: you are the
temple of the living God. Now the Lord himself says of our Savior, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and we also read in the 1 Ephesians. 6.
that it has pleased him of his infinite mercy to accept and take delight in us
in his beloved. Wherefore you see that God might take delight in the temple in
that it signified and shadowed out Christ (in Jer. 7. 10.
whom only, if we speak absolutely and properly, God is delighted) as also his
members whom it has pleased God to adopt, and so to delight in his beloved
son whom also he vouchsafes; this grace, that he accepts not only of
their persons, but of their works too: Wherein the latter promise is contained
(and I will be glorified) which regards the end whereunto this house was
built to be a house of prayer, and to offer up praise and thanksgiving for his
mercy; to hear his word read and expounded: and so because these works of
Christians are acceptable through Christ, in this respect also it may be said
that he took great delight in the temple. Not in it self as Pilgrimagers
imagine that God delights in places for themselves, or because that holy men
have possessed them. For when these actions I spoke of were not practiced in
this place but the temple was so polluted that it did not represent his dearly
beloved son, God himself showed (sending his Prophets to them) that he took no
delight in it, and namely by the prophet Ezekiel to whom the Lord showed the
great abominations that the house of Israel had committed to cause him to
depart from his sanctuary, etc. which Jer. 7. 4. 11 Ezekiel. 8. 6.
having at large in that Chap. showed in the 11 Chapter he declares how the
Cherubims lift up their wings and mounted from the earth and went forth and
stood upon the mountain: and so by degrees the Lord forsook them from the
sanctuary to the threshold of the temple then to the Cherubims which stood at
the right hand of the Court, verse 3 then to the Eastgate and Ezekiel 11. 29.
entrance of the Court. verse 19 to provoke the people of the City to
repentance and openly to show his departure, Finally flying from the City into
the mountain. Chap. 11. 13. declaring thereby that he took no delight no not
in his temple, when his religion was not therein maintained, and it not applied
to those uses whereunto it was erected, and where ever has there been either
any person more holy abiding, or any actions more Godly practiced then in the
temple at Jerusalem where Christ Jesus himself preached and taught the people,
yet even this place, if ever any beloved both for the persons and actions, was
so detested of him when it ceased to practice these actions, and to present
that whereunto it was instituted, that not many years after our Saviors death
it was as you know ruined by the Romans, and made even with the ground, yea
when Julian the Apostata in despite of Christ went about to raise it up again,
it pleased God by miracles to show his dislike therereof, First by an
earthquake Ruffinus. l. 1. c. ult Zozom. l. 5 c. ult. Anni Mer. Lib. 25.
and then by flakes of fire issuing out of the earth and plagueing the workmen
(which not only Ruffinus and Zozomene write of but also Aminimi Marcellus who
lived at that time) and served Julian being a great admirer of him, witnessing
that out of the earth there issued such flames of fire as consumed the work
men sundry times and so brought to pass that the work could not be
accomplished, hereby it is manifest, that God delighted not in the temple of it
self, neither yet for the persons that have been conversant therein, and
actions performed when they ceased to be: but because it r^pre^ented Christ
Jesus and his Church in whom indeed he delighted, and as it might be used to
the service of the people of God therein to worship him with a holy worship, yea
in this respect he says he will take such delight in it, that this temple
Agg^i 2. 7
should be more accepted than the former (though it were for the building
nothing so glorious) because in this Christ Jesus himself should be present in
person. And this is the former reason namely the favor which he will show
them, nowout of his favor proceeds his benefit, and that is it which he
adds; I will be glorified: for we may perceive that this is the meaning of
these words, if we match them with those that go before, and those that follow
after, for having before laid down the punishments that were fallen upon them
he adjoyneth withal, the cause thereof, for that each man ran to his own
house, and left the house of the Lord waste. Now things contrary have contrary
consequences, as if he had thus said in effect, as those chastisements which
heretofore you suffered came upon you because you did not build the house of
the Lord, so on the other side if you do build the same you shall be refreshed
by sundry blessings: Romans 15. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 8
yet by the way when he says, I will be glorified, he puts them in mind
what they ought to do, when they have received these benefits, for so by the
consequent, he betokens the Antecedent, by the glorifying of him, the holy
invocation of his name whereby he is glorified, and these be the reasons whereby
he stirs up the Jews to go up and bring timber and build the house. But
does the Prophet stir up them only, and not us also? (yes my brethren) even
us also: For whom, whatsoever before time was written (as the Apostle says to
the Romans) for our sakes I say was it written, that we in the assurance of
Gods favors and blessings (which contain the promises of this life and that
which is to come) should do the same things that here are mentioned; Therefore
up to the mountain bring wood and build this house for as you have heard that
this house was a figure of Christ and Christians so let us remember, as they
were willed to build that material temple, so we likewise are required to
edisie the Church of Christ, which that you may the better do, consider with me
the points noted in the things whereunto they are exhorted, and the reasons,
although the time will not suffer me indeed to stand on th reasons, howbeit I
must request that in the mean while you have an eye unto the reasons that are
drawn from the rewards proposed to them that perform the commandment: that so
you may be stirred up with a fervent zeal to perform that, to which so
glorious a reward is promised. And first let us consider who they are that be
exhorted. It is before said, Zerubbabel and Joshua, the Prince and the Priest
as they whose help, and endeavor is most necessary to the building of the
Church, because they were as guides to direct others: yet as it is manifest in
the 13 and 14 verses, the Prophet was sent to the remnant of the people, and
the Promise as well made unto them, and their hearts likewise stirred up that
they came and did the work of the house of the Lord. They therefore who are to
build by Gods Commandment are Zerubbabel and Joshua, with all the remnant of
the people; principally Heb. c 6. 1.
Zerubbabel and Joshua, who are best able for special graces, and gifts
bestowed on them, or because of the ministry of the word, and authority
committed unto them, but next all the people likewise, not the Prince and high
Priest only: now for the Princes, how the Temple is to be built by them; I
showed you when I spoke of the former verse, at which time I showed for the
general building that the foundation hereof is as the Apostle to the Hebrews
declares the doctrine of the beginning of Christ taught and contained in the
catachisme, the building of the wall the laying of the roof is the perfection
of doctrine and increase of Godliness, till it be built in all respectts
perfect, even such aone pleases God himself to pourtray out in Scripture.
Therefore touching the general building, I then spoke, which must be done by
them that are in principal place the Queens highness and the states in
Parliament, and declared how it was to be done for the increase of true
godliness by preaching of whole* some doctrine and establishing godly
discipline through all Churches in the Realm according to the prescription of
the Lord revealed in his word: A thing though hardly hoped for in these days,
in which so small care is had in Universities to make sufficient persons to
furnish the ministry, and of Patrons abroad to call them that are sufficient,
finally so small will in the people to submit themselves to the yoke of
Christ: yet it is to be prayed for of Gods people according to the example of
Daniel who when the temple of God lay waste more then ours, did make earnest
prayer to God to cause his face toshine on his sanctuary that did lie waste,
for the Lords sake: but leaving this to them that have amongst us the place of
Zerubbabel and Joshua and of whom we are to hope in due time they will have a
care that the Church of God in all places be perfectly built up in the wisdom
and spirit of Joshua: let us remember the next branch, Jude verse 21, 22, 23.
namely that this commandment reaches also to all the rest of the people: for
that this charge concerns also all us likewise, Saint Jude the Apostle and
brother of James expressly teaches, when he says, but ye beloved edefie your
selves in your most holy faith praying in the Holy Ghost and keeping your
selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life and have compassion of some, in putting difference: and others
save some with fear pulling them out of the fi^e, and hate even the garment
spotted with the flesh. For whom are they that Jude gives this charge? even
they who are called and sanctified of God the Father and saved by Jesus Christ
even as the title of the Epistle shows, in which respect it is also called
General as written to all faithful Christians; now the foundation that we are
to build upon, is, as the Apostle here says, the most holy Faith, For that
Jude signifies when he says edefie, or build up your selves on your most holy
Faith: the walls and roof of the house are the exercise of the works of
faith, namely the love of God and man breeking out into fruits of
righteousness, so that we hate even the garment spotted by flesh. In which
speech there is an allusion to the law of Moses, wherein the clothes and
garments that had touched any unclean things were likewise accounted unclean,
as if he would thereby teach them that they were to grow on continually from
faith to faith in practice of Godliness with such a fervent zeal that they
detest all contagion of sin, and show themselves perfect (according as the
weakness of men will suffer) as their heavenly Father is perfect: but alas may
I make this exhortation to all that are assembled in this place? I may make it
to all, but would to God there were not in some even a want of the foundation.
For what is the foundation? it is as Jude says, a most holy faith. Now S. Paul
to the Thessalontans writes that all have not faith: doubtless 2 These. 3. 2.
these words were true, not only in his days but in ours, wherein, sure, all
men have not faith, and though all had faith, yet have they not this faith
which Jude names a most holy faith; for many have faith which yet have not a
most holy faith, which is the Essential difference, whereby the faith of
hypocrites and wicked men is distinguished from the faith of Gods true
servants. For there is a belief which is without holiness whereof Saint James
speaks when he says, The Devils believe and tremble. But as for you (my
brethren) who by the testimony of your consciences, know that Jude speaks to
you who are called and Iam. 2. 19.
sanctified, Remember you that this exhortation is in special sort made to
you, namely, that you build up your selves upon your most holy faith, keeping
your selves in the love of God and man etc: the exhortation is made to all, God
grant that all may embrace it, but it shall be embraced of all to whom S. Jude
writes let us all then that make a profession of this faith, Join virtue with
your faith, with virtue knowledge, with knowledge temperance, with temperance
patience, with patience godliness, with godliness brotherly kindness, and with
brotherly kindness love. In which words as it were Saint Peter does interpret
the other; making faith the foundation as it were of all other virtues, willing
2 Pet. 1. 4. etc.
the rest to be built upon it, not as though these were distinct but mentioning
so often the same by diverse names, as if he would show he could not satisfy
himself with any words, when he was earnest to exhort such as called upon the
name of the Lord to depart from iniquity, and to lay the walls of a holy and
Godly 2 Timothy 2. 19.
conversation upon the foundation of an holy and sound faith The Apostle Paul
likewise to Titus delivers the same thing though in fewer words The grace of
God (says he) that brings salvation unto all men has appeared and teaches
us that we should deny Tit. 2. 11.
ungodliness and worldly lusts and that we should live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present evil world; which words would God they were so well
marked of us, as they are continually rehearsed in our Assemblies, soberly,
righteously, godly, containing the substance of all religion; Soberly in
respect of our own vessels, righteously in respect of other men, godly in
respect of God himself. In the duties touching the which three, the whole law
and the Prophets consist, neither must we only take care to build up our selves
in this sort but others also. For so Saint Jude also commands and have
compassion of some and others save with fear 1 These. 5. 11.
pulling them out of the fire. Though if Saint Jude taught it not yet we may
learn it out of Saint Paul when he wills us to exhort one another, for every
one of us is the temple of Gods holy spirit and every one of us is exhorted to
build up this temple according to the grace which is given him. Not all indeed
as the ministers who are specially given for the gathering of the Saints
together for the work of the ministry and for edification of the Ephesians 4. 11,
12.
body of Christ, but in some sort by example, and word, at due times and
seasons according to the measure of grace given to them, and this do the godly
in the prophecy of Esau, where they are brought in, one exhorting, encouraging,
and calling upon another Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he
will Esa 2. 2. 3.
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, And David rejoiced when he
heard them say Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, our feet shall stand
in thy Gates O Jerusalem; but with us there is so little care had hereof, that
men take scorn to be advertised of their duty especially by their inferiors,
yea that they who should advertise others and be advertised themselves too, are
Psalm 12^. 1, 2.
most careless of all men, and some there are so wretchlesse and careless in
this respect of going up and bringing timber, and building the house of the
Lord that they no whit regard it, as though it no whit appertained to them to
build others, but let us learn that it was the voice of Cain, am I my brothers
keeper; Reuben though none of the best sons of Jacob yet when he saw that
Joseph was not in the pit, he rent his clothes and returning to his brethren
said, the child is not yonder, and I alas whither shall I go. This then is
the first point that we are to mark, that they who are willed to go up and
build are not Zerubbabel and Joshua only, but all the remnant of the people,
and all Genesis 4. 9. Genesis 37. 29. 30.
faithful Christians are bound to build up themselves and others For both we
are the body of Christ and others also: both which are noted by the name of the
Temple both in the 1 Cor. 6. 19. and 2 Cor. 6. 16. In the former place he
speaking to every one says, that their bodies are the temples of the Holy
Ghost, and in the latter he speaking to the Congregation, says they are the
temple of God.

The second point to be noted is that we are not only commanded to build but
that with industry also and pains, for the Prophet says go up to the
mountain, bring wood and timber and build this house, wherein by proposing the
particularities of the pains, difficulty and labors, he tells them that
though indeed it be painful and hard, yet it is the duty which God requires
of them: To go up a hill is not very pleasant, but to go up having carriage
and burden must needs be troublesome now the Prophet tells them that they
were not only to go up a hill, but to carry up timber thither also: and it
seems the Prophet would mention the hardest thing, for what was it to bring
timber? In the third of Ezra. 7. it is declared how they gave money to the
Carpenters and fellers of wood, and meat and drink and oil unto them of Tyrus
and Sidon to bring them Caedar-wood Ezra 3. 7.
from Libanon to the Sea to Ioppa: so that if we consider the difficulties,
First in felling of the trees at Libanon then of bringing them to the Sea to
Ioppa, then the carriage of them to Jerusalem and the bringing of them up to
the mountain, we shall find that it was a matter of no small weight, nor
importance, and yet all this was but little in comparison of that which they
are lastly commanded, namely to build the house, especially considering that
Solomon having so many workmen, and all things ready prepared for the building
was yet as we read some seven years in building it, when therefore he says,
Go up bring timber and 1 Kings 6. 37, 38.
build the house, he teaches us that if we mean to build this temple of the
Lord, we must not do as they who take their ease and stretch themselves on
their beds, and drink wine in bowls, killing Oxen and sheep, and eating the
fattest of the heard, anointing themselves with oil and singing of songs to
the instruments of music; but we are to take pains to fetch timber Amos 6. 1.
3, 4, 5, 6.
and to build; he that will not do this is no workman for the house of the
Lord: a hard speech for us (my brethren) who are like them that are troubled
with the green sickness that we cannot well travel on plain ground, much
less climb up mountains with burdens on our backs: or like the Roman
gentleman, who when others were busied in military exercises, laid him down
and tumbled in the grass saying, V^inam hoc esset laborare, O would that this
were to take pains: imagining so many difficulties, and adversaries to come
against us if we should set our selves about it, as though we were the persons
described by Solomon, The slothful man says a Lion is in the way, a Lion Pro.
26. 13
in the streets, as the door turns upon his hinges, so does the sluggard on
his bed; the slothful man hides his hand in his bosom and it grieveth him to
put it again to his mouth. The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then
seven men that can render a reason. But these are slothful men; Saint Paul is
of another mind, of another spirit who fought with beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor.
15. 32. 2 Timothy 4. 17.
and was not afraid to meet a Lion in the streets of Rome, from whose mouth he
also says that the Lord delivered him, yea who was contented that he might do
this work, to suffer imprisonment, stripes, hunger, nakedness, even death as
it were often, as he shows in the 2 to the Corinthians 11. furnished indeed
with a greater measure of grace then all or any of us are to look for; but
according to the measure which we have received we 2 Cor. 11. ^^, 25, 26, ^^.
must all learn to take pains in our calling and state, to build this house.
It is a general rule of the Apostle, That he who will not labor let him not
eat, there are indeed diverse and sundry vocations amongst men, but they are all
ordained by God to furnish us that we may be better able to travel in this
work: So that there are none exempt from labor, no not gentlemen, and Princes
for it is not enough for one of them to say, I will not, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1^.
I need not labor, I can live on my lands; for so could Adam have said in
paradise more truly, when God set him in it to manure and till it, that we
might learn that not Adam himself (though all things yielded their increase
to him without his labor) yet that he was not by God created to be idle. Now
if that Adam were not then to be idle when he had need neither to labor for
maintenance of himself nor yet was fit to fall into wickedness through
idleness: how much more necessary is it for us to learn that we bestow our
selves in some profitable and lawful labor, on whom this burden through the
sin of Adam is laid that we should eat our bread in the sweat of our brows?
and Gen 3. 19.
experience sufficiently teaches us there is nothing sooner casts men
headlong into the sink of all ungodliness then the foregoing the honest
pains and labors; which yet I speak not as though all were to take bodily
labor: for there is also a labor of the mind, which spends the body
happily more, then the other, neither as if I thought it not lawful to use
recreation for 1 Timothy* 5* ^^.
the comfort and strengthening of the body and mind, for he that willed
Timothy to drink a little wine for his stomachs sake, by proportion grants
us to use a little recreation also if our 1 Timothy 4. 13.
bodies stand in need of it; but this is granted and must be used in such sort
that it may tend to make us more able, each one, in some vocation lawful, to
build this house unto the Lord. So 1 Cor. ^^0
then must the Minister give attendance to teaching, reading and exhorting. I
need not speak of all singular vocations, seeing we have a general rule that
every one continue in the vocation whereunto he is called of God, to serve him
with pains and industry carefully and diligently. For we are commanded not
only to build, but in such sort as we use all diligence, as also Saint Peter
has expressed it, considering what our Savior has told us namely, that the
way is narrow and the gate strait whereby men pass to life, and therefore that
it is necessary that we labor 2 Per. 1. 10
and strive to enter therein and that the Kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and that the violent take it by force; and if it be required in all
vocations that we should be painful what is Mat. 7. 13.
required then of the minister of whom in especial it is exacted that he
should build this house, and then (alas) what shall Mat. 11. 12. 1 Cor. 39.
1* Tim. 3. 13.
we say of them who not only go not up to the mountain, but being in the
mountain stay not there, but come down into the valley? or if they stay in
the mountain yet preach nor there, no caring to bring up timber and to build;
Nay I would there were not many of them that behave themselves so wickedly in
their conversation that they may be rightly joined with them of whom it is
written in the Ps^^mes, that they break down all the carved work of Gods
house with axes and hammers: but leaving them to their just judgment seeing
exhortations pierce Psalm. 74. 6.
not their hearts, having been so often called upon: let us (my brethren)
remember that this building requires one point further, even for the general
commandment; namely, that this labor and diligence be continual even till
the work be fully ended, and ended it is not so long as we live here, which
the Prophet Ephesians 4* 11, 12, 13.
seems to insinuate in that he makes mention of timber only and not of
stone: at least when he makes mention of timber, which we know was to be
brought from Libanon to accomplish the work and to serve to make the roof;
whereby they are taught that they should not leave till they had brought it to
a perfect and absolute work; and so let us think that we are to build up the
temple of God not in part but in whole; understanding ^uk 14. 28 29 30.
that he is accounted but a foolish builder that begins to build, and is not
able to make an end, and he is unworthy 2 Timothy 4. 10.
of the kingdom of God who laying his hand to the plowe looks back behind
him. Let Demas therefore alone who having been companion with Paul left him and
followed the present 2 per. 222.
world, but for us who I hope be careful as we have begun to go forward, let
us not like dogs return to our vomit but Heb. 10. 38 39.
let us set before us the exhortation here made and remember the words of the
Apostle, If any man withdraw himself my soul shall have no pleasure in him,
but we are not they that withdraw themselves unto perdition, but follow faith
unto the conservation of the soul. It is to destruction if we withdraw our
selves, let us then go forward knowing that the price is promised to none but
to him that overcomes, and him says Christ I will make a pillar in the house
of God as it is in the 3 Chap of the Revel. and Revel. 3. 12.
in the 11 Chapter and ver. 2. The Coward is commanded to be cast out, but he
that overcomes and continues unto the end he shall be made a pillar in the
house of God and shall not be cast out: Let us not therefore be weary of well
doing fot we shall reap in due time if we faint not, let the words the Apostle
uses be our encouragement against the manifold impediments and lets set by the
wicked to hinder us as here were by adversaries Gal 6. 9.
of Judah and Benjamin to stop the building of the Temple. For all this those
that faint not neither by reason of persons or thing that stand up against them
shall be sure to reap in due season, and these are the special reasons and
things therein to be observed, but beside there are two or three points to be
noted in the several Ezra 4. 1.
words of the exhortation.

This house was to be but upon a mountain, go up to the mountain, and our
Savior in the 5 of Matthew says of his Church that it is as a City set on a
hill, wherefore if it were but only for this reason that the house we are to
build stands on a hill and Mat 5. 14.
therefore many eyes are cast upon us, because we may be seen afar off: as
David prayed the Lord to guide him because of them that eyed him, so we because
of the wicked and ungodly that look upon us ought to be more careful to look
unto it that we build carefully because the house stands on a mountain, Let
us thesefore remember that those words of our Savior Psalm. 5 8.
are spoken to all, a City set on a hill cannot be hid, neither do men light a
candle and put it under a Bushel but on a candle-stick: you are the salt of the
earth, but if the salt have lost its saltness wherewith shall it be seasoned?
The Papists on this similitude teach very largely that the Church of God is
visible and ought to be so: as though we denied it, but the gross errors
which they deliver in urging this place are all of them plainly refuted by
Saint Mat. 5. 14. 15, 16,
Matthew in the very text. For first they imagine that if the Church be visible
it may be seen to every place, as though a City built on the Alps because it
is a mountain, must needs therefore be seen to Rome, or a City on the
Pirenian mountain of necessity must be seen to Toledo. Nay to come near to
the particular thing we have in hand, Bethania is but two miles from Jerusalem,
and yet they who have traveled in those countries say that a man cannot see
Jerusalem from that place, albeit that Jerusalem were a City built upon a
mountain, yea upon many mountains as the Prophet says of it, her foundations
are among the holy mountains, but yet cannot men see it as I said from
Bethania by reason of Mount Olivet that lies betwixt Jerusalem and it: or that
I may open it to you by a more familiar example, although a man should go to
Shotover, yet should he not see Harrow on the hill, (the very name whereof
notwithstanding declares that it stands on a hill) Nay it may be that all who
have traveled from hence to London have not seen it. Perhaps they were blind,
perhaps they cast not their eyes that way, perhaps though they did, yet were
there such mists that by reason of them they could not see it, which indeed our
Savior, Mat. 5 14, 15.
in the similitude adjoined, expressly teaches, you are says he the light of
the world, neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light unto all to all that are in the house: the
candle gives light indeed, yet not to all, but to all in the house, but not to
them that are without the house, the walls of the house keep it from others,
Again they imagine that because it is a City set on a hill, that therefore it
must always continue in the same case, and not sometimes decay, and sometimes
have nothing remaining of it but only the foundation. Old Salisbury was a City
built upon a hill howbeit now there is not much to be seen of it. Rome it self
was built on seven hills, yet on the chiefest of them Aventinus, Collatinus,
Capotolinus, on which it was first founded there is no building now to be found
as they write that know it, unles it be three or four harlotrey houses or
happily some Monastery or a few gardens. A City therefore on a hill may
sometime be decayed and this our Savior signifies in another similitude, you
are the salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost his saltness, Salt may
lose his saltness then, and so a Church seated upon a hill may have that
happen unto it, which is correspondent to that in salt to lose his savor.
Finally they imagine that all houses built upon a hill must be of one sort, nor
of one sort only, but of like condition and state, whereas it may be that some
are fallen some standing, some hidden, some of diverse kinds. And this our
Savior also puts us in mind of: for did they to whom our Savior speaks,
make all one Church or City severed from the Jews that were then of Jerusalem?
No; for the Papists say that after Christ's ascension, they first began to make
a several Church from the Jews; therefore then they should have confidered
that there were some of the Church who were members of it, disagreing from them
to whom Christ spoke: as were in Jerusalem they which frequented the public
and ordinary service of God, resorted to the temple and heard the law, who yet
in opinion and judgment dissented from Christ and those that believed in him.
Now in comparison of that multitude, the disciples of Christ were but few in
that City: and even so in the midst of Popery there have been some Saints of
God scattered among the wicked, as were the Apostles among the unbeleeving
Jews in Jerusalem to whom this appertained; you are the light of the world:
and were they hidden? No sure, they were not hidden for the Papists found them
out, and some of them alive paid for it whom they burned that their light might
shine and be seen, and some they dug out of their graves when they had
layen long dead, and that in them it was easily seen that they were as a City
set on a hill that could not be hid; And so we may see it has gone with the
Saints of God even here in England since religion was first planted in it, and
with the Church which at one time has been in better case then at another,
even as it happens to Cities amongst us which are not at all times so well
built and maintained, and Churches also who at all times are not so well
repaired, but to return to our purpose seeing we are built on a mountain and
therefore are sure to have so many eyes looking upon us, let us be more wary to
look to our selves, and seeing we are to live in the midst of a froward and
crooked generation let us have care to shine forth like lights in the world as
the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, and hold out the light as those phil 2.
3.
that were persecuted in the time of the Arrians who yet were light and salt
who were to give light to them in the house and season them that received their
words.

Another thing to be observed is the timber whereof this house was built, which
they were commanded to bring, which was Caedar, whereby we are to remember that
there, is commended to us that stuff for the building o^ the Church, which is
durable and in all respects most fit for it. For they that write of the nature
of the Caedar-tree, some of them say that it is odoriferous, but all agree that
it will not putrify; insomuch that Pliny seems to attribute eternity to it,
for that it will continue so long as any wood: but it is most true in the word
of God, which as Saint Peter says lasts for ever. Therefore the stuff
wherewith we are to build must be proportionable hereunto even to Caedar. So
the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians. Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouths but that which is good to edefie withal, etc. where he uses
the same similitude of building Ephesians 4. 29.
and so proportionably, our talk, wherewith we should edefie and build up
others should be sound and durable, not rotten at the word properly signifies,
which the Apostle uses contrary to the nature and quality of the Caedar, which
is the timber that this house was to be built with, Let no rotten speech
proceed out of your mouth but that which is good to edefie and build withal,
there are diverse other things besides Caedars necessary to this building but by
the name of this one of timber all other whatsoever likewise necessary are
understood, and so must we likewise understand in our building: and here, by
occasion, I am to commend one thing to you, for seeing they were to bring
timber, it was necessary that it should be first cut down, whereunto are
necessary instruments, as also workmen. Now to us for instruments and tools
are indeed our laws and statutes whereby our work is to be framed and
directed. When the children of the Prophets came to Elizeus and craved leave of
him that, because the place where they dwelt was too little for them, they
might go to Jordan, that every one might take thence a beam and make them more
room, and he granting them leave, and going himself with them: as they were
about their work a^ one was a felling a tree, the axe head fell into the
water, whereupon he cried out unto Elizeus and said, alas Master it was but
borrowed, the man of God therefore considering not only that the instrument was
borrowed but also how necessary it was for their purpose, cutting down a piece
of wood and casting it into the water caused the Iron to swim; We have my
brethren amongst us our laws as it were instruments wherewith to fell our
timber: a great part of them is fallen into the water Indeed they be in the
Proctors book but there they be as if they were fallen into the water. The
Children of the Prophets have complained unto Elizeus alas Master they were but
borroed, and great need have they to know them, for that they are bound in
conscience by oath to keep them. To which purpose some have taken pains to
restore them; notwithstanding it has yet pleased God to move them that should
see it accomplished, howbeit we may hope to see it when it shall please God to
place in that room a man that has Elizeus spirit: sure, there is great use of
them for the cutting and framing of the Caedars wherewith to build, especially
if those which be known already were kept, which I must needs also add,
because that of those which are known many have their edges rebated by
dispensations. A lamentable thing that we keep yet so much that which was
received from the sink of Rome, which I speak not as though our dispensations
were so detestable as his who takes upon him to dispense against the
commandment of the Apostle however it please him, to distinguish of the
precepts of the Apostle which he commands not God; but in a place and matter
where laws and orders are taken to the contrary, it is no way tolerable.
Pluto and Aristotle the Princes of the Philosophers have affirmed, that it is
most pernicious in a commonwealth to break the laws which are once
appointed, which we learn even out of them, if we read them to make our
profit of them, and not only to talk of them: which neither yet do I speak as
though I would have nothing dispensable, but that when it is so ordered that
there shall not in such cases be any dispensations absolulutely, yet that we
should continually come against this decree. For what can be more absurd than
that men of judgment and discretion should make no more account to break Gods
laws than children would do to break sticks; but if statutes were only broken
by dispensations the matter were more tolerable, for then should we also have
our parts in it, but statutes have been broken without dispensations, whereof
the experience is fresh in your memory, the last week as you know, or if you
know it not, I tell what I mean, even the plays kept against the express
statute, by the tollerance and connivance of the Magistrate, the statute has
been broken.

Some there are who be persuaded that thence may be gathered good timber for
this building.

Happily indeed some bushes and brambles, or muske-roses; and that is the best,
and I would to God it were the worst. For many there are who are brought
through such corruptions to lewd persuasions, but doubtless they make evil work
for the Church of God, they that heard them may say more, but this one of their
own Prophets has said of that place, Ille locus casti damna pudoris habet.
which was spoken of such places as that where these were kept, I need not add
as the Apostle does, this testimony is true therefore rebuke them sharply, yet
will I say to them that be heads of houses parents of families, tutors of
Scholars one of their own prophets have said, and the testimony is true,
therefore rebuke them sharply God be blessed and pardon our sins for his sons
sake. Amen.

Sermon the 5. December 25. 1585.
Ver. 8. Go up to the mountain and bring timber and build this house and I will
take delight in it, and I will be glorified in it says the Lord.
THis sentence of the Prophet Haggai, exhorting the Jews that were returned
from Babylon, that they should build the house of the Lord, contains as has
been before declared when I last spoke to you of it out of this place, the
reason why he exhorts 1 He that exhorts is the Lord, 2 he exhorts them to
build the house of the Lord, to go up to the mountains to bring timber.

1. The reasons: I will take delight in it I will be glorified, for the meaning
of all which we understand then that 1 it was the Lord that by the Ministry of
the Prophet, made this exhortation: 2 For the thing where unto they are
exhorted, that it was the building of the temple on the mountain Moriah whereon
it stood before. 1 What the reasons were, 2 Why he ought to do this. 1 Because
he would take delight in it. 2 Because he would beglorified, of the former two
points namely the Lord who exhorts, and the thing whereunto, I spoke then as
grace was ministered and time served: there now remains the last circumstance
at this time to be handled which contains the reasons why they should go up
to the mountain and build. And for the meaning of the reasons. I opened that
at that present, touching the former that God will not delight it it, for it
self as in the timber and stones etc. but because of the signification and use
thereof in that it betoken^th Jesus our Savior, as is plainly declared in the
Epistle to the Heb. Neither him only as the head of the Church, but his body
also together with him, both the Catholic church, which is partly on earth,
and partly received into glory. The Church militant, and the Church triumphant,
and visible Churches not only as bodies considered wholly, but also each member
of the same in particular, as by the places then alleged Ephesians. 2. 1 Cor 6.
was made manifest.

Now concerning the use of the Temple, we know it was called the house of
prayer in regard of the holy exercises and rites prescribed by God which were
therein performed, which ceasing to be used in such sort as were by Gods
commandment appointed, it was, according to the threatenings of the Prophets (as
before) destroyed by the Babylonians, so (after it was renewed) was it made
desolate by Antiochus and in the end of all (as our Savior foretold) quite
overthrown by the Romans, wherefore it was the regard of the Mystery thereby
figured, for the veil as it is showed by the Evangilist signified Christ the
holy of holiest, etc. and the exercises by God prescribed, for which he says
that he would delight therein.

From the delight which he promises to take in it, to stir them up yet the
rather, he proceeds and adds the latter reason, he will also be glorified;
whereby is meant that he will also pour his blessings upon them in such sort
that they should have occasion hereby to praise and magnify his mercy. For
that this is the meaning of the Prophet, it is manifest by the Antithesis which
is here used, for setting down how for their negligence they had been
afflicted, eating and not being satisfied, putting on cl^thes and not being
warmed, etc. so contrariwise he promises, that doing his commandment these
evils should be removed and good things bestowed on them, whereby they should
have cause to glorify his holy name for his mercy. In these reasons proposed
to them to move them to the building of the Temple, Let us first consider how
the truth was first performed to the Jews, the Lord promises his favor and
likeing of them, and his blessings proceeding from his favor; how this was to
be performed the Prophet expounds in the 2 Chapter in the words of the Lord
himself v. 16. 17., 18, 19. where willing them 1 to consider how they had been
afflicted, he bids them to reckon from that day, signifying that from that day
forth he would bless them. Neither promises he only temporal blessings and
corporal, for which they should glorify and praise his Name, but eternal and
spiritual also: which is likewise shows in the 2 Chapter in the words of the
Lord, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. Yet once again says the Lord and I will shake all
nations, and the desire of all nations shall come and I will fill this house
with glory, silver is mine, and gold is mine, the glory of this house shall be
greater than the former, I will give peace in it.

In which promise the Lord of Hosts so often repeated he notes the greatness
and power of him that makes this promise, and this peace and glory signifies
not worldly prosperity, or earthly peace, in which respect this Temple exceeded
not that of Sol^mons, but hereby is signified another peace, even a peace of
peaces, the peace of God which passes all understanding: Which the Apostle
wishes the faithful, grace and peace, peace betwixt God and us in the
Covenant of grace, of which I say he says unto us Phil. 4. 5. Ephesians 2. 14. 17.
Romans 5. 11
a son is given, the prince of peace, Ephesians. 2 he is our peace he came and
preached the gospel of peace, a covenant betwixt God and man. That this is the
meaning is most evident by Heb. 12. 18. Akingdome that cannot be moved, and
Luke 2. 1. 13, 14. peace on earth. In this second temple the Prince of peace
was to sit, here the Jews have on their hearts the veil: ask them how this
was performed, seeing the Temple was destroyed, how the glory of the latter
Temple was greater than the former, some of them will say in regard of the
building, for that albeit it were at the first lesser than Solomon's, yet was it
after amplyfied by Herod: others in respect of the continuance, for that as
they account, this stood ten years longer than the former, which is laid down
by the author of their ordinary gloss, but the promise of glory is made to
this temple which in the 3 of Ezra was nothing in comparison of the former: so
that although it be true, that afterward it was enlarged by Herod, as Josephus
shows, yet the promise is of glory, not greatness only which stretches
further. Saul had a greater body yet was he moved with anger thinking that a
greater glory was given to (...) in the women's song: and when the Lord says
silver is mi^^ he could (if he had pleased) have made it in that respect more
glorious than Solomon's yet (as the Rabbis confess themselves) in respect of
the gold the latter was nothing to the former, which as the Scripture shows
was all covered with gold, walls, beams, floores, posts, and that with the
fine gold of Opher read Josephus, lib. car. 8. and lib. 15. ult. for the
comparison of the two Temples: in respect then of the glory by greatness and
beauty joined together especially of the riches of gold and silver etc. the
latter was nothing. As for the continuance that is nothing, for what if it
stood ten years longer could it therefore be more glorious, amongst all the
Kings of Judah Solomon excelled in glory, yet reigned but forth years,
Manasses 55. did he therefore excel him, for it be said that he was in
thraldom part of that time, so may it be said of the dishonoring of this
temple by Pompey and Cassiu^, but Vriah reigned 52 years as much longer then
Solomon as this Temple stood longer than the former; wherefore if it be
repugnant to scripture to say ste excels therefore in glory Solomon, so it
is for this cause to say that this Temple did excel the former.

Nay they are convinced of madness by the same Rabine, for on the same word,
because the Hebrew word wants the letter (*) which in number stands with
them for 5 th he says it is a note a mystery for that this latter temple
wanted 5 things which the former had, 1 Vrim and Thummin: 2 the Arc of the
Covenant, 3 fire from heaven, 4 the sign of Gods glory 5. presence of the Holy
Ghost, and this i^ proved, alleging a place of Talmud, which is among the the
Jews as the decretall among the Papists, the Author thereof would no more err
than can the Pope, a Talmudicall fancy: for although (*) were wanting (as it
is not in those copies which are received without points,) but if it were by
their fault that copied out the book what reason that there should want 5
things because (*) signifies 5 in numbering, which is nothing but a sottish,
and Cabalistine toy, for even this temple wanted more than these five things,
as they also confess even in the same book, for there was not the cup of
Manna and therefore not only 5 but 8, or 9 more were were wanting. But to take
that which they grant, seeing these five things were not in the latter Temple
which were in the former unless the things of latter which were not in the
former may match and excel these, it cannot be said that so the glory of the
latter should excel the glory of the former. It may be that Zacheus in some
one coin or other had some more money then Herod, as happily a mean
goldsmiths in London may have in Crasadoes or Florrens or Ducats more than the
Prince, yet if Herod's treasure far pass the wealth of Zacheus, and the
Princes the substance of the goldsmiths, were not he absurd that would say the
goldsmiths were richer than the Prince? In like sort since the glory of the
latter Temple was to excel the glory of the former and howsoever in
continuance, and bigness it passed the latter, if in other points of greater
glory it were behind it, how shall one truly say that this was performed,
wherefore if those things which they confess be wanting in the latter, nay if
some one of them be more glorious than the continuance wherein they make this
excellency, the glory thereof must be placed in some other thing than they
fancy. Now how excellent was the Vrim and Thummin whereof Deuteronomy. 33, The mercy
seat, Arc, fire from heaven, glory of God visible in the cloud that filled the
Temple, presence of the holy Ghost, succession of Prophets. Whereof seeing some
one, how much more all? far exceed the ten years continuance, it follows
that in this respect the glory of the latter house could not be greater;
Therefore since God promised that it should be greater, and that cannot be but
in respect that in this Christ taking flesh should personally teach during the
same, make atonement between God and man, working our redemption; which one
thing, far excels all that were in the former Temple, he being the truth,
and they but shadows. It is most manifest that the Jews were possessed with a
spirit of giddiness as was threatened them, their ears dulled, their eyes
darkened against the evident light of Gods truth. But for us we are assured
that this peace was performed in our Savior, as all circumstances noted by the
Prophets agreeing to him, of the time, by Daniel mentioned, the place, by
Michael, Dan. 9 Mic. 4. Isai. 7. and 9. I^ua. 10. 4.
his name; his progeny, his Mother, so that in respect of us to whom God has
made this known, we may use those words For I tell you that many prophets and
Kings and righteous men have desired to see those things which you see and have
not seen them, and to hear those things which you hear, and have not heard
them; To whom is this performed, this promise of peace as the Angel said to
the shepherds; for Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy which shall be
to all people, for unto you is borne this day Luke 2 9. 10, 1^.
in the City of David a savior which is Christ the Lord. And this is the first
point by reason of the celebration of the Lords Nativity in accomplishing the
promise of God by giving peace above all blessings, sending Christ a Savior to
take flesh upon him. The next point in these words is, that God takes delight,
and will pour a blessing upon it, on the temple only in respect of Christ
figured, and holy exercises commanded, by him therein practiced how the Temple
figured Christ and the exercises there, the duties of Christians in particular
set down, else we are not to stand on them. But note the blockishnesse, first
of the Jews, then of the Papists, for they in their Talmud thought that God
took delight in the Temple, that now for sorrow he has destroyed it, he
spends many hours in bewayling the same, the papists though the Temple be
overthrown, yet think that that God took such delight in the place where it
stood, that they go on Pilgrimages, as though yet that prayer of Solomon's were
in force for them that pray more in that place then the other, blind men that
consider not rudiments of the law, while the Jews as children were thereby to
be schooled to Christ our Savior to the Samaritane so expounded it, Woman
believe me, the hour comes wherein ye shall neither in this mountain nor yet
in Jerusalem worship the Father. But the hour comes, and now is when the true
worshippers of Ioh 14. 21
the Father shall worship him in spirit and in truth: meaning the time had been
when the place of true worship appointed was Jerusalem, but the truth being
come, all places are now sanctified as 1 Timothy 2. 8 Mat. 17. 9. 2 pet. 1. 18
Exodus 3. 5.
Jerusalem, according to that 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that men pray very
where, lifting up pure hands without wrath and doubting. The Remish Jesuits
upon Matthew 17. ver. 9. say the mountain is called holy by Saint Peter 2 Pet.
ver. 18. as that place by Moses Exodus 3. 5. was called holy ground, whereby it
is evident say they that by such a precious place they are sanctified, and
thereupon grows a religion and devotion in the faithful toward such places,
and that there was great pilgrimage in the Primitive Church to this mountain,
and unto all those places which our Savior had sanctified with his presence
and with his miracles, and therefore to the whole land of promise, also upon
John 12. 20. the gentiles say they came to adore, the gentiles came of devotion
Ioh. 12. 20
Pilgrimage to the temple of Jerusalem, and Acts 8. 27 Act. 8. 27.
Note that the Ethiopian came to Jerusalem to adore, that is on Pilgrimage. Out
of all these places they would prove that yet we should go to Jerusalem, by
virtue of which conclusion they may also prove that we should also offer bulls
and Calves, which were prescribed by the law as was this coming to Jerusale^
for as they were bound to come up to appear before the Lord, so were they also
commanded not to come empty: if bound to Jerusalem, because of a special
promise made to that place, why not to all the ordinances prescribed by Moses?

Besides Paul's resort to Jerusalem at the feast was for the opportunity of
preaching to them then assembled as on the Saboth Acts 13. 44. and so they may
conclude that we are to keep the Jews sabbath, which the Jesuits will deny.
Therefore of the example of Paul going up to Jerusalem it can no more be proved
that we ought to go thither, than that we should also yet offer, for that we
read he did so in the temple, Acts 21. 16. and it makes as much for his
offering as the other for the going thither. The Remists note on the 17 of
Matthew is more forcible in show but as weak in substance: That the mount was
called holy, because it was sanctified by that apparition, we grant, but was it
then so sanctified that holiness must then needs cleave unto it for ever, and
still abide therewith? Peter called it the holy hill, so likewise Matthew 27.
33. calls Jerusalem the holy City, and the 24 the holy place, namely as other
things are called holy because consecrated to holy uses, so the City because of
the holy assemblies to it, because of the Church of God it signified and the
temple, more especially because of the glory of God which appeared therein. But
those holy actions when they were omitted, and the contrary practiced,
howsoever they were holy in respect of the things they prefigured: yet
doubtless they were profane nd unholy insomuch that Christ said even of the
temple that it was made a den of thieves, and the faithful City was become a
Harlot, and the pollutions thereof were such, and the profanations so many,
that Christ threatened, and it came to pass that not a stone therein should be
left upon a stone, in the 87 Psalm the Mountains whereon Jerusalem was
founded were called holy: but were they accounted so any longer than were the
holy exercises by God appointed therein practiced? In the 8. 9. of Ezekiel
their abominations are described and the punishments of the same in the 10 and
11 how the Lord for the same left and forsook them, yea how he departed from
the temple first, and then quite from the City: whereby is taught us, that
there is no place never so holy which God detesteth not, when his commandments
therein are broken, and his Majesty profained. The Jesuits themselves will
confess, that Churches although sanctified by the Pope, yet that the holiness
of them cease if murder be committed in them; whereby they might see that
such things might be committed in places otherwise holy, that the places may
become so profane, that God will not only not delight in them, but detest and
abhor them, as it was manifest by Jerusalem: for else what meant our Savior
by that threat against it? O Jerusalem Jerusalem thou that stonest the
Prophets. See what Greg. Naz. says in a Sermon touching them that run about to
such places a Pilgrimages were made to such places say the Jesuits not long
after Christ's time, but yet they were reproved by that Fathers judgment,
because Jerusalem is called the holy City, and is it not also called
spiritually Sodom and Gomorah because of the wickedness therein committed? and
what shall we say of Rome since that it is likewise called spiritually Babylon
in the Revelation? But such is the blindness of that man of sin that albeit it
be the place where the Saints of Christ in the Revelation are said to be slain
as Christ in Jerusalem, yet commend they it as the place wherein above others
God will delight most, as the Jews fancy of Jerusalem: hereupon Boniface the
8 ordained that whosoever would come up to Rome Anno 1300 (at which time he
lived) should have most full remission of all sins Extranag. com. lib. 5. de
peniten. et remission cap. 1. et cap. 2. in Bulla Plat. in vita Bon. 8.
Oaephinus in Chri. anno 1294. The Jubilee was reduced by Clem. 6. to 50 years
abridged by Martin 5 and Paul brought down unto 25 years, which was confirmed
Sextus 4 vide plat. in Clem. 6. et in Nic. 5 Oaemp. in Sexto 4. et Extranag.
com lib. 5. cap. 1 ^o gloss in fine vide Bullam Clem 6. ibid. cap. 2
vingenitus et Bullam Sixto 4. Extra com lib. 5 cap 4
Clem. 6. The very circumstances of which places deriving their Jubilee from
Moses law, and building it on the merits of Peter and Paul and binding all the
solemnity thereof to their Church of Rome do sufficiently show the superstition
of it. This same Boniface ordained at the first, that every 100 years they
should enjoy the same pardons: which after by another was abridged to 50 and
then to 25, for their year of Jubilee. Now we know the year of Jubilee as
Joseph de antiquitat. liber 3. chap. 14. was ceremonious, that every fifty
years liberty should be proclaimed, to the bond freedom, to their servants
lands restored. Now this was a figure of Christ as Isai he sent to proclaim
spiritual liberty to the captives the opening of the prison the acceptable
year of the Lord, which in the 49 Chapter and the 8 and 9 verses he had called
the acceptable time and day of salvation, and the Apostle. 2. Cor. 6. 2.
expounds it of the time whenever the gospel is preached, behold now is the
acceptable day, and the Pope as though Christ were not yet come or had not put
an end to these things applied this to his year of Jubilee. And Bristow in his
motives does exhort all Catholics to prepare themselves against this most
acceptable year of grace, Jeroboams charge to his calves. But all this must be
to Rome; whereby you may note the original of all this superstition, which
indeed is the coveteousnesse of the Pope. For it is not Jerusalem that he
cares for, nor the Temple of Peter and Paul, These are only fair pretenses,
the holy place, the holy land, the temples of the Apostle, the year of Jubilee,
the year 1575. But the thing to which all serves was the commodity which
thereby comes to the Popes coffer. For that law out of Deuteronomy must be
kept inviolable, that none appear here empty: which mystery bewrays the
knavery: for in the year 1000, because the offerings came not to such
abundance as was looked and hoped for, the Pope sent abroad to such as had not
been there his plenary pardons, offering to them that would buy for money the
same grace and favor which they should have been partakers of had they come
that year 1517, which he might well and truly promise, whereby it pleased God
to awaken Christians by the ministry of Master Luther to see the sink of that
iniquity which appeared manifestly in this abuse in ti^ulo de clericis
peregrinantibus, So in effect for the place he has brought it from Jerusalem
to Rome, for the year of Jubilee, by mincing it in parts for his greater
advantages. So the end of their pilgrimage is the Popes commodity, Saint Peter's
Church is the Popes Court, there offering to him purchases their pardons, but
to whom does this indulgence good? to all that pay; nay they will not say so
but vere* penitentibus they who truly repent shall have forgiveness of all
their sins most true indeed. Therefore if Christians know that, they would
little trust to themselves for his pardon or the year of Jubilee; for I can
assure them out of the word of God, that whenever they repent though they
never see Rome or Jerusalem, yet shall they be forgiven and their sins done
away, though the Pope receive not a penny of them, yea even this day, and in
this house, and in this place freely and without money I assure all such, as
unfaignedly repent and turn to God, assurance of the forgiveness and
remission of all their sins, though the Popes pardon never come amongst us, nor
we once think on this year of Jubilee.

Sermon 6. February 8. 1589.
Haggai 1. ver. 9 Ye looked for much and it came to little. and when ye
brought it home I did blow upon it, and why says the Lord of Hosts? because of
mine house that lay waste, and ye ran every man to his own house. Verse 10
Therefore against you the heavens stayed it self from dew and the earth stayed
from fruit. Ver. 11 And I have called for drought upon the land, and upon the
mountains, and upon the Corn and upon the wine, and upon the oil and upon
that which the earth brings forth both upon men and upon cattle, and upon all
the labors of their hands.
THe Prophet Haggai having exhorted the Jews to go forward with the Temple and
sanctuary, and having moved them thereunto by laying before them the gracious
promises of God, that he would be favorable and take delight therein, does
further stir them up with these words by calling to their remembrance that
great want and scarcety wherewith God did not chastise them, who therefore did
not prosper the labors of their hands nor give success to their endeavors,
for that every one ran to the building of his own house, and the trimmingup
thereof, they labored not to advance the house of the Lord, for as the Lord
had threatened in his law, that if they would not hearken to his voice to do his
will they should be cursed in the town, and in the field, and in the fruit of
their body, and the fruit of the earth, that the heavens over them should be
brass, and the earth under them iron. So did they feel by experience that
those threats were performed to them from heaven and earth in themselves, and
in theirs and in the field and in the town, because that they were commanded
by the Lord to build this house they took all opportunity to do it, and to
persuade them hereunto to leave their slackenesse and bestirre themselves
hereabout, he shows how God had withdrawn his blessings from those creatures
that should have done them good, and had stretched out his hand against them.
Haggai therefore does advertise them showing that they were chastised in the
town and in the field, forasmuch as they took great pains and got little,
and that which they got and brought home, he did as with a whirlwinde disperse
and scatter, and why? because they left the house of the Lord waste and every
man ran to his own house, therefore against you the heavens, etc.

Wherein, to affect them with a more lively feeling of their misery laid upon
them, because they suffered the Lords house to lie waste, the Prophet does more
particularly specefie the means used by God to work these wants. The things
they wanted were the blessings of this life, the hurt themselves and theirs
felt, whereby he notes their sin, and the correspondency of their
chastisements which they felt, which appears by the word wherein their fault
was noted, compared with their punishment, as it is laid down more evidently
in the original, for the word which is rendered Levit. 26. Psalm. 18.
(Waste) verse 8 does first signify dry, and by consequence waste, because
places which are dry and want moisture are likewise waste and desolate, Now
verse 11 it is said he had called for a drought: the word comes from the same
stem in the Hebrew that the other does, and in the sense of wastenesse does
express more plainly the agreement of the punishment with the manner of their
sin, as though he should say, because you have suffered my house and
sanctuary to lie waste, therefore have I also by calling for a drought brought
also a waste upon you, you have been most careful to provide for your selves
and yours whatsoever was needful, and might by you any ways be purchased. But
behold I have wasted and consumed that, I have called for a drought. So the
Lord hereby does declare the performance of that which he threatened, that he
would deal overthwartly with them that overthwarted him, and that to the
froward he would become froward: howbeit let not any that have offended flatter
themselves as these men, because they feel not such chastisement as these did,
because they are not plunged, nay because they live at such ease and
contentation of heart, that as the prophet speaks their eyes start out of
their heads, although they be nothing careful to build Gods house, nay be
careful to build their own, nay run to it, and that to build them with
blood, for albeit they felt not the experience of this punishment in temporal
blessings, yet let them remember the words of the Prophet, When I went into the
sanctuary of God then understood I the end of these men, surely thou set
them in the slipery places, and castest them into utter desolation, 1 slipery
places, 2 utter desolation, as it is taught in the history of Job, The
rejoicing of the wicked is Psa. 73. 13
but short, though his excellency mount upon the heavens and his head reach to
the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like the dunge and they that have
seen him, shall say where is he? But the children of God are dealt withal as
children, although he chasten them, as what son is there that he chasteneth
not, yet will he not withdraw his mercy from them, neither here nor hereafter,
so that everlasting mercy Job. 20. 5. 6.
it surely acertained: For, what is said of Solomon, if he sin I will chasten
him with the rod of men, but my mercy shall not depart from him, the same is
performed to other the children of David, even to all the faithful and eiect.
And the example of the Corinthians may teach us the end of Gods chastisements
on his servants, the Apostle shows for their unreverent receaving of the
Sacrament, some were sick and some fallen asleep, that is taken away, and
thereupon showing that this appertains to all, he says, when we are judged
we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned of the world.

Howbeit if any of the servants of the Lord who have neglected their duty,
have not felt his hand, let them not be high-minded, but fear and be humbled,
as, who knows not what the late evening-tide may bring forth; remember that,
which is written to put them in remembrance, the judgment of God is just
against 2 Samuel 7. 14. Psa. 79. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 30. 32. Romans 2. 2. 3, 4.
the ungodly that do such things: and what think thou O man^ that judge
them that do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the just
judgment of God: or ^espisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and
pa^ience, and longsufferance? for it is most plain that they shall not enter
into the holy tabernacle hereafter, who persist not to build Christ's tabernacle
here, as the 15 and 24 Psalms plainly show: wherefore as we tender our own
salvation, not only the favor of God and the benefitts of this life let us
every one be careful for the building of the Church and Temple of God,
according as God has committed a charge to every one for the edefying of the
same, remembering that Commandment of our Savior, First seek the Kingdom of
God, and then all these things shall be given you after, if first we will seek
the Kingdom, then these at leisure, to be regarded afterward, and Mat. 6, ult
not to follow the example of them whom the Lord here reproves, which run to
the building of their own house, and were so slow in the Lords work: we see
David so to have been careful thereabouts, that his purpose was not to take
benefit of one nights sleep in his own house which he had built, until he
had finished the house of God, which although he could not accomplish 2 Kin, 9,
2
because of the wars wherewith he was troubled against the enemies of the
Lord, yet Solomon his son followed the same course, and built first the Lords
house, and after he had finished that, his own house, for which God
accordingly blessed them, though neither of them wanted chastisements, because
also some times they faulted therein, yet were great blessings bestowed on them
both in this life, vouchsafed out of the everlasting favor and blessing of God
as by the monuments of them both is manifest.

By example of whom we are instructed to follow the Commandment of God in
building his house, in going at leastwise as far as David in providing those
things that were requi^^te, for perfecting thereof: which work was referred to
Solomon, let us be moved with the example of Gods mercies on them, to look for
the like blessing, if we follow them in well doing, remembering that which is
written by the Prophet, how that afterward he had espoused them to himself in
kindness and mercy, and had made a covenant with them by this, that he
promises that he will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the
earth, Hosea 1, 2
and the earth shall hear Israel, nay they may assure themselves not only of
these blessings, but of such as are inestimably to be preferred before them,
whereof mention is made in the Apocalips, though represented also by such
things as Manna, the tree of life, to conquerers, to them that go forward in
the building of the Temple, and of the Sanctuary.

This exhortation pertains more specially indeed to the principal builders
of it: But it does also belong unto all the people of the land, not to the
ministry or spirituality as they term it, but to all Christians who must all
be spiritual: if they will all be Christians, they must as lively stones be
built upon the foundation, they must offer up themselves a living holy and
acceptable sacrifice, none is exempted from this labor, all must be Kings to
conquer their lusts and affections that rebel Romans 12. 1 Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2.
1 These. 5. 11. Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. Mat. 5. Phil. 1. 1. Phil. 2. 15, 16.
against Gods Commandments, all Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifice, yea
they are each one to go further, and not only to build themselves but others
also, every one one another, remembering that which the Apostle exhorts the
Thessalonians, Exhort one another and edefie one another, Therefore all must be
builders all our speech must be to edefie, poudred with salt, our actions,
rules of Godliness, that we may be patterns for others to behold; for our
Savior spoke to all his disciples, Ye are the salt of the earth, and the light
of the world, not only the Bishops and the Deacons as Philippi, but also the
rest of them were as lights shining forth holding forth for others: salt
serves for many use^ to season other things, light to light others also;
Therefore all are to edefie not themselves but others also. This exhortation
made to all we ought to call to remembrance, that so we are for this cause
termed salt, light, a princely priesthood, a chosen nation whom God has
sanctified to show forth the virtue of him that has called them, and the care
which they are to have one of another. It was Cains voice, am I the keeper of
my brother? But we are rather to propose unto ourselves the example of Moses,
when he was not yet called to be delivered of his brethrenbut prepared
thereunto, he labored to reconcile his brethren that were at discord, yet this
exhortation concerns principally Zerubbabel Psalm. 102. 14. Isai 61. 3. 4.
and Joshua, because they be the chiefest of the Lords servants, and the graces
of God are most eminent in them whose heart God has so touched, that they
pity the dust and the stons, the ruins of Jerusalem, who as trees of
righteousness moistened by Gods spirit, sanctified by Gods grace, that was poured
upon Christ Jesus, are appointed to build the old waste places, to raise up the
former desolations, and to repair the Cities that were desolate and waste
through many desolations, which words of the Prophet must teach us, who are
called especially to the charge of building, to take delight in the stones
thereof, to be careful for the raising up of them, to repair the desolate
Cities of Judah and Jerusalem, whereby I am moved to beseech you (fathers) who
are enabled with gifts to perform this duty to the whole household, that you
would not only raise up others to do this holy work, but that you with more
care diligence would perform the same your selves: for though you are content
to hear the young sort, and sometimes Eliba may speak more wisely than his
elders: the youth of Timothy is not to be despised, yet many have more regard
of the gray head, and aged Paul is able to speak with great gravity, and
therefore is wont to be heard with great reverence and profit. Gideon when he
had taken the K. of Midian Zeba and Zalmanna, he spoke to Jether his firstborn
to rise up and slay them; but the boy drew not his sword, because he feared,
because he was yet young: then the Kings said unto Gideon, rise thou and fall
upon us, for as the man is so is his strength: our carnal lusts and carnal
concupiscence, whereby we are led to wickedness, fight against the spirit of
God, and they are the enemies of the Lord, and therefore we are willed of the
Apostle to mortify our members that are on earth, fornication, uncleanness,
the inordinate affection, coveteousnesse which is Idolatry: the wicked
affections are (as the Apostle says) limbs of one body growing so fast unto
us by the depravation of our nature, as our arms or legs do to our bodies,
therefore these limbs of our body must be slain, the sword wherewith we must
do it is the word of God, as the Apostle teaches, why these lusts are for the
most part so slowly slain; there are many reasons partly because Gideon
spe^keth to his first borne to slay them, not boys indeed as he was to whom
Gideon spoke but of riper years, yet our sons though our firstborn and
flower of our sons, yet but our sons Zeba and Zalmanna knew well enough, that
Jether though Gideons firstborn, yet he could not make so quick dispatch in
killing of them, because they were to dye by his hand, they were to dye a
lingering death: wherefore although your children are loath to say to you, that
you your selves are rather to rise up and perform this duty, as nether Jether
did to his Father Gideon, give us leave as Zeba and Zalmunna to will you to
rise up and run upon your lusts and slay them, for as the man is so is his
strength God forbid you should be justly to be taxed with that reproof which is
laid upon the great men and the Tekoils, of whom when the Prophets had showed
the building of the walls of Jerusalem, each sort fortified in their place,
but the great with he of the Tekoits put not their necks to the work of the
Lord; the phrase here used notes the kind of labor they should have taken,
even to carry stones and mortar, a base work that great men should be
laborers in, yet we see the Holy Ghost touches them with just reproof of
ingratitude, that they submitted not themselves thereunto considering that it
was the work of the Lord to whom they did owe themselves, and all others the
building of Christs-Church is a work base and contemptible in the judgment of
the world, though before God most excellent and precious. But it is base as we
list to account it. If we cannot submit our selves to the bearing of these
burdens, let us remember it is our Lords work, and let us fear the just
reproach which the Tekoits bear for the neglecting of it. In the French story we
read that at a dangerous siege of Rochel, for the fortifying a Bulwark against
the enemies, each one so bestirred themselves that even the gentlewomen and
ladies carried stones and rubbish for the raising thereof, which therefore was
called the Ladies Bulwark, because the great women in the siege of Rochel were
content to submit themselves to bear rubbish, it was the work of the Lord by a
consequent, and shall it not be a shame for men of how great calling soever
they be, or count themselvsto be, not to submit themselves to the work of the
Lord* If they be such as have taken in hand to build many places, let them
remember that they are bound to build in all places, even as the Tekoits were
of whom it is noted that they edefied in diverse places which in that building
might more be done, because that being many when they had perfected the work in
one place, they might after go to another: but how many or any of us, may
undertake to build in sundry places I see not, for if the building be such as
requires continual labor therein, of laying of living stones continually
requires residence of the builders, that they should still be present on their
charge, that as new stones as still brought so they may still be laid on still
more and more, to be won to God; let them remember that this is the Lords
work; and if they be not able to build in many places, let them be content to
resign their charges, so that there may be a workman able to furnish the
places appointed thereunto.

Cursed be the man that does the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed be
the man that withholdeth his hand from blood, says the Lord by his Prophet: he
speaks of killing the enemies of the Lord, God forbid that a curse should
fall upon us, amongst those that have faulted therein, and that it may not fall
the Lord hold still up their hearts to perform that with all care which the
spirit of God teaches to be their duty namely to advance the glory of God, in
building the temple and sanctuary of God.

For the rest which are not such as the Tekoits and yet are comprised in the
number of them that are said to build the sanctuary and set to fight the Lords
battles, let them remember that they were cursed that withheld their swords
from blood, although they have not the strength of Gideon, yet let them
remember that the word of God is sharper then any two edged sword, and peirceth
through the dividing of the joints and marrow, wherefore if we build in that
measure which God has given us, God will yield his blessing and put strenght
unto it, and though we be not able with David to kill our ten thousand, yet let
us be content with Saul to slay our thousands, yea there were of David's
worthies that slew but their hundreds, let us remember the promise made to them
that do their duty herein.

And that this sword may the better strike and wound, we must remember that it
must be applied to the limbs and members, we must take heed that we content
not our selves to run on the generalities; and to stand upon flourishes, but
apply this sword to the special faults of our hearers, for so it is like to
pierce the better: there are some also which although they use this sword, yet
they cover it with such a scabbard, that by reason thereof it is not able to
wound in such sort as it should, as either with intermingling of strange
language without any necessity or heaping up of many testimonies, or other
things not so fruitful, so that although they come near with the sword yet
because of these scabbards they perform not that duty which they ought to do,
wherefore we may remember that the builders which the Apostle speaks of, the
Corinthians are reproved not only for the matter which they built, as for
raising hay and stubble upon the foundation, but also for the form and manner
they used: let these men set before their eyes the examples of the Prophets and
Apostles in their preaching, yea of the Fathers themselves, whom they like so
well: and mark in what sort they apply this sword to the mortifying and
slaying of the old man.

A great help hereunto might have been the example if it had continued of
many, who heretofore out of other places, and lastly out of this have broken
the bread of life amongst us. But what shall I complain of the mass of
freewill-offerings, when even those that were necessarily appointed, either the
morning or the evening offerings are oftentimes wanting, so that often that
which should be offered in the Evening, is offered in the Morning, is offered
in the morning, as at this present. Howbeit, that the free will offerings so
long continued should be intermitted the next year after God had delivered us
from the Spaniard, I cannot but lament, when such offerings should rather be
increased to the glory of God, and testimony of our thankfulness for so
wonderful a deliverance.

The fault hereof I cannot lay on them that before took pains herein, or on the
chief Magistrate, for that of them many are otherwise employed. And the
Magestrate I think was ignorant, that it has been the use for them in that
place to solicit others, for this thing was at the beginning of the entrance
into his office. But I beseech you that are the Lords remembrancers, that you
would use all means to procure that these free will offerings may be continued
again. When there had been long want of rain in Israel, Elias promised Ahab,
at length, that there should be rain, and going to the top of a mountain sent
his servant to look, who at the first saw nothing, and he still sent him down
till at the 7 time, when at length he saw a little cloud arising like a hand at
the first, whereof afterward ensued great rain: It may be you shall not have
your desire at the first, nor at the second time, yet I beseech you not to omit
this thing for at length, doubt not after seven times you shall see, though it
be not a cloud, whereof may ensue great store of rain. A cause of the
intermitting hereof may be the dislike which by some division amongst us by
preaching might be bred, because that all of us are not of one mind. For
though all agree that the foundations and walls of the building of the Lords
Temple be laid, and raised amongst us, yesome think the covering of the same
is not so good as it ought to be: others are of opinion that it is good and
sufficient, some think that there wants a fence about it for the keeping out
of beasts, as we read Nehemiah required him timber of King Artaxerxes, for
building of the gates of enclosure that appertained to the house of the Lord,
though weknow that in the days of Darius the temple was perfected, howbeit
whatsoever dissension there be among us about circumstances, yet we are
brethren, and God forbid we should come any more to such distempered speeches,
as some one both sides have done: if they had had to have dealt with the
Samaritan, that had been enough, yea happily to much, some of it, seeing it
falls within that which the Apostle has forbidden, as not fit to be amongst
Saints.

Let us remember that which the Apostle writes to the Philippians, in that
whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind one thing,
now unto this we are all come, that we acknowledge that there is necessary in
the Church an able and sufficient ministry, and that in this Seminary such
might be trained up in learning and godliness here amongst us, that being
thoroughly seasoned therewithal, they may be made fit to build up the Church of
God, not as deceitful workmen, but as wise and faithful builders. One of the
wisest amongst the Philosophers giving precepts for the good government of a
commonwealth, showing of what sort governors, assistants and others should
be, says, that God in framing men for government, in those which are to be
chief has mixed Gold, in those which are fit to assist Silver, in husbandmen
and such as are to obey, brass and iron; now these are of one kindred that
beget their like; yet sometimes it falls out that a golden father begets a
brazen child, and a brazen father begets a golden child, that the son
shall not be permitted to take the office of his father, but that he should be
set among the husbandmen: and if a brazen father should have a golden son,
that the governors should take him from amongst the brass and iron, and place
him amongst the golden children, receiving this as an Oracle that the
commonwealth must then go to wrack, when they shall be contented to prefer
brass and iron to the place appointed for gold and silver. This is but a fable
I know, and like to that of Jothans, but the moral of it is agreeable to our
purpose, there are amongst us certain dispositions as it were of gold and
silver, fit to be placed among Ecclesiastical and civil charges of
government, some of another temper, not fit for government, great care is to be
had by those that are in place of government, that brass sons are not
preferred to places appointed for golden children, that if they be not
furnished for such places, they may be applied for that to which they are fit.
Therefore you that govern considering according to the rule of the holy
scripturs, that all must go to wrack when brass and iron are placed in
charge, are to be requested to have care, that when you are to make choice of
such as are to be in place of government, that you make choice of such as are
of gold; at least of silver dispositions, but if you meet with such as are of
brass and iron, then play the part of Apollonians, and signify to their
friends that they are not fit for such places, but that they may be set to that
wherewith they may do most good. Especially care would be had of statutes which
godly founders have provided for maintenance, of such as being fit for such
places, their parents being not able to train them up: a lamentable case that
golden purses should be preferred before golden wits. It is pittisull though
we ought also to be thankful for it, that the Parliament has taken such
order therein, which we our selves would not, yet pitiful it is that a law
should be made for the restraint of corruption in those matters, howbeit, if
this law do not restrain them that buy and sell for gold, let them moreover
take heed lest favor sometime compass that corruption which money did before:
nay if your own children and friends be brass beware you prefer them not,
when gold should be preferred, prefer your own you may, but then when they be
fit. Moses made not any of his children rulers after him, but Joshua, yet made
he his brethren Priests and his children, because they were fit for those
places; his own they were not, we have laws to show whom they be that be so
qualified that they may be chosen, our founders had such care therein, that
they would not so much as have their own kinsmen preferred unles they be so
qualified. The candlesticks of the sanctuary were of gold, which were to hold
out the lights, some parts of the sanctuary were covered with silver, there was
also about the santuary use for brass, but for government they only are to be
chosen whom God in their creating has intermingled gold with their metal,
and as they should have specall care hereof in Election sa afterward they are
made fit, lest that which is degenerate end become copper, for many things show
to be gold which afterward prove otherwise, so are they not to be taken for
gold until that by constancy in going forward they make perfection of the
same, they are by their towardness before to be esteemed but their trial
comes after. This might be performed if orders already provided heretofore were
performed, and where they want they were supplied, that such exercises were
maintained in all Colleges and Halls, to make these instruments indeed of gold
fit for these purposes: I am loath to enter into discourse of our particular
fault herein, of the negligence and some what more then negligence of many
neither of the faction maintained in sundry places, by such as love to fish in
troubled waters, only in general.

I would have such to remember as are to be made stones of this spiritual
building, chief stones and corner stones, to be trimmed up to serve either in
Church or commonwealth, that they ought willingly to submit themselves to good
orders, whereby they may be fit for the building. The stones must be squared,
carved, polished and graven, which had they reason and sense, they would not
have neglected, how much more willing should you be to submit your selves
hereunto, especially for that so wonderfull-use. The Philosophers said that the
stones appointed for altars were happy instruction, reproof, correction, may
seem unpleasant, but if you have that care which living stones should have,
that religious feeling which you ought, you will be content to submit your
selves to such things, without which you cannot be made fit, and be content
though you be restrained of such things as else where happily be hold
tolerable, and may not be permitted, as your Christmas Lords, an use taken from
the heathen, as Polidorus Virgill shows, which in no place are tolerable:
but among the Prophets and their children such discords are most of all to be
condemned, the very name thereof shows the inconvenience of the thing, as
also the rest unprofitable and unfruitful delights, as plays to say no more
of them. It is observed that corruption entered first amongst the Jews by
those means whereby through the policy of Antiochus and the enemies, their
minds were so much effeminated. In this also we all agree, that as there ought
also to be godly and learned ministers, so there should be a sufficient
maintenance for them: which in some places being sufficient, they only are to
be requested who are in authority to dispose of such livings as Patrons: that
they have a care that the candlesticks which are to hold out the light may be
of gold, but such are a great deal worse, which take gold to prefer
brazen-nose men, but let them take heed lest they fall into that mischief,
which the example of Ananias and Saphira, teaches against them that go about
to intervert any part of those livings which either themselves on their
predecessors have applied to the maintenance of the house of God.

It may be there are not many in this place that have to deal in this matter,
but some there are that hereafter may, to whom this latter exhortation may
appertain, namly that where there is not a sufficient maintenance appointed for
the minister, there themselves would be careful to increase it; following the
example of the princes of Judah, who with willing hearts (as Moses notes)
off^to the Lord, as also ^ Chron, last chapter, yea all the people are said to
have been so ready that they were content to have given more than was
sufficient, because they offered with an entire and willing heart. But that
others also may be more willing to provide for the maintenance of the
ministry, by providing that which is wanting, we in this place so much as
lies in us are to give example hereof in those things which are in our hand,
bestowing tha^ on a fit person which amounts out of the commodity of such
living, without decaying that which is, to be applied also to the service of
the ministry, you know my meaning is it were to be wished that you should show
that especial care in bestowing impropriations which are in your gifts, upon
men able to do good in the Church, that your example may provoke others to do
also the like, at least that the surplusage may thus be bestowed, and if we
would in this place begin, it were to be hoped that others would follow: the
priests begin to offer though in*indeed it be too late for us to begin for
others whom God has filled with the zeal of this house herein some go before
us. Joas King of Judah is said to have commanded the priests to cause the
ruins of the temple to be repaired, and it appears that the King was more
forward then the priests I mention it to our shame that our Princes and rulers
should in building and repairing the house of God be still found more ready
then we, can we not find one fit man on whom such things as we have may be
bestowed, and will not there one of our governors be found that will have care
to turn that which rises out of the commodite of these livings to the benefit
of him that may serve in that place to bring men unto God, rather then a Tobiab
and Amonite: shall we still suffer his Majesty's laws to go before us? shall
we be careful of the establishment and foundation of our foundations which we
before should have been careful of, and shall we not be careful to use the
benefit thereof so as may be most sor Gods glory? If we expect also till by law
she drive us to this, whereas it is presently in our own power let us take
heed it be not laid to our charge God grant it be not in that day.

I know it will be said, that regard is to be had of such as live upon those
livings, and it is true so far as may be done without prejudice to that great
matter in regard whereof that is but small, when Tobias was placed in a Chamber
which belonged to the house of God, Nehemiah passed but a little to thrust him
out of it, although Tobias was authorized to keep the same by the priest but he
thrust him out and cast his stuff and garment out of doors after him, if the
mind of Jonas were in these rather cast into the sea, when the Mariners see
they cannot be safe whilst he being in, seeing that God is able to preserve
them if they were so cast out as ^^nah, and that money which is offered for the
compassing of voices (I speak what I know) though I wish no man to say to them,
as Peter did to Simon Magus, thy money perish with thee. I would rather wish
they would be persuaded to bestow it on somewhat that they may better hold, As
for the gain which is said may arise to the University by the fine, alas do
we not see how cursed such fines and such money is, how many hundred pounds have
in few years been brought to nothing, as though all had been put into a broken
bag, but if we grant it not, it will be feared, that our posterity will, yet
we herein shall show the ^^^d of David, who though he himself could not build
the house of God, yet he prepared whatsoever was fit and convenient for the
same, and who knows but the Lord may send a Sol^^^n to turn it to that end we
mean it, It is not sufficient for us to say we wish these things were done,
thus and thus ordered as were best but we must be content to put to our helping
hand and labor to the uttermost to bring it to pass, else we shall do as the
man S. James speaks of, that says to the needy person, go in peace and warm
thee, but gives him not to relieve his poverty.

If these things move us not, let the last reason move us that among the
sacriledges committed by the Abbeys and Monasteries which drew down Gods wrath
upon them, this was one, that they spoiled their churches for their provision
of able ministers and having commodities in their hands, set only such
hedgepriests to be over them, feeding themselves of the rest; neither doubt I
but God will raise up others, if you be loath to move the Chancellor and others
to be content to suffer us to bestow these livings as we have intended, and for
which cause we have withstood, and satisfied the request of other honorable
personages in this suite, and it may be said as Mordecal said to Esther, If
thou neglect it God will send help from some other place, but then thou and
thy Fathers house shall surely be destroyed, I would have stood longer upon
other things, but I speak to men of understanding.

Sermon the Seventh.
Haggai Chap. 1. verse 12, 13. Verse. 12. Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
and Joshua the son ver. 12.
of Josedech the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the
voice of the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet (as the Lord
their God had sent him) and the people did fear before the Lord. Verse. 13.
Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger in the Lords message unto the people,
saying; I am with you says the Lord. ver. 13.

WHen the Prophet Haggai had delivered his message from the Lord of Hosts, unto
Zerubbabel, Joshua and the remnant of the people; the fruit of this message
from the Lord is here set down, what effect it wrought in the hearts of the
hearers, not only of Zerubbabel, and Joshua, but even of the people also. The
principal effects that followed upon the Prophets Sermon are here noted to be
two, one of Obedience. They all obeyed the voice of the Lord, Another of
reverence, And the people did fear before the Lord.

The word of the Lord by the messenger of the Lord, had brought some fear and
reverence upon them, to cause them to stoop unto the will of God, and this
fear had wrought some desire in their hearts to yield themselves in obedience,
to do the work of the Lord in the building of the Temple also. It is said of
Christ Isai. 11 Chapter That the fear of the Lord should rest upon Isa. cap.
112.
him! and so it may be likewise of all true Christians, that the fear of the
Lord is before them, not that fear which John speaks of, which is a fear that
has painfulnesse wherewith the wicked are vexed, dreading punishment, that
being a slavish and a 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
servile fear: but such a fear as Abraham had, when he would have offered his
dear son for a sacrifice to the Lord, fear arising from faith and love, and
drawing us on to obedience. Genesis 22.
That fear of the Lord, which Joh. says continues with love for ever: herein
is love perfect that we should have boldness in the day of judgment. This fear
is a token of grace in the children of God, that they tremble and fear at the
word of the Lord, so says the Lord by the Prophet Isai, Is. 66. c. v. 2. To
this man I looked even to him, that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my Isa. 66. 2,
word, and again v. 5 hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble at his word.
Such a^^are did the Lord himself approve and commend in the heart of goo^
(...) fiah 2 Kings 22. chap. 19. ver. Because thine heart was tender, and thou
have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against
this place, and against the inhabitants 2 Kin. 22. 19.
thereof that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have rent thy
clothes and wept before me, I also have heard thee says the Lord. And such a
fear joined with obedience the Lord requires in all his servants.

Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
that walks in darkness and hate no light, let him trust in Isa, 50, cap 10,
ver,
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Thus did Zerubbabel, Joshua, with
the remnant of the people, they obeyed the voice of the Lord their God, and the
words of Haggai the Prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him, and the people
did before fear the Lord.

A lesson of no small importance both to us that preach the word, and to you
that hear it also.

For us that preach, that we do the work, and preach the word of the Lord not
only faithfully, but plainly also, that the people that hear us may be
effectually moved to reverence and obedience there withal

To you that hear: that you receive the message not as from men, but as from
God, as did the Thessalonians to whom the Apostle gives testimony with
thanksgiving and that without ceasing, for that 1 These. 2. 13.
when they received the word which they heard of him, and others of Gods
Ministers, they received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the
word of God, which effectually works in them that believe. And let us here
consider what the Apostle says, follow after charity, and desire spiritual
gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy.

All preachers of the word after a sort are Prophets, not because they foretell
things to come, but because they open and reveal the word of the Lord, and
apply it also unto Gods people For he that prophecieth speaks from God unto
men, to edefication, exhortation, and comfort, and so is he said to edefie the
Church of God according to that of the Apostle, he that speaks a strange 1
Cor. 14. 6.
language edefieth himself, but he that prophesies edefieth the Church.

The Church is said to be edefied by a Metaphor, when they that are believers
are laid as living stones one upon another, being edefied, that is built as a
spiritual (...) is by Gods Ministers, who are therefore called Gods build^^s,
as the people are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3. 9. and so it it is said, Acts 9. 31.
That 1 Pet. 2. 5.
the Church had rest throughout all Judea, and Galile, and Samaria, and were
edefied, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, were multiplied. To preach or prophecy therefore is not to speak
strange language, if we will ever have the people edefied, but we must Prophecy
as the Prophets and Apostles did in plain evidence of spirit and speech,
rather to profit, than to please, either our selves, or those whom we speak
unto, which if either we would follow the Apostles judgment, or did mind so
much the peoples profit as he did, we would be much more willing to do so our
selves also. For though he could speak as many and more languages than any of
them all, yet had he rather (said 1 Cor. 14. 19.
he) speak five words plainly and profitably to instruct others, than ten
thousand in a strange tongue. And it is well worth the observing, that which
the Apostle has noted already, that when God spoke in a strange language, he
did it because of the peoples infidelity, 1 Cor 14. 22. and it was no mercy but
a judgment, that the Lord would speak with other tongues to that people, Isai.
28, 11. For all that, will they not hear me says the Lo

The Fathers of the Greek Church, never preached in the learned Hebrew, but in
their vulgar tongue, neither any Church till Papistry came in. The Apostles
themselves being filled with the Acts 2. 4. 8
Holy Ghost, began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them
utterance, and although the multitude which heard them were of diverse
languages, yet did they hear what the Apostles spoke every man in their own
tongue wherein they were borne. They spoke not in Greek to the Arabians, nor
in Latin to the Egyptians, nor in the Parthian tongue to the Phrygians, nor in
the Act. 2. 11.
Hebrew tongue to the Grecians: but the people heard them speakeing in their
own tongues the wonderful things of God. What the true language and learning
is, which Preachers should labor for, and so present unto Gods people: we may
understand and find by the Prophet Isai, speaking in the person of Christ the
chief Preacher Esa. 5. 4.
of the Gospel, The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary, which also we
may take from his own blessed mouth in his own person to the same purpose,
Matthew. 11. 28. when that of the Prophet was accomplished, Come unto me says
he, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall
find rest unto your souls, and yet more effectually, when that Scripture Esai
61. 1, 2 by his own testimony was fulfilled in him, and by him. Luke 4. 18.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, etc. And began to say unto them, this day is the scripture
fullfilled in your ears, and in the pening and applying of which words, he did
so wonderfully affect the minds and hearts of his hearers, that as the
Evangelist says they all bearim witness, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. Here then may we see indeed what true
learning is, and who has the tongue of the learned, who he is that is best
able to preach the Gospel with most power and best fruit even he that has the
spirit of God upon him in some measure, as Christ had above measure, and so
delivering the word of grace causes those that hear it to wonder at the
gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. That preaching then is most
warrantable, which is most profitable, and that most profitable which is most
powerful, and that most powerful which best informs the mind, enlightneth
the judgment, affects the soul aright, and warmeth the heart with the
comforts and contentments of it. As it fell out with the two disciples going to
Emaus. Did not our hearts say they burn within us while he talked with us by
the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures? which no doubt he did, not
in any strange language to procure the credit of a learned tongue, but in
plain evidence of speech and spirit for the help of their understandings and
affections in their Vulgar language well known unto them. Saint Paul exhorts
to prophecy in words of understanding, and not to use a strange language;
Learning doubtless is fallen to a low ebb, if men cannot understand us, nor
will acknowledge any learning in us, except we construe greek or hebrew, and
stuff our sermons with allegations of diverse languages, which may indeed
please our selves, and humor others, but tends nothing to the profit and
edification of them that hear us, and albeit the scripture seems sometimes
to use some words of a strange language, yet must we wisely consider upon what
just occasion such words were so uttered, and then so recorded, by the penmen
of the Holy Ghost, it was not for any vain ostentation, nor purposely for our
imitation, but either for the explication of some mystery, or exposition of
some prophecy. When Christ raised up the daughter of Jairus Ruler of the
Synagogue from the death to life, he said, using these words of the Syrian
language Tabitha-cumi: to put them in mind of the Scripture, that was now
performed which Isai prophesied, Isai 16. 1. Send ye the Lamb to the Ruler of
the land, from the Rock of the desert to the mount of the daughter of Sion,
when the ears of the deaf were opened, Mat. 7. 34. he said Ephatha a word of
the Syrian tongue, which the Evangelist presently expounded (be opened) that so
that might be known to be performed which was spoken by the Prophet Isay. 35.
5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be enlightened, and the ears of the Mat.
27 v. 46. Mar. 15. 34.
deaf be opened, when he was crucified in his grievous agony upon the Cross,
he cried out with a loud voice in these words, Eli, Eli, Lamma-saba^thani, the
former of which words being Hebrew, and the latter beings words of the Syrian
language which Christ uttered and the Evangelist interpreted (My God, my God,
why have thouforsaken me, and this was done to show both the accomplishing of
the prophecy of David Psalm. 22, concerning his person and bitter passion,
whence these words were taken, and also the bitter mocking of the Jews, who
hearing him call Eli, Eli, said in a scoffing manner he calls upon Elias, and
let him alone, let us see whether Elias will come to take him down, and so we
find that both Christ and his Apostles did diverse times in the New Testament
use the Syrian word Abba Father, when they called upon God or spoke of the
voice of the spirit of Adoption in our hearts, whereby we cry unto God as unto
our Father; a probable argument, as some do conceive that usually they did both
preach and pray, in a known language, even in the vulgar tongue: all which
being duly weighed and considered, we may easily perceive that it is much
safer and better both for preachers, and hearers, that the word be delivered,
not in words and sentences of a strange language, but to the best capacity of
the hearers in a known tongue, for as we must not so preach, that we may seem
to be learned, so neither may the hearers desire to hear otherwise our other
things, then such as whereby they may go away better instructed and edefied in
the Faith and fear of God. And then if thus we speak and thus we hear, and
if thus we deliver, and thus we receive the Lords message from the Lords
messengers, as the people of God did in this place, we shall receive the
pattern of wholesome words, and be better acquainted with the form of true
godliness, we shall speak as the words of God, and receive the word that is
brought us, not as the word of man, but as indeed it is, the word and Oracles
of the living God. Such was the effect and fruit* of Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.
Act. 2. cap
when he spoke not only so plainly to their ears and understanding, but also
powerfully, and peirceingly to their very hearts and affections, concerning
Christ the son of God, whom with their wicked hands they had crucified, for
they upon the hearing thereof they were pricked in their hearts, perplexed in
their spirits, they repented of their sins, believed the Apostles, were
baptized, ver. 41.
and received the Holy Ghost, and the same day there were added unto them about
three hundred souls: And albeit the word of God though powerfully and plainly
preached, have not always the same or the like gracious effect and fruit, ye
shall it always more or less accomplish the work and will of him that sends
it. It shall not only shake and move the weak and slender reed, but cause also
the stoutest and strongest Caedar to quake and tremble, so did it prevail with
Faelix, when he heard Paul preaching, and disputing of righteousness, and
temperance, and of the judgment to come, for the text says he trembled; and
answered, go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will
call for thee.

It has been ever, and is yet still the use and custom of froward and profane
people, when either their ministers or their friends did rebuke and reprove
them, not so much to be grieved that they had offended, as to be angry and
moved that their faults were told them. It was an affection of an naughty
Tyrant to cast John Baptist into prison, for reproving his incest in retaining
and maintaining his brother Phillips wife.

When Alippins a young man of great hope, and of Austines acquaintance, was too
much transported, with an inordinate desire and delight, in and after the games
and spectacles at Carthage, especially those which they called the Circences
ludi Austine much desired and endeavored out of the love he bare unto him, by
the best means he could to reclame him, but could not for the thife prevail
with him. Not long after the same Alppins hearing Austin in his Rhethoricke
lector at Carthage, drawing a similitude from the same plays to make the
matter he had in hand more plain, and pleasing with a kind of biting
derision, of those who were captivated too much with the madness of those
sports, Alippins took the whole matter unto himself, and was persuaded says
Austin, that I had not spoken so much but even for his sake, and that which
another would have taken as an occasion to be angry with me, the honest young
man, made an occasion to be angry with himself, and to love me more fervently.
For thou have said it O Lord, and set down in thy writings, Rebuke the wise
man and he will love thee. Thus was Alipins both healed of his error, and
reclaimed from his vain sports, by the good providence and power of God in the
hand of Austine never thinking of Alippins nor intending his curing or healing,
as he himself says at that time. For after those words the filthiness of all
those sports and delights, did so recoyle and vanish from his mind and heart,
that he never after came amongst them any more. Now let us well consider my
brethren, that if Alippins profited so well in hearing a rhethorick lecture,
both for the informing of his judgment, and reformation of his life, and all
by the blessing of God, as Austine himself does acknowledge in that place, why
may not, why ought not we to look for the like good fruit and effect of our
desires, and labors in hearing of divine lectures, and godly sermons, such as
may be more able having a better promise, to convince the judgment, convert a
sinner, save a soul and cover a multitude of finnes. And this we shall yet the
more effectually find and feel, if we reverently and obediently (as it now
follows in this scripture) hearken to the messenger of the Lord in the Lords
message: Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger in the Lords message unto the
people, saying I am with you says the Lord. These words comprehend another
sermon of the Prophet Haggai, and do signify thus much in effect unto us, that
after the people were moved a little, at the first sermon to reverence and obey
the word of the Lord sent unto them: yet notwitstanding they stayed a little,
and then the Prophet came again unto them, both to take some fear out of
their hearts, which was upon them, and also to make them a promise of Gods
gracious presence, and assistance in this great business, fear not I am with
you says the Lord of hosts.

By the words of the Prophet it does evidently appear that in this work of
the building of the Temple, they much feared the Persian King, lest he should
molest or hinder them in the same, therefore the Lord sends them this word
that they should not fear, for he would be with them to encourage and
strenthen them, and cause the work to prosper in their hands: and least they
should think he spoke this of himself and not from the Lord, the Prophet adds
thus. Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger, in the Lords message unto the
people, saying, I am with you says the Lord, showing thereby that he came unto
them, not only as the messenger of the Lord, but that the thing which he
brought was the Lords message also. When David being troubled in his mind that
he should dwell in a house of Caedar trees, and the Ark of God, remain under
curtains, he purposed in his thoughts to build a house unto the Lord, Nathan
the Prophet spoke unto him saying, Go, do all that is in thy heart, for the
Lord is with thee. Nathan that spoke this was the messenger of the Lord,
because he was a holy Prophet of the Lord, but that which he spoke was his own
and not any message from the Lord; for the fame night the word of the Lord came
unto Nathan, to let David understand that not he, but his son that should
proceed out of his loins, should build a house unto the Lord. A good lesson
for such as preach, or prophecy unto Gods people, to hold nothing back from
them, which the Lord by them has sent unto them, but to open unto them the
whole council of God, as Saint Paul did, that they may say with more comfort,
even as he said, that which we have received deliver we unto you as the
Message of the Lord, and the Lords messenger. Which also justly condemns such
of our Prophets and Preachers, as refusing to stand in the council of the
Lord, and to deliver his word unto his people, do utter the dreams and deceit
of their own hearts, and put upon them the fancies and visions of their own
heads, of whom the Lord may justly say now as he said of some such Prophets in
Jeremiahs time. I have not sent these Prophets yet they ran, I have not spoken
unto them, yet they prophesied: and this may well serve also for a christian
admonition unto all such as are hearers of the Lords Prophets, to look as
carefully to the Message as to the messenger, to the matter as to the man, and
to try the spirits, and proving all things take hold of that which is good,
like the men of Berea who are said to be more noble than they of Thessalonica
in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
scriptures daily whether, those things which Paul had taught them were so.

We may hear also well and worthily observe how necessary often preaching is
to Gods people, if ever we will draw them to walk in his fear, the spirit may
be willing but the flesh is weak as our Savior says, and when we are at the
best, our best duties are full of many wants, and mingled with much
imperfection, insomuch that we have need continually to be stirred up quickened
and strengthened unto every good work by the preaching of the word. It is not
enough for Paul to plant unless Apollos does water also, there must be precept
upon precept, line upon Lsai 28.
line, here a little and there a little, neither must the Philippians be weary
of hearing the same things often, seeing it is not grievous unto Paul to write
them, and for them it is a safe thing: when Moses and the Prophets spoke of
preaching, they called it Deuteronomy 32. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 206 46.
a dropping, My doctrine shall drop as the rain and my speech shall distill
as the dew. Son of man set thy face toward the South, and drop thy word
toward the South, and prophecy against the forest of the Southfield, for as
the rain by often dropping and falling upon the earth does soften it and make
it fruitful, so does the word by often preaching make the hearts of men like
good ground to bring forth their good fruit in due season, It was the council
and charge of Paul to Timothy to preach the word in season and out of season,
not only ordinarily in a constant course, but extraordinary also if any just
occasion should so require; and if 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
we well consider the good success which Haggais often preaching found with
this people it may be an encouragement unto us to take the like course to
procure the like blessing: his first Sermon was delivered in the first day of
the sixth month, and therein their finnes discovered and reproved, Gods
judgments opened and applied, for their neglect in building the Lords house,
and themselves exhorted to go up to the mountain to bring timber to undertake
the work, and to build the house, had not this been thus spoken, the work had
not been so thought upon, nor taken into due consideration. His second sermon
was preached unto them in the four and twentieth day of the same month
somewhat about three weeks afterward, and had not this been added unto the
former, the work in all likelihood had been neglected still; this made the
Prophet to strike once and again, while the iron was hot, least the sparks
which were kindled by the first Sermon, should have been either quenched, or
cooled for want of another to second and abett the same, unto this the Lord
himself gives testimony, when he tells us Ezra 6. 14 that the elders of the
Jews having now taken the work in Ezra 6. 14
hand builded the house of the Lord and prospered through the prophesying of
Haggai the Prophet, and of Zachary the son of Iddo: and thus does the Lord
make his own word by faithful and frequent preaching, either as a hammer to
bruise us, or a fire to melt us, that so he may accomplish his own work which
he requires at our hands.

The Eight Sermon.
Haggai Chap. 1 verse 14. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtie a Prince of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of
Jehosideck the High Priest.
IT has been heretofore declared in the explication of the former part of this
Chapter, how the Jews having begun to lay the foundation of the Temple of
the Lord, did afterward surcease from proceeding in the Lords work, wherefore
they were first sharply reprehended, and reproved, by the Prophet of the Lord
for their sin, and afterward he did incovrage them to go on forward in the
building of the Temple.

In these words, he shows how the Lord unto the words of the Prophet did add
the inward operation of his spirit. 1 The Lord did stir up the spirit, etc. 2
The obedience of the Prince and people thereunto, in the words following; and
they came and did the work.

The first needs no exposition, saving, that whereas it is said, that the
Lord did stir them up, we may conceive their drowsle sluggishnesse was like
unto a sleep, and sleep is nothing but a similitude of death, wherefore the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 5. Ephesians 5. 14.
14. Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. The same admonion the Jews did receive by God at the time when by
stirring them up he awoke them out of sleep. ver. 15.
The next point is the circumstance of time, v. 15. In the 24 day of the sixth
month, in the second year of Darius the King, which does show that the part
does not belong to the second Chapter, but to the first, for the scriptures
were delivered into chapters a little before our age, but the scripture it
self shows this Hieron, in Aggai. Cap, 2. Vulg at Edit. Aggai Cap. 2.
division is more probable seeing that the second verse of the next Charter
should begin with another circumstance of time, so Saint Jerome and others have
divided the same, a matter wherein I would not have spent so many words, but
that the council of Trent, and some of the ancient Fathers have joined the
same to the second Chapter according to the translation of the old latins,
Sextus the 5 does not join this to the former but to the latter circumstance in
the second Chapter.

Paulius de Palatio, one of the popish writers, would have this part according
to the Hebrews to be joined to the circumstance of time, and Rebera also a man
of the papists, and of greater judgment, affirms that this circumstance of
time, in the first verse of the second Chapter, appertains to the first
Charter. So clear and undoubted it is that the circumstance of time and the
course of the scripture, does show that as soon as the spirit of the Lord did
stir them up, they made no delay, but went and built the house of the Lord,
so that they did not then defer, so many days as before they had done
years, but went and did work in the Lords house: we may also further here
observe that this house is called The House of the Lord of Hosts; To show
Ezdras 1. 2 Ezra 4. 17. 23.
his power over all creatures, a thing which might stand much for their
encouragement: for whenas they had began to build the house of the Lord. Ezdras
1, 2. by the permission of Cyras: then their adversaries procured a commission
from Artaxerxes to hinder and molest them in the building of the roof, and
afterward they obtained liberty to reedifie the same, in the days of Darius
as appears, Ezdras 4. 24, so that they might have been discouraged, Ez. 4.
24. Pro. 21. 1.
if they had not considered that the hearts of princes are in the hands of God
as the rivers of waters: 2 as his power, so his fatherly goodness is showed in
this, in that he is called their God, as he made promise to Abraham to be a God
unto him and to his seed for ever; so now he shows himself to be their God,
being Abraham's seed. The consideration whereof must needs Genesis 12. 2. 3. and
15. 1. 5. and Genesis 17. 7, Romans 15, 4
breed a child-like affection in them to obey so good a Father, for when he
might have justly punished them for their daily sins, yet as a loving father,
he raised them out of the same, which must needs encourage them and make them
thankful for it (and the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel.) The
spirit of God teaceth us that what soever is written a fore time is written for
our instruction, so that in this place we may learn diverse lessons for our
learning. First where the Lord is said to have stirred up the spirit of
Zerubbabel with this connection (and the Lord etc. The connection shows that it
depends on the words which went before, whence we may observe, that the
orninary means which the Lord uses to stir us up and to convert us unto
himself is the ministry of the word, so that it pleases him to send his
messengers, not only to the meaner sort of men, but to Kings and Princes also
for the same purpose. A thing the more to be marked, because there are some as
tradsmen, scholars and Divines, which may happily think themselves not to be
charged with these things, or else not to have need thereof, whereby they may
seem to be exempted from them, but let such men consider that this is the
means whereby they must be stirred up. Lydia a seller of purple had her heart
opened thereby, even at the preaching of Saint Paul. And as for others,
although Act. 16. 14.
they have never so much learning, yet I hope they neither may nor will
prefer themselves before David a man after Gods own heart, and endued with a
principal and singular spirit, who did Act. 13. 22
not arise out of the dead sleep of sin, until the prophet Nathan came unto
him, to stir him up, and them he cried as it is 2 Samuel 12. 7. Psa. 51. 1.
Psalm. 51, Have mercy upon me O God, cast me not away from thy presence, nor
take thy holy spirit from me, and this the same spirit of God does manifest
unto us, that which our Savior Christ said John 3 3.
to Nicodemus, that we must be borne anew: except a man be borne again be
cannot see the Kingdom of God, and borne again we cannot be unless we be
first begotten by the word; and though it be true, that God begetts us by the
inward operation of his holy spirit, yet he uses the outward means of the
ministry to the perfecting an laccomplishing of the same: and therefore Paul is
Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23 1 Cor. 4. 15 Phil. v. 10.
said to beget the Corinthians, and Onesimus by the word: so unless we receive
the messengers which bring this word unto us, and apply the same unto our
hearts, we can have no regeneration of the spirit. God the creator of all
things might have begotten us without Fathers or Mothers, or any other means
as he did in Adam and Eve, and he might of stones, have raised up Children unto
Abraham, but he ordained and used the means Genesis 1 27, 28.
of natural generation, and so must we in our new birth, that so we may
be-gotten, not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, which
lives and endures for ever: Rachel said give me children or else I die, unto
whom Jacob answered, Mat. 3. 9. Gen 30. 1,
am I in Gods steed who has withholden from thee the fruit of thy womb: so
that as in natural generation the fruit of the body comes by the blessing of
God, so is it in our spiritual regeneration also; if Rachel had not asked of
God, God had not remembered her, and if she had not used the means she had not
been the mother of Joseph and Benjamin, which teaches us, that we must use
the means of the ministry; that we may be begotten and borne Iam. 1. 18. 21.
1 These. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 15.
again: as many, as will be the children of God they must receive the word
which is brought unto them by the Lords messengers, that they may be begotten
anew by the same, and being thus begotten and borne anew, we must not stay here
but be nursed up further, and brought up with the pure milk of the word, that
as newborn Babes we may grow thereby: and when we be 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2.
grown to be of riper age, in Christ; then this word will afford us strong
meat also, for this is not only the sincere milk of the soul which as newborn babes we must desire, that we may grow thereby, as 1 Pet. 2. 2. but as it
is also strong meat for 1 Pet. 2. 12 1 Cor. 3. 1 2.
strong men, and belongs also to them of riper age which through long custom
have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. As Heb. 5. 14. Let
us not therefore neglect the means Heb. 5. Heb. 5. 14. Heb. 2. 3. Heb. 10. 28
29.
of our so great salvation, for if he which despises Moses law died without
mercy under two or three witnesses, how much more sore punishment shall he be
worthy of, that neglects the work of reconciliation, whereby we grow up in
Christ Jesus, Remember the word of the Lord, spoken by the Prophet Amos 8.
Behold the days come says the Lord 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Amo. 8. 11
that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread nor a thirst for
water, but for hearing of the word of the Lord, and they shall wander from sea
to sea, and from the North even unto the East shall they run, and seek the
word of the Lord and shall not find it: And this plague shall not only be
upon the ancient and Elders of Israel, but he adds further, that even the
fair virgins and young men shall perish for thirst: a most evident proof that
as our bodies would quickly perish, unless they should be strengthened with 2
Kings 3. 9, 10. 1 Kings 17. 22. Galen de senitate Lib 1 Cap.
material food and nourishment, even so our souls unless they be fedd and
nourished with the heavenly food of the word brought unto us by the ministers
and preachers thereof; would quickly dye and perish, whereby we are to
acknowledge the singular goodness of God, and his great mercy showed unto us
above the Jews in sending us so great plenty of this food, and therefore the
more wretched and ungrateful are we, if we contemn so great a grace and mercy
when it is offered unto us, It is said Jer. 29. that the Lord had sent them.
Prophets rising up early and instructing them, yet they were not obedient to
receive doctrine; The word of rising early should put the ministers in mind of
their industry and diligence in their vocation, and delivering the message of
the Lord: and if this early rising do seem to be to early to some, Let them
remember the saying of the wise man in the Proverbs which may help to awake
them, How long will thou sleep O sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy
sleep? yet a Pro. 6. 9.
little sleep a little slumber, a little foulding of the hands to sleep;
therefore thy poverty comes as one that travaileth by the way, and thy
necessity as an armed man; wherefore let every one awaken and strengthen the
things that remain, least if we do not watch, he come upon us as a theife in
the night at unawares. If we say Rev. 3. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 10 11. 1 These. 5. 2 Rev.
3. 17.
with the Church of the Laodiceans, that we are rich and increase with goods
and have need of nothing: then it is to be feared least indeed we be wretched,
and miserable and poor, blind and naked, or if we think it enough for us to
be present only where the word is preached though we take it not home to our
own hearts, let us consider that the high Priests did frequent those places
where the messengers of the Lord did deliver their message; but it was not
sufficient unless they did apply the message to themselves which was brought
unto them unto that end. Moreover where it is said, that the Lord did stir up
the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, we are taught that neither the
chastisements of the Lord, nor yet the preaching of the word can bring us out
of the sleep of sin, unless it please God to add thereunto the inward
operation of the spirit to awake Isa. 26. 16.
us, for though affliction do cause us to cry and call unto the Lord, as Isai
says, Lord in trouble they have visited thee, they poured out a prayer when
thy chastisements was upon them, yet oftentimes afflictions Hos. 7. 14. Isa. 1.
5. Exo. 6. 9. Re. 16. 11. 21. Ier. 5. 3.
do work no such effect in the hearts of men, else would not the Lord have
said, why do I correct you in vain? Nay many times, the very grief of
affliction does estrange men from God, cause them to blaspheme the name of the
Lord, and breed hardness of heart in many of the wicked, as is manifest Re.
16. 9. 11. 21. Amos 4. 6. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Revel. 16, when the angel did plague the wicked, they boiled in great heat,
and then they blasphemed the name of God, which had power over plagues and they
repented not to give him glory; and if they break not out to these extremities
-- yet they will continue still in their wickedness, and not turn unto the
Lord that he may have mercy upon them: so that neither afflictions, nor yet the
preaching of the word can stir us up, unless God do add the secret
operation of his holy spirit thereunto. A resemblance herereof the Romans do
afford us by the fact of Camillus, who when he had besieged the City of
Phalisci with ten years war and attempted by the sword and famine to cause
them to yield unto him, yet all was in vain, till at length by his clemency
and lenity he prevailed with them; for when the Schoolmaster of the City, who
had the charge of the noblemens sons, did bring them and betray them to
Camillus, that thereby they might be enforced to yield up themselves, and the
City for the ransoming and redeeming of their children, Camillus considering
Plu. in vita Came.
that the falsehood and treachery of the Schoolmaster could bring him neither
comfort nor credit, commanded his officers to stripp him naked, and bind his
hands behind his back; and to cause the children his Scholars each of them
having rod in his hand to whip him back into the City again. At which Noble
action, the Citizens were so moved, that they presently Camillum setvatorem
suum Dumque et parentem invocantes
delivered up their City unto him acknowledging Camillus as their Savior and
God, and father: even so oftentimes the Lord does plague us with Famine and
sword, but yet we will not turn unto him, until by his Holy Spirit he gently
move our hearts to yield unto him, and then we begin to acknowledge him our
Savior our Father, our God in Christ Jesus; We indeed are oftentimes overcome
with such a dead sleep of security that affliction does not awake us, nor work
our amendment that we might turn unto God: nay rather the grief of a son as
has been said, does many times more withdraw and estrange our hearts from the
Lord. It is recorded that the men of Canas after they were overcome by the
Carthaginians alleged that they prospered better so long as they burnt their
children unto their idols, but what should I speak of the heathen, seeing the
people of God the Jews, blush not to tell the prophet Jeremy, that whilst
they burnt incense to the Queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings
unto her, they had plenty of victuals, and saw no evil but since they left
off say they to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink
offerings unto her, we have wanted all things Ier. 44. 17.
and have been consumed by the sword and by famine. The word of God I confess
is a very forceable means to stir them up, and to prevail for obedience,
but yet of it self insufficient, unless by the power of Gods spirit it be put
upon our minds and written Heb. 4. 12. Heb 8. 10, 11. Isai 6. 9. Ioh. 12. 40.
Act. 20. 26.
upon our hearts, and therefore our Savior Christ and his Apostles dealing with
the unbeleving and stifnecked Jews said unto them, as was prophesied of them,
Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and
shall not perceive; for the heart of this people is waxed fat, and their ears
are dull of hearing, they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, and all
because as the Prophet speaks, Romans 11. 8. Eze. 3 7 9 Ioh. 32. 8.
they are a rebellious house, wherefore we may say with Elihu, Job 32. Surely
there is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding, and this is not true only in the first operation of the spirit,
but in going on forward in the grace b^gunne, and not therein only but in the
perfecting of the same So that we may well acknowledge, that of our Savior,
That no man comes unto the father, except the father draw him, and the Spouse
in the Canticles says wisely, draw me and I will run after John 6. 44 Cant. 1.
4. Phil. 2. 13. Romans 15. 19,
thee, And the Apostle to the Philippians shows, that it is God that works
in us both to will and to do; And when the Apostle had preached the Gospel,
from Jerusalem and round about to Illericum, he ascribes nothing unto
himself, but all to the power of the spirit and grace of God which was with
him. But some may object that if God do only work in us all good motives and
actions, by the secret and inward operation of his holy spirit, and that we can
do nothing of our selves, why then does God punish us for not doing these
things, seeing that he himself 2 Cor. 3. 5.
is the cause why we do them not? To this I answer, that God does justly punish
us for that we have lost that knowledge that was given us in our first
creation, and then we had free will to do good our selves, but now we are
ignorant thereof, and therefore are justly punished.

For as Laertius reports of Piltacus, who made laws, whosoever were drunk
should be double punished if he committed any offense, according as Aristole
also witnesses Tertio Ethicorum cap. 5. First for his drunkenness, and
secondly for his fault committed in his drink, so we are justly punished, not
only Ephesians. 4. 20. Rom 9. 16 To. 9. 20.
for the fault or sin it self, but because of our original corruption and
ignorance which is incident into us by reason of that general curse which fell
upon all mankind at the beginning, but as for us that have better learned
Christ, and can cut of all objections with the word we know that it is not in
him that wills, nor in him that runs but in God that shows mercy, And
therefore we may say with the Apostle, O man who art thou that pleadest with
God, shall the thing formed, say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? It may therefore suffice us to know that our corruption is such, that we
falling into the sleep of sin cannot of our selves arise unless Gods spirit
awake us, Zac. 1. 3. Jer. 31. 18 I am. 5. 21
For although the Prophet Zac. says turn unto me says the Lord, and I will
turn unto you, yet it may not so be understood as though man had power as in
himself to turn unto the Lord, but it must be God that must first convert;
and therefore we must say with the Prophet Jeremy, Convert thou me and I shall
be converted for thou art my Lord and my God, and as it is in the Lamentations,
turn thou us unto thee O Lord and we shall be turned, renew our days as of
old, So that it appears manifestly, that the Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians 5. 14. 1 These.
5. 11. Hos. 14. 3. Jer. 4. 1. Za. 12. 10 Zac. 4. 6. Zac. 4. 7. Zac. 4. 14.
grace of God must work in our hearts before we can do any thing, it is of
his grace both to will and to do. Awake therefore thou that sleep, and stand
up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Let us remember that
although we be exhorted often to renew and repair our building and to return
unto the Lord yet it must be by grace, and this grace must be wrought in us by
the secret operation of the Spirit of God. But if any man will say that he can
awake of himself, let him consider the saying of the Lord by the Prophet
Zachariah to Zerubbabel, that the Lord does preserve his chosen Church and
chosen people, neither by an army nor by strength, but by his holy Spirit, and
he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting and with crying,
grace, grace unto it: and they came and did the work of the Lord, in the house
of the Lord of Hosts their God in the four and twentieth day of the month,
in the second year of Darius the King.

The next point is their example of obedience, whereby we are taught that we
must work in Gods house, that is in Gods Heb 3. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Church, whose house we are, if we hold fast, the confidence and and rejoicing
of the hope unto the end, Heb. 3. whereby he shows that the mystical members
of Christ, are his Church, as also he says 2 Cor. 6. Ye are the temple of the
living God, yet all this is but one house, and as the Saints of God are but one
spouse of Christ in general, so are they but one house also, the building 1
Cor. 3. 8 9.
whereof although it depend upon the ministry chiefly whom are by an excellency
termed builders, yet all must work and build his house, and this duty
belongs to all, as Saint Jude speaks Edify your selves in your most holy
faith, praying in the Epi. Jude ver. 20. Exo. 35. 4. 6, 7, 9.
holy Ghost: for as in the material building of the Tabernacle or Temple they
did not bring gold, silver or brass, blew silk purple, scarlet and fine
linen, but those which were less able, brought Goats hair, and Rams-skinns
dyed red, and Badgers skinns with Shittim wood* so in the spiritual building,
all must build but not all in like manner; the ministers they must be the
chief, they must build with silver and with gold, and precious stones* and the
inferious they must build with goats hair and ramms skins, and so all must be
workmen in the building Titus 1. 12. Genesis 2. 15. 1 Cor 3. 6 Gal. 5 6.
As many as are of Christ they must be Christians, not Cretians not idle slow
bellies, even in paradise. Adam must work and dress the garden, Therefore how
more must we, and ought we to labor in this estate of earthly corruption, Paul
must plant and Apollos must water, and not they only as the chief, but every
man in his several estate must labor, every man's faith must work by love,
The noble example of these principal persons who did themselves, work in this
building, may put us in mind Zenophon in Cyrop.
that we should not post off this building unto others, but put to our own
hands and be builders our selves of the Lords house, Cyrus as Xenephon
reports of him was so greatly delighted with the works of husbandry, that
amidst his royallity his goodly aparell his golden chains, his rings and his
precious stones, he would neither eat nor drink, until he had been planting,
or 1 Cor. 3. 9. 1 Cor. 3. 6.
some other painful action procured sweat. If Cyrus being a noble Prince
thought it no disgrace to his Majesty to labor in husbandry much less ought
the ministers of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, either because of this
great calling, or at least because of his small ability and weakness abstain
from doing of the Lords husbandry. Paul must plant and Apollos, must water that
God giving the increase, his Church may be edefied, and his name be glorified.
Macrobius reports that a Captain of Augustus having sustained many dangers,
and suffered many wounds in his defense, in the end being accused wrongfully
and much distressed, desired Augustus himself to work his liberty. M^^^^b.
Satur. lib. 2. p. 288.
The Captain then seeing he went not himself, but would have sent one of his
servants about it presently baring his breast and body, showed the wounds he had
received for his sake, and told At non ego Caesar pericli^ante te actiaco
bello, vicarium quae sui sed pro te ipse pugnavi, Heb. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 2. Isai
63. 7.
Agustus very boldly, that he had not sustained those wounds by any Vicar, but
by his own person for him, and therefore had well deserved that not his
servant, but he himself should deliver him. Augustus blushed and being moved
thereat, became his advocate himself, ut qui vereretur non superbus tantum sed
et ingratus videri. As one fearing least he should be thought to be both proud
and unthankefull.

Our Savior Christ as our good Captain, has suffered many things for our
sakes, he has trodden the wine press of the wrath of God and therefore ought
we not to send others as our deputies or vicars, but with our own hands, and
in our own hands, and inour own persons to do this work and (...) his holy
temple, especially if we have the blush that Augustus had, and bear the like
mind toward Christ that he bore toward the Captain, even to fear the
suspicion of pride or unthankefulnesse, Senectus quidam morbus est ludo Senect.
Plut. in vit laton.
seeing he has wrought so great things for us, I confess that weakness and
sickness may hinder some, and also old age which is a kind of sickness may
hinder and let others from building, yet such as cannot themselves, they must
assist and also encourage others by all means to the building of the Temple:
Plutarch in the life of Ca^o the elder reports, that in the building of
Minervais Temple when one of the old mules, could not carry such things as were
necessary, he would not withstanding according to his former custom go with
the rest empty, whereby the rest were drawn to work and labor more
cheerfully. If any of our elders, be by reason of old age and weakness of
boby unable themselves to build, yet let them accompany those that are young,
and by all good means provoke them to the building of the Temple, but if being
able to do little or nothing themselves, they will not favor nor cherish
others, then it is to 2 Cor 11. 13. Two reas. 1 2
be feared they be but deceitful workmen pretending to build the house of the
Lord, when indeed they do but build a Temple for Idols. The two reasons follow
drawn from the two circumstances, one of person whose house they were to
build, viz. the house of the Lord of Hosts their God. And the other of the
time without delay in the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, so soon
as the Lord had stirred up their spirits, they began to build the house of the
Lord, the former circumstance of the person contains a double reason to move
them to all speedy Genesis 14. 2^. Zac. 1* 3. Joel 2. 11. 25.
and due regard of building of the Temple; one saw the power and all
sufficiency of him, whose work it is, viz. the Lord of Hosts, ^o called
because he is the chief commander, and possessor of heaven and earth, and
uses all creatures as his armies and soldiers, to execute his will both for
his friends and against his enemies, The due consideration whereof, might
greatly encourage them against all the power of the Persian Kings, and all
other their adversaries that should attempt to hinder their work and the other
from his goodness and mercy, in that he was by Genesis 17. 7.
covenant the Lord their God, and therefore considering that the building of
the Temple was the work of God their Father the (...) ^^ght and ought to
encourage themselves in going forward (...), being well assured that he would
both bless them in their labor and take it in good part at their hands. In
regard wherereof it were no less than their bounden duty, to bestow not only
their labor but their lives also in the building of their Fathers house, the
Temple of the Lord their God. The sum and substance of both which reasons
drawn from Gods power that he was able, and from his mercy that he was willing
to bless and prosper them in their work; I do further commend unto you in the
example of the three children mentioned Daniel 3 who being in danger of the
fiery furnace, resolved to cast and repose themselves upon Gods power and
mercy, and so to be constant in their profession, both in doing and suffering
his good pleasure whatsoever should befall them. Our God is able to deliver us
Dan. 3 if it be so, say they, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hands O King, but
if not be it known to thee, that we will not serve thy Dan. 3. 17, 18. Act.
21. 13
Gods, nor worship thy golden image which thou have set up, As also in that
example of S. Paul, what do you weeping and breaking my heart for I am ready
not only to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus. If this were so engraven in our hearts, that the Lord of hosts is our
God able and willing to defend us, it would teach us to have a good conscience,
and to show forth a good profession, knowing that in all this the Lord of hosts
Eccles 11. 4. Heb. 12. 10.
both can and will be our guide unto death, He that regards the wind (as the
Wiseman says) shall never sow, therefore let us, casting from us all things
which might press down, go forth in the strength of the Lord only, and so
build in his Temple assuring our selves with the Prophet David, that the Lord
is our strength and stony rock, and defense and Savior, and our God and our
might, in wham we will trust, our Buckler the horn of our salvation, Psa. 18.
1, 2
and our refuge.

The last reason to move us hereunto is the shortness of time Last reas.
wherein we are to build, we must apply our selves to that which is in hand, we
must remember that this is our day, and it may be but a day, let us therefore
as children of the day, walk in the light, and work in the day, the night of
death may come we know not how soon, whereof we may be put in mind every
night when we lie down to rest, our sleep being and image of 1 These. 5. 4, 5.
7.
death, our beds a resemblace of our graves, our sheets of our winding sheets,
the putting off our clothes, the putting of our mortality wherewith we are
clothed, the putting them on and our rising up a figure of our resurrection
from our graves, and the putting on of mortality, let us therefore remember
that the Lord may say unto us, as he said to the rich man in the Gospel,
Somnus mortis imago.
This night shall they take thy soul from thee, The consideration whereof
might cause us to go on forward in the building of our temple: And other reason
is effectual might move us hereunto, the unreasonablenesse of the weather,
whereby the judgment of the Lord do light upon us, therefore if now we will
begin to build this house, then he will be merciful unto us, and we shall see
great plenty, and if he will not deliver us from these plagues 2 Cor. 5. 4. 1
Cor. 15. 53. Luke 12. 20.
yet let us assure our selves with the thee children, that he is able if he
will to take these plagues from us, but if he will not, let us resolve to
worship none but him, and confess with Saint Paul, that we are not only ready
to suffer these punishments, but even to dye at Jerusalem, being always
prepared to build his temple, seeing he is the Lord of Hosts and therefore able
mightily to defend us, and our God therefore kind and loving unto us his
children that call upon him.

Therefore to this our God together with the Son and Holy Ghost be rendered all
praise, power, might and dominion both now and for evermore, Amen.

Sermon the Ninth.
Haggai 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the seventh month, and in the one and twentieth day
of the month, came the word of the Lord by the Prophet Haggai, saying, speak
now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, and to Joshua the
son of Josedech the high Priest, etc. to the end of the fourth verse.
WHen as the Jews had eftsoons been exhorted by the word and after stirred
up by the quickening power of the spirit to build the Temple of the Lord whose
foundation long before was laid, the Lord here least they should be hindered in
their work, stirs them up with a new message, enjoining them to go forward.
Ezra 3. we read that when the foundation of this house was laid in the days of
Cyrus, many of the ancient men, which had seen the former temple built by
Solomon wept with a loud voice conjecturing by these beginnings (as well they
might) that this latter temple would be nothing so beautiful and magnificent
as the former was, The cause whereof some interpretors think was the decree of
Cyrus, Ezra 6. who commanded that the height should be sixty cubits, and the
Ezra 6. 3.
breadth 60 cubits, and that it should be made ex lapidibus impolitis, as the
vulgar latin has it of rough and vnhewed stones, whereas the former as we may
rather gather from 1 Kings 5. 17. and 62. and 2 Chronicles. 3. 35. was in breadth 20
cubits, in height an hundred and twenty cubits, and in lenght sixty cubits,
after 1 Kings 5. 17.
the cubit of the sanctuary which was as long again, as the common cubit, and
all made of broad and fair hewed stones, others not persuaded that Cyrus
herein differed so much from the former, attributed this to their poverty and
mean estate that built it, who coming far short of Solomon in riches and
magnificence we are not able to bestow so much on this as he did on the other.
And indeed it agrees with that Caldee word used in that place, that it was not
rough stones as the vulgar Latin has it, but fair and great stones as the
septuagint agree, whereof this house was built, wherefore though Ribera a
papists upon this place in his commentaries give this decree of Cyrus as a
reason thereof, yet in his second book de Templo etijs quae ad templum
pertinent, he denies the same, adding for the credit of their latin text,
that where it is written, ex impolitie, it should be, ex politus lapidibus,
whatsoever was the cause the thing is clear, that the ancient men had marked
that this temple was no way compararable to the magnificence of the former
temple, now seeing hope deferred makes the heart faint, as it is in the
Proverb, to fail in our desire in any thing hinders our resolution to go
forward with it, The Jews whose chief honor was in the glory of their
temple, and therefore they would feign have seen it as fair as ever it was
before, could not but be thereat dismayed and discouraged. And therefore the
Lord here by his Prophet with this thought laid before them encourages them to
go forward in the building of the temple, adding to stir them up hereunto
three most gracious promises, first of his assistance with his word and Three
promises to encourage the Jews to reedefie the temple 1 2 3
spirt in the building of the temple, ver. 4, 5. Be strong and work and I am
with you: secondly of honoring it with Christ's presence in it, verse 6, 7.
Thirdly, of enriching it more then the former settling in it peace and all
felicity, ver, 8, 9.

This message he commands his servants to carry, ver. 1. 2. In the seventh
month, in the one and twentieth day, etc.

The thought and cogitation that hindered them he lays before them ver. 3. who
might be left, etc. And then he exhorts them with courage to go forward verse
5. yet now be of good courage.

After which he adderh the promises, verse 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. I will be with you
my spirit shall be with you, I will fill this house with glory, etc.

Concerning the charge given to the Prophet, we must call to mind that in the
first day of the sixth month he was sent unto them from the Lord to exhort
them to build, and after in the four and twentieth day of the same month, he
was sent with a new message to cause them to go forward in building, with one
of these promises concerning the Lords assistance, when they stirred up with
things being considered and compared with that which follows, that
notwithstanding both the former sermons of the Prophet and the working grace of
the Spirit, to meet wit this temptation hindering them, they were to be stirred
up yet with a new message, and to be encouraged with more promises, as they
instruct us on the one side that Gods grace must be both prevenient to go
before, and subsequent to follow after us in all things. First to work in us,
and then together with us, first to stir us up and after to help us forward, so
do they on the one side teach us, that the good graces of God even in the best
of us will be quickly extinguished and put out, if so be they be not quickened
and repaired in us by hearing the word of life, whereupon it is that Christ
Jesus when he ascended into heaven gave gifts unto men: Besides those which
were to remain for a time even Ephesians. 4. 7 8, 9.
which should continue for ever, for the repairing of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edefying of the body, 1 the Church whereon was built
this temple, a type of those pastors which he has given, Paul writing to
Timothy commands that they preach the word, and be instant in season and out of
season, which though they seem, yet it is not disagreeing with that of Christ
Luke 12 where he commends the faithful Seward which gives to each servant
his portion of meat in due season, for men are so backward to come where this
meat is to be received, and so many excuses they make, as trying of Oxen,
seeing a farm, marrying a wife, that the importunity which may seem to them
and perhaps also sometime to the Minister to be unseasonable, is hereby the
Apostle commanded to be practiced, so that the Ministers are to teach
instantly, and as some think unseasonably, and common sense will teach us
this, if we will consider the parable of our Savior Christ, whereas he
compares the minister to the Steward, the people to the servants, the word to
the food, so that as food sustaines the body, so does this word mainetaine the
soul spiritually for the word he uses in the Greek, (...) or signifies a
measure of Lu. 12. 42. Di^ensum
corn, so many pecks as was wont to be given unto servants for their monthly
allowance, which if they should not receive havingno more to live one, common
sense would teach us that they could not but be pined, and what may we look
for, if we regard not to receive this our allowance, when it is distributed but
to be pined with that famine threatened Amos 8. Not a famine to bread nor thirst
for water, but of hearing of the word of God, when men shall wander even from
sea to sea, and from the north to the east and shall run to an fro, and shall
seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, which I would to God they
would consider better of, and for small causes, absent themselves from
Ecclesiastical exercises, where the servants of the Lord destribute these
portions light of nature, should (as I think) so much teach them that herein
they so much injury themselves as he did his servants, of whom the Poet
Juvinall speaks, Socrat. ea. Hist. lib. 4. cap.
Servorem ventres modio castigat iniquo.


And this should make them herein more careful, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 10.
writes of an unlearned monk, who living in the wilderness of Egypt called
Pambo, who coming to one and requesting to be taught, he reading that in the
Psalm, I said that I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my
tongue: Pambo would hear no more, but requested him to stay there till he had
learned that, and so departed from the man, who meeting him six months after,
and asked him why he had not come unto him again? why says Pambo, because I
have not as yet learned that lesson perfectly; Socrates might well note that he
was an unlearned man, or else he might have known that this was not sufficient
and have gone no further then the 34 Psa. where it is said, If any desire life
let him keep his tongue from evil, but not that only, but let him eschew
evil, and do good, seek peace and enshew it. And admit that nothing else
were needful, but the brideling of the tongue were sufficient, yet here we
learn, that to learn sucha lesson thoroughly, we must hear more of the word of
God, Zerubbabel and Joshua who had been taught this lesson, with more words
then was Pambo, yet had need to be taught the same often viz. in the sixth
month more then once, as in the former Chap. and here in the seventh month,
as also in the eight month, as we find in Zachary: and again, lastly in the
ninth month, as in the words after this text, ver. 10, and if they had stayed
so long after the first lesson in the sixth month as Pambo did, they had still
lien frozen in their dreggs. Far therefore be from us, such monkish fashion,
and though some in regard of their affections commend them, yet let us remember
that lesson of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 15. Let us consider one another to provoke
one another to love, and to good works, not forsaking the fellowship that we
have among our selves as the manner of some is, meaning meeting in
ecclesiastical services, and thus much does this message, with relation to
that which went before commend unto us. 1 Now the message it self follows
verse 3, who is lest among you, and laying before them their conceit and
cogitation, which contains an ingenuous and modest confession of some things
wanting which might seem somewhat to touch their credit, the more by us to be
observed, because commonly we are prone to flatter our selves like the Church
of Laodicea, who said, Revel. 3. I am rich and increase with good, and have
need of nothing, and knew not that she was wretched Multi ad sapientiam
pervenire potuissent, nisi se jam pervenisse putassent.
and miserable, and poor, and blind. and naked, Seneca says many might have
obtained unto wisedomt if they had not thought they had not obtained to it
already, from which their ingenuous acknowledgment, we may learn to examine
what is wanting, and if the spirit gives us those eyes, which they had, we may
see if we look on that sanctuary built by the Apostle in the Acts, that that
which is built since our return from Babylon, wants much of the former, Acts 4.
we read there how the multitude of believers were of one heart and one mind,
and had all things common, and what care they had for the poor, with us (God
be thanked) the poor are cared for by good statutes if the godly magistrates
would put them in execution, but for that unity of heart which was among them,
alas, where is it in one toward another among us, Turtullian writes in the
38 of his Apology, that the heathen in his time gave it for a mark to
Christians. See how they love one another, well noted says Turtullian for they
hate one another, and that they will dye one for an other well marked, for they
kill one another. But is it not amongst us now, rather as among the heathen.
Tertullian noted it to be in his time, as the heathen noted it to be among the
Christians, In our factions do we not hate one another rather Tertul. in 38
Apol. cap. 39.
then love one another, and be we not more ready to kill one another then to
dye one for another. Again Acts 14. we read that the Apostles ordained by
election elders in every Church. First, Pastors such as Paul describes, writing
to Titus that they ought so to be qualifyed that they might exhort with
wholesome doctrine, and convince those that gainesay it, which continuance of a
learned ministry is commended Act. 14. 23 Titus 1. 9.
by Justin Martyr in his Apology, where he writes that the faithful in the
primitive Church used on the Sunday to assemble themselves together, both they
that dwelt within, and those that dwelt without the town, And after certain
parts of scripture read, the pastor stood up, and taught and expounded some
piece of the scripture to the People; But now a^a^^e abroad in our land, many
of our Churches are destitute of Pastors and have only readers, wherein least
we deceive our selves, though it be a great grace and blessing of God to have
the Scriptures read in a vulgar tongue, yet our Savior Christ Jesus, though
the Jews had Moses law read in their Synagogues, and the Prophets also as may
be gathered, Act. 13. greived Mat. 9. to see the multitude wandering as sheep
without a sheepherd, thereby implying Act. 15. 21. Mat 9. 36
that the readers were no Pastors, for else the Jews having readers had not
been without Pastors, as he grieved that they were, when he considered what
was requisite for a minister, namely to bring back that which was gone astray,
to preserve from danger, to heal the sore to bind up the wounded, an^ all the
other properties which the word requires of a good Pastor, and therefore he
sent the Apostle by preaching to perform that which by reading they could not.
And if that to hear the law and the Prophets been enough, then had the Jews
known Christ, for Moses wrote of him, and so likewiae did the Prophets, and
amongst them, the Prophet Isai so plainly, that S. Ioh. 5. 46. 47* Act. 3. 24.
Act. 13. 27. Act 8. 30, 31.
Jerome sticks not to call him an Evangelist, and yet the nobleman when he read
Isai the Prophet, could not understand him, but had need of Phillip to come and
teach him, and preach unto him, and if this instruction did not need, but by
reading the ignorant people might understand the meaning of the word, yet those
of greatest knowledge may, and often be, so surprised with passions of
infirmity, that they had not need of the help of others by applying of the word
to heal their diseases, whether Moses were read in David's time, we cannot
certainly affirm, yet certain it is that David, whose whole delight and
study was in the law of God, as may appear Psa. 119 was well skilled therein,
so that this knowledge could serve him to conclude; That he who had committed
murder and adultry, as sure as God lives was the child of death, and yet he
had need to have Nathan, to apply this unto him and to tell him he was the man,
so that we see how needful the pastor is to the people (as Aristotle in his
Politics, that they were wont to bring in strange Physicians into the sick,
and yet thought them not fit to heal themselves) least they be accounted in
Christ's judgment, as sheep without a shepherd. And of this modest
acknowledgment of what was wanting, we have Paul for an example, who Titus the
first gives a reason why he set Titus in Crete, because there were many dis
obedient, whose mouths must be stopped, where the Apostle acknowledges that
his pains had not profited all, but until that were brought to pass, that
they were convinced, reproved or converted, there must needs be something
acknowledged to be wanting, and so must we ingeniously until this be brought
to pass something to be wanting. I may not go further herein, and from the
general come to the particular Temple of each man's soul, whereof this Temple
as Paul to the Corinthians shows was a type; but I leave it to the godly in
particular to consider of, howbeit I do not doubt but if we examine our selves
upon 1 Cor. 3. 16.
our beds the best of us, and those who were long since called and built as
Temples of the Lord, may soon find some want if we compare the present
building with the former. It was said to the Church of Ephesus that she had
lost her first love, and would it not appear if we were well tried, that some
of us had lost our first love, our first sincerity, our first sobriety, our
first zeal and godly virtues, acknowledge therefore your first buildings not to
be comparable to that before, but consider that all this acknowledgement must
be to this end, that notwithstanding these defects which we must modestly
acknowledge, we must still go forward Vetus est enim ubi non sis qui fueris,
non esse curvelis vivere Cic ep. fa. l. 7. ad marium ep. 3.
and strive to repair our ruins as follows in the third place, yet now be
strong, O Zirubbabel says the Lord.

It was a saying amongst the heathen testified by Tully in an epistle to
Marius, that when a man's estate begun any way to be impoverished, there was no
cause why he should desire to live any longer, but that he might make himself
away, which saying was so approved amongst the people, that many when their
honors or riches are impared, or desires frustrate, did not stick to dispatch
themselves as we read of Atheniensis and Cato Viticensis and diverse others, and
Tully himself so far approves it, that although he laid not violent hands
on himself, yet he said he knew not why a man's estate was decayed he should
Plu. in ejus vita.
wish to live any longer, but here we are taught another lesson that though we
find our selves in particular or our Church in general any whit impaired, yet
we must not despair, but take example by this exhortation to strive to amend
what we find amiss, yet now be of good courage O Zerubbabel and be of good
courage O Jehoshua etc. Hag. 2. v. 4


Thus we see it has pleased the Lord in great mercy to prevent a temptation
which might else have been taken up, wherefore the Mat. 12. 20 Isai 4^. 1.
Prophet Isai as Christ expounds it Mat. 12. tells us, That he will not
quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed. Where by flax he
understands the week of a candle, and by smoking, burning darkely, that
signifying, that so long as there is any light in us he will not put it out,
but cherish and maintain it in us, this must we in particular mark when we
consider any defect in our selves, for to him to whom it is said, thou have
lost thy first love, to him also it was said, Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works. Whosoever therefore feels
or shall feel any decay in himself or his charge, let him strive to stir up
the good graces of God in himself, and in the place where he is set. Let him
help to strengthen the weak hands. Beloved, let there be no factions among
you, except it be a spiritual and Christian faction, for so it comes to pass
now a days as it did in Tertullians time, that the religious consent of the
Godly in the best causes is maliciously traduced by the name of a faction, so
that now we are driven with Tertullian to distinguish betwixt a godly and an
ungodly faction, but rather let us Tertu. apol. cap 38. adversus Gentiles. Heb.
12. 14 1 These. 5. 11. Ep. Jude v 20.
as much as may be to have peace with all men, without which no man shall see
God, and in this peace and love let us seek to edefie one another, and save
one another, and so build up the ruins of this Temple of the Lord, especially
Tutors are to labor herein, for that they may hope that the Temple of the Lord
may be repaired by them which are now under the^, as we read it was by Joash,
being well brought up under good Jehoida, and though perhaps they that be in
your charge some of them be not of that ability to prefer worthy men to the
building of the temple, yet may they be so brought up by you as they be fitted
to be preferred by others, and move the hearts of Patrons to prefer them that
are worthy, to the building of this house. But those which especially are to be
builders of this house, I mean the Ministers, though as yet they are not
called to any particular charge, yet I heartily beseech you in our Savior
Jesus Christ, to consider that your Colleges wherein you live are places to
furnish and prepare you against you go abroad, and therefore that you labor
here to fit your selves for employment wheresoever God shall call you,
remembering in the mean time to relieve them by your preaching which have only
reading, as the Prophet in the old time did where the Priest could not; do not
stand idle all the day though no man have hired you, indeed the labourer is
worthy of his hire, yet the same grace and providence which brought Joseph (by
telling of the Butlers dream afterward to honor in Egypt, may after also by
this means bring you to a convenient charge, wherein you may employ your
labors; As for those who already are called to a particular charge, let me
only commend unto them the exhortation of the Lord by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.
17. Son of man I have made thee a watcbman over the house of Israel, therefore
hear the word of my mouth, and give them Ezekiel. 3. 17 Ezekl 33. 7
warning from me, when I shall say unto the wicked thou shall surely dye and
thou give him not warning nor speak to admonish the wicked of his
wickedness, that he may live; the same wicked man shall dye in his
wickedness, but his blood will I require at thy hand, They that are so called
to any charge may think themselves spoken to in Ezekiel. The ancient council of
Melde in the 23 Chapter reproveing the practice of pastors as damnable, who do
not by themselves but by others feed their flock, says that they are bound
necessarily hereunto by the Prophet. The name of watchmen here used is drawn
from the time of war, where the watchman was set in a high Tower, to descry
the enemies coming, whereof if he did not tell the people, but the enemies
came and assaulted the people unprepared, his blood is to answer it, but if he
give warning he was safe. I am loath to mention that heavy threat of the Lord,
his blood that perishes will I require at the watchmens hands, but it were to
be wished that we did consider that if we would reap temporal things we must
sow spiritual things, and if any of us cannot perform this by reason of other
charges which we must attend, and for looking to the profits and fruits which
may arise from them, how much better were it for them to have that cogitation
that David had, 1 Chro. 11. who when he had desired to drink of the water of
the well of Bethlem; and three of his valiant men had broken through the Host
of the Philistimes, and had drawn of the water and brought it to him, would
not drink if it, but poured it out for an oblation unto the Lord, and said,
let not my God suffer me to do this, should I drink the blood of these men's
lives, and is not this the blood of these men's lives which we drink when we
are clothed, and fedd with that which they allow us, and yet leave them in
that case, that they pine away for want of feeding, and as the Prophet says
they dye in this blindness and ignorance for want of teaching. Therefore I
beseech you in Jesus Christ, though perhaps you have had a longing desire to
drink of this water, yet think better on it, and take David's affection and
resolution, and say, let not my God suffer me to do this, and rather bate of
that you spend of your raiment and fair, then take such dead pay, and keep
back other faithful watchmen, which else they might have.

The Lord for his mercy so sanctify our hearts that by the often hearing of his
holy word we may consider and acknowledge our wants and imperfections; and
hereby be stirred up to redress what we find amiss in our selves, to the
building of his Church to the comfort of our own souls, to the glory of his
blessed Name through the grace of his holy Spirit in Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior, to whom with the Father and the same holy Spirit be all praise for
evermore, Amen Amen.

Sermon the Tenth, 1599.
Haggai 2. 5, 6. For I am with you says the Lord of Hosts according to the
word that I covenanted with you, when ye came forth of Egypt, so my spirit
shall remain among you fear not.
HOw the Lord by the ministry of the Prophet Haggai did often and earnestly
exhort and stir forward the Jews after their return from the captivity of
Babylon to the building up of the Temple, has been hitherto declared unto
you: now of the promises or causes of encouragement, whereby it pleased God to
harten them least the conceit which they had, that this house should not be so
famous and so execellent as the former, should discourage them and hinder them
from that business, this is the first which I have read unto you: which
contains in it a most gracious promise of his aid and assistance by his
spirit, because that flesh and blood is ready to suggest into the mind of a
man that which is in the Proverbs, It is better to be idle than to be occupied
in vain, and to make folk measure things by the event, so that unless they
see present means to effect that which they undertake, they cast off all hope
of accomplishing their purpose, and so cease from meddling any further, whereon
it was that Moses Exodus 4. 10. when he should be sent to Pharaoh excused
himself that he was not eloquent, that he had a stammering tongue, but the Lord
raised him up from that thought, telling him that he should trust in the grace
of the Almighty, saying, who has given the mouth to man, or who makes the
dumb to speak etc. do not I the Lord? now therefore go and I will teach thee
what to say, to the like effect is the message sent to Haggai, because that
Zerubbabel and Jehoshua, and the rest which should have been the chief in the
work, having laid the foundation of the Temple, despaired of finishing it, and
so despaired before he began it. The Lord therefore stirred them up to go
forward by these words which I have now read unto you, a reason very forcible,
and motive very pregnant to move them forward, I am with you says the Lord of
Hosts: which words the Prophet often uses there, by putting them in mind
both of his power that sets them forward, whose will all creatures as soldiers
are ready to perform: and meaning thereby also, that by his favorable
assistance he will bless them and that by his spirit he will give them grace
to accomplish that which they had undertaken.

In the second place the doubtful understanding of the word, (word) has
caused interpretors diversely to expound it, for by word in scripture is
sometimes signified the second person in the Trinity, the Savior of the world,
the Essential and eternal word of God of which John speaks, John 1. In the
beginning John 1.
was the word, by whom all things were made, and through whom all things are
now preserved, and so here should be three things which the Lord should now
promise, 1 His own presence. 2 The presence of his Son. 3 The presence of the
holy Ghost which sense the Hebrewe would bear as may be translated, and then
it should be translated thus, I am with you by my word that I covenanted with
you, etc. whereto also the Argument agrees because he was the Angel
mentioned. Exo. 23. 20. that spoke unto Exo. 23. 20.
Moses in Mount Sinai, that gave the law unto the Israelites and promised them
his favor, if they kept his covenant as Stephen shows, Act. 7. 38, sometimes
it signifies a promise made Act. 7. 38. Psalm. 105.
unto any, insomuch that David Psalm. 105. ver. 8: mentioning the covenant, that
the Lord made with Abraham, says thus, he has always remembered his covenant,
and presently adds this word of promise made to a thousand generations, and
thus othersome do think it to be taken in this place, and this indeed the text
will best bear, and so much the more, since the Lord on the like occasion says
Deuteronomy. 31. ver. 8. that he himself Deuteronomy 31. v 31.
would go before them, and therefore encourages them not to fear, or be
discouraged, for himself would be with them, and would not fail them nor
forsake them, and this the ordinary construction of the Hebrews does include,
as they know that are skilled that way, especially I say if these words be
compared with the 8, 9. verses of the 105 Psalm. before mentioned, besides there
is a more pregnant motive to induce me hereunto, even the authority of the
Apostle himself, who Heb. 12. 27. declares that those words which are in the
next place set down by Hag. were spoken by Christ himself, yet once more, I
will shake the heavens: so by the word in this place, Heb. 12. 27
cannot be meant Christ, seeing Christ is said to have spoken this. It
follows therefore that his word was not the Essential word of God, but some
external word, not the eternal word of God, but some word that had a
beginning, namely when this promise and covenant was made, when the Lord
brought the Israelites out of Egypt, and delivered them by his Angel, God the
Father by his son promised his favor and assistance, if we follow this
interpretation, the sense will well agree with the former, namely, this word,
this promise, was made by Christ, considering that in him all promises are yea
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20 and considering that Christ says Joh. 14, 15, 16. that
if we love him and keep his commandments, he will pray the Father and he will
give us another comforter, that he may abide with us for ever, whence the
latter place in the Text of the Holy Ghost receives also light, our Savior
there calling him the comforter, and promising his abiding with us, not for a
season but for ever, And this for the meaning of the words, whereby the Lord
encouraged Zerubbabel and the rest to go about the building of the Temple,
assuring them that he will be with them, and that he will be merciful unto
them and prosper them in their endeavors, that he will send them his spirit to
guide and direct them, and to relieve them in all wants and does not the Lord
here likewise stir up and exhort us to go forward with the building of the
spiritual house, not only such as have the place of Zerubbabel, or the office
of Jehosua, but all the faithful also, that every one in his vocation should
do what in him li^th to the building up of the body of Christ, no doubt as we
have the like command, so to us likewise is given the like encouragement
according to the rule of the Apostles. To. 15. ver. 4. Whatsoever is written,
is written for our learning. For why have not we Temples to build as well as
they? are not our Ephe. 2. 10, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 39
bodies called temples of the Holy Ghost, Ephe. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor 6. 19. and
therefore not only the Church that is the Church universal assem^ly of the
faithful is to do this, but also every man and woman in particular, and albeit
the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, Pastors and Teachers are to be
principal laborers herein, because they were cheifely given to this end, Ephesians.
4. 12. yet all the faithful are appointed as under-workemen for as much as the
Lord exhorts them that they exhort and edify one another, 1 These. 5. 11. and
Jude commands them to have care to edify one another in their most holy
faith verse 10. the commandment therefore that was given to them is given to
us, which is so much the more to be regarded of us, how much more near to God,
and more precious the spiritual house, that is built on Christ and is to last
for ever, is above the material temple built on earth which was not to
continue but to be laid waste, insomuch that one stone should not be left one
upon another; so that thus you see that in respect of the like commandment, we
also are to build up our spiritual tabernacle and temple to the Lord, which
also we must do in respect of the like promises, that they had, which the Lord
most graciously has made unto us, as he did unto them, to the end that we
should cast away all fear and distrustfulnes, nay rather we have greater
promises made unto us than ever they had to them, at lest in measure greater
howsoever in substance they be the same, for what says Christ Mat. 28. 16. the
last ver. Behold I am with you to the end of the world, what promise can be
more gracious? what more comfortable? which cannot be understood of the
Disciples and Apostles only, because of that circumstance (till the end of the
world, and though they did belong chiefly to the ministers, who were to observe
and teach all that the Lord had commanded them, yet in command they also
respect all other, as many as believe in the Lord by their ministry, as Christ
well shows in his praise, Job. 17. 20. where he adds the en^ also, that
they might be all one they in him, and he in them, as the Father is in him, yea
the promise is more graciously given to us then to them, insomuch that Heb. 8.
8. the words of Jeremy that the Lord spoke unto the Jews are cited [I will be
their God, and they shall be my people says etc.] are appointed unto us,
promising us that he will prosper us, he will not leave nor forsake us, that he
will bless us not only with heavenly blessings, but also with temporal and
with earthly Genesis 15. 1. Ier. 31. 2. Cor 6. 18.
treasures, according to the meaning of the very same promise made to Abraham
Genesis 15. 1. I will be thy God, and renewed to us Jer. 31. and yet with more
kind words 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons
and daughters. 2ly In respect of like or greater promises we must build up our
spiritual Temple, 3. We must do it respect of the like continuance of the
spirit which we have amongst us as they had, for Christ promises us, John 14.
16. That he will pray the Father and he will give us a comfortor and he shall
abide with us for ever, which least any should think to be spoken in respect
of the disciples only, the Apostle 1 Cor. 16. tells us that the spirit of
God dwells in us also thereby the Metaphor of abiding in us as it may be
explained, by that which Cato in Tully says of the soul, namely, that nature
has given it an abiding place in the body, not a dwelling place, therefore it
must go out of the body, as out of an Inn, and not out of a dwelling house,
yea this is so to be understood of all Christians, that the Apostle says Romans
8. after Romans 8.
he had used the same phrase of the soul dwelling in us, that he that has not
the spirit of God dwelling in him, is none of Gods avouching, that there is no
Christian to whom this promise is not made good or verified, it is true indeed
that the spirit being God fills full all places, taking in it that
generality, but when we shall talk of this dwelling amoung the faithful, we
take it after a more particular manner, that he dwells in them by his Ephesians 3.
13
gifts and graces as the Apostle signifies, Ephesians. 3. 17, when he says that
he would pray that Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith, for so Christ
dwells in us by communicating his spirit.

The Spirit I say shedding in our hearts faith and love, and then Christ comes
and dwells in them, which Augustine implies when he applied those words to
the widow that wept for her husband, why says he do thou weep for thy
husband? thou have by faith a better husband in thy heart, for thou have Christ
himself for thy husband. A sentence, beloved, most comfortable to the
faithful, and which may serve well to assure them of their salvation by
Christ, and therefore the Papists desiring to impair it, where Cyril uses the
same words they willed them to be put out, least any of their Scholars reading
them in Cyrill not so corrected, should conceive that Christ dwells in our
hearts by faith: but blessed be God that our students may read it not only in
Cyril but also in Gods own truth, and the unlearned may hear it preaced by
others, thus 3ly. in respect of the continuance of the spirit, we are likewise
to 4 Last. The same promise to encourage us as the Jews. Re. 19. 14.
build up our selves as well as others. Lastly we have the same promises that
they had from the same Lord of Hosts Jesus Christ as he is described Rev. 19.
14. where it is said that the warriers or armies which were in heaven follow
him, and if they so excellent creatures, then much more* we who are far
inferior: nay he more kindly promises it to us, promising that he will be
with us by his spirit for ever to guide and comfort us in all our calamities,
and therefore it is our duty as well as theirs to set aside all fear,
distrustfulnesse, and with all courage go forward, and with all encouragement
to strengthen our weak knees and lift up our feeble hands that we may be able
insome measure to accomplish the work the Lord has enjoined every one; for we
have the like commandment that Zerubbabel had, the like promises yea the same
promises, and the assistance of the same spirit, and he that promises to be
with us is the Lord of Hosts most mighty and able to do whatsoever he will,
which name least happily it should somewhat affright us, let us remember that
he is mighty and powerful against his enemies, and toward his sons and
servants merciful, and full of compassion, yea he 1 Pet. 2. 25. Psalm. 23.
i^ the Bishop and sheepherd of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. and therefore it ought
more to embolden us, than discourage us, as it did David Psa. 23. My sheepherd
(says he) is the living Lord, therefore will I fear no ill, and indeed he
himself showed it to be true in his own particular, by his godly example in
all his life, and first when there was but a step between him and death, as he
had told his friend Jonathan. 1 Samuel 20. he went forward with some
circumspection indeed and care, to prevent danger, but yet never 1 Samuel 20.
a whit discouraged, because he knew that the Almighty was his sheepherd, and
that he was able to keep and defend him, yea that he would defend him because
that he had promised to dedefend all such as put their trust in him, and why?
for the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it whether soever
he willl, and that as easily as a husbandman can turn the streams of waters:
And so the Lord did the heart of Saul to David, as appears by the sequel of
that story, and when the Lord did not deliver him by his power, yet he
preserved him by his goodness, Elias might have feared Ahab, and Ehizeus might
have been dismayed with the taunts that were cast on him, by Jeroboam, but
they went boldly forward, showing indeed that they had no cause to fear or be
discouraged, for they knew well enough that the Lord was with them, The
memorable example of the three children shows the like courage to have been
in them, when they said, our God is able to deliver us, and if he do it not yet
know O King, that we will not worship, etc. whereby they showed that they were
fully persuaded, that the Lord is present with his servants, either by his
power or by his goodness, by his power to deliver them, or by his goodness to
comfort and strentghen them, if to endure torments were most for Gods glory,
yea the very example of these three shows, how true that in the Proverbs is,
when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him, so that not only the fury of Kings shall be turned away, but if need
be they shall become ever Pro. 16.
friends, and if the hearts of Princes be so subject to the Lords ordination
and government, which seeeme to have some freedom, how much more are the
hearts of inferior creatures, the slothful man says that a Lion is in the
street, but the Lord has Lions at command, so that they shall not hurt his
saints Dan. 6. he that observes the winds shall not sow, and he that marketh
the clouds shall not reap, so that the Lion fears the slothful man on the
one side and the wind on the other side keeps him back, Daniel. 6.
that he cannot go forward, but for the true children of God who know that both
wind and weather sea and air are at Gods Eccl. 11. 4
command, they fear neither the heat of summer nor the cold of winter, nor the
storm of persecution; but go boldly on in their calling, following the
precept of their God and committing all other things to his providence, for
they know that he is with them even in affliction as David witnesses, Psalm.
23. thy rod and thy staff comfort me, where we are to consider, that the rod
and the staff are terms used in respect of the former word sheepherd, the
word rod signifies a long thing to strike with, but yet used as sheepherds use
the like about their sheep, to keep them in by threatening them, and a little
tipping them, the word staff is borrowed from a word that signifies to lean
on, which sheepheards use to lean on, and withal to keep their sheep, but in
proper, the Prophet declares that the Lord would not chasten him, or if he did
his chastisement should be but such as should comfort him, as he says else
where, Psalm 119. It was good for me that I was punished, and before I was
smitten, Psalm. 119. Columella lib. 7. cap. 3
I went wrong. Columella writing of the use of the latter word for staff,
says that in some countries the sheeherds use to lean on their staffes and
never sit down, but stand upright to look on their flock least that any
sheep coming after might be entercepted of wild beasts, of which the country
is full, in which sense, if we take the word staff it shows that the Lord is
watchful over his, and so regards them, that none of his perish, and look
what chastisement he gives them it Act. 21. 31.
shall in the end turn to their salvation: and hence it was that the Apostle
Paul when the Lord bad him, be of good courage none shall hurt him, he boldly
and joyfully went about his calling, even then when the Lord was not with him
in his power to deliver him, but yet by his goodness to comfort him, as I said
yea, when he knew that he should be delivered up, he boldly without fear went
on to build up that body which he was sent for, teaching us by his example to
remember that in the Epistle to the Romans cap. 8. 31. 37, 38, 39. If God be on
our side who can be against us? nothing can separate us from his love which
Romans 8. 31 37, 38, 39.
we have in Christ Jesus, wherefore that this might the better be kept and
performed, the Pastors are to stir up the people to this boldness, remembering
that even in weakness the Lord will perfect his strength, and bring his will to
pass, and that he often uses weak instruments to great purposes, which they
should do well to remember that separate themselves from us, because there is
not that perfection in us, which they dream there should be: In the Church of
Sardis, there were but a few names left among them? was the minister then to
leave them, because it was even then decaying and declining, no he was to
stir them up again to awake and strengthen the things that remain; which is
not spoken to the Ministers alone, but to all the rest that remain, as
appears ver. 1. 4. the like charge Paul gave to Archippus, Col: 4. 14, namely
that he should take heed to the ministry, that he should fulfill it, which
certainly ought to stir up all such as have charges, that they employ
themselves about their calling, teaching them privately and publicly as it is,
Acts 20. not thinking it enough to read unto their charge once a month, for so
Act. 20. 20
they shall never fulfill their ministry, well may they indeed quite starve
their flock, which Columella waiting of sheepherds well shows, and when he
says a few sheep well fed, will bring more profit to the owner then a great
many ill fed, for besides that they bring small profit, they also perish and in
fect others; for leanness breeds scabbs and scabbs death, and therefore are
Ministers to labor and feed the Lords flock according to their gifts, that
the Lord may receive the advantage according to the quantity of the tallent.
And therefore let me beseech them to give themselves to reading and
exhortation, if their maintenance be not sufficient that they should leave
their College, let them remember how the Lord fed the Israelites with Manna,
and how the widows oil was increased, and how Elias was fed with Ravens, and
not to go to -- miracles, how the Shunamites provided for the Prophet, how Paul
labored with his own hands, nay remember, that golden Mediocritie which Paul,
speaks of in Tim. If we have food and raiment, we ought therewith 1 Timothy 6. 6.
to be content, and for such as have charges and yet preach not, but pretend
they be not eloquent, etc. Let them remember what the Lord said to Moses
pretending the like, will they do better then they can, you know what Julius
Florus said to Julius secundus, a little boy should make a declamation which he
had done, saving he wanted a fit Proem which he labored three days for, and
could not hitt of any to his liking, and thereby grew very heavy, Julius Florus
his Uncle would needs know the cause, he tol^ him, whereupon he smiling said
numquid tu melius vis dicere quam potes, so may we say to them, will they do
better then they can, God regards that they can do, not that which they
cannot, when as Socrates had bid many to dinner, his wife told him that there
was but a little meat, why says he, if they be honest men it is enough, if not
too much, so may they think if their hearers be godly, be it a little that
they bring it shall suffice, be they wicked it will be too much, and therefore
fear not to be bold, the Lord will be with you in the preparation and in the
delivery, and see others which are hearers, such as take not that profit by the
word as they hold, whose flesh is always rebelling against the spirit, let
them endeavor and the Lord will add a blessing, endeavor they must to
reform themselves, and to inform others: For the more they hear the more
they understand, the more will be looked for at their hands, let them not use
those idle excuses of a Lion in the street, let neither the frost in the
winter, nor the heat in the summer hinder you from going forward, Be faithful
unto the death, and you shall have the Crown of life, which the Lord grant, for
his Sons sake Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sermon the Eeleventh.
Haggai 2. 7, 8. Yet once again (that is but a little) and I will shake the
Heavens and the Earth, and I will move all nations, and the desire of all
nations shall come, and I will fill this House with glory says the Lord of
Hosts.
OF the three most gracious promises whereby the Lord encouraged Zerubbabel,
and the residue of the Jews to go forward in the building of the Temple, the
second, (in these words ensuing) does declare that our Savior Christ by his
presence, and powerful preaching to the salvation of them that should believe,
would replenish this house with glory; A blessing which how excellent it is, we
are by St. Paul. Ephesians. 1. 18. and Col. 1. 17. sufficiently taught, and this is
both compared to and amplified by the benifit which the people had in their
deliverance out of Egypt, mentioned in the former verse, when he says here,
yet once that is small, for so it is in the originiall, which is diversely
supplied by the learned interpreters, somethinking here a short time to be
meant put it thus, (after, or yet a little while) as if it had bin spoken to
comfort the godly in the shortness of the time as Isay 10. Hab. 2. Heb. 10.
others deeming the thing before spoken of to be meant, which sense I take to be
more agreeable to the place, read it by aparenthesis, yet once (I that is a
small thing) viz. to bring them out of Egypt, I Will do a greater matter, which
kind of phrase we have also. Isay. 49. 6. But howsoever it be taken, the rest
of the words wherein these leanes do extol the benifit of the Gospel by
Christ brought to all nations, comparing it with the law delivered to the
Jews, as the Apostle inferres it, Heb. 12. 26, 27. Where having stirred them
up to receive the Gospel he adds that as a reason, that if they escaped not
which refused him, that spoke on earth, much less should they that refuse him
speaking from heaven, whose voice then shook the earth, and has now also
declared, saving yet once more will I shake not the earth only, but also the
heaven, to which in this place is added the seas and lands as parts of the
earth, for greater amplification, whereby is employed that as when the Lord
gave the law on Mount Sinai, he made the earth to shake. Exodus 19. so now would
he shake not only the earth but the heaven also, to authorize the Gospel,
which corporally was done as both Matthew. and Luke record, when as reconciling
the Gentiles by his passion, the earth quaked, and when the glad tidings of
this, reconciliation was sent to the Apostles, there came a voice from heaven
as a mighty wind and the earth eftsoons shaked, although taken figuratively,
spiritual things may be thought to be intimated as some expound it, that the
earth and the heaven may rejoice for that whereby a new heaven and a new earth
was to be made, as did the Angels in heaven as well as the men on earth, then
verse 8. There follows the efficacy of the Gospel toward them, to whom it is
sent, wherein are noted two points, First, Their moving. Secondly, Their
drawing.

Their moving I will move all nations which was done partly by himself when
John 12. many of the Gentiles desired to see him, and partly more fully by his
servants, the Apostles by whose preaching all nations were moved, as appears,
Act. 2. 13. And the Ecclesiastical Hystories report, the latter he notes when
he says, and the desire of all nations shall come, which was performed when
the desired persons. i. e. the Elect came unto the Temple unto Christ, and to
the Church verifying that which began in the first f^uits of the Gentiles,
Acts. 13. where it is said that when Paul preached Christ unto them, as many as
were ordained unto life believed, which exposition, I take to be agreeable unto
this place, especially because the verb in the Heb. is of the plural number
venient desiderium, which according to the phrase both in the Hebrew and other
languages we translate, venient desiderati, meaning thereby that the Church of
God which is called Ieremi. 12. the portion of desire, as Daniel is called a
man of desires, Ephesians. 1. the faithful are called the Adopted in Christ
according to the good pleasure of his will. Our Savior Christ, Matthew. 8. when
he had found in the Centurion more faith than in Israel, speaking of his coming
said, that many shall come from the East and west, etc. and yet of this he
speaks, John 6. where he says, none can come to me except the Father draw
him, And John 12. 23. showing the means how the Father will draw all the Elect
as Austin and Gregory well expound it, against this is apposed simply the
exposition of Ierom who reads it in the singular, veniet desideratus which to
countenance, Ribera a man learned, and industrious, if he were not sometimes
blinded or bleared with a Papish humor, says that the original was since
Jeromes time corrupted, which is a great marvel that he should say, when as
the Greek Inter^^eters, the 70. long before Jerome took it in the plural,
translating it by desideria, the Elect as Jerome, himself does, as also that
is strange, the miracles wrought in the establishing of the Gospel (on which
Jerome and Ambrose ground) he should take the sense to be Alegoricall, rather
of shaking the heavens, when as so nothing can be meant but the Angels, but
greater then any circumstance is that of the Apostles, Heb. 12. 28. that they
shall come to Christ, for if he had spoken of his own person, as they would
have it, likely he would not have spoken in the Third person, having before
spoken in the first, I will shake, I will move, and so after in that as
follows, and I will fill this house with glory, when his glory after his death
should be published, which was done when in the Acts, by the preaching of the
Apostles his glory was spread far and near, and so he became glorious who in
his passion had bin infamous, and therefore the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. often
repeates that the ministry of the gospel was glorious, because it did publish
the glory of him, now this being done, first at Jerusalem, Luke 24. and the
Apostles abiding in the Temple, Acts. the 1. and when they wear arrested, Act.
45. Therefore he says hear that he will fill it with glory, This then is the
comfort whereby the Lord seeks in this place to stir them repeating eft
soones, that the Lord of Hosts would do it, that considering not the earth but
the heaven also should be moved: so they should in greater alacrity go forward
in their duty, out of which that we may note something concerning our duty. 1.
the first words yet once, so give occasion to note what the Apostle says, Heb.
12. 17. that the things which are shaken as being made with hands: are removed,
that the things which are not now shaken may remain for ever, yet that notes a
change but once, that shows that we must expect but one change lasting for
ever. Now what the things shaken and made with hands are, appears in the type
of the law, the parts of the Tabernacle, noteing the heaven and earth which
should be shaken, and the ceremonies taken away: when Christ should enter not
into the santuary made with hands, but into heaven above, as Heb, 9. 24. But
those things which are purchased by Christ must continue not shaken, therefore
the gospel is called (...) an everlasting gospel not to be altered any more but
to endure for ever, I need not here Mark 1. 14.
to take occasion to refute those heretics who think that as Christ added to
the law, so also there remains to be added to the gospel as Montanus did take
upon him, the person of the Holy Ghost; But I rather note another error in some
Churches not far from us, if not also in some of our own, viz. that Popish
error which have brought in types and ceremonies which were by Christ
abolished, that the thing signified which cannot be shaken, might remain for
ever as might be showed at large in respect of both time and place, and persons
out of their Missals, Decretalls, Pontificialls, but I will only note that
which this present time brings to pass, out of their year of Jubilee, we read
Leviticus 25. that God commanded that the fiftieth year should be kept holy
unto the Lord, as a year of deliverance from service, release of debt, and
restoring of Land to the owners, thereby shadowing the time of liberty which
Christ was to bring from sin. Now Pope Boniface 7 chap. in the extravagants
has set down, that the 50. year is a year of pardon and freedom from all
sins whatsoever, to them that will come devoutly to visit certain Churches in
Rome, and to abide there if they be strangers, forth space of 13. days, if
Italia, 30. because says he, the 50. year is the year of remission, and
Christ came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it. And yet the prophet Isay
61. 2. shows plainly, that that was a type, the substance whereof Isa. 61. 2.
was established by Christ, who was anointed (as he says) to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the acceptable year of the Lord, as he
expounds it of himself, Luke 4. 18. the accepted year of Gods favor, wherein
as at the Jubilee, all were set at liberty, and restored to their former
estate; So when Christ came, they should be delivered from bondage, and
restored to the liberty of the sons of God, which to be done by Christ to
continue, as the Apostle witnesses, Corin. where he says, Now is that
acceptable time, now is that day of salvation: Which to restrain to one year
in 50. if I should compare them to beggarly rudiments, I should too much honor
them, being rather a profane error, which I need not further to make infamous
then by opening their covetousness showed therein, which Polidore Virg. our
own Histioriographer, Chapter 26. sets down, writing that the last great
Jubilee before, this in the year 1500. Pope Alexander the 6. in great
kindness to the Englishmen, sends them over a Spaniard, to show them the way
how to come to heaven by this Jubilee; yea, and further also how they might
have the benefit of it, and stay at home. But says Polidore Virgit, Ejus
liberal tas non fuit gratuita; and lest (says he) the King should hinder it,
he was content to part stakes with him; but as for us, this yet once shows
that our Jubilee is yet perpetual, every day, yea every hour is a year of
Jubilee and deliveance unto us if we seek it. The time once changed,
continues for ever, for therefore (says the Apostle) was it said yet once
more, that those things which were made with hands being abolished, these might
continue for ever.

2. Another thing, hence the Prophet here commends unto us, in that it is the
Lord that speaks unto us himself from heaven, as here he says, I will shake
him; that therefore with all dutifulness we are to accept the doctrine of the
Gospel, for so the Apostle concludes all that he had said of keeping faith,
retaining hope, maintaining love, receiving the Kingdom unshaken, that not
despising him that speaks, we may have grace to serve him, with
shamefastness and fear, and lest the earthlinesse else should abase the
credit thereof, therefore he says, the heavens which yet he purposed to do,
only by the Ministry of his servants, for that which they do, he accounts
it as that which he himself does, having said Luke 10. He that hears you,
bears me: And therefore St. Paul says that Christ speaks in him, in 2
Cor. 13. 1. These. 2. 13. He thanks God for them, that they received the word
of him: And Silvanus and Timotheus, not as the word of men, but as it was
indeed the word of God. And does not our Savior, cite that out of John, I say
they shall be all taught of God: Now God teaches inwardly by his spirit, and
outwardly by his Ministers, as from Christ, and Christ from heaven by them, for
so the Apostle speaks Heb. 12. 5. We must therefore come with these, and
such like minds, to such assemblies, that as Eli bad Samuel say when the Lord
called him, speak Lord, for thy servant hears; So when the servants of the
Lord speaks the Lords message unto us, we should hearken as to the Lord;
esteem of them as to the Minister of Christ, lest God say of us, as of the
Israelites to Samuel, They have not cast away thee, but they have cast away me;
which also may be a lesson for the Minister, to deliver the Lords message, not
his own. John and James are called Mark 3. Boanerges the sons of thunder,
but howsoever certainly they were so called, because, by them he used to
shake the Heavens as in thunder: Now how James thundered may appear, in that
he was chosen as the chief Preacher first to be put to death, Acts 3. And
John, though he lived longer, yet how did he thunder in his Gospel against
the heretics that denied Christ's Deity; and in his Epistle against the great
breaker of the bond of love? It were to be wished that our Preachers would
thunder but as the sons of thunder, to shake the heavens, so as to move all
people to those things which remain and continue, Psalm 45. by the sharp
arrows the people shall be subdued unto thee. It Is not by bol^, but by sharp
arrows; therefore the Ministers of God had need to sharpen their arrows by
taking heed, As the Apostle wishes 1 Timothy 14 15. to learning, to wrap
himself as it were therein, for so the word signifies, that so he may save
himself, and those that hear him: For though Gods providence do cast
somewhat further, that all that hear are not saved, hereby humility and
modesty is commended to the Ministers, as to know that they are only
instruments, and therefore to pray, as Paul requested the Ephesians for
himself, that a door of utterance might be given him, and yet when they have
that, all is nothing, but that God it is by whom that is performed, which
follows, that the desire shall come, etc. yet all must be moved, for that it
is an effect in all; Many are called, but few are chosen; many moved, few
drawn, and none can come to Christ, except they be called, Matthew. 21. When
Christ came to Jerusalem, many, even the whole City were moved, and what a
tumult was there, and yet not many drawn: And Acts 2. many were pricked,
hearing Peter, when at the first they jested. And Acts 17. When Paul preached
at Athens, some mocked, and some, as Damaris clave unto the Lord; these were of
the desired of the nations, and so was Lydia, of whom it was said* that it was
God that opened her heart to attend unto that which Paul preached. The whole
glory therefore is to be ascribed unto the Lord, who of his special mercy
draws some, and leaves others to their own corruptions; For it is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy: He it is
that accepts, and approves, and makes desired, where by the way is a lesson
for us, how we account of them whom God makes his desire and liking, especially
Psalm. 15. The prophet requires as a thing necessary in him that will dwell in
Gods Tabernacle, and rest in his holy mountain, that in his eyes, a vile
person be contemned, but that he make much of them that fear the Lord. And
Psalm. 16. All my delight is on the Saints that dwell on the earth. And Isay 45.
where God describes the state of his Church, he says, he will lay her stones
with Carbuncles, and her foundation with Saphires; and make her windows of
Emerods, and her gates of shining stones, and all her borders of pleasant
stones, or stones of delight, those that he builds up his Church withal, that
so we may say with the Prophet David, all my delight is in them. But alas, too
too many ways are our delights carried, but not that way as they should,
valerius maximus reports, that a Gentleman of Capua, coming to Cornelius house
showed her his Jewels, and desired to see hers, but she having none as was
likely, put him off with some other talk, till her sons the two Grachi came
in from the school, which then she showed saying, here are my Jewels, and
indeed these are Jewels well brought up. If she took such joy in her
children, how may we think God does, and therefore we may delight and rejoice
in his godly children, especially seeing he reckons of them as his chief
treasure and choice Jews, Psalm. 135. 4. Malach. 3. 17. I will fill this house
with glory; which commends unto us a duoble point. first, of wisdom, secondly
of comfort, first, to teach us, and then to strengthen us.

To teach us first, that the glory here spoken of does singnifie that true
glory, wherewith he will fill this house, for other places are filled with
painted glory, the want of which wisdom draws many to noisome lusts and
pleasures for false glory. Again we must know to this glory is joined
infamy, as we see in the Apostles, who wear counted the scumme of the world,
yea how many speak contumeliously of Christ himself, and his fellowers, who
wear voted with that ignominious name of Nazarites, Act. 24. touching which,
when Paul came to Rome: Act. 28. 22. The Jews told Paul, that it was every
where spoken against, which may put us in mind of that which Simion spoke of
Christ, Luke 2. that Christ was appointed as a sign to be gaine-sayed,
wherefore it is to be meant true glory, which is here accompanied with unjust
and untrue reproach and infamy which yet the godly may rejoice in, Austin
tractat. 100. in fol. 16. on these words, the holy Ghost shall glorisie me,
defining glory to be a speech of many consisting in ones praise, says he, when
we commend or praise either for that things should not be commended, or
secondly, that person that indeed is not to be commended; as for example says
he, to bestow money on stage plays is a fault, and not a virtue; yet says
Austin many praise it, for the wicked says he, citing out of the 20. Psalm. are
praised for the lusts of their own hearts; And so again says he, the wicked
when hearing the face of the righteous they are praised, and men deceaved, this
is false glory. But if the righteous not seeking praise of the world, are
praised for their virtues, this is true glory: Now St. Austin meaning that
Christ was glorified with true glory for the glorious works of his function
and passion, may teach us to avoid the occasion of their error which mislike
the calling of the Ministry, and grief at their reproach; St. Paul
considering how this true glory was joined with ignominy but false; resolves,
2 Cor. 6. 10. to approve himself by honor and dishonor, by good report and
ill report as we see, Act. 24. he was accussed as a chief maintainer of the
sect of the Nazarites, herein appeared his glory, so Athanasius as it is in
Theodorets. 1 Chap. 13. being falsely accused of murder and adultery, his glory
appearead when the man was brought forth with both his arms whole, whose arms
he was accused to have cut off, and when the woman had falsely accused him for
being naught with her, chargeing another in his presence, as mistaking him,
Athanasius sufficiently cleared him, So Calvin is accused in this place for
receiving venient desiderati, to apply unto others that which belongs unto
Christ, by one in that book called Calvinus Judaizaus, wherein Stapleton
sooths him, as glad to find any fault, but that this and others which he
brings are but false reproaches, David Pareas does sufliciently make clear,
but if Heb. 12. our Savior himself did so patiently endure the gain sayings
of sinful men, how may these be content: and since not only Paul and
Athanasius, and Calvin, but even Christ himself suffered reproach, this shows
that since Christ was glorified with true glory; that a Christian may have true
glory, though untrue ignominy and reproach do accompany it, which may serve in
the second place, for the increase of our comfort, since its said, Matthew. 15.
blessed are ye that suffer, etc. so that we need not to marvel that Act. the
5. the Apostles so rejoice that they were thought worthy so to suffer for
Christ, or that Philip. 1. Paul says, that it was given to them to suffer, and
that he would rejoice in the cross and marks of the Lord Jesus, which we may
so much the more do, if they be wicked that wrong us, but if they be godly,
yet take comfort in this we may, that the cause is not just, if all were like
Datinius, Milo might take comfort as Tully says, but its likely that even
Cato, being as to his praise, Pliny notes 44. times accused, and every time
acquitted, yet was sometimes accused by honest men. But then hic murus aheneus
esto nil consciere sibi, consider the example of Job, James. 5. what end the
Lord made, he was charged with hypocrisy, but in the end cleared. Yea put
Christ for example, if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, no
marvel that they use the servants sharper, but we dear brethren must here
follow Christ, who* Heb: 12. for the glory that was set before him, endured the
cross, despised the shame. For Romans 8. If we will reign with him, we must
also suffer with him, we must not think to go to heaven in a horse-litter,
here we shall have true glory, but hereafter more perfect glory.

O Lord instruct us, that we may embrace the things that remain, and hearken
unto that thou command, that we may stir up our selves so to perform our
duty; that here being partakers of true glory, we may hereafter be brought to
perfect glory, even by the God of glory, Christ Jesus, Amen.

Sermon the Twelfth.
Haggai 2. 9. 10. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of
Hoasts: The glory of this last house shall be greater then the glory of the
first, says the Lord of Hosts, and in this house will I give peace, says the
Lord of Hosts.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life, and
that to come, says Paul to Timothy; the truth of which sentence is here
illustrated by an example of a duty here commanded, touching the building of the
Temple: For of the three gracious promises made by the Lord to stir up the
Jews thereto, the two lastly handled, concern the promise of the life to
come, the glad tidings of the Gospel; and the last now to be unfolded,
comprised in the words read, contains the promise of this present life. Silver
is mine, etc. We heard before, as may be gathered from the Prophets words, is
it not as nothing, etc. that the people were discouraged when they saw the
foundation of the Temple how far short it would come of the former, to
recomfort them, therefore this is added, that the glory of this latter house
should be greater then the glory of the former, and that not only in respect of
the spiritual glory mentioned in the former verse, And I will fill this house
with glory; but even with temporal and eternal glory also, wherewith because
the other was so beautified, they were cast down and discouraged, as if the
latter would be nothing in respect of the former; therefore the Lord here does
not only promise to fill it with glory, but also that the glory thereof shall
be greater then the glory of the former; which for that (in respect of that
glory which they meant, it might seem a thing unpossible, since they had not
the riches of Solomon which built the former.) Therefore first the Lord
mentions that the silver is his, and the gold is his, etc. The silver is mine,
and the gold is mine, as if he had said, notwithstanding ye are now poor,
and see no means how to effect this, yet it is in my power to enrich you, The
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, which he showed when he fulfilled
Psalm. 24.
his promise by raising up Herod, and enriching him to build up this House in
glory, as an eye witness, Josephus by name Antiquitat. l. 15. e. ult. and de
bello Judaico, lib. 6. cap. 5, as it is divided in the Greek, does testify;
the disciples desire our Savior to behold the goodly buildings of the Temple.
And Luke 21. 5. It is said that some did admire the Temple, how it was
garnished with goodly stones and consecrated things: Now Mat. 24. Luke 21. 5.
for the stones, Josephus, who at large expounds that in Luke, says the Temple
was made all of white stones, some six cubits long, and sive broad, some of
twelve, and some of twenty five, some of forty five, in respect of which,
perhaps it might be compared with that other built by Solomon. Now for those
consecrated things which Luke calls (...) the same Josephus says, that all
the upper parts of the Temple were set about with spoils which Herod had taken
from the Arabians and others. Further he affirms, that nine of the doors
were covered with gold, the upper gate with Corinthian brass, the inward with
gold: the posts were covered with gold, the forefronts with plates of gold, the
roof set with round spires and boules of gold, so that all was either
glistering white, or shining with gold. And so also within, the vessels were
many of gold, some of those as were before, others made new, especially the
golden Table, Candlestick, and Altar of Incense; Insomuch, that besides Luke
and Josephus, even externe writers, as Tacitus lib. 5. History says, that it
was immensae opulentiae Templum. Now whether in these respects it may be said
to be more glorious than the former, I pronounce not; but certainly in respect
of the spiritual glory mentioned in the former verse, and this temporal added
together, it was much more eminent and glorious then the former. Now hereto is
added, And in this house I will give peace, meaning thereby that not only
war and dissension should cease, as we commonly take the name of peace; but
that also all prosperity and temporal blessings should be added, as the word
in the Hebrew does signify perfection and Integrity, Salubritie and
Inc^^lumitie, as they used it in their salutations, Peace be unto you, wishing
them all good, as we may see 2 Samuel 11. 7. where it 2 Samuel 11. 7.
is said that David asked of Vriah, of the peace of the war, that is, of the
prosperousnes and of the good success of the war, which Zachary, Zach. 8.
makes plain to be meant here, speaking Zach. 8. 11, 12, 13.
of the same thing two years after, for there he asked them whether before
they received the commandment of building the Lords house, they did not
remember there was no peace, Nay says God, I did set every one against his
brother, but now there is a seed of peace, as (i.) as translations render it a
prosperous seed; noting, that by peace is meant prosperity, Zach. 8. 12
for which they must wait, as husbandmen do until it grow up, which is
plain from the words following, that as other peace cannot (as it is said
does) make the vines to bud, but is Gods gift of peeac, as after he says; and
you that were once accursed, shall be a blessing among all Nations; So that by
peace there is not meant only concord and unity, but that as is promised
Deuteronomy. 28. all prosperity to them that obey the Lord.

And this you see, that the Lord of Hosts, the Almighty God, signifying unto
these people, that gold and silver is his, and therefore that he can perform
what they cannot, does promise also that he will make the glory of this latter
house greater then the former, and therewithal will bless it with peace and
temporal prosperity.

The foundation of which promise being a premonition to take away
distrustfulnesse from them, the silver is mine, does instruct us in this ground
of common faith, that the Lord of heaven by the right of creation, does enjoy
and possess all earthly blessings, and can as he please dispose them. This
Moses and Aaron did not so well remember, when Numb. 20. being commanded to
speak to the Rock, and promised that the water should flow out, they by
destrusting Gods power, did not sanctify the Lord in their hearts, nor so
before the people by believing his promise as they should have done, that
therefore he would not let them bring the people into Canaan, God then
sanctified by believing, this which here is said that the silver is his, under
which are comprehended all other creatures and temporal blessings as his own
and at his disposing, serving for the performance of his will, the benefit of
his servants. When Samaria was besieged and the famine so sore that the Mothr
was to boil her son, and to refresh her self with her own child as we
read, 2 Kings 7. and the Prophet coming to the King told him from the Lord,
that by to morrow this time there should be plenty in the gate of Samaria: A
Prince on whom the King leaned, thinking it a thing impossible, answered the
man of God and said, behold, If God should make windows in the heaven, could
this come to pass? The Prophet replied that he was sent from God and
confirming that which he said, threatened him punishment for his incredulity,
that he should see it with his eyes, but that he should not taste thereof, as
also it came to pass when the Angel Gabriel sent from God promised Zachary a
son, Luke 1. How can this be, says he, since I am old and my wife barren?
well says the Angel, I am sent from God and it shall be, but because thou have
not believed thou shall be dumb until this thing be done, which example of
Moses, of Aaron, of the Prince and of Zachariah, does teach us to believe, that
what the Lord does promise in his word it shall undoubtedly be made good by his
work in due season, silver is his, and gold is his, for so says the Lord of
Hosts, The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, etc.

A point that may further teach us to remember that seeing also these earthly
blessings are the Lords, therefore in getting, using, loosing or wanting them,
we should have care so to behave our selves as those that know they are not
ours, but the Lords, In getting he gives it them to whom it pleases him, and
it is not (as many foolishly imagine) committed to the Prince of the world, to
be disposed by him at his pleasure: It Is true indeed, that Satan said so, that
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them are delivered unto him,
and to whom he would, he gave them, but he said it falsely, and for the most
part as false as this we see here worldly men, as if silver and gold and these
worldly things were not the blessings which God bestows, seek them by unjust
and unlawful means, belike thinking they are none of Gods at all, otherwise
as Jacob said he would serve Laban seven years for his daughter Rachel; so
they would also serve God for his blessings. But with many (as the wise man
says) stolen waters are sweet, and his bread is pleasant. The sons of Eli
robbed the people that came to sacrifice, and took by force that which was not
theirs: And I would to God that not only the sons of Eli, but that also our
Elies themselves, for I would be loath to judge any, did they not, I will not
say rob, but did they take more then their own from the portion of the Lords
Sacrifices, etc. Sure if any so do, they consider not with David, Psalm 15.
that preferment comes not, neither from the East, nor from the West, but that
it is the Lord that does give it, else they would be of David's mind I hope, who
1 Samuel 26. 11.
would not do any thing that he should not against Saul, a wicked-King, no
not for a Kingdom; God forbid that I should do this, and sin egainst God,
etc. They that pray to God as their heavenly Father, Give as this day our daily
bread, and yet delight in stolen waters, show that they do the lusts of
another Father; Ioh. 8. 44.
God forbid that I should say they are of another Father, but sure herein they
serve him, by serving another then the Lord in good duties, they should get
that they desire by good means; For silver is mine, and gold is mine, etc.

Secondly, in using we are but Stewards to the Lord, in using and disposing
those blessings which we enjoy, and therefore must remember, that we must
give an account thereof unto the Lord. Nabal, when David's messengers came to
him for some provision to refresh himself and his followers, 1 Samuel 25. Shall
I take my bread, and my wine, and my flesh, etc. And give it to strangers? All
was mine, and mine, and mine with him, he did not consider, that he had
received them from God, to be at his will disposed, not all for himself, but
some for others also. It is said Proverbs 3. Withold not the goods from the
owner thereof; neither say to thy neighbor, go, and come again too morrow,
etc. The owners are called, them that has need of any good we have, and we are
but as stewards to dispose it to them, according to that rule in the Epistle to
the Corinthians, He that sows bountifully, shall also reap bountifully, for
the Lord loves a cheerful giver, and he gives 2 Cor. 9. 6.
twice, that gives quickly.

The Israelites in Hosea, had forgotten that it was the Lord Hos. 2. 9.
that gave them silver and gold, flax and oil, which they gave to Baal, and
therefore he threatens to take it away; So, if we bestow those blessings that
he gives us, amiss, let us know, that he yet retains an interest in them to
take away. What if his silver and his gold be bestowed upon Papists Images,
Idolatry, etc. what if men make their bellies their Gods, as Phil. 3. and serve
them with their riches like Polixhemus in Euripides, who said he never
sacrificed to any God but to his belly, and he thought that wise men would
think that it is a man's God to eat and drink; yet for all this, the right of
these blessings thus abused by wicked men, belongs unto God, and he will at
his pleasure both take them away from them, and call them to an account for the
abuse of them. Alas, if it were not so with us also, we should be more ready to
come to these assemblies, when as we are so ready to fill our own bellies, but
let us know, that we have now but the disposing of these things, and the Lord
will require an account of us.

Thirdly, what if we loose them, yet let us comfort our selves 3 In losing.
with Job, remembering, that the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, and
therefore blessed be the name of the Lord.

Fourthly, if we want them, yet remember they are the Lords, 4 In wanting.
Psalm. 73. Je^e. 12. Romans 2.
who if he please, can give them ^ But say that we want them, and the Lord
bestows them upon the wicked that worse deserves them? This is a great
temptation I confess to the godly, as we may see in David, and Jeremy, yet
consider he is the Savior of all, though especially of the godly, and he makes
his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall on all sorts, that so by his long
suffering and goodness, he may call them to repentance, or at last, as Acts
14. Filling their hearts with food and gladness, he may not leave himself
without witness. But to come from this point, Acts 17.
which is set down to strengthen their faith in the power of God to the
promise it self, of greater glory, The glory of this house shall be greater
then the former, which ministers greater comfort to the Church, as comprehended
with Judah in this promise under the name of Israel, Zach. 8. 13. whereby
Israel is meant the same as in that speech, Gallat. 6. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and upon the Isreal's of God,
etc. Israel not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. Even the
Gentiles which are joined in the building of this latter house, as the Peophet
Isa. speaks, Isa. 6. 13. alluding to the Temple, The glory of Lebanon shall
come to thee, the Fur tree, the Elm tree, and the Boxtree together, (i.) the
Gentiles to beautify the place of my Sanctuary, and then showing he means
hereby the Church to be gathered out of all Nations, he says, The sons of them
that hated thee shall bow to thee, etc. And, I will make thee an eternal glory
and joy; noting thereby, that before the Gospel was preached, the Jews were
hated by all, who then being converted, shall submit themselves to that
religion, which before they detested, so that there should be a perpetual joy
made for all the Church. And verse 9. he says, that the Isles shall come, and
the ships of Tarshish, etc. Even they that grow by merchandise unto greater
wealth, as Isa. 23. speaks of Tyrus, that came with their silver and their gold
Isa. 23. 18.
unto the Lord, to beautify therewith his spiritual Temple, the Church.

This is that then which here is promised, that God will provide for the
merchandise of his Church those things that may be sufficient, as for food and
raiment; for so the Apostle interpreting the promise, limits it 2 Timothy 6. When
we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content. Howbeit to this is
added a greater glory due in this life, (that prerogative to be called the
John 2. 12 2 Cor. 4.
sons of God) and fellow heirs with Christ, Romans the 8. And after this life,
to enjoy an exceeding weight of glory. So that the Church shall be blessed,
though not with abundance and superfluity of earthly goods (it may be) for it
was not for naught that Solomon prayed, Proverbs 30. Give me neither poverty
nor riches. And Deuteronomy. 23. we see, that when the people waxed full, they spurned
against the Lord. But always with sufficiency, and with a spiritual glory
greater yet in this li^e, and an immortal weight of glory in the life io come.
Therefore to those that lead a religious christian and a godly life that
endeavor to build upon themselves and others in an holy building to the Lord,
is this promise made that this later house shall be more glorious than the
former. They before Christ having but a taste in comparison of that, whereof we
have the full fruition, this is it that Solomon has Proverb. 8. exalt wisdom
and it will exalt thee, and he learned it from his Father, who taught that God
would give both grace and glory. Psalm. 84. 11. and no good thing will I with
hold from those that walk uprightly, no good thing, nothing that if indeed
good for them, with that moderation, 1 Cor. 14. the Apostle says of himself
and such as he was, that they were a gasing stock unto Angels and men, hungry
and thirsty, naked and buffeted, but 2 Cor. 4. he adds that those small
afflictions should work in them a far more excellent and eternal weight of
glory, so that God works always that which is most of al for our good,
therefore in respect of those other greater good things these lesser are
denied, whosoever says Christ, shall loose Father and Mother, or Friends, for
my name sake he shall even in this life receive a hundred fould, but with
persecutions, and in the world to come life eternal, He that has given us his
son how should he not give us all things together with him, the Psa. 84. 11
Lord can deny nothing that is good to them that walk uprightly, but then we
must walk uprightly, and in so doing our glory shall be the greater, For if we
build the Lords house then we glorify and honor him and their it is written,
them that honor me I will honor, says the Lord. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Now the last promise and in this house will I give peace, is made of a seed of
peace, etc. not only that discention shall cease, but that the heavens shall
hear the earth to give her dew, and the earth shall hear the corn to give
her fruit, etc. and they shall hear Israel, so travel in the building of the
house of the Lord Hosea. 2. 21. 22.
and the service of him as they ought, which may put us in mind, that we may
fear that we have not labored so as we ought in the building of the house of
the Lord, forasmuch as there be so many breaches and vents among us, and in the
seventh chapter the Prophet tells them, that before when they built not the
Lords house but every one his own, that the heaven staid it self from dew,
and the earth her self from her fruit, there was no peace, nay says Zach. 8.
10. Before those days there was no hire for man nor beast, neither was there
any peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, because of the
affliction, for says God, I set every one against his neighbor and that by
the just judgment and vengeance of God, because they traveled not in the
building of the house of the Lord. From whence are wars and contentions says
James? are they not hence, even from your own lusts James, 4. 1. 2.
and pleasures that fight in your members; And are not our contentions to
maintain our lusts and our pleasures, also I would to God we did consider
aright the root of them, Its an old Proverb to fish in troubled waters, Cleon
in Aristophanes was told that he dealt like them that fished for Eles, for as
they when the lake is calm and clear can take nothing, and therefore do they
trouble it and stir up the mud and slime, so when the City was quiet he could
get nothing, and therefore he sought to make strife in the City, if any such
Cleons be amongst us, I Heb. 2. Prove. 11. 30. He is wise that wineth Souls
Jam. 3. 15.
would they would remember that they are called not to be fishers of Eles, but
to be fishers of Men, not of such slimy stuff which Hab. 2. is called thick
clay, but for the souls of men which are most precious, and which they must
seek for; as for the wisdom of such as fish for Eles it descends not from
above as St. James says, but is earthly, sensual, carnal, and devilish, such
as do not consider that the Lord says, Silver is mine and Gold is mine, and I
will give peace in this house, But if St. James cannot serve to persuade, then
let them yet remember what a heathen man, worthy their remembrance, says Varro
by name, whom Austin so commends, Distractione civium says he languescit
praecipium Varre li. 1 de vita populi Romans
civitatis bonum est incipit aegrotare and deflorescere out of all
controversy, the Prophet having promised peace unto them when the Temple and
house of the Lord was built, does show plainly that we do not build the Lords
house, because we are not at peace. But is by the example and promise we hope
to have peace, let us look to be fishers of Men, and not of Ecles, then shall
we be sure to have prosperous success, and to be enriched as the Jews were
afterward, woe be to him says God to Jehocakim, that builds his house with
unrighteousness, and his Ier. 22. 13.
chambers by wrong.

Did not thy father Josiah eat and drink, and prosper when he executeted
Judgment and Justice. If men could be content with moderation as Josiah was,
and not seek to justify their inordinate lusts and affections as many do,
then might they eat and drink, and prosper, as Josiah did, But when they
begin with Jehoiakim to follow after their own wicked lusts, then its not
moderate eating and drinking that will serve their turn. They think they must
shift for more by other means, the sentence that St. James adds upon his
exhortation and reprofe of their contentions, Iam. 3. 15. is worthy our
remembrance. vi^le, the fruit of righteousness i^ sown^ in pence to them that
exercise peace, wherein the former place peace is taken for Gods love and favor
accumpanied with temporal and spiritual blessings, and in the latter for
peace and concord, and so doubtless Gods eternal peace which passes all
understanding, is sown to them that make peace, yet they must wait as the
husbandman does for fruit, and not think to have it straightway, but
certainly they may expect it for the Lord has promised, that as many as sow
righteousness shall have the fruit of peace in this life and in the life to
come life everlasting. But I beseech you to remember that Isa. 2. 4.
which is prophesied to come to pass in the time of the Gospel, To break our
swords into mattocks, and our spears into sithes, let us lay aside the
instruments of war, and take unto us the instruments of Gods husbandmen, and
laborers, and so build the house of God that the Lord may dwell among us,
sanctify us O Lord that we may remember that the gold is thine.

Sermon the Thirtenth.
Haggai 2. 11, 12. In the fourth day came the word of the Lord saying, Thus
says the Lord ask now the Priests concerning the law, and say if one bear
holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or
pottage, or wine, or eyle, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the Priests
answered, and said, No. AFter many and great promises of sundry blessings and
benifits whereby the Lord had before incurraged these people of the Jews to go
forward in the building of the Temple, wherein at this time they showed
themselves somewhat slack: Hear again for the strengthening of their hands,
and the chearing of their hearts to stir them up, again in these words, the
Prophet renews one of the former promises, concerning the plenty of temporal
blessings of wine and oil, so the comfort of which benifit is annexed and set
out by the contrary (to wit) barrenesse, blasting, by which for their sins
they were chastised in the former year, and least being the only people chosen
to serve the Lord, they should flatter themselves in the multitude of their
sacrifices and religious worshipping of the Lord, and think therefore that they
wear not so plagued for their sins, they are advertized from the Lord, that
notwithstanding their daly offerings and services, and not only their other
actions wear displeasing to him, but even their sacrifices abominable in his
sight, so long as they neglected his Commandments and left his Temple unbuilt.

The several points to be observed are these,

First that their sins is opened, and they by themselves 1.
convinced of it. v. 12. to v. 16.

Secondly, the Prophet shows that therefore they were plagued with barrenness
from v. 16. to v. 19. 2.


Thirdly, Upon amendment of this fault, and going constantly on in building,
plenty is promised, v. 19. to v. 20. 3.


The first point is as much I shall be able to handle at this time, though I
did read all because of the connection and coherance of one part with another.

For the first therefore to omit the other whereon this depends.

Their sin, the Prophet opens by two mystical Resemblances rawne from Moses
Law, v. 13, 14. and declaring thence, v. 15. that they being themselves
unclean, so were all their works and their sacrifices, which they more
effectually to persuade them, the Lord, v. 12. commands Haggai to ask the
Priest concerning the Law, as by the witnesses of them that were therein
skillful to convince them, and perhaps to reprove the Priest which should
before have taught the people according to the Law.

Now the Law of Moses laith open these two Types for 1 Levit. 6. 27. concerning
the sin offering, the Lord by Moses pronounces, that it was most holy, and
whatsoever should touch the flesh should be holy, and here is the former
question made by the Prophet, v. 12, 13. if one bear holy flesh in the skirt
of his garment, and with the skirt do touch the bread or the pottage, whether
the bread or the meat so touched, shall be holy, whereunto the Priest
answered, no: And that eighthly, for though it be said there, that whatsoever
thing the flesh of the finne-offering touches shall be holy, yet does he not
say that whatsoever touches that which touches the flesh shallbe holy, In
like manner the Jews in their sacrifice could not be said to be holy, because
they touched that only which touched the thing that was holy, and never
touched that thing which was holy, to wit the true flesh of sin as he called
Gal. 2. the body of those shadows, Heb. 9. 9. who was sacrificed on the
Cross to take away sin, whom and whose garments as they only who touched, by
faith were healed, Mar. 6. 56. Matthew. 9. So only as many as touched him in the
sacrifices of the Jews, spiritually by a true and a lively faith; first, those
that spiritually believed in him were saved, and so consequently sanctified;
which spiritual touch is required, Ioh. 3. Heb. 11. 6. wherefore as the Jews
by neglecting the building of the Temple, and therein their obedience showed
their unbelief wanting that faith which works by love, although they touched
the outward shadows and ceremonies yet since they touched not Christ the
substance and body of them by a true faith they remained yet unholy still,
Again, Numb. 2. 19. it is written, that whosoever touches the corpse of a dead
man shall be polluted and unclean, and whatsoever the unclean person
touches, it shall be also unclean* And hence is the second question moved,
whether if a person sopolluted by touching a dead body (as the word in the
original shows and is although not here, yet Levit. 22. 4. translated, touch
any thing unclean by the dead) whether the thing so touched should be unclean:
to this question the Prophet answers yes, it shall be unclean, and that also
agreeable to the law as before we have heard* wherefore the touching of a dead
body does betoken the committing of sin, which is called ^^ dead ^ork Heb. 9.
14. As may appear by Christ's blood ^^^ging ^^om us the uncleanness of sin,
to that clen^^ng water which purged them from that uncleanness of the dead,
Heb* 10. (...) that the Iewe^ howsoever by the sacrifices and ceremonies, they
were outwardly washed, from such pollutio^ yet being not washed by Christ blood
they were dead in the (...) and sins, and so polluted with dead works that
all of them were unclean* yea and their sacrifices defiled, and all they did
which is the maine point of reproof inferred as from those former proofs* by
the testimony eve^ of the Priests themselves, concerned (...) where the prophet
answers, So i^ this people, (...) which say it is not time to build the Lords
house, (...) clean before me says the Lord (i*) in my judgment howsoever they
think themselves clean by their sacrifice^ and so ar^ (...) but all the
works of their hands and that which the^ effect here. viz. as we may gather
from their da^ly (...) offering into unclean* Th^^ wear the Iewe^ informed
how they did (...) against the law of God in not building a^ they wear
commanded, the Temple of the Lord and therefore for (all their sacrifices they
were unclean^, and all their (...) ye and their own sacrifices an abominatio^
unto him and that by the confeflida of the high Prie^^^, their own teacher of
which (...) ^^ction given unto them we may make (...) we may see.

1. The sin of these Jews* vi^* the neglect of the ^^^filling of the Lords
commandment, inbuilding as (...)

2. The convicting of (...)

3. By resemblances and (...) serve for opening the meaning of these words, now
see what hear we learn for instruction and our further use, v. 12. thus says
the Lord, ask the Priests, de lege, whence

1. We learn in general, that for convicting men of sin, and instructing
them in the way of God the word of God, is an infallable rule and ought to be
the square of all our actions, The law of the Lord is perfect converting the
soul, And the testimony of the Lord is sure and gives wisdom to the simple,
And Psalm 19. Neither does only David, Psalm. 119. say that it teaches a
young Psa. 19. 7. 8 Psa 119. 9. 105.
man ^o redress his way but (even of his own) he says, that the word is a
la^tho^ne unto his feet: And our Savior Christ when he was asked o^ the
Scribe, how he might have eternal life, sends him to the law, saying, how is
it written, how read thou? Mat. ^9. And so being to prove to the Saduces the
resurrection, he sends them to the Scripture, saying, Have ye no^ read? and
Mat. 22. so the Apostle Paul persuaded Timothy and in them all the Ministers to
continue in the things they had Tim. 2. 3. 24.
heard, which are able to make them wise unto salvation, and desired Titus to
continue in the doctrine taught him and thereby to convince them that gainsay,
not by men's Doctrine which Tit. 1. 1. 9.
are all but vain rudiments Colos. 2. and which they teach but all invaine to
worship God Mat. 15. a doctrine necessary to be noted touching the sufficiency
of the word of God against the doctrine of men's traditions, which the Lord by
Esaias complains of in the Jews, that gave themselves to the Talmud, tying
themselves to the doctrine of Rabbis, and also digging broken Cisterns that
would hold no water, and forsaking the fountain of living waters, alleging
those Canons for directing of men's actions, as now the Papists in their giving
directions, for the training up of their Novices. A Jesuit, Ribera, on these
words (ask the Priests) says that it is as much as we say, now ask the
Priest in cases of conscience, and the observation is very true, but then
seeing cases of conscience are decided in Gods word, they that be thus asked
must be golded by Gods spirit, and be able to answer as the Papists here did,
out of the law of the Lord what God says, and not out of men's doctrine, what
Tho. Aquinas says.

But remember that they be ^ases of conscience, which only God does determine
and resolve, and herein let the^ take their own Doctor Thomas Aquinas who part
(...) quest^ 1 (...) ar. 8. upon the words of Titus, says, that although by
way of reason men's authorities may be alleged as of Aratus by the Apostle, yet
these are but probable not demonstrative, and that only the doctrine of the
Canonical Scriptures is certain and infallible and such as whereon our faith
may and must alone be grounded, as on the Revelation, given immediately by God
unto the Prophets whereon also Saint Augustine says, that he had learned to
give only to the holy Scriptures that reverence, that they could not err, when
all other men might, and in their writings often did. But as for us my
brethren, we are not to rely upon Thom. Aquin. or any other man, our heavenly
schoolmaster Ad Hieronimum. Epist. 19.
has taught us better, Es. 8. Should not a people inquire at their God? To the
Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this it is because
they have no light in them. They have no light in them that have not learned
this, and this we learn in that the Prophet did, ask the Papists concerning
the law.

The next thing to be observed here, is, that the Prophet being bidden to ask
the Papists, the Papists make answer out of the law, where we may observe the
duty of the Papists, viz. that they ought to be men who ought to know the law,
and thence to be able to resolve the truth in any question being asked out of
the law, for so says God, Mat. 2. that he made his covenant with him of life
and death, and hereupon inferres that the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his mouth for he is the Angel
of the Lord of Hosts, we my brethren that are called to the Ministry of the
Gospel succeed the Priests in this office, though the name indeed be not given
to us in the new Testament, but together with other Christians as may appear
by Esaias 66. 21. there the Prophet alluding to the old name to set down our
office, says, In the Lords name I will take of them (1) from all nations
Priests and Levites unto me sum and therefore we also must know the law of
God, and that as it was said then, so it is now said of us also, that our lips
also should preserve knowledge that we may teach the people and this Saint Paul
requires of Tymothy to give attendance to reading, although he had been
brought up in it from his youth, and though old men may think that this was
spoken to young men such as Timothy, yet may they know that this also belong
to those who are old persons, such as Paul, and that from August. Epist. 63.
Terti. ^^ Volsianam to whom having written for resolution to August. Epist 3
aduolsianam. Tanta est profunditas, etc.
Austin (as if ^^ thought he knew all things) Austin correcting the opinion
says that so profound and deep were the Scriptures, that he might profit
still in them, although from his childhood unto his old age, with most
diligent study he was conversant in them; Not as things necessary unto
salvation were to be attained unto by so great difficulty; an exception
needful to be inserted for the Pupists, but that when they have attained to
Christian faith, yet such mysteries are there and so shadows, that although
the Ministers be ingenio accutissimo ani^^ fiagnantissimo* yet they cannot in
all their life, as Eccl. 7. attain to them of knowledge; So that the lesson
given to young Timothy is to extend to the old, also Paul himself doing what
he exhorts Timothy to do as the gloss thereon, Cherion notes And
Chrysostom, that Paul did that himself which he exhorts Timothy to do by
Paul's so often writing of the Oracles of God in the old Testament, and by other
circumstances: now this knowledge is not to be kept under a bushel but we must
teach and instruct the people, and resolve of questions according as it is
said, ask the Priests, which thing before they should have done since they
could not choose but read in Deuteronomy. that they should teach Jacob Gods judgments,
and Israel his laws, which the better to perform, they are forbidden, Levit.
10. to drink wine or strong drink, when they enter into the Lords Tabernacle,
that they may discern things aright, and teach what was to be observed among
other Christian duties, as to instruct, 1 Timothy 5. 23. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Timothy 3.
3. Sic quoque in proverbium essit Sapientiam vino obumbracipem. lib. 23. cap.
1. Isa. 56. v. 10. 11.
correct, reprove, 2 Timothy 3. Paul also requires of the Minister^ not in the
strictness of that law to drink no wine at all, yet not to be vinodeditus,
given to wine, and for the same end according as Plato in Cratylo says, that
temperance is called (...) -- quasi (...) whereto Aristotle assents Ethic. p.
6. which Etimologi although some Gramariane dislike yet it is true that
temperanc^ preserves wisdom and contra as Pliny says, lib. 23. cap. 1.
Sepia ob umbrator vino, and therefore of Rishope and Pastors, it is required
that they be temperate in dy^t that so they may preserve knowledge to instruct
others, the w^nt of which makes the Prophet Isa. 56. Denounce woe against the
Pastors, as blind guides wanting knowledge, which he ascribes partly to their
coveteousnesse, and partly to rio and excess, the plagues which such draw on
them for leting the people be destroyed for want of knowledge, we may see in
Hos. 4. because thou have refused knowledge says the Lord, I will also refuse
thee that thou shall be no Priest to me, since thou have forgotten the Law of
thy God, I will also forget thy children. To which if any shall reply that they
have no children, and therefore think in this respect that they shall escape
the curse, let them remember the curse their denounced, and so Zach. 11. 17. O
idle shepherd that leavest thy stock, the sword shall fall upon thy right
eye, etc.

And I would the wise consideration of these things might stir us all up to the
diligent study of the Law of the Lord, and faithful delivery of the same unto
his people, to seed the flock of God that depends on us, and that of our
Savior, of the wise and faithful steward ought to be a lesson for us in this
case, and this duty required of those Priests, a direction unto us for the
performance of our duty in this behalf.

A third Observation.

Hence is gathered by the Papists, that the Papists were, and so consequently
the Church* That is, as Bellar. 3. (de verbo Dei interprets) the Pope with
his counsel are sovereign Judges of all controversies, and that in their
judging of the same they cannot be deceived, which Chap. 4. of that book
proving, or rather endeavoring to prove, he brings for his purpose amongst
others, this place, where it is said, ask the Priests. And that of Malach. 2
Lib. 1. 2. Sacerilotis custodient scientiam. The Priests lips shall preserve
knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth, as here the Prophet is
commanded. Whence he concluded only that this the Priests lips ought to do, it
had been well, and that which the Law would bear. But whereas hereupon they
would infer, that they cannot err in doing it, so making that a promise what
they should do, not only a precept what they ought to do, that very place in
Malach. 2 Chap. verse 8. shows the contrary, where it is added by way of
reproof; But ye are gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the
Law. So that it is manifest by the whole drift of that place, that the Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hoasts,
and therefore they that do not so, deserve punishment, as follows ver. 9.
Therefore I have made you contemptible. But after this interpretation of the
Jesuit, every man in his calling almost as well as the Priests, may claim a
prerogative of not learning in the performance of this duty, Romans 13. of the
Magistrate it is said, that he is for the praise of them that do well. What
therefore shall we say; Nero being a Magistrate, never Genesis 2.
failed therein, or that all they that did well received a promise of Nero?
Again, the wife is said to be made a help unto her husband, what? may we
think that every wife is so, or that Jobs wife was so, and did perform this
duty to her husband? Again Mat. 7. A son honors his father, and a servant
his Master; what? therefore is there no stubborn child, nor disobedient son to
his parents? was that Law Deuteronomy. 21. for no purpose? or are all servants
faithful to their Masters, and is that false of our Savior, Luke 9. O wicked
servant; These places show indeed that the Magistrates should be for the
praise of them that do well, that the wife should be a help to her husband,
that the child should be obedient to his father, but not all of these are so
always: And so the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, as in the future
tense this word is often used, or imply a duty as even (Ribera) a papest
confesses that even Bellar: from his own men might have learned not to have
abused his Reader, and for the thing itself, although the priests here twice
answer well, yet other examples show how fowly they erred oftentimes as to note
but 2. for all in Jer. 26. Concerning the Church when the prophet threatened,
that God would make the temple as Shilo the Priests pronounced that it was a
crime worthy of death, when yet the princes confessed that it was according to
Law, and so delivered Jeremy out of their hands, And secondly, Mat. 26,
Concerning Christ the head of the Church, when Christ said that heareafter ye
shall see the son of man sitting at the right hand of God, the high Priests
rent their clothes and pronounced it to be a blasphemy when indeed i was not,
and perhaps he had not fallen into that error if he had not known our Savioar.

This point therefore we are not to learn by the Prophet in this place, but
rather because they are false teachers which come in sheeps cloathings,
therefore it behooveth us to be careful that we be not ledd by false guides,
for such as you have heard, may be blind, and if the blind lead the blind,
do not both fall into the ditch together, therefore as we are commanded let us
examine the spi^its.

Now as these points may be learned out of the answer of the Priests, for
skilfulnesse and faithfulness is required in Gods Ministers, so is there here
left unto all sorts a lesson of wisdom in touching of sinners, out of Haggai,
his wise dealing with them who because the calamity was general, and the
Priests in fault as well as the people, by his wise command, brings the
Priests to confess against themselves, and so convinces them also of sin
together with them.

So did Nathan deal with David, proposing the parable of the poor man's only
sheep, in such wisdom that David gave sentence even against himself, And had
it returned into his own bosom with this personal arrest. Thou art the man*
So Christ dealt also with the Pharasees by a parable of a vineyard let out to
a husbandman; Matthew. 22. and after the same manner did Amphitochius Bish. of
Iconium convince Theodosius the Emperor of his sin in bearing too much with an
Arrian heretic, for when he had entreated the Emperor to banish the Assembly
of the Arrians out of the City, as utter enemies to the son of God, Christ
Jesus, and the Emperor had denied his request, being loath to deal so hardly
with them, Amphitochius was silent for a season, but afterward, most wisely
attempted the matter again, on this manner. Entering on a time into the
Emperors Palace, and beholding his son Radius (whom he had now made
Emperor) standing by him, he after his wonted manner saluted the Emperor
himself, but of purpose did not obeisance unto his son, which the Emperor
observing and thinking it to be done by Amphitochius only of forgetfulness, he
commanded him to come unto his son, and in token of honor to salute him with
a kiss; Amphitochius answered that it was sufficient that he had done his duty
unto him. Theodor. Eccl. hist* Lib. 5. c. 5.


Whereat the Emperourwas much moved with great indignation interpreting the
neglect of his son to be the contempt of himself, Then immediately the most
wise Amphitochius as (Theodoret styles him) declaring the whole purpose and
drift of that he said, and cried aloud O Emperor do thou so take to heart
the neglect of thy son, and art thou so vehemently angry with them that are
contumelious against him? why (...) that the Almighty God does hate the
blaspheme^^ of (...) only begotten Son, and is angry with them as being
unthankefull toward him their Savior and benefactor: the Emperor being
convincest by these his words and deeds, did forthwith make a law for the
restraint of the Arrians, Heretics according to the Petition of Amphitochius.

Sermon the Fourteenth.
Haggai 2. 13. etc. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and
with the skirt do touch bread or partage, shall it be holy? and the Priests
answered, and said, No, etc. and Haggai said, So is this people, etc.
TO pass over all coherence of those words that follow with these (noted
heretofore) and to remember you only of the drift and meaning of the same: The
Jews being now returned from their Babylonish captivity to Jerusalem, although
they went not forward with the building of the Temple as the Lord commanded
them: yet because they offered sacrifice on the alter of the Lord: built long
before they supposed that they were thereby sanctified, so that their
disobedience in not building the Temple did not defile them. The contrary
thereto, here they are taught out of the law by two resemblances, 1 Levit. 6*
and 2 Number. 19. for that 1 avouching every thing that touched the flesh of the
sin offering to be clean, did not yet imply that the bread and wine that
touched the skirt, which touched the sin offering should be likewise clean,
and the 2 affirming them that touched a dead body to be unclean: and
whatsoever they touched also to be unclean; did show plainly that all that
such a party did touch, whether bread or oil was thereby defiled and unclean,
after which points out of the law avouched by the confession of the Priest (for
God bad the Prophet ask them) the latter part of the second similitude
follows, so is this people, and so is this whole nation before me, etc. the
force of the illation or argument, why the Jews were not sanctified by their
sacrifices, but count their sacrifices defiled by their disobedience, does
consist in the mysteries represented by those ceremonies. For First Christ
Jesus our Savior was signified by the sinne-offering whose flesh was most
holy, here called holy flesh, the touching of which here signifies the
spiritual touching of Christ by faith, as the woman Luke 8. is by our Savior
said only to have touched him, when as others did more then so; wherefore,
since they that truly do believe in God, do love him and keep his
Commandments, and the Jews did not build the Temple as he commanded them, it
follows that although the Jews did touch that which in some sort might be
said to touch Christ, viz. the sacrifices and shadows of the law, wherein he
was covered as in the skirt of a garment, yet they did not touch Christ
himself by a lively faith working by love, therefore they were not by these
sacrifices sanctified and made Holy; nay contrarily all their sacrifices were
by them defiled and made unclean, since the touching of a dead body did
signify the committing of sinful disobedience, which was deadly: and
whatsoever such a person did touch did signify whatsoever he did, which thereby
he defiled, so that the Jews being themselves defiled by their disobedience in
not building of the Temple defiled all their works; even their very offerings,
seemed they never so holy before men, yet before God they were but polluted and
defiled. Now to pass by the ground of this reproof, the testimony, namely of
the Priests out of the law, of which before ver. 12. and to proceed to other
notes of instruction, 1 from the two similitudes in general from the ptne of
their meaning applied we may observe, that the sacrifices and ceremonies of the
old law were ordained by God, not to signify only those things, which the,
words barely did import unto the Jews, but other myster ies also for the
comfort of the godly unto the end of the world: this the Apostle, Col. 2. 17.
shows us, that these were but shadows 1 as it were the just draughts of the
lineaments, as painters His name was Planus.
(whence the phrase seems to be taken) use first in a darker sort, as with a
coal or the like to shadow forth their portraiture as Apelles did Ptolomie his
servant, (Plin. lib. 35. c. 10.) which after Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 35. cap. 1^.
they make more perfect, and yet more plainly, Heb. 8. 5. where it is said,
that Moses made the tabernacle, and all things therein according to the
heavenly pattern which God showed him in the Mount, which pattern what was
it, but the mysteries of our redemption, by our Savior Christ, which were
shadowed out by the Tabernacle. To show this by examples Exo. 12. there was a
paschall lamb appointed to be killed, and the blood to be sprinkled on the
door posts, 1 Cor. 5. the Apostle applies this to Christ, saying, For Christ
our savior is offered, Exo. 29. 38. There was appointed in the daily sacrifice
two lambs to be offered, one in the morning, and the other in the evening:
John the Baptist seeing our Savior Christ (Ioh. 1.) says, behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. whereof indeed the other were but
shadows: Numb. 21. Moses is appointed to erect a brazen Serpent, that the
people who were stong with the fiery serpents might look thereon and be
healed, in John 3. our Savior Christ does show, that himself was shadowed by
that serpent, for as Moses lifted up the serpent etc. I need not to open other
mysteryes hid in these; touching the faithful, as that 1 Cor. 5, that when the
Pascal was eaten, they eat unleavened bread; the Apostle there seems to
signify, that we being by our savior redeemed, are to put away all leaven of
malitiousnesse, and to keep a continual feast all our life with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, and so in this place, the touching of
the flesh of the sinne-offering, which did make holy that which did immediately
touch it: though not that which did only touch that as did touch it: did
signify as by the Prophets application, we learn the touching of our Savior
Christ by a lively faith, which did sanctify those that did so touch him;
although not those which did only touch the shadows wherein he was lapped; as
contrarily the touching of a dead body which did defile whom it touched and
made him also to defile what he touched: did signify the committing of deadly
disobedience which did defile the Jews, and the very best works they did.

These things, beloved, may serve to stir us up to the meditation of that which
the Apostle says Heb. 5. 11. that there are in the Scriptures of God, many
things hard to be uttered, and we Tanta est Christianarum profunditas
are dull of hearing and such as had need of milk and not of strong meats,
though we may confess with Saint Augustine Epi. 3. ad volusiam that even the
strongest among us may learn still uterarum ut in eis quotidie proficere si
eas solas ab meunto aetate etc.
more, since such a man as he, did not stick to say of himself that the
Scripture is so profound a depth that one of far better wit and gifts then
he, though he should study in it alone and nothing else ever from a child unto
his old age, yet still might profit therein non quasi, says he, caquae sint ad
salutem necessaria were not therein plainly delivered. To prevent the
objection that the Papists make why the people should not read the Scriptures)
but after these plain things are learned, there are so many darklier shaddowed
mysteries (as are these, in interpreting of which many have missed, not only in
the depth of the words, but even of the things therein contained) that the
learned may therein increase his knowledge: and this may serve to be noted
from the two similitudes in general.

Secondly, it follows that from the first similitude, part 13. we observe that
by the outward service of God they are not sanctified that have not religious
and believing hearts, which being Nihil sere de illis obscuritatibus cruitur
quod non planissime dictum alibi reperiatur Aug. de doct. Christ lib. 2. cap. 6.
here by their similitude shaddowed forth, is in other places of Scripture
plainer set down according to that with August has. lib. 2. de doct.
christiana, where he says that nothing is taught obscurely in one place of the
scripture which is not in another more plainly expounded, and for this
doctrine, it is plain: as first by that of Samuel unto Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 22.
Does the Lord more delight in burnt offerings, than when the voice of the Lord
is obeyed; behold to obey is better then sacrifice, etc. Isay goes farther,
cap. 1. bringing in the Lord as accounting all their offerings no better then
abominable, what have I to do with the multitude of your oblations, etc.
incense is an abomination unto me, but his meaning is the same that Samuels
was, that God did regard more their obedience, the washing of their hands and
cleansing their hearts from sin, their ceasing to do evil, etc. then all
those oblations without these, Hosea. 6. 6. the place which our Savior
alleges, Matthew. 9. 12. I desire mercies and not sacrifice: his meaning is by
way of comparison: not sacrifice in respect of mercy, (as the latter words
added show) and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings, such knowledge
namely as, 1 John 2. speaks of, which is joined with love, when he says
hereby we know that we know him, if we love him and keep his commandments, as
he indeed will that does know God as our Savior, no marvel therefore if the
Jews disobeying God in what He commanded touching the building of the Temple,
though they were very ready and forward in their sacrifice, as we may read.
Ez^^. 3. yet were not hereby sanctified. etc. By their disobedience, they and
their sacrifices were defiled as hereafter we shall God willing hear from
the second type, first the outward service of God does not sanctify any in
whom there is not a believing and obedient heart, our Savior Christ by his
coming has (as before was foretold he should, Dan. 9. vlt.) abolished those
sacrifices of outward services of the Law: which being but shadows; were to
cease, the body once come. Col. 2. which else would signify Christ to be as
yet come: we cannot therefore now serve God with the same manner of external
service as they did: but yet we have some services even under the Gospel like
in some proportion unto theirs, wherein we are by ecclesiastical assemblies
to offer sacrifice unto the Lord. The Apostle. Heb. 13. 15. mentions some of
them exhorting them, and in them us, and all Christians to offer up unto God
always by Christ the sacrifice of praise even the fruit of the lips to
confess his name; and Romans 15. 16. concerning sermons, the Apostle says he,
was ordained a Minister of the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the
Gentiles (the word in the original is (...)) might be acceptable being
sanctified by the holy Ghost according as Isay 66. 20. was foretold, that by
the preaching of the Gospel the Gentiles should be sacrificed up unto God: in
the former of which sacrifices of prayer and thankesgiving as the people are to
join with the Minister and say Amen. So in sacrificing of themselves in the
later by the preaching of the Gospel, they are to join also as the Apostle
does exhort, Romans 12. 1. howbeit least we should herein vainly flatter our
selves and think that our outward service might sanctify us, although the
Jews could not do them we are to understand that howsoever the Jews strove
indeed specially by blood, to make God appeased with them, yet had they also
together with their sacrifices, both prayers, and sermons for performance of
this spiritual duty, ergo. Psalm. 122. 4. its said in commendation of Jerusalem
where were the sacrifices, that thither the tribes go up unto the testimony of
the Lord to praise the name of the Lord: and that we may know that they had
prayers still together with their sacrifices, Act. 3. 1 we read that Peter, and
John, went up into the temple, at the ninth hour. 1. the hour of prayer:
which was the hour betwixt the two evenings when the Jews did offer daily,
their evening sacrifices; as also we may find many Psalms 1. at that time
ordained to be sung; yea and besides their prayers used with their sacrifices
(which only were offered in one place, viz. at Jerusalem) they had still every
where throughout Jury in their Synagogues, prayers and divine service and Act.
16. 13. mention is made of a place by the rivers side whither the Jews usually
resorted unto prayer, and again ver. 16. where Paul says that the maid met
them as they Phil. Iud. Lega. ad Caium. Philo Iud. de vita Mosis lib. 3. p. 9
33. Vid. Bez. in Act. 6. 9. and Act. 16. 13.
went to prayer, many think that by (...), is meant the place where they used
prayer so called, as Philo, who lived about that time, that shows they used
to call their Synagogues (...) of the prayers they used to have in them; now
that together with prayer, they had also preaching and expounding of the word,
as it appears by that place alleged, Acts 16. where it is said, that at Paul's
preaching God did open the heart of Lydya to attend to that was spoken, so also
that at Jerusalem it was likewise used; that famous place Nehemiah 8, 9. does
show sufficiently, as also in other places of Jury as 2 Kings 4. 23, from that
answer which the Shunamites husband gave unto his wife, when her child being
dead, and he not knowing thereof, and marveiling why she sadled the Ass
(asked) why she would go to the man of God that day, since is was neither new
Moon nor Sabbath day: the learned gather that on such feasts (as the new moons
and Sabbath days) the people that dwelled far off even in the Countries did
use to assemble unto the Cities where were Prophets and Levites which they
called men of God to be taught and instructed by them. as Acts 15. 14 it is
said, that Moses had them which preached him in their Synagogues, being read
every Sabboth-day, as even in our Saviors time it appears by that which is
recorded, Lu. 5. 17, where it is said, that to hear Christ among the rest,
there came the Pharisees and teachers of the law, out of every town of
Galilee, and Judea and from Jerusalem, insomuch that when the scriptures were
read, if there were any likely in the Congregation, to preach or make any
exhortation they were requested thereunto, as Acts 13. 15. we read how at
Antiochia after the lecture of the Law and the Prophets, the ruler of the
Synagogue sent unto Paul, saying, yea men and brethren if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on: which farther appears by that is storied
of our Savior, Luke 4. 17. how, coming into the Synagogue at Nazareth the
book of the Prophets was delivered unto him, which having opened he read, and
expounded a portion of 61 of Isay unto the people Therefore since that to these
sacrifices here mentioned the Jews joining both prayer and preaching of the
word and yet were not thereby sanctified without obedient hearts, we may learn
also: that by our calling on the name of the Lord in prayer, and learning his
will by hearing his word: we cannot at all be sanctified without obedient and
believing hearts. And does not the Apostle teach us the very same things? why
else does he exhort, 1 Timothy 2. 8. that men should pray every where lifting up
pure hands, and without wrath, and without doubting if so be that only prayer
and lifting up the hands would serve, without the puriry of the affections of
the heart? And why does he say to the Hebrews that the gospel was preached
unto Heb 4. 2.
them, as well as unto the old Jews in Moses his time: but the word that they
heard did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it; if that barely to come to hear the word, were all that were
required? Or why does he say concerning the Sacraments which are the visible,
as the preaching is the audible word of God, 1 Cor. 10. that the Fathers under
the law did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all drink of the
same spiritual drink, and yet with many of them God was not pleased: so that
they fell in the wilderness: and adds that these are examples unto us: but
to instruct us, that although we have such graces as they and be partakers of
the like Sacraments of Christ, yet if we be disobedient as they were we must
look to taste of the like plagues as they did, so evident is that doctrine
which from the former similitude in the beginning I observed: that by the
outward service of God none are sanctified, but those only which have faithful
and obedient hearts?

Wherefore since it behooveth us (reverend and beloved) to be careful of
holiness, without which none can see God. Heb. 12. 14. we see how we should
stir up our selves not only to the outward, but even to the inward worship of
the Lord: for Mat. 7. 22. Many shall say Lord, Lord (so that there shall be
prayers, and have not we in thy name preached etc? they shall use preaching
also, and yet Christ shall say unto them, I never knew you. Seeing then the
outward ceremony will not serve to sanctify any, or bring them to salvation,
we must be very careful, not only to perform this outward service to God of
prayer which by an excellency is called (...) Romans 9. as all other Romans 12. but
also to offer up our souls and bodies, even the best of our inward and
spiritual sacrifices and services to Gods glory, for we are bought with a
price and I am sorry that I am prevented, by the time so that I must speak
breifely, which else I should more largely.

1. How many of us are there that do not come to the outward service of God, so
as they ought? I refer it to every man's conscience to consider how they
frequent the assemblies for prayer and divine service in their private Collegs,
but for coming at the beginning of terms, when as we are by oath and
conscience bound thereto, how slackly is that done, if done at all? Alas how
far are we from the zeal, that was in the Jews, who with wearisom journeys
walked on through the wilderness till they appeared before God in Sion, Psalm.
84? how far from that foretold should be in the people of God, Psalm. 110. 3.)
thy people shall come willingly etc? how far from that example which the
people give us, Neh. 8. who were said to have heard the word willingly from
morning until night. So we read Act. 20. Paul being to depart on the morrow,
the people that believed assembled themselves together to hear him, so that he
continued his preaching until midnight, but alas, how do we degenerate from
these, who cannot endure but for an hour or two to frequent such religious
Assemblies, it is recorded by Zoromen l. 6. c. 18. that when Valence an Arrian
Emperor had forbidden the Christians to have any Assemblies: the Godly
notwithstanding used to meet together in the fields for the service of the
Lord. The Emperor hearing thereof, was very wroth with his Chief Captain
Modestus, for so he was called, and so indeed he showed himself, because he
suffered them so to do. Modestus therefore forewarning them that they should
meet so no more, and threatening that if they did they should be punished; they
notwithstanding the next day in great multitudes met again, which Modestus
understanding thought good to go out against them with a band, and to scatter
them: but as he went a certain woman with her head not thoroughly tired and
with a little child in her hand overtaking them, brake through among the
Soldiers and made have toward the place where the Christians were assembled.
Modestus causing her to be called to him, demanded of her, whither she was
going in such have, she answered: that she was going to the place where the
Christians were assembled, to serve God. Why said Modestus do thou not know
that the Emperor has commanded that they all that come thither shall be
killed? yes I do, replied she, and therefore I go the rather, that I may be
martered among the rest: and why said he do thou lead with thee that little
child? that he also (answered she) may be partaker of the reward. I am loath to
say that which the example of this godly woman moves me unto, but I will only
speak in Latin out of the Poet, Vos etenim juvenes animum geritis muliebrem,
illaque virgo virum, But

Secondly, put case we were without exception in this behalf: yet let them
know, that are most diligent in the outward service of the Lord that this
sanctifies none in whom there is not a faithful and an obedient heart, the
Prophet Isay 1. speaks of much prayer, which yet because it was done without
faith. The Lord accounted no better then abomination. And Ezekiel. 33. 31. tells
us of some that would come and stand before the Prophet as if they would learn
the will of the Lord, and yet are reproved, we see that the Scribes and
Pharisees for frequenting Sermons, and using long prayers, Mat. 23. could not be
reproved, and yet our blessed Savior tells us, that except our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of them, we cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. But one place Micah. 6. May serve to seal up all
that I have taught. How does the Lord expostulate with his people? My people
what have I Mich. 6. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee: testify against me? How we
may apply all this unto our selves; consider we what God has done for us, and
how has he greeved us, has he not brought us out of Egypt, yea, from
papistry, 10000 times a viler slavery then that of Egypt? has he not by a
mighty hand redeemed us, when in Queen Mary's time many suffered banishment,
and others lost their lives; and sent before us Moses even our gracious Queen
Elizabeth, whose memory is for ever blessed; and for our preservation under
her, has raised up unto us many Aarons and Miriams endewed with prophets,
spirits to instruct us? can we be forgetful what Balack of Spain devised
against us: or what Balaam of Rome answered him from Shittim: under Moses
whither the Moabite sent their daughters to corrupt the people (a lively
representation of the sending forth of the Priests and Jesuits to seduce us)
unto Gilgall, under Joshua: where (by circumci^ion) the shame of Egypt was
taken away from them: as of late one branch thereof has bin from us, by our
Joshua, His Majesty's Proclamation against the profanation of the Sabbath, and
all this that we may know the righteousness of the Lord? with what then shall
we come before the Lord? shall we offer 10000 of prayers, or 10000 of Sermons,
etc? no, he has showed us what is good and what he delights in more then all
these. that we do justly, and love mercy, and humble our selves to walk with
our God, that we behave our selves religiously, as they that are indewed with
an holy spirit and are heirs of life remembering what is said, Esaias 66. 2. That
God regards him that is of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at his Word,
needful it is for us to know the Word of God and to use all means thereto,
but if we do no more, we do but draw near to God with our lips, and not with
our hearts.

Sermon the Fifteenth.
Haggai 2. 14, 15. etc. Then says Haggai, if a polluted person touch any of
these shall it be unclean, etc? then answered Haggai, so is this people, etc.
IF those two types brought to convince the Jowes of error who thought they
were by their sacrifices sanctified, howsoever they continued disobedient and
did not build the Temple as they were commanded by the Lord) the former has
already taught us that the outward service of God, does sanctify none, but
only him that has a faithful and obedient heart. And by the latter, now,
further we are to learn: that who so has not a faithful and obedient heart
he is not only, not sanctified by any outward service: but on the contrary
both himself and all his actions, yea even his outward service of God: is
impure, defiled and detestable in the sight of God. For the word in the
original which we translate a polluted person, does properly signify such an
one as is unclean and polluted by touching of a dead corpse (the phrase being
to be supplied from Numb 9 6.) compared with Levit. 22. 4. the Law concerning
whom Numb. 19. is, that whatsoever such an one touches should be unclean, as
here the priests confess. Wherein, after the manner of the mysteries of faith,
expressed as by shadows, and portractures in a dark manner, by legal rites
and ceremones (as heretofore has been showed: the touching of a dead man (who
came unto the state of mortality by sin Genes. 3.) does import the committing
of sin which is called by the Apostle a dead work, Hebr. 9. 14. and that
ceremonial uncleanness which did exclude out of the camp Numb. 5. 1. does
imply that moral uncleanness which does indeed defile Heb. 6. 1. and 9. 14.
the man, Mat. 15. and that none so unclean, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Reve. 21. ult. and lastly in that all Mat. 15. 19, 20.
(by the Law) was defiled which was touched by hand, arm, or leg of any such
polluted person being all instruments of action, Romans 6. imployeth that all
whatsoever is done by the Romans 6. 13
unfaithful and disobedient is infected through the corruption of their
unbelieving heart, Titus 1. hence therefore it followed that the Jews
committing dead works of impenitency, security, unbelief and disobedience by
not building the temple according to the Lords command, and so being defiled;
all their works togetheor with themselves were uncleene as verse 15, the
Prophet concludes hereupon. So is this people, and so is this Nation [before
mee] says the Lord where the term [before me] is significantly added, to
note that although in the sight of men they were accounted holy by reason of
their sacrifices, yea and themselves, thought so of themselves (as their
predecessors did for another kind of service of fasting, Isay 58. 1.) yet in
the sight of God (who beholds all their hearts, and works a far of: and not
only those that were of greatest luster, but others also whatsoever) their
holiness was but hypocrisy, and themselves, and all they did abominable: no
otherwise then the Pharisees after them: who did wear brass Phylacteries, and
used long prayers, etc. and yet, because they were hypocrites, covetous, and
ambitious they had the like judgment denounced by our Savior, Luke 16. 15.
^ee are they that justify your selves before Men: but God knows your hearts:
for that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of
God: and to the same effect the Lord concluding this sentence by adding [and
that which they offer here, is uncleane] does seem to refute as by name, that
wherein the Jews hoped to be sanctified, and which they most esteemed holy
both in respect of the thing: viz. their offering on the Altar, Exodus 29. 30.
whereof all were holy and some most holy: so that their service of God in this
kind, was by an excellency called the service of God (witness the Apostle to
the Hebrews and Romans) and also in regard of the place where they offered
them, here in Jerusalem the place chosen of purpose to that end: called
therefore the holy City in Matthew, and greatly praised in sundry of the
Psalms for that respect. Seeing then the people and whole Nations of the Jews
yea all their works, even their very sacrifices offered in Jerusalem, were
unclean, and detestable in the sight of God: because they had not faithful and
obedient hearts, but did neglect the building of the Temple commanded by the
Lord: the lesson hence to be gathered is plain which in the beginning we
mentioned, viz. that whosoever has not a faithful and an obedient heart,
himself and all his works, even his divine Service of God is impure, and
unclean in the sight of God. This in the carnal sacrifices as in the shadow,
does Isay teach Isay 66. 3. declaring that who so is not of a contrite spirit
(as only the faithful are) to tremble at Gods Word. If he kill a bullock he
was as if he flew a man, etc. for in these words expressly noting all the
several sacrifices that the Jews did offer, as greater beasts, and lesser:
meat offerings and incense: and comparing them wi^h dogs flesh, and swines
blood (things forbidden by the Law, nay to the murdering of a man, or the
blessing of an Idol (which his soul abhorr^) he plainly shows how
detestuble the Lord holds all these, where was wanting a faithful, and an
obedient heart in them that offer the same, also concerning spiritual
sacrifices of Prayers, and of Sermons preached or heard, does the spirit else
where witness as of Prayers, Prove. 28. 9. he that turns away his ear from
hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abominable: of Sermons preached,
Psalm 50. but unto the wicked (says God) what have thou to do to take my
words in thy mouth, and hate to be reformed: of Sermons heard likewise, Ezekiel.
20. and also Ezekiel. 33. 31. where first the Elders, and then the people are
reproved, because they came and sat before the Prophet as if they would learn
the will of the Lord, and yet their hearts went after their covetousness, and
they did not that they were enjoined, finally all the actions of the
unfaithful whatsoever are censured by two rules of the Apostle 1. In respect
of the things themselves that are done, Romans 14. (ult.) whatsoever is not of
faith is sin, and the 2. In regard of the persons that do them Heb. 11. 6.
without faith it is impossible to please God, etc. so undoubted an axium proved
by the Scripture is this which here our Prophet teaches, that the best works
of men are of themselves unclean in Gods sight without a faithful heart, etc.
Whence may be confuted an^er or of the Prophets, who, howsoever the ancient
Fathers, Jerome, Gregory, Prosper, and especially Austin (proving the point not
only by those two places last alleged out of St. Paul) but also by that of
our Savior, Matthew. 7. a corrupt Tree cannot but bring forth bad fruit, do hold
that all the works of the unregenerate done before faith, are sin and
deserve Gods Wrath; yet the Papists I say in their authentical counsel of
Trent, Sescion. 6. cano. 7. Pelagian-like, stick not to pronounce, That if any
man shall say, that all the works done before institution, are to be accounted
properly sins, or do deserve the hatred and wrath of God: let him be
accursed? A curse heretically and blasphemously uttered by Antichristian impes,
whose faces are set against Heaven, and their tongues walk through the Earth,
for all works done without faith are unclean in Gods sight (as here Haggi
teaches us) but before in justification, no works are done with faith, for
then we are justified and made the Sons of God when we believe, John 1.
therefore whatsoever works are done before in justification are properly
unclean, and do defile, but whatsoever is unclean and does defile is properly
sin Mark. 7. 10. and 1 Cor. 8 now God hates all sin Zach. 8 13. he being
just in all his ways Psalm 145. ye all works done before in justification
are properly sin and deserve Gods wrath, nor can they be pure whiles the
heart, the root or fountain whence they proceed is impure and corrupt, now
the heart is only purified by faith, Act. 15. 9. and all unbelievers even in
their mind and conscience are defiled, Titus 1. 15. the Papists therefore
herein curse the Prophets, nay the Lord of life, who here himself spoke by the
Ministry of his Prophet. And shameless is that shift which Ribera the Jesuit
makes writing one this place ^. 76. first saying that the Prophet does not
speak of all the Works of the unregenerate, but only of their sacrifices, from
the which gloss (if the Text it self did not refute it, yet where it is
plainly added (and all whatsoever they do) yet St. Ieroms authority (which in
other places he would seem to esteem.) Should have at least occasioned him to
have forborne: and to have rather passed it over in silence then so to have
gainsayd him, and the Text, for omnia and cuncta quae agit says Ierom, (nam de
cunctis loquitur profanantur): Nay, Jerome not so content in general only to
avouch it: applies it in particular to the works of both Jews, Heretichs, and
Gentiles, and says that whatsoever they do (not only whatsoever they offer)
their vows, their prayers, their charity, and Almsdeeds, etc. all are
unclean: for although th^se actions seem in show to be good (and are so indeed
in their own nature) yet because they are touched by him that is polluted, they
are unclean. But as for us (beloved) who are taught for his sake to bear
reproaches: and to endure curses patiently that we may become conformable unto
him, according to that of the Prophet, the rebuks of them that rebuked thee,
are fallen on me (let us I say) against all Pelagian spirits hold constantly
what here the Prophet teaches us, etc. and let the princely Prophet David,
join with Haggai, in interpreting this ceremonial type of Moses where Psame.
51. having confessed sins actual, and original verse. 7. he prays: purge me
with hysope and I shall be clean. No way to be made clean but by Hysop, now
what that purging with Hysop meant, we may understand by the ceremony, Number.
19. of the red Kovv burnt without the host, the figure of our Saviors
sacrifice as the Numb. 19. 2, 3, 4, 18. Heb. 9. 13. Heb. 13. 11
Apostle interprets it Hebrews 13* who to sanctify us suffered without the
City. And St. John plainly sets down that with by allusion only was
signified in the figure, where 1 John 1. 7. he says that it is the blood of
Christ that cleanses us from all sins, but his blood cleanses none but only
such as do believe, for Romans 3. 24. 25. We are justified freely by grace:
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has made a
propitiation through faith in his blood. Which Peter. 1. Pet. 1. 1. calls the
sprinkling of Chrsts blood whereby we are sanctified: by allusion to the
ceremonies! avouching the same act as plainly, that all men's hearts are cleansed
no otherwise then by faith. Therefore against that cursed and cursing counsel
of Trent. We now see how Moses, David, Haggai, John, Paul and Peeter do
avouch that whatsoever men do, before justification by faith in Christ's blood
they be cleansed: all is unclean, and so are the persons that do the same, all
are sin and deserve Gods hate, and let this be the first use of this Doctrine
for strengthening us in the purity of our faith. A second may serve to put us in
mind of our duties for the bettering of our life, for if all our works,
without faithful and obedient hearts be so detestable, that God accounts
them defiled, and unclean in his sight, you see how careful we should be to
avoid such works of sin, since howsoever otherwise we may seem to do
some things pleafing unto God, yet they do but defile us, and make us to be
shut out of the camp, even excluded out of Heaven. And to stir us up herunto
we have two forcible inducements in that Text 1 Pet. 14. from the tipe or
shadow where sin is compared to a dead body, for if we should consider with
our selves how loathsome the touching of a dead body is, and which is more that
we are growing thereby our selves unto death, we shall be the more moved in
this behalf: and the Pastors will I doubt not but be stirred up by that which
our Savior speaks to the Angel of the Church of Sardys, Rev. 3. 1. 2. I know
thy Works for thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead: be awaked
and strengthen the things that remain that are ready to die for I have not
found thy Works (...) not full, not perfect, so he concludes that he was in
part dead, and in the reast ready to die, if he did not speedily strengthen that
that remained by repentance for that which was decayed: so that except the
pastors works be full, howsoever he have a name, that he lives, yet he is but
dead: now know you the duties of the Minisiers, or Divines if they will ever
fulfill their Ministry to be patterns in word, in conversation, in faith, in
spirit, in love, in purity, etc. to attend to reading and to exhortation, to be
instant in season, etc. And the Apostle Collo. 4. 17. commands the Christians
to say unto Archipus, take heed to thy Ministry that thou have received of the
Lord, that thou fulfill it, the Word (...) being compared with that other (...)
does show that the Pastor ought to fulfill every part of his Ministry, else
his works are not full: and then that may be said to him, that was to the Angel
of Sardys, strengthen the things that are ready to die: for thou have a Name
that thou live but thou art dead. Nay, and does not this duty belong also to
every Christian! has not every one some talent that he must employ in the
Lords service and not leave it to rot, or rust lapped up in a napkin: does not
Paul both say of himself that the grace of God that was in him was not in
vain: and bids the Corinthians beware (2 Cor. 6.) that they receive not the
grace of God in vain, but that (2 Cor. 7.) they cleanse themselves, from all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit. And grow up into full holinsse in the
fear of God; and does he not Philip. 1. and Collos. Pray for them and exhort
that they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness? these may serve to
let us know that if we serve God by halves, and do not labor to have our
works to be full, we are at least half dead, and so without speedy repentance,
growing unto death. Now (accorning as the heathen speaks of virtue si oculis
cerneretur quales excitaret amores, so per contrarium) if we could consider and
set before our eyes, how loathsome a thing it were to touch dead bodies and by
them to grow to death our selves, it would much affectus to fly from such dead
works.

When our Savior (coming to raise Lazarus) was about to have the stone rolled
away from the door of the Sepulcher his own sister lothing, and fearing the
infection, Lord says she, he stinketh now, for he has been already four
days dead: yet here the dead body was farther of from Martha; what if the dead
work be nearer unto us? When King Edward the second was by treacherous
conspiracy imprisoned in the Castle of Barkly, and intended to be made away,
the tormenters to hasten his end put him in an upper Chamber: and under him in
a lower room, placed dead bodies, the stink whereof did so stifle and torment
him, that as he told one out of the window he had never in all his life
endured the like torment: (as Thomas de la See Stows Chron in Edw. 2. Clem.
Alexand. Orat.
more one that served him records in the story of his life) yet these dead
bodies were farther off from King Edward, Then many dead works are from many of
us, Clemens Alexandrinus in his exhortatory oration ad gentes, relates that the
Barbarians did use to tie unto those live bodies of men that they took captive
other dead bodies, that so both might rot together: a cruelty which Virgil
mentions to have bin practiced by the cruel tyrant Mezentius Mortua quin etiam
jungebat corporavivis, Compones marubusque manus at que oribus ora, Tormenti
genus and sametaboque tumentes, Complexu in inifaco, longa sic morte necabat.
Anaeid. 8. Tormenti genus. Virgill might well call it, but the Word (...).
Does express it in Clemens, how the one did cause the other to rot together.
The Apostle writing to Ephesus 4. 29. forbids that (...) -- should proceeds out
of their mouth: we commonly transla^e it any corrupt communication, but the
Word properly signifies that which is rotten, which compared with the verb
which Clemens uses may open more of the Apostles meaning then else happily
would come into our mind; which the Apostle seems somewhat to expound, where
Colo. 4. 6. exhorting to the contrary; he wishes that their words may be
gracious and seasoned with salt, salt you know being the preservative against
rottenness. And so hence we may imagine of all dead works what there the
Apostle speaks of one (viz. foolish and filthy talking) that they are rotten,
therefore as Clemens speaks of those dead carcakes joined to living bodies
(...), they make them in whom they are, to rot, and putrify; so that they
ought to be no less loathsome unto us then those dead bodies, were to King
Edward, or those by the Barbarians tied unto their captives, and much more
danger of infection may we fear then that which Martha feared in a deady body
four days dead; for what if the work have been four years dead? and the
more should we fear these, because being spiritual they bring unto us a far
greater destruction then the former. Howbeit if any have not this spiritual
sense of feeling: let him consider the two motives following. In that the Lord
pronounces all our actions touched by the unfaithful and disobedient to be
unclean in his sight: and not only swearing, lying, slandering, etc. and those
that are simply evil in themselves, which should teach us, how we ought to
have imperfect detestation that which God, (seeing our hearts who must also be
himself judge, and revenge of all) pronounces in his sight to be unclean, a
thing the more of us to be considered: because otherwise men, not seeing our
faults but looking on our better actions, may happily account us very holy nay
many deceive themselves as the pharisee, Luke 18. and they that justify
themselves, Luke 16 thinking that they are holy when they are not. Man's
knowledge is defective, and often sees not many things: nay we our selves
many times see not all and go in that, Rev. 3. to stir up the Angel to this
consideration it is added: for the works are not full [before God] for many
are accounted free from fault before men, which yet are detestable before God:
yea and Ephesians. 5. 4. the Apostle we see joins with (...). Also as things Arist.
Eth. lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 4. c. 8. (...)
unseemly; which Latin, Phisosophers account a virtue rather, and in it self
we used as a thing indifferent, yet is censured as a dead work; because it is
by men commonly abused. And therefore in the same place, verse. 11. he adds
this exhortation, that they should not be partakers with the unfruitful works
of darkness; but even reprove them rather, for it is a shame to speak of
those things that are done of them in secret; and how men flatter themselves in
their sine, so they may conceal them from men. Gehazo's example, 2 Kings 5.
may sufficiently instruct us, when once the talents were conveyed into a secret
place; then he comes and stands before his Master, and all he thought was well;
he had been no where, but God saw where he had bin and revealed it unto the
Prophet, and so many if they can (for scholars places, etc. which should be
given freely) take bribes, so cunningly that neither state of Prince or
Parliament shall take hold of them; they think all well and safe enough: but
yet how soever in man's sight they can cover it, in Gods eyes their works are
abominable, and he will discover it, wherefore good for us it is betime to
begin to set before our eyes that consideration which David had, Psalm. 139.
viz. that whether soever we go we cannot hide our selves from his presence.
Seneca Epl. 11. ad lucillum says that it would be a great incitement to virtue
and restraint from sin, if we could always imagine some reverent grave man
in our presence, if Cato were too grave, yet Laelius, supposing that a great
occasion to sin would be taken away cum peccaturis testis adsit? but in
Epistle 25. he tells us that he had yet profited more, that had learned so
much as to reverence himself; and indeed if none else be present with a man,
yet his conscience, which is as a 1000 witnesses, at present ought sufficiently
to move a man herein, and so it was Isocrates his counsel that none should
venture to do any thing in hope to conclude it, when as himself yet at least
should thereof be conscious to himself; but this witness also is far too
short from that which is here commended to us by the prophet; that the Lord
sees and censureth our actions, for our consciences may for sometime wink, and
many consciences are seared (as it were) and past feeling but if one will be
affraide to commit evil before a grave person, how should we fear to commit
any in secret alone since we are always in the sight of God who is the searcher
of the heart, much more for this, that others can be but witness only, but God
is judge also and avenger, as the spirit says to the Angel of Sardys. Rev. 3.
that if he should not be awake he would come on him as a theif in the night
the phrase taken from These. 5. 2. and threatening sudden destruction as Gehazi
leprous, and those that were unclean in the shadow shut out of the City, and
those that are unclean in truth, not to enter into Heaven, Rev. 21. Therefore
since it so that God sees and judges all our actions, let us do as David did,
who setting also before his eyes that other consideration, Psame 62. 12. that
the Lord recompenceth every man according to his Works.

When he had defiled himself with Adultery, and Murder, and was once made
sensible of it, he sought to the Lord to be cleansed, and after, still
endeavored to keep himself clean, but if we be not both careful of
Repentance for the present, and after still to keep our selves clean for the
time to come, what may we expect but what is threatened Prove. 15. that the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; Now Eccles. 4. 17.
wishes us to look to our feet, (the instruments of motion Isocrat. Orat ad
Demon. (...) Arist. Eth. lib. 4. 8. c.
first, to have a careful regard to all our carriage, even in these things
whereby we are to be instructed (when we enter into the house of God,) and be
nearer to hear, that is, to obey (as the same word is used likewise, 1. Sam.
15. 22. to obey is better then sac^ifice) then to offer the sacrifice of
fools, as otherwise we shall if we only outwardly hear or frequent prayers,
etc. The sum of all is comprised in the Covenant of God with Abraham, Genesis
17. 1. walk before me and be upright: and this (beloved) is the covenant that
is made with us who are by faith in Christ the Sons of Abraham, that we being
redeemed out of the Church from all our enemies should serve him in holiness,
and righteousness all the days of our life before him, Luke 1. 15. Let us
therefore know that having our consciences by the blood of Christ purged from
dead works to serve the living God Heb. 9. 14. We must labor to have grace so
always to serve him that we may please him, with reverence and fear, Heb. 12.
that we may finally be with those that serve him, day and night in his Temple
as it is Rev. 15.

The English of the Latin in page fifth.
THat thing is commendable amongst those of Geneva, (if any where) which makes
a common Wealth flourish, if not inriches and extent of Empire, yet certainly
in virtue and piety, viz. the censure of these of chief authority in the
Church, then which nothing can be thought of greater or more divine, to
restrain the irregular appetites of men, and such of their vices, which by
humane Laws and Decrees, could in no manner be reformed: and this coertion
has borrowed its direction from the rule of our Savior Christ, first; to
proceed calmely and in a friendly manner, then more roughly, and last of all
if there be not obedience, a heavy and powerful interdiction of holy
Ordinances follows, and the punishment of Magistracy that interdiction. For
it is a ridiculous thing says Seneca, that a good Man should not stand for a
Law, in so much that it comes to pass, that such things as no where are
adjudged by Law, there without force or tumult they are constrained by those
censors, who have raised for themselves a high esteem of their virtues.
Therefore no Whoring, Drunkenesse, no lascivious Dancing, no Beggars nor idle
Livers are found in any City.

FINIS.

