A Looking Glasse^ FOR THE ANABAPTISTS AND THE REST OF THE SEPARATISTS:

Wherein they may clearly behold a brief Confutation of a certain un-licensed,
Scandelous Pamphlet, Entitled, The Remonstrance of the Anabaptists, by way of
Vindication of their Separation.

The Impertinancies, Incongruities, Non-consequences, Falsities, and Obstinacy
of William Kiffen, the Author, and grand ring leader of that seduced Sect is
discovered and laid open to the view of every indifferent eyed Reader that will
not shut his eyes against the Truth.

With certain Queries, vindicated from Anabaptisticall Glosses, together with
others propounded, for the Information and Conviction, (if possible) the
reformation of the said William Kiffen and his Prosylites.

By Josiah Ricraft, a well willer to the Truth.

1. John, 4.1. 2. Tim 3.6. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into
the world, for of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead Captive
simple women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.

Published by Authority.

London Printed, and are to be so^d by Peter Cole in Cornhill, at the sign of
the Printing P^esse; And John Hancock in Pope's Head All^y, 1645.

Courteous Reader,
I Had not troubled the Press in this scribbling age, had I not accidentally
met with an unlicensed, Scandalous Pamphlet in print, in Answer to six Queries
I had heretofore propounded, in behalf of a friend of near relation, but to
my knowledge, I never saw the man to whom I propounded them unto, but by
credible hands I am certified, he pretends a new light, and takes upon him to
set up A new found Church, and by this means seduceth and draws away men's
wives, children, and servants to be his prosylits, to the great grief of those
that should have the power and government over them.

And now finding my opposite so ready and bold to Print without Authority, and
some friends very earnest with me to Answer; It prevailed with me (by consent
of Authority) to put forth this my ensuing Discourse, with certain Queries
more into the world, with my opposits wandering discourse, for the satisfaction
of all sides and parties, and to stop the mouths of all, I have here laid it
down as it came written with his own hand and name subscribed thereunto to my
hand, and not as it was most falsely added to and taken from in the printing to
cover his nonsensicall absurdities, which any judicious man may discern. It is
my intent to speak to his Answers to my Queries so far as they seem to have
any color of reason or argument in them, but, where I find him impertinent
and extravagant, I give him leave to wander alone in the midst of his own
mistakes which are very many: Now kind Reader impartially peruse this my short
Treatue before thou pass they sentence as many do now adays, because they are
prejudiced at the matter, though never so true, or the Person, though never so
godly, because neither Person nor matter agrees with the temper of their
opinion: I wish England at this day could not witness this truth with grief,
to see that monstrous Hydra of opinions, and divisions upon divisions, with
sub-divisions, and these increasing daily, pleading Toleration with a brazen
brow and an impudent face, not fearing to abuse that ever to be honored high
Court of Parliament of England, with that faithful Kingdom of Scotland, and
the right Reverend, the Assembly of Ministers of England, and the rest of our
honored Arthodox Ministers, and the two worthy Patriots, Mr. William Prynne of
Lincolns Inn Esquire; with Mr. Doctor Bastwick; And if this lawless generation
may proceed under the vizor of a Liberty for tender Consciences, our condition
will suddenly be worse then it was in the time of the Bishops in their lordly
height, for instead of a prodigal Hirearchy, we shall have a turbelant
Anarchy, but to prevent both, It shall be my prayers to God, to put it into the
hearts of those truly Noble, and right Honorable ones, who sit in the Stern
to guide and preserve the tottering Ship of this Kingdom, to use means to the
height of their powers to bring it to the Haven of happiness, a settled
Reformed government amongst us, which they and we both have entered into a
Covenant to perform in every of our places according to our powers, That God
may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms: So prays he who is a well
willer and Servant to Englands friends in Jesus Christ to serve them,

JOSIAH RICHAFT.

A Looking Glass for the Anabaptists and the rest of the Seperatists.
QUIERI. I.
BY what Warrant of the Word of God, do you Separate from our Congregations,
where the Word and Sacraments are purely dispensed.

Kiffens Answer. This Queire seems to import thus much, that from such
Congregations where the word and Sacraments are purely dispensed men ought not
to separate, but that men are, and ought to separate from such where the word
and Sacraments are not purely dispensed: Your Queare seems to grant but
however though it should be denied those scriptures plainly proves Rev.
14.8.9.10. more fully manifested in Rev, 18, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Esa, 52, 2. and
more at large spoken of, 2 Cor: 6:14 to the end as also Practiced by the
Apostle Paul himself in Acts, 19, 8, 9, 10. But now Sir here lies the Quest,
that your Congregations be such as where the word and sacraments are purely
dispersed then we sin and you justly charge us with sisme, for seperating from
you, but that it be not so that your congregations are such but one the
contrary such as do not dispense the word and Sacraments purely then we do
well, and you sin in charging us for sisme in doing what the word commands and
the Saints practiced, and therefore we having nothing to prove that the word
and sacraments are purely dispensed among you but your bare afirmation it
cannot satisfy our Consciences and I marvel how it satisfies you; does not
the word o^ God like a two edged sword fight against you, may not that
scripture Justly be aplyed to you Ier, 1, 7, 9, 10, 11. for do you not daily
admit and suffer to be amongst you, such as do according to Gods word leaven
the whole lamp: 1 Cor, 5, 6, and do not purely despence the word upon you for
their he^ling, the spirit of Christ says such glorying is not good and the
feast of the Lord ought not to be keept with them, and I pray you show me what
pure institution have you for the baptising of Children which is one of your
great sacraments amongst you, what can you find for your practice herein more
then the durty pudle of men's inventions, and therefore when the Sacraments are
purly administered, according to the pure instritutions of the Lord Jesus and
when you have dispensed the word, and power of Christ for the cutting of all
Drunkards Fornicators Covitious Sweraers Dyers and all abominable and filthy
persons and stand together in the faith a pure lump of beleivers, we I hope
shall join with you in the same Congregations and fellowshipe and nothing
shall separate us but, death, but tell then we shall present those Scriptures as
an adition to those formely quoted wherein we have sufficient testimony from
you comparing them with your practice that the word and Sacraments are not
purely dispensed among you, 2 These, 3, 6: Ephesians, 5, 3, 4.5, 11: Gall, 5, 9 12: 2
Cor, 6, 14, 15: 1 Cor, 5, 4, 5, 6: Asts, 2, 40.

The Reply of JOSIAH RICRAFT to W. K. his Answer
FOR your Answer to this my First Queare, which you affirm seems to import
thus much, that from such Congregations where the word and sacraments are
purely dispensed, men ought not to separate, but that men are, and ought to
separate from such, where the word and sacraments are not purely dispensed, It
is well you used that evasion (seems) which you do twice in one sentence (yet
many things seems to be, which are not:) And if I should take the advantadge
of falling upon every passage of your discourse, I might show you how my Queare
in many respects though it does impley as in the case of our Church the
unlawfulnes of all Separation from out Congregations where the Word and
Sacraments are purely dispensed, yet it does not impley, that men are, and
ought for to separate from such a Church where the word and Sacraments are not
so purely dispensed, because there are differant degrees of purity and
reformation of Churches, and whilst the Word and the Sacraments are dispensed
according to the institution for the maine though there may not in some
Axedentalls and Cercumstances and Concometents be that pureness which ought to
be, and is desired; Yet to separate from such Churches, has neither ground in
the Word, nor the approved Judgment of godly and learned Devines: Yea further,
a Church may come to be so corrupted as that the Word and the Sacraments in
somethings of Substance may be corrupted, and yet it is not lawful for men
presently to separate: There is something else to be done before they leave
such a Church, for they ought to try and use all means and ways to see if the
Church may not be healed. In this kind I could give you many instances of the
unlawfullnesse of a sudden separation from a corrupted Church; God will not
have his people come out of Babylon until they have used all means to heal
her, as is evident, 51. Jeremiah, verse 9. We would have healed Babylon, but
she is not healed: Forsake her, and let us go every one into his own Country.
Which shows Babylon must not be left till first means habe been used for her
healing: And if you had read aney thing in this point, you would know that as
there is an unjust and an un-nessessary Separation which is upon leight and
small causes, so there is a rash and unadvised separation in forsaking a Church
suddenly and willingly without waiting in the use of all means for
Reformation, but I shall spare to speak further of this, and now come to speak
to the maine of your discourse to this my first Queare namly to show our
Congregations are such as where the Word and Sacraments are purely dispensed,
and then according to your own confession you sin and are justly charged with
Schism for Seperating from us: All the Scriptures that are coated by you in the
beginning of your discourse, and the close to this Queare do none of them in
the least prove the Separation from such a Church as ours is, where there is a
profession of the true Faith the most essential noate of a visible Church, as
is confessed not only by great reformed Devines, but even by some Seperatists
themselves, as Mr. Robinson, and we have also the Word of God powerfully
preached, professed, and maintained, and the right administration of the two
Sacraments. As for your Scriptures, they only prove a lawful Separation from
Heathen Idolators, and Blaspheming Jews, and Antichristian Idolators, Familiar
and volentary unnecessary private society with wicked men, or the casting out
of evil men by those that have the power in the Church: And if you look over
the Scriptures again (and God give you grace to consider) you will find all
this to be true, as for those grounds by which you would prove that the
Sacraments are not purely dispensed amongst us, and so you may lowfully
Separate from us, namely in regard that wicked persons are admitted and
suffered amongst us, to come to the Lords Table, and that Children are Baptized
amongst us; I answer these are noe grounds, and I dare challenge you and all
the Anabaptists in England of your way to bring any Scripture wherein you have
any precept or example to Separate from a Church for some wicked persons
mingled with good, or because Baptism is administered to Infants: Is any man so
ignorant as to deny the Church of Corinth to be a true Church? Yet I say there
was wanting Discipline, and more horible abuses of the Sacraments, and many
vicious persons uncast out, 1. Cor. 5.1, 2. and 1. Cor. 11.17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22.30. also, 1. Cor. 15.12. with the 2. Cor. 12.20, 21. Yet Paul writes to them
as a true Church. Many such instances I could give you, as also that of the
Israellites where there wanted Discipline, and the Ordinances most grossly
abused, yet we account of them to have been a true Church, 1. Sam. 2.16,
17.22.29. And in this case the Apostle Paul speaks of many loose and unclean
persons, and yet in many of his Epistles, though he blames the not casting out
of such, yet he blames not those that continued in the Church with such; and in
all his Exhortations about purging out the old Leaven and putting away the
wicked persons from among them, never exhorts private persons in case his
Apostallicall commands were not obeyed, that then they should Separate; and in
particular he gives not any directions to the house of Cloe to Separate from
the Church, although they had made their address to the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.11.
And for our Baptizing of Children which in scorn you call one of the great
Sacraments amongst us; Know we have ground in the Scripture for our practices
therein, and do not go into the durty pudle of men's Inventions (as you say) but
from the Covenant made to believers, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. with
Acts 7.8. and Romans 4.11. also Levit. 12.3. with Luke, 2.21. and 1. Cor. 12.13.
likewise Gal. 3.26.27.28.29. Baptism, it succeeds Cercumcision, Coll. 2.11.12.
(...) it did not, the condition of Christian Infants in this time of the
Gospel, were worse then the condition of Jewish Infants under the Lu^^? First
in regard of their age, if Baptism may not be conferred upon them now, as
Circumcision was upon the Jewish Children: Secondly, if Baptism belongs not to
Infants, then the Grace and Favor of GOD by Jesus Christ his coming, is more
obscure and strait, and less testified then it was to the Jews; which to
afirm, were a great indiguity offered unto Jesus Christ: Thirdly, if Infants
may not be Baptized, where is the enlargement of the Covenant, or fulfilling of
the Commission of Jesus Christ? Matt. 28.19, 20. It was the Apostles practice
at their Preaching of the Gospel throughout the world, to Baptize both the
House-holders and the Household, 1 Co. 1.16. and Acts, 16.35. with Acts 16.15.
Children of believers, they are holy as they are within the Covenant and
Abraham's seed, they be joint heirs by the promise of the kingdom of GOD and
of Christ; there is no reason therefore to withold the Baptism of Water from
them whom GOD Himself vouchsafes the Baptism of His Spirit, with the
blessings of Abraham for an inheritance of his everlasting Kingdom, 1. Cor.
7.14. and Romans 11.16. with Acts, 3.25. also Isa. 46.3, 4. and Gal. 3.2. with
Psalm. 22.23.30, 31. and Luke, 1.41.44. with Acts, 20.47, 48. also Romans 8.9.16.
and Luke, 19.9. with Mark, 10.13, 14, 15, 16. And for the conclusion of your
discourse upon this my first Querie, I say to you as Christ said in another
case, Go and learn what these Scriptures mean, Jude 19. These be they that
Separate, 1. John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us.

QUERIE II.
By what Scripture warrant do you take upon you to erect now framed
Congregations, Separated to the disturbance of the great work of Reformation
now in hand?

Kiff-Ans. This Querie has in it these 2, parts, 1. That we erect new framed
separate Congregations, secondly, we do by this disturb the great work of
reformation now in hand.

To the first it is well known to many espetially to our selves that our
Congregations were erected and framed as now they are according to the rule of
Christ, before we heard of any reformation even at that time when Episcopacy
was in the hight of its vanishing glory (and we are confident will remain in
the despit of all cruelty) even when they were ploting and threatening the ruin
of all those which opose it, and we hope you will not say we sinned in
seperating from them whose errors you now condemn, and yet if you shall still
continue ta brand us with the names of Annabaptists Sismaticks Heriticks and
for saving our selves from such a generation Acts, 240: as you your selves have
cut of and from such a superstitious worships as you say shall be reformed we
conceive it is your ignorance or worse and though you condemn us, Christ will
justify us even by that word of his which he has given us, and we de^siret to
practice and have already commended to you, in the conclusion of our answer to
the first Querie.

And for the second part of your Querie that we disturb the great work of
reformation now in hand I know not what you mean by this charg unless it be
in that you are angry with us in that we disturb you, in reforming our selves,
before you, for as yet we have not in our understanding seen neither can we
conceive of any thing that we shall see reformed by you accorbing to truth but
that through mercy we enjoy the practis of the same already and whereas you tell
us that the work of reformation is now in hand noe reasonable men will force us
to disist from the practice of that which we are persuaded is according to
truth, and wait for that which we know not what it will be, and in the mean
time practice that which you your selves say must be reformed, but whereas you
tell us of a great work of reformation; we should entreat you to show us
wherein the greatness of it does consist, for as yet we see noe greatngsse
unless it be in the vast expense of money and time, for what great things is it
to chang Episcopacy into presbitery and a book of Common prayer into a
Directory and to exalt men from livings of 100. l. a year to places of 400. l
paranum for I pray consider is there not the same power, the same priests, the
same people, the same worshipp and in the same manner still continued, but when
we shall see the great work of reformation appear that you have framed your
Congregation according to that true and unchangeable pattern, 1 Cor:
3.9.10.11. according to the command of our savior, Matthew, 19.20: and the
Apostles practice Acts 2: 41: and 5, 13.14. and made all things suitable to the
pattern as Mos^s did Exo 25: 40. Hebr. 8, 5, you will see I hope that we shall
be so far from disturbing the work as that we shall be one with it.

The Reply. FOR your Answer to this my second Querie, instead of showing
Scripture warrant for such a private man as you are, to erect a new framed
Congregation; You allege ledge your own practice, that your Congregation was
erected and framed even in the time of Episcopacy, and that before you heard of
any Reformation; I pray you what answer do you think in your own conscince,
this is to the Querie propounded, I ask for Scripture warrant, you aledge your
practice, as if your practice must be scripture warrant; but because all this
while you have aledged no Scripture warrant, either of precept or allowed
example; I put the question again more particularly, What scripture warrant
private persons have, to gather of themselves Churches, either under Episcopacy
or Presbytry, take which you please: And as to the second part of your
discourse to this my second Querie, which impleys the disturbance of that great
work of Reformation now in hand: That cannot help you, that you say your
pretended Congregations were erected before you heard of any Reformation; And
if it should be granted yours possible might he, not what shall we say to those
multitudes of Congregations that have vene erected since they heard of
Reformation? they are not salved by your discourse: But it seems you much care
not, what became of the Ship, so your cabinet be saved; and besides the
continuance of yours, and such like Congregations which might be erected and
framed with a gidey headed multitude of persons since a^^d to them, and your i^
carriage since are so great a disturbance to the work of Reformation, that all
that run may read it, which will save me the labor to prove it, only let me
mind you of certain considerations put out in Print. even by Subscription of
the hands of some of the primest Independent brethren, who do diswade all from
separation, as an hinderance of the great work of Reformation now in hand. And
whereas in your discourse upon this Querie, you do in a most Sacasticall manner
speak of the great work of Reformation as consisting in the vast expense of
money and time, and ex^^l^ing (as you say) men of 100 a year to 400. a year,
In this you show your self to be of the number of those Seperatists St. Jude
foretold of Jude 16. There shall be Mockers in the last times: And also to be
towneere a hin to wicked Sanbalat and Tobias, Neh. 4.1, 2, 3. who mocked at the
beginning of the building of Jerusalem, and we may justly against the whole
sect of you Anabaptists, make that prayer of Nehemiah Neb. 4.4. Hear, O our
God, for we are dupised, and turn their reproach upon their own heads, for
they have provoked thee to anger before the builders; and I may speak the words
of Zac. 4.10. For who has despised the day of small things? And know, that
however your eyes are blind, and you drunk with your own conceits, and will
not see what the great change is of Episcopacy into Presbytry, and the Book of
common prayer into a Directory, yet all the Reformed Churches see it, and
wonder at it, and bless GOD for it; yea, they look upon that you count
Reformation as a Deformation, who instead of Ministers gifted and called by GOD
to dispense the Word and Sacraments, have Jeroboams Priests of the lowest and
basest of men, to be your Priests, and such whom God Himself rejects for want
of knowledge: And whereas you think you are sled out of Babylon. you are come
into Babell of confusion and errors, and your churches ministers and people,
are like a Bedlam, sit to receive none but brainsick, distracted, santastick
persons, and wholly unsuietable for all sober, godly, and conscientious
Christians; I shall conclude my Reply to your discourse upon this Querie, in
reference to your Separate meettings, with that prayer of good old Jacob in
another ^ase, Genesis 49.6. O my soul, come not thou into their secrets, unto
their Assemblies my honor be not thou anited.

QUERIE III.
What warrant have you, either to be a Member, much less a Minister of any
such separate Congregation?

Kiff Ans. This Querie as I conceive is added more for number then for weight,
for who can be so ignorant as to think a congregation can be without members,
therefore that we can prove our congregations true our membership must needs be
true, I would not speak any more to this Querie but that I see you pinch so
hard upon our separation in four of your Queries to which I shall give a more
full answer to prove our separation true from your assemblyes, and first it
cannot be denied, but Jesus Christ is of the Father Anoynred to be the head of
the Church which is his body Ephesians 1.20.22.23. Coll 1.18. and that we are
commanded only to here him Deuteronomy 18.15. Acts 3.22. and 7.37. Math, 17, 5, Pet,
1, 17, and that whosoever will not hear and obey him the Lord will require it
at his hands, Deuteronomy, 18, 19. Acts, 3, 27. Math, 7.26.27. and hereby we know we
love God and he loves us when we keep his Commandments, 1. Job 2.3. and 5.2,
3. now then that we can not keep faith and a good Consciencein obeying all the
Commands of CHRIST, so long as we assemble our selves with you then are we
necessitated, to separate our selves from you, btu that we cannot keep faith
and a good conscience so with you these scriptures prove compared with your
practice, 2 Thessalonians, 3 6. 1 Cor, 5, 11, 2, Tim. 2, 21, and. 3, 5, Ephesians. 5, 1. to
the 14. with many other scriptures but in the mouth of 2 or 3, witnesses every
truth shall stand, now then so long as you deny to follow the rule of Jesus
Christ, and are not obedient to his comands reject the word of God which is
given by Christ, for the separating of wicked from the godly and seperating the
precious from the vile as Mat 18.15.16.17. 1 Cor 5.4.5.11.13. we are bound in
obedience to Jesus Christ to leave you whilst you remain obstina^e to him,
and as it is with a natural body, which receives in all and wants power to
void the excrements must needs become a rotten filthy and unclean body, even
so it is with all false spiritual states, who by power and authority given to
them by the civil magistrate they command all both rich and poor to subject to
their worship, whether their consciences be brought over to see it a truth or
no, or else they may not live amongst them or use any traffic with them, Rev,
13, 16, 17, and so become the hold of all soul spirits and a cage for every
unclean bird, Rev, 18, 7. now I would but appeal to any reasonable religious
men, whether England has not at this time in her as hateful birds as any
nation whatsoever, and whether there be not at this day an authority to force
in all to worship, the d^ily experience of this may be seen by the practice of
those which would be counted the most knowing learned men of our times, who
will have men to worship with them against their wills and so makes them as
the formal hipocrites, and therefore when these things do so appear is it not
high time to harken to the voice of the Apostle Acts, 2, 40. to save our selves
from such a generation, and to come out from them, Rev, 18, 4. now that these
spoken of with many other which might be brought as the quenching of the spirit
and despising prophecy, so that no man may speak in your public exercises
but one that has the same call and power as those whom you now have cast off
contrary to these scriptures, 1, Pet, 4, 10. Heb, 10, 25. Coll. 3, 16. Ephesians, 4,
15, 16. 1 Cor, 12, 7, 8, and. 14, 24, 26, 31, 39. as also all superstitious
consecrations to the great deluding of poor ignorant people inraging them
against those which worship any where save in your high places, contrary to
these express texts of Scripture Job, 4, 20, 24. As also continuing of tithes
and offerings of the people as that Christ were not come in the flesh, as that
the Clergy of the Kingdom were the tenth part of the Kingdom for number,
when as they themselves will tell God in their prayers that the harvest is
great but the laborers are but few, an act so unjust by them to be demanded,
that reason would abhor, that a few men in a Kingdom should have the tenth
part of the riches of the Kingdom, and yet so eagerly persued by them that
though the paying of it be the undoing of men, they will have it, and
therefore pursue men in au^hority, at bed and board, in pulpit, and private
chamber, to have power put into their hands, to that end, as likewise their
cruelty in refusing a place of Burial, in their consecrated ground, except
they have so much money as perhaps the parties have not in all the world to give
them, all which considered, wi^h many more I desire you to consider of and that
yet it be not a sufficient ground to you for the confirmation of our Just
separation yet know it is to us, and unless you can show us that Christ Jesus
is not to be harkened to, as well in these Scriptures given for the
establishment of the new testament as Moses was in the establishment of the
old and under the penalty of the same and greater judgments then was inflicted
upon the breaches of the same, as Heb, 2, 15, etc, 3, 1, to, 9, and CHAP, 10,
21, to 31, and 12, Col. 22. to the end do declare, and therefore we cannot, nay
we dare not, but continue in these our practices, and witness the truth of it
even by suffering, though others oppose it.

The Reply. AS for your Answer to this my third Querie, in stead of showing
what grounds you have from the word of God to be A member, much less a
Minister of such Congregations as yours are. In stead of giving reasons from
the word of God, in such material points and practices which might satisfy
the consciences of men, you run out into extravagant exclaimings against our
Church and Congregations about the power of the Civil Magistrate,
superstitious consecrations of Tithes and Offerings of the people, despising of
Prophecy, and disobedient to commands, rejecting of the word of God concerning
the purging of the wicked from the godly, which were they all true according to
your relation, and further supposing them to be so, it were not a sufficient
ground of leaving our Church, yet you need further grounds from the word of God
for your positive separation, and for making and erecting such Churches as
yours are, or joining to be a member of any such Church. I do not deny but
there may be some causes (as many learned Divines show) wherein Christians may
lawfully separate negatively, and may go and join themselves, as the case may
fall out to some other public Reformed church, when as yet to erect and set up
a new separated church is schism. And I do in the fcare of God more
particularly renew my former Querie, What Scripture warrant or example have you
as a private man to take upon you a public work (namely) one of the most
public and solemn works, the building of a Church of Christ? a work that in
all the New Testament where Christian Churches are recorded, was never taken in
hand but by eminent public persons, both for office and gifis Apostles, or
other eminent Ministers at least, so that it is evident you are without all
call, and a mere intruder upon other men's offices: and to speak to you in
your own words and phrases which you use, You go not according to the
pattern in the Mount. And for the other branch of the Querie, What ground you
have to be a Minister of any such congregation. You did wisely to pass over
that wholly in silence, as being too hard for you to answer: and in stead of
that to fill up your pages with other rabble, in which you hope the Reader
might quite lose the sent of that question. But I will now renew that branch of
the Querie, and in stead of putting it by way of question to you, now I do
positively declare to you, That you are so far from having any warrant to be a
Minister of any such congregation, as that you have not the least warrant to be
a Minister of any at all. But your taking upon you to be a Minister to
dispense the Word and Sacraments, is a greater sin and disorder then ever any
was in the constitution of the Church of England since Reformation. And for
ignorant illiterate men, the lowest of the people such as your self, to take
upon you to be a Minister of God, and a guide of souls, is such an intolerable
usurpation and profanation of Gods name, that without great repentance you
will find one day to your cost that fulfilled of our Savior, The blind lead
the blind, and both fall into the ditch. Paul that great Apostle speaking of
the ministerial calling, says, Who is sufficient for these things? now if
such persons as you are may be Ministers Who is not sufficient for these
things? The sin of Jeroboam cleaves to you and to your Tribe, that you make
Priests of the lowest of the people which were not of the sons of Levi, and
whosoever will he consecrates himself, and becomes a Priest of your way? I
wish you with fear and trembling to read (and God give you grace to consider)
1 King. 12.31. and 1 King. 13.33.34. with Hosea 4.6. and Romans 10.15. wherein
you will find that in stead of a warrant for your self, and such as you are,
to he Ministers, your Ministry will become sin unto you, to cut you off and
to destroy you from the face of the earth. God rejects you that you shall be no
Minister to him, and that you should not preach, he never fending you, for, the
most wise God never sends fools on his errand. But now those things which you
would charge our Churches with, as grounds to justify your separation, are not
truth. For the fr^st of your charges we answer, That in the very times of the
Bishops, by the Orders of the Church there were rules for purging the wicked
from the godly, and separating the precious from the vile, both in their
Rubrickes and Canons, as namely to keep away ignorant and scandalous persons
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and many godly Ministers even in these
days did in several Congregations, notwithstanding the illegal and
tyrannical carriage of the Prelates, practice the same. But any ingenious man
would marvel what bold face you had at the time of writing of that you call
your Remonstrance, to charge upon us the rejecting of the Word of God given by
Christ for the purging of the wi^k^d from the godly, and our remaining
obstinate to him. When as your conscience must tell you, that hundreds of
Ministers at this very time do keep away ignorant and scandalous persons from
the Lords Supper, and that the Assembly of Divines called by authority of
Parliament for reformation of the Church, have long ago agreed on the
separating the precious from the vile, according to these Scriptures, Matthew.
18. and 1 Cor. 5 Yea and you know that the godly Ministers of England generally
and the people, are daily laboring for Reformation in this way. As for your
second extravagancie, know you slander the Civil Magistrate, which is no
strange thing for you to do, it being one of the Characters of Anabaptists, to
despise dominions, and speak evil of dignities; in saying, They are so hasty
to command all both rich and poor to subject to their worship, whether their
conscience be brought over to see whether it be a truth or no: or else they may
not live amongst them, or use any traffic with them. To this there needs no
other confutation, but the suffering of you and your fellows to go on in your
separated Churches, without subjection to their Worships (as you phrase it) And
the Civil Magistrate may do well to take notice of your unthankfulness and
unkind requital to belie them thus, considering their great long-suffering and
patience toward you. But know, when the Civil Magistrate shall be pleased by
Laws and Ordinances to command all to submit to the true worship of God, and
the true government of the Church, and not suffer you and such like to go on
in your Schisms and Heresies, they do no more then they may lawfully do* yea
then what is their duty to do: and this is so far from being any lawful
ground of forsaking our Church, that on the contrary, the not suppressing of
Sects and Schisms by their power and authority, were a juster ground of
separation. For it is apparent by the example of the godly kings and
Magistrates, as Asa, Josiah, and others, that they look to it, that the
worship and house of God were reformed according to the word, and commanded and
caused all the people to stand to it, 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. As for your third
ground brought to justify your separating from us, in that we quench the
Spirit* and despise Prophecy: know it is your ignorance in not understanding
the Scripture, makes you say so, for your selves will be found to be the men
that quench the Spirit, and despise Prophecy, in despising the public
Ministry of the word, and you could not have quoted a place against your
selves more then that is, for by the interpretation of learned men upon that
Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. is meant the public ministry of the word, as
being the great Ordinance of God against the quenching of the Spirit: and your
Sect of all others is known to be a despiser of the public ministry. And as
for a fourth ground brought by you, to name no more, they being so frivolous,
The maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, I wish you to consider of that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. where the Apostle shows that they that minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they that wait upon
the Altar are partakers of the Altar; which is meant of Tithes. And the Apostle
speaking of the maintenance of the Ministers under the Gospel, says. Even so
has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. Now observe the Apostles words, he does not say, The Lord has
ordained, but even so the Lord has ordained: (how so) but as he speaks in the
13. verse. namely, of Tithes and Offerings (as you call it) if you say, not by
Tithes and by Offerings, then it concerns you to make it appear either out of
the old or New Testament where ever God has ordained that they that preach the
Gospel should have any other fixed maintenance but Tithes. And it is certain
by this place that God has somewhere in the word ordained their maintenance.
And for conclusion to your Answer to my Third Querie, supposing that through
want of discipline we had not nor should not have a purging of the wicked from
the godly, yet for private persons to forsake our Churches were not
justifiable, neither the want of prophesying: take it in your own sense,
suppose it were a defect of something of an Ordinance, yet it would not
justify your separation, and so I might say of all the rest. And were it not
that I had been so large already, I might show you how that the suffering of
evil persons in the Church, yea the neglect of somewhat commanded being an
affirmative duty, could no way warrant your becoming a member, much less a
Minister of any such separate congregation. And let me make it your own case,
whether your suffering of many of your members to live in disobedience, as
wives to their husbands, children to their parents, and servants to their
masters lawful commands, and further living in backbiting, railing, and
reviling, not of private persons only, (as they have some of them to their
shame been convicted of) but also of the high Court of Parliament of England,
with our Brethren of Scotland, with the Ministry of both Kingdoms, and all
the Reformed Churches, which sins are as great as drunkenness, and are put
by the Holy Ghost in the Catalogue of vilest sins, Romans 1.30. backbiters,
disobedient to parents. And in the 1 Cor. 5.11. the plact brought by you for
not coming to the Lords Supper in our Churches because of drunkards, does as
expressly forbid to eat with railers, which you and your members are notorious
enough for, and this by your rule were a sufficient ground for your members to
forsake your Churches, and set up new in their rooms.

QUERIE IV.
WHat warrant have you to admit into your separate Congregations, silly seduced
servants, children, or people?

Kiff. Ans. I see our separated Congregations stick very hard upon your
stomachs, therefore as I have labored to help you to digest our separation,
so I hope I shall give you something from the word of truth that may remove
your imbitterednesse of spirit against our Congregations. And first know this,
that infinite love which has redeemed a people to God out of Nations, Tongues
and Kindred, has also made them Kings and Priests unto God to reign with him
in his spiritual Kingdom here on the earth, Rev. 5.9, 10. and that all those
which are begotten by the immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. even those newborn
Babes that have tasted of the Lords bounty and come to that living and precious
stone, the Lord Jesus: being themselves living stones are built up a spiritual
house, being made a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet: 2.1. to the 11. verse, and being
quickened by Christ are raised with him to sit together in heavenly places, Ephesians.
2.5.6, being by one spirit baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12 13. the old man
being buried with him, Romans 6.4. and the new man put on, Gal. 3.27. Col. 3.10.
thus having an entrance to the Father: the building being thus coupled together
by the same spirit grows to an holy Temple, and so becomes an habitation to
the Lord, Ephesians. 2.18. to 22. which assembly we are not to forsake, Hebr. 10.25.
but to exhort one another daily, Hebr. 3.12, 13. having received gifts by the
same spirit we are to dispense them for edification, 1 Cor. 12.47. 1 Pet. 5.10.
Romans 12.3. to 9. to these congregations has Christ promised his presence, Mat.
28.19.20. and 18.19, 20. Rev. 7.13, 14, 15. and 21.2, 3. and 22.13. Now then
that we can prove our selves to be such congregations as are before spoken of
or at least wise such as do sincerely and truly strive according to that light
we have to be such then I hope you will be so far from despising such
gatherings of the Saints together as that you will not deny them to receive in
members and to dispense such gifts for the edifying one of another as the Lord
has given us, and this I shall labor to do in the answer to your next
Querie, and whereas you demand what warrant we have to receive silly seduced
servants etc. we answer it is well known to you we receive in none as members
with us but such as has been members of your Church at the least 16, 20, or
30. years, and that they be silly when they are received members among us,
surely they were marvelous silly when they were received members amongst you,
and it should seem they have received by your own words little eddification
in their so long membership with you, and therefore it does behove them whom
you say are so silly to look also where to be better instructed who have
received so little benefit in so long time by your ministers least they perish
in their own ignorance and blindness and therefore herein you would doe-well to
take our saviors advice, Math, 7, 3, 4, 5. we know it is noe strange thing for
those that desire to walk in the strait ways of the Lord to hear themselves
despised and reproched with these and far greater aspersians but however that
such as are so esteemed of by you have a right to be received into the
fellowship of the Saints these Scriptures prove which I pray you examine P^o 9,
1 to 7. Isa 14, 32, and 18, 7, 1 Cor 1, 26, 27, 28. Rom 14, 1.

The Reply. FOr your Answer to this my fourth Querie, in stead of positive
laying down your Ground, What warrant you have to admit filly seduced servants
or children, or people into your Congregations. Which question implies in it
thus much, What ground you have to take away them that by the laws of God and
Nature are not in their own powers, but under the powers of others. In this
you answer nothing, but wholly wave it, and run according to your former
method, into a tedious heterogeneall discourse of a people whom God out of his
infinite love has redeemed to himself. And here you quote several places of
Scripture, all which are meant of the invisible Church of Christ, and belong
not to the question of Congregations. This is commonly your error, and the
error of all in your separated way, to apply that to the visible Church which
is spoken of an invisible Church, and so it is nothing to the purpose. And
whereas after this long and impertinent answer, you gather from it, that if we
can prove our selves to be such Congregations as are before spoken of: which by
way of reply I tell you that you cannot prove your Congregations to be such,
they being invisible, and so known only to God. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, 2 Timoth. 2.19. for of such you speak of in your
discourse. In the former part of your answer to this my fourth Querie, namely,
a people out of infinite love redeemed: and if you could prove your selves to
be such real Saints and not hypocrites, yet I must tell you that the people of
God have no warrant to leave the Church to which they are or were joined, where
there is a profession of the true faith, and the preaching of the word, to go
join themselves to a company of people, though they should be true Saints,
because there goes more to the making of a visible Church, then that there be
many Saints gathered together. And besides there may be many such Saints you
speak of, that have put off the old man, and put on the new man, and are Kings
and Priests to God, which yet may neither have office nor gifts of preaching,
and so such Christians shall sin against God and their own souls many
ways, as forsake visible Churches to join with such Saints only. And in this
sense I profess to despise such gathering of Saints together, as to forsake a
visible Church where there are Word and Sacraments, to go to join with them,
they wanting the public Ordinances, and the due managing of them by persons
fitly qualified, and orderly called, according to the Scriptures to that end
and purpose.

QUERIE V.
HOw can you vindicate by the word of God your Anabaptisticall way from the
sinful guilt of notorious Schism and defection from all the Reformed Churches?

Kiff Ans. They that runn may read what fire this pen and heart was inflamed
withal in the writing and inditing this Querie, but first of all that by
reformed Churches you mean those Churches planted by the Apostles in the
Primitive time, which are the platform for all Churches in all ages to look
unto, to be guided by those apostolical rules left them, we then shall
vindicate by the word of GOD our Anabaptists way (as you are pleased to call
it) from that guilt and first although we confess our selves ignorant of many
things which we ought to know and desire to weight daily for the farther
ciscoveries of light and truth from him which is the only giver of it to his
Poor people, yet so far as we are come we desire to walk by the same rule
they did, and first of all we baptize none into Christ Jesus but such as
profess faith in Christ Jesus, Rom 6: 3 by which faith they are made So^ns of
God and so having put on Christ are baptized into Christ, G^l, 3, 26, 27 and
that Christ has commanded this and no other way of b^p^izme see Mat 28, 19.
Mark 1, 4, 5. Luk 3, 7, 8. and that this also was the practice of the Apostles
see Acts 2.41, and 8, 12, 36, 37, and 10, 47, 48. and that being thus bap^ized
upon profession of faith they then are added to the Church Acts 2, 41. and
being added to the Church we conceive ourselves bound to watch over one another
and in case of sin to dease faithfully one with another according to these
Scriptures, Lev. 19, 17, 1^ and Mat^, 18, 1^. and that they remain obstina^ to
cast them out as (...) that are not fit to live in the Church according to the
rule 1 Cor, 5, 4, 5. Math, 18, 19, 20 by all which and money other perticulars I
might ^am, it apears that through mercy we can free our selves from th^^ gu^l^,
and truly if your eyes were turned to peruse your own practices and ways you
would then see we could better free our selves from that gu^le of ^ch^sme from
those reformed Churches then you your selves from ^he notorious guile of
schisming from Rome for first you hold their baptism true, their ordination
of ministers true, their maintenance by tithes and offerings true, there people
all fi^ ma^ter for a church and so true, and yet you will separate from them
for some corruption, now for you par^s we deny all and every one of these
amongst you to be true and therefore do separate from you, so then when you
have made sati^faction for your notorious schism, and return as dutiful sons
to their Mother, or else have cast off all her filthy Rubies of her
abominations which are amongst you; we will return to you or show our best
grounds to the contrary: Yet I would not be understood as to suppress that
none of the people in your Assemblies of England to be fit matter for a Church
of Christ in respect of the graces and qualifications of the Spirit, which we
see to be in many; But I speak of all the multitude which are forced in
amongst you, to be members with you, though they never manifest Faith; so that
by this you may see the Net you lay for others, your self is caught in.

The Reply. FOr your answer to this my fifth Querie, in stead of giving of
positive grounds for the vindication of your way from the sinful guilt of
notorious schism and defection from all the Reformed Churches, you still
according to your old wont relate your own practice and course you use in your
Churches, and in stead of freeing your selves from Schism, you put us to free
our selves from the guilt of Schism from Rome, now the Reader may easily
observe in stead of answer you make diversions, and run into other matters: but
something for the first of these two, the relation of your practice in your
way, the question will be supposing the matter of your way were justifiable, As
to baptize none but such as profess faith in their own persons, yet still the
question will be, By what warrant or authority you do all this? Who gave you
authority, being such a private person, to make Churches and Ministers, to
preach the Word and administer the Sacraments, and exercise the power of
censures? My question was not to you, Whether it were lawful to baptize
children or no, or whether Christians are bound to watch over one another, or
whether such as remain obstinate are to be cast out, and not fit to live in
the Church. Suppose some private persons in this City should take upon them
the acts of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and should do the things which for the
matter are just and lawful, whether would this justify their leaving of their
callings and places wherein they were set, and taking upon them to exercise
that power? I ask whether by the Law of the Land they were blameless? And now
I leave you to make the application. As for your discourse you run into About
the baptizing of such as profess faith in Christ Jesus, the places brought by
you do prove such were baptize as professed faith in their own persons, yet
they do not prove nor assert that none else were baptized: the reason is
evident why in your Scriptures quoted, many that professed the faith were
baptized, because they were the first in their families that believed in Jesus
Christ, and were not the children of believers. And besides, they being grown
to years, and come to a knowledge and belief in Christ, it is not strange
that they desired to be partakers of that Ordinance of Christ. And in some of
your Scriptures quoted, Math. 28 19. there is a ground of baptizing of infants
as well as grown men: and were it worth the while to speak more at large in
answer of such a weak Pamphlet, I might out of the Act. 2.39. and 2 Col.
11.12. lay down that for baptism of children, which I am confident all the
Teachers of your seven Churches (before whom you are first ranked as
Metropolitan) could never answer. But I have spoke sufficiently already in my
Reply to your discourse upon my first Querie, and my other occasions cause me
to contract my self. And as for your turning of the guilt of your Schism from
all the Reformed Churches, by your bidding us free our selves from the guilt of
Schism from Rome; in this you betray either your great ignorance, or impudent
malice in it, for we have all the just grounds laid down in the word of God
for a separation from the Church of Rome, as gross idolatry, damnable herefie,
intolerable tyranny, the discovery of Antichrist sitting in it, and so have
clear Scriptures in all these cases, besides the example of all the reformed
Churches that have left Rome when as they found she would not be healed. But
now we defy you and all the Sects in England in this Reformation begun, and
further doing to show either idolatry in the worship of God, or heresy in the
doctrine, or any other crimes forementioned. And for any circumstantiall
corruptions which may be, we are willing to hear of them, and are in a way of
reforming of them, which whilst we are a laboring after, you and your faction
are most busy to make separation and division, and go about compassing the
earth to seduce Prosylites, and draw away members from our Churches. And in
respect of some small failing in matter of discipline and external order, you
draw them into Churches guilty of Heresy and Schism, and in point of
Discipline full of Anarchie and confusion; and it will prove a hard task for
you judiciously to remonstrate that either your Church or any such separate
Church as yours is, have the necessary essentials and substantials required to
the constitution of a true visible Church in them. And therefore I think
without any wrong we may count yours no true visible Churches of Christ at all,
but mere carnal Conventicles, set up only of men and not of God, which you
magnify as the only Churches on earth. And to conclude, let me warn all those
who in simplicity of heart follow you as many of the people did Absolon, to
separate from your Assemblies because of the heresies and false-doctrines that
are held in all the Conventicles of the Anabaptists.

QUERIE VI.
Whether you and such like pretended Teachers as you are be not the persons
characterized and condemned in these and such like Scriptures following, Mat.
7.15. Acts 20.29, 30. Romans 16.17.18. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Pet. 2.1, 3. 17.18,
19. Jude verse 4, 8, 10, 12, 13, 16.

Kiff. Answ. Although (as far as I am acquainted with my own heart) neither I,
nor such as I am, thirst after revenge; yet we could desire, that the Lord
would be pleased to manifest the innocence of our spirits and uprightness of
our intentions in all such our Actions against such false suppositions, or
rather calumny cast upon us; I shall only quot one of those Texts, and comment
a little upon it, Mat. 7.15, 16. the words are these, Beware of false Prophets
which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves:
you shall know them by their fruit. Christ Jesus himself makes the best
description how those false Prophets may be known, which is by the observation
of the Fruit, Christ in these words, compares implicity a true Prophet, to a
Sheep; Now its the nature of Sheep to be harmless, silent, and to feed in the
commons where the shortest pasture usially is: So is it the property of a true
Prophet of Christ to be harmless in his conversation, silent under all his
sufferings that he meets withal from unreasonable men, and to be contented
with the meanest enjoyments of this world, so he may honor Jesus Christ in his
condition, no way warring after great matters, in compelling men by a Law, to
feed in the fattest pasture in the Land; And as the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor.
10.3. Though we are in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.

But a Wolf, even in Sheeps clothing; to which false Prophets are compared,
even while they are thus clad, may be known by their fruit, which will appear
in these two things, 1. By their ravenous disposition; and, 2. By their often
snarling with their teeth: So you shall sinde false Prophets in Sheeps
clothing, they are always raveming after honors, and therefore like Dogs
creep into Kings houses, that they may be looked upon as followers with the
best of the Kings houshould-Servants, and ravening after riches, to feed in
the fairest pastures of a Kingdom; crying, Give, give. and therefore run from
living to living where they may have the greatest enjoyments of the world: and
2.ly. they will be always snarling with their teeth, that is, ready to
devour, and persecute all, that shall in a way that is more holy then their
own, derogate from their honors, and names, and fat enjoyments in the world; I
cease to apply this, but desire the Lord to give you discerning eyes, to see
between light and darkness: Thus at present have I given you a brief Answer to
your Queries, leaving them to the trial of Truth, and you in the perusal of
them, to the direction of him that leads into all truth, ever resting

Yours, so far as be shall know his duty, William Kiffen.


The Reply. FOr your Answer to this my sixth Querie, you labor and endeavor to
put off from your self and the rest of your Teachers those Characters
expressed in those Scriptures quoted, by passing by all save one, and insisting
a little upon that by a gloss of your own: and the truth is, all the other
Scriptures do so fully decipher you, that the very reading of them without
any comment at all, shows you to be one of those men meant in those
Scriptures. And if the Reader will take the pains to turn to them, he will
confess as much. I will but point at two or three of them, Acts 20.30. Romans
16.17.18. and 2 Pet 2.1, 2, 3, 17, 18, 19. For how evident is it that you make
it your work to draw disciples after you, and that you serve your own belly?
when you could not live on your own trade contentedly, but you must take this
course to serve your belly. And for your own description of true Prophets from
false, which you say Christ compared true Prophets to Sheep, and that it is
the nature of Sheep to feed in the shortest commons. It is evident that you
and your faction are not silent under your sufferings, nor contented with the
meanest employments and shortest commons of this world, but seek to get the
best you can, and are capable of, and that you are not silent under your
sufferings, witness your master whom you served John L^lborne, whose railings
and revilings against the high Court of Parliament, and the Assembly, and those
two pious and worthy Gentlemen Master Prin and Doctor Bastwicke. And for
further conviction of you that you are like false Prophets according to your
own description, in ravening after honor and riches: call to mind the
examples of your predecessors, recorded so much in many histories, as of John
of Leyden, Munster etc. and though some of you now pretend that you will
suffer, and that you are contented with a mean condition, (just as the Fox
loves no grapes, but it is only then when he cannot reach them) but there is
already so much discovered of your faction in this kingdom, that if they
could get any power in their hands, it is evident they would be ravening
wolves after the lives and estates of those that are not of their way, even as
they now raven after the seducing of souls.

Thus I have done with your replies to my six Queries, wherein I have been the
larger, that I might give you and your misled disciples the more full
satisfaction, with all the rest of your poor misled Anabaptists in England,
and in so doing it is for truth, and not for victory: and I pray God both you
and they may more seek peace, and love truth, then erroneous cruelty. I shall
advise all of you to study conscience more then controversies that are above
your reach, (he that hewes above his head, makes the chips fall into his own
eyes) and more to busy your selves at home then abroad, in faulting your own
souls rather then the Church of Christ, in studying a true constitution or
grace in your own hearts, rather then in quarrelling at the constitution of our
visible Churches: so shall you do less harm to others, more good to your
selves.

ANd now to shur up all, though you have given no satisfaction at all to any
one of my six Queries propounded, as I have made it to appear to an capable
and impartial judgment: yet that I may bring you to some conviction of your
error, and apprehension of the truth, I desire you to bestow your most serious
and composed thoughts upon these further Queries ensuing; and to give me, if
you are able, A bri^fe, per^inent, rational resolution to the same, without
vagaries, invectives, and improper circumlocutions, such as may become a man
that has the use of reason, the fear of God, and familiar acquaintance with
the holy Scriptures.

Querie 1.

Upon what Scripture ground can you satisfy your conscience, that you did not
greatly sin against Christ, the Church, and your own soul, in leaping from
your private secular vocation into a public Ecclesiastical office.

Querie 2.

By what authority do you take the honor to your self to become Pastor of a
Church without proportional qualifications for that office and regular
vocation to that function, seeing none may take such honor to himself, except
he be called, as was Aaron, nor did Jesus Christ glorify himself to be made a
High Priest without unction from the Father, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6.

Querie 3.

How can you choose but broach errors, deceive souls, pervert the Scriptures,
belie the Spirit of God, and build abundance of hay, stubble, and such like
trash, upon Gods foundation, whilst you presume to expound the Scriptures to
others, your self wanting the necessary helps of the Original Tongues,
wherein the Scripture was written, and of the Liberal Arts requisite for the
interpreting of every line in Scripture, without which you wholly preach, and
your followers believe by an implicit faith.

Querie 4.

Whether do not you contract upon your self the dreadful guilt of the blood
of all those souls which you have seduced unto or abetted in you
Anabaptisticall and schismatic errors, and when Jesus Christ the great
Shepherd of the Sheep shall appear, what will you answer him?

Querie 5.

How can you make it appear by any probable color of Scripture, that either
our Ministers are false and Antichristian, or our Churches false and
unchristian, as your party are often vaunting.

Quetie 6.

Whether have not you and the rest of the separation more really and
perniciously opposed and retarded the reforming of our Church, (which you cry
down for her corruption) then all the Prelaticall, Papisticall, Atheistical
opposites of the Antichristian faction, and is not this a high offense against
the Church of God, for which you ought to be deeply humbled?

Querie 7.

By what light of Scripture or sound reason can you oppose the supreme
Parliamentarie authority, in restraining of profaneness, schism, and
heresy, in punishing of incorrigible obstinacy, in reforming a Church
corrupted, in protecting a Church reformed, and in conveening of an Assembly
of godly Orthodor Ministers to draw up their advice according to the lord of
God for such ends and purposes, and strengthening their determinations with
their civil sanction?

Querie 8.

Whether is not the government and discipline of the Church according to the
dependant Presbyterian way, undoubtedly held forth in the Word of God, as
Christ's New Lestament-government, and all other governments mere humane
invention, or what can you produce out of the Scripture to the contrary?

Querie 9.

What Scripture can you produce, which either in express terms, or by clear
infallible consequence disallowes the baptizing of Infants of one or both
faith-professing parents? and by what warrant dare you presume to rebaptize any
persons, whose Infantbaptisme no Scripture condemns, whose rebaptizing no
Scripture allows?

Querie 10.

By what Scripture grounds can you prove that stinted forms of Praise and
Prayer to God are simply and absolutely in themselves unlawful? and if they
be not in themselves intrinsecally evil, why may not Christians sometimes
comfortably use them, according to Christian prudence and liberty?

Love the truth and peace, Zach. 8.19. Do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. It is the advice of him, who although he abhorres your
errors, yet wishes well to your souls, Josiah Ricraft. FINIS.

