THE RIDER OF THE WHITE HORSE And His ARMY, Their late good Success in
YORRE-SHIERE.

OR A true and faithful Relation of that famous and wonderful victory at
Bradford, obtained by the Club-men there, with all the circumstances thereof.

And of the taking of Leeds and Wakefield by the same men under the command of
Sir Thomas Fairfax, with the manner and circumstances thereof from good hands.

Seriously commended to the High Court of PARLIAMENT, and all that are of GODS
side for their encouragement.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, 1643.

BRADFORDS Deliverance.
AFter the Lord Fairfax his Excellency had retired from Tadcaster, the Lord of
New Castle possessed himself of Pontefract, so making himself Master of our
Western parts, block't up all passages between us and our strength, and then
manifested his resolutions to sesse the whole County, but to exact
extraordinary sums of those who had subscribed the Parliaments Propositions.
We could expect nothing now, but that those Towns should first suffer, who had
bin most forward to assist the Parliament: Leeds, Bradford and Halifax were
principally aimed at. In Leeds the malignant humor being predominant, easily
converted the Town into their temper. Bradford was the next place in their
way, the Town most unable to resist them; and indeed who ever considers their
dangers, weakness and discouragements, must judge their attempt as worthy
admiration as their success. The maine body of the Popish Army was within a
days march of Bradford, some amongst them grievously exasperated by a
dishonorable repulse from this Town not long before. So far were we from
expecting help from the Lord Fairfax, as we thought it scarce possible to seek
it: Our malignant spirits before charmed, now appeared, breathing forth nothing
but threatenings against those who had bin most active for the Parliament: and
their apparition was so terrible, as it affrighted many of the best affected
persons out of the Town; and thereupon, out goes our Royalists to bring in the
Kings Catholic Army. Some religious persons in the Parish, considering what
danger might result both to their consciences and Country from such cowardice
and treachery (instigated by fear of perjury, if they should contribute any
assistance against the Parliament, and care of their lives and Estates,
evidently endangered by a bare refusal without resistance) resolved to stand
upon then guard, invited all the well affected in the Parish to assist them,
and entered the Town. When our Malignants were returned with a Letter from Sir
William Savile, wherein he manifested an intention to burn and plunder, if we
did not contribute to the maintenance of the Popish Army. To which no other
answer was returned, then the apprehension of those who brought it, and had
subscribed it; All courageous attempts, yea desperate in the account of many,
who saw neither wisdom nor strength sufficient to manage them; There wanted
both the head, body and sinews of war, we had never a Gentleman in the
Parish to command us, nor would any stranger be persuaded to undertake the
charge. All our trained Soldiers with their Arms, were with the Lord Fairfax,
and the most of those who were fitted for service as volunteers. Nor could it
be expected, that the well affected of our poor Parish, could pay a Garrison
any long time, and none would carry one day without pay. Our neighbors
perceived this, and therefore judging our attempt desperate (as in the eye of
reason it was) and fearing the issue would be our ruin, refused to help us,
least they should perish with us. Nor wanted we discouragements from our own
men, to instance in no more; the very night before the Enemy assaulted us, the
greatest part of them left us. This was on Saturday, December: 17. The next
morning about 9 of the Clock the Enemy was discovered, approaching the East end
of the Town: They were marshald in two Bodies, the Van was commanded by
Colonel Evers (eldest Son to the Lord Evers) wherein were 3 Troops of
Horse, 2 Companies of Dragooners, 100 Foot, 20 Pyoni^rs, 2 Drakes, the train
of Artillery, commanded by Major Carew a Dutch man. The Re^e was commanded by
Sir Francis Howard, wherein were his own and Captain Hiliards Troops, 6
Companies of Colonel Eddringtons Dragooners, and a 100 Foot. Colonel Goring
came along with them, and some say the Earl of Newport; but whether they had
any charge or no in this expedition I hear not. All these our York-shiere
Gentlemen had procured of the Lord of New castle, as though Sir William Savils
Regiment, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Thomas Gleman and Sir John Gothericks
Troops, Sir Ingram Hopton, Captain Nevill, Captain Batt. Captain Bins
Companies had not bin sufficient to have swallowed our despicable Town: I
should now show how our men were marshald, but it is a hard matter to marshall
those who had neither Commanders, Colors, nor distinct Companies. The night
before, we had borrowed a Commander of Hallifax, we had near upon 40 Muskets
and Calievers, in Town about 30 Fowling, Birding and smaller Pieces, and well
nigh twice as many Club men. These our Captain disposed in several parts of
the Town, 10 or 12 of your best marks men upon the Steeple, and some in the
Church; Who being next the Enemy, awaited not their warning piece, but at the
first fight gave fire upon them bravely. The Enemy who expected a surrender,
rather then resistance, being herewith something daunted; and perceiving how
advantageous the Steeple was to us, presently possessed themselves of some Houses
not far from the Church, very convenient for the shelter of their men, and
planting of their Ordnance, and from thence sent out Sir John Gothericks
Troop, who partly to divert us from hindering them planting their Canon, and
partly to hinder the Parish from coming in to our aid, past through some
Parish villages on the one side of the Town, robbed a Woman, most cowardly
slew two naked Men, and so came within fight of our Sentinel at the West end
of the Town, Our Musketeers there discharged at them, shot 2 or 3 Horses,
whereof one of them lightly wounded was brought into Town; and in a short
space (partly by our shot, partly by the approach of some Club-men from
Bingley) they were forced to retire back to their strength. In the mean time
their Canons were planted in places most convenient for battering the Steeple,
(which did most annoy them) and scowring of Kirkgate, down which, our men must
upon necessity march to resist them; This done, Major Carew draws down some
Foot, and therewith takes two Houses within 30 yards of the Church, and this he
did without any other impeachment then from the Steeple; We having not any
strength to sally out upon them, from these Houses they played upon the Church
very hotly, and the Church upon them: Our Steeple had a notable advantage of
them, which our Musquitiers there especially improved against them, for when
any Buffe or skarlet Coat appeared, they laid 2 or 3 of their Pieces in one
hole, and discharged at once upon them with good success, and thereby deterred
the rest from relieving their men in the Houses, and thus they continued till
high-noone, about which time there came to our aid from Hallifax some Fire-men
and many Clubbs, such of these as came to fight, were forthwith drawn down to
service, some of them were placed in the Church, others in Lanes near the
foresaid Houses; The Church and Lanes kept the Houses in play, and the Steeple
hindered the Enemy from relieving the Houses. But this was not the way to repel
the Enemy. The largeness of the Church windows, and smalnesse of the Houses,
made their assault secure, and our defense dangerous, which our men perceiving,
resolved to win or lose all at once; watching an opportunity betwixt the
discharge and charge of the Enemy, they sallyed out of the Church, and being
seconded by those in the Lanes, rushed in upon the Houses, burst open the
doors, slew those that resisted, took those who yielded; the rest fled into
the next Field, whither some few of ours followed, (the greatest part being
employed in conveying the Men and Munition which the Enemy had left behind
them) and in the Field the skirmish was hotter then ever; Our men were too
eager to keep Rank or File, though they had known how to keep it, and
indeed their disorder was an advantage to us, for mixing themselves with the
Enemy, they fought securely in the mouth of the Enemies Canon, and in the eye
of one Body of their Forces, both placed in the Field above them; the Enemy not
daring to discharge, least with them they should slay their own Men,
(otherwise, they having 10 Fire-men for one, might have cut us off in an
instant) nor could ours use their Muskets otherwise then as Clubbs. To speak
ingeniously, their Commanders exasperated by the cowardice of their common
Soldiers, manifested great courage, but they smarted for it; our Sythes and
Clubbs now and then reaching them, and none else did they aim at: One amongst
the rest in a Scarlet Coat, our Club-men had got hold of (and he in all
probability, as some credible reports give us occasion to believe, was Colonel
Goring) and were spoiling him. Their Horse fearing the loss of such a Man,
became more courageous then they intended, leaped over the hedge, and rode full
upon our Men, forcing them to give a little ground; too Much (alas that they
had known him) to lose such a Man, but they quickly recovered the ground 'tho
they lost the Man; doubled their courage, would neither give nor take quarter;
(nor was this their cruelty, as the Enemy complains, but their ignorance) and
in the end forced both Man and Horse to leave the Field; and yet could not we
keep it, for we being separated from theirs, the Musketeers had liberty to
play upon us; and indeed they rained such a shower of lead amongst our men, as
forced them to retreat for shelter to the next hedge, and so hindered them from
pursuing, till they had removed their Canons. Their Ordnance all this time
played upon us, one of them ranged an 8 pound Bullet; yet see the Lords mercy
to us: that which was planted against the Steeple never hit it; another
intended for the skouring of Kirhgate, 'tho planted in as advantageous a place
as they desired, 'tho the Street was continually crowded with people; yea,
though many of their Bullets hit the Houses, and some the Street, yet was no
body at all hurt therewith; they bored indeed 3 or 4 Houses, yet (which is
observable) did most harm to a Malignants; and thus the terror of the Lord,
and of us falling upon them, sending their Foot and Artilery foremost, away they
went. (using their feet better then they used their hands) and about 50 of our
Clubbs and Muskets after them; Which courage in ours, did most of all astonish
the Enemy; who say, no 50 Men in the world, except they were madd or drunk,
would have pursued a Thousand: Our men indeed, shot as they were madd, and the
Enemy fell as they were drunk, and so we will devide it. Some discharged 10
some 12 times in the pursuit; and having the whole Body of the Enemy for their
butt, it may easily be imagined what good execution they did in a miles march
(for so far they pursued them) even to the Moore, where fearing to be
environed by their Horse, they retired, some of them so wearied with this 8
hours hot service, as they could scarce return to the Town, One thing I
cannot omit, a hearty Roundhead left by his comrades, environed with the
Enemies Horse, discharged his Musket upon one, struck down another Horse
with the thick end of it, broke a thirds Sword, beating it back to his throat,
and put them all to flight; which (though as the rest wonderful) I dare pawn
my credit to be true. And thus ended our skirmish; wherein there was

Slain of theirs, Sir John Harper, (as one Savile taken at Halifax
confesses,) Captain Wray (in whose pocket was found good store of gold, and a
Commission directed to Major Williams, which made us think him to be the Man)
and Captain Bins (whom they carried to Leeds scarce dead, and buried two days
after) and many common Soldiers, more I am persuaded then we shall ever know
of, Of ours, I cannot hear of two that perished by the Enemy in the fight.

Sir John Gothericke got a bastinado, had his Horse killed with a Sith, and
about a 100 common Soldiers were wounded, as we are informed from Leeds where
they are Billeted: Of ours, about 12. all curable except one or two.

Taken of theirs, Serjant Major Carew, (a Man of great account, borne in the
Low Countries of English Parents) 26 Common Soldiers, about 10 Horses, 180
weight of Powder, and about 40 Muskets; and thus God supplied our wants out of
the store, giving us as many more Muskets as we had, and well-nigh as much
Powder as we spent.

This was the issue of the fight, wherein nothing can be seen but God, and the
wonderful effects of his glorious Attributes: Let us and our Enemies both see
it, that they may fear and shame, that we may trust and praise our God, who
has manifested himself to be the Lord of Hosts.

A true Relation of the passages at Leeds, on Monday the 23. of January, 1642.
SIR Thomas Fairfax, son to the Lord General Fairfax, marched from Bradford
(six miles distant from Leeds) on Monday morning with 6. Troops of Horse, and
3. Companies of Dragoones under the command of Sir Henry Fowls Knight, his
Lieutenant General of the horse, and near a 1000 musketeers, with 2000.
Club-men, under the command of Sir William Fairfax Colonel, and Lieutenant
General of the Foot. One company of these being Dragoones under Capt. Mildmay,
and about 30 musketeers and 1000 club-men, marched on the South Side of the
River of Air to Hunslet-more above half a mile from Leeds, on the South-east
side toward Wakefield: and the rest on the North-side Air by Aperley-bridge
(20. yards of Christall-bridge being broke down by the enemy) to Wood
house-more. On the west side Leeds about a mile thence; where they commending
the cause to God by prayer, Sir Thomas dispeeded a Trumpeter to Sir William
Savile, who commanded in chief in Leeds, requiring in writing that Town to be
delivered him for the King and Parliament; which Sir William disdainfully
answered and said, he used not to give answer to such frivolous tickets, being
confident (it seems) that with the strength he had he could keep the Town,
wherein were about 2000. men. viz. 1500. foot, and 5. Troops of Horse and
Dragoons and two Demiculverins.

Sir Thomas approached nearer the South-west-side of the Town with his Forts
that came on the North-side air, and coming within view of the Town with
banners displayed (about 36. Colors) sent another Trumpetter to Sir William,
who shortly after by a Trumpetter assured him he should get nothing but by
fight, whereupon he drew out of his companies 5. Colors of his expertest
Soldiers, and appointed them to march down with Sergeant Major Forbes,
Captains Briggs, Lee, Francke and Palmer, with his Dragoones on foot, toward
the water along the trenches, drawn two yards breadth and height from M.
Harrisons new Church along the South Side of the Town to the water, an inner
trench being divided and drawn on the inside that long trench near the
waterside, compassed about the declivity of the Hill a little above the water.
Near to and above which about a 100 musketeers were drawn out of the Town,
and about 2 of the clock in the afternoon, gave fire from the inside of the
works upon Sir Thomas his musketeers, who approaching nearer shrouded
themselves under a hill at the South head of the great fields before the great
long Trench, and let fly at the said Centry with no loss at all to either
side, they within the Trenches shooting too high, and the other at the
Trenches; mean while Sir Wm. Fairfax, Sir Tho Norcliffe, and other Captains
leading their Companies to the West Side of the new Church, and the Troops of
Horse attending the enemies out-roads in the lanes and fields on the west, and
north parts; and the forts of the south side air, approaching the Bridge,
forced the Guarders to quit the works at the first centry, placed on the
outside the Houses toward Beiston, brake through the works, and shot at the
other strong centry at the Bridge end, where the Forts discharged upon them
without any loss to either side, but seeing the very near approach of the
Dragoons, Musketeers and many Club men and fearing the speedy forcing that
place they instantly fetched to the bridge the Demiculverin. And after about an
hours time spent in vain shooting between the Forts within and without the
works on the south side of the Town, as aforesaid. Sergeant Major Forbes most
bravely leading on his companies in the plain fields before the great Trenches,
his Lieutenant Horsfall of Halyfax, Captains Lee, Brigg and Francke contended
which should next follow, and Captain Chadwicks Lancashiere soldiers
accompanied: The Enemy shot most vehemently from the Trenches, yet killed none.

It was perceived by the Forts on the South Side Air, that if they could get
some musketeers over the fields to the water side without danger by the Cannon,
and musket from the bridge, they could force the great Centries from their
works on the other side the river (in regard they had made no other defense
against the south side water) and so open an easy passage to Ser-Major Forbs
and his forces; whereupon by single persons they got to the vvater-side, and
hid them in a little lane ( James Nayler one of the Dragooners being first)
vvhither they had no sooner got, then the Demiculverin from the bridge played
near them, and about 4. muskets from that little lane, and 2. from under a
stump of a tree, a little above by the vvater-side, discharged amongst the
Centry, and one man being there slain, the rest perceived their error, and in
conclusion fled apace out of the lower Centry, which being espied by those on
the south side air (Sergeant Major Forbes and his company not discerning them,
for the height of their works hindered) a great shout from those on the
south side of the water, discovered it to the Sergeant Major, who with his
forces coming down toward the vvater-side was helped by Lieutenant
Horsfall, who lending him his shoulder to climb the top of the works, be
most furviously and boldly entered the works single, him his said Lieutenant
(vvading through the riverside below the work) next followed most
resolutely, them the rest followed, and M. Jonathan Scholefield (the Minister
at Croston chapel in Halifax Parish near To^merdeu) in their Company begun,
and they sung the 1 verse of the 68 Psalm, Let G^darife, and then his enemies
shall be scattered, and those that (...) him flee before him. And instantly
after the great shout on the south side river, still informing of the enemies
flight from the upper and next Centry (where about a 100 were) Sergeant Major
entered that also, and M. Scholefield begun, and they sung another like verse.
So these works being gained, the enemy fled into the Houses, and shot again
furiously at those who had entered their works, who pursuing their victory,
went up along the inside the works to the third centry at the lane near M.
Metcalses house, where fierce shot being made from a new house and all about,
two men of Sergeant Major Forbes company were shot dead, here Captain Lee
entering that centry from the lane, leading from Chrystall-bridge, was shot in
the leg above the ankle, some bones being broken and took out, he is likely
shortly to recover. The victory they pursued, though with great difficulty;
Captain Briggs drawing toward the old-church, was from an House shot under
the chin near the throat, and in the arm, though not mortally, as is hoped.
The Enemy flying along a street or lane, from the 2. centries near the water
into the heart of the Town, where the other Demiculverin lay to guard that
passage, Sir William met them, and enquiring the cause of their flight, was
answered that their works were entered, he called on them, go beat them out,
promising to lead them, yet they denied: which he seeing, and that 12.
musketeers, drawn on both sides that lane by Mr. Scholefield had gained that
Cannon by killing the Cannoneere (though with loss of a gray cotes, the one
vvherof being shot, did fight beyond the strength of a man) he and the rest,
perceiving the Town lost, about an hour after the first centry was entered)
fled away, thinking to get over the bridge toward Wakefield, and some of them
(upon occasion of the club-mens beating back from that centry by shot from any
house near the bridge end) got, to the number of 40, by the south side water,
down toward Hunslet, but were many of them taken, amongst whom Captain
Thirlwell Sir William seeing that way blockt, with many others fled amain
back to the old-Church, by the south side whereof by fine force they made way
through clubs and fouling pieces along the north-side air toward Pomfret. Sir
William being near drowning in the passages. Many Ancients, Drums and foot
taken, and some slain here, viz. Captain Widrington, Maud of Wake-field,
Hunsworth of Leeds, and others, captain Errington was drowned, so were M.
Robinson vicar of Leeds and others, viz M. Calvery of Calvery, and M. Iackson
of Leeds; and 460. common soldiers taken, with about 14. barrels of
Gun-pouder, great store of match, 2 cannons and many muskets. So the Town
being taken about 4 a clook, notice hereof came to Wakefield about 6, the
Garrison there about 12 quitted that place, and the Malignants thereof, M
Nevile, Paulden, Reyser and the rest conveyed what goods they could to
Pomfret, whence also the next night they fled away with 30. carriages, and all
except about 200. who keep the castle; and captains Birkehead and Wilson
with about 200 muskets and near 1400. club-men from about Almurbury, and 3
Troops from Leeds, entered vacant Wakefield the same Tuesday, and that night,
and captain Radcliffe, and near as many musketeers and club-men on the next
day from Quick, etc

As the musketeers and club men retreated from the vvater-side after the first
a centries were vvon, the cannon from the bridge played amongst them, and as
they went on in the lane, leading to Beiston, it beat down the bars of a
tenter which flew amongst them; and the next shot from it crushed the top of an
house, yet did no more harm; These of Halifax Parish, viz. one Michael
Woodhead was shot upon his tin-buttons, and his dublet burst near his heart,
and the bruised bullet fell down into his breeches and no more hurt; John
Milnes man, had his coat, dublet, and 2 shirts shot through to his collar bone
on his back, whence the bullet rebounded and no hurt, but a little rotting of
the flesh since; one Lilly, M. Tho. Listers man, had a bullet shot into the
hilt of his sword, whereby the hilt was drawn out almost as small as wyre where
the bullet light and no hurt.

About 20 slain, 10. of Sir Tho: Fairfax part, whereof Sir Tho Norcliffe lost 2
men, as they entered Leeds near new-church: The works cost about 500 lb The
460. prisoners are all discharged (save about 20) upon oath taken never to
serve against King and Parliament; and Leeds and Wakefield strongly guarded.

FINIS.

