Learning's Foundation FIRMLY LAID, IN A SHORT METHOD of Teaching to READ
ENGLISH, More exact and easy then ever was yet published by any: Comprehending
All things necessary for the perfect and speedy attaining of the same. Whereby
any one of discretion may be brought to read the Bible truly in the space of a
month, though he never knew letter before. The truth whereof has been
confirmed by manifold experience.

BY GEORGE ROBERTSON, Schoolmaster between the two North-Doors of Paul's, in
the new Buildings.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Maxey. 1651.

To the Reader.
THou have here (good Reader) a more easy, familiar, and perfect way to read
English then ever was published; Wherein is not only contained a speedy and
certain way for reading of English, but also for understanding of numbers,
usual abbreviations, all manner of points, clearly described in their names and
uses; And generally all things useful or incident to reading, so as the
learner shall not need any other book for his help of reading but only this;
which being perfectly learned, the learner shall be able to cast up any chapter
of the Bible, and read it truly and perfectly, though he have never seen a
Bible before: wherein the progress will be very easy, being from letters to
syllables and words of all sorts, first in order, then out of order, to prevent
learning by rote. By which (with some directions which I shall be willing to
impart) one that can read may perform what is here promised upon any of
ordinary capacity, being desirous to learn; which directions are here
altogether omitted, because the principal of them cannot be imparted but by
word of mouth.

My genius indeed leads me so much to other studies, as that I could hardly
afford my felfe any spare time to look after this, if my conscience did not
tell me, that that candle which the Lord has lighted to me in this way, so
bright beyond all that ever were before me, must not he put under a bushel,
but on a candle stick, that so far as I am able, I may make it shine to all the
world, especially to the place where my lot is cast. And indeed, when I
seriously consider the fruits of my labors by this Method, and by my way of
teaching the same, and the fruits of the labors of them that learned the same
of me (who live comfortably by it, acting far beyond what others of the
profession do, which is a testimony of the validity of the Method by which they
do act) I can see no one thing besides whereby I can benefit the Commonwealth
more then by this, as I have found by experience. For some have come to me
after spending many years at School, until for stature and years they were
ready to be prentices, but void of all other qualifications, whom in a short
time I have considerably qualified in every kind. Others of age have for the
space of some 12, some 16, some 20, and some more years together scarched
diligently after reading of English, and not attained it in any measure, whom
by Gods blessing I have brought to read the Scriptures truly in the space of a
month. Reading of English is a very easy thing; but the easy way is not as
yet known of all.

But some may say, That such things may be performed upon those that are quick
of apprehension; But there may be as small hopes of those that are dull, by
that way as by another.

To whom I answer, I know nor do acknowledge no such thing as a dull person,
either young or old; but (though there be degrees in that as in other things)
all are capable; for I have taught those by this Method, who never could be
made to couceive any thing by the old way, to read the Bible perfectly in a
short time: yea some who were very imperfect in speeking, I have made read
plain before they couldspeak plain, who after have spoke as plain as others by
practicing reading after the way of this Method; and all in a short time, to
the admiration of parents and others that did see and hear it, who will be
ready to witness the same upon occasion.

So those that be called block-heads or dull, are much injured, because the
reasons do not proceed from themselves, but either from the carelessness of
parents, who do not keep their children close to School; or their too much
indulgency, that will not commit them wholly to the Tutor; or from the rigor of
a rigid cruel teacher; or from an irregular endless Method of teaching, of
many years practice, and in the end no perfection; impossible to be
comprehended of a tender-brained child, and therefore must be beaten in with
rods and scourges, and what he gets must be deerly bought with blood and sweat,
whereby he is discouraged, and his affections quite crushed and withdrawn from
all learning, and from School, which turns to be a grinding and tormenting
house unto him, and not a delight. And to teach one of discretion and years by
these old jumbling irregular ways, is (just as one searching for the
Philosophers stone) to be ever searching, and never finding; as I have known by
hundreds in my time, and never finding; as I have known by hundreds in my time,
and never heard of one come to perfection; to the which I shall bring them in a
months time with ease and delight to the learner. And as for young children,
if they have an easy ingression by a pleasant Method, and a smiling Tutor, who
in the first place labors to get into their affections, and to find out
their dispositions, and follow them according thereto; Then will they run the
way of their learning with alacrity, rejoicing in their loving Master, and
triumphing in their victories by their easy Method of reading; every degree of
progress encouraging them to a further advance: So that nothing shall be more
pleasant then the School, nothing more delightful then their Masters company.

This (good Reader) have I found by experience, and therefore I exhort thee,
whether thou be Tutor or Parent, that thou prejudge not this Work as slight and
inconsiderable, until thou have well weighed those necessary directions that I
have yet further to impart: whereby thou shall find the same effects which I
have found, who (I assure you) never met with any young nor old, desirous to
learn, but I brought them to reading, unless it were the fault of the Parent,
distrustfully pulling them away in the very nick of time, and but a very few of
those: for, I believe (notwithstanding a combination of base people (for whose
good I have hazarded my own undoing) suborned such as themselves, both private
and public, every one acting according to their qualifications; some by subtle
underminings, others (more shameless) by open practices, endeavoring to
subvert me, by polluting the ears of my honest Neighbors and Customers with
the poison of Asps which is under their tongues; yea, and deceived honest
people, persuading them to run that course with them; who afterward seeing
their base, wicked and unjust ends, were ashamed, and fell off from them. I
know that there is no evil in the City but the Lord has done it, who is holy
and just in all his judgments, and will not punish without a cause, before whom
I lay my hand upon my mouth, and acknowledge my self not able to answer one of
a thousand of his judgments; but in regard of them, the righteous Lord judged
righteously, and brought forth my righteousness as the sun, and disappointed
them of all their wicked and unjust plots.) I believe (I say) none of my
profession have met with more honest customers then I have done, who
notwithstanding these things, have trusted me, and do not repent when they see
their children so perfect of the English, and can give so good account of their
proceeding in Latin in so short a time; and see the vast difference between
those that have been removed from me for a time, and these who have been
constant with me.

These my endeavors (Reader) I recommend to thee and to all Parents of
children, and my brethren of the profession, wishing from my heart that you
were acquainted with them in the effects as I am, that you might accept of
them, and make use of them; so shall I find reward in my labors, and rest thy
friend,

G. R.

Brief Directions.
LEt as many learn together as conveniently may, matching every one with a fit
mate; let all say by course, principally the most negligent, the rest
(especially the mate) looking on and correcting what he misseth. Let each one
carefully point to every Letter with a Fescue drawn leisurely and steddily from
Letter to Letter, sounding every one as he touches it, that he do not miscall,
misplace, put out, nor put in: the forefinger of the left hand may guide them
to the beginning of the next line. Encourage the well-doer by commendation or
reward, to keep them in striving to excel one another.

Let them not take a new Lesson until they have well learned the old; nor take
too much at a lesson, nor continue too long without intermission. Let them give
every Letter his true sound distinctly, not sounding e as ee: nor confounding
pb. bv. vf. cg. gj. td. mn. sz. j chapter ch sh. What Let is to any most difficult,
let him carefully observe you drawing it with your pen in a fair paper. To
learn the Consonants, let them often repeat it with the two first syllables made
thereof. Beware they give not too much sound unto them, especially to the
Mutes. In a syllable let them not divide the sound of the consonant from the
vowel.

The words of the rule of Quantity are to be read by pairs, the short with the
long; as, fire, fir.

In spelling of a long word, let them go on to the end, without stop or
division into syllables: and instantly go it over again once or twice, every
time faster, until they have the right pronunciation of it. Let the Numbers be
read both as cardinals, and ordinals.

a e i o u y

i o a e u y

a i u e o y e u

i a o y u a i e

ai ei oi au eu ou ea oa ee oo

ay ey oy aw ew ow ea oa ee

oo ea oi au ei ow ay oa eu oo

oi ee ei oa eu au.

ea e au a oa o ee i u oo

e ea a au o oa i ee oo u.



n na ne ni no nu nee no

s sa se si so su see so

f fa fe fi fo fu fee foo

v va ve vi vo vu vee voo

d da de di do du dee do

b ba be by bo bu be boo

l la le li lo lu lee loo

r ra re ri to ru ree roo

g ga ge gi go gu gee goo

k ka ke ki ko ku kee koo

z za ze zi zo zu zee zoo

w wa we wi woe we woo

t ta te ti to tu tee too

y ya ye yo ye

p pa pe pi po pu pee poo

j ja je ji jo ju jee joo



h ha he hi ho hu he hoo

s as es is os us ees oos

x ax ex ix ox ux eex oox.

d r l b d p c g s f v w

m n k c g s z s t x h j

y l r b d u m s f v j g

c b p d w t s z f k s h.

b d p d b p u n b p d

u n j s f l k n h b d p

d b p d h p b p h d.

ae ei oe oi au ee oo oa ea



be de fe ge he je ke le me ne pe re se te ve xe ye ze.

by di fi gi hi ji ki li mi ni pi ri si ti vi xi yi zi.

bo co do fo go ho jo ko lo mo no po to so to vo xo yo zo.

bu cu du fu gu hu ju ku lu mu nu pu ru su tu vu xu zu.

ca do fi le nu sa ri bo me gu ha by pe ru to vi za.



lamoderusivagonebufi



em es en el of ez ex eb ed eg ep et er ec eh.

im is in il if iz ix ib id ig ip it ir ic ih.

om os on ol of oz ox ob od og op ot or oc oh.

um us un ul uf us ux ub ud ug up ut ur uc uh uk.

om is ul en of az ib uc ed og ap it ur ex om as il un of oz ab ic ud eg op at
ir ux em es al in uf ez ob id ug ep ot ar ix um es ol an if uz eb oc ad ig up
et or ax im us el on af iz ub ec od ag ip ut er ex ah iz.

ea ead eal eam ean ear eat. oa oad oal oam oan oar oat. eal oam ean oar eat
oan ear oat ead oal eam oad.



mem mes men mel mef mez mex meb med meg mep mec met mer meh mek.

mim mis min mil mif miz mix mib mid mig mip mic mit mir mih mik.

mom mos mon mol mof moz mox mob mod mog mot mor mop moc moh mok.

mum mus mun mul muf muz mux mub mud muc mut mur mug mup muh muk.



lem les len lel lef lez lex leb led leg lep lec let ler leh lek.

lim lis lin lil lif liz lix lib lid lig lip lic lit lir lih lik.

lom los lon lol lof loz lox lob lod log lop loc lot lor loh lok.

lum lus lun lul luf luz lux lub lud lug lup luc lut lur luh luke

nam was lan fall daf vaz tax rab wad bag sap hat far zam ras dan bal wax rag
hap nab sat gad ran wall fas bad fam har zax call yan cap yal.

nem was len fell def vez tex

nim wis lin fill dif viz tix rib wid big sip hit fir zim ris din bil wix rig
hip nib sit gid rin will fis bid sim her zix.

nom wos lon fol dof voz tox rob wod bog sop hot for zom ros don bol wox rog
hop nob sot god ron wol fos bod some hor zox col yon cop yol.

number lun full duf vuz tux rub bug sud hut fur zum rus dun bull rug hup nub sut
good run fus bud sum hur zux cul cup.



batfoxredhuldigwasnebzin



bab bal ban bat bat.

bibe bide bile bite bize

bib bid bil bit biz

bobe bode bone bore box

bob bod bon bor box.

bube bude bule bute buze

bub bud bull but buz.

file fine fire fite fix

fill fin fir fit fix.

mude mule mure mute muze

mud mul mur mut muz.

wade wale wane ware wax

wad wall wan war wax.



qu qua que qui quee quo (...)


th tha the thy thee thoo (...)
(...)


th tha the thy thee thoo (...)


ch cha che chi chee choo

ph pha phe phi phee phoo

wh wha when whi whee whoo

sh sha she shi she shoo.

wh ch th qu ph sh oo ee

ph th wh ch qu ph ee oo

th wh sh qu sh ch oo ee

ch ph qu sh wh th ee oo

qua choo she phu thy wha

shoo quee cho why pha thee

chi sha when tho qui phe

thu who phi chee sho que.



br bra bre bri bro bru bree

ch cha che chi cho chu chee

cl cla cle cli clo clu clee

cr cra cre cri cro cru cree

dr dra dre dri dro dru droo

dw dwa dwe dwi dwo

fl fla fle fli flo flu flee floo

fr fra fre fri fro fru free

gl gla gle gli glo glu glee gloo

gn gna gne gni gno gnu

gr gra gre gri gro gru gree

kn kna kne kni kno knu knee

ph pha phe phi pho phu

pl pla ple pli plo plu

pr pra pre pri pro pru

sc sca sco scu.



shr shra shre shri shro shru

sk ska ske ski sko sku skree.

sl sla sle sli slo slu slay

sm sma sme smi smo smu smoo

sn sna sne sni sno snu snee.

sp spa spe spi spo spu spee

spl spla sple spli splo splu splee

spr spra spre spri spro spru

squ squa sque squi squo squee

st sta ste sti sto stu stee sty

str stra stre stri stro stru stree

sw swa swe swi swo swee

thr thra three thri through thru

thw thwa thwe thwi thwo

tr tra tree tri tro true tree

tw two twe twi two twee



wr wra wre wri wro

phr phra ps psa spe sph sphe.

bl st dr fl sm cr sl scl ph

sk br gl th spl pr sn ch tr sp

cl sh gn sc fr pl str kn sw gr

wh scr dw shr tw spr thw wr

squ phr sph ps scr dw kn sw

ps thw shr tw sph wr squ gn

dw ps wr thw spr tw shr dw

squ kn ps wr phr sw gr dw sph

blu sti dra flo sme cru sly

pha sko bre glu thy pra

sne cho true spi cla gno

she fru sco pla stre kni.



phe sku bri gla tho pre chi

fui tra spo cle gna shi fra.

sco ple stru kni swa gro when

scru dwi shra two spre thwi

spla wro sque phra sphe psa.

blo ste dru fly sma cro sle

phu sky bra glo the pru chi

sna tro spe clu gni sha fro.

sca plu stra kne swo gre who

sci dwa shro twe spru thwa

splo wre squo phri spha pso

scra dwo spre knu swi psa.

thwo shre twi spe wra squo

gne scru dwi spra kno swe

psu thwi shra twe sphu

wri squa gno scle dwa.







ffe affe effe iffs offs uffs

ck ack eck icks ocks ucks

dde add edde idds odds udds

mme amme emme imms omms umms

nne anne enne inns onns unns

rre arre err irrs orrs urrs.

ass onne eck udde isse amme

orre egg usse innes ack odd

esse umme irre osse enns uck

idde affe omme err isse anne

ocks add uffs imme arrs esse.

basse son peck budde stiff ram

dorre leg trusse sins back todde

weffe sum fur quaffe penns muck

lidde wa^es loss hemme miss locks.



bs abs ebs ibs obs ubs

ch ach each ich och uch

cle acle ecle icle ocle ucle

cre acrce ecre icre ocre ucre

ct act ect icts octs ucts.

dle adle edle idle odle udle

fle afle efle ifle ofle ufle

ft aft eft ifts ofts ufts

fth afth efth ifth ofth ufth

gle agle egle igle ogle ugle

gs ags eggs igs ogs ugs.

lch alch elch ilch olch ulch

lct alct elct ilcts olcts ulcts

ld ald eld ild old uld

lf alf elf ilf olf ulf

lk alk elk ilks olks ulks



ln alne elne ilne olne ulne

lp alp elp ilps olps ulps

ls als else ils ols uls

lt alt elt ilts olts ults

lth alth elth ilth olth ulth.

lve alve elve ilve olve ulve

mb amb emb imb omb umb

mble amble emble imble omble umble

mne amne emne imne omne umne

mp amp emp imp omp ump

mph amph emph imph omph umph.

mple ample emple imple omple umple

mpse ampse empse impse ompse umpse

mpt ampt empt impt ompt umpt

nch anch ench inch onch unch

ncle ancle encle incle oncle uncle

nct anct enct inct onct unct



ndle andle endle indle ondle undle

ng ang eng ings ongs ungs

ngle angle engle ingle ongle ungle

ngst angst engst ingst ongst ungst

ngth angth ength ingth ongth ungth

nk ank enk inks onks unks

ns ans ens ins ons uns

nt ant ent ints onts unts

nth anth enth inth onth unth

ntle antle entle intle ontle untle

ple aple eple iple ople uple

ps aps eps ips ops ups

pt apt ept ipt opt upt

pth apth epth ipth opth upth

rb arb erb irb orb urb

rble arble erble irble orble urble.



rcle arcle ercle ircle orcle urcle

rd ard erdle irdle ordle urdle

rf arf erf irf orf urf

gle rgle ergle irgle orgle urgle

rk ark erk irk ork urk.

rle arle earl irle orle urle

rld arld erld irld orld urld

rme arm erme irme orme urme

rmth armth ermth ormth

rne arne erne irne orne urne

rp arp erp irp ord urp

rple arple erple irple orple urple.

rse earse erse irse orse urse

rs ears ers irs ors urs

rsh arsh ersh irsh orsh ursh

rst arst erst irst orst urst.



rtle artle ertle irtle ortle urtle

rth arth earth irth orth urth

rve arve erve irve orve urve

sht asht esht isht osht usht

sk ask esk isk osk usk.

sle asle esle isle osle usle

sme asme esme isme osme usme

sp asp esp isp osp usp

st ast est is it ost ust

stle astle estle istle ostle ustle.

tch atch etch irch otch utch

tle attle ettle ittle ottle uttle

ts ats ets its ots uts

xt axt ext ixt oxt uxt

zle azle ezle izle ozle uzle.



ce cel cen cent cep cer cease ci cil cim cir cise cite.

ge gel gem gen gent ger ges gi gib gil gin gip.

tiall tian tien tion tious.

question bestiall mixtion. sx


ce gil tian gem cir gel tion cep

gen tial gent cim ger tious gig

cent gi tion gin cer ge tien cel

gip tious ges gib cent gi tion

cite gen cise Virgil accent gibbet

cellar deceive ginger citron gemme

cider motion virgin surcease

council gentle civil recite.

ce ace ece ice oce uce

ge age ege ige oge uge

nce ance ence ince once unce

rc earce erce irce orce urce

dge adge edge idge odge udge

nge ange enge inge onge unge

rge arge erge irge orge urge.







va ve vi vo vu

jade jef job jud

vade ved vide void

gne igne sign aign eign oign g


reign arraigne sovereign design resign phlegm assign.

debt doubt lamb kemb comb tomb b
womb dumb thumb.

scene obscene ascend ascent descend c
descent ascertain discern scepter scedule concupiscence

sci sciatica science conscience disciple discipline conscious lascivious.

schi schism schismatic schismatic

handkerchiefe handmaid handsome d


unhandsome friendship

heard heart george e


igh high nigh sigh weigh thigh, etc. cough gh
tough through, etc. straight light might night sight bought brought naught
thought sought

heir hour guess ghest ghost. John author h
authority myrrh

bruise suit fruit conduit circuit. i


damosel jeopardie yeoman feoffe o
goal gracious precious courageous

buy build guard guess guest guide u
guile guilt guise disguise catalogue

league plague decalogue dialogue epilogue prologue prorogue tongue oblique
relic heretic traffic.

e as ee, be he me we people.

ie as ee, biere besiege chief grief friend field shield priest liege lieu
lieutenant view adieu. o as oo or u short, to do two conie some son. u as w,
gualter guerdon language anguish languish distinguish exstinguish. cc as x,
accent access.



- shep-herd shep-hooke dis-hearten dishonest dis-honour fals-hood gos-hawke
gras-hopper household knighthood lanthorn neat-heard pot-heard pot-hooke
priesthood.

real reenter theater preamble coeternall coequal Jezreel Bezaleel mutual.

ayl eyl oil awl ewl owl eal

aid eid oid and eud oud oad

ayn eyn oyn awn ewn own

air eir oir aur eur our oar

ayt eyt oyt awt ewt out eat

aim eim oim aum eum oum.

laid leid loid laud lewd loud

said seid soid saud seud soud

raid reid roid raud reud roud

nail neil noil naul newl noul.



Aa Bb Cc Dd Ee Ff Gg Hh Ii Jj Kk Ll Mm Nn Oo Pp Qu qu Rr Sss Tt Vu Uu Ww Xx Yy
Zz.

Aa Bb Cc Dd Ee Ff Gg Hh Iij Kk Ll Mm Nn Oo Pp Qu qu Rrr Sss Tt Uuu Ww Xx Yy Zz

Ch ch Ph ph Sh sh Th th Wh wh.

Ch ch Ph ph Sh sh Th th Wh wh.

Ch ch Ph ph Sh sh Th th Wh wh.

ct ff ffi ffl fi fl si sl ss ssi st.

ct ff ffi ffl fi fl si sl ss ssi st st.

ct ff ft fl si ss sl st.

ai ei oi aw ew ow ay ey oy au eu ou ee oo ea oa

ai ei oi aw ew ow ay ey oy au eu ou ee oo ea oa

ai ei oi aw ew ow ay ey oy au eu ou ee oo ea oa.



P Qu R S T V U W X Y Z.

A L K U R T B I D H G F M E N

Y D M F N E B O H R T K L G I

C Qu A R V S H P Z F T L O W.

Qu Sh Th Ph Ch Wh Th Sh Ph

Wh Ch Ph Wh Th Sh Ch Ph Th

And Men Lot Red Fall Did Nut

Can Pot Sell Inch Quit Hall But

King Zeal Or Vent Your End Gal

Top Xeno Why Chalk Sheep Thus

Quil What Cheap Shall Those Well

Know Lamp Ear Hand Fill Green

Root Name Yet Make Faith Dear.

East When Chair Thine Show Art

Ship Then Whose Child Where

Aid Bench Good From Death Sin

This Draw Blaze Stair Glow Play

Shril Chafe Two Praise Bend Axe

Come John Hope Give Much Not

Keep Live Push Time Small Ripped.



ai ei oi aw ew ow ee oo

ay ey oy au eu ou ea oa

ai ow ei oo eu oi aw ee ay ou ei oa ew

oy au ea ai ow ei oo eu oa ee ail owd

eim oot eur oin awl eed aim out eyr oan

ewl oyd aum eat air own eyl ood eum oit

awr even ayl oud eim ook eut air awn eel

aid oum eit oar ewn oil and eam.

ss sl sp st ss ff st st ct ch ph sh th wh fl th ct sh st ph sp ch sl wh ss ct
ff st ph sp wh ss ch ct ss th st sl ff sh sp fl.



E A N B I P V M G E D K W T U R Qu Y M A G T J P K V E M R N A U B Qu D Y Z.

Ch Ph Sh Th Wh Art Hill Rod Pull Eat Kid Let Vow Bill Your Mud For Wit Send
Call In Ox Dig Tub Zeal. Xeno Quiet Shall Which That Philip Cheap When Those Arm
Gloze Bride Plate Dream Stain Whole Freeze Crow Kept End Vine March East Quash
Ear Should Gripe Chafe Strive Inch Hymn Mount Fix Gnaw Breed.

ce gil tian gem cir gel tion cep gen tial gent cim ger tious gib cent gi gin
cer ge tien cel gip tious ges cite ace orge ince uge earce ange irce odge urg
ence age orce enge ice arge once ege urce inge adg oce erge ige unce onge adge
uce irge ance ulge erce udge oce erge orce unge idge ece.







v b p qu d v w m r x m w x r qu p b v d b v x a o d g p qu y z s f l k h b v d
m n u i t r x y z r s a u n m w d w v b h k g.

ai ei oi aw aw ew ow ay ey oy au eu ou ee oo ea oa ai ow ei oo eu oi aw ee ay
ou ey oa ew oy au ea.

aid own eit oor eul oid awn eek ayn oul eyd oam ewt oyr aun ead ff fl ss st sl
ct ch ph sh th wh sl th si ct sl sh st ph ss ch ff wh sl ct sl bl st dr fl sm
cr sl ph sk br gl th pr sn ch tr sp cl sh gn sc fr pl str kn sw gr wh scr dw
shr tw spr th w spl wr squ phr sph ps spr tw shr dw.

stadroflelmucryslaphoskebrugh

thaprothesnutrisweknaspridwa

scradwesproknuswignashrapsa

thwesquawrosphignesprvdwy

scropsiwreswasphothwashritwe

knisquotwasphipsothweshragni.



A C L H E K P B T R N J G U D F Y D S Qu M X W Z.

A L C B R Qu T P J N G H K E W M O F Z U D Y S Qu M X U Z D O Qu R K D R K S C
A F B P N J W.

Sh Th Ph Ch Wh Th Ch Ph Sh Wh Ch Th Sh Ph Wh Sh Th Chapter

Ark Pit Ball Sod Quip Dog Hap Out Kill Rob Cut Lop Will Yet Full Nor Xeno Zeal
Egg In Til Meat Got Uan Call Ten Was Keep Chair.

ce gen tion cep gil tian cer gem tial gent cim ger tious gib cent gel tion gin
cer ge tien cel gip cite gen cise ace odge irce ange earce uge ince orge once
ege arge ice enge orce age ence urge ige unce erge oce adge inge urce ege erce
ulge ance irge uce edge onge earce idge ece unge orce.



Adieu allegiance ambassador anguish antichrist arraigne ascend ascertaine
assign atchieve attempt author anthoritie Banquet beauty beautiste beguile
besiege biere bought brought bru^se buy build busy business Catalogue
catechisime character surgeon choler chrisme Christ christian chronicle
circuit coheire comb concupiscence conduit confession conscience conscious
conveigh cupboard Damosel daughter deaf debt decalogue deputy descend dialogue
dipthung disciple discipline disguise dishearten dishonest dishonor doubt
dough doung Eccbo eight errand excbequer extinguish Faishood feoffe phlegm
foreign friendship fright fruit Goal guess ghest ghost goshawk grasshopper
guard guerdon guest guide guile guild guise Hanghtic heir hour honshould
hymn Jealousy jeopardy juice ivy just Calendar kemb knight knighthood Lamb
language languish lan^^orn lascivious league lewd light liquor lieu lieutenent
Might mirthe melancholy mishap monarch monarchy Neatheard neglect negligence
neighbor nephew night nymph nostrill naught Ohlique ought Pantosle patriarch
peaceable people fantasy pight plague plight pomegranat potherh pothook
priest priesthood prologue prorogue psalm psalmist psalter puisant Quince
quiver Raigue relic relieve renown resign rhyme rhetorique rheum rogue
Sceduele sanguine scepter sepulcher schism schismatic school scholar
sciatica science shepherd shield sight sign solemn sought soldiers sphere
straight subtle subtlety suite swound synagogne Tetrarch though thought
thro^le through thyme tomb thumb tougue traffic travel triacle triumph
twilight two Uice vicount victual view unhandsome Womb women wrangle wreath
wren wrench wretch wrest wright wring wrought Xenophon Yeoman yunugh iron Zeal.






IMAGE MASTER PREF ACE DOCTRINE HOLY REASON METHOD PROPHET DIVINE TESTAMENT
BAPTISM HONORABLE ADDITION REVEREND GENERAL IMPRINTED EXCELLENT AFFLICTION

OUR MOST GRACIOUS LORD JESUS CHRIST SON OF GOD THE FATHER, PRINCE OF THE
KINGS OF THE EARTH WHICH WAS SENT FROM HEAVEN FOR, etc.



knarmblstrengthdwimplstwrenchthwarmble

scrombstdwintchthwarnstwrathplgnorstht

psarldthwingstknarmpthwinchwrangl

sprongstspharthpldwelfthwranglknormth

swarmblethwermthwrinktwelfthstarndl

thwimpstsquarmthwrindlshroughthwism

dwernsthwrongsphromblthgnoshtwrench

glofthsworndlthwinsptdwarmthstwrolnchth

gnashtwrenchdwangstromblewrnight

swomptdwarldnshrilmthwarmpstspritch

thwerndlshramptknornsthwrinstlethraxt

knelzthwartswonbrimsnthlartzexspgrith

swarmstgrolnchdwarnsmeltstungswird

gnashthrontwrengthsworlbrashthwinsme.

Abbreviations upon Vowels.
a^ e^ o^ u^. a^ e^ o^ u^. a^ e^ o^ u^.

a^ an am, e^ en em, o^ on om, u^ un um.

As for example,

Remember my Co^me^datio^ns to all my friends at Farnha^, and to all my
acquaintance at Fullu^, to who^ I wish abu^da^ce of peace, plenty, consolation,
etc.

and is put for and. etc. for and so forth.

The Names and description of the Points used in Printing are as follows, viz.
Comma noted thus [,] Semi-colon thus [;] Colon thus [:] Period thus [.]
Interrogation thus [?] Admiration thus [!] Parenthesis thus () The note of
Continuation thus [-] Apostrophus thus ['l]
Directions for their Use.
At [,] stay or stop a little; as, Back-biters, haters of God, despiteful,
proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to Parents, without
understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable, etc.
Romans 1. 30.

At [;] stay a pretty while; and at [:] stay somewhat longer: As, They that hate
me without a cause, are more then the hairs of my head; they that would destroy
me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: Then Prestored that which I took
not away. Psalm. 69. 4. A fool utters all his mind: but a wise man keeps it
in till afterward. Prove. 29. 10.

At [.] make a full stay, sounding the last word before it somewhat lower: as,
Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks. Quench not
the Spirit. Despise not prophecyings. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 20. Honor all men. Love
the brotherhood. Fear God* Honor the King. 1 Pet. 2. 17.

At [?] make a full stay, sounding the whole Whose ox have I taken? or whose
ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? etc. 1 Samuel
12. 3.

At [!] make a full stay; and sound the whole sentence before it, as wondering
or crying out: as, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me, etc. Romans 7.
24. O Death, where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy victory! 1 Cor. 15. 55.

At () observe that the words between those compass strokes must be sounded
somewhat different from the rest, as being an addition to the sentence, which
would be perfect without them: as, Know ye not, Brethren, (for I speak to them
that know the law) that the law has dominion over a man as long as he lives?
I know that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing, Romans 7. 1, 18.

The [-] is used when one part of a word is put at the end of a line, and the
other part begins the next line; or else when two words are (by way of
elegancy) as it were joined in one; as, self-love for the love of ones self:
quick-sighted, for one that has a quick sight.

The Apostrophus, being a small point put to the top of a letter thus ['d] is
used for the cutting off a vowel or article, whereby two words or syllables are
sounded like one: as, ' it is, or it is, for it is; 'twere, for it were; he will,
for he will: and commenced, for commenced; maintained, for maintained.

My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou, not refraining thy foot, etc.
for Consent thou not, refraining thy foot, etc. for Consent thou not,
refraining thy foot, etc. So, Christ says, St Peter died for us; for, Christ
(says St Peter) died for us.

Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them; I will liken him to a wise
man, which built his house upon a rock, etc. and the floods beat upon it, and
it fell, not because it was grounded upon a rock. For, and it fell not, Matthew.
7. 24, 25.

Speak you righteously, O ye Congregation. Judge ye justly, O ye sons of men.
For, Speak you righteously, O ye Congregation? Judge ye justly, O ye sons of
men? Psalm. 58. 1.

Usual Abbreviations.
Sr for Sir, Mr Master, Sch. Scholar, Qu. question, Ans. answer, Obj.
objection, Sol. solution, Chap. chapter, v. verse, viz. that is, Page page,
Lin. line.

Mr Sch. Sr Qu. Ans. Obj. Sol. viz. Chap. v. Page Lin. Sch. Mr Sr Ans. Qu. Sol.
Obj. viz. Chap. Page V. Lin. Mr Qu. Chap. viz. Lin. Sch. Ans. Page Obj. St V.
Sol. etc.

Good Sr, I have a suit from my Sons Mr, concerning his Scho. viz. that when he
has read a chap. you will appose him with a Qu. or two out of any v. or lin.
you shall think meet; and then out of his Ans. to frame an Obj. or two, by his
Sol. to try him, viz. how he understands what he reads.

For I perceive by his Mr, that a Sch. exercised in answering a Qu. propounded,
and then giving sol. to an obj. there against, shall be made not only more
careful to mark the contents of every page and chap. but the better to
understand and remember every lin. and v. that he reads; Which, good Sr, let
me entreat, etc.

The characters of the figures, with their use.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200

300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000.

The numeral Letters, and their value
I IV V VI IX X XL L XC C D M 1 4 5 6 9 10 40 50 90 100 500 1000

X V I L C M D L X C V M D C I L M IX XL XC CXC IV CIV XIX M CIX LX

i ii iii iiii iv v vi vii viii ix x xx xxx xl l lx lxx lxxx xc c v ii ix vii
iv cviii xlvi lv xcii clxii Mcclxvii xcix lxxxvi cxlix xv xxi x xviii MDcxix
MDCLI.

FINIS.
The Names, and Order of all the Books of the Old and New TESTAMENT, with the
Number of their Chapters.
GEnesis has -- Chapters 50 Exodus 40 Leviticus 27 Numbers 36 Deuteronomie 34
Joshua 24 Judges 21 Ruth 4 I. Samuel 31 II. Samuel 24 I. Kings 22 II. Kings 25
I. Chronicles 22 II. Chronicles 36 Ezra 10 Nehemiah 13 Esther 10 Job 42 Psalms
150 Proverbs has Chapters 31 Ecclesiastes 22 Song of Solom. or Canticles 8
Isaiah 66 Jeremiah 52 Lamentations of Jeremiah 5 Ezekiel 48 Daniel 12 Hosea 14
Joel 3 Amos 9 Obadiah 1 Jonah 4 Micah 7 Nahum 3 Habbakkuk 3 Zephania 3 Haggai 2
Zechariah 14 Malachi 4
The Books of the New TESTAMENT.
MAtthew has -- Chapters 28 Mark 16 Luke 24 John 21 The Acts 28 Epistle to the
Romans 16 I. to Corinthians 16 II. to Corinthians 13 To Galatians 6 Ephesians 6
Philippians 4 Colossians 4 I. to Thessalonians 5 II. Thessalonians has chap. 3
I. to Timothy 6 II. to Timothy 4 The Epistle to Titus 3 To Philemon 1 To the
Hebrews 13 Of James 5 I. of Peter 5 II. of Peter 3 I. of John 5 II. of John 1
III. of John 1 Of Jude 1 Revelation 22
The first Book of the CHRONICLES.
CHAP. I.
ADam, Sheth, Enosh,































and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.



was Peleg, (because in his days the earth was divided) and his brothers name
was Joktan.







were the sons of Joktan.







is Abraham.











are the sons of Keturah.









and Ana, and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan.

was Lotans sister.





and Jakan. The sons of Dishon; Uz, and Aran.

are the Kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before any King reigned over
the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and the name of his city was
Dinhabah.





was Avith.







was Pai: and his wives name was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred, the daughter
of Me-zahab.









CHAP. II.
THese are the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Judah, Islachar, and
Zebulun,



which three were born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitesse. And
Er, the firstborn of Judah, was evil in the fight of the Lord, and he slew
him.

were five.























were Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and
Asahel, three.

was Jether the Ishmeelite.

children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and
Shobab, and Ardon.









even threescore cities. All these belonged to the sons of Machir, the father
of Gilead.





































were Mesha his firstborn, which was the father of Zif: and the sons of
Mareshah the father of Hebron.













was Achsah.





and half of the Manahethites.







The second Chapter of EZRA.
NOw these are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity,
of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchad nezzar the king of Babylon
had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Juda, every
one unto his city;









and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.







































































































were three hundred ninety and two.

were they which went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, Addan, and Immer;
but they could not show their fathers house, and their seed, whether they were
of Israel.





among those that were rekoned by genealogy, but they were not found:
therefore were they as polluted, put from the priesthood.



was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore.

there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and there were among
them two hundred singing men, and singing women.

were seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred forty and five.

their asss, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the Lord
which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God to set it up in his
place:





The XXXVIIth Chapter of the Prophecy of the Prophet ISAIAH.
ANnd it came to pass, when King Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes,
and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord.





thy prayer for the remnant that is left.









it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,





as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden, which were in
Telassar?

is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of
Sepharvaim, Henah, and Ivah?





between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms
of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth.











concerning him, the virgin the daughter of Zion has despised thee, and
laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.

thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy One of
Israel.





how I have done it, and of ancient times that I have formed it? now have I
brought it to pass, that thou should be to lay waste defenced cities into
ruinous heaps.

were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were as the
grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the house tops,
and as corn blasted before it be grown up.





shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as grows of it self;
and the second year that which springs of the same: and in the third year
sow ye, and reap, and plant vine-yards, and eat the fruit thereof.



they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do
this.













The third Chapter of MATTHEW.
IN those days came John Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea.

































FINIS.

