REASONS TO Resolve the unresolved PEOPLE Of the Legality of the KINGS Trial
and Judgment.

By Rob. Robins.

Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.



LONDON. Printed for Robert White. Feb. 26.

REASONS To resolve the unresolved People of the Legality of the KINGS Trial
and Judgment.
LECTORI. True Englands Truths I would declare to thee,
If Englands Iayls my Guerdon might not be.

Imprimis.
HE says, that he is King successive, which if he be, he should have declared,
That his Interest to the succession, was an hereditary, or an elective
succession: If an hereditary succession, then hereditary from the Conquest; if
so, then by the sword have we freed our selves from slavery, as we we were by
the sword inslaved; if electory, then the Electors may reclaim their own power,
and call the elected to an account, his authority arising from the Electors.

At the death of Kings, all the Officers of his Court lay their offices at the
dead Kings feet. This ceremony does declare, That all offices and trusts dye
with him, and then (if not in a Parliament time) the Bishops, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Chief Justices, and Judges, proclaim the next Heir to the dead King,
King; which ceremony does manifest, that they are electory, and not hereditary:
For the Bishops, Dukes, etc. are the Body of the Kingdom, and Council of the
people, and their Representative out of Parliament, trusted by the King for the
peoples weal; and if electory, why shall not the people elect whom they please?
and when the trust is abused, which the elected is trusted with, why shall not
the people call the elected to an account of his trust, and punish him
according to the Common Law (which is Reason) for breach of trust, if he refuse
to yield an account of his trust?

It has been Englands, and other Kingdoms Custom, to call to highest Offices,
such as were of greatest fame, repute, quality, and estates, thereby imagining,
that they who are conceived most honorable, and most rich; are best bred in
knowledge, and would duly discharge their trusts, for conscience and honors
sake, and to preserve their estates, being liable to restitution for wrong
doing.

The trust that Kings of England are trusted with, is, to govern well, and
therefore has the name of Rex, being a derivative name or word, from Rego, to
Govern; which word, if observed well, will tell you what Rex, a King, is; for
it is an old Proverb, Regum est parcere subjectis, and debulare superbos; Regum
est* id est, officium Regum, the office and duty of Kings.

The King enjoyes the Crown, not as his, but the Kingdoms, nor can grant any
office before he is sworn; and when he is sworn, it is by the peoples
Representative, trusted for that office, by the dead King, in his life time;
and the Crown Lands, after he is sworn, and crowned, allotted him for
maintenance, as a reward to maintain him, to execute his office.

After he is sworn to execute such trusts as the people have trusted him with,
he is by the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury, (the chief Ecclesiastical
Minister in England, clothed in white) crowned with a Golden Crown, beset with
Diamonds, and other rich Jewels, which carry a luster round about the Crown and
Head; which is a Celestial Type, fit for such a man, as a glorious renown, that
will discharge that great trust he is trusted with, and has sworn to execute
it.

By virtue of his oath, he is Chief Justice of England, to administer true
Justice, as well to poor as to rich, without respect of persons; and has
thereby power to call to his assistance, Wisemen, and Lawyers, and to depute
them, swear them, and locate them at his pleasure; and if they do not well
demean themselves, to displace them, and call others.

He is also Lord Chancellor, and makes a Seal (which is Treason to
counterfeit, for fear of wrong to be done by it to his trust, which he is
trusted with) and is to hear and determine in equity, what Reason, which is
Common Law, may impose upon any man contrary to equity.

He is Receiver of the Revenue of the Kingdom, being trusted in his hands for
maintenance of Officers deputed by him in Courts of Justice for his assistance,
in executing true Justice.

He is Admiral of the Sea, and the Tonnage and Poundage the Kingdoms, trusted
in his hands for maintenance of a Navy, to protect the Merchants from Pirates
and Sea Rovers.

He is Constable of all the Towers, Castles, Forts, and Arms in the Kingdom,
being the Militia, which is moenia Angliae, trusted in his hands by the people,
and by them bought to preserve the Kingdom against foreign Invasions, and
domestic Rebellions.

He is Gaurdian of many Infants, until they come to the age of twenty one
years, left by their Parents hereditary estates; and to preserve the Orphant
and estate, and to breed them in the fear of God, and learning, and to account
when they come to age.

He is Keeper and Preserver of the Peace of the Kingdom, and to see the Statute
Laws put in execution; and to have a care, that if any shall offend against it,
to fine and punish him at his pleasure, or at the pleasure of such Judges or
Justices as he shall depute.

Many more Trusts have the people reposed in him, which for brevity, I omit,
and he has broken them; he has turned the Militia into the peoples bowels,
and killed them with it; he has taken the Merchants, with the Tonnage and
Poundage, and spoiled their Ships, and Goods at Sea. Equity has he turned into
cruel iniquity, contrary to a good Conscience; he has sold Justice, and placed
Ignorance in her Seat; he has sold the peoples Interest to monopolizing
Creatures; he has thrown wisdom and honesty into prison, protected the wicked,
and punished the innocent; he claims the Militia, the Revenue, the Tonnage
and Poundage, the Crown, and Crown Lands, to be his, and not the peoples; and
refuses to account to the people, being demanded several times, and says he
will account to none but God, and will not by fair means, nor legal trial, give
any answer; and therefore, according to Englands Laws has his sentence, as
consessing all that is charged upon him, in respect he denies it not.

Now let all the world judge, whether the people have justly recalled their own
Interest, and adjudged him to death for such abuses, and refusing to account.


