Certain brief OBSERVATIONS AND ANTIQVAERIES: ON MASTER PRIN's TWELVE
QUESTIONS ABOUT CHURCH GOVERNMENT. Wherein is modestly shown, how un-usefull
and frivolous they are; How bitter and unchristian in censuring that way;
whereas there are no Reasons brought to contradict it.

By a well-willer to the Truth, and Master PRIN.

Printed in the year 1644.

Certain brief Observations and Antiquaeries on Mr. PRIN's Twelve Questions
about Church Government.
THere is no sight so lovely, and taking to the eyes of all ingeniuous and
sincere hearts, as naked truth; these which know its excellency will study to
find it out. Truth is a jewel which lies out of sight, as it were, in the
bowels of many reasons, men must search for it, that will find it out, among
truths, this of Church Government is not the least. There are many things this
age has brought forth about it to little purpose; most men beating about the
bush; few that I have scene have discovered it in its nature. Some write so
voluminous, heaping up so many distinctions about it, that they rather darken
the truth then set it forth, rather entangle a man's understanding then inform
it; others write so full of passion, as if they writ with poison of Aspes,
reckoning up men's personal failings to disgrace the Cause, not urging their
arguments to convince the judgment, (among these I have observed one Master
Edwards has the quickest pen, and I have often thought that book should rather
have been writ by Doct. Pocklinton, Doct. Heylin, or one of the Archbishops
Chaplains, then Master Edwards, who has been sometimes accounted godly.)
Master Prin has begun another way as unsatisfactory as any; though we hope
there is more candor in his spirit: He professes in the beginning he has not
leisure to debate the controversy; and then its wondered why he propounds these
Quaeries. For either, first he lays them down as positions undisputable,
undeniable in respect of the clearness of them unto all understandings, or
because of his name to them; for else he knows (as all know) that have any
light in this Controversy, that all these grounds, these whom he calls
independents will deny, and their answer would be negative to every one. Or
secondly, he propounds them as affirmatives which he intends to prove and
clear by solid arguments, and then he must have leisure to do it; and as yet
the others negation is as strong as his affirmation, for here is no proof for
it. Or else thirdly, as considerations in which he desires satisfaction as one
being in doubt which way to walk, only these things for the present move him
to be of a contrary judgment; the style of the book does not much favor this
last, as being too full of confidence, and bitterness: If Master Prin had such
a sense of the public divisions, he would not have gone to make the breach
wider by setting forth Quaeries stuffed with such invectives. I had thought
sufferings had learned Master Prin a little more meekness; Mr. Prin knows his
name is famous abroad, and that the common people will all think that that
must needs be true which he pleads for. Besides, he knows that the Reverend
Assembly is now controverting of the thing, and that Quaeries will do little
good while Arguments are expected on both sides: but since they are out let us
see what are in them.

The sum of the first Quaerie, is, whether Christ has set down in the Word
any prescript form of government for Kingdom and Churches to follow; or
whether (seeing there be different forms of civil government in almost every
Kingdom) there is not a latitude, and liberty left them by Christ to choose a
government suitable to their State.

If this were granted, what absurdities would follow?

For the Gospel would be straiter then the Law, Christ more unfaithful then
Moses, God set a Exodus 25. 40. Hebr. 8. 5.
pattern to Moses, which he charged him not to vary from in a title, that was
but a carnal Temple in comparison of this, nay, it was a type of the Church
under the Gospsll, Christ should neither be faithful as a husband, head, nor
King of his Church, if he should give others power to order it, to suit it as
they pleased to their own civil government, not setting down his own Laws
for them to walk by. In Revel. 11. 1, 2. you read of a measuring of the
Temple: Now how can you measure without a rule? The meaning of that, according
to Master Prin, must be thus (measured) that is, frame it according to your
civil State, a miserable measure for a Church. In Revelat. 20. 1, its said the
pattern of the new Jerusalem, (which is but the Church in her purest state,
the same for form with the former Church) came down from heaven.

Besides, look in this Quaerie and you shall find a contradiction, for he asks
whether Church government may not be framed to any civil State if it be
consonant to the Word, and yet questions whether there be any rule in the Word.

Secondly, if no prescript form in the Word, why not Episcopacy as well as
Presbytery? why such crying down of Bishops as Antichristian, for how can that
be more Antichristian then any other, seeing there is no certain government in
the Word? Episcopacy regulated and moderated (if all were known) is more
consonant and agreeable to a Monarchical government then Presbytery.

Thirdly, I ask of Master Prin, if Church government must be suited to States,
whether Politicians are not more fit to consult about stablishing it: And why
is an Assembly of Divines called to search the Word about it? Surely Statesmen
know better how to fit the Commonwealth then Divines: there must be something
in it, surely, or else the Parliament did very ill to have a Synod. If the
Doctrine be true, throw aside the Bible, in this matter study the Law; and then
it is well done of Master Prin to write of it, being his profession.

Fourthly, Whether Master Prin thinks it more reason that the State should be
subject to Christ's rule, or Christ to their direction; that the government of
his Church should be fitted to States, or they to it. I know his religion,
though his reason should stand a far off, would abhor the thought of it: if
you, and the Presbyterians go on that principle, the Saints will hardly be of
your judgment, for they think Christ is King alone over his Churches, and has
not left them to substitutes, and the politic considerations of men for to
govern them.

These two places you urge out of 1 Cor. 14. 40. and the 11. 34. where the
Apostle speehes of doing all things decently, etc. is far from this, it being
about things that are merely circumstantiall, and ordering of things in a
Church already constituted, not of the constitution of any Church.

The second Quarie, in sum, is, whether if any government be stablished by
any State upon serious debate, every one is not bound in conscience to submit
to it, and no ways to seek an exemption from it, under pain of being guilty
of arrogance, etc. The Scriptures in the margent I wonder to what end Master
Prin quotes them so little to purpose, look on that place 1 Cor. 14. 32. The
spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; how full to the thing let
all judge who know the scope of that place; by the Prophets there does he mean
the civil State, or the Synod, or both? And is not that spoken to a particular
congregation, for the regulating the exercise of prophesying; or does he mean
by being subject, that the Prophets have an authoritative power over the other
Prophets; I know not what he means by that place. The other places, Romans 13. 1,
2. of submitting to every ordinance, etc. If that be true, then every man is
bound to put out his own eyes, to yield to blind obedience, never to search
into the truth, for if he search and find it contrary to the Word, he must
follow his judgment, and to follow his judgment is to be a Schismatic, to be
guilty of arrogance, etc. to contradict the Word, to oppose an ordinance of
God; so that a man must inevitably sin, take either part. Is not this to uphold
the Papist tenent of believing as the Church believes? etc. I put it to Master
Prin, if the Parliament and Synod should set up an Episcopal government, which
he thinks is Antichristian, whether he would not speak a word against it? Is
not this a base bondage, jurare in verba alterius, to give up a man's faith and
conscience to men's direction; but if the former be true, then this second must
follow, if no rule, then you must obey what is commanded you. Suppose that is
commanded may prove untrue, what if that way be not right, if that Synod and
State should err, what would you think of it then? etc.

Secondly, I humbly demand of Master Prin whether he and the other two holy men
were not justly stigmatized and censured for speaking against the Bishops and
Ceremonies? etc. which were stablished by so many Synods, and Acts of
Parliament; and how h^ can excuse himself from pride and arrogance in such a
course; for by his own rule he should have actually obeyed and not spoke a
word to the contrary. Such divinity will overthrow all the power of Scripture
over men's consciences, only make that to bind which a Synod thinks good.

The third Quaerie contradicts the first, in the first he asks In this
Quaerie he quotes a saying in a Book called The bloody Tenent, which was
written by one as contrary to this as the Independents, as he is to the
Presbyterians and they utterly disavow the Book.
whether there be any rule in the Word; here he asks whether that government
which has sufficient, if not most warrant in the new Testament is not to be
chosen. In this he cries up the one government (which he instanceth in the
fourth Quaerie to be presbyteriall) as tending to establish Christian unity;
peace, etc. that which serves most effectually to prevent Heresies, Schisms,
etc. Here is a bare affirmation, and the independents, No, is as good as your,
I. Its desired Master Prin would prove what he says, that independent
government has not such express warrant from the Word (another contradiction)
as presbyteriall; prove that, and you shall be Magnus Apollo; as for the
Scriptures you bring will little help you.

For the fifth, its answered by way of concession, that it will overthrow all
national Churches, as not conceiving any such warrant in the Word, but for any
form of civil government it will stand better with them then Presbytery can;
the mischiefs of Presbytery, are veiled with Orthodoxnesse, and preventing
Schisms, etc, But if the Saints would pry into the formality, tyranny,
inslaving men's judgments and consciences the Presbyteriall way, etc. they
would look upon it as that which is most inconsistent with their spiritual
liberty, and with State privileges. Its politickly done of you to put the best
terms on your own way how will you have it take else; I will let pass your
bitter expressions (that one man would be, if possible, a independent Church,
and republicke subject to no laws) I thought such language would not suit with
you spirrit, Master Prin especially that you would not speak so of them who
were your best frinds in your sufferings; which stood to you, and refreshed you
when most of your presbiterians (Episcopal enough then) were shye of you, I
could name the men that used you kindly whom you now implicitly reproach; the
independents give more to civell power then your presbyterians do; I would
feign know whether your presbyterians do not hold; that an Act of a Synod or a
National Assembly is as valid and binding in Ecclesiastics, as an Act of
Parliament in civills; and whether the Parliament can de jure contradict their
proceedings, whether they will affirm that the Parliament has any
jurisdiction over them in settling Ecclesiastical matters, this is not a
Quaerie without ground; for as far as the independents understand of the
presbyteriall government in Scotland, its absolutely independent from the
Parliament in respect of decreeing and inacting matters of government; only
this honor presbyterians give to their Magistrate, they must be the
executioners of their Judgments, to hang whom they condemn.

The sum of the sixth Quaerie, is, whether since the first preaching the
Gospel, believers multiplying, they did not gather into Churches which had
dependencie on, and was subordinate to National Synods, etc. And if not to
show the place where, and to name any eminent Author that ever maintained the
contrary. This Quaerie is very bold and daring, yet I answer that believers did
as soon as they were converted gather into particular Churches, as is
apparent, but that they were subordinate unto National Synods, etc. sub judice
lis est; And if in many Kingdoms it might be so, de facto, yet whether de
jure, and from a pattern in the Word that we desire may be proved.

Suppose this should be true, that there cannot in any Kingdom such a Church be
shown for many years; or at least no Writer expresses it; if so be it can be
made forth from the Word, and consonant to the Saints practice in the Apostles
times. I know no such Schism in dissenting from all men's practices to follow
the clear truth. You challenge all to show you one eminent Writer who
maintained the same; I will not go so far back into antiquity, as to bring you
out a catalogue of Fathers, who though they had not a clear light in that way,
yet had many shroud hints and notions in many things, which are practiced by
these you call independent. There be many latter Writers as eminent in
holiness, and without disparagement in learning to many whom you can produce
for the other: (as learned Doct. Ames in Medul. theolog. de eccles. Master
Ains^ Master Cotton, with many of this age known unto you, to whom you will
not deny eminency in learning) which have stood for this way; besides, does
Master Prin think we have no more light discovered in these days about
Church Government, then the godly had in former days; or must all the Saints
be regulated by former patterns, then should Episcopacie be more followed then
Presbytery, it being as anciently practiced, and as learnedly writ for as it.

Your seventh Quaerie is the same in form with the first and sixth, and as
little in it as in any; for first he asks whether the Law of Nature that
teaches men to subject themselves to one public form of government in a
State, does not teach to subject to a National or Provincial Synod in matters
of Church Government. This is answered in the first, beside the independents
think that its as suitable to the law of nature, rectified reason, etc. for
every particular man to have his vote in that which most concerns him; not to
give away his reason to another, not to subject his conscience to any but
Christ; reason, and politics will show, Master Prin, that there is a
sutablenesse to the Law of Nature in a Democraticall, and Aristocraticall
government (for this way of Church Government is made up of both these) as in
Monarchical, or mere Aristocraticall; besides, Christ has given to men no
such power over men's consciences, as he has to Magistrates over men's bodies.
To let pass your bitter speeches, saying that there is no example for
particular Congregations, (which you can Independents) except derived from the
conventicles of the Arrians, Donatists, and other Heretics. Leave off these
names of Heretics, Master Prin, you have been paid enough with that title,
you may bless God for these conventicles, in which you were remembered with
tears, when others durst not name you.

Master Prins eaghth and ninth Quaeries are in sum all one, thus, whether the
concession of one Catholic Church, the National assembly of the Israelites,
the Synodall assembly of the Apostles be not an infallible proof of National
Churches of a common Presbytery, etc. Its answered negatively. And though he
say that the Independents answers are but evasions, we shall judge them solid
arguments till we see the contrary. The National Church of the Jews cannot be
a pattern for us now, because the covenant of the Gospel is not made with any
one particular Nation, as with the Jews, but to all persons that embrace the
Gospel, and believe in Christ. You have no promise nor prophecy of any Nation
to be holy to God but the Jews Nation, when they shall be called again.

Secondly, Neither can Master Prin show any Nation, every member whereof is
qualified for to make up a Church; which is the body of Christ, unless Master
Prin will take in all drunkards, whore-masters, etc. to be members of a Church;
whereas the Word says, they must be visible Saints; and this cannot be avoided
1 Cor. 1. 1. Phil. 5. 1.
in a National Church. Neither is that Assembly in Acts 15. which you call a
Synod, any proof for a Presbyteriall government. For first, I demand whether
that Church had not power within it self to debate the business, and settle
the controversy, seeing there was a great strife among them about it.
Secondly, I demand of Master Prin, whether Paul and Barnabas had not power
(being Apostles) to determine the matter, Act. 15. 1.
as well as the Synod of Elders?

Thirdly, Whether they went not up principally to prove the false Apostles,
that werr among them, liars, for they told them they were sent by the Apostles
to make known that they must be Verse. 24.
Circumcised. Now to give testimony unto this, that they came not from the
Apostles, they send chosen men to Jerusalem about it?

Fourthly, Whether this was not an occasional meeting, not a Synod, which is a
collection of the Elders of diverse Churches into a body, but only some of the
Church chosen out and sent to the other Church at Jerusalem for advise.

Master Prin may think as slightly of the arguments given by the Independents,
(as he calls them) from this head, yet notwithstanding his word, he must give
them leave to judge they are sufficient, unless the authority of Master Prin's
name be argument; the Scriptures quoted serve to fill up the margent, nothing
else, unless you open them, and argue from them; for these texts are used by
the contrary side against you, and as validly still as yours, before more be
shown.

The ninth Quaerie, Whether the Independents challenging the Presbyterians to
show a National Church in Christ's time, be not an irrational and unjust
demand, Ans. no, if the Scripture has a form of government for the Churches
of Christ in after ages to walk in; but to you it may seem irrational, who
think Church Government must be ordered according to civil State, and be cast
into that mould.

Master Prin from his Quaeries falls to his Logic, and demands whether a
Syllogism framed from the former, viz No National Church in the Apostles
time. Ergo, None ought to be now, be not as absurd as these.

There was no meeting of Christians in public Churches, but in caves, corners,
etc. Therefore they ought not to meet in public Churches now, but in caves,
etc.

I thought that Master Prin's Logic would have distinguished between the form
of a thing, and the circumstance of place in the exercise of it, which is left
to every Churches discretion, would this be a good argument in his Logic? that
because the ordering of circumstances of time and place are in the Churches
power; therefore the making of new forms of government, is, when the
congregation men argue from the not being of a national constitution of a
Church in the Apostles days, to the denying of any now; they argue on this
ground, being able to make it appear, that the form of the constitution of
Churches in the Apostles time, is a pattern for all Churches to follow, and in
no kind to vary from it.

Again, he demands whether that way of arguing be not as absurd as this?

There was no Nation, Kingdom, City, Republike, Catholic, Congregationall, or
Parochial Church in Adam's younger days, before people were multiplied, but a
family government.

Ergo, There ought to be none but a Family government now, no man would be so
void of reason, no truly Sir, neither did the Independents think you would be
so void of reason, as to father such an absurdity on them, who are as rational
as your self.

As for Civil government, let men alter it as they will, and if God will alter
the government of the Church, as he did from a Family into a Nation among the
Jews, and if again from a Nation God will alter it unto a oeconimicall or
congregationall, we must yield.

Thirdly, Again, whether it be not as absurd as this: Every man in his infancy
is born destitute of religion, reason, etc. Therefore he ought to continue so
when grown a man.

The Christian Church in the Apostles time, while in her infancy was not
National, but so and so, (what I pray) (not Independent. How know you that,
Master Prin, we will not take your word.) Ergo, It ought not to be National
now. Here observe Reader.

Master Prin accounts the Church in the Apostles time, a poor weak Church, that
had not so much reason for things then, as we have now; the Apostles, the
stablishers of it, weak men; whereas there was more light of the Gospel, and
gifts of the Holy Ghost powered out then, then ever since; even private
Christians being as able to deal in the things of God, as most of our
Scholars and Ministers are now; yet Master Prin compares the following that
pattern, the following of a child in his infancy, that has neither reason nor
religion. Master Prin, follow you your perfect Church, we will follow this
infant pattern, and I beseech you, is not this argument you bring to fasten an
absurdity on them, as absurd as this.

The Scriptures were writ in the infancy of the Church, therefore wiser and
better Scriptures may be writ now, the Church being grown up into a Nation,
having so many reverent Divines in it.

Secondly, You would needs make a National Church State more perfect,
understanding, and ripe Church then a Congregationall; we would think so too,
if we had a Word for it.

And whereas you say the History of the Acts shows that as believers
multiplied their Church government and discipline varied, its answered if you
mean by varying, that things before established by the Apostles in any Church
was altered, its denied, and pray show the place if you mean by varied that
they added rules for government as occasion served we grant it, for as they
received not the knowledge of the Gospel at once so neither of discipline,
neither had the Churches need of all the rules at once, but as God fitted
occasions so he made known rules, yet so as at length to discover the whole
form of his House, as he did the whole mystery of divinity, to be as rule to
all generations afterward you see what your logic is come to Master Prin,
draw better consequences next.

Your tenth Quaerie is the same in sum with your secord, only there you
speak in general, here you perticularise, and you ask of the independents
whether in conscience they are not bound to submit unto presbyteriall government
in case that the Parliament and Synod should establish it; and whether it would
not be a high degree of ob^nancy singularity, self end, etc. to oppose this
form of government.

I Ans. If you require this of them, and charge them so highly in not
submiting, I hope you will show your authority; either you would have them
submit because what they command is of divine institution, or because commanded
by their authority, if in the former sense, they must have eyes to see it as
well as the Synod, or else their obedience will be hypocritical most
displeasing to God; if in the latter, then the Popes council, decreeing any
thing must out of as much conscience be obeyed by these that be under his
authority, as the best things commnded by a Godly Synod, for a quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia; if because they command, then what ever they command must
be done; I put the case to M. Prin, whether when he challenged all the Divines
in England to make good against them that Episcopacy was not jure de vino,
whether if the King had called a Synod and had concluded it as the most Divines
thought; he would have given up his judgments to their votes and submited to
their determination, it had been hight of arrogance, self ends, schism in
Master Prin not to do so, and so in point of law when most of the Judges had
given in their judgments contrary to M. Prin, why did not he submit, because
the contrary was clear to him, and he had sinned against his own conscience if
he had gone back one jot from his opinion; what if independency should be set
up, what if the Synod should maintain the errors of Antinomians, etc. was
Master Prin bound in conscience to say as they did, to speak against it would
be shisme, faction, arrogance, etc, Master Prin how is your spirit changed what
will you now submit to any thing, are you become a time server? have you given
up your faith to other men? when Synods can say as they, Acts 15. it seems
good to the Holy Ghost and us to lay these things on you, then we will think
we are bound in conscience to submit, else you must help us with new eyes.

In your eleventh Quaerie you go on in your way of bitterness and ask whether
that independencie be not a womb to all schisms, heresies, etc. its Answered
no, its a seminary of holiness a nourisher of love, a way to build up unto the
fullness of Christ, your presbyterial way is a way inflauing men's consciences;
crushing the parts of these Saints which you ^all Laymen, is a way to depresse
truth to hinder growth in grace and Spiritual communion with Christ, the
Saints shall soon find it so.

In the last Quaerie M. Prin falls a jeering of his brethren. He would needs
father a child on them, of the presbyterians begetting; they have put a
nickname on them to make them odious, and now he asks whether it be not an
insolent proud name, etc. unfit for any Christian to arrogat, your
presbytereans have pretty slights to defame these that are of a contrary
opinion; as if one should call an honest man thief, and ask a man whether it
were not a shameful thing for him to be given to stealing. Know Master Prin
these men scorn the name, they have disavowed it in See M. Simpsons Anatomy,
anatomised.
print; the term is more fit for you and these whom you stand for, a term fit
for your provincial, and national Synods from whom there is no appeal, but
to whose judge ments all must submit as to an ordinance of Christ, and though
but to question what is done by them is to be guilty of faction, schism,
arrogance; these you call independants, confess that they are accountable for
their actions to every neighbor Church that shall in the name of Christ
require it, they stand not independent from others but hold communion with all
other Churches, both in the ordinances, and asking counsall and advise
mutually; to let your other loose language pass much with what is in the
former; take some Christian advise; remember you have not your hand in
darkening the glory of any of the Saints; take heed of defaming a way which for
ought you know may be a way of Christ; it will cost you many a sigh afterward
if God should convince you, you know Christ will never own bitterness in
maintaining any way though consonant to his Word. Remember, neither you nor the
Synod are infalliable, but as subject to errors as others; never more damnable
Heresies confirmed then by Synods (I speak not this to cast Council. Trent.
any blot on Synods or this Synod espcially in which there are many holy and
learned men) but to show that a man is not bound in conscience to follow their
decrees upon penalty of sin, arrogance, etc. and not to seek the least
exemption from what they determine whose decrees may be subject to as great
errors as any. Oh that a spirit of love were maintained among these which are
brethren, though men differ in judgment must they needs differ in affection! M.
Prin if you will needs be busy in this controversy leave off your Quaeries
for we will deny them all; state your question; set forth your arguments, open
the Scriptures you quote to fill up the margent, be as brief as may be; call
in your passion and consider, and doubt not of an answer to what you shall
modestly set forth.

FINIS

