THE IVDGEMENT OF DOCTOR REIGNOLDS Concerning EPISCOPACY, Whether it be GODS
Ordinance.

Expressed in a Letter to Sir FRANCIS KNOVVLS, Concerning Doctor Bancrofts
Sermon at Pauls-Crosse, the ninth of February, 1588. In the Parliament time.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, 1641.

DOCTOR REIGNOLDS HIS Letter to Sir FRANCIS KNOVVLS, concerning Doctor
Bancrofts Sermon at Pauls-Crosse. 9. Febru: 1588. In the PARLIAMENT time.
ALbeit (Right Honorable) I take greater comfort in laboring to discover and
overthrow the Errors of Jesuits and Papists, (enemies of Religion) than of
the Ministers of Christ; yet seeing it has pleased your Honor to require me,
to show mine opinion of some things, which certain of these men maintain and
stand in, I thought it my duty, by the example Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
of Levy, who said of his Father, and Mother, I regard them not, nor
acknowledged he his Brethren, to declare the truth, without respect of persons.

Of the two points therefore in Doctor Bancrofts Sermon, which your Honor,
mentions, one is, concerning that he seems to avouch, The superiority
which Bishops have among us over the Clergy, to be Gods own Ordinance; though
not by express words, yet by necessary consequence; In that he affirms their
opinion, who oppugn that superiority, to be Heresy. Wherein, I must
confess, he has committed an oversight, in my judgment, and himself, (I
think) if he be advertised thereof, will acknowledge it. For having page 18.
first said that Aerius affirms, that there was no difference by the word of
God betwixt a Priest and a Bishop, and afterward, that Martin and his
companions, do maintain this opinion of Aerius; he adds that page 19.
Aerius persisting therein, was condemned for an heretic by the general
consent of the whole Church, and likewise page 69.
that Martins, and all his companions opinion has herein been condemned for
heresy.

Touching Martin, if any man behave himself otherwise than in discretion and
charity he ought, let the blame be laid where the fault is, I defend him not;
but if by the way, he utter a truth* mingled with whatsoever else, it is not
reason that that which is of God, should be condemned for that which is of man;
no more than the doctrine of the resurrection should be reproved, because Act.
23. 8
it was maintained and held by the Pharisees. Wherefore removing the odious name
of Martin, from that which in sincerity and love is to be dealt with, it
appears, by the aforesaid words of D^. Bancroft, that he avoucheth the
Superiority which Bishops have over the Clergy to be of Gods own ordinance;
For he improveth the impugners of it, as holding with Aerius, that there is no
difference by the word of God betwixt a Pri^st and a Bish^p which he could not
do with reason, unless he himself approved the Bishops superiority, as
established by Gods word: and he adds, that their opi^ion who gainsay it, is
Heresy* whereof it insueth, he thinks it contrary to Gods word; since Heresy
is an error repugnant to the truth of the word of God, as (according to 1 Timothy
6. 3. Titus 3. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 19. and 21.
the Scriptures) our own Church The defense of the Apology* part 1* and 7.
division 2. Answer to the Rhem. T^tus 3. 10.
does teach us.

Now the Arguments which he brings to prove it an heresy, are partly
overweake, partly untrue: overweake, that p^g. 18.
he begins with, out of Epiphanius; untrue, that he p. 19. and 69.
adjoyneth of the general consent of the Church. For though Epiphanius do
say, that Aerius his assertion is full of folly, yet he disproveth not the
reason which* A^rius stood on, out of the Scriptures; nay he deals so in
seeking to disprove it, that Bellarmine the Jesuit, Tom* ^. cont. ^ lib. 1* c.
15.
though desirous to make the best of Epiphanius, whose opinion herein he
maintains against the Protestants, yet is forced to confess, that Epiphanius
his answer is not all of the wisest, not any way can fit the Te^t.

As for the general^ consent of the whole Church, which D^. Bancroft says,
condemned that opinion of Aerius for an heresy, and himself for an h^retik^,
because he persist^d in it, that is a large speech: but what proof has h^
that the whole Church did so. It appears he says in Heresy 15*
Epiphanius. It does not, and the contrary appears by I^ (...) ^d (...) ^ and
^p^st. 8^ (...).
^^ (...), and sundry others* who lived, some in the same time, some after
Epiphanius* even S^ Austin himself, though Dr Bancroft cite him, as bearing
witness thereof likewise; I grant S^ Austin Cap. 53.
in his book of heresies, ascribes this to Aerius, for one, that he said,
Presbyterum ab episcopo nulla differentia deberi discerni: but it is one thing
to say, there ought to be no difference betwixt them, (which Aerius saying
condemned the Churches order, yea made a schism therein, and so is censured by
St Austin, counting it an heresy, as In Argu. prefix. l. 3. Tom. 2.
in Epiphanius he took it recorded, himself, as D^ haeres. ad quod vult Deum
in prefatione.
he witnesses not knowing how far the name of Heresy should be stretched)
another thing to say, that by the word of God there is no difference betwixt
them, but by the order and custom of the Church, which St Austin Epist. 19.
says in effect himself, so far was he from witnessing this to be heresy by
the general consent of the whole Church. Which untruth, how wrongfully it is
fathered on him, and on Epiphanius (who yet are all the witnesses that Dr
Bancroft has produced for the proof hereof, or can for ought that I know) it
may appear by this, that our learned Country man (of godly memory) Bishop Def.
of the Apol. part. 2. ca. 9* divis. 1. page 198.
Jewel, when Harding to convince the same opinion of heresy, alleged the
same witnesses, he citing to the contrary Chrysostom, Ierom, Austin, and
Ambrose, knit up his answer with these words: All these, and other more holy
Fathers, together with the Apostle St Paul, for thus saying, by Hardings
advice, must be held for heretics. And Michell Medina, De sacrif. hom orig and
confir* lib. 1. cap. 5.
a man of great account in the Council of Trent, more ingenious herein than
many other Papists, affirms, not only the former ancient writers, alleged
by Bishop Jewel but also an other Jerome, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, and
Theophilact were of the same mind touching this matter with Aerius. With whom
agree likewise In 1 Timothy 3.
Oecumenius, and In Epist. ad Titum.
Anselus Archb: of Canterbury, and Collect. Ca^. li. 7. cap. 87. and 1 27.
another Anselmus and Policar. lib. 2. Tit. 19. and 39.
Gregory and Cap. ^^gimus, did* ^9. ca* ^l^mp. did 95.
Gra^^^ and after them how many? It being once enrolled in the Canon law for
sound, and catholic doctrine, and thereupon publicly taught by Author g^os^.
in ca. did. citat. ^odo^ous caol Ave, let in ^on^il, (...) Duaren de sa^ra
eccle* minist. lib. ^* ^^^. 7.
learned men; All which do bear witness against Dr Bancroft, of the point in
question, that it was not condemned for an heresy by the general consent of
the whole Church* For if he should reply* that these later witnesses did live a
thousand years after Christ, and therefore touch not him who page 19.
said, it was condemned so in the time of St Austin, and of page 69.
Epiphanius, the most flourishing time of the Church that ever happened since
the Apostles days, either in respect of learning, or of zeal; first they whom
I named, though living in a latter time, yet are witnesses of the former.

Oecumenius the Greek Scholiast treading in the steps of the old greek Fathers,
and the two Anselmes, with Gregory and Gratian, expressing St* Ieromes sentence
word by word. Besides that, perhaps it is not very likely that Anselmus of
Canterbury should have been canonized by the Pope of Rome, and worshipped for a
Saint; that the other Anselmus and Gregory should have such place in the Popes
Library, and be esteemed of as they are; that Gratians works should be allowed
so long time by so many Popes for the golden foundation of the Canon law, if
they had taught that for catholic, and sound, which by the general consent of
the whole Church, in the most flourishing time that ever happened since the
Apostles days, was condemned for heresy: chiefly in a matter of such weight
and moment, to the Popes supremacy; which as they do claim over all Bishops
by the ordinance of God, so must they allow to Bishops over Priests by the same
ordinance as they saw at length: and there* ore have not only decreed it now
in the Sess. 23. c. 4. Can. 6. and 7.
Council of Trent, but also in Annot marg. ad cap* legimus did* 43.
the new edition of their Canon law have set down this note, that on Hughes
Gloss allowed by the Archdeacon (saying, that Bishops have differed from
Priests always as they do now in Government, and Prelatship and Offices, and
Sacraments but not in the name and title of Bishop, which was common to them
both) must be held hereafter for St Jeroms meaning: at least for the meaning of
the Canon taken out of St Jerome though his words be flat and plain against
this gloss, as Bellarmine Tom. 1. contro. 5. lib. 2. cap.
himself confesses. Whereto may be added, that they also who have labored
about the reforming of the Church these 500 years, have taught that all
Pastors, be they entitled Bishops, or Priests, have equal authority and
power by Gods word. First the Aeneas Silvius bisto. Bo^em. cap. 35 and P^gh*
Hierarch Eccles. l. ^. c. 10
Waldenses, next Defens. pacis part 2. cap. 15.
Marsilius Patavinus* then Tho. Walden Doc. fidei Tom 1. lib. 2. cap. 60. and
Tom* ^. c. 17.
Wickliffe* and his scholars; afterward Aeneas Silvius loco citato.
Husse, and the Hussites* last of all Adversus falso nominat ordin* (...) and
adver. Papa. Romans
Luther, ^n Epist ad Philip. 1. and Titus 1.
C^lvin, Apol. Confess. Wittenb c. 21.
Brentius, Decad. 5. ser. 3
Bullinger, Loc. Com. Tit. de minist. verbi.
Musculus, and other, who might be reckoned particularly in great number, since
as here with us both Jewel loco citat et Pilkington in the treatise of burning
Paul's Church.
Bishps, and the Queens D. Humphrey in Camp. and in Duraeum Iesuitas part 2.
rat. 3 and D. White* ad rat. Campiani, 6 and Confuta, Duraei Iesuitae lib. 6.
Professors of Divinity in our Universities, and M. Bradford, Lambert, and
others. M. Fox, Acts, etc. D. Fulke against Bristow, motive 40 and answer to
the Remists, Tit 1. 5.
other learned men do consent ^^erein: so in foreign Nations all* whom I have
read treating of (...) matter, and many more, (no d^^bt) whom I have not read.

The sifting and examining of the Trent Council has been undertaken by only
two, which I have seen, the one a divine, the other a Lawyer, part 2. lib. 4.
Kemnisius, and Gentilletus; they both condemn the contrary doctrine
thereunto, as a Trent error; the one by scriptures, and Fathers; the other by
the Canon law. But what do I further speak of several persons? It is the
common judgment of the Reformed Churches of Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland,
Germany, Hungary, Polony, the Low Countries, and our own, witness the Harmony
sec. 11. in Helvet, post Gallia Belgia, Anglia, etc
Harmony of Confessions.

Wherefore since Dr Bancroft (I assure my self) will not say that all these
have approved that as sound and christian doctrine, which by the general consent
of the whole Church, in a most flourishing time, was condemned for heresy: I
hope he will acknowledge, that he was overseene, in that he avouched the
Superiority which Bishops have among us over the Clergy to be of Gods own
ordinance. And thus far of the former point of Dr Bancrofts Sermon.

The latter is, concerning that he affirms, that St Ierom pa. 14. and 69.
says, and Mr Calvin seems on his report, to confess that Bishops have had
the said superiority ever since the time of St Mark the Evangelist. Of the
which point I think as of the former; since neither Ierom says it, neither does
Calvin seem to confess it on his report. For Bishops among us, besides
ordeining, and laying on of hands, may do sundry other things, which inferior
Ministers, or Priests (as Dr Bancroft* terms them) may not; But Epist. ad
Evagrium.
Ierom, after mention of the superiority allotted to Bishops since St Marks
time, What does a Bishop (says he) except ordination, which a Priest does not?
Meaning and enforcing by this kind of speech, as a thing most evident, and such
as no man could deny, that Bishops had that only power above Priests then,
which Hom. 11. in 1 Timothy
Chrysostom also witnesses.

Though neither had they it alone in all places, as it is apparent by a Council*
4. Can. 3.
Council of Carthage, showing their Churches order; that the Priests laid
their hands together with the Bishop on those who were ordained. Yet Ierom
having proved by testimony of Scripture, that in the Apostles times, Bishops
and Priests were all one, even in the right In 1 Timothy 4. 4. (...)
of this too, grants that afterward Bishops had that peculiar unto
themselves some where, but nothing else save it. St Ierom therefore says not
of that superiority whereof the question is, that Bishops have had it ^ver
since St Marks time.

No more does Mr Calvin see^ to confess it upon his report. For Calvin (in the
same ^ Instit. li. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2.
place that Dr Bancroft quoteth* showing how in old time the Ministers that had
charge to teach, chose of their company one in every City, to whom they did
especially give the title of Bishop; least equality should breed dissension,
yet says he) the Bishop was not above them in honor and dignity* that he had
rule over them, but look what is the Consuls duty in the Senate, to propose*
matters, to ask their opinions, to direct others by giving them advise, by
admonishing, by exhorting, to guide the whole action by his authority, and see
that performed which was agreed upon by their common consent, that charge had
the Bishop in the assembly of Ministers. And having declared, that St Ierom
shows this to have been brought in by the consent of men upon the first of
Titus, he adds that the same St Ierom other where shows, how ancient an
order of the Church it was, even from St Marks time to Hereclas, and Dionysius
at Alexandria. In which words of Calvin, seeing that the order of the Church he
mentions, has evident relation to that before described, and that in the
describing of it, he had said, the Bishop was not so above the rest in honor,
that he had rule over them: It follows that Mr Calvin does not so much as
seem to confess of Ieroms report, that ever since St Marks time Bishops have
had a ruling superiority over the Clergy. Wherefore to use no more proofs in
a thing manifest, which else might easily be proved more at large out of St
Ierom and Mr Calvin both: It is certain, that neither of them does affirm,
that Bishops so long time have had such superiority as Dr Bancroft seems to
father upon them.

Thus have I signified mine opinion of the points that your Honor specified in
Dr Bancrofts Sermon. Which yet if he or any do prove, that I have erred in, or
take him otherwise than I ought, I shall be very willing by Gods grace to
correct: remembering the Apostles lesson, that* The spirits of the Prophets are
subject 1 Cor. 14. 3^.
to the Prophets.

19. September. 1598.
FINIS.

