ROBIN HOOD AND HIS Crew of SOLDIERS.

A COMEDY Acted at Nottingham on the day of His saCRed Majesty's Corronation.

Vivat Rex. The Actors names.
Robin Hood, Commander. Soldiers.
Little John. William. Scadlocke.
Messenger from the Shieriffe.
LONDON, Printed for James Davis. 1661.

Robbin Hood and his crew of Soldiers.
A shout without the Bower. Enter Hobin Hood, little John, William, Scadlocke,
etc. WHence springs this general joy?
What means this noise that makes Heavens
Arched vault echo? and the neighboring woods
Return a dreadful answer? With what uneven
Measures the amazed Birds cut through the
Trembling air? How the whole Forest shakes,
As if with us 'twas sensible of wonder, and
Astonishment. Shout again.
Still the glad noise increases
And with it our fear and wonder; Thus when
Unruly tempests force the weak banks,
Rolling the foamy billows over the yielding
Strand, fear and amazement, confusion and
Distracting cares seize the neighbring villages,
And thus it is with us; the guilty breast
Still pants and throbs, when others are at rest.
Look out and learn the cause, and in the mean while
Each man betake himself to's arms.

Exit little John No danger unexpected to a mind
Prepared to meet the worst that it can find.

Enter little John and Shierifs Messenger. Rob. Speak, what is the news?


Little Jo. Gives and Fetters, Hatchets and Halters, stinking prisons, and the
death of dogs is all we can expect.


Rob. Why, what is the matter?


Jo. It Is the Kings Coronation; and now the Shieriffe with a band of armed men,
are marching to reduce us to loyalty, and the miseries of an honest life; this
Messenger here can tell you a rufull tale of obedience, that is expected.


Rob. Peace, and let him declare his errand.


Messen. From my Master I am come to require and command your arms, and a
cheerful and ready submission to his Majesty's Laws, with a promise of future
obedience; and that forthwith you join with us to solemnize his happy
Coronation, which is this day to be celebrated; this done, and the rest of your
lives running in a swooth stream of loyalty and honest allegiance, I here bring
pardon of all past misdemeanors; but otherwise, expect the miseries of a sudden
destruction: this told you, I wait your answer.


John. Did not I tell you this? he talks of submission to government, and good
Laws, as if we were the sons of peace and idleness, or had bin such
Whay-blooded fools to live thus long honestly. And has thy Master so little
brain to think that we who know the sweets of theft and rogery, to whom
dangers are as pleasant as dried suckets, who have been nursed and fed fat with
blood and slaughter, can be content to bear part of your general joy, for that
which takes from us the means of our beloved mirth.


Will. Shall I change Venison for salt Cats, and make a bounteous meal, with
the reversion of a puddings skin? Or shall I bid adieu to Pheasant and
Partrige, and such pleasing Cates, and persuade my hungry maw to satisfaction
with the bruis of an Egge-shell? Or shall it be said that thou O famous little
John becomes the Attendant of a Tripe-woman?


John. The very thought of it is dangerous, I have got the gout only with the
apprehension, I was born for action, but yet I cannot plow nor thresh, except
it be mine enemy; and after all my famed exploits to hang for stealing sheep
'twould grieve me. I hope our worthy Master will not credit the gingling words
of pardon, and acts of grace, and fully all his former glories with a surviving
repentance; for my part I had rather trust my self then any other with my life.


Will. If this gear takes then we may turn our Bows into Fiddle-sticks, or
strangle our selves in the strings, for the days of war and wantonness will
be done. Now must I whimper like a breecht Schoolboy, and make a face as sour
as an Apes when he eats Crabs; and then learn manners, and to make legs with
the patience of a setting-dog; and cry, I forsooth, and no forsooth, like a
Country wench at a Churching; Wakes and Bear-baitings, and a little Cudgel-play
must be all our comfort, and then in some smoaky corner recount our past
adventures, whilst the good wives bless themselves at the relation. We must
not dream of Venison, but be content like the Kings liege-people with crusts
and moldy Cheese.


John. Every brave soul is born a King; rule and command over the fearful
rabble, is natures stamp; courage and lofty thoughts are not ever confined to
Thrones, nor still the appendages of an illustrious birth, but the thatcht
Hovell or the simple Wood often times turns forth a mind as fully fraught with
Gallantry and true worthy as does the marble Palace; bounteous nature ties not
her self to rules of State, or the hard Laws that cruel men impose; she is
free in all her gifts, as the Suns general light, which when it first peepes
over the Eastern hills, and glads the widdow'd earth with its fresh beams, is
not straight snatched into a Monarchs Court, and there imprisoned to guild his
private luxury, but spreads his welcome rays, and cheares the poor Orphan and
dejected Widow, with the same heat it does the Persian Prince.


Rob. Why then should the severities of obedience, and the strait niceties of
Law shackle this Noble soul, whom nature meant not only free but soeveraigne,
those ties that now by a boundless spreading force do equally concern the
brave and base; first chiefly touched the vulgar herd and throng of men, that
mass of fear and folly, who therefore closed together, and with an easy
fondness suffered themselves to be manacled by Laws, because distrustful of
their own free strength, and since being nur'st in idleness and soft
intemperance, have grown inamoured of their Chains, and caressed their
slavery, and dote upon their hateful Bondage. But the bold daring Spirit has
in all times disowned this sneaking lowness, and with a commendable brav'ry
challenged their darling Liberty; and from the insulting Laws rescued their
enslaved honor: Those famous Heroes in this gallant attempt wee've boldly
followed, and should we now sit down, and whine a vain repentance; or tamely
and coldly yield our hands and legs to fetters, and necks to the mercy of the
haltar, the world might well esteem us rash and heady Men, but never bold or
truly Valiant. No we have Swords, and Arms, and Lives equally engaged in our
past account, and whilst these Arms can wield our Swords, or our uncurdl'd
blood give vigor to those Arms, hopes of submission are as vain as is the
strange request.


Mess. Doubtless were the quality of actions the justice or injustice to be
measured by the boldness or fear of the undertakers, what now is your shame,
would be your greatest glory, and your Rebellion would be worthy of an
honorable memory to eternal Ages; for none have begun and managed such wild
designs with more unshaken confidence, but since Laws were not made as you
formerly imagine, to enslave the Generous, but Curb the Proud and Violent, the
ambitious and unruly nature, your disobedience betrays aboundlesse pride, and
desires unfix'd as mad-mens thoughts, and restless as the Seas watery motion.
That by the Laws which careful Princes make, we are commanded to do well and
live virtuously, free both from giving and receiving injuries, is not to be
esteemed slavery but privilege. And since we know the power of doing wrong is
seldom ununcompanyed with a will someway answerable, it is our perfection to
have that fairly chekt that so virtue and justice, the top and complement of
our natures may have their due regard, which is the end of Laws. Nor can a
good or just Man, one who dares be virteous or honest (which is the truest
gallantry) think it a loss of freedom to wait and obey the commands of his
Prince, especially, when with his regality and Kingly power, are joined the
true embellishments of piety and real goodness. A Prince of such an
influential sweetness, that every account teaches a virtue, and the meanest
Subject by his great example grows up into an Hero, as if his Princely Soul
was grown his peoples Genious. A King so dear to Heaven as if he was it is only
care; His birth ushered in by a bright Star, and each minute of his Life linked
to the former by a miracle, whose preservation was the amazement of his
Enemies: and though the prayer, yet scarce the hope of his most hearty
Subjects; One who has suffered injuries beyond example, yet of such an
unparalleld charity, he pardons them beyond hope. Whose Virtue is as great as
his Birth and his Goodness unlimitted as his Power, To whom the illustrious
persons former Ages bragged of were no more comparable then the Nights
Glimmering to the Noon-dayes Splendour.

This Great, this Gracious Prince is this day Crowned, and offers Life, and
Peace, and Honor, if you will quit your wild rebellions, and become what your
birth challenges of you, nay what ever your boasted gallantry expects of you
that is) loyal subjects.


Rob. Ha! whence is this sudden change? That resolution which but now was
remoseless as a Rock of Diamonds, and unyielding as the hardened Steel, is now
soft and flexible as a weak woman's passions. I am quite another man; thawed
into conscience of my Crime and Duty; melted into loyalty and respect to
virtue. What an harsh savage beast I was before, not differing from the f^ery
Lion or the cruel Bear, but in my knowledge to do greater ill, my strength
and eager rashness was all my boast. How all my pride now is undermined? How
am I dwarfd in mine own sight? removed from that advantage ground my fancy set
me on, and shrunk to mine own low pitch? How am I torn now from my self? sure
some power great and uncommon has quite transformed me, and consumed all that
was bad and vicious in me. Methinks these men, companions in former ills, look
like those Grecians, the enchanted cup transformed: they have shapes of beasts,
rude, uncomely and very affrightfull; yet do I see remorese bud in their
blushing brows, as if with me they felt shame and true penitence for their
fore-past Crimes. Let us all then join in the present sense of our duty,
accept the profer'd pardon, -- and with one voice sing,


3. Voc. Since Heaven with a liberal hand
Does choicest blessings fling,
And has (not only to our Land
Restored but) Crowned our KING.
Let us to joy and general mirth
This glad day set aside,
Let the Neighboring Woods now Echo forth
Our shouts and Loyal Pride.
May Halters that Man's fate attend
That envies this days Glee
And's name meet a perpetual brand
For his Disloyalty.

Exeunt. FINIS.

