THE KINGS Noble entertainment AT YORK WITH The Lord Mai^r of YORK his worthy
Speech to the King.

As also the manner how the Aldermen, Sheriffs, Citizens, and sundry other
Gentlemen congratulated his Majesty to York.

Likewise how triumphantly he was entertained with many rich Presents, and now
they conducted his Majesty to his Castle.

Sent from York by Sir Nathanaael Rigby to a Merchant in London. March 18. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Williams, 1641.

THE Kings Noble Entertainment At York.
THE Kings Most Excellent Majesty, being variously discontented, partly at the
seditious and preposterous Distraction in this Kingdom, partly at the
Rebellious insurrection in Ireland, and the barbarous continuation of the same,
none, or very little means of redress being used, and partly (which I conceive
was the principal cause that induced him) at the dangerous imputation of high
affairs reflected on his Majesty, was deeply wounded hereupon with grief and
vexation: all which loaded his Princely mind with such a ponderous burden of
sorrow, that he resolved himself to live absented from his Parliament. And in
this remote distance from them, receiving diverse times Messages from both
Houses, highly touching his Majesty; it did rather redouble and ingeminate his
former griese, then lessen or extenuate it. Wherefore being at New Market, he
recreated himself oftentimes, and did seem respectively to entertain some
mirth and alacr^ty in his former dejected mind; till afterward receiving a
Declaration from both Houses of Parliament, he was more vexed then before.
Whereupon he left New Market, and went next to Cambridge: from thence to
Huntington, and there continuing a while, he afterward confirmed his
resolution to set forward for York. And the Lord Mayor receiving intelligence
before of his Majesty's intent, with the Aldermen, Citizens, and other
Gentlemen, he went out to meet, and congratulate his Majesty to York; where
coming before his sacred person, he with all humility, and ardency of
affection, pronounced a Speech unto his Majesty, ^o the tenor of these words
following;

Dread sovereign,
WE are now no less joyful to attain the happy aspect of your Majesty, then
before do esull and dejected, as well sympathizing with your own grief, as
being deprived of your sacred person: for since your last return from Scotland,
we required so general a triumph and alacrity at your then secure and
prosperous return, that now likewise in commemoration of the same, we present
our loyalty and sub nissive obedience to your Majesty. It Is true, you came then
from a Parliament, and so you do now likewise; only the difference lies in
this, that as you come t^en with the li^e branch of peace, so now you are
burdened with the fears and jealousies of your people: then with the public
assent, now with the dissent: then with the peaceful conclusion of all thing,
now in the tumultucus distraction of all: then your subjects were joyful for
your preferce, now they are traduced with passion for your absence.

Dread Sovereign, if my too audacious tongue does trespass on your Majesty, I
humbly beseech your favorable absolution for the same: neither can you impute
it as a presumption in me, so much a careful solicitation both for your own
security, and the better satisfaction of your subjects: for form the pious
shade of your Royal Crown, we expect to reap nothing but the delectable
fruits of Justice and Equity: of Justice, in prorecting none from their
deserved censure, and condign punishment for their delinquencie: Of equity, in
subscribing and condescending to what your Parliament shall conceive to be
just, equal, and expedient for the public safety of your Kingdoms. Thus (my
Royal Liege) you will link and tie the affections of your people so fast and
so unitely to your Majesty's favorable reflection, that nothing shall separate
them in maintaining your Prerogative from detraction of any, or your person
from any violation. But I think to admonish you of this, were to lead the Sune
to go its daily course, the Spheres to revolve themselves annually, or the
Moon to keep here Monthly change: For you are so well read in the School of
Justice, that nothing (we hope) can distill from your pure mind. Howsoever
(most gracious Sovereign) remember your Parliament, forget not them that
always remember you: concur with them in their sedulous consultatitions,
that so by that means your Imperial dignity may be the more advanced, and
your Kingdoms sooner eased of their grievances and troubles. Your Palace at
Westminster waits in expectation of your presence, it longs to enjoy your
sacred self, it expands its gates, as if it expects your return each minut:
let it not seem desolate, but rather honor it with your presence, that so it
may seem a Paradise.

Now (my Liege) grant us your element patience a while, that we may perform
our own particular duties unto yon. We are come to present the humble tender
of our loyalty and obedience unto you, laying down our lives, fortunes and
estates before you, being piously resolved both to live and dye at your
gracious feet. And in presentation of our humility, we are ready to expose our
live (as sacrifices) to your Majesty,. Accept then (we beseech you) what the
indigencie of our Country affoords, which shall be the only ambition of your
obsequious and loyal subjects, to obtain your Majesty's gracious acceptance
of their humble obedience.

The Lord Majors Speech being ended, his Majesty graciously thanked him for
the same, then the Aldermen, Sheriff, Citizens, and a moltitude of other
Gentlemen submissively congratulated his Majesty in a mutull vicissitude of
humble salutations: the Streets were embroidered with people on both sides,
each one triumphing in a joyful acclamation, having the happiness to behold
his Majesty, crying mutually, GOD bless King CHARES: in the midst of the
City, they presented two Golden Flaggons, and two golden Cups, being
entertained with great triumph: then they conducted his Majesty to his Castle,
where he continues: but it is supposed that his Majesty suddenly intends to
go to Hull.

FINIS.

