SOME FEW CONSIDERATIONS PROPOVNDED, As so many Scruples by Mr. Henry Robinson
in a Letter to Mr. John Dury upon his Epistolary Discourse: With Mr. Duryes
Answer thereunto.

Wherein is observable with what overtures of spirit they endeavor to edify
each other, notwithstanding their differing Judgments and Opinions about the
Independent and Presbyterian way.

Published by a Well-willer to Peace and Truth, in expectation that it may no
little conduce, either to the reconciling of such Controversies, or to the
debating them with less noise and bitterness.

Whereunto is annexed another Epistolary Discourse, written by Mr. John Dury,
to a worthy Knight, concerning the Principles of Meditation: From which Rules
may be gathered to direct men to order their thoughts, so as to find a
resolution of all their doubts.

2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. A servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing (even) those that
oppose themselves. Gal. 6. 1, 2. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of weeknesse, considering thy self
lest thou also be tempted. Psalm. 50. v. 23. Who so offers praise glorifieth
me, and to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the salvation
of God. LONDON, Printed for Charles Green, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Ivy Lane, at the sign of the Gun. 1646.

To the Reverend and much honored, Mr. JOHN DURY.
Reverend Sir:
ACcording to that small talent of understanding which it pleased the eternal
Dispencer, from whom all good gifts proceed, to bestow upon me: I may safely
say, and that with great joy of heart; how amongst so many as do argue, and
debate the present differences of the Churches, particularly about the
Independent and Presbyteriall Government, I have not met with any who ever yet
expressed so sweet, so brotherly, so Christian, and even so Apostolical a
spirit, as without any other prospective, I clearly see inhabiting in you
breast, by some letters which came forth about two months ago, entitled, An
Epistolary Discourse, etc. with others, which it pleased my worthy friend Mr.
Hartlib to favor me withal: your proceeding with the Apologists therein, I
cannot better express, then, as if it were between your own right hand and
your left; toward which, any other then an equal proportion of liberty and
affection would be both unnatural and unjust.

It is now eight months since I was bold to enquire after you in hope you had
been in England, with an intention of importuning you (which since I perceived
to be needless through your own forwardness) to engage your self toward the
reconciling of this Clergy War; but understanding you were so far off, and
withal scarce settled, or well at leisure, I forbore purposely to give you
farther trouble. However because in the beginning of your Letter to Mr.
Hartlib, as also in the other to Mr. Good win and Mr. Nigh: you seemed desirous
of a further correspondency with the Apologists, or some others in their way;
whereby you might have known the state of their case in England: and as I
conceive would gladly for the common Cause sake, that some punctual answer
were made unto the Epistolary Discourse, which I am fearful will not succeed
as yet, in that I apprehend that most men of their way, are rather totally
possessed and taken up with an imminent danger, and daily expecting some sudden
sentence of absolute silence or certain banishment for what is said already,
through a most fierce persecution of certain unquiet Presbyterian Spirits: the
consideration whereof, as also the great desire I have of being farther known
unto you in the high esteem of those admirble gifts which God has given you,
prevail with me to trouble you with these few general considerations, upon
the reading of your Epistolary Discourse; whereby you will perceive I take not
upon me neither to state the controversy (so much above my slender abilities)
and yet not as one altogether without hopes, through Gods mercy (which is still
most eminent when most relied upon) and the love you bear to truth (a greater
then which I know not where to find to make an ensample unto my self) but that
they may in some small manner, and by degrees be conducing unto the public
good.

Page 20. Briesly then about the middle of your book; you please to say the
Apologists are not to be tolerated unless they can show their way of
Non-communion to be the only way of God; and the Presbyteriall contrary etc.
But I should suppose it sufficient, if they can prove their way to be one of
the ways of God, if but a possibility of salvation in their way; since they
profess before God and man, and must be believed in charity, that they cannot
comply with a good conscience in any other way: our Saviors Proclamation of:
He that was not against him was on his part, Mark. 9. 40. seems to make not a
little to this purpose; and so much the rather, they may be tolerated, whilst
they insist not so much that the Presbyteriall government should be rejected by
the State, as that their own way be barely suffered among themselves: but
whilst the Presbyterian party (or such as will not permit a Civil abode but)
banish or exp^ll all such as differing in opinon do separate themselves from
Church society; they are Authors of a more desperate separation, far worse then
non-communion, or the separatists themselves in whatsoever sense, because they
take away all possibility of regaining them, if they were in an error by their
conversation.

Page 21. The less the cause of separation is; the greater the fault is, in
those that make it:

The cause of separation is great in apprehension of the Apologists, but less
in judgment of the Presbyterians, proceeding only, as these usually allege,
about things indifferent; and therefore they ought the rather to give way unto
them, since they may contrive it with a quiet conscience; all the reason they
give unto the contrary, is the goodlinesse of uniformity in the outward
comeliness, which cannot be stood upon as necessary; much less to be pressed
so far, as not to suffer such to live amongst them, who cannot comply through
tenderness of conscience; godly, reasonable, and understanding men, as they
are thought to be, should not by charitable men, be deemed to separate to their
so great inconveniences, if their conscience could otherwise dispense with
them; whereas the Presbyterians here, which stand upon their pantofles,
enjoying all acco^modations, may easier be supposed to keep their despised
brethren of the Independent way to such hard task and measure, to gratify
their private interests.

Page 23. Let us remember, that the servants of God must not strive, but be
gentle to all men; chiefly unto our nearest brethren. If the Apologists can be
thought to strive, it is only in a defensive way, to keep their consciences from
being ravished into a uniformity; whereof they find themselves not able to
give an account neither to God nor man; but they are the Presbyterians, which
may be said, both properly and actually to strive, and that with carnal civil
weapons, whilst by their doctrine, instigation, or approbation, their poor
brethren, which cannot with a good conscience comply with them, are persecuted
by discountenancing, turning out of their Ministry and livelihoods,
imprisoning and banishing, through grief and manifold inconveniences, even unto
death.

Page 24. You say, if spiritual relation cannot be settled by the wisdom and
loving affections of spiritual office-bearers within the Church amongst
themselves, then it is just that they should forfeit their spiritual right and
liberty, etc.

If this be so; I would gladly see it proved from evidence of Scripture, or
good reason; for, I conccive, that as Christ did only purchase for us our
Christian rights and liberties: so no State or Government, no body but himself
may take upon him to abridge us of them: Secondly, that no civil misdemeanors
can be just cause to abridge us of our Christian liberty: Thirdly, that
divisions in opinions about a Church Way do not necessarily conclude divisions
in a State: And lastly, such as do actually disturb the civil State, the
public peace, both ought, and may be punished, even unto death, without
abridging such offenders; much less the civilly innocent in their spiritual
rights and liberties. The utmost extent and height of Christians differing in
opinion, which I ever heard of, was this. First, that they might have leave to
search the Scriptures: Secondly, to try the spirits, examine the doctrines
which were taught them, and so rejecting error, hold fast the truth; worshpping
God in such a manner as he requires, with confirming and edifying one another
in all piety and godliness, for discharging of a good conscience, both toward
God and man. If it be objected, that men may not worship God after a false
manner, under pretense of a true one; nor publish errors in stead of truth: I
answer, that nothing can be saving truth, nor any kind of worshipping God prove
acceptable from any man, which is not held to be such in his own conscience and
understanding. I submit my self to hear, read, or be informed in whatsoever
shall be required of me; and it may on strong presumptions be conceived, that
the sundry disadvantages I lie under, in dissenting, with the many benefits I
might receive by conforming, do make me no little willing and desirous, that my
very judgment and conscience could be brought about to approve and agree in
what the State establishes, so it might be with a good conscience toward God
and man; but if after all this I shall profess in presence of the Lord, that I
do not find evidence by all that was alleged, for convincing of my
conscience, I desire to see clear grounds from Scripture, on which any politic
ends of State may any ways proceed to offer violence, or any degree of
compulsive means to work upon my conscience and understanding, on which such
spiritual as have hitherto been used were not able to prevail, since such only
we find warrantable and sanctified in Scripture to this effect.

Page 25. They should be so tolerated, as may be no prejudice to that Church
whereof the State it self is professedly a nursing mother.

I cannot apprehend how the similitude can hold between a private Christian and
a public State in many respects; I will urge only in one, viz. a public State
may at sometime, both have, and suffer thwarting, cross or contrary opinions
to be believed, and yet subsist, though (if it were granted) not so peacebly,
not so secutely as is objected. But a private Christian cannot possibly, at one
and the same time, believe two diametrically opposite opinions to be true in
the self same respect.

I wish you would be pleased to state the course and orderly conference you
speak of, p. 26. which doubtless all Independents will with you approve of.

I do not find it expressed in Scripture, that Christian Magistrates have any
thing to do in setting up an outward visible worship under the Gospel; or that
they can any ways be furthering of it, except by giving good example unto
others, as being members of the Church, or in protecting the Saints, whilst
they apply themselves to worship God, according to the integrity of their own
consciences, in spirit and in truth, for since the Magistrates weapons are
coercive, teriall, camall, if they take upon them the vindication of spiritual
neglect or defect, each State setting up its own, a different worship; men must
from time to time take that to be the truest, and subject their consciences to
that which has the sharpest sword to fight for it, still changing Religion
according to the event of war; with the sundry alterations of States and
Kingdoms. And though I am not well satisfied with the expression you use
concerning the conscience of a State: I suppose you will sufficiently apprehend
me, if I querie, whether the conscience of every State, can be accountable, and
at the day of judgment excuse all such as have been cast away through false
worships, which they set up in relation to their own consciences respectively,
compelling the people to submit thereto? If not, I querie again, if it be not
are argument of greatest indiscretion, for reasonable men and women to resign
up their own understandings, unto such as cannot bear them harmless for so
doing, and of greatest presumption and tyranny in those who assume unto
themselves a spiritual dominion over others, whom they can neither give a
spiritual assurance to at present; nor provide for them if need be a
spiritual deliverance hereafter.

Page 28. You say the Civil Magistrate may not meddle with what is spiritual,
nor the Spiritual office bearer with what is Civil, which I grant: and yet p.
29. you say the Civil Magistrate must have the cognizance of the just and
orderly behavior of those which do administer Spiritual ordinances: wherein
I beseech you, consider whether this be not a direct way of setting the Civil
and Spiritual office bearers at odds amongst themselves; as put the case the
Civil Magistrate tells the Spiritual, that he has not well and orderly
administered the Ordinances, admonishes him to reform; and upon resusall
proceeds to punish him: on the contrary, the Spiritual Magistrate justifies
himself; flies to his Spiritual weapons in his own defense, and if they
prevail not, in likelihood endeavors to stir up the people against the Civil
Magistrate; and how you can avoid this great disturbance upon these grounds I
cannot possibly imagine, but much desire to be informed thereof, if your
leisure may permit, and that upon further thoughts you continue of the same
opinion. You make it likewise within the sphere of the Civil Magistrate to
keep people from choosing Teachers according to their own humors, their own
understandings, and Teachers from drawing people after them: how is this I
beseech you, consistent with the liberty? nay the charge which is imposed upon
Christians for trying of the spirits, and holding fast that which is good: if
they may not hear such as they apprehend to be sent from Christ, and embrace
such doctrines as they take to be saving truths, and necessary to their
salvation according to that light of reason and understanding in the
Scriptures, which God has given them for this very purpose.

Page 36. If those you call common principles (whilst you say the Apologists
insisting on generalities, cannot be brought to trial) were demonstrative, as
you allege the Scriptures may be demonstratively analized. P. 4. I should
think it the work of some Angel to have it once effected; and as well the
Apologists as all others who now differ in opinion, would quickly grow together
into an unity of faith: But till then I shall expect, that according to the
Scriptures, there will be heresies, and in the mean time conceive that nothing,
except this demonstrative analizing sacred truth, will sooner vanquish them,
then the suffering them, to be with all possible freedom examined and
debated, which must necessarily infer the most acknowledged truths themselves,
to be subject to the same proceeding, in that what one man, Church or Nation
takes to be truth, another perhaps accounts no less then heresy: And if Paul
told the Galathians, that if a good Angel, an Angel from heaven, should
preach any other Gospel to them then what the Apostles had done before, he
should be accursed: I conceive we may much more try the spirits of mortal men,
of like passions and infirmities with our selves, consequently holding fast
what we find sound, and rejecting what appears to be erroneous by the
touchstone of holy Writ, according to our own reason, understanding and faith:
since we neither may or can judge truly of them (no more then see with the eyes
of other men) by the reason, understanding and faith of others: neither can I
apprehend a third or any mean betwixt these two conditions.

To Page 30. I consesse a dissolved government, may often times prove dangerous
and fatail to any State, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; and yet not so
dangerous not fatal as a dominiering, over rigid, tyrannical government,
especially in the spiritual state; and both of them are therefore to be
regulated according to their bounds and rules: If Church discipline and
censures will not prevail on Church members, I find no warrant to fly to
Civil, but conceive it highly condemned even by that place of Paul, where he
blames the Corinthians for going to law with one another, and that before
unbeleevers; besides all Civil states account themselves in a manner perfect
for their civil condition and constitution: As first, they are complete in
Laws, they have as many as they will themselves, they pretend to understand
them fully, even to the least jot, and every man is bound to know them exactly,
and keep them in the letter. But for spiritual matters we know but in part;
and therefore ought to reach forth to what is wanting, not refusing to lend an
ear unto it, though tendered by a stammering illiterate tongue of some
otherwise despised soul: As all truth for the most part, even from the
beginning has been discountenanced, and rejected upon the first discovery, and
so much the rather in that the Primitive Christians however weak and ignorant
in faith and knowledge, the Apostles found them; yet had they such amongst them
in both respects, as far exceeded all others ever since; neither have we such
infallible teachers like theirs, to confirm unto us what we have for truth, or
add unto us what is wanting.

To page 31. I must needs confess, the opinion of a greater light is no little
deceitful; but does not God require that we should walk according to such
appearing light, whether true or false, I must be guided by it, as it appears
unto my self? and how can God be angry with me for serving him to my power? or
how can man condemn me for differing from him, when I have used all such
rational common principles which he could prescribe to bring me to be of this
opinion, without prevailing upon my conscience? You say well with the Apostle,
that if any man thinks he knows any thing he knows nothing, yet as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. and yet a man must be ruled by that which he thus
but thinks to know: so, much less ground has any man to impose what he knows
not, (for even his knowledge neither is no better) upon another who knowing
nothing, yet knows as much as himself: Nay, a Synod, Council, or State, have
so little preemimence in this respect, as that we must not look upon them with
respect of persons, unless we will justify the Church of Rome in their
implicit faith.

Page 32. You approve the casting off subjection and absolute obedience unto
Episcopacy, but would not have dissolved the brotherly corresponcie in a
Presbytery; and certainly it should not be, but it must then continue
brotherly; we must run hand in hand like brothers, so long as we can keep a
good conscience both toward God and man; and if afterward upon just grounds
in our opinions, for some respects, we are forced to separate from them, we
shall be yet desirous to rest among them, that if possibly they may be won by a
godly conversation; but if like a cursed father, or imperious Master, they
endeavor with rods and staves to drive us from our Father and Master, which is
in heaven; or from our native country, friends and livelihoods, they do not
only cease to be brotherly, but cast away all hopes or possibility of
reclaiming us if we were in an error.

Pap. 34. You make duties of practice no less fundamental in the profession
of Christianity, then the knowledge of necessary truths, according unto which
principle, I suppose the Apologists ought to be permitted, both to practice
such duties as they apprehend requisite, and not to join with such as they
esteem superfluous, erroneous, since both may be no less of faith, then for
one that eats, and another that eats not, whilst both give thanks to God,
as Paul says of them, Romans 14. 6.

To page 37. As they will not refuse subjection to their own Pastor, that has
the charge of their souls, so much less when what he requires of them be
confirmed by the approbation of a Presbytery, other Churches, or Brethren; but
this must be in such things as they may yield unto with a good conscience; and
in case they find reason for dissenting, they are liable only to be censured
by their own Church, which has power over them, not by any others, who have no
jurisdiction, much less authoritative o^ compulsative: Synods and Assemblies
may well be convocated, and take counsel, debate, and seek to vanquish such
difficulties as arise without a Majesteriall jurisdiction, which neither our
Savior or his Apostles did ever make use of, or give command to others to
practice it in after ages; Christ's kingdom was not of this world, his body is
mystical; and such means only are capable to build us up therein.

Thus have I presumed in as weak as cursory a manner to weigh the foregoing
passages of your Epistolary discourse, in the unequal balance, like enough,
of my own understanding, but proceeding entirely from a desire of being better
informed in what I am at a loss: I doubt not but your singular candidnesse of
mind will make a good interpretation of it.

The settling of an Ecclesiastical Peace, I apprehend to be of such eminent
weight and consideration, as that without it Christians will never in any
comparative degree be brought to unity in discipline and doctrine; and that
more souls are kept from knowledge of the truth, and miscarry through
persecuting one another, for cause (...) conscience, then by reason of all
other such great differences betwixt them, whether for discipline or doctrine.

If you have puplished any of your other thoughts, concerning this subject
besides your Consultatio Theologie^, etc. Letter to the L. Forbes, and your
Informati^ Ecclesiis Reformatis oblata, etc. I should excedingly rejoice to
have a sight thereof; and especially touching the demonstrative analizing the
Scriptures, which I conceive would be a greater Jewel, then all that ever
Solomon wrote of, from the Cedar to the shrub: Wherefore I most humbly beseech
you, for the public good, that you would not suffer the least dram of your
Meditations in this behalf, any longer to lie waste or dormant, which, though
it were not yet perfect and complete, might by degrees, and contemplations of
others well-affected, be further improved, to the eternal honor of the
Almighty, to whose gracious protection, I cordially recommend your most pious
endeavous, and to them most earnestly desiring to become any ways subservient,
do in all humble manner remain

London, the 5. of November, 1644. Your most devoted Friend and Servant in the
Lord, Henry Robinson.

To his much respected and loving friend in Christ, Mr. Henry Robinson.
Worthy Sir
ALthough your Letter did miscarry, and never came in the Original to my hand;
nor the Copy thereof till I was resolving to go from Rotterdam toward
England, yet I thought my self obliged to answer your love; which then I did
begin to do, but was interrupted in the prosecution hitherto: nevertheless
lest either mine own purpose or your equitable desires should be frustrate; or
I seem careless to give you some satisfaction to your scruples; I shall now
endeavor to perfect the thoughts which once were in my mind, beseeching the
Lord to assist us both with the increase of his Grace; that in this and all
other services his Glory may be advanced by us.

But before I enter upon the matter, I must truly tell you, That as I cannot
acknowledge any of these things in my self which you attribute unto me beyond
my measure; so I must needs take notice of the large expression of your
affections which I am bound to requite and entertain; not only because you
have moderate and sober thoughts of your self, and because your way seems to me
very ingenuous, and your whole strain conscionable in the doubts which you
make; all which deserves respect: but chiefly because the duty of Christian
love (even toward those that deserve it not) is the only means of edification
toward them: For it does make the testimony of divine Truth in the (...)
thereof without offense: and therefore fit to be received through Gods blessing
with profit by them to whom it is offered. For as God is moved, and is
powerful only by his love to reveal himself to us, offering himself as a
Father of spirits to his children, which are our souls; so we as children of
such a Father are bound to do all things in his love; for so we are commanded
by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. and toward our Brethren we should as members
of each other advance that knowledge which we have of him and his truth in love
only and not otherwise: For what we do with any other affection is done in our
ownestrength, and will be found either ineffectuall, or hurtful to
edification. Therefore as I make no doubt but you have spoken the truth from
your heart: so I shall assure you that I shall without partiality lay open unto
you my thoughts, and hold out the light which I have received; not only in
these things which you have proposed, but in all other matters wherein I shall
find my self obliged to bear witness to the Truth.

Now then beseeching him again to direct our thoughts, and guide our spirits
in all truth by his holy Spirit of promise in Jesus Christ, to be able to do
all things unblameably to the glory of his Grace and our mutual comfort, I
shall endeavor to resolve the doubts which you propose, and give you as
briefly as may be the best satisfaction I can.

1. To the first Scruple then out of page 20. concerning the toleration of the
Apologists: I find that you take not up rightly my meaning; I will therefore
explain it first more fully, and then come to the particulars of your
exception. Consider therefore that in the whole first part of my Discourse, and
consequently in that place which you allege, I speak not of a Toleration of
Forbearance whereby one Christian is bound with all long suffering to support
another in meekness: nor of a Toleration of Connivence in a Civil state,
whereby the Magistrate may wink at things which he cannot mend, when they are
not settled according to his judgment: but I do speak of that Toleration
which I supposed the Apologists did sue for; which I must call a Toleration of
Approbation, which the Magistrate as the public Minister of God, in the
visible society of men should setle therein for the welfare thereof. My
Question then in the first part of the Discourse is not, what in State Policy
(I should have said humane Prudencie) a Magistrate may do lawfully, if his
inclination leads him thereunto: or what in charity as a Christian he should
intend to do privately: but what in state wisdom as it is subordinate unto
Gods will in the profession of Christianity is most expedient for him to do in
his public place. And in this respect I say, that I think it no wisdom in a
state seeking a Reformation of Religion, to tolerate by way of Approbation
(that is in effect to authorize and setle for a time) a public profession,
which they cannot find to be the true and only way which God allows. This
is the meaning of my assertion in the whole first part of my Discourse: and in
this sense only I dissuade the state to grant the Apologists their Petition:
but if for other more important reasons it cannot be denied, then I thought it
would be wisdom in the state, so to limitate the Toleration which they should
grant for time and manner; that thereby a full agreement and unity might be
brought to pass between the Apologists and their Brethren, which is the
subject of the two following heads of my Discourse: and I am still in the same
mind which then I was in.

But if you or any make a doubt of the first Position, take notice of the
grounds whereupon I raise it; and if you or any, can show me that they are not
sound, I shall quit them with their consequence.

I conceive then the Magistrate to be Gods Vicegerent, over the society of men,
as it is a Civil Body; and that his charge is to look to the Natural
constitution and visible face of that society, to keep it in a frame
subordinate unto the glory of God; that it may appear that God by him rules
in the world in the Kingdom of men. He then is bound as a Vicegerent of the
most High to authorize (that is to set up in the name of his Sovereign) nothing
but that which his best understanding tells him, is the will of his Sovereigne:
Now he cannot be ignorant of this; that his true worship should only be
authorized in his name, because that is only according to his will. Therefore I
conclude that it will be no wisdom in him to authorize the practice of any
Religion in the state, committed by God unto his inspection, but that which he
knows to be the true worship of God; and if he knows it not to be the true
way of Gods worship, He has no warrant to authorize it. He may (if he cannot
avoid the Toleration) do, as God does with us; wink at it, until the time of
reformation, which is in his eye; and in the mean time, direct all unto the
best ends he can, in hope of redress, but may not authorize and settle what
his Sovereign does not allow in his worship: This is my ground for the duty of
the Magistrate: as for that which I call the only way of God, which the
Magistrate is to look to, I conceive it to be nothing else but the true way,
which God does intend should be observed for his glory: For I conceive that his
true way is but one only way, for God is but one only God, and his name is one:
The way of his glory must be therefore as his name is one only way, because his
glory is nothing else but the manifestation of his name, from all which, I
suppose, I may lawfully infer thus much, except the Apologists can show that
their way of non-communion is the only way of God; that it will be no wisdom
in the state to authorize it jointly with the way which they have settled, and
acknoleged to be the true way; for this were to make the name of God, which he
in his Vicegerency is to uphold, which is but one in glory, manifold, against
the intention of God in Christ, and the duty of his Vicegerency: For if God
does manifestly declare that all Christians are called in Christ to partake of
his glory, by being one Ephesians. 4.
body and one spirit in him, as partaking of one Baptism, of one faith, and of
one hope of their calling throuhg him, then it is also manifest that his
Vicegerent on earth amongst men, should advance by all lawful means which
belong outwardly to the sphere of his charge, tho setlement of this unity, to
be as visible as may be amongst those who make profession to answer the calling
of God in Christianity.

From all which I suppose you may gather an answer to your supposals: For when
you say, to obtain a toleration, it is sufficient, if they can prove their way
to be one of the ways of God, if but a possibility of salvation therein: I
answer that I see not how Gods ways to salvation can be said to be many,
Christ Jesus is but one yesterday, to day and for ever the same, Heb. 13. 8.
and without him there is no salvation. Now his way to save, is but one, which
is by faith; and the means to beget faith is but one: this is the word, and the
way to bring the faithful by this means to the Father is but one: namely, the
government and leading of the Spirit, which directs the children of God in
all truth answerable to, and discernable by the tenor of his covenant with them
in the Word. If then the Word be but one, the covenant in it one, the truth in
the Spirit but one; and the government of souls to enjoy God it that truth
through the Spirit be also but one; I know not what you mean by the many ways
of God, and those having a possibility of salvation; except you mean the
manifold degrees of the revelation to, and of the apprehension of that one way,
in several persons, which is very improperly called the way of God. So then,
when you say one of the ways of God, wherein is a possibility of salvation: If
I should take your words in the best sense that I can give them, I must
understand them to be spoken of any one degree of the knowledge of Gods ways
which may be effectual to work salvation by Gods blessing, and in this sense I
agree with you, that all such as are come to any degree of saving knowledge,
ought to be permitted to walk in that light which they have, and ought not to
be constrained against their conscience, to follow a practice wherein they see
no light: But although from hence it follows, that they ought to be born
withal, as professors of Christiany in such or such a growth, yet it does not
follow, that it would be wisdom in a State to authorize their way by an act of
public toleration, whereby they should be stinted to that degree of growth in
the profession of the Gospel, when the State does not know that to be the true
Way which God does intend and allow, to bring all to the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, answerable to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. For, seeing God has
revealed, that the gifts which he has given by his Spirit unto his Ministers,
are given for the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of the body of
Christ, till they be brought unto this degree of growth, in a manly stature,
that they may not always be in a childish condition of doubtfulnesse and (...)
tainty, to be tossed too and fro, and carried about with every^^^ blast of
doctrine, which cunning men, for their own ends, will Ephesians. 4. 12. 17.
craftily insinuate, lying in wait to deceive unstable souls: seeing (I say)
God has revealed this to be his intention, and has showed to his Saints the
way by which it will be brought to pass: namely, by this only way that they
should deal truly, without deceit, by word or deed, one with another in love,
by which they should be able to grow up in all things into him, which is the
head even Christ Jesus: and to the end that this their true dealing may work
out this growth in them effectually, and prevent the cunning craftiness of men
who lie in wait to deceive, seeing he has showed them that they ought all to
be settled together in one body under their only head: and be fitly joined
together, and compacted in one society; that by the spiritual joints and
ligatures which his Spirit through love in the mutual care of each other does
frame amongst them, they may make the increase of the body, in the measure of
every part, by that which every joint supplyeth unto the edifying of themselves
in their duties of love: seeing (I say again) all this is thus by God
declared, therefore it follows; that not only the whole body of Believers in
a Nation, may by a right from God compact themselves together, by their joints
and ligatures for their mutual strengthening in spiritual duties, to do all
things as one man in Christ; but they ought to depend in this relation only
from Christ as their head, and act toward each other only by the ability which
he gives: And Christ's Vicegerent on earth, appointed for the inspection of
Civil and outward matters, must not presume either to hinder them in the use
of these means of their spiritual growth unto the stature of a perfect man
within themselves; or injoyne them to act only, as from and under his Authority
that which is to be done in this kind. For this cause we say, that the
Magistrates sanction in spiritual matters of edification for the execution of
duties and compacting of the Body; is but de been esse, and cumulative
requisite for outward protection, and not at all necessary for to give a being
unto the work it self: nor is it from his Civil sanction, that the whole
Body of Believers in a Nation is made one; but they are bound for their own
growth and preservation to make themselves one, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ: nor may the Vicegerent of Christ on earth (if he
will not incur the high displeasure of his sovereign) abstruct this growth of
Christ's spiritual Body, but is bound to further it by all the assistance that
he can contribute thereunto, and ought to take away the lets which may hinder
it, whereof this would be a maine one, to authorize several ways, and allow
them as ways of God, to constitute the Body of Christ, and manifest the truth
of his worship; when he cannot be ignorant that there is but one way agreeable
to the will of God in doing this.

As touching the place Mark. 9. 20. which you allege, He that is not against
us is on our part: does infer to me thus much only; that private men^ ought
not to be prohibited to make use of the name of Christ, or to walk in a way
not opposite to Christ, although they join not themselves to follow Christ
with his true Disciples. For the question is there, of hindering some (who
followed not Christ as the Apostles did) to make use of his name to do
miracles; Christ forbids his Disciples to hinder such, from doing what they
did, by a rule of Prudencie, that such could not lightly speak evil of him.
This case does hold well amongst private Christians in the way of mutual
edification: but it does not reach the point which I insist upon in respect of
the duty of a state. For there is a vast distance between the duty of a
Disciple of Christ in not hindering particular men's practices, which hurt not
their ways in Christianity, and the granting of a Toleration by a Magistrate
to an Assembly or many Assemblies of men to practice publicly in the state
that which he does not find to be the true way of God. This difference is
great many ways, but particularly in this, that such a granting of a
Toleration, is an act of public Approbation, which to declare is not always
wisdom in a private Christian, far less in a state. Therefore not to hinder
in that case is one thing, and to give a Toleration in this, is quite another
matter.

As for the charge laid upon the Presbyteriall Brethren in the end of this
Paragraphe, that they will not suffer any Civil abode to any, that differ in
opinion, separate from Church society from them; I know not how you can make it
good; nor will I believe it, without sufficient proof; nor ought you to
allege it without a sure and undoubted warrant; therefore as a thing spoken
in haste and out of too much jealousy, I will leave it till God let you see
the contrary in their unblameable ways of conversation to gain all men, by
loving forbearance with all long suffering and doctrine.

2. Page 21. Upon the words, The less the cause of separation is, the greater
the fault is in those that make it, you make no exception: but you apply the
Assertion against the Presbyterian Brethren, for the advantage of the
Apologists, contrary to the application that I made thereof. The ground that I
had to apply the assertion to the Apologists is taken from their own words in
the close of their Apology; where to my best understanding they say plainly of
their own way, that is differs but a little from their Presbyterian Brethren;
which seems to contradict the speech of your observation, when you say that in
the apprehension of the Apologists, the cause of separation is great, and
little in the judgment of the Presbyterians. But if you mark the argument
which they use to the Parliament it will be found this: That which differs but
a little from the way which you allow, you may safely tolerate. But the way
which we desire to follow differs but a little from that which you allow.
Therefore you may safely tolerate it and grant our suit. But if you make the
argument thus: Because the way which we desire to follow is greatly different
from that which you allow; therefore you should grant us a Toleration; I
suppose this would be no strong persuasion, and no part of the Apologists
meaning.

But to speak of the thing in it self, as you apprehend and deliver it: I
confess that nothing which does relate conscience, as to conscience, can
justly be counted small; yet the difference of things in respect of each other
may be small when you compare them together: but if a man's conscience be
troubled at that small difference, it is to him no small matter to digest it;
if he makes truly conscience of his ways: but if his own conscience be not
sound, nothing will be of great moment to it, or else every thing of too great:
for it will always be in the one or other extreme.

Now a good and sound conscience is that which is enlightened by a rule to
determine all that it does: For in matters of Religion, if I leave my
conscience at large without a rule, I make mine own will and reason a rule, and
serve God, not as he requires, but as I think good: then which nothing is more
destructive to the glory of Gods name, whereby he is acknowledged the Father of
Spirits. Therefore I must tell you, that I know no Presbyterian understanding
himself, who will allege, that which you say as you allege it; namely
thus, that the things wherein the difference is between them and their
dissenting Brethren are matters of indifferency in respect of
Church-constitution and government: nay I know, that many make the difference
wholly fundamental and utterly destructive to the constitution of Churches in
the communion of Saints. I wish they would explain themselves, so as to take
off the jealousies and constructions which are made of their Way to their
prejudice. The plea of conscience which is pretended, must not be slighted, or
unconscionably entertained, but examined and weighed; and I hope that if the
cases which trouble their consciences were distinctly stated and clearly showed
what the point of trouble is, that rules might be found in the Word, and by the
tenor of the new Covenant might be so applied unto the tender conscience, that
it should find ease; but whiles matters are carried in a cloud, and a general
plea for liberty of conscience is stood upon, without respect to such duties,
as cannot stand with a good conscience to be neglected amongst brethren, there
is great cause to fear, that there may be much deceit in such a plea: For where
the liberty, which with a pretense to conscience is pleaded for, is abused
unconscionably, and is without respect, to the end wherefore it is obtained,
made an occasion to the flesh: there may be a strong presumption of deceit in
such a pretense. Therefore the prudencie of the righteous, will in due time
make discoveries of that which is unsound. For we know by experience, that the
conscience may be deceived many ways, for want of knowledge, to discern the
rules by which it should walk; and of watchfulness to apply known rules unto
the ways wherein a man does walk. All the deceits which proceed from these two
causes, are in defectu; but many of these that plead for a liberty of
conscience, err in excessu; either by mistaking the rule, and misapplying of
it consequently, or by a misapprehension of the matter of which the difficulty
is made, which is the case of many that make every thing most odious which
differs from their Way, or by a kind of habitual scrupulositie, which makes
them fearful of every thing, so that they can rest no where at first; and then
being wearyed out of that frame of spirit, they take sometimes up such large
principles, that they cast off all fear, and doubting of nothing, do whatsoever
they please at last. There be some that pretend conscience unconscionably; that
is, unadvisedly, without judgment and consideration of the reason why they
make a scruple; these men's will, rules their conscience, and the liberty which
they affect only to please themselves, is pleaded for, under the name of
conscience; and I am much afraid, that since the raising of these
controversies, about matters of conscience amongst brethren, which have been
agitated with some heat, and with respect to some outward privileges in the
state; that the plea of conscience may be corpupted with humane passions, and
worldly ends in many: For, when men's affections are raised with zeal for a
particular cause, relating to conscience, if then they do not in humility
reflect upon themselves, to look to the rule of charity, that they may consider
other therein, to interpret their actions in the best sense, to behave
themselves unblameably, in affections in word and deed toward them: if (I say)
they do not this on the one side, but on the other side, looking upon these
that are of a different Way, with an eye of jealousy, to compare themselves
with others, and their own freedom with the freedom of other; if then their
zeal for their own interest heat their passions, it is no wonder; and where
humane passions are once set awork, there the conscience will be passive, and
led into error, and the plea thereof will arise more from the will, then from
the judgment. Now, in all these, and many more respects, the plea of
conscience should be examined, in respect of all the causes and circumstances
thereof, that it may be rightly stated; not that any may take upon him to be a
Judge over another man's conscience, but that by an unpartiall disquirie of
matters, belonging to the mystery of goldlinesse and of iniquity in the
consciences of men; rules may be proposed according to the Word, and by the
indictment of the Spirit, which will discover to the heart of man within
himself, and to others also that judiciously weigh matters, what truth or
falsehood is in the plea and pretense of conscience, and the conscience of every
one within it self, being helped by the Word, which is a discerner of the
thoughts of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. will be laid open to it self, and made a
judge of its one pretenses, from what grounds they arise, whether sound or
unsound. And to help you in this disquirie of your self, let me offer you a
Principle or two of truth, which I suppose are appliable to all men's cases and
consciences, which are these:

1. That nothing may or, ought to trouble the conscience, which does not tend
to a breach of the new Covenant, by which it stands in the favor of God.

2. That nothing can tend to a breach of the new Covenant between God and us,
which is a means to increase his love in our hearts toward others, and may
engage us to do service unto others, as Christ did to us.

3. That if any have a scruple of conscience, concerning any matter of duty, or
behavior toward God or man, that by a right disquirie of the nature of it,
compared with the tenor of the new Covenant, and the purpose of Gods love
toward us therein, he shall be able to find a resolution of his scruple.

4. That in case any upon pretense of conscience does refuse that which another
upon the like pretense, does challenge as a duty of love from him, and does
offer reciprocally to perform toward him, then he that is the refuser, is
bound to show from the tenor of the covenant the cause of his scruple, how in
his judgment, that which is required of him, cannot stand with the purpose of
Gods love to mankind in Christ Jesus and ought by all means to satisfy the
other in what he shall require of him to that effect. Consider these rules, and
if you have any doubt concerning them, I shall be willing as God shall enable
me with grace to clear them to you.

Sir, in the close of this your second Observation, you have some unsavory and
uncharitable expressions, which if you will take into your second
consideration, and reslect upon them, to see from what Principle they proceeded
in you when you wrote them, I make no doubt, but that you will discover
somewhat of passion, of humane jealousy, and want of Christian charity in
them; and so I leave them to be rectified in you by the Apostles rule, Gal.
Chap. 6. 1. till verse. 4.

3. The third observation upon that which I say, page 23. of the duty of
gentleness in Gods servants to abstain from strife, is an enlargement of the
former complaint, and accusation whereof I doubt you will hardly give good
proof: As to the general, I am sure the way does not lead to such a practice;
what particular faults may be in some, none can answer for: It is wisdom and
charity to deal with particulars in a particular way to recover them, and not
to impute their faults to all.

4. The fourth observation is upon page 24. concerning the forf^iture of
spiritual rights and liberties, where to prevent mistakes, I will now open my
self more fully then that discourse did require. I say then thus: If men, who
pretend to be brethren in Christ, cannot settle their mutual relation of
Brotherhood in a friendly way amongst themselves without such debates and
quarrels as tend to the scandal of Christianity, and disturbance of the
public peace, that then God does allow others, (namely, his public
Vicegerents in the State) to look to their ways, and to take authority over
them, so as to order their public courses for the prevention of such
inconveniences. But in case they can agree amongst themselves according to the
Will of God, for their mutual edification in love, then he has no such power
to prescribe any such course unto them. If you understand the case rightly, as
I make it, I suppose you will not at all scruple; for my full meaning is this.
That brethren in Christ, have a right and privilege from Christ to settle the
ways of their brotherly profession of Christianity amongst themselves; that
is, of edifying each other, and of preventing offensive carriages, both toward
one another, and toward forrainers: nor can any man on earth deprive them of
this right and privilege, so long as they use it in spiritual matters for the
true end; but if they abuse it to any other end, or make no use at all of it,
but fall to quarrelling about it, or about other matters, and with their
quarrels dishonor their profession, and disturb the peace of others, then
Christ has set one to look unto them, to prevent and rectify the
inconveniences which arise from their unrulinesse.

Now, if I understand your scruple rightly, you say nothing to my apprehension
against this case, because I grant fully that Christ has purchased for us our
Christian rights and privileges, and given power to use them for edification,
and not for destruction of one another. I grant also, that if we use them so,
then no state, government, or body in this world, may abridge us of them; but I
deny that no misdemeanors can be a just cause to abridge us of such rights and
privileges as serve to order our own ways in the public profession: For, if
our misdemeanor be such as may disturb the quiet of others, then, I say, that
the Magistrate, as Christ's Vicegerent, over the public society, wherein and
the outward human relations under which, according to the laws of nature, we
live together, with these, others has a right to order these courses which are
hurtful to others, to make them harmless, and free from offenses. I may
confess, that different opinions and Church-ways, do not necessarily infer a
division in the state; because it is possible that men may be peaceable and
orderly in public courses, not withstanding their private differences: but yet
we see by experience that ordinarily in all ages and places, the difference of
men's ways in spiritual matters does infer a division in Affections, and the
division of Affections, a division in outward carriages and relations; and this
a division in state matters: because naturally private men aspire to make their
differences public; and by gaining Adherents, they come at last to fasten an
interest of state upon themselves, and so disturb the state so far as their
interest does reach. If you acknowledge that the disturbers of a state may be
punished with death; you cannot deny to the Magistrate the right of inspection
over the causes of disturbance; and the power to use prevention, lest the
effects of evil causes break forth into inconveniences.

As for the privileges of searching the Scriptures, of trying the spirits of
men, and examining doctrins, and such like: God forbid that they should be
abridged: but to have a privilege of practicing at large and in public
whatsoever any shall pretend to be his conscience, and Religion, and that the
Magistrate may not have any thing to say to men's public ways in such a
kind, is a thing which I do not conceive: yet I would not have you think,
that I allow of all manner of compulsion and coercive power over the
Consciences of men, which is practiced among such as endeavor to blind the
weak and vulgar sort, that they may rule over them according to their own
will by an implicit faith: But how far the coercive power of the Magistrate
does go, in taking away the causes of offenses, I suppose may be gathered from
Psalm. 101. and now it is not fit for me to enlarge my self upon that subject.

5. The fifth Observation upon page 25. is a doubt how the similitude does hold
between a private Christian and a public State. I answer: 1. It does hold in
that for which I allege it. 2. It does hold proportionally each being taken
in his sphere, and according to his principles. 3. It does not hold in all
imaginable circumstances as one and the same thing, Nullum simile est idem,
nothing that is like is the very same, and your exception is no difficulty: For
as a public State may suffer, thwart, cross and contradictory opinions to be
believed, by its subjects and yet subsist: So a private Christian may suffer
the trouble of cross and contradictory thoughts, and doubtful opinions, and
yet remain a good and conscionable Christian, till God clear his judgment.

And to that which you require upon page 26. concerning the course of an
orderly Conference; that I should state it: I say, that that might easily be
done, if men could be obliged to follow it. In all Conferences men show
themselves men, and have an Art of fencing: from which (till God teach them
fully to deny themselves) they cannot be brought, chiefly when they have set
their Aim, they will have their own way to prosecute it, and then when they
can go no further and lose their Aim, they fall a complaining and telling
stories of each other, to their prejudice and reproach. In the following part
of this Observation you speak of the Magistrates Power: where again, I see
you mistake my meaning; therefore to inform you aright, I must tell you, 1.
That Christian Magistrates are not appointed by God, to set up an outward and
visible worship: but their duty is to authorize, protect and maintain that
which God in his word requires. 2. They are Custodes utriusque tabulae, to
oversee the ways of the Churches as they relate the public, and of the
Ministers thereof, to use means toward them that the duties which Christ
requires may be performed: and in case of neglect to press them by authority
to the performance thereof. 3. I give them no such inspection over the Churches
which is Ecclesiastical, to vindicate and punish faults in fore interiori; but
only to hinder misdemeanors which are publicly observable. 4. The Ministers
are bound if it be required of them to give them an account of all their
proceedings with all due respect, that they may know the order of their ways
in all things, because nothing ought to be done in the dark, or concealed
from his cognizance. As for that which I say of a States conscience, that it
ought to be like unto the conscience of a good Christian, my meaning is; that
as a Christian in his private sphere must rule himself and those that are
under him conscionably to Gods glory: so the Council of State is bound in its
sphere to do the like: and though this ought to be so, yet your inference is
not good, that therefore any man must resign his understanding to another
man's will and conceptions: for all this is objected upon a mistake. In a word,
I allow of no dominion over any man's faith or conscience; but only as a
Ministerial service according to the Word, wherein both the Magistrate and the
Church Officer is to learn his duty, and thereby Christ is to rule over the
State and Church visibly and invisibly, in the outward and inward, bodily and
spiritual relations.

6. The sixth observation upon page 28, 29. is answered already, if the case be
rightly understood, and you will find your mistake to lie in the civil and
spiritual spheres, in which the Magistracy and Ministry ought to walk: For,
if they keep each within their own spheres, there will never be cause of
contest; for the spiritual has no power over the civil government, nor the
civil over the spiritual as such, but only in cases of misdemeanor. And in
this case only, I say, that the Magistrate has power to hinder a people in the
choosing of a Teacher, when they do it not orderly, but tumultuously; or when a
Minister in a factious and violent manner, or otherwise disorderly thrusts
himself upon a people, he may, and ought to take cognizance of the matter, and
see good order and peace kept according to the rules of Ecclesiastical
government. Therefore let every Christian in Gods name, have his full liberty
to try the spirits, and to hear all, and hold fast that which is good; but let
him use his liberty orderly, and give no just cause of complaint, or grievance
unto others.

7. In your seventh observation upon p. 36. you plead again for the freedom of
disputes, and to follow that which is best; which I never intended to restrain;
only let it be regular, and for the end of edification, without vain jangling
and confusednesse of strife and passion.

8. The eight observation upon p. 30. concerning the power of the Magistrate in
Church Matters, I will admit, if taken in the sense which I have formerly
delivered.

9. To the ninth observation upon page 31. I say, that God does not require
that we should walk after any light, but that which is the true light, which
enlightneth every man that comes into this world; therefore all are bound to
seek that light, and never rest till they find it. It is true, that no man can
follow any other light, but that which seems to him to be true according to
his measure; but thence it does not follow that we may strive and contest
without end for every thing that to us appears to be truth: the weight of
matters is to be considered with discretion; and because no man will presume to
be infallible, the way of proposing our sense of truths, ought to be such, as
may declare that we can bear diffenters, and are not unwilling to admit of
further light, if offered unto us from the Word. And although a Synod, or
General Council has no infallibility annexed to the Decrees thereof; yet
there is some difference to be made between the private opinion of one, and the
consent of many, whose praises are in the Churches. This consent of many
attesting the same matter as a truth, does oblige men that are of an humble
Spirit, and love not to be wise in themselves, to consider things more exactly,
wherein their judgment differs, then otherwise they would do. And if they
cannot find light enough to assent unto them, yet discretion will require a
moderation in dissenting; excepting some invincible and demonstratively
convincing reasons can be alleged, why it is necessary both to dissent and to
profess a disagreement; and yet in this case the professed disagreement of
judgment should be without breach of brotherly love, and with the preservation
of the unity of the Spirit in matters of undoubted practice for mutual
edification; at least so far as in us lies: For the Apostolical rule, Phil.
3. 16. So far a^ we are come, let us walk by one rule, and let us mind the same
thing: is never to be refused on our part, if offered by others* nor neglected,
if it may be obtained, how far soever we differ in judgment from others in
matters extrafundamentall.

10. To the tenth observation upon page 32. concerning a brotherly
correspondency in a Presbytery, which you allow of, so long as it does
continue brotherly: I have this to say; that I am confident your fears of
being driven by rods and staves from your father in heaven will be needless:
For the Presbyterian way does cease to be Presbyterian if it be not sociall as
between confederates, who in all things are equal one to another; so that all
alike judge and all are alike judged, and every thing is done by common consent
and counsel; nor are any rights taken from private Churches, but rather
confirmed and strengthered to them: As for the separation which you call in
your opinion just, to which, for some respects you think your selves forced
unto; I know not what else to say, but that I cannot see how it may be just or
lawful, for any to separate from a true Church, for causes not laid open to
them; and for matters extrafundamentall. For although I find things in my
Brethren (...), which are very offensive to me, and might perhaps amount in my
opinion, to a just cause of separating from them: yet before it is lawful for
me actually to separate, I am bound in all meekness, first to bear witness
of those things unto them, and seek redress thereof, letting them see the
grievance which they bring unto my conscience; and then if they will neither
redress the causes of my grievance, nor satisfy my judgment in an orderly
way; but cast me out from them, not at all taking notice of my complaints: if
(I say) in dealing thus, I be thus dealt withal, then I may, and not till then
be separate. So that I am so far from thinking it lawful for some respects
grounded upon mine own opinion to intend a separation from Brethren in the
faith; that except they cast me out, and will not suffer me to be of their
society any longer, I may not break off from them.

11. Your eleventh Observation upon page 34. concerning Fundamentalls in
practice and knowledge, tends to justify the desire of the Apologists, to be
permitted to do or not to do what they think requisite; but you mention
nothing in particular, which may be counted Fundamental in their profession;
for which only a separation is justifiable when duly attested; and not only not
received, but rejected together with the witness bearers. Now the case between
them and their Brethren is quite contrary at this present* for they have been
and are desired to hold forth the Truth of their way, but they do decline it,
and yet will be separate although they acknowledge the Churches to be true
Churches from which they depart: and although those Brethren from whom they
depart, intend to offer them all equitable forbearance and redress of their
grievances, so far as can stand with the Fundamental constitution of their
own Churches and the peace of their consciences.

12. Your twelfth and last Observation upon page 37. wherein you speak, of the
subjection which members owe to their Pastor, and consequently to the
Presbytery of Pastors joined with him, is somewhat dark to me. For first, you
seem to yield the Point; namely, that such a subjection is due, and then you
make a restriction thereof in respect of certain things, and in respect of the
manner of censuring them in case of not submitting. You say then (if I take you
right) that they are bound to submit to a Presbytery, in things only, unto
which they may yield with a good conscience. This cannot be denied, but is
needless to be alleged, because it is to be supposed that a Pastor joined
with a Presbytery will require no subjection but in things which may be yielded
unto with a good conscience. For their proper work is to deal with the
consciences of those that are under their charge, to inform them of Gods will,
that they may understandingly submit unto it. That which is offered by them to
others is not offered. Authoritatively as a thing which they will have done;
because they so have determined it (this is the language of worldly States unto
their subjects:) but they offer it as servants of God, to declare, as his
messengers, by the word, his will; for they watch in all cases of common
concernment over the souls of men; and in this respect obedience and
submission is commanded by the Apostle to be yielded unto them, Heb. 13. 17.
But you will put the case that he who is directed in matters of conscience by a
Presbytery, finds reason to dissent, because he is not convicted in
conscience that the direction is according to the word of God: in this Case you
say that the Presbytery has no power to deal with him, but that he is liable
to be censured only by his own Church, under whose jurisdiction he stands.
Here I suppose you speak of the point of jurisdiction in a humane sense, and
suppose in all this Discourse that which is destructive to the true communion
of Saints and to the relation which Christ has settled in the parts of his
Church fitly compacted together and baptized into one body by his Spirit. For
you suppose your Pastor and his Congregation under whose censure alone you
would stand, to be alone a Body by it self and separate from the other Pastors
and Congregations: I will confess it to be a Body by it self: but if you
suppose a Presbytery rightly constituted with it, then it is not to be
considered as separate, but as compacted and a part of the rest of that which
is the whole; and as you stand in relation to that Congregation whereof you are
an immediate member; so it does stand proportionally in relation to that Body
to which it is combined as a part. As then you are under the jurisdiction of
your own Pastor and Congregation by your own confession immediately; so you
must be mediatly by their means under the jurisdiction of that Body whereof
they are a part, and whereunto they are associated. But if you will not grant
any such associating and compacting of Churches together into one Body, for
their mutual edification (which is certainly Christ's clear intention from Ephesians.
4. 1. till 17.) but will suppose that all Churches and their Pastors must stand
single and separate by themselves; then it is to be granted that you are under
the jurisdiction of none but your own Pastor and Eldership. But supposing that
which cannot be denied (if you grant it lawful to combine Pastors and
Elderships into a Presbytery, which I suppose I have fully proved) that your
Pastor and his Eldership is accountable in his proceedings to his confederate
Brethren, as they are accountable unto him for mutual edification: and that he
finding you a refractory and unruly member of his flock, disturbing the peace
thereof; and having dealt with you as much as he could, and yet has not been
able to bring you to the obedience and submission which you owe to the will of
God, supposing this to be so, if then he to strengthen himself and his
Eldership by counsel first does bring the matter to the Presbytery; and having
received counsel and put it in execution, does find it without effect: you
remaining still disobedient, and disturbing the quiet of his own, and perhaps
of some neighbor Churches; may not he then in the second place desire the
assistance of his confederates in the judgment of the matter? and may not he
call you before them to be censured by himself and them jointly? and his and
their jurisdiction being in this case but one in Christ: and the authority of
the same Presbyteriall office being put forth by all at once through the same
spirit in the name of Christ; do not you think that the sentence of judgment
against you will be ratified in heaven if it be rightly pronounced? or do you
think that Christ will allow of this plea, that you are exempted from their
jurisdiction, because they are not your immediate Pastors? has not Christ
given to the combined society of Church officers a power to judge of matters
according to the word, when they are in an orderly way brought unto their
arbitration? and where there is a power to judge by virtue of an office, there
also a power to pronounce a sentence cannot be denied: and if the sentence be a
censure, the same Authority which does pronounce it, has power to see it
executed. Suppose again on the other side that a Pastor does some injury to
his flock, or to some one of them; and that they or he cannot find redress
at the hands of the Eldership; if there be no Association of Elderships, they
or he have no remedy but to make a trouble, and perhaps a rent in the
Congregation; but if there be a Presbytery under which this Pastor does stand
as a member; the matter may be brought unto them, and he who is the Pastor in
that case will be censurable, if he be in a fault; all that in these cases can
be pretended is, that the matter is first to be judged and considered by the
immediate Eldership, and then by the Presbytery; and when the censure is to be
pronounced, it is to be given out, by his own Pastor, in his own name and in
the name of all: These matters of outward order, if they can take away the
scruples of such as stand upon pointilloes of Right and Jurisdiction after the
manner of men; and if they can prevent and heal our dangerous breaches and
divisions, should by all means be yielded unto. But if men will be content with
nothing but with such a Church-constitution wherein they can upon the matter
do what they will; and make laws and break them as they think good, and
rule by the sense of the multitude, (whom they can possess with jealousies and
sway for ends and interests) their officers, by whom they ought to be ruled;
and to this purpose stand separate, and hinder all Association of Church
Elderships, lest they should be strengthened by their mutual consent,
counsel, and joint Authority: if I say, men will be content with nothing but
this, and if they cannot get this undue liberty, will possess themselves and
others with jealousies, and trouble thereby their own and other weak
consciences with fears and scruples, it is a sad condition and a doleful
presage that the Candlestick will be removed from this Nation; if God in mercy
does not direct the outward Authority to strengthen effectually the hands of
these that seek a settlement of themselves according to the rule; but if they
also refuse to countenance and protect them in the settlement of their union,
except they will come wholly under their secular power to depend upon them, as
upon their head in spiritual Judicatures, which only tend* to the reforming and
purging of their Congregations from scandales dishonorable to the profession
of the Gospel: If I say, the former sort of men may hinder the settlement, and
these latter will not grant a furtherance to it but upon this condition; we are
in a sad case, and for ought that I can see, remediless without some special
work of heavenly providence; whereunto I shall heartily recommend you with all
that walk in your way of truth and simplicity, as being

Your affectionate servant in Christ Jesus* J. Dury.

To Mr. H.
Loving Friend:
YOu tell me that Mr. Robinson did expect that I should have answered somewhat
to his demands, concerning the demonstrative Analysis of Holy Scripture, which
with much earnestness in his Letter to me he required I should put forth, at
least so far as the matter is ripened in my thoughts; and that he does not a
little wonder, that in my whole Letter to him, wherein otherthings are so
distinctly answered, and largely handled; this main thing whereunto chiefly he
would have engaged me, is not so much as mentioned with one word. To give you
satisfaction concerning this, that he by you may know the reasons hereof; I
would have you to take notice unto him, that what I upon occasion have written,
or spoken of a demonstrative way, of analyzing the Scripture, has rather been
a declaration of my opinion, that such a thing may be found out and held forth
unto the world, and by Gods blessing, of great use to compose our disorderly
notions in Scripturall matters, then any brag of mine, that I should have found
out such a way; for although I have endeavored to satisfy my self in this
thing, and thank God that my mind is at rest in it, for my ordinary course of
meditation; yet I presume not to boast of any thing, extraordinary beyond
others, or to make the measure of my rule, a Rule to others; (for this were to
measure my self by my self) but I desire simply to hold forth the truth,
whereof I am convinced; to give others occasion to think of it with me for our
mutual settlement in peace and truth; that when it may be seasonable and
expedient, and God shall call me forth to propose matters of this nature I may
be heard, and judged by such as are able, without partiality to discern the
nature of the thing which may be proposed in this kind: You know that I love
not such commendations as he does give to me in respect of this matter; and if
I should appear to entertain his motion in flattering my self with them, would
it not be vanity? And might not God justly blast the small beginnings of light
which I have received in this kind; if I should be lifted up to conceit any
thing of my self in regard of it? Therefore I thought it fit not to speak so
much as one word of that matter to him, upon such high expressions as he does
use, lest I might seem to accept of undeserved praises, and attribute something
to my self which is beyond my line. My silence then is no effect of any
unwillingnesse in me, to impart any thing to others, of that which God has
bestowed upon me for the increase of knowledge, but it is necessitated by
reason of the want, both of time, to elaborate what is further requisite for the
manifestation of my sense in this matter? and of opportunity to propose
seasonably that which is in some measure already elaborated, that it may be
taken into consideration, and examined by such as are able to judge thereof.
You know, that when I have bin discreetly and seriously called upon in a
private way, by men known to your self, to impart my thoughts unto them of this
matter, that I have never refused to lay open the principles of my General or
Particular ways of meditating in this or any other kind; and that the maxim
by which I walk is quite contrary to reservednesse, therefore I hope you do not
take any offense at my silence at this time, seeing you know how I am otherwise
strained, and what freedom of spirit is requisite to intend such weighty
thoughts, and propose matters of so universal concernment to the view of the
world: And if these considerations which necessitate me to lay these thoughts
aside till a sit season, do not give satisfaction for the grand silence wherein
this matter is involved in my answer to Mr. Robinson; you may, if you please,
add as a supplement to his Letter, some of the Tracts which in former times I
have written to some others about* this subject, whereof I scarce have any
copies (for you know how they drop from me) but you have kept the transcript, I
suppose, of* all, therefore, if any thing written to Sir Cheny, or to any
other^ may be seasonable to supply this seeming neglect of his deman^^ I shall
not be against the use which you may m^^^^^ of it for this end* I am loath to
leave either in you or him any scruple concerning any intentions, which shall
always be harmless unto all* but truly (...) and faithful to do you service
in Jesus Christ, in w^^^ I (...)

His and your affectionate servant, John Dury.

To Sir Cheny Culpeper Knight.
SIR,
I Am very desirous to gratify you in the virtuous desire which you have
expressed unto me, concerning the method of Meditation: For, I think my self a
debtor more to you therein, then unto others, because your zeal does lead you
to more universal conception, then others are capable of: if therefore it we^^
Gods will to open a door of utterance unto me, toward you at this time, at
least so far, as to initiate you fully in the way of future conference with the
about this matter, I would be exceeding glad; not only for your sake, but even
for mine own sake, that I might have a fit object to work upon, and to bring
forth the particulars which lie in my mind, and which without some good and
sit opportunity, I cannot be drawn to elaborate and put to paper.

I am willing then at this time, to show you my conceptions, concerning the
first principles of the Method which I think everyone should follow that will
walk by a rule in ordering his thoughts for Meditation and Consultation: Here
you have the aim of my present discourse with you, wherein you may observe
distinctly, that I presuppose: First, that a man is able to order his (...)
thoughts: Secondly, that the means to order them is a certain rule, by which
(...) should walk: Thirdly, that this rule has certain principle^ (...) which
now I am chiefly to speak: Fourthly, and that the ends, or ^^ther the objects
toward which the thoughts are to be ordered, are the acts of meditating and
consulting. If any body make these presupposalls disputable; or, if you should
make a doubt of them, I cannot proceed clearly with you, except I know where
his or your scruple does lie, that some principle wherein we can agree, may be
taken up to rosolve it. But supposing that things are not so much scrupled and
made disputable, as not well and fully understood, then before I proceed, I
must open the same unto you. I say then, concerning the first, that my meaning
is not, that a man has any such command over himself, that all the risings of
thoughts in his mind should be under his power, either to prevent thoughts
which he would not have to come in his mind, or to lay down thoughts risen, or
to reduce at all times into good order the thoughts that cannot be laid down;
This is not my meaning: For, I know that the preparations of the heart in man
and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. and that man's
goings are of the Lord, and that therefore he cannot understand his own way in
respect of the first motions thereof ibid. Chap. 20. 24* to which that place of
Jerem. 10. 23. is parallel: O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in
himself, and it is not in man that walks, to direct his steps, viz. the first
motions are not from a man, nor can a man by any humane instruction, or
habitual practice and premeditation attain to any such perfection, that he
shall be able to direct and overruled all his thoughts, and the actions which
proceed from thence unto his own preconceived aims and ends: For, although a
man's heart does deceive his way, and lays plots unto it self, and makes many
resolutions, yet the Lord is he who directs a man's steps, toward the event
thereof; so that neither (...). ^6. 9.
the first motions of the mind, nor the constant and absolute progress thereof
is in our power; but this I mean, when I say that we are able to order our
thoughts, viz. that the understanding of a man has received from God a
reflexive faculty to consider of it self and its own actions, and of all things
belonging unto the motions thereof; to the end that they may be brought into
some regular frame, and freed from confusion and unsettlednesse for the
prosecution of matters whereupon the Spirit is fully bent, and ought to be
fixed. This reflexive faculty is given to the nature of all men's understanding,
but it is not in the power of every one to make use of it, or to (...) use of
it; For, neither can every one reflect upon himself and his own motions when
it is most expedient; not when he does reflect upon himself, and upon the acts
of his understanding can he do it at all times as he ought to do it: but this
ability to make use and to make right use of the reflexive faculty is a
peculiar gift of God, and he does bestow it upon whomsoever he pleases. For as
Elihu says to Job, There is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the
Almighty gives them understanding: so it is certain that although the faculty
of ordering our ways be in the soul, yet except God breath upon it and make
it alive, it cannot either act or act any thing aright, but it lies there as a
dead thing without motion whilst a man does walk at random in a vain show
not knowing himself what he is doing; or if perhaps he does take notice of
himself what he is doing; or if perhaps he does take notice of himself (as
naturally men use to do) it is rather to flatter himself in idle conceits and
imaginations or to follow eagerly some particular plots, then to order and
regulate his ways unto true felicity, and subordinate his motions unto the
lawful ends for which they should be undertaken.

Thus I must be understood in the first presupposall aright lest I should seem
to attribute too much unto our own abilities in nature, and exempt the motions
of our heart from Gods immediate working upon it as if he did leave it wholly
to a man's self; or as if by any art, method, instruction and direction which
we can give, any man should be made able to rule all his thoughts, so that
they should be composed at all times to attain to any object which he should
propose unto himself. This must not be thought, but my meaning is to be
conceived of the ordinary faoulty of reflecting upon our selves how to make use
of it in the fear of God when we find our selves moved to intend good and
lawful matters for our own and others edificution: how then we should frame
and compose our Meditations and Consultation to attain by rule unto the end
for which they are undertaken, and not to proceed as fools and children do at
a random, in the acts wherein reason and wisdom should take place, is the
true object of this Discourse, and the sense of the first supposall.

The second presupposall think has no difficulty: For if a man does grant
that there is a reflexive faculty in the understanding, and that this faculty
can act upon the thoughts, and that those thoughts can be ordered and freed
from confusion, I do not see how he can make a doubt of this, viz. That the
means to order our thoughts should be some rule or other, according to which
the understanding should proceed in working upon it self. And then concerning
the third in like manner, if it be granted that where order is to be observed,
there a rule may be used, it cannot be denied but that in ordering things by
rules, principles must be observed whence the Rules are to be taken: For
seeing by ordering is employed a setting of things in a precedencie and
consecution one to another; and by a Rule is meant either the form and frame,
or the reason why the precedencie and consecution ought to be so, and not
otherwise. And seeing all forms and frames which are rationally composed have
a ground in the being and nature of the thing, whence they arise* therefore it
cannot be denied but that the Rules by which humane thoughts are to be ordered,
must have certain principles; which principles we will now speak of (God
willing) in brief, that you may have an overture made unto you, either to
proceed by your self upon the grounds that shall be afforded unto you, or to
call upon me hereafter, and give me cause to open my self further in due time
for your better satisfaction.

You have now already understood that by principles, I mean the grounds of
rules by which a man is to walk in his thoughts of meditation and
consultation; the end then to which we drive is to meditate and consult aright:
by meditating I conceive the act of the mind reflecting upon the nature of any
thing to dive into the true properties and uses thereof. By consulting, I
understand the act of the mind reflecting upon the actions which are to be
undertaken or left off, or not undertaken about any thing; to gain some good
end whereunto they should be directed according as it may be conceived to be or
not to be possible or useful. From whence you may gather that the acts of the
mind which are to be regulated (which we call meditation and consultation) are
not now to be considered in respect of the subjects whereupon they are to
reflect (which we have called the natures of things and the actions which may
be intended by us for some good end) but in respect of the reflection it self,
that whether we meditate or consult, we may have a rule to order the reflection
of our mind upon any subject whatsoever. The rule then which we seek at this
time is to be gathered from the nature of the acts of the mind to set them in
their right frame one toward another, and not from the relation which they may
have to w^rds the discovery of any thing in respect of outward objects: you see
then that the acts of the mind, ^^ they have a twofold Relation, so they admit
of a twofold Rule; for as they relate other objects besides themselves, they
must be made proportionate unto the ends which the understanding ^^^th ^t in
these objects but as they relate one another they must be ruled and ordered
according to their own inward properties, and made answerable unto the end
wherefore they ought to reflect one upon another. Where I observe, that to
find the principles whereby these acts are to be regulated is to discover
three things: 1. What the acts of the mind of man are, and how they are
distinguished? 2. How they stand in relation one to another in their several
inward properties? 3. What the end of this relation is? and how it must be
gained? for this relation is the ground of this reflection; and the end of this
relation is the first inward principle of goodness, and of that well being
whereupon the nature of the soul of man has been (...) and constituted; and
from which all the well ordered acts thereof must naturally flow: and
whatsoever is not answerable thereunto in the agitation of thoughts and motion
of the mind is to be judged irrational and void of understanding.

Now then to lay open the Acts of a man's mind, it is not possible except we
know what a man and what his mind is. By a m^^^^^ conceive this creature which
we (...) our selves to be ^s we (...) distinguished from all other living and
ani^^ll things by the frame of our body and of our soul, which the Scripture
says, was made after the image of God, which image of God (since we have lost
it) is now unknown unto nature; and there fore by the use of natural reason
no man can know himself truly what he is, because he has lost the Idea of the
image after which he was made. But the Scripture having told us that our body
was made of the substance of the earth, and that by the breath of the ^^^d into
our nostrills we are become a livi^^ s^^le; and ^^at God made us thus after his
own image that we should under (...) as his substitutes bearing his image and
likeness in this world, have Dominion over all the rest of the creatures which
are therein. I say the Scripture having taught us this much; we have by this
doctrines new principle of knowledge whereby to discer^e our selves (...) are,
and what our mind is, and what the end is wherefore it was put in our earthly
b^^y, of which things I will no^ now sp^^^^ at large ^ but in a wo^d I will
tell you what according to this Scripturall truth, I conceive man and his mind
to be; viz. a spirit, a soul, and a body joined together in the powers of an
eternal rational and sensual life whereof the acts should be answerable one
to another according to their predominant or subordinate properties, wherein
they are all to be answerable unto the life of God. The acts then of the life
of man are threefold; some are sensual some are rational, and some are
spiritual. The sensual arise from the body and its outward or inward senses:
the rational arise from the faculties of the natural soul in the imagination
of the mind, in the memory, in the discerning and judging faculties, and in
the will. The spiritual arise from the conscience bearing witness of the will
of God, and of our agreement or disagreement with the same. By which you see
what is called the mind of man, whose acts we should regulate, viz. The living
faculty of the spirit dwelling in the conscience, and of the rational soul
dwelling in the will and understanding. As concerning the sensual life wherein
we differ not from beasts, we make it no part of the mind of man, although we
hold not that man has more souls then one, or that these Acts of the sensual
life are to be neglected, and no way brought under a Rule: but we affirm both,
that the soul is but one, and also that these Acts may and must be regulated
although we conceive that they belong not properly unto the life of the mind.
Thus then we see what the Acts of the mind of man are, and how they are
distinguished; namely, into the Acts of the spirit dwelling in the conscience,
and into the acts of the rational soul dwelling in the memorative
understanding and willing faculties, to which the whole sensual life and all
the acts of the inward and outward senses are subordinate. The relation wherein
these acts stand one to another in respect of the properties of these faculties
whence they proceed is this, that the faculty of the spirit in the acts and
enditements of the conscience is supreme and predominant above all the rest: to
which the rational faculty of the soul in the acts of memory, understanding
and willing is immediately subordinate; and to these the acts of the
imaginations and sensual passions are subservient and submitted. And if this
relation and subordination be altered, so that the sensual should be
predominant above the rational, or the rational above the spiritual acts,
then all is out of order, and a man's life is either beastly or divellish.

The and wherefore this relation and subordination of the faculties of man was
thus appointed and ordered by God, is, that in the right use of these faculties
he should express the Image and life of God, wherein he should be able to rule
over the rest of the creatures, to bring them to the state of happiness, that
Gods glory might appear as in himself: so also in every one of them according
to the degree of their perfection. So that to gain this end for which God has
thus framed the mind of man, the rule is none other, but to observe the true
relation wherein God has set us, which is, that our spirits should be in our
conscience wholly subjected unto his Spirit, and dependant from him, (who is
the Father of spirits) in all things. So that without his leave and the
knowledge of his will, by reflecting upon his Word ingrafted in our hearts, we
should not presume to think, say, or do any thing: Secondly, that our reason
should in all things be a servant unto the ^ndictment of the spiritual Word
made manifest unto our conscience to obey it, and to make the truth and
goodness thereof plain and evident to our selves and others: Thirdly, that our
sensual motion should be servant unto the prescripts of reason to help our
rational faculties to express the will of God, and apply it unto those with
whom we have to deal outwardly.

From all which you may gather, (for these are the principles which I did
intend to speak of) much more then I am able at this time to utter: For here
you have a fountain of rules, f^^m whence many directions may be taken, how to
order the acts of the mind in respect of their mutual relation one to
another: For, consider that in all things whereof we do think, except they be
mearly spiritual and divine; so that they are no ways subject unto sense,
there ought to concur the act of conscience of reason, and of the imaginative
faculty, which is the inward sense, and the head of all the other sensual
faculties; and seeing these acts should continually concur in all the minding
of outward matters, the rule is, that they must not be confounded* nor
preposterously brought forth; but that we should first order the acts of our
mind within it self before we proceed to meditate upon any particular object*
For, except the conscience be clear and at rest in respect of God, the
understanding will not perform the duty aright and if the understanding faculty
be out of order, the senses will not be well employed administer and seek out
evidences, or to represent them orderly unto (...) rational abilities: So that
to lay the first ground work of meditation and consultation aright, a man of
judgment should look to himself, that these three great wheels of the mind, be
well composed and ser in order one toward another; the conscience, the (...)
ability, and the sensitive faculty, lest the conscience being under guilt and
desilements, be separate from God, who is the author of all good gifts, and
from whose mouth alone wisdom does proceed, ^am. 1. 17.
Prove. 2. 6. for God does not give true wisdom and understanding, but unto
such as come to him to seek it: Now, to come to him or to seek wisdom from him
without faith, it is neither possible nor (...) any thing be received at his
hand; for without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And he that
is of a doubting and wavering mind, must not think that he can receive any
thing of the Lord, Jam. 1. 6, 7. But when the conscience is not cleansed (...)
from dead works, there must needs be a doubting, and wavering in it, when it
comes before God* and so it will be found unfit to receive wisdom or
direction from him.

For God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, and
joy, but to the sinner he gives travel, Eccles. 2. 26. nor can wisdom enter
or find place into an unclean soul, because it is prepossessed with sin, which
makes a separation betwixt God Isai. 59. 8.
and it. Besides all which, it is to be considered, that as the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, so the spirit that has not a dependency upon
the Word of the Lord, can have no wisdom, because Jeremiah says: That seeing
they have rejected the Word of ^erem. 8. 9.
the Lord, what wisdom is in them? There can be no wisdom where the Word of
the Lord is not regarded; and this Word cannot be regarded, except the heart he
possessed with his fear* and this cannot be except the conscience be sanctified
and cleansed from dead works: So that we see the first principl^ and
preparative unto meditation, must be the composing of the heart toward God, to
set our selves to think of that which is to be thought God, to set our selves
to think of that which is to be thought upon* as in his presence, through his
fear depending upon his Word, and de^^^ing his direction; that not only with
his leave and ^^^^^^ion but by his order, and according to his will, we may do
all things and think all our thoughts. This predisposing of the mind toward
God, to reflect first upon him in all our meditations, is like unto the tuning
of an Instrument, before a man does begin to play a piece of good Music: so,
by drawing near to God with a good conscience, in cleansing it from all
superfluity of naughtinsse, and calling upon him by faith for grace and
direction, the strings of the soul are tuned and set in a good harmony, that
the Spirit of wisdom which proceeds from him may play some harmonious
melodicall piece upon the same, which without this tuning of the soul, cannot
be done: And this tuning cannot be performed, except the conscience be brought
near unto God, and be able to look upon him, that it may be enlightened: For, by
looking to him, and comparing it self to his will and living Word, it receives
light; First, to see and judge it self in what estate it is, and then to judge
other things also; for then it reflecteth upon all things, (and chiefly upon
the inferior faculties, which are subordinate unto the motions of the Spirit)
with a commanding power; so that they all stoop and yield to it, to become
answerable unto the intentions of the Spirit, which are conceived by a good
conscience to be aimed at in the work of meditation and consultation: And let
every man, who desires to go safe in any business of consequence, be sure
that he never fall to work without this preparative; for without it, he may run
himself into errors, and those very dangerous, and he cannot possibly walk by
true light and rules, as long as the great Master rule, and principle of light
is not made use of, which is the subordination of the intents and purposes of
the heart unto God, to set it in frame, which may be answerable unto his will.
This then is the first main Principle of true order, to be settled in the
thoughts to bring the conscience to reflect upon God, and settle it self
toward him in the business which is to be minded.

The second main principle is, to have a care to clear the natural
understanding, from prejudices and forestalled opinions, which are like filmes
over the eyes of the mind, through which it cannot look so, as to discern the
right shape of things, otherwise in themselves sufficiently apparent.

These prejudices arise from a narrowness and stinting of the thoughts unto
things too particular; therefore, before we begin to meditate or consult, we
should abstract from particulars, and state the question whereof we are to
think in general terms, which should comprehend the true nature of
particulars, which being done, the terms of the question are to be considered
and examined, that the properties thereof may be discovered. To which effect
the acts of ratiocination should be observed and rightly ordered, which are:

1. To discern distinctly the differences of matters belonging to the terms of
the question. 2. To compare those distinct matters together with the thing
inquired after; that from their agreement or disagreement, the judgment may
gather the resolution of the question. 3. To apply the question generally
resolved, unto the Particular matter in hand; where the circumstances of the
particular are to be looked into, to sinde how far they answer, or answer not
unto the general determination of the question.
Thus then the acts of Ratiocination should proceed by degrees: For, the main
Principle, whereby they are to be regulated, is this, that the understanding
must proceed always from things foreknown to that which is unknown, by single
notions, to proceed unto componuds, which may be done, either from generals,
foreknowne, to determine particulars unknown: or, from particulars foreknown,
to gather the general notion wherein they all agree; for both ways the
reasoning faculty should proceed.

First, to state the question which is to be made the subject of Meditation, by
summing up the particulars foreknown, into one general head and property of
their agreement.

Secondly, to resolve that question into its distinct matters, to discern the
properties thereof.

Thirdly, to compare those properties with the thing sought after to see what
they will discover of it in general. And,

Lastly, to apply that which shall be discovered in general, to the
particular, as it stands under its circumstances. And to this last act of
reasoning, which concerns the circunstances of particular matters, the use of
sense does concur to enquire, observe, discern, and help to compare things
together, by their out wardly perceptible qualities, which lead the
understanding to the apprehension of more inward properties.

Now, the Principle by which the acts of sense are to be regulated, is this,
that they should be kept from confused wanderings, and be made to reslect upon
the observation of circumstances, according to the suggestion of reason in the
order by which matters are to be compared one with another; for except
circumstances be taken in their right places, the application will not be
clear, nor rightly made. The imagination then, and the memory (which have
received the Ideas of circumstances observed by outward sense) must be
commanded; to make report of the same in that order, and for such intents,
which reason subordinate unto conscience shall require to be done; for the
decision of that which is enquired after by way of Meditation and Consultation.
And if these principles of order in the acts of the mind within it self be
carefully observed, I suppose no man can doubt but that the progress will be
effectual toward the discovery of Truth in the objects of Meditation, and of
goodness in the objects of Consultation. For all the work the mind of man is
set upon, is nothing else but Truth and Goodness, to find the same in Matters
and Actions. And because Truth and Goodness are complicated together, so that
the one is never without the other, therefore they are sought jointly, and
never found but together. But the instinct of nature leads men more to desire
goodness then truth; is sought because it is known to be good but the notion
of goodness is different in the capacities of men, and therefore is sought
differently according to the apprehensions which men have of it: For some
apprehend nothing to be good, but what is answerable unto the delight which
they take in sensual objects: others apprehend the goodness of rational
objects; and some are exalted unto spiritual objects. Whence we find three
sorts of men in the world: some (but few are such) seek before all things and
in all things, the goodness which proceeds immediately from God in the life
of the Spirit. Others, who live in a rational and moral way, content
themselves with the fruits of natural knowledge, in the works of their
understanding.

And lastly, some live in their sensual appetites as beasts do. The first
sort of men are Citizens of heaven. The second are Rulers of this world; the
third are slaves of the world. These different properties of men, are to be
found more or less in all the Meditations and Consultations of men about
particular objects. For when the minds of men run chiefly upon temporal
matters to seek bodily case and contentment unto themselves in all things
whereof they meditate and consult; they debase the use of their reason, and
pervert it to become a slave unto lust. And if they rest in a temporal content
of things not merely bodily, but somewhat also rational: To have power and
honor, and pre-eminence, to rule over others by their understanding, they are
in some degree better then others, but yet not truly set upon that which is
good. And therefore none but such as in the Acts of Meditation and
Consultation, raise their thoughts, first to spiritual good, which is
permanent unto life eternal: And then comprehend under it as subordinate
matters there unto, the objects of reason and sense. Now (Isay) but such order
their thoughts aright, and whosoever walks by this Rule, he may expect, that
in seeking the Kingdom of God, other things shall be added unto him, according
to the promise of Christ, Mat. 6. 33. Now because I labor in the ways of my
calling, and in all the Meditations which I use to propose unto others, to draw
men's thoughts unto this rule, therefore although none does contradict the
proposalls which I make; yet I find that they are not much relished; because
most men, even of this Calling wherein I live, seek not truly that which is
spiritual, but rather that which is temporal, either in a rational or
sensual way: for except they can perceive a particular present advantage of
honor and credit, or of profit to themselves, they never care for that which
is spiritual: And this is the cause why I cannot sinde a Patron for my work,
because I do not set my mind, to serve ends and particular interests, unto
which all parties now adays are wedded; and can relish nothing but what is
lubordinate thereunto.

This then is the combat which I have to fight with the spirits of men;
namely, to bring them from their private Aims, to a true general good,
wherein the glory of God, and the salvation of souls, without any other
respects may be advanced.

I have added this Digression to let you see, that I neither can nor will
expect promotion for my endeavors, but from such as can and will follow with
me these principles of Meditation, and Consultation to join with me therein to
further the public good, whereat I aim. For except men's aim concur, there
can be no real conjunction of endeavors And it is not lawful for me to leave
my aim and way of meditation to serve inferior ends; and seeing they cannot
raise their thoughts, to walk with me by these rules, I am like to be as I am,
continually deserted, yet I am not discouraged; for I know that my reward is
with him, whom I serve, and he in due time is able to open men's eyes, to see
that they weary themselves for vanity; and wander in the foolishness of
troublesome councels, so long as they follow not these grounds of meditation.
For all the plots and purposes of men, merely rational, though never so
plausibly and strongly laid, will vanish when the Kingdom of God draws near,
which is now at hand, and then nothing but what is truly universal and
spiritual shall remain. If then we do not intend to lose our labor, and be
frustrate of our reward, we should sow to the Spirit, by a sound way of
spiritual meditation and consultation in all matters which we take in hand:
That every purpose wherein we desire to walk rationally amongst men, and to
apply our senses in a right course, may be first considered, as in the presence
of God conscionably.

These general Principles of meditation, by the grace of God, may be useful
for the ordering of our thoughts in particular objects, if according to the
nature of these grounds, rules be delivered to direct the acts of the mind in
the disquirie of doubtful matters as well rational and humane, as spiritual
and divine; so far as these can be brought under a rule: For we cannot presume
to prescribe any rules to the Spirit in his motions, because, as it is in the
work of regeneration, so is it in the discovery of mysteries, the Spirit
blows where, and when it pleases; yet some rules may be given to the
rational faculty, which is subservient unto the Spirit, by which, deceits may
be prevented, and mistakes discovered; that a spiritual man may be able to
walk in the light, both by proposing cautions to himself, and calling his
thoughts unto an account, that he may discern his own spirit, and regulate his
course so far as reason does go, lest he be led by some false light, and a
deceived spirit bring him out of the way: For, when the Apostle, Romans 1. 2. 3.
does warn every man not to think above that which he ought to think, but to
think according to sobriety; as God has distributed unto every one the measure
of faith, he does clearly give us a rule, by which we are to reflect upon our
selves in spiritual matters, to discern our own thoughts by a discovery of the
proportion which they have, with the Principle from which they flow: And as in
this, so in all other acts of meditation, the rule will be found in the same
kind of proportion.

Now, the objects of meditation, concerning which doubts may arise, and wherein
mistakes may be incident, which by the regulating of our thoughts, may be
prevented, or resolved, are chiefly these:

First, concerning the sense of the Holy Scriptures, which are the dictates of
the Holy Ghost: we find that many doubts do arise in the minds of
Interpreters, which without a certain rule, cannot be resolved. Therefore
concerning Scripturall Interpretation, I conceive that the way of analyzing the
Text literally, materially, and mystically, may be delivered, so, as to
discover the grounds of demonstrating the true sense thereof; so far as the
proportion of faith does lead us, and further we are not warranted to proceed.

Secondly, concerning all other matters wherein the mind may be more free, and
needs not be bound up (as in Scripturall meditation) to the dictates of
another meaning; the rules are of two sorts, some for Theoreticall, some for
practical meditations; and both these are either in humane or divine objects.

The Theory of humane objects, may have rules to direct the mind to sinde out
hidden truths in natural things.

The Practical meditations of humane matters require rules, discovering the
ways of prudency, by which the best course of doing lawful businesses may be
found out and followed.

The Theory of divine objects, must wholly be Scripturall; therefore all the
rules which can be delivered to direct the mind to sind out hidden truths of
this kind, must be consequences of that analyticall doctrine, which does relate
to the matters and mysteries of the Text.

Lastly, the practical meditations of the spiritual objects concern either
the doubts of conscience, which Christians may have within themselves, or the
works of edification to be intended toward others. Of the first rules may be
given, how the conscience should resolve it self of its doubts; of the second,
how the works should be prosecuted and proposed toward others.

Of all which, much is to be said of very great concemment to the building up
of our souls in truth and peace; but many outward lets and distractions, and
some inward infirmities of mine own, take me off from the attention and
intentivenesse which is requisite in the elaborating of so weighty matters,
time and leisure is then requisite; which I hope the Lord will grant, with
other necessary graces: and this I am willing to assure you of; that you shall
never be more willing to put me upon these tasks, then I shall be found
(according to the ability which it has pleased God to grant unto me) ready and
desirous to apply my self thereunto for your edisication, as being in truth

Your most affectionate and faithful servant in Christ, J. Dury.

FINIS.

