DIAPOLITEA. A Christian Concertation WITH Mr. Prin, Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Harrington, For the True Cause of the COMMONWEALTH. OR, An ANSWER to Mr.
PRIN'S (Perditory) ANATOMY of the Republic, and his True and Perfect
Narrative, etc. To Mr. BAXTER'S (Purgatory) PILLS for the ARMY: and his
Wounding Answer to the Healing Question. WITH Some soft Reflections upon his
Catholic (or rather Cathulactick) KEY; and an EXAMEN of the late Petition of
the sixth of July to this Parliament. In all which we have A most Necessary
VINDICATION of the Cause; of the Honorable Persons now in Parliament and
Council, from the Venom and VILIFICATION of their Pens. By Joh. Rogers,
through Grace kept (under many Sufferings) a faithful Servant to Jesus Christ,
his Cause and the Commonwealth.

Prove. 26. 18, 19, As he that is Mad, casting firebrands, Arrows and Death: So
is the Man that has deluded his Neighbor; and says, Am I not in sport?
LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Council of State, Sitting by Authority of
PARLIANENT In WHITE HALL.
HIGHLY HONORABLE,
A Poor DUST (as I am) needs no great attendance; and A servant of Jesus Christ
needs no other CREDENTIALS to demand an Audience then his Message: besides, the
Matter herein does more concern your selves then me, and the best PRUDENTIALS
that you have. If this Quadruple Discourse, do but come to your Ears, the
Commonwealth is an object presented to your Eyes, 1. As an ANATOMY (but most
miserably mangled, yea) cut up Quick by Mr. P. 2. As a PATIENT, but as
pitifully Physick'd by Mr. B. in the Preface of his Holy Commonwealth. 3. As a
Spartan, Athenian or Venettan State; upon orders EKDEMICK, and differing with
the nature of our Cause, Climate, Manners, etc. by Mr. H. 4. As a Christian
Commonwealth, in a Theocratick constitution and Cause of Christ upon orders
ENDEMICK (both to MEN and to CHRISTIANS) as was contended for, by the
well-affected; and is by J. R. In every corner of which Quadrangular, is
somewhat observable, either from Mr. P's opening of his Stomach; Mr. B's
opening of his Spleen; Mr. H. his Brain; or my plain denudation of heart to
your mature and wise judgments, in the Promptuary and Larder of this
Discourse. So that these Papers, as you accept them, are yours; if you reject
them, are mine; though they more concern you then any men alive, upon a twofold
consideration, Chilification or concoction of the whole Matter.

1. Upon the account of that PUBLIC TRUST and confidence which the
Commonwealth has in you: if Immanuel (your Motto, or) GOD WITH US, be GOD WITH
YOU, then Butter and honey shall be your food, and you shall CHOOSE the GOCD,
and REFUSE the EVIL; yea, BUTTER AND HONEY shall every one Eat that is left in
the Land, Isa. 7. 15, 22. under such a Government. What is eligible (I hope)
will be acceptable, and (upon your digestion) profitable and nutrimental to the
WHOLE BOBY; it may be (by this) you may find out, who are (indeed) the
Gunpowder-plotters, and which are the Grand Designs that would blow you up into
the open Air. Some are so confident of carrying it yet, that already they
conclude the Commonwealth is but a firm Nihil, or a mere Nothing without a
foundation; and it is hard to say, whether they would propagate their work more
by a Faux under, or by a Fax in the Parliament House. All I can do in that, is
but to tell you where and how their Barrels are laid, and Instruments are at
work. In the next place, I could not do less (if not somewhat more) then to
present your Honors with the SPOIL of those GOODS that I have taken from your
Enemies, by way of reprisal or Letters of Mart, in this Polemick susception for
the service of the Commonwealth; and therein, the recovery made of the Honor
and Reputation of your most worthy Members, Sir Arthur Haslerige, Sir Hen.
Vane, etc. and others (not lost, but) invaded by most Name-murthering and
uncharitable Pickroons, who have infested and ranged the Coasts of our
Commonwealth (now) many months (if not years) together; to rob you and us, them
and the Commonwealth, as they have done. And this I observed, that as I hoised
Sail, and was in pursuit of the SPIT-FIRE (Mr. P.) I was set upon (and so fell
in) with the HUNTER (Mr. B) who came in to assist the first: and afterward I
met with the FOX in the way (Mr. H.) though I cannot say, of the same company,
yet at the same employment; All which I have (with God's blessing) BOARDED (and
without much Fiering on my part) have brought them into this BAY before you, as
Prize (in the RESOLUTION) where I now am bent to live and die (through Gods
grace) for the Good old Cause and a Christian Commonw.)

2. Upon the account of that late DEBATE had of me, (unknown to me) in the
COUNCIL; wherein some would render me what (I hope) they shall never find me;
herein some shall find me what (I fear) they would never render me to be, both
for Principles and Practice as to Government; which I presume are such as
(infirmities excepted) you would be loath to eject or not affect. And therefore
( Curvis Poplitibus) with bended knees, and a will broken and bowed to the foot
of the Lord) do I present my Requests to him for you; and to you for him; and
from him, that you may give us but a due encouragement (that are ready to
engage our utmost in your service for Christ and the Cause) by a true judgment
upon this Subject set before you, viz. the HEAD ( i. e. Christ) and BODY of the
Commonwealth i.e. the adherents to the CAUSE, as they are (indeed) the most
sound, sanable, and sociable parts of it is Constitution; and this

1. In the PHYSIO-LOGY of it; wherein all things must be pondered that
appertain to the essence or nature of our Cause and constitution, ( viz. Parts,
Temperaments, faculties, functions, most innate spirits, qualities, and the
like) for then I dare aver, you will give us freedom to pay the TENTHS of all
the SPOIL to our Melch^sedec, as well as to feed upon his Bread and Wine, and
take the blessings; yea, to consecrate the gain unto JEHOVAH, and the substance
to the ADON of the whole earth. (Hacharamti, the word is; I will set it apart,
with an Anathema to any that shall alter that property of it, Micah 4. 13.) to
retrieve and drive on this interest of Christ, (our ADON) in all, and of
JEHOVAH above All; as suits best with the very being and nature of our CAUSE.
It is your Honor to maintain HIS, and your interest to espouse HIS; and not to
think worse then you need, or (too severely) to censure such as peaceably,
piously, humbly, honestly, in a holy manner, with a gracious spirit, and
without any contempt to your Persons or Authority, or to the Peoples just
Rights and Liberty, plead this CAUSE, and justify it as YOURS, as THEIR'S, as
OUR'S, and as HIS; who shall be, who must be, the desire of all nations. But
because Mr. Baxter may be heard with many when I may not, I shall usher in ALL,
in his own words, that I have to offer for this Christian Commonwealth or
Theocratick Government, as the CONCAMERATION and upshot of the whole Discourse.

2. In the PATHOLOGY of it; and therein to consider how the Principal parts
might be affected (if not infected) with the late Morbous estate of the
Commonwealth: And acted (for that time) so preternaturally, that might render
it as unsafe then to follow them, as now to fall on them for no MEMBERS, (
humanum est errare, sed inhumanum perseverare, Cic. Phil. 2.) Unless we be of
opinion that the only way to cure a disease, is to cut off the member; or to
evacuate an humor, is to kill the man. So to measure the affections of your old
friends (who are sound at heart) ADHERENTS to the Good old Cause and
Commonwealth, by any humorous or incomposed resentment of your interruption
(which was sudden and amazing!) however they took it, may be dangerous and
unjust. Seeing some that were more troubled fell in with the Apostasy; and some
that were less, fell out with it! yea, seeing such as were Active in it, and
made their Advantages by it, are indemnified; shall such as were Passive in it,
and pursued nothing by it, but the Public Good, be indamaged? Can any think
that after so many years hard Bonds and Banishment, those that were forwardest,
proclaimed the Single Person, served him (or rather themselves) therein, should
be the Men of your Right Hand, and not those that have witnessed, prayed,
appeared and Protested against it (from the first to the last of it) be worthy
of your LEFT? Or that those who were but FOOLED into an expectation of better
things (and in that did rejoice through hope) be the only marks for your
enemies to shoot at; and such as were KNAVED into into a Perpetration of worser
things (and in that they did Triumph and boast) be the very Quivers of those
Arrows that are shot at them? As soon as the first sort saw the snare, they
escaped it, with the loss of Liberty, Estate and Livelihood, a many of them;
but the last sort saw it, kept it, and became their enemies that did it not.
The first sort were more in simplicity, and (as they intended) upon the account
of the Cause (the Reasons and Grounds in the Declaration An. 1653. pretended,
were for the better carrying on of the Cause, and a more absolute weaning the
people from Monarchy, and for successive Parliaments, etc.) but the last sort
in Subtlety and Design (a many of them) upon the account of themselves, Places
and Profits. The first sort did sink but like Peter, and as their feet slipped,
their hands held fast upon Christ; but the last sort sunk rather like Pharaoh,
having no principle to bear them up, and nothing to hold fast by: (only this we
see by it) that a man may sink and rise! and sink and rise again! and yet be
recovered at the last.) The first were WITHOUT, blinded with Words, and knew
nothing but what was openly pretended; the LAST were WITHIN, even in their
Cabals, and might easily guess at what they secretly intended. The first did
but stumble; but the last did fall, and lie in their filth. It is a Good horse
that never stumbles, but it is a Bad one that ever does; and that will wallow
in it too! To stumble once, is a common fault; but twice, (at one Stone too) is
a special one! and therefore (we humbly think) that the first ought not so to
be exploded, if the last ought so to be applauded and preferred. The Orator
said ( Natura me Clementem fecit, Respub. severum; sed neque Natura neque
Respubl. me Crudelem efficiet) Nature has made me MILD, the Commonwealth has
made me SEVERE; but neither one nor the other shall make me CRUEL to any man:
and the Preacher says, Eccles. 5. 8. If thou see violent perverting of
justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: For he that is HIGHER then the
HIGHEST regards, and is HIGHER then THEY.

For my own part, I need no Apology in the matter, who was possessed with
amazement at the rashness of the Action. I was so far from irritating or
abetting it (as some would suggest) that I never mentioned or imagined it; or
(to my knowledge) heard it of any other, till it was performed: And then was so
unsatisfied with it (of which eminent Persons are my Witnesses) as might free
me both from the suspicion and the sin of it. Besides, it is in print to the
World (and was then in Press!) for Posterity to see, my opinion of them that
were reputed Active in it Vide my Irenic. Evang. Epist to Church, p. 7.
. Yet when that interruption had so candid an Interpretation, by Good People
(who were over-credulous and ignorant of the Design) I did write to the (then)
GENERAL, and my fourth Propos. was, hisce Verbis, word for word, That those who
were righteous, and spirited for this Government of the WORTHIES of the late
(i.e. this) Parliament, that are without just exception, may be Owned with
Honor, i.e. Returned again to their Trust. And these Proposials are the worst
that can be said of me by any man, wherein I meant, as much as I mentioned,
very honorably of them, as of our WORTHIES. But if that satisfy not, I shall
presume with the words of a Scottish EARL Leviston (in his Oration to the then
Lord Chancellor, ex Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 11. and Junii 27. adhort.
p. 151.) Non me HONOR Spoliatum, sed ONERE levatum existimo; Privatim si quam
accepi injuriam, eam Publicae Salutis Causa libenter Condono: Si quam feci,
Bonorum Virorum Arbitratu satisfaciam, etc. I account not my self robbed of
Honor in your late DEBATE, nor exempt of Reason in any former REBATE (being
armed with so much innocence that I can heartily say,) If I have privately
received any Wrong, I can freely remit it for the Publick's sake; but if I have
done Any either to the PUBLIC or to PRIVATE, I (as heartily) refer it to the
Arbitrament of Good men, and I will make satisfaction, if I can, for it.

Neither expect I any thanks, to be an Advocate for others; but to prevent the
injustice of squaring your Affairs and their Affections by so fallible a RULE
as that is. The Angel's Golden Reed is the Golden Rule to measure the Inward
by; but the outward (Rev. 11. 1, 2.) may be measured by the best Reason of man
(rightly fixed for judgment) and then I need not show the danger of Breaking
Bones too often in one place, lest they fester, and Rot, and come to Ruin, as
well as put to pain the Whole Body. But to conclude,

I see you like Men in the Dark, up at MIDNIGHT, in a confused State; ready to
Knock your Heads at every Post, and to break your Legs at every Block! and
therefore hope by this Collision of flints to strike a spark of fire; and if I
find my match, I shall light a Candle at the least. Which will be some comfort
to me in my WAY, if it be no help to you in your WORK: and seeing I am not
Worthy to live in my own Nation, I am glad that you are so worthy as to send me
into Another. I would say, with Chrysostom, Well, the Earth is the Lords! and
the fullness thereof! ET NIL NISI PECCATUM TIMEO! yea, I would answer too with
Aristotle, when asked why he left Athens, (...), because I would not have the
Athenians to sin TWICE against Philo-sophy; nor would I that our Honorable
Worthies should run the SECOND TIME upon the (same) ROCK, or Danger of Ruin.

My poor Prayers and Tears to my God for you have been, are, and will be, That
with Wisdom and Grace (like a Burning-Glass, which gathers All Beams into ONE)
you may be both HEAT and LIGHT to your selves and us; Discovering the dark
Designs and Retrenchments of all your Enemies, Recovering the Light and florid
intendments of all your friends to serve the PUBLIC with. And, O that JEHOVAH!
would honor you, as Instruments! and Columns of his immortal Praise! in
raising up the Plant of Renown in this Nation! and making it to flourish in
your Days! by the Pouring out a fresh Horn of Oil upon the Heads of his
Magistrates and Ministers of the Gospel, so as may make us his HEPHZIBAH and
his BEULAH in this Island; and GREAT be the Day of his JEZREEL! Amen, Amen.

From my House in Aldersgate Street 14. of the 5. Month (called July) 1659. in
the 1. Year of our second Deliverance or Return to the Liberty of a Free State.
Your Servant (to my utmost Power) whether in this Nation or any other, for the
Cause of Christ and this Commonwealth. JO. ROGERS.

DIAPOLITEA. A Christian Concertation with Mr. Prynne, etc. his Anatomy, or
rather Apotomy of the Commonwealth, etc.
SInce the Publishing of some former Papers for the clearing of our Cause and
Commonwealth from Mr. Prynne's charge, and others of his Principle; some
Scurrilous Goose-quils have been dashing the GALL of his Ink upon them to
little purpose; but to blot them a little, not to answer them a Line, nor the
Argument of them in the least. And yet some Gablers of late have been so
Garrulous in their Pamphlets and Reports, as if they were the only GEESE that
this Age affords, to keep the Capitol (of their Cause) whiles the Dogs sleep.
And as if an Annual Commemoration of this good service were too little (after
the manner of the Romans) to carry a GOOSE before them in Triumph, and to lay
it soft upon a rich Carpet, they ridiculously Act it every day (almost) for
Children and Apes to gape and skip at, but for wise men to scorn and spurn at.
My Arguments are all firm and untouched, which have proved Mr. Prynne's Cause
to be the very CORPSE and stump so long since defunct, buried and rotted
(though he would have it rise again, or the Ghost of it) But ours to be the
living and only true Good old Cause; neither have I yet heard any Reason to
decline what I have said upon this Subject, without his felo de se, and bare
saying it, in p. 4. of 's Republican (in the Margin) with his bungling ANATOMY
(which others boast of) be sufficient to effect it. In the FIRST he refels like
a Lawyer, not like a Logician; and in the SECOND like a Butcher, not like an
Anatomist of the Commonwealth; by a (...), not a (...); a wrangling, rather
then a reasoning with any Sobriety. Nor can my heart but bleed at that
monstrous Barbarism and horrid Error of Dissection in Herophilus and
Eristratus, Mr. Prynne's cutting up of mea alive.
that he seems to follow (and so his fellows) in cutting up men alive to try
his Skill. O cruel practice to make Proficients indeed! so to mangle the
tremulous Members, and most noble Parts, Names, and Worthies of this
Commonwealth! with the highest violation of the Laws of Nature, Reason and
Religion! This must needs render the Art very diabolical, both in (his (...))
Inspection of it, and in (his (...)) the Instruction of it!

As to the Gentleman's SKILL, M. Prynnes skill in Anatomy.
it is apparent to most men, that he exceeds more in the Ektomy and Apotomy (or
most cruel incision and wounding) then in the true Art or Anatomy of the
Commonwealth, which requires a more gentle, even and ingenious Hand or Head
then Mr. Prynnes or mine, to make it a most Curious Section, or clear Discourse
through all the Labyrinths and abstruse mysteries of State, or an Accurate
Discovery of all the outward and inward Parts, with the nature, feature and
structure of them, in this great ANIMAL (if I may so call it) for so he handles
it; (with a rough, rash, rending, vulnerary Dissecting, or rather Bis-secting
(in his two Books) of the most Principal Members of it, without order, Rule or
Reason in it. Besides, he that makes no discrimination between the Similar and
Dissimilar parts of the Commonwealth, cuts it up as a Butcher does a Beast;
with but little skill or excellency, if with any truth or honesty at all.
Neither does Mr. P. so aim at the Curing, as at the Killing of the
Commonwealth, in all his Science and Section. And what a rare Piece! or rather
(Butcherly) business he has made of it, His instruments of Anatomy cruel.
is easy to guess from those instruments of cruelty he has used in it, all
the way of his Anatomy, viz. the RASOUR of his Tongue, like that in Psalm. 52.
2. which devises mischief (or cuts most cruelly) like a sharp RASOUR working
DECEITFVLLY: in Chald. Targ. mill malshinuta, working words of slander, and
detraction. As he has his Rasours of the worst sort! He has also such Brazen
(faced) PROBES (for searching) as were made out of the Jesuits own Forge, by
his own confession! Cavaleerish SIZZERS, to cut us off for spurious Republicans
like Proud flesh! Episcopal SAWES, to make havoc of such as go under the Name
of Sectaries; Presbyterian PINCERS too, to tear and pull us; and CORDS too, to
bind them that are for Liberty of Conscience; some Brutish HOOKS to draw with,
and Whimsical WIMBLES to wind in with, and to Worm the Vulgar; a TABLE too
(after the old fashion) to bind this (living) Anatomy upon; with the very same
Rings, Chains, Fetters and Perforations that before were used to bind us with,
and to make us all SLAVES. These are his tools to work with; and in this manner
he enters upon his bloody Anatomy, to the injury of the living Commonwealth; as
if nothing could fit him for an Example, but the abominable Action of that
Monster of men, who was not content to butcher his own Mother AGRIPPA (by
Assassinates) but in a most barbarous manner make a Survey of her Body and
Parts (so mangled by his order) and weltring in Blood.

Had Mr. P. gone about it like a Workman, His Anatomy has no order in it,
neither 1. Dignity, nor
he would have done it either after the order of DIGNITY or of DISSECTION. 1.
Of Dignity, and therein have told us, who and where the HEAD of it is; which is
the seat of wisdom, contains in it the faculties of sense and motion; which
has upon it the face of Majesty; as well as in it a Brain fit to perform the
variety of all animal offices and functions throughout the whole Body of the
Commonwealth. Or 2. of Dissection; 2. in Dissection.
and so to have told us, what he means by the public and private Regions of
it, and where he begins his view of Parts, as to Structure, Action, Use, and
Conformation of every one of them; yet that you might think him a most profound
and Accomplished Artist, he begins his Anatomy, at the Spermatick parts of it,
p. 1. and the 5. p. affirming that Parsons the Jesuit, Watson the Priest, etc.
were the fathers of our Commonwealth, Mr. P. begins with Intrals first
and had the Prolifical part, or Art of procreating it, which (he says) he
finds by his penetrating the INTRALS of it, in p. 1. I confess it was the
manner of Soothsayers and Conjurers of old to penetrate the INTRALS (as he
calls it) for such discoveries; so did they in the days of M. Marcellus, when
he fought for the Syracusans against the Carthaginians, declare this way the
Projects of their enemies, And so did the Soothsayers of old
and predict also the event of things (as Mr. P. does) by the INTRALS of an
Animal opened, which the Sooth-sayer or Witch gave his judgment upon: And thus
did the Apostate Julian, when he entered Illyricum, and engaged against
Constance, he used the INTRALS of Birds and Beasts to Soothsay by; but I never
heard of this Course taken by Anatomists before, (either in order of Dignity or
Dissection) to penetrate the INTRALS, first, (and for the discovery of a
Gunpowder-Plot too, as he calls it) before he has passed through the EXTRALS
of it, or outward membranes of the body; unless he did believe that he should
be lost in the snare, or caught in the net of the Kell (or Omentum) that covers
those INTRALS; which he rips open most inhumanely to the VIEW of the Beholders,
and then reads his Lectures (like NERO) upon the very Womb wherein himself once
lay. But could he have come (with the Art or Honesty of an Anatomist) to the
Intrals FIRST; yet how by them Mr. PRYNNE (or his PRIN -- cipled ones) can
presume, or pretend to find it out, that our Free State is the Jesuits
Project, without a professed Witchcraft or Sooth-saying; I profess I cannot
see, nor they (I think) very rationally suggest. In the interim, these most
intelligible and legible Characters which Mr. P. has made of himself, M. Prynne
his own Anatomst, and his friends.
(and of his Consociates) by such occasional openings, passions, and
enucleations, are not more easily read, then remembered (and Commented upon too)
by understanding men; and as evidence enough, that (instead of the CAUSE) he
has ANATOMIZED himself (and them too) to the very life, in his Bissection (or
two last Books upon the Commonwealth), and before the Next he may well
remember, that the man who has no RVLE over his own spirit, is but a City
broken down and without walls, Prove. 25. 28. and 16. 32. He that is slow to
anger is better then the mighty; and that rules his spirit, then the taker of
a City.

It would be endless to instance in every particular; But how (out of reason)
remote this Novel Anatomist is from all the just Rules of Art, Reason or
Honesty in his Description of the Republic, let our famous College (of Phys.
Chirurg.) I mean the PARLIAMENT (that sit by extraordinary Providence, as men
raised from the dead, for the PUBLIC Good we hope) perpend; it being most
proper and essential to their Honorable Profession, places of Trust, long
experience, and good success in the service of the Commonwealth, so to do.

His two last Anatomy-Lectures (that I met with) upon this most (miserably
mangled, His mistake in the subject of his Anatomy.
and) mistaken Subject (whereof the one consists of fourteen sheets) are very
incongruous and irrational, upon an errant mistake of the Subject that he
handles; putting no difference between a Free State, and an Enslaved; the
Commonwealth, and a Kingdom; The Parliament of the Commonwealth sitting since
An. 1648. and the Parliament of the Kingdom before that. After this manner one
DEMOCRITUS of Abdera did play the Anatomist (to find out the seat of Anger or
Melancholy) he cut in pieces the Body of a Beast, but never considered the GALL
in himself, or seat of Melancholy in his own Breast; and so is it easy to give
a most erroneous judgment, upon the Dissecting of a creature of a far
different Nature, as Mr. Prynne does all the way. Therefore for time to come,
before he cuts up, we must desire him to tell us truly what creature he means,
(...), etc. and to write ore the Head of it, This is a BULL, and that a Beast
or Horse, etc.

But that the Ignorant may be undeceived in this, and those silly souls (so
devout at his Lectures) unseduced to that; so that their Brains be the clearer
from these Notorious mistakes, by a sternutation at least, at the Pus or opus
of his matter; and that they may not poison their intellectuals, with that
which is neither (...) nor (...), sweet nor sane, pleasant nor wholesome to the
body of the Commonwealth: I shall contribute my help (for their better
information,) and might answer his two Books in two pages, by obviating and
demonstrating Mr P's false and suppositious GROUNDS that he goes upon in both,
The grounds he goes upon are very mistaken, and merely fictitious.
(with an uncontrolled Prolixity and Loquacity;) but I shall for the common
benefit, dilate a little, or expatiate upon his splay-footed Discourse, to
strike up the heels of this Champion. 1. In that which concerns himself and the
Secluded Members. 2. In that which concerns the Kinglings Interest for a Single
Person, upon a most dangerous creeping insinuation, that this Commonwealth is
but the Superfaetation and spurious of issue Jesuits and Papists. In both
which, as Mr. P. himself will be put upon his second thoughts or reserve, if he
have any to retreat unto; and if he have not, like the Camel (in the fable) by
seeking HORNS lost his EARS; so his Devout Pupils be put upon another Lesson in
the true Anatomy of the Commonwealth: Unless they resolve to incur the
punishment, which sometimes the Heathens put their ( Adulterated) People to, (
viz. by thrusting the heads of such Adulterers and Adulteresses into the odious
Paunch of a most filthy BEAST, and there stifled them:) So to be suffocated in
the filth, venom, and excrements of Mr. Prynne's Anatomy. But we shall hope yet
better and more charitably of them.

I shall therefore begin with his first Assertion, Mr. P's first Discovery in
his Anatomy, is, that the Secluded Members had a right to sit in this
Parliament.
in Narr. from p. 1. to 18. and in p. 22. viz. That the Secluded Members had as
much right to sit as any, and the Majority, were and are forceably kept out of
this Parliament, etc. Mr. BAXIER seconds him with as agile a Notion in his
head, and Motion from his heart to the Army for their Readmission The truth
is, it is all the way observable, how PRINIAN Mr. Baxters words and Arguments
are for Law, and how BAXTERIAN, Mr. Prynne's proofs are for Scripture; yet as
Plato once said of Diogenes, Illum esse Socratem insanum and furentem, etc. he
is no other then Socrates raging and mad, and Socrates is but a sober Cynick or
Diogenes; so indeed Mr. B. is but Mr. P. in more sobriety; and Mr. P. is but
Mr. B. in more bitterness and asperity. But sure neither of them could think us
so far out of our wits, (or beside our senses,) and Nescient of the History and
State of the Commonwealth (whatever they conceive of others, whom they carry as
Faulconers on their fists do hooded Hawks) that we should be persuaded this can
consist with the Sanity or Sanctity of it and of the Cause. Muchless can they
induce us (or any alive, Mr. P. no Artist in Anatomy.
who are but Masters of their own Reason) to believe a right they have to sit
as members of this present Parliament. Hip. lib. 1. de offic. Medici.
But had M. P. been an Artist in Anatomy, he would have learned of Hippocrates,
first, To look into those things that are alike to one another, and SIMILARY
Members of the whole; and then into those things that are so unlike, and
DISSIMILARY; I mean, of that Parliament, that was then in being; Secluded
Members Dissimilary parts, at best.
for of THIS (that sat since An. 1648.) they never were, neither in the one
sense nor in the other. Thus Aristotle teaches, That which is right and strait
must be first, because it does not only measure and manifest it is self; Arist.
lib. 1. de Anima. The Secluded Members how found in the true Anat. of the
Commonwealth to be oblique.
but it also measures that which is oblique, crooked and contrary to it, and to
the Body. This Mr. P. should have done; and this was done when they were
secluded: They were first measured in their Affections and intentions, and so
found oblique to the Public; (yea, professed and avowed enemies to the
Free State and GOOD CAUSE;) by such as have infinitely more skill in that Art
(of true Anatomy) then either Mr. P. or I can pretend to. And that this is so,
it hangs upon Record; so as that a little Revise of the PARLIAMENTS necessary
Resolves and Votes about them (with the GROUNDS and REASONS of the Votes for
their Seclusion) will satisfy any well-willers to the Cause and felicity of
the WHOLE; that Mr. P. does labor but in vain to rescue that with Wit, which
they lost in Worth. Besides.

2. Their SECLUSION and expulsion was from the House of Commons indeed; 2 The
were Secluded from the House of Commons, or that part of the Kingdoms Parl.
which is long since at an end.
or that PART OF THE PARLIAMENT, which were called and convened by the King's
Writ (of Caroli 17. An. 1640.) which Parliament Mr. P. himself determines, and
has resolved to have been actually Dissolved at the Death and Decollation of
the late King, according to Law and REASON; and this, he so learnedly proves
from p. 24. to 34. that I am ready to say, with Appelles upon the 7. years
elaborate piece of Protogenes, (...), the Labor is great, and the work too;
but alas! the Grace and Beauty of it (which is the formale) is wanting! and how
needless that long discourse is to prove what we never denied, let the Reader
judge; but that which we deny, and which Mr. P. must prove, is, that the
MEMBERS (for whom he and Mr. B. are such Advocates) ever were or are Members of
this PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth, Never members of the Parl. of the
Commonwealth, nor never had a right to sit in it, as such.
or Secluded from it, viz. the Parliament of the Commonwealth without King,
Single Person, or House of Peers. Which neither Mr. P. Mr. B. nor any man
alive, with all his Art of Anatomy, Calumny, Law, or Logic can be able to do;
or to evidence the least RIGHT they had, or have to sit in this present
Parliament, as he would suggest it; or indeed any at all, but what grounded and
precipitate presumption in any other might as much pretend to. And therefore
with his leave, those Honorable Persons that his Pen dashes upon, in p. 10. of
his Narr. viz. Sir Arthur Hasilerige, and Sir Henry Vane, rendered him such
Reasons for his not sitting in the House, as might have satisfied the Writer as
well as the Reader, him or any that had not been quite bank-rupted, and as void
of Reason as of Right.

3. The Bustling, 3. They were not the majority of the House that were Secluded.
Blustering noise which Mr. B. and he makes of the Majority, is a mere SOUND,
and mistake. Had he been pleased to have made known to the Reader, how many
were Delinquents; how many left the Parliament, and sat in the Juncto at Oxford
(200. or more) that never returned again! and of those that remained in the
HOUSE, it must needs follow, that the Secluded Members were the lesser Number;
and those that sat since 1648. are the greater Number, being now about 200.
besides those that are dead of them. But whether it be more the folly of a wise
man, or wisdom of a fool, to make this loud noise of a Majority, I know not!
only this I know, that the Decision of a difference, by a fool in Paris, was
not without that equity and justice which is due to Mr. PRYNNE and them of his
Humor; for when a Cook fell out with a poor man, that had been in his SHOP and
eaten never a bit, but satisfied himself with the smell of the meat that was
roasted; he would make him pay; but it was referred to the NEXT that came,
(which was the fool) who determined it thus; that as the Man had been filled
with the Smoke of the Meat, the Cook should be paid with the jingling of the
Money. And it is as just, if a fool may say it, to men so wise, that M. P. and
M. B. who do fill our heads with FUME, be paid with the tinkling gingle of that
FAME, for which they are never the better, nor will be richer at the last; I
pray God, not much the worse, with a (Mat. 5. 2, 5, 16.) Verily I say unto you,
They have their REWARD.

4. Mr. P. confesses, 4. Their design is to destroy the commonw.
that had he been admitted to sit (with the rest of the Secluded members) their
design was p. 22. propounded, to resummon the long since defunct House of
COMMONS, which has been buried and out of mind almost eleven years.
Notwithstanding (by his own words) there was no such thing in being since the
Kings Death; and how these could be the Antecedent, without the Relative of
King or House of Peers, or made demonstrable and practicable by his own LAW, or
responsible to the Writ and Summons of a Parliament as he accounts LEGAL, I
understand not; but this is easy to be understood, that if these Secluded
Members had pretended as fair at first, as Cleomines (the Laconian) did once to
his friend Archonides, they intended as foul, and with like Policy at last.
(...), etc. He swore to him, that he would do all things jointly with him, and
transact nothing without his HEAD were in it; but he watched his time, when he
cut off his companions HEAD; and to keep his Covenant, after he had parboiled,
and fitted it, he kept it by him, honored and perfumed it, and upon every
weighty matter or consultation would set this SKUL by him, and tell it what he
purposed, (...), saying, That he did not violate his engagement, or break his
OATH in the least, seeing he did ever take Council with the HEAD of Archonides,
and did nothing without it. That this is the Honor our Patriots should have,
if they could effect it, is as clear as the Sun.

5. Mr. P. knows (as well as we) that the Parliament recalled to their Trust
(by the Declaration of the Army) is expressly denominated that Parliament that
sat from Anno 1648. 5. It is denominated what Parl. is called to sit.
till Anno 1653. viz. the Commonwealth-Parliament, whereof they were never
members; so that he might well have spared his squint-eyed Arguments, or
unanswerable Reasons (as he calls them, from p. 34. to p. 40.) to prove they
are not the House of Commons till they took themselves for such a House; but
thus poor Mr. P. does make himself both Adversary and Answerer; Dr. Featly
Sermon. p. 885.
Mark and Archer in his matter; and is either like one Antipho (that a Dr.
tells us of) who through a Disease in his Eye, thought he had his own IMAGE
ever before him, and for THAT, he could see nothing else: Or like that Soldier
who in a foolish Bravado meant to expose himself to such a needless Peril, that
for want of an Enemy he would find himself to fight with; and so does Mr. P. in
the most Parts of his Discourse. Indeed he wounds himself severely, and I much
pity him in those unruly passions which fall with the deadliest blows on
himself and on the Bowels of his own Arguments that are torn apieces with very
anger; Mr. P. properly and in Law-sence guilty of the Felo de se.
for this he knows is by the LAW the Felo de se.

And thus Mr. P. has seen his HEIRS apparent (as he supposed) to the next
Revolution; (and who were accordingly in expectation of possessing) utterly
disinherited, by a gracious Providence, and unexpected; so that like M. LIVIUS,
who through his own folly had lost All, and said (to his own shame) he had left
nothing to his HEIRS, praeter Coelum and Coenum, but air and mire; he may say
it, (I fear) that it is AIR and MIRE, and nothing else, that he bequeaths by
his writings to those Gentlemen; and I wish it might not have effect like the
River Lyncestis, Robinson on Genesis 49. p. 49.
of which whosoever drinks is sure to run Mad. Thus we see also, the Caninum
appetitum of them that long after the Death of this Commonwealth; accounting
their only Riches to lie in the Reversions (purchased at so easy a Rate, as a
Breath, or the Vote of a company of Lawyers) for the King, Lords and Commons;
which they were very near effecting in their last (Dissolved) Assembly; only
lost all by over-hast; and the Commonwealth is recovered, The Commonwealths
strange recovery.
but most strangely. Not much unlike to that of a King of Parthia (ORADES by
name) the same that slew Crassus, who being desperately ill (as our
Commonwealth was) it proved a temptation to his son Phraates (so impatient he
was of his Death, that himself might succeed to the Throne) to dispatch him
quick; he gave him poison, but the Poison did not only work out it is self, but
the Disease with it, and was so far from killing him, that it perfectly cured
him. And so it did with this poor Commonwealth (a sick Patient! when they came
together, and whose CASE Vide plain case of the Commonwealth etc.
I then opened to them,) the POISON that was given to make a quick dispatch of
the Commonwealth (by the Lawyers and Courtiers, etc.) has produced a cure; And
the Lord has (we hope) saved us once again! Disappointed our Adversaries! and
raised up this Renowned Parliament, as from the Grave, to do great things for
Christ and his Cause in this Commonwealth, or to the Greater shame of them that
hinder.

What Mr. P. has suggested like a learned Anatomist; Mr. B. has as bravely
seconded like a Physician (in's Preface to the Army.) Mr. B. Seconds Mr. P. in
the same plea. Mr. B. holy Commonw.
Because (says he) I find that self-conviction works in you, and has
brought you already to more confessions then Volumes from me were ever like.
And when Nature hopefully begins a CVRE, it must not be disturbed by VIOLENT
Medicines. You have already confessed, and the Officers of the Army in Scotland
confess. Penitent confessions will be some reparation of your honor. This
much from another would by some have been called a second GANGRENA, or a
SCANDALUM MAGNATVM. And if you be indeed sincerely penitent, we are not only in
hope, but past all doubt, that God who has showed you the sin of forcing out
the last 120. will also show you the sin of imprisoning and secluding of above
140. at once, long before, etc. How exquisite Mr. B. is in this Art or Science
of Physic I know not; His skill in Physic, examined, as well as P's in
Anatomy.
but (with his favor) if he follows right Rules in his prescriptions, he ought
to have told us first, what Humors he would have evacuated; and so to have
proportioned his Dosis and Directions to the quality of the Disease; 1. What
Rules.
not mistaking or taking them for ACTIVE QUALITIES in the Army, which were
merely PASSIVE, and under orders; 1. What kinds of Humors are in the
Commonwealth.
nor on the contrary, to account them passive qualities which were merely
Arbitrary, Active, and their own, without Orders, which the Parliament ought to
consider. 2. Also, with what kinds of medicaments or means, consisting with the
(...) and State of the Commonwealth, as Aristotle (when sick) said to his
Physician, 2. What kinds of Means to cure them.
What, do you think to cure me as if I were a Horse? that I must not know what
ingredients you do give me? (...). Away, away! you shall never meddle with me,
like a Farrier, Heardsman or Delver; but first go! and find out the cause and
nature of my disease: and so say we. For all Medicines agree not with all men;
and I presume Mr. B. has more then one Rule or Remedy for all diseases. 3.
With what Reasons.
3. He should have given us his Reasons also; For in methodical cures, not only
the remedies but the reasons of things ought to be proponderated, and as
accurately prepared. Now although (as Mr. B. says) Lenitives be most necessary
when nature begins to work so, M. B's Lenitives examined.
and into such confessions; yet when the Humors are hard, viscous, very tough
and tenacious, they are not outed with such contrariis blandis, so easily; as
with corrosives duly corrected, and with such, consideratis considerandis, as
best suit both with the Patient and Potion. And Mr. B. himself tells them of a
more violent, working, exasperating Physic which he has; but he shall forbear
to give it at present, Mr. B's Corrosives examined, in's Preface to his Holy
Commonwealth to the Army.
viz. to set before them the aggravation of their sins; terrors of hell and
damnation, etc. (and all about the Secluded Members, or the last Assembly, for
which) amongst his mild ingredients, he gives them this ARGUMENT. To resist or
depose the best Governors in all the world, that have the Supremacy, is
forbidden subjects on pain of damnation: But the best Governors in all the
world that have the Supremacy, have been resisted or deposed; I mean (says he)
the Secluded Members, secondly, the Powers that were last put by, etc. So that
his conclusion is DAMNATION. Are these his Lenitives? Though the minor of his
Argument is an errant untruth, yet his MAJOR ought to have been explained, and
not so applied, until he had told us what the Apostle means by (...),
Damnation, and whom he meant by SUBJECTS, and where the Supremacy indeed is,
and then was. But with such a preposterous zeal too, poor Hugh Peter's did offer
them his Potion, P. 23. l. 13. Hugh Peter's and Mr. B. for the single Person and
last Assembly as the best Governors.
in his Letter to a great one of the Army, thus. The Protector and the two
Houses, were the hopefullest way in the whole world to settle these Nations;
and the crossing thereof, the most dangerous. So a little after he says, The
Authority of the best Parliament, and most freely chosen, trampled upon: yea,
such a sort of men gathered together, as would have been a defense and
establishment against all evils, etc. thus Hugh! Which Potion because they
would not, indeed could not accept, he drank off himself, and (poor Wretch!) is
become stark MAD. Wherefore I would earnestly wish that Mr. B. in all such
Acute corrosives and threats of Damnation, (which I think he uses too often to
poor sick Patients and tender Consciences) will for future lenifie them with
the love of Christ, and tenders of Gospel Grace; with so much Cassia of
charity, and Manna of mercy amongst them, as may make them work more kindly
upon the Patients. Neither let him think to correct his Lenitives with
Astringents, or with binding of them up to his opinion, way, or apprehensions;
for we have seen it (by sad experience) that such narrow spirits, Astringents
or narrow spirits, ill for the Commonwealth, and now dangerous.
in their binding, contracting, and Astringent Means; which some Good Men,
(whether Presbyterian, Independent or others) are propense unto, and do propose
for the only means of Curation, (viz. to set up their own form and judgments,
but to cast out others that differ) do rather detain then drive out the most
knotty, rigid, HARSH, Clammy and Viscous humors in their (so recovering)
Patients or Proselytes, under that form of godliness, or color of being cured.

But fourthly, 4. Well and suitably applied.
Mr. B. must be Better advised in the clapping on of his Applications for the
future; he might as well have applied Hepaticks or Liver-medicines to the Feet;
or Cephalicks accommodated to the Head, unto the Bowels; (and yet such improper
and impertinent Prescriptions, are common in our days,) which tend more to the
destruction of the Commonwealth in it is natural strength (that so through it is
excessive weakness they may Refund and confound us into Kings, Lords and
Commons) then to kill or expel any putrid and Peccant humors, that have
appeared so high for a Single Person, by the late Apostasy, or before it; which
it seems (to our sorrow and danger) are like to be left in the BODY still, if a
better PURGE then Mr. B's be not (gently) given them; and such a one at least,
as may reach to the remotest places of this BODY of the Commonwealth, otherwise
from causes inward and outward, I profess unfainedly, I fear the fatal issue
and danger of the next CRISIS, if the great PHYSICIAN of Heaven and Earth do
not miraculously help us, and prevent it. Therefore watch and pray!

2. Mr. Baxter deals very disingenuously, 2. Mr. Baxters evasion of the
Gangrena and scandalum Magnatum P 4. of M. P's Cause stated and stunted.
to insinuate this, viz. that an exercitation or excitation, to such a
confession and return (as the Army have made) would have been from another
called a SECOND GANGRENA, or a scandalum MAGNATUM; seeing himself knows that
the occasion of that expression was quite contrary, upon his most imprudent (I
had almost said impudent, but I would be modest) calumniating of the
Commonwealth and most worthy members of it.

Expressly declaring in his Key for Cath. p. 323. that he left it to Posterity,
1. The occasion given to call his KEY for Cath. a Gangrena.
that the putting the King to death was the work of Papists, Libertines,
Vanists, Anabaptists, etc. and that no Protestants had hand in it. So p. 355,
356. If you take Vanists, Levellers, etc. who were the chief Agents for
PROTESTANTS, you might as well say PAPISTS are Protestants, p. 321, 322.
Calling this Army since the new Moddel a Jesuited corrupted Army, etc. and in
p. 341. and in's Epist. Dedic. he stirs up the Single Person, and them that
were in Power, against some of the most constant adherents to the Cause, and
living Members of the Commonwealth, under the Bear-skinny Notion of MASKED
PAPISTS, or men far worse then the OPEN Papists; for whom he professes he has
less charity then for open Papists; branding them to Posterity, with new names
of his own inventing, viz. Vanists, Hiders, Seekers, Juglers, Sectaries, etc.
besprinkling his whole Book with such flaming fireballs of defamations,
abusive passages, and (through God's goodness abortive) instigations to a
Perscution, as could merit no less (if not much more) then a second Gangrena:
At such a time too, when some were like wild Boars a whetting their Tuskes, and
had (as he could not but know) their Teeth an Edge to be so doing, and as ready
to take at the least spark of fire, as Gunpowder or Brimstone; and to be then
irritating to it, was very evil, and ungospellike. Besides, as the matter is
most scandalous, scurrilous and untrue; so is the form thereof very unbecoming
Man, Minister, or Christian, like the ACCUSER of the BRETHREN, to be levying of
so high a charge against the Lord's dear servants and Commonwealth's friends;
Most unreasonable and unreligious in the matter and form of it, against the
Lord's servants.
without once so much as admonishing them for their Errors he judges them
under, or using means of conviction and recovery of them; which is not only
against Humanity, but Divinity, and the very Scriptures, Romans 14. 4. Ephesians. 4.
31. Jam. 4. 11. Psalm. 50. 20. So Gal. 6. 1. You which are spiritual restore such,
(...), in the spirit of kindness and mildness it is self, not of madness;
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted; not as if thou were exempted.
For be thou ere so spiritual or strong a Christian, thou have in thee faeces
as well as flores, excrements as well as excellents; and art as capable of
being cast by others into the like, if not the very same furnace of infamy and
obloquy which thou have heat for the honest, innocent and upright in heart. And
one day thou will see thou need every inch as much their pity, prayers and
charity, as they do thine. Ah! and will thou insult over others, for those
things that thou art subject to thy self? Periculose maledicit Alteri, (says
Erasmus) Cui vel idem, Libro Apothegm. de maledict.
vel simile, vel diversum, sed deterius vitium possit objice. It is a mad and
most dangerous thing of any man, for him to speak evil of another, against whom
may be objected the same, or the like, or another, but a worse fault. And of
all men, for Mr. B. to call upon them in power to heat the furnace seven times
hotter then it is already, Strange Vicissitude! and inconstancy, that the same
hand which wrote the Saints Rest, should write for the Saints RUIN. Hos* 7. 6,
7.
(or then HE has done it) for so many of the dear servants of Christ, makes me
amazed! And when I excogitate the matter, I profess I cannot but presume the
case to be much altered with him since he wrote the SAINTS REST, when so near
(as he thought) his Dissolution, wherewith I (with others) was so much
affected: To write now for the SAINTS RUIN (when so near as we thought a
Persecution) wherewith we are as much afflicted; and may say with the Prophet,
They have made ready (or kirbu, applied) their hearts like a FVRNACE in their
treachery and insnaring. (bearbam) They have been all made hot as an oven
(jecammu katannur) viz. by such as are ever putting in of fuel. And it is easy
to discern how much his STUDY of CONTROVERSIES, has envenomed his spirit,
destroyed his charity, and delivered him up into the very CONTROVERSY of
STUDIES; which without a Retractation, will stand as a Monument indelible to
his dishonor. As if his only work now had been to weave a web (like the
Spider) to catch flies in; and then to poison them. The good Lord pardon him,
and show him more grace and mercy then he would others! before the day wherein
the Auditor-General shall cast up his accounts! Yea, show him, O God, what
spirit he was of when his PEN was so gangrened against thine innocent ones!
Thus far for the GANGRENA which fills all the Avenues and Hollows of his KEY.

Now for the Scandalum MAGNATVM, How a scandalum Magnatum
Whereof not only Mr. B. but a many others (by imitation) are egregiously
guilty: for good men may have their Apes as well as Bad, who follow nothing
more aptly then mocks and mowes, and the most unseemly actions; such as these,
of unjust aspersing the Persons of the most incomparable wisdom, worth and
abilities (under God's) in the whole Nation; which he knows is a Scandalum
MAGNATVM, and a great crime both in Law and Gospel; the punishment thereof has
been so severe both in the Roman Commonwealth, and others, as I dare not name
it, lest it should be thought that I did desire it. Englands confusion, etc.
They fix their defamatory Venom and malign aspect upon the Lord Fleetwood,
Lieutenant General Ludlow, Sir Arthur Hesilerig, Sir Henry Vane, Sir James
Harrington, Lord Bradshaw, Col. John Jones, Mr. Reynolds, Maj. Genesis Lambert,
The highest Dignitaries and Star of the Commonwealths Coelum Chrystallinum
above their Clouds.
Major Salloway, Mr. Scot, and such others both in Parliament and in Council,
as they conceive have been or are the most Active, and eminent Dignitaries in
our Orb; Whose sparkling virtues, and Twinkling luster, like STARS above the
upper Region, outshine all such clouding and eclipsing Reproaches of the lower
Region, (and nihil speciosius est in Victoria, quam Virtute Vincere, says
Erasm.) and nothing is like this, viz. to overcome EVIL WITH GOOD (as the
Apostle says) vice with virtue, Romans 12. 21.
and influences from the Coelum Christallinum of most orient worth and dignity.
When Demochares (who was Demosthenes's Nephew) heard a company of people
traducing the Worthies of those days, (...), says he, What do ye prate for! ye
malignants! for ye exceed the worst that ye can say of them. And the truth is,
should we ask these cruel Calumniators, what they mean by this malediction of
ALL, or of the BEST; every man of them must answer for his Malevolence with
Zoilus (that was called the (...), for his barking Rhetoric!) Their Designs,
to cast a mist before our eyes, and then to arise with Arms. Suttons sermon.
Assize in 40. p. 14.
(...)* (I speak as evil as I can) because I cannot do the mischief that I
would; and this is so apparent, as is not with reason to be denied, but that
like Cadmus (whom Dr. Sutton tells us of) they have sowed the teeth of the
Serpent, ut ex iis homines Armati prodierent, that out of them might arise
ARMED MEN, of the same breed to execute their design; which doubtless is much
like to that upon poor CICERO, if they could effect it, (put on by M. Antony
and others) after all his singular services for the Commonwealth, An example
for our States, in Parliament and Council.
to have him so cast out of esteem as none might plead for him; (who pleaded
for them and the Public unto his death.) Cum ejus salutem nemo defendisset,
qui per tot Annos, and Publicam Civitatis, and Privatam Civium defenderat; and
when they had so done, it is a rueful Tragedy to tell how he was murdered; who
for the COMMON GOOD was so free to give up his life, that he put his Head out
of the Litter for his Assassinates to cut it off; which Popilius Lenas did, To
provide against false reports.
with a most ungrateful cruelty, seeing CICERO but a little before had saved
him from the Gallows. I wish the Parliament might in time perpend it, lest such
Acts of Mercy, should prove Acts of Cruelty to themselves and the Public. But,
Virtus Virtutis eget fultura: non satis est jecisse fundamenta, Parietes
extulisse, mediana Cubicula Separasse Sine Tecto, etc. (says STRADA lib. 3.
prelect. 3. plantin. 2. Virtue must be supported by Virtue in the Commonwealth:
and it is not enough to lay the fonndation, build the walls, divide the
chambers, but to set up a covering and shelter for their principal Rafters from
the injury of the Weather too.

But Mr. B. who is culpable for all this, Mr. B. by giving his example to
scurrilous and scandalous pens, is the more guilty. He haps to pitch upon Sir
H. Vane, to pour out his venom upon.
and conscious of the interest as well as of the principal, is pleased to pitch
upon Sir Henry Vane with the greatest Virulency (not without his harsh
reflections upon all the rest; and as many as sat at the trial of the late
King, whereof Sir H. V. was none) a man of such eminency for piety and
prudence, honor, abilities, self-denials and sufferings in the service of
Christ and of his DEAR Country, as is not so meet to mention whiles he lives;
(lest it come to his ears, and prove a snare;) and lest I fall under the
suspicion of flattering any man, which the Lord knows I dare not ( knowingly)
do; but with Elihu say, as Job 32. 21, 22. Let me not NOW accept any man's
person, (face, or countenance, Al^na essa pene ish!) neither let me (SURNAME,
ve al Adam lo akanah,) or give flattering titles unto ADAM (i. e. man in his
highest excellencies, that (as man) he is capable of) So ENOSH signifies often
man in a more corrupt state; but ADAM, man in a more refined, renewed, and
excellent consideration, Psalm. 56. 1. with 11. and 58. 1, 2. and 49. 2, 12,
etc,) lest if I SURNAME him ( akanah) my Maker (megnat issaeni) should a LITTLE
cut me off. Besides, I am sensible, what Temptations a poor creature is
proclive unto, when he comes to be tickled with praises that are indeed due to
the testimony, wisdom, grace, or any other excellency of God in such Earthen
Vessels, which makes me very wary of what I might say, and beseech God I may go
no further then to what I must say, or is of necessity for the truth. Seeing,
as the Apostle says, Not he whom (man commends, 2 Cor. 10. 18.
or) that commends himself, is approved, but whom the Lord commends. And
the Lord justifies, who shall condemn? Isai. 50. 8, 9. Romans 8. 33, 34. Yet I
think, there be but few that are so malicious as to hate this Gentleman for his
own sake, A vindication of Sir Hen Vane, from his own worth and public service.
but many indeed that are envious at him for our sakes and the Commonwealths.
In whose Memory and Posterity I nothing doubt, but that his indefatigable
endeavors and deserts from the Public, will outlive the most irrefragable
anger of all his enemies, (or rather ours.) Justum and Tenacem propositi, Non
civium ardor prava jubentium, Non vultus instantis Tyranni Mente quatit solida:
neque Auster, Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae, Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus,
si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae; was the song of the
Heathen, Hor. l. 3. od. 3.
which I mention to our shame (and not with much delight in reading Heathen
Authors) that we should be so ungrateful as not to commemorate (in our minds at
least) the worth of such men as neither Turns nor Times, The very Heathens wont
highly to commemorate such.
Tyrants nor Tempests, Troubles nor Thunderbolts (that have rent the heavens,
cracked the clouds, and split the very foundations) could ever remove, or
slacken in their constancy to the cause and Commonwealth. Now that Mr. B. who
(of any) has so little knowledge of this so honorable a person, Reasons to
think Mr. B. was set on by some enemies to the Commonwealth. His Key for Cath.
like to let more into Hell then into Heaven.
must be the man to abuse him (or us rather) with such black reports of him to
the world; and at such a TIME too (wherein he was and is, wholly taken up with
that which he prefers above his daily food, or I think his life, viz. the
service of the PUBLIC,) is an Argument sufficient that he went to the
Philistimes to make and to whet his TOOLS, because he could find no SMITHS in
Israel, that could make such a KEY; or a Key with such wretched Wards in it, as
I fear (if the Lord prevent not) will let more into Hell, then into Heaven or
happiness. And whether some that were engaged for the King, or against the
Cause, Commonwealth and this Parliament, did not prompt him to it? or were the
bellows of his forge to blow up the sparks of his discontent into such open
flames and luculent firebrands of malignity; is to me a Question almost out of
Question; if I look but into his Preface, and see in the Margin of it, Who were
blowing whiles M. B. was forging of this KEY is apparent; and the Reason of his
timing of it so.
how highly he extols the E. of Lauderdale as his helper in it. Yea, whether it
were not designed and TIMED on purpose to perplex this person of honor, as
well as others in Parliament? or to give them a Diversion from the PUBLIC,
into a private vindication of themselves, and of their unblemished names? (had
they thought it worthy;) and thereby to have left the House? (whiles the
Adversaries should have carried all therein, (more without opposition) for the
interest of a single Person, and against the Commonwealth?) or otherwise, that
these ulcerous defamations might pass uncontrouled; spread further and further
amongst the credulous vulgar; upon their silence, and want of leisure to rescue
their reputations from such horrid impeachment. But these Gentlemen perferring
their Christian names above their Sir-names, have left their innocence to the
omniscience of God, and the testimony of it to the Multiscience of us who know
them; without the least vacillation of their restored luster; whose wonderful
constancy, is a most worthy Antidote to the poison of the Pens and Parts of
their enemies.

I am not for my own Part of any party, The Author of this no otherwise
concerned, then for the truth, and the Public.
sect, nor faction; nor am I of that number Mr. B. charges or covers with his
blackest clouds of contumely; Neither have I any man's person in admiration; nor
am I put on by any but the Lord (and I hope his own Spirit) for love of the
truth, and of the PUBLIC, (lest that should suffer by it,) to ward off such
Cowards blows, as come behind them so unworthily, and bite them so unwarily;
whiles they are swallowed up in the insuperable necessities, We must keep on
our Worthies at the Public, and keep off others that would disturb or divert
them, if we be of the Lifeguard.
and inseparable affairs of the Public Weal; so as that (without palpable
injury thereunto) they have neither leisure to mind nor make answer (if they
would,) without it be with the blessed Patience of Christ, who opened not his
mouth, Isai. 53. 7. (in Sept. (...), he So opens not his mouth.) Who when he
was reviled, he reviled not again, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. and with the commendable Patience of Pericles, that
could not be provoked by an Enemy; but when one went railing upon him to his
very door in the night, he bid his man to light him home with his own TORCH:
and of another that said, O! that these men could rule their tongues, as well
as we our ears! their pens, as we our spirits! Now that it may appear to Mr. B.
that he had need to be forgiven his traducing of them, and his seducing of
others, as well as be redeemed from the great evils and temptations of BOTH;
His own writings may convince him of the wrongs done to Sir H. Vane.
I hope it will not be imputed presumption or unkindness, if I present him (for
the present) with a little taste (from his own words) of the notorious wrong
that he has done to that wise and worthy Knight, with others. And 1. from his
own description of a Protestant (though I think it a very Lame and defective
one, 1. From his own description of a Protestant.
and not plena and pari ratione) says he, p. 130. It is a title that accrewed
to our Religion from the PROTESTING AGAINST the Romish Innovations and
corruptions. If those that have protested against the Romish Innovations and
corruptions be Protestants, Sir H. V. a better Protestant then himself.
then these who in his vain eye (and foolish fancy of Boys-play) are called
Vani, are Protestants, having protested as far as any Protestants, (that Mr. B.
accounts Orthodox) have done; Yea, further then ever Mr. Baxter himself did
against Romish innovations (which makes him so offended,) and therefore to use
his own words in p. 393. Scarce a man that crosses or displeases (i. e.
dissenteth from and disobeyeth) the uncharitable Clergy, but he is stigmatized
for an Heretic, and charged with almost as much wickedness, as their mouths
are wide enough to utter, and the ears of other men to hear. These out of his
own Book, whereby no man can absolve him of self-condemnation in the
justification of this honorable person by his own pen.

2. From his Description of a Papist in p. 392. 2. From his own Description of
a Papist.
As soon as ever any man has received this opinion of the necessity of an
universal Visible Head of the whole Church; he is either a Papist, S. H. V.
less a Papist then himself.
or of an opinion equivalent: so a little after, This Error about the
necessity of an universal, visible head, is the very thing that turns most to
Popery.

Now those that he calls SEEKERS, and in a Satirical Vane, VANISTS,
Anabaptists, Sectaries, etc. hold no universal visible head (nor any other over
the Church but Jesus Christ,) And therefore are not within the compass of his
description of a Papist; Nay, are further off (with his leave) then himself,
according to his own Characters of them in his Treatise.

3. From his own Grounds of Communion, 3 M. B. goes against his own grounds of
Communion.
he is an (...), or condemned of himself, for his uncharitable censoriousness
upon Sir Hen. Vane, and those he calls Sectaries, etc. p. 440, 441. Where peace
and holiness may be carried on together, there unity and peace must be sought
as a means to holiness (these are his own,) but amongst them that he calls
Sectaries, peace and holiness may be carried on together, so p. 441. Hence it
is (says he) that wicked livers do turn Papists. But those that I know, who
lie under his merciless Lash, are not wicked Livers, but very excellent
examples (many of them) of Peace and Holiness; Sir H. V. Family for piety and
virtue so exemplary that it may be esteemed a Church, though not a Parish.
and particularly for Sir H. V. his virtuous Lady and godly Family; of any that
I know in the World of that quality (though I hear the like of others, as of my
Lord Fleetwoods, etc.) they may be called in themselves, (as once was the
Family of George Prince of Anhalt) an Ecclesia, Curia, and Academia; a Church,
a Court, and an University of the highest, best and most Liberal Sciences that
appertain to men or to Christians. Mr. B. in p. 442. says further 442. It is
but a carnal stir that Papists and some Reconcilers make, to have unity so
general, as shall take in the most impious Rabble; therefore in some cases we
are called to separate. And yet because of a separation from those that are so
impious, or are such reconcilers; must the poor sectary be branded by himself
and his followers for Masked Papists.

4. From his own detection of Masked Papists, 4. From his own detection of
Masked Papists, Sir Hen. Vane none of them.
p. 343. he may be convinced of the horrid liberty that he has taken to
traduce; his own words are, The Juggling Papists may be known by this, that they
are always LOOSENING people from Religion: and LEADING them into a dislike of
what they have been taught. But Sir H. Vane is far from being within this
Character: I have heard him often open and apply the precious Scriptures, to my
great Comfort; and to the best of my judgment (who have been 14. or 15. years
in the Public, but sweet labor of the Gospel, with sweat and swinck, day and
night, with prayers, tears, watching thereunto) and I do profess I never could
perceive his Doctrine for LOOSENING, Sir H. V. Doctrine for strengthening and
fastening, the people of God, and wherein.
but ever for FASTENING the people of God in pure RELIGION and undefiled; (and
yet I have heard with prejudice enough too, upon reports of others, till I was
convinced of my error,) his constant scope is to the power and principles of
godliness; to fix us in the everlasting holiness under the benefit of the
Mediatory Covenant, and in the benefits of the Covenant of Grace, electing and
Eternal Love; LEADING them (or rather, the Lord by his Spirit) into the most
holy and optable relish of what they have been taught of that nature.
Expressing himself so clearly, soundly and discriminatively in the principles
of the New Creature (or Regeneration) from the common mistakes of men, that
rest in a mere Reformation, outward Purification, or a first-Adam-renovation;
and so showing the difference between a Christian per saltum and per altum, as
profitably as ever I heard: Also upon the points of justification and
Perseverance (and that it is the first Adam and first Covenant-spirit which is
the subject of falling away:) and upon Sanctification, the life of Christ, the
Mediatorship of Christ, and all his Offices; also upon the excellency,
certainty, and felicity of COMMUNION with God, and acquaintance by Jesus
Christ, etc. and are these loosening Doctrines? I do verily believe had Mr. B.
but heard him as I and others have done (in Carisbrook C. and elsewhere) he
would have said incomparably more for him, not only then I do, but then he
either does or can say against him; yea, have blessed the Lord for him more
abundantly, and have wept at this incogitancy (such charity I have for him)
with a Laconian Countryman, saying, (...), I am not the cause, but my nature;
or as the APOSTLE, It is no longer I, but sin that dwells in me! (which
breaks out thus at lips, and in my lines, with spots like leprosy, unclean,
unclean,) and in the mean time, we need no more then his own Argument, in p.
119. They that are sanctified, justified, have the love of God in them, are
members of the TRVE CHVRCH.

5. Mr. B. himself proves them in the true Religion (in opposition to the
Papists) thus, 5. From his description of the true Religion, Sir H. V. in it.
p. 118. That Religion which has all the essentials of Christianity, is the
true Religion. Now let him name any one essential of Christianity (if he can)
that Sir H. V. or those that he calls Sectaries, Vanists, etc. do not hold; and
lay aside (for shame) those Boyish fancies and youthful tricks to play with
men's Names and Reputations so: and as if he were but at Hat-farthing, he has
found out a company of Hiders too (for so he calls them) to play with; Mr. B.
plays like a Boy at Hat-farthing, with men's names and Reputations.
and though the Question be between him and them, who Hide first? yet he calls
for the Magistrate to help him to play his GAME, over the Consciences of his
brethren; and to thrip up a CROSS or a PILE upon them, (as upon the HIDERS,)
or he will wrangle for it, he is resolved; and so tells us beforehand.

6. From his very Description of the Seekers as to their work, 6. From his
Description of the Seekers, etc.
says he, p. 331. The Papists work by the Seekers, is to take us from all, or
from our former Religion. But those Gentlemen so unjustly accused, Sir H. Vane
none of them that he describes.
and calumniated by Mr. B. are not taken off from all Religion, he knows. Do
they not preach, pray, expound, meet, confer together, and wait upon the Lord,
in public, in private, and often in a week, in the use of his holy Ordinances?
and does Mr. B. more? Besides, he goes beyond all bounds of Logic or
reasoning, both in his Definitions, This part of the KEY came out of the
Papists fire, and is forged for their interest.
Propositions and Descriptions of things or Persons; as particularly in this,
where there is not an adaption (reciprocal) of the Description to the
described; and to make this a mark either of Seeker, or of Papist, viz. the
taking us off of our former Religion, is to lay the charge rather upon them
that took us and our fathers off from Popery (which was the former Religion) or
us off from Episcopacy, which was our former Discipline; then upon the Seekers:
And so indeed is he pleading for the Papists, not against them.

7. From his own Conc^ssion, 7. From his own concession, Sir Hen. Vane further
off then himself from Popery.
p. 293. That true PROTESTANTS are no more a Sect then the Patients in an
Hospital, who are almost healed; or then the higher form of Scholars in a
School; but still acknowledge them of the lowest form, even them that learn
the A. B. C. in the same School. If these be true Protestants, and not Papists;
then is Sir H. V. (and so those worthy Gent.) farther off from that wicked
impeachment then any I know of; Of the most comprehensiveness in Principles and
Practic^, and his Love to all Saints; of no Sect or Party.
so large, healing, comprehensive and condescending to the least and lowest
forms of believers are his Principles; yea, so remote and declaredly distant
from the keeping up of any one Sect, sort of men, party, or faction whatever,
is his Practice; and in both, so far either from opposing or imposing in things
civil or Religious, that had Mr. B. been not above 89. degrees off of
Logick-longitude, or 98. of Christian-latitude, I should have had some hopes of
finding him out, or of overtaking him, at least before he came to the very
Nadir and Antipodes of Truth it is self: Ah Miser! Quanta laboras in Charybdi!
but now I have lost him in the dark World, and yet would send after him one
Scripture to give him Light, if the Lord please! Eccles. 7. 16. Be not
righteous OVERMUCH, neither make thy self OVER-WISE: for why should thou
destroy thy self! lammah tishshomem, why will thou make thy self desolate?
SEPT. (...)* or bring a stroke upon thy self even to astonishment; to go on so
(by an over-confidence) in ways of sin and slandring.

But, by this little Pen-tilt or justing, may the Spectators see, how tottering
and unsure Mr. B. sits the saddle in other things, if in this he be so easily
cast out of it! and more by his own unweildy Weapons then by others; the very
Splinters of his own LANCE splitting and flying in his own face, wound him more
deeply, and the Crena of his own discourse and writings (truly collated
together) do pierce him more to the quick then I could have found in my heart
he should have been put to the pain or smart of; which he is sure to feel at
last; and the longer they lie in the flesh rankling (and he unsensible) the
WORSE, the worse! For my own part, I had rather lick the Sores then enlarge
them, or make him new ones, by any new Answers or engagements! only I wish,
with my heart, he may not neglect these of his own giving, which he intended
for others; which may be cured, but with a SKAR. It is a saying, That the blind
eats many a fly; and had not Mr. B. been as blind as a Beetle, with such
bleating prejudices and dusty passions, he would have seen before he had
swallowed so many unsound and notorious Soloecisms: which whiles they were
dropping from his pen, might have stricken a conviction, as they do a
contradiction and a confutation of himself by himself, in more (by much) then I
have mentioned; besides the multiplied untruths and absurdities so often
reiterated until almost believed, which are so clearly refuted both now and
formerly; and Sir H. Vane's honor rescued from the devouring jaws of such
insatiable detraction, by a godly A vindication of that prudent and honorable
Knight Sir H. Vane from the Lies and Calumnies of Mr. R Bax.
Minister a little while since; I need to say no more to prove Mr. B. guilty
not only of a Scandalum Magnum, but a Scandalum MAGNATUM; unless it be in this,
that he winds the Horn of falsehood HIGHER yet; and would insinuate (p. 331.
of 's Key) Sir H. V. brought his Doctrine out of ITALY with him, where he never
was in all his days; and as if he had the greatest hand in that JUSTICE, (...),
( King-killing as he calls it,) who (then) was neither in the Parliament, nor
of that Court. And as if God had witnessed against him in New England, which is
as true as all the rest, it being known (to 1000.) what a witness he has had
from God and men both here and there, even until this hour. Integer Vitae,
Scelerisque Purus, Non eget Mauri jaculis, neque Arcu, Nec Venenatis gravida
Sagittis, fusce, pharetra: Genesis 49. 23, 24.
The ARCHERS have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him; But yet
his BOW abode in strength, and the Arms of his Hands were made strong by the
HANDS of the mighty God of Jacob. Wherefore the Lord convince and humble Mr. B.
that the Gospel may not suffer such dishonor! of whom I have had a high
esteem, so long as he was comprehensive in his spirit, and yet shall have, so
far as he is apprehensive in the TRUTH (with a latitude of love and charity to
his Brethren) but I dare not follow him into the other world, or a world of
lies, ugly and misshapen monsters; such as I should think might make him tremble
to lie down with, as with Dragons, Satyrs, and with Schreech-owls! Nor can I
think that he has been without some secret Psithurisms in his mind for this
TEMERITY; the Concomitant of his HAVE (as he calls it in's Lr. to Dr. Heylin
for a far less matter, or to use the Phy-sick-phrase) his unnatural heat, and
wrathful spirit, which works not the righteousness of God. I had rather his
KEY would have let us in, to the God of truth, or truth of God, then to the
father of lies; lest such as fall in with it should be left to the PARABLE and
Doom of POPE Sixtus Quintus (that Adams on Pet. tells us of, Whether M. B's or
Mr. Popes Keys can do the Catholics most good?
p. 1114.) who when he died, knocked long for Admission into heaven, (like them
in Mat. 7. 21, and 25. Saying, Lord, Lord, open to us!) but was remitted to
fetch his own KEYS first, which would do him no good when they came, for the
WARDS were altered; and so I doubt Mr. B's KEY will no more unlock the gate of
heaven for his Catholics at the last day, then the Popes KEY will for his
Catholics, or for himself at this day. But thus we conclude the second
Consideration, viz. his insinuation to the Army, that his stirring them up to a
repentance, etc. would be accounted a second Gangrene, 3. Mr. B. in his milder,
and M. P. in his wilder Doses aim at one thing, i. e. the KING.
or a Scandalum MAGNATUM. 3. His Lenitives to the Army, and Mr. P's Corrosives,
are applied all to one END, viz. to repent of Secluding the Members of the
House of Commons, and to restore them and a single Person in all haste again!
saying, We have sworn and sworn, and sworn again! for King, Lords and Commons,
etc. which Mr. P. urges, as though this Parliament had not the Authority of a
Parliament without them; saying, in p. 39. of 's Narr. Nor can the Bedlam,
Turkish, Brutish, unreasonable Argument of the longest Sword, or Army-logick;
nor Petitions, Addresses of crack-brain'd Sectaries and Vulgar Rabble of
illiterate People make them so. Neither did they; for they are SO without them.
But for all this, seeing these Corroding, biting ingredients and Diuretics
will not do it! It must be Physic of a more strange operation (in their
judgment) and more violent means, that must be used to revive the filthy
CORPSE; if their CLISTER-Pipe cannot effect it, to try it by the SWORD-Pipe.
Seeing they are not upon the subject of health and sickness, but of life and
death; Not to recover a dying Patient, but a long-since dead Carcass (which by
this time stinketh and is corrupt) or had they been Members of this
Commonwealth-Parliament (which they never were) yet seeing ( ex concessis) they
are all for Kingly Government, and against the Free State, Why the Secluded
Members are not capable either of Conjunction, or of Rejunction.
they could never have been rejoined (by any rules that I can find) (...),
according to the FIRST PRINCIPLE; for that they are neither found in the
Efficient, nor yet in the Material, Formal, nor Final Causes of such a
Conjunction, either as to Coition, or Coalition; and so are not capable of a
Rejunction (as Mr. P. and B. press it) till we see a REJUNCTION in them also;
(if the Armies Repentance reach to that.) And this I say, Neither after the
first intention of it (as we use to say) which is called (...), By no Rule;
neither after the first intention, nor the second.
and must be the same in nature and in substance with the rest, ( viz.
Commonwealths-men All, and not Kinglings any, unless for Christ) which they are
not; not yet after the second intention called (...), expressed both in the
colligation and obligation of such (natural-united and well-disposed) Members
(every one in his proper joint and place fitted and fixed for the service of
the WHOLE Vide a Book of my penning and principles, upon this subject, called A
Reviving WORD from the quick and the dead, etc.
;) which those Secluded Members would never take, or if they had, could never
hold, viz. to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, etc. as it is now
established, without a King, Single Person, or House of Peers. So that all they
propose are real impossibilities both to Reason, Art and Nature; nor are they
able to offer any MEDIVM HOMOGENEVM, or suitable expedient to effect it, i. e.
in the due consistency with the State of the cause, being and well-being of the
Commonwealth. Wherefore if the Lt. G. Fleetwood and the Army were pleased, they
might Anwer Mr. B. as once the Emperor Adrian did an old Courtier who came
unto him for some preferment then void; but the Emperor denied it him: within
some few days after, the Gent. with great Art trimmed himself, put on a smooth
face (as it is now in fashion) with a very youthful habit, and so applied to
the Emperor anew. But Sir, (says the Emperor) not so, not so; I dare not, I
must not be so unjust! to give that to the SON, that I denied to the FATHER,
but 3. or 4. days since! and so we hope that neither the present Lenity, future
Acrimony, nor deceitful Ideo-pathy or Sympathy of Mr. B's Physic (no more then
Mr. P's Antopathy or Antipathy) can work upon the Army to be so unjust, as to
give that to those men that are the same (though now new-trimmed, and with the
greatest Art they can too, for Kingship,) which they denied them before; fought
against (and resisted in the Scottish-War more especially) when these men were
more GRAVE in their fatherhoods, (and much more reverend) a few years since. So
I leave Mr. P's first Demonstration of the Republicans CAUSE (as he calls it)
in his two last Anatomy Lectures. 2. Mr. P's Groundless asserting this
Commonwealth to be the offspring of Jesuits.
His second is as groundless as the first; wherein from p. 40. to 69. of Narr.
he gives his first Lecture upon the living, which only concerns the dead
Anatomy; As if the JESUITS formative faculty (and designs which they had afoot
in the days of the King and Kingdom) had laid the Prolifick Project of this
Government; and so throughout his Anatomy of the Republicans Cause, from p. 4.
he would make us believe (if we could be so besotted) that the Commonwealth is
a BASTARD of the Jesuits begetting; Little reason to take it for a child of
Campanella, Watson, Parsons, or the Jesuits.
(Mr. B. seconds him we need not question) telling us stories of Campanella,
Parsons, WATSON, etc. and of their designs against King James, and the Nation
then; about An. 1604. or 1605. So that the child lay longer in the Womb, then
that which ^o. Albos^us tells us of, that lay in the mothers Womb 28. years,
and then too it was turned into STONE. Now with how little Weight of Reason or
Judgment this is charged, I shall refer to the Reader, that has any skill in
the (...) of Anatomy to judge upon their own Histories and grounds. 1.
Campanella's Commonwealth was plotted for the interest of the King of Spain,
and so was not our's.
In Campanella. 1. For CAMPANELLA the Italian Friar (in his Monarch. Hisp.) his
Project was to promote an interest for the King of Spain against Q. Elizabeth
and K. James; and all his Politics were calculated and suited to the state of
the Nation at that time, and in those days (far different from what it was or
is in ours, which was not made for the interest of Spain, but our own.) 2. Upon
far different Grounds too, viz. 2. As on different interests, so on different
grounds.
to make such discord amongst the English as might admit them no leisure to
disturb the Spanish; to persuade the Parliament of the Kingdom (in Q.
Elizabeth days) to cast her off, and so fall into the form of a Commonwealth;
by this means to sow the seeds of an inexplicable and in expiable WAR, between
England and Scotland; that if England should be turned into the form of a
Commonwealth, the Kingdom of SCOTLAND might keep up continual Wars with the
Commonwealth of England (for it was never laid, They never laid it both for
England and Scotland, but to keep up a deadly feud between them.
for BOTH to be a Commonwealth) and so to manage all affairs so slowly, as not
to hurt the Spaniard, if not to give him advantage; and if a Commonwealth could
not be effected, then to make it an Elective Kingdom, etc. Now are these the
grounds, or the effects of our Free State? let any judge, seeing the Friars
plot was laid, so as to keep up Scotland a Kingdom, and distinct from England,
as well as England a Commonwealth; or else it answered not the Popish design,
neither to incapacitate England from disturbing the Spaniard, or defending our
selves against them: but in this Commonwealth it is no such matter; we are Both
one, and in a far better capacity both for PRESERVATION and INCREASE to deal
with an Enemy, 3. Upon different Ends.
then under the King. 3. The Friars ENDS were such as did as well correspond
with a Kingdom Elective, or any thing, so that Q. Elizabeth, King James and
that Family were (but routed, or) totally amoved; but our ends in this
Commonwealth are not such as can consist with, or be answered in a Single
Person, or a Kingdom Elective, and therefore cannot be the same which the
Jesuits plotted (if they plotted any) for us. But that is the thing which
these Gent. If they plotted a Commonw. yet not THIS Commonwealth.
must prove, viz. that This, this is The Commonwealth which Campanella plotted;
and not to ensnare us with a Homonymy, or so to accuse the Commonwealth as the
woman did Eustatius (the Bishop) for Whoredom with her, (being hired unto it by
the Arrians) and thereby had him banished, until she was tormented with a
judgment; and then confessed it was another Eustatius, 4. the Papist's were
abortive in their plotts.
and not THIS. 4. Though Campanella and the Papists would have been glad at
their hearts at any Alteration either for Commonwealth or Kingdom Elective, yet
their's proved an Abortment, a mere (...), and came to nothing; or had any of
their's by a Superfaetation, or a new procreation came to maturity amongst us,
5. They never intended it to abide so.
it must have been upon Grounds and Ends as far different from our's, as West
from East, or North from South. But, Lastly, Campanella and the Papists never
intended a Commonwealth as the ULTIMATE, but upon a design, and to turn it back
to a Single Person: his own words are, Tandem in Democratiam, and fine Rursus
in Statum Regium revolvuntur. So that THEY carry on the Jesuits Plot, that
would Revert us again to a Single Person.

2. So for PARSONS The Jesuit, 2. Parson's his Commonw. not THIS.
he pretended a Revelation from God: But this Commonwealth was laid upon
Reason, Righteousness, and not on Revelation: so Parsons proposes his
Commonwealth to be generated, by infusing this Principle into Soldiers and
People, that every Pecope or Multitude get the title and style of a Public
State or Helvetian Commonwealth. But it is not so laid in these Nations, that
every Company (or County either) or any indeed, but ( altogether) united, that
are the Commonwealth in England; so that this Commonwealth could not be Parsons
his; Nor is it Watsons.
nor is it of that kind. Nor could it be that which Watson would have had, for
he shows plainly that HIS must be effected by a Conjunction of Puritans,
Anabaptists, and Jesuits together, in the principles and Theorems, wherein
they agree to carry it on: and then that the Jesuits having the (optima and
Acutissima Ingenia) most acute capacities, and greatest interest in Princes and
Noble persons, will keep uppermost. But it is not so in this Commonwealth, They
drove on an Anarchy or Confusion, not a Commonweal.
nor ever was there such a Conjunction in this Nation, unless invisible and
unknown: besides, they set down Rules for every man to rise up, and graspe a
power into his own hands in a Mutinous manner (as at Munster in Germany) and to
be under no Government or Rule; rather stirring them up to a wicked Anarchy,
then to a godly Commonwealth; and that was indeed the very thing they aimed at.
Reasons why our's cannot be their's.
So that neither Parsons, Watson, nor the Jesuits can be the father of our
Commonwealth, for these reasons.

1. For that, 1. It could never have lain so long hid, and not have stirred or
appeared until now.
that VERY design that was contrived, timed, and in travel to be brought forth
(which was not so much for a Commonweal, as for any thing that might do
mischief) in An. 1604. 1605. (or before in An. 1590.) in Q. Elizabeth or King
James's days (through a Spanish Malignity to those persons) sure could not have
been imprisoned (ever since the abortion of the Gun-powder-plot) in the Womb;
and have been nourished, by the Vmbilical Veins of Popery, without the least
appearance of life or quickening in it until now. Or if it had been so, and had
lain there so long, or by such a monstrous superfaetation as was never heard
of, 2 It could never have suited with these times.
yet sure it could never suit or Quadratre with these times, as it did with
those* 1. Because in those days, were there many eminent Papists and English
Confederates both in Court and Country to Gratify by it, 1. Because that was
to gratify Papists in the Land, this is not.
and to humor; such as closed in with those forain Projects; yea, many
Arminians, Noble men, and Bishops of Popish-principles, that sucked in seminal
spumous spirits of mischief both to Church and State; and through an eager
attraction took a conception here of that design which was laid there: but of
late days such have been discountenanced, displaced, and in no capacity to
bring forth such a design, if they had conceived it in this Nation.

2. Because in those days, 2. Because in those days there was that Attraction,
and so Retention of Popish seed, as is not in these. And the Popish womb is
apparently a miscarrying womb in England.
as there was an Attraction, there was a Retention too of the Popish Seed,
Principles, opinions and Jesuitical projects, which they received more heartily
and with more mutual embracements, then of late days in this Nation. And yet,
if in those days they no sooner conceived, but miscarried (witness 88. and the
Gun-powder-plot) surely in these days the Lord has more apparently given them
the miscarrying womb and dry breasts, as he said of Ephraim, Hos. 9. 16. Though
they do bring forth, yet will I SLAY even the beloved fruit of their womb: and
as this we have seen with our eyes all along; so in the nature and course of
REASON, Hippocrates tells us ( de Nature. Pueri. 1. Sect. 44. Aphor.) That those
Wombs which are too much weakened and extenuated do abort the sooner, as at two
months, or before. Now the Popish womb, was in no age weaker then in this, nor
in any Nation then in this; 2. Their Commonwealth not from the same Principles
of Generation 1. For Liberty and Rights both as men and as Christians.
and therefore the Principle (a Quo) of this Commonwealth could not be from
them. 2. Nor can this Commonwealth be THE Commonwealth, that Parsons, Watson,
or the Jesuits laid so long ago; or their spurious issue (as Mr. P. is pleased
to call it) from the very principles of the Procreation and Rise of our
Commonwealth: and to name but some now. 1. Our Rights, and Liberties, both as
Christians and as men (or in matters of Conscience and in civil things)
declared and contended for (as is proved at large in Mr. P's Cause stated and
stunted) conquered and maintained; of a Legitimate and full-grown conception,
founded in the Laws, Word and Spirit of God, of Nature, and of the Reason and
Wisdom in this Nation; that are of longer standing then any Government, by
King, Lords and Commons,) which by their own innate heat (and not by Jesuits
or any others) gave the first formative faculty to this Commonwealth; which is,
or ought to be diffused throughout all the matter of it: This is asserted in
the Act of Parliament, March 17. 1648. Whereas by the Abolition of the Kingly
Office, a most happy way is made for this Nation (if God see it good) to return
to it is just and Ancient Right of being Governed: reducere omnia ad prima
Principia. So in the Declaration of this Parliament, May 7. 1659. Now Parson's,
or the Popish Commonwealths come not up to, or from such a principle of
Liberty; Jesuits Commonw. against Toleration, and narrow in Civil Liberty.
as Adam CONTZEN, that Jesuit tells us in his directions (which Mr. B. quotes,
cap. 17. They would permit no other Religion, but call for a speedy punishing
of erroneous; and not to take up JVLIANS plot, i. e. to destroy Religion by a
liberty for all Sects, etc. the Jesuits Commonwealth will not admit of a
Toleration; calls it a Julian design to destroy Religion: neither would Mr.
P's: so Chap. 18. in 's 4. Direct. it is as narrow, and imposing upon the Civil
Liberty. 2. They never struck at the Office of Kingship; but THIS struck at
that, and not at the Person so.
But, 2. the Jesuits Project and principle for a Commonwealth (or a Kingdom
Elective) is not nor ever was against Kingship, or the OFFICE of it; but
against Persons, Families, Protestants, etc. But the Generative principle of
this Commonwealth was against the very OFFICE of a KING; as burthensom,
unnecessary and dangerous (and not so against his person or family.) Therefore
it cannot be the Jesuits Commonwealth.

3. From the Causes of it; 3. They were not in the first Causes of this
Commonwealth, if they were of the confusion and Wars that went before it, which
I believe not.
the efficient causes of the Commonwealth are of three kinds; either Principal,
Assistant, and Co-adjutant; or else Causa sine qua non, that cause without
which it could not be. But the Jesuits could not be or give the principal
cause of it, as I have proved, for then they should have had some principal
effects, and some principal benefits of it by a necessary consequence; nor were
they the Assistant cause, for then there should have been a Permixtion and
Conjunction of principles directly or indirectly, (but that I have proved to
the contrary:) Nor are they the cause ( sine qua non) without which we could
not or cannot be a Commonwealth; and this (I presume) is undeniable by all,
that we may be a Commonwealth without them. Therefore they were not the chief
prolifical cause, nor had they the chief projecting Hand or Head in the
procreation of this Commonwealth.

4. Had this Commonwealth been the BIRTH or fruit of Popish Seminaries, 4. This
Commonwealth has not a Conformation of Parts with, or indeed any Resemblance
of such Parents.
we should have seen it not only in some conformation of Parts, i. e.
Homogenean with Popery long ere this; but in some semblance or similitude like
unto the Parents of it; either in Specie or Figura, in kind or in feature,
since it is so natural for Parents to beget children like to themselves, as it
is said of Adam, Genesis 5. 3, He begat a son in his own LIKENESS, and after his
own IMAGE: But the parts of this our Commonwealth have little conformity to, or
similitude with Popery or Jesuitism, Parsons, Watson, or Campanella; and
therefore sure could not be of their begetting.

5. I cannot believe that those Jesuits, 5. This Commonwealth is not of a
Temper, motion, nature or nutriment like to Papists Commonw.
or any other, had the SPERMATICK power of producing this Commonweal, from the
Temper, Motion, and Nutrition of it. Had it been theirs, it would have been of
a more immoderate, bloody, cruel Temper, burning with an unnatural Jesuitick
heat. Hippocrates (de diaeta) says, That the soul steals into one that is
begotten, as a thing that consists in a mixture of FIRE and WATER. Had the
Popish or Jesuits soul stole into this Commonwealth to animate it, or to make
it Luculent with their flames, it would have been more violent, Hectic and hot
with their fiery spirit of Persecution; and have received all or much of it is
Alimentary moisture and nutrition from their ( holy, or) unholy water. But the
true Genius and spirit of this Commonwealth inclines more to a Theocratick
Liberty both to us as CHRISTIANS and as MEN; and the TEMPER of it is more
EQUAL, and ought to be proportioned (of all the different Elements in Harmony)
orderly mingled and balanced to a Right Use of functions. So it is NOURISHMENT
(even in the Womb of it) was from the choicest and best blood in the whole
Nation, (that adhered most constantly to the Cause) (...), and yet is
maintained by the Lives, Blood, Liberties, and Abilities of the BEST (and the
furthest off from Papists or Jesuits) in all these Nations: The Weak Grounds
Mr. P. goes upon for evidence.
Therefore it cannot be the same which Parsons, Watson, or those that plotted
in K. J's days: Nor are the Grounds considerable Mr. P. and B. produce to
evidence it by: As first, the Speeches of O. Cromwell to the Clergy, 1653. and
to his Assembly at Westminster, 1. From the advantage which the Jesuits took
by the late Stateapostacy.
Sept. 4. 1654. That he knew Emissaries of Jesuits never came over in such
swarms, as since the late Wars, and his being Protector, reflects not upon the
Commonwealth, but upon that Apostasy, which bred an Indulgence to them,
Familiarity and Correspondence with them, (as Sir Ken. Digby, Mazarine, etc.)
who rather gave their instructions against the Commonwealth, 2. From Owen To
Oneal's and the K. of Spain's early Agreement with this Commonw. which was
upon their own Account.
and for the reducing us under a Single Person or King again; so little
friendship had they to THIS Commonwealth. So secondly, that Owen To Oneal in
Ireland and the King of Spain Capitulated for terms of Peace with this
Commonwealth; was not from any good will they had to IT, but to themselves and
their own security; and upon mere Politic grounds of State, after the Law and
wisdom of Nature, and of Nations, to seek their own safety, and not any other
ways as I know of. 3. Much less are they discharged of Allegiance or
obligations to the King, which were naturally dissolved with his death and
Government, 3. From discharge of Allegiance to a Single Person, and of the
Engagement.
or the Engagement of the Commonwealth, (To be true and faithful to it) without
a King or house of Lords) any rational evidence of it as laid by Papists or
Jesuits, 4. From our Wars in Scoland, in Defense of the Commonwealth.
but the quite contrary. So 4. Nor the Wars with Scotland to keep up the
Commonwealth, and defend it from that cruel Confederacy of Rezin and Remaliah;
who said, Let us go up against Judah! and vex it! let us make a breach therein,
and set up a King in the Midst of them, even the Son of Tabeal; after THAT
Government had been dissolved too (Root and Branch) amongst us. So that it was
not as Mr. P. says p. 48. without provocation, and the Greatest too, that
could be; This Commonwealth being but on the defensive part. Their sufferings
no Argum this Commonw. is of the Jesuits Generation, or Regeneration.
Also the sufferings of Mr. Prin, Sr. W. Waller, Sr. John Clotworthy, etc. and
afterward of Mr. Love, and the Ministers, (which I take no pleasure to rake
into, some of them being now at Rest with the LORD, where Calvin and Luther are
agreed, and so shall we most happily) seem to many, to have been brought upon
themselves, by their daily and incessant endeavors to destroy the
Commonwealth, and so to engage us in Blood again; for that end, Agents and
Instruments being employed to buy Arms, raise Moneys, and Armies for the K. of
Scots, against this Commonwealth; so that their sufferings (the Recoile of
their own Motions) cannot appear to me to be of the Jesuits laying or
plotting, M. Prynn's merciless and unjust JURY excepted against, nor is a
Butcher (or Mangler) fit to judge in the Case.
but to arise rather from themselves, through a Principle of self-preservation,
and Public Safety, on our part, which the Laws of Nature and of Nations teach
us. By this the Reader may see what a wretched JURY it is, Mr. Prynne (as he
calls it, p. 50, 51.) has packt or impannelled together, to condemn the
innocent Commonwealth with, how liable both He and They are, to our just and
lawful Exceptions, and how little proof they make, or Evidence they take for an
Impartial Verdict upon the matter, 1. It Is the Jesuits Design to render the
Commonw. odious, by making us believe it THEIR'S; This being the last shift
they* have left them.
as the proper Child of Father Parsons or the Jesuits. And upon the whole, I
am ready (in my Reason) to conclude,

1. That it is one of the most subtle Arts and Plots which the Jesuits have,
to make us believe that to be their SPAWN, which they never had the least
Sperma of; either in the (...), Power or the Being of it; nay, which they most
deadly hate (and is most against their very nature) on purpose to fright us
from it, when they have no better way to beat us off it; and to turn that out
at the BACKDOOR, which they cannot keep out at the FORE-DOOR; This, this is
the very thing that they design in it. And upon this (it is like) they may
give out, that they have fifteen Colleges of Quick-silver'd Seminaries, and
Jesuits in England; and according to the Lord Cromwell his Speech, Septem. 4.
1654. p. 16, 17. That they have a Consistory and Council that RVLES all the
Affairs of England (which it may be they did in his Days, i. e. in the
Apostasy from the Commonwealth) and that in Rome, they said about four years
since, They had above fifteen hundred Jesuits in England. So for that smart
Jesuit, which Mr. P. tells us of, and of his reports, in p. 85, 86, 87. as
Prodigious as Prolix. I profess I fear it might be a Plot on purpose to amuze
us, and to make our Joult-Heads, (as they call us) believe Strange things, to
deter us from our Duty, Not but that a Godly Jealousy be had, and search he
made.
not our Danger thereby: Though I would not say one word to hinder our Godly
Jealousy of them, and as strict a search for them as may be, or as Mr. P. can
or does desire in his p. 88. for a many doubtless are in England under
Disguises and Folding-Doors. But I say, We may run as much into an Extreme (as
I fear Mr. P. and B. do) by believing these CHEATS, and moving upon the PRATE
of such Pragmaticks as the Jesuits are, to condemn the Commonwealth as theirs,
because they (it may hap for their interest) would say it and swear it too with
procacity enough to turn us from it. And this, I think, may be rather the Plot
of the Jesuits and Papists (or at least the Porch of it) who fear us more as a
Commonwealth, then as a Kingdom by far.

2. I am apt to think it a BRAT of Mr. Prynne's own Brain, 2. It appears that
Mr. P. his Brains have a most Spermatick faculty; and Mr. B's Breasts have as
Aphrogalaktick a faculty, through his Mammarie Vein of maintaining K. Lords and
Commons; and of condemning our Free State; which Vein of his, we find in the
Claves (as the Anatomists call them) but Mr. B. his Clavis or KEY for Cath.
to make the Jesuit the Father of this Commonwealth, seeing he has such a
(...), or faculty of Pro-creating, yea, of Creating something out of NOTHING,
as we all know. Being a man of Ability to do it, not only in a fleshly
Solidity, but some say, in an inordinate concupiscence and ambition after FAME,
full of Spumy, frothy, and (errant) excrementitious Spirits! through his own
Natural heats and temper, (as well as praeter-Natural) boiling up in him to
bring out to others Monsters, that are as ready to receive them. Nor is he more
able or strong (in that kind) to bring forth by Hard Labors against the
Commonwealth and Worthies of it, then Mr. B. is to be his Nurse, and to give it
suck, with all the Parts, Zeal and Abilities he has, that it may grow and get
in favor with the world, which truly I think is their sin, and will be their
sorrow: for such a consent there seems to be between Mr. P. and B. herein, as
between the Womb and the Breasts, which are the magazine of excrementitious
moisture, passing through the twinings of his Glandulous and spongious
Affections to Mr. P. and to all his writings. So that let Mr. P. but generate
matter, Mr. B. is as ready to generate meat to keep it alive.

3. It appears plain to us, 3. Mr. P's hard TRAVEL this 10. years in
campanella's design.
that Mr. P. has been in hard travel for above this 10. years, to bring forth
the very Child indeed of Campanella, Parsons, and the Jesuits, i. e. ut in
fine Rursus in Statum Regium revolventur, which are the Friars very words, That
they may at last be revolved, or thrown back again into a Kingly Government.
Now is not this the very design of Mr. P. Mr. B. and the rest of the Cassocks,
Cloaks, and Gowns? that the Commonwealth might be revolved into a Kingdom
again, in the Tri-partite Power, and Tridentine Tyranny of King, Lords and
Commons? so that he and others are laboring as for life to lay a Changeling
(of the Jesuits begetting indeed) in the room of our present Commonwealth, if
they have but strength or opportunity to effect it.

4. Whether the Hysteron Proteron of Mr. P's Magnified and Multiplied Labors,
4. His writings dangerous these times, to kindle, or blow up Popular
discontents.
Throes, Pangs and distended Limbs now anew, with struglings (to bring forth
his former ill-begotten Embryo (i. e.) for the KING) does not Accelerate (with
the help of Mr. B. his Nurse) the most WINGED inclinations of Popular
discontents to an open Insurrection. In p. 42. of his Narr. he most
importunately summons the Ancient Nobility, the secluded members, Gentry,
Commonalty of the Nation; that had never (he says) such effeminate Spirits as
now. All the good women are called to his Labor.
And yet all these good women (or effeminate ones as he calls them) in England
he sends for to his Labor, to help him with such means and active COUNSEL as
may most handily obstetricate and ease him of his burden. With a special care
of the Deuteron Hysteron, or of his Afterbirth as well as of his Former-birth,
lest for want of skill it be left behind (in his Brain) and there lie, and
rot, and Ruin him at the least; which neither that we nor the State do desire,
is obvious in the full (if not foul) Liberty which he takes to write, print, or
any thing for his own ease or good, if it be so. Nor had I disturbed him (if
this do it) but that I found the Knocker at his own Door.

5. It seems the Jesuits BASTARDS were most strangely begotten, 5. It is a
monstrous thing in Nature, to make this a Plot of An. 1605. etc.
(if it be as he says) and by a most incredible superfaetation (against the
course of Nature it self, sense or reason) that One of them should prove an
Abortion, in An. 1605. at the Gun-powder-plot, and yet the other (or a part of
the same Jesuites-plotting) continue in the Womb until now; brought forth in
this new-Republick, (as he calls it) so long after, is a Monstrum horrendum!
inform! ingens! Cui lumen ademptum.

6. The highest Argument that either Mr. P. Mr. B. or any of them have for it,
6. All their Argument lies upon fallacies secundum quid, or malae
consequentiae, or homonymiae.
is by either an (...), as mere a non-sequitur, as to say, the possessed with
devils did confess Christ to be the Son of God, therefore such as confess
Christ to be the Son of God are possessed with Devils, which ( secundum quid)
is true and false. So to say, the Jesuits plotted a Commonwealth for England
An. 1605. therefore a Commonwealth in England was the Jesuits plot, or else by
an (...), and a mere Equivocation in putting the like for the same; if they
could have made that Argument good, with the help of that fallacy. But they
cannot, neither exhibit they a word to prove this is the same Commonwealth
which they designed, (if they did design any) and so indeed say nothing to the
purpose. Nor does Mr. P's sore Labors or Contumacy carry less then this, that
his ingenium is neither sine Dementiae mixtura, nor Mixturae dementia, and that
he is almost Mad. Now a Delirium at the inchoation of a Disease is dangerous;
and so in a Fever if too fierce; but Most, when Melancholy is the Concomitant
or Predominant; which to divert, may do him good (if it be but by changing the
HUMOR;) and therefore I shall take Example from Eliah's Sarcasms, 1 King. 18.
27. Eliah mocked them (jehattel) saying, Cry aloud, for he is a God! taking a
journey, or a sleep (may hap:) And so from Luther, who did often use it; and
Erasmus, of whom it was said, Plus nocuisse jocando quam stomachando; that he
did the Pope more hurt by an ingenious jesting, then by chiding; so that if I
may imitate such Worthy Presidents, I shall presume for Mr. P's sake to subjoyn
a few Serio-jocular Queries: and if he take them in earnest, yet I will offer
them in jest; or if in jest, yet I am as earnest, as the Philosopher was to
convince Plato of his folly (in defining a man, to be a Two-legged creature
without feathers) when he plucked off the feathers of a poor silly Cockrel; and
so sent him to teach them in Plato's School, hopping about (a naked Bird) with
an Ecce! or Behold Plato's MAN! so do I these Sarcasms with an Ecce! or behold
the Secluded Members MAN, how naked he is and obvious! not only to scorn, but
to pity. As it was said of Naaman, 2 King. 5. 1. That he was a great man with
his master, but he was a LEPER. Wherefore let the Reader, for a relaxation to
his memory, and Mr. B. for a refrication to his skill (in Physic) make him his
Patient (and a pitiful one he is, as by all the indications of him specific.
and generic. do appear;) and therein with prudence consider!

Q. 1. Whether Mr. P. when he was thrown into Hell (with the other Members) did
not take such a surfeit, that he never recovered to this hour? and whether this
has not broken out most lamentably in his Lips, Ears, Mouth, Eyes, and in all
parts ever since? and a sign that Satan smote him so! as makes him a sad
Spectacle to men and Angels? Besides, the sick morbous estate of his mind from
the Blackest Choler, or beds of Melancholy: and whether any Pump of Tongue or
Pen can be set deep enough, or plied fast enough to fetch out all the filth of
his foul stomach? (a Kitchen of uncleanness?)

Q. 2. And whether the most loathsome, stinking, Nauseous stuff, which Mr. P.
has lately brought off of his filthy Concavous stomach, be not contragious and
dangerous to the Commonwealth? and whether the very air is not infected with
his breath, seeing so many are fallen into Prynian fits, and lie sick at heart
of his foul disease? Or whether the orifice of his Pylorus which was open and
able to digest good things (in his Pillory-suffrings) be not wholly shut up?
and the Oeso-phagus and upper orifice only open, and wide enough to let out all
manner of Emets (without much straining,) or the most ugly suffusion of his
excrements upwards?

Q. 3. Whether he and his fellows* could lie so cold (as he says) in Hell (p.
18. of 's Narr.) and be almost starved in one Night, without a Notorious,
tremendous judgment? (too much like that in Mat. 8. 12. and 13. 42. seeing he
has ever since been under the Wailing, and in gnashing of Teeth?) (seeing his
Tongue was then in such a flame, and is still on fire (as the Apostle says,
Jam. 3. 6.) to the endangering the whole course of Nature; yea, seeing the
Torrid Zone of his spirit, is so inhabitable for heat and wrath! that a
Temperate man can no more come near him, then one can take a fire into his
bosom, and not be burnt, Prove. 6. 27.

4. Q. Whether Mr. P's (...) Madness be not caused by too much Blood in his
Brains since the King's death? And whether his strange conceits, staring eyes,
tickling ears, roving fancies, rambling head, and ravening appetite after
Kingship, are not evident symptoms (to sober men) of his fearful Madness and
Folly? And whether the best, and most ordinary way of Cure be to let him Blood
under the Tongue? or to lay some of the ( Horse) Leaches to suck him from the
forehead to the fundament? or shall he be left to the extraordinary way of
laying him up warm, in St. Martins straw, to cure him of this (...), or brutish
madness?

5. Q. Whether besides his Surfeit, cold and madness which he caught in Hell,
he were not grievously Bewitched, (like the Galatians, Chap. 3. 1. in another
case,) from the Truth of the Cause, seeing ever since, at his long and strong
strains, he has raised up (as a man in much torture) amongst other stuff, the
veriest Trash, rubbidge, stones, straws, gravel, iron, nails, that can be, and
what not? And seeing nothing will serve him, but that the Rotten Corpse of the
old constitution might be raised to life, which because we cannot believe
practicable or possible, he sub-poena's us for this with a legend of lies; like
that poor man (the Popish legend tells of) a Guest at a feast at Benonia; where
a Cock was dressed at Dinner, and carved out in the Dish; but this man denied
that St. Peter was able to restore this COCK to life again, and (believe it who
will!) the Cock (or rather the Devil) leaped up, and crew, and slew! and with
clapping of his wings scattered the broth all about; but punished severely
this unbeliever: And so because we deny that their Carcass of the old
constitution can come to life again, till the great day, we shall all be
punished, when the Devil has done it, and played his part fully in it, if they
prevail?

6. Q. Whether Mr. P. were not poisoned with conceits, seeing he has swollen
so big ever since? or were not possessed with Legions, seeing matters in his
Books are expressed with such variety and change of Voices? And whether M. P.
does ride better in a false-gallop of words? or like a madman for matter? or
be in both HIGH Post for the King of Scots? by Summoning the Cavaliers, p. 92,
93. of 's Narr. and blowing his Horn beforehand to make way for his worship?
whiles the merit of his Argument creeps like a Creple, and Lackquies after to
little purpose, sense or reason? so that Mr. B. had need to set up St. Andrews
Cross to carry it on better.

7. Q. Whether any Emperor, King or Potentate on earth, can be more loaded
with accumulation of titles (to make him proud, and keep him in the Heralds
Books!) then this Aut'-Encomiast, p. 40. of 's Nar. A member of the old
Parliament, a Covenanter, a Protestor, a Lawyer, a Scholar, a Man (that is
well!) an Englishman and a Christian! so in other places, a Gentleman, a
Squire, a Bencher, a Barrister; and why not a Barreter too, to make up the
number? Whether these be not too many for any honest man alive, unless a
Lawyer? and whether this does not fill Mr. P. with as much Pride as the great
Cham of Tartaria had, whose servants when he had dined, used to sound the
Trumpet of it at his gates; and thereby give leave to the Kings of the earth,
that they (with manners) might go to their Dinners; but not before.

8. Q. Whether Generation be not from the brain? seeing Mr. P's has had such an
illegitimate and mighty issue of late? and whether it be not as likely (as what
Albertus Magnus tells us of a Stage Player, who when he was dead and opened,
but little of his brains were left, he had spent so much upon his Harlots) that
if Mr. P's brains be opened (after his decease,) and the battlements of his
Skull razed down, we shall not see how lavish he has been of the powder and
shot of his spinal marrow upon others? and yet the Skull be kept for the sake
of his DRY-MOUTH, Vincent. lib. 25. c. 4.
to make a Delphian Oracle of, against the Sectaries, so called; seeing
Macarius of Alexandria did interrogate a Skull in the name of Jesus, till it
said (or the Devil in it rather) that the Heretics were in the lowest hell,
meaning the Protestants, with Mr. P. Sectaries.

9. Q. Whether it had not been wisdom, to have kept out the company of gabling
Geese or Scriblers, that noise it so in Mr. P's Chamber during the time of his
Travel, hard labor, and unprofitable pains to be delivered of Campanella's
Bastard (...) or headlong? And whether they had not better have persuaded Mr.
P. to have kept his Terms still, then to have fallen in with such filthy
interests, to commit sin with, or conceive seed from, for the trouble of the
Nation? or so to sell himself to the next KING that comes, for so little
profit, and for less credit?

10. Q. Whether in all this Mr. P. and Mr. B. have not made a more exquisite
and Artificial Section or discovery of themselves, their party, parts, and
principles, then of the true Cause, or of the Commonwealth, through all the
Meanders intricate and abstruse notions and designs to obtrude or exalt the
interest of the Stuarts, and debase our Cause? Let the Reader judge: for, in
Publicos Hosts Omnis Homo Miles, says Tertul. Apol. c. 2. It is every man's
case, and all the Country will up, when wild beasts are broken loose; to that I
leave them and their followers.

I have been the longer upon these things, they being the very hinges or the
Axle-trees of all their Polemick Disceptations against the ( present)
Government in four books, which for substance are answered, and their fallacies
discovered to the Readers: only Mr. B's wounding Answer (which is truly his
own) to the Healing Question comes under our present consideration (and his
Politic Aphorisms, (if occasion serve) for future) which he adds in the
Preface of' s Holy Commonwealth to the Army, that they may not be kept up in
impenitency, i. e. from returning to King, Lords and Commons.

I would say this for the Healing Question and its honorable Author, The
Healing Author of the healing Quest. has taken the Leaves of the Tree of Life
for the healing the Nations.
that is of such a Healing Spirit and Frame, (whiles Mr. B. is professedly of a
Wounding) That the Almighty God has made it and him so great a Means of
Blessing toward the Recovering and Healing of this poor ISLAND (as our
Children after us, may live to reap, remember, and bless GOD for:) indeed I do
think there is in that little Treatise such Apples of Gold, if well considered,
as were taken from the Lord Jesus that Tree of Life, Prove. 3. 18. whose Leaves
are for the Healing of the Nations Rev. 22. 1, 2. And to speak rationally, It
was as properly called a HEALING Question, as his Antagonist would call it a
WOUNDING Answer, after Gallens understanding of Healing, in a Physical
Consideration, in the beginning of Lib. de Ossibus. (...), What is meant by
HEALING.
i. e. All things that concern the Action of HEALING, have that for their scope
and direction to it, that agrees best with the Nature and Constitution of the
body, or part which must be HEALED, i. e. the Commonwealth. Now whether Mr. B.
by's WOUNDING, or Sir H. V. by his HEALING comes nearest to the nature and
constitution of the Commonwealth or Free State, let us diligently enquire, and
duly preponderate, without respect to persons but to principles, and to the
matter.

The healing Question (says he) places the cause in two things, page 3, 4, 5,
6. 1. In a Freedom (by way of dutiful compliance and condescension from all
parts and members of this Society) to set up meet persons in the place of
Supreme Judicature and Authority amongst you. Enlarged page 10, 11. 2. Freedom
in matters of Religion that concern the service and worship of God; enlarged
page 5, 6, 7. The PERSONS that he supposes have this Sovereign power (says he)
are sometimes said to be the Whole Body of Adherents to the CAUSE, p. 3. to
which they have a double Right, M. B. quotes the Healing Quest. in a Wounding
and unfaithful manner at first dash.
1. Natural, 2. Conquered (and Recovered;) and sometimes the whole BODY OF THE
PEOPLE, page 4. But here Mr. B. begins already to deal unfaithfully and
dis-ingenuously with the Healing Question and its Author: for page 4. it tell
us, of the natural right and Freedom due to the whole Body of the People (for
whose safety and good, Government its self is ordained) which the Norman by
Lust and force of Arms kept them from. Natural Rights may be forfeited and lost.
This is their natural Right indeed; not but that they may forfeit it, and lose
it, as a man may forfeit his Liberty and his Life, (which he has a natural
right unto, by Theft, Treason, Rebellion, Murder, or the breach of good and
equal Laws.) But when he treats of the Goodness and the Nature of the Cause, p.
3, 4. then it is that he tells us the unforfeited and undoubted Power of
choosing, The Healing Q. asserts the unforfeited Natural Right.
etc. lies in the body of Adherents to the CAUSE; who have contributed their
counsels, purses, pains, affections, prayers, and united strength unto it. And
these have not only their (foresaid) natural Right, but (through Gods
blessing) their conquered and restored Right unto it. (Which others have not,
that fought against the CAUSE and the PARLIAMENT, to destroy both it and us:
These (that have forfeited it) are not said to have the Sovereign Power of
choosing persons fit for Supreme Trust, by this twofold Right that the
Adherents to the Cause have. And therefore the Healing Question, page 3. speaks
of Restoring This, THIS whole Body to it is just Rights in Civils and in
Spirituals. But Mr. B. would jumble them both like a jusculum of Hodg-podg, or
Galleymaufrey into our minds by a fallacia compositionis, taking them
together, M. B's dark Lantern has no lucid Answer to the Healing Quest.
Caution to the Army how they take Mr. B's tea Pills. Mr. B's 1. Prop.
as he (in his Wounding) and not as the Author in's Healing Question states and
exhibits them. Also it is observable, that in lieu of any lucid or clear
Replication, he would have the Reader subjugate his Reason to his Dark
Lanthorn, or abstruse implication in some ten PROPOSITIONS (which he offers as
his Purging-Pills or Troches) to the Armies Consciences: but let them first
examine the INGREDIENTS of them, and the hand that gives them, if he have
skill, and if there be no danger in receiving of them.

His 1. Prop. is, That it was none of the Old Cause which we contended for in
the Wars, ( viz.) the free choice of Parliaments.

Answ. Answ.
We shall then appeal to all Records, (living and dead) yea, Right to Choose
Parl. part of the Cause.
to Mr. P. himself, whether Privileges of Parliament, and peoples Rights were
none of the Old Cause contended for: 1. (says he) the King granted it; but at
the first he denied it. This the K. kept the people from by his own Prerogative.
And what if he did by word acknowledge it, if he (by force) hindered them the
benefit of it? which is the thing the Heal. Quest. says. But for Mr. B's
satisfaction, he may see it recorded in History; That in the very first four
years of his Reign, he dissolved three Parliaments one after another, The
History of it.
and by Proclamation forbid the people to speak of any more Parliaments after
that; so that; in the Intervals they were miserably enslaved, oppressed both in
Consciences and Estates, taxed, fleeced with Monopolies and illegal sufferings,
had no visible Remedy left them: All thoughts of ever having a Parliament being
banished for many years: and the ordinary discourse of the Courtiers then was
against Parliaments, as injurious to the Kings Prerogative. This continued
until Firebrands that had been kindling by it were laid together in Scotland,
and there began first to FLAME about the ears of the Clergy, and their Liturgy,
An. 1637, 8, and 9. The King raised an Army against them, and notwithstanding
the Pacification of 18 June 1639. he resolved to have War with the Scots; told
some Lords about him ( December. following) he would call a Parliament in
England; the noise of which made the People amazed! I so long had they been
without it, and so little expectation had they of it, (whiles the King sends
his bosom and Cabinet-Counsellour, Strafford, into Ireland, to call one there,
to raise him moneys) but on the 13th of April it was convened, and on the 5th
of May dissolved again; and some of the Members, vizt. Sir John Hotham, Mr.
Crew, Mr. Belliesis, imprisoned, the Lord Brooks Plundered; and the King goes on
with the War against the Scots, until about 20. of the English Earls, Lords and
Barons, Petitioned to him at York, to call a Parliament that might continue
until Grievances were redressed, etc. By which means, (and his unavoidable
necessities together) he could not help it, but summon the Long Parliament; who
seeing the people so miserably robbed of their Rights, drew up a Bill for
triennial Parliaments, which the King signed 15. Pebr. 1640. Also an Act of
Parliament was passed (by King, Lords and Commons then in being) That this
Parliament shall not be dissolved without it be by Act of Parliament; and the
Ground is expressed in it, viz. The fears, jealoustes and apprehensions that His
Majesty's Subjects have, that this present Parliament may be adjourned,
prorogued, or dissolved before Justice be executed, Grievances redressed, etc.
With what confidence then can Mr. B. put in such an ingredient, (and so
dangerous a one) to make up his first Pill or Prop. to purge the Army with, and
to scour their Consciences?

To his second Prop. His 2. Prop.
It was not the old Cause, for the People to have right to choose a House of
Commons to exercise the whole sovereignty, etc.

Answ. And who says it was, Answ. It is granted that the Cause is not a Right
to choose a House of Commons.
I pray? not the Healing Quest. I am sure; neither do the Commonwealths-men say
it; that the people have any Right to choose any House of Commons at all,
seeing it is utterly inconsistent with the Free State and principles of it, to
have any such House, as a House of Commons; and more to have them (as such)
exercise the whole Sovereignty of the Nation. But here he contends with himself
alone. As I have seen a Puppy play prettily with his own tail, weary himself,
and lie down when he has done. For to what purpose is this Pill of Fumitory? A
fumitory Pill.
unless to fetch away Melancholy Fumes, and make us laugh a little at all their
weakness and folly.

To his third Prop. His 3. Prop.
It was none of the old cause to assert the peoples Sovereignty.

Answ. But it was their old cause to assert their Rights, Ans. It was the cause
to preserve our Rights.
(I am sure) both as men and as Christians; and this is one (the Healing Quest.
says,) and a natural one, which all the Adherents to this Cause (against the
King) have recovered (through mercy) if they can but keep it, Exact Col. p. 464.
viz. to keep the Primary power (under God and Jesus Christ) or the power of
choosing their own Rulers into the Supreme trust. And this was (we find by a
little Retrospection) declared for, both by Parliment and Army, Act of Parl.
March 17. 1648. St. Albans Remonstrance, Poly-pody-Pill.
in the Scottish Declarations, and a many others. So that this his salt Pill of
poly-podium will serve for nothing, but to make a man cough, complain, or else
to choke him quite.

To his fourth Prop. His 4. Prop.
It was not the Cause to change the constitution of the Commonwealth into any
other form of Government, then what we found in it.

Answ. What ever was the Cause, Answ. Another form of Government a necessary
effect of the King's waging War with the Parliament and People.
that was the effect (and an inevitable EFFECT of the Wars) I am sure; though I
confess the CAUSE of it lay (in my judgment) more on the Kings part; according
to the Parliaments own words of 20. March 1642. That whenever the King makes
War, that it tends to the dissolution of his Government. So that ( Sublata,
Causa tollitur effectus) had he not made the War, he had not destroyed his
Government, it is like. Nor does this lay the Guilt of the blood upon the
Parliament, as he pretends, but upon the King and his evil Counselors, who
destroyed him and his posterity, as well as that Constitution of Government by
it; And albeit, no one part had authority to destroy the other, and set it self
in the room of the whole (as King to destroy the Commons, or Commons the Lords;
and set it self up as HOUSE of COMMONS) yet had they a Power to destroy one
another, and to kill themselves, if they would; as the King did, and so
consequently the Lords, and then the House of Commons (as the Commons-House;)
The King and Lords destroyed themselves, and so the House of Commons.
which are all dissolved with that CONSTITUTION of GOVERNMENT (by a Felo de se)
indeed. 2. Nor is the Platform of King, Lords and Commons, the Fundamental
Constitution; but rather imposed upon the people (as has been often proved by
the learned in History. And 3. Though this were not the ULTIMATE in our eye; 2.
The old form of K. L. and Com. an imposed form.
yet the Peoples Rights, and properties, (which fell in naturally to them) were
in their eye, ULTIMATELY and intentionally, amongst other things of higher
concernment, 3. This form of Government fell in naturally and unavoidably upon
dissolution of Kingly.
viz. the Kingdom of Christ, throughout the management of this cause.) Now
where the people have the greatest propriety and interest to out-balance, (as
it was in this cause) they must naturally fall into that Balance which is in a
Commonwealth, and can fix for security and satisfaction in nothing less; be it
ever so beyond our first intentions or second. But for my part, I cannot find
one word in the Healing Quest. that says, it was our cause intentionally to
alter that constitution (though that effect was given in as a blessing,
supplement, and success unto this cause;) but that we have a Right to a Civil
incorporation and society distinct from that of the old constitution now
dissolved (by its self and it is inorable adherents.) So that as the CYNICK ran
to the mark, The Healing Quest. a mark, but he cannot hit it.
for fear the Archer should hit him, when he shot at Rovers, we may run to the
Healing Quest. and never fear that he will hit or hurt us; or can come near us,
for ought I see. This is his fourth Pill as bitter as Aegrimony: A pill of
Aegrimony.
it may serve to make a body sick, and to make him stare; but not to cure or
comfort him in the least.

His fifth Prop. is of the matter, 5. Prop.
asserting the Parliaments Declaration for the Kings person, Ans. This is fully
answered elsewhere; all the Declar. and Engagements kept in their ends by this
cause.
Privileges of Parliament, etc. which is fully answered in Mr. P's Cause
stated and stunted, p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11. to the very same Declarations and
Arguments; wherein is proved, that (in Sensu Composito) every tittle and
Punctilio of all those Declarations and Protest. is kept in this Cause of the
Commonwealth; so far as it comprehends all, in the sense, end, and equity
thereof, wherein the Letter or form was incapable or incompatible: besides,
the very words of the Covenant are, for the person of the King in (and no
otherwise but) in the defense of the true Religion and liberties of the people:
Now so far as any of these or all these can (or could) possibly consist
together, ( viz.) in the liberties of the people, they are conserved to this
very day. Therefore this Pill being the same with the other, though it be a
little bigger, will work but little better, and so I leave it.

His sixth Prop. (which is the main) That it was none of the old Cause, His 6.
Prop.
that the people should have Liberty, and the Magistrate have no power in all
matters of Gods worship, faith, and Conscience. Answ. The Author of the Healing
Quest. abused, fallaciously quoted, and as falsely accused.
And here I cannot but observe how unworthily (or like the false witness) M. B.
deals with this honorable Author again, after a superficial complement which he
would never give before (nor nothing like it in's Key for Cath.) says he,
Without any exception, restriction or limitation that I can find, he expressly
extends the Case to matters of Religion, or that concern the worship of God,
p. 5. and to matters of faith and Conscience, p. 6. yea, all matters, and that
the Magistrates must fear and forbear intermedling with: whereas he knows (and
says it) but a little before, that the persons spoken of, are the whole body
of honest men, adherents to this Cause; and is that no restriction? I believe
Mr. B. thinks it one, and a close one too, to him: for the truth is, the Author
of the Healing Quest. He pleads especially for the adherents to the Cause; but
generally for all to whom Christ has given and bought this Liberty. M B leaves
out a most material significant part of the same sentence.
is pleading for them (especially) that have adhered to the cause, and for
their Rights and Freedom of Conscience, under different apprehensions and
opinions; yet in the general, for that natural right, freedom and liberty,
which Christ has purchased by his blood; and may not that be admitted? who
dares hinder it? does he say any more then so? But to see how like a SOPHIST
his Antagonist quotes him (as if he had a mind to imitate the Grand accuser of
the Brethren, Mat. 4. 6. who left out IN ALL HIS WAYS) Mr. B. leaves out the
most significant and considerable Clause, even of the SAME sentence, to spoil
the sense, or play the Tempter with: For the Healing Quest. says, That all
Magistrates are to fear and forbear intermedling with: (here (M. B.) skews out
of the way now, as if he were scared; or feared that his FOLLY would appear to
all men, to proceed with the same sentence! which he most rudely, abruptly and
ungrammatically Lacerates, at the very preposition, without the Case that
follows it) with giving rule or imposing in those matters. Therefore nail up
this counterfeit (Reader) upon the next Post, lest it pass for CURRENT; and
then consider, does this discharge the Magistrate of his duty? or don't he
rather charge him with what is not his duty? that would have the Magistrate to
impose upon us in the worship of God, and matters of Conscience? (that are out
of a Civil consideration, and merely spiritual?) What the Healing Quest.
proposes about the Magistrate, that he would not impose upon tender
Consciences; Mr. B. corrupts, and falsifies, most shamefully.
so that all the Healing Quest. offers, p. 7. is, The Magistrates forbearing to
put forth the power of Rule and Coertion in things that God has exempted out
of his Commission: This is all, and these are the very words. And is this so
wicked a Cause as Mr. B. calls it? or which deserves such a scarifying, or
Cauterizing brand and denomination, of wickedness and falsehood, as he puts upon
it? But if I may give him the Brand for falsifying so; for the Question is
(says he) whether the Magistrate may restrain them from propagating a false
faith? or Infidelity, and drawing others into it? But stay Sir! Whose Question
is it? do you think to catch old Birds AUCUPIIS, or with your chaff, (...);
with empty words, abusive nothings? for who (I pray) makes this the Question
but your self? not the Healing Quest. I can affirm; for that which he says, is
only about the Magistrates not compelling, or imposing in the matters of God:
not about this restraining of Papists or Infidels, (though some there be that
question the extent of his power, merely for their faith or worship; yet it is
not so much as mentioned by the Healing Quest.) Upon this the poor man (to
find himself work enough with his own pretty Paralogisms and Sophisms, and so
to make sport for our money, lest we take him for a Pick-pocket) he spends at
one clap 6. or 7. pages, very generously, to prove what none denies; that it
was neither the Cause nor the good Cause to Countenance POPERY, Mahumetism,
etc. Notwithstanding it never entered into the Question; and so his Answers are
shot in the Air, or at himself (all the way) being in nothing adequated or
adapted to the Case. But says Mr. B. He has not excepted Popery, etc. and if
worship be out of the Magistrates reach, then so is Mass. Under due correction,
and with due respect to his gravity and the Ministry, he Reasons neither like a
Christian, nor like a Logician: 1. It is not like a Christian to traduce Sir H.
V. so, Mr. B. argues not like a Christian with Sir H. Vane.
as if Popery, etc. were not excepted in the Healing Quest. when the Case (it is
self) is (and the whole discussion) both for matter and form (to the Body of
ADHERENTS to the Cause) most proximately exclusive of Popery, infidelity and
unchristianity in worship; as fully as ever it was in the times of the Wars
with the King, and highest attempts, or contests with the Biships before. But
Psalm. 50. 16. with 19, 20. What have thou to do to count up my statutes? --
Thou give thy mouth to evil, thy tongue joyneth with deceit: thou sit and
speak against thy brother, thou (titten dophi) give a double mouth of thy
mothers son. 2. Mr. B. argues not like a Logician.
2. Nor like a Logician, in his rambling from the verity of the matter, and
very principles of demonstration; for that Propositions ought to be true, de
omni, and the Predicate to agree with the Subject in every thing: but to help
the Reader, a little, out of the snare of this (...), or fallacy which lies in
the Ambiguity of the PROP. viz. If worship be out of the Magistrates reach,
then so is Mass, to speak ad Rhombum, It is (as the Heal. Quest states it) out
of the Mag. power, to impose Mass, or any worship; and this M. B. ought to
prove like a fair opponent by Logick-Law.
and not to ramble from what the Healing Quest. affirms; it is out of the
Magistrates reach of imposing or compelling us to Mass. For all that honorable
person says, is, that the Magistrate might forbear Coertion in the worship of
God. Neither does he say as Mr. B. by his fallacy would insinuate, that
Magistrates have nothing to do; but that this they ought not to do, viz. impel
or impose in the worship of God, upon our Consciences; and so Mass, Mahumetism,
and all false Religion is out of the Magistrates reach indeed, viz. of imposing
it upon our Consciences, and of forcing us to that or any other Religion. Now
that the Magistrate may force us to MASS (or to any false or true Religion) is
the Thing, that Mr. B. has to prove (or he does nothing,) but puzzle himself,
and perplex his Reader (with a company of fallacies and falsehoods.) Now was not
this a great and essential part of the Cause and quarrel at the first? between
the Bishops, Popish, Arminian Imposers, and the Puritans, Brownists, and
Sectaries (so called) to keep up this, their Liberty of Conscience from all
such destroyers and invaders of it? This was in our Cause, to keep up this
liberty of Conscience in the worship of God.
(as is to be seen in Husbands his Exact Coll. p. 20, 21, 22. etc. in the
several Declar. and Remonstrances of Parliament and Army: And in the very
Covenant it self, to maintain Religion according to the word of God, in the
liberty and purity thereof. And in the history of the Wars with Scotland,
occasioned by imposing upon them the Book of Liturgy, Anno 1637. being
forceably and by command of the King, and Magistrates, read in Edinborough
without the peoples consent; which the poor people could not bear (but a Woman
threw her stool at the Bishops pate) and so began the hurly-burly, the Wars,
and the Alterations to this day; for freedom in both kinds, ( viz. in
Spirituals and in Civils) from being imposed upon; and herein both the nature
and the goodness of the cause will appear (do what he can.) Now let Mr. B. deal
but honestly, as the Healing Quest. states the case (which were he a fair and
allowable Opponent, he ought) without diminishing or adding to what he says,
and then prove if he can, That this due liberty for godly believers and
adherents to the Good old Cause (for he speaks of such) in matters of Gods
worship under their different persuasions; Be

First, His first Charge assoiled, that this is not against Gods word; but the
contrary, and his Scripture-examples examined.
against the word of God, or express Scriptures (as he pretends;) flying for
proof to Moses and them that were Types of Christ, under the Law; who did in
extraordinary cases, and for extraordinary ends, exercise both swords
sometimes; and so not only Moses and the Kings of Israel did meddle with the
external matters of worship, but even Priests and Prophets did sometimes
execute in civil matters too; as Phinehas on Zimri and Cozbi, Numb. 25. Eliah
upon the 400. 1. King. 18. and Samuel on Agag, 1 Samuel 15. but alas! the one is
no more a Rule for Magistrates in these days, then the other is for Ministers:
And besides, it is most evident even in the Old Testament (if he keeps us all
to THAT, for he must never come at New Testament) that Powers over any, in the
worship and service of God, (or Eccles. Powers so called) were ordinarily
distinguished (all along) from the Civil, or Magistratical Power, as Moses* and
Aaron, Rulers and Priests, etc. kept in their distinct Orbs and Places. Now for
his instance of Asa his days, His instance of Asa obviated and enervated.
2 Chronicles. 15. 12. it was a voluntary Covenant which the people entered into;
spontaneously, and not compulsorily; neither did the Magistrates impose it upon
them; That the Mag. has no such Power in his Commis. to impose, is proved by
abundance of Scriptures.
so that it is Nihil ad Rhombum, again, (after his wonted manner of rambling.)

But on the Contrary, All those Scriptures that call for willing obedience,
faith, and persuasions of a willing People to the Lord, Exodus 35. 5, 22. 2 Chronicles. 29. 5, 6, 7. Nehem. 4. 6. Cant. 4. 12. Psalm. 110. 3. Isa. 2. 2, 3. Jer.
50. 4, 5, Micah 4. 12. Zach. 2. 11. and 8. 22, 23. Prove. 23. 26. Mat. 11. 27.
Joh. 6. 35, 37, 44. Luke 9. 23. Act. 2. 37. 2 Cor. 8. 3, 5. John 4. 23. Romans
14. 5, 10, 14. Joh. 16. 8, etc. and all those that limit the Magistrates Civil
Power to Civil Objects (as to give to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's,
etc.) and Romans 13. 3, 4. Psalm. 83. 11, 12, 13. 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. (that rules
over MEN in external and humane matters) 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. And all those
Scriptures, that make Christ alone the Head of the Church, and the only
Lawgiver in positive matters of Worship, and his Laws sufficient which he has
left for that purpose, Isa. 9. 7. and 22. 21, 22. and 33. 22. Zach. 6. 12, 23.
and 9. 9. Cant. 3. 11. Psalm. 2. 12. Col. 1. 18. and 2. 19. Mat. 28. 18. and 18.
17. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 23. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. Iam. 4. 12. Heb. 3. 6.
Besides Martyrs, And by learned Authors, with the Witness of Martyrs.
Learned Authors; as Ambrose, Epist. 13. ad Imp. Valentin. Bernard Epist. ad P.
Eugen. Luther Epist. ad Fred. and Jo. D. Sax. Tom. 7. fol. 209. and Epist. ad
Carol. Duc. Subaud. fol. 483. and Epist. ad Erphard. Tom. 7. Zuinglius, in
Respons. libel. Strothionis, Tom. 2. fol. 302. Chamier de Oecumen. Pontif.
Marlorat in Luc. 9. 25. Marlinus; and the Martyrs, Jo. Huss, A. Askew, Hooper,
Bradford, and a cloud of Witnesses, Books, and Arguments of the ablest (holy)
Writers that ever used a Pen or a Pulpit, for above these thousand years, are (
una Voce) for the Healing Question, against the Imposting power of the
Magistrate in matters of Conscience, and of Gods Worship; and were it not that
I must be concise, and consulere brevitati, for the benefit of the Readers, I
would have written at large their very Words and References.

Also secondly, To his 2d Charge, Of the evil of it, That it tends to the Ruin
of the Commonwealth; but the contrary tends unto that.
Let any that have the exercise of Reason free, consider upon his second
charge, whether this Non-imposing-Power of the Magistrate in the Matters of
Religion and Worship of God; or indulging of a Tender Conscience, tends to
the Ruin of the Commonwealth? or whether an Imposing in such Cases does not
clearly put the People upon all the means of Freedom they can come at? as it
did in Scotland, because of the Liturgy; and in England because of the Bishops,
Canons, Courts and Impositions of their Hierarchy on Conscience? nay, let Mr.
B. himself umpire it, if he please, when it comes to be his own case Mr. B's
Holy Commonw. Preface.
in his Preface to the Army, thus: I wish you to be tender of your BRETHRENS
Consciences. So, Let not men be too hastily forced to engage to a Power.
Ungodly men of seared consciences, will engage to any thing for wordly ends. --
(So) Be not too forward with your Impositions, etc. Thus was the Philosopher
convinced of his Error which he held against Motion: when his Arm came to be
put out of joint, and it became his own Case, he went to Hirophilus to set it
in again; sure (says this Surgeon) it cannot be; if your opinion hold, your
Arm would hold: for if there be no Motion, there is no Dislocation. Therefore
as Portius Cato was said to be so exactly just to all men, that he would choose
the veriest enemies he had (such as Tiberius Gracchus) to judge his Cause, and
condemn him, if he could; so will we in this, let him but remember us as well
as himself, and equal with himself (for in the Conformation of parts the beauty
lies, (...), in the equality, as Galen says) and then let him judge.

Thirdly, To his 3d Charge.
Whether This tends to vilify the Magistrate, or Mr. B's more to vilify
Christ and his Members? the Church, Truth and Gospel? and consequently, to set
the MAGISTRATE upon the most conscientious?

Or Fourthly, To his 4th Charge.
Whether it be against any Tittle of the Decalogue, to keep up each Table,
Duty, and distinct Function of Magistrate and Minister in their proper places
and functions, which Mr. B. would confound?

Fifthly, To his 5th Charge.
Whether this tends to the decay, and not to the greatest encouragement of true
Grace, Faith, and Holiness? not to whip, force or impose upon us in mere
Spirituals, and matters of Worship?

Yea, To his 6th Charge.
Sixthly, Whether the Healing Questions sweet Argumentum a Christo and Pace, or
M. B.'s bitter Argumentum a fustibus and Face, would gratify the Devil and his
Malice most? He that would have the Magistrate not to impose his light upon
other men's consciences? M. B. and Mr. Harrington for a National Rule over the
Conscience.
or he that would have it imposed as a Rule or Standard for All Men in the
Nation to come, or to be cudgel'd up unto? as Mr. B. and Mr. Har. (likewise)
would have it; so in page 27, 28, etc. of his OCEANA, That all men might be
subject to the National Conscience.

Seventhly, To his 7th Charge.
Whether this or that would let out Tempters (and Persecutors too) the
farthest, and with the most loosened Reins of Lust and Cruelty over the Soul?
to the Danger or Perdition of their own?

8. Whether Parents or Masters of Families ought to impose their own Religion
or Opinion upon their Children and Servants? To his 8th Charge.
and not rather to permit them the Free exercise and Liberty of their
Consciences in the Worship of GOD (consistent with our CAUSE) both in
Spirituals and Civils.

Ninthly, To his 9th Charge.
Whether it tends to the destruction of an Army, to let every one March (not
to Mutiny, that is his own word; and the Healing Q. asserts the Magistrates
power in such Cases as are suitable Objects, to keep the peace, and promote the
civil good,) but to let every one march on (in his own Order) without justling
or molesting of another? Joel 2. 7, 8. They shall march every one in his ways,
and not break their Ranks, nor one Thrust another; Or to the hurt of Families,
not to impose, or to let their children have liberty to hear GOD's word and
worship? (not to Theft, Drunkenness, Whoredom, as Mr. B. most unworthily
states it) though in a different manner, place, time, and such like
circumstances? But for an aliquid amplius, I refer to a Treatise I wrote some 2
years since, called A reviving Word from the quick and dead, etc. for Uniting
of All the Godly with this Liberty.

Tenthly, To his 10th Charge.
Or against the exercise of a Church Power over offenders, Mat. 18. 17. Tit. 3.
10, 11. 2 These. 3. 14, 15. because a Magistrate ought not impose upon their
Consciences?

Eleventhly, To his 11th Charge.
Or is it against the Interest of CHRIST (who shall be the Desire of all
Nations, Hag. 2. 7.) to indulge any or all of his Members with Equal Liberty,
Benefit and Safety in the service of GOD? without an undue magnifying of any
one Form or Faction above, or to be a Rule to others? consolidating all under
one Head (JESUS CHRIST) Ephesians. 1. 13. Hos. 1. 11. in such sweet Symmetry, Vide
Reviving Word, for Uniting all in one.
Order and Consistency together, as the four Elements have in the humane Body
(though different asunder, yet in Harmony together) so as one may not Master,
but Balance another to the service of the Whole, and of every one in their
particular places, faculties and functions? and would not this be for the
Interest of our dearest Lord? But says he, It Is an unholy Saint that would
have Liberty to reproach his Lord, or deny the faith and essential Article of
it, to speak against his holy worship, etc. Whereas all the Healing Question
propounds for, is, That the holy Saints that do serve their God sincerely,
though under different apprehensions, that do hold the Faith, and Truth in the
Essentials of it, and that are for his holy worship, not against it, that these
might have equal Liberty and Countenance. But so absurdly for many pages
together does this poor man spit the Venom of his Pen upon that Noble and Pious
Author, (without Ground or Matter) but of 's own devising, to render him (and
such as are the liveliest Assertors of our Cause in the Latitude and Liberties
of it) contemptible, if he could (as well as the Cause it self, which is the
thing they aim at;) that I might say to him, as once Zeno said to Antigonus
(whose breath was strong, and stomach foul) (...), Get you gone to your Vomit!
for (as Aristides also said) we are not of that Number that can spit and vomit
stuff so loathsome. And as one said when he was hit in the Teeth with his
stinking Breath, that it was because of the Great trust of SECRETS which his
Friends had committed to him, which he kept within him, until they were ROTTEN;
he may as Wittily excuse it, but not as Worthily, if they be Designs for the
King or Cavalierish Secrets, against the Worthies of Parliament, Cause and
People of GOD, which lie and ROT, and export so ill a savor.

And lastly, 12 To his last Charge of introducing Popery.
Let Any judge, Whether this Liberty of Conscience, for the faithful Adherents
to the Cause, (in matters of Worship only?) or that Persecution and Imposition
which Mr. B. would put the Magistrate upon, be the most apparent Way of
introducing Popery, and of destroying the Power of Godliness with a Form? or
whether any one can study more to mischieve the Magistrate then by this means?
For as Mr. Hooper (Martyr) said to his Friends, Anno 1555. Tyranny Extremity,
and Enforcing, have been the only Arguments to maintain the POPE. And if Mr.
B. had not been too forgetful, he would have considered, That these were the
very Arguments of's own-quoted Jesuit, That Mr. B. is guilty of this Charge,
shall appear by the Jesuits of his own Quoting.
Adam Contzen, in's Directions for Restoring Popery, Chap. 17. (Lib. 2.) To
preserve Popery, that no other Religion should be permitted, and the speedy
punishing of the Erroneous, cutting them off in their first appearance,
prohibiting their Books, and taking heed of Julian' s Device, destroying of
Religion by Liberty for all Sects. Thus they do (says Mr. B.) in Spain, Italy,
Austria, Bavaria, etc. i. e. destroy Liberty of Conscience. Is this then the
Jesuits way (by Mr. B.'s own words) to let in Popery, or to destroy it? The
Jesuit calls it, A destroying of the Religion, (vizt. Popery) to give Liberty
(as he calls it) to all Sects. Indeed Mr. B. does put me in mind of one Cacus
a great Thief, that was wont to pull all the Cattle he stole into his DEN,
backward, (or by the Tail) to avoid the pursuit of the people that followed the
Track; and this pretty Knack Mr. B. uses, to pull us into Popery (as we shall
see presently) and yet pretends to keep us from it, by the Track, that whoever
follows (as he has made it) shall no more find out the Introductor of Popish
and Jesuitick Principles, then the People did the Thief; but be going from his
Den, not toward it. And to see yet further how much he serves the JESUIT
Contzen, Chap. 18 to bring in Popery into a Land, he shows, 1. Do it slowly and
sliely. 2. It Is easy; when the common people are a while taken with Novelties,
and diversities of Religion, they will be weary, and give themselves up to the
RVLERS wills, i. e. to their commands in matters of Religion. And is not this
the way (by their own words) to introduce Popery? So the Jesuits 7th Rule,
which is, To forbid them (they account erroneous) in their Assemblies, (and is
not this to Impose upon them in matters of Worship?) and his 8th Rule is, To
use Violence. And lastly, another Rule is, That the Magistrate keep the
Institutions, Presentations and Examinations of Ministers in his own hand, etc.
So that all those Ministers that will side with their power over the
Consciences of poor people, shall be gratified with good Livings for it. Let
any see now if Mr. B's be not the very Method of the Jesuit to restore Popery,
to put the Magistrate upon Imposing or infringing Liberty of Conscience. And
indeed, to add hereto his familiar converse and parley with the Papists, his
eager invitation, and offers of peace and communion with the Roman Catholics,
from p. 364. to 376. where (in 5 or 6 Chapters together) he offers to the
Papists love, peace and fellowship (but is far from offering it to his poor
Brethren at home, who are farther off from Popery then himself, both in
Principles, Doctrine and Practice) may leave the matter without Vacillation,
That it is Mr. B. not the Healing Question that would usher in Popery. The
Grounds he goes upon are these, page 364.

1. That he is satisfied in many Doctrinal points, The grounds whereon M. B. is
satisfied with the Papists.
That the Difference between Protestants and the Papist is not so great as it is
commonly taken for; instancing in certainty of salvation, of Pardon, of Works,
of Justification, of faith, and almost all the Controversies about
Predestination, 1. The Harmony or Proximity of Doctrines between them.
Redemption, Free Will, the work of Grace, etc. So near a Harmony he confesses,
is between them.

2. As being fully satisfied, p. 366. There are many among the Papists that
truly fear God, 2. The Condiscipulation, and Charity b^tween them; and the like.
and are sanctified, gracious people, with whom (says he) I hope to dwell for
ever. And therefore I think it my Duty not only to forbear unjust censures of
them, but also to love them with that entire Christian love by which Christ
would have us known to love his Disciples, and to persuade all others to do the
like. Such a special love he professes he has for the Papists, and will do all
he can to persuade others to it, and forbear censuring of them; so that who
intends most to let in Popery? Mr. B. or the Healing Quest. But not a word of
any such LOVE, Kindness, Charity for, or forbearing to censure the servants of
GOD, that go under the notion of Sectaries (poor souls!) or the Adherents to
the Cause; nay, exciting the Magistrates power most against them (and very
uncharitably) what he can. Upon these and other Grounds which he gives p. 366.
his Proposals to the Papists for peace, M. B's Proposals to the Papists.
or between the Roman and Reformed, are

1. That we may so far agree, 1. For personal Assemblies together.
as to hold personal Assemblies in the worship of God, and live under the same
particular Pastors; And yet he will not offer this to others of Christ's dear
servants that differ from him in particular persuasions of Faith and Worship.

2. If it cannot be; 2. To have a Catholic, Christian Communion together.
That we may hold a Catholic Christian Communion in several Assemblies under
several Pastors, acknowledging each other the true Churches of Christ, etc. And
yet this he will not do to the Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, Vanists (as
he foolishly calls them, from the forge of his censorious and pedantick
Language, Art Pungendi potius quam Pingendi.) 3. To take one another for
Christians and Churches of Christ.


3. If that be not attained; to take one another for Christians and Churches of
Christ, though under such Curruptions. And why might he not more easily take
them he calls Vanists, and Sectaries, or different Judgments at home for such?

4. If this be not effected! 4. To agree together, without hatred of one
another.
4. To consult together on certain terms, on which most peaceably, to manage
our differences with the least hatred and violence, etc. Can he offer this to
Papists also, and not to Protestants at home? let the Reader judge! who are
likest to introduce Popery, or are nearest allied, and most obliged to it? The
Honorable Author of the Healing Quest. or Mr. B. and whether he, Mr. P. and
the rest that are inveighing most amarulently against others (as if they would
allow a Toleration to Popery) do not like Athaliah, cry out Treason first; or
like the Cutpurse that cries out first, STOP THIEF! stop THIEF, stop the
Thief! for themselves to escape by. Let any that have the command or use of
Reason, judge impartially: for the case is plain enough.

2. How far the power of the Magistrate reaches in the matters of Religion, 2
The power of the Magist. in matters of Religion, a Controversy of long
standing.
is another Question; (And a controversy long, before I or Mr. B. were born,)
but not meddled with, by the Author of the Healing Quest. any farther then as to
this Negative granted by most or all the Orthodox of these last ages (as well
as some in former) That they ought not to interpose or impose in the worship of
God, or in the matters of faith and Conscience (as such) but as they come under
their Cognizance (Quatenus Magistrates) or a civil consideration, so they may
and must: And so the Healing Quest. freely and fully propones it, p. 6. They
are to content themselves with what is plain in their Commission; as ordained
of God to be his Ministers to men for good, whiles they approve themselves the
doers of that which is good: In like manner he is to be a Minister of Terror
and Revenge to those that do evil in matters of outward practice, converse,
dealings, etc. What can be more desired? this Controversy was so cleared in
the Assembly of Divines, and in the heat of the Wars, that we made no Question
of it then. Mr. Hooker in's 3. lib. of's survey of Chapter Disc. Cha. 1. asserts
it, That the Civil power may (as a thing civil) require men to be Civil, and to
come under the call or outward tender of the Gospel: (which is vox
significativa Christi,) but cannot compel them, or force their Consciences by
any means. Much less force them to this place or that, this man or that; this
part of the worship of God, or that; but can compel them to be peaceable,
Civil, etc. no otherwise. Thus Mr. Burton said to Mr. Prynne (in's Vindic. and
Answ. to's 12. Inter. p. 70.) We must put a difference betwixt Conscience, and
practice: God alone is Judge, and Christ is Lord of the Conscience; but the
Magistrate of men's Actions, whether good (to encourage them) or evil, to
discourage and punish, Romans 13. 3, 4. and so says the Healing Quest. upon
these reasons, p. 7. That it is not good for the people to be brought up in a
biting, devouring, wrathful spirit one against the other; or be found to do
that to another, which we would not have them do to us were we in their
condition. Now this is the Golden Rule indeed, were it but answered with Silver
Practices; and so no Consciences could be imposed upon in the worship of God:
Besides, for himself and that party Mr. B. urges a necessity of liberty of
Conscience (as we heard) when it comes to his own Case, Vid. Hor. li. 2. see
Sat. 1. Med. so Drex. on school of Patience, pt. 2 c. 1. s. 4.
in his Preface to the Army; which puts me in mind of Opimius a Covetous
Citizen of Rome in a desperate Lethargy; out of which no pinching, cupping, nor
cuffing could keep him awake; till his Physician commanded store of money to be
poured out, and told on a Table hard by him; at the noise whereof, and at the
Doctors loud cry! Opimius! Opimius! look to thine own! it is thine own! he
awakes, and was CURED, was cured; and so may Mr. B. of this Error. But to
proceed, Mr. Buroughs also in his Vindic. against Edwards's Gangrene; says
he, Heinous actions and turbulent carriages, do come within the Magistrates
Cognizance indeed, but they are not fit Judges of Religion or matters of faith.
And therefore the Magistrates we hope do and will understand us; Our hearty
affections and readiness to serve the Magist. in all his capacities and power;
and not to deprive him of any right due to him; only desire that Christ may
have but his right also.
That we are as tender of their Honor, interest and Place; and as ready to
serve them with our Lives, as any men alive; are as active for them, and would
not for a World be without them, or not give them their due, in all their civil
capacities and commands, all we can (as to a most precious Ordinance of God,
that we can be no more without, then the Sun to Rule by day, and the Moon by
night;) but only in these things, that are more promixely and immediately
under Christ's Government and Jurisdiction, in the matters of Gods holy worship,
we dare not, and therefore would not willingly be imposed upon. And this is all
that Mr. B. makes so much noise about; in this his Prop. traducing this prudent
and most pious Asserter of our Liberties, for that he takes the goodness of our
cause to give us this Christian liberty. The Army now may see the ingredients
of this purging- pill; The ingredients of this Pill are in part Jesuits
powder, and partly his own desire to persecute.
partly consisting of the Iesuites-powder, and partly of Mr. B's own sine
quibus esse nolo, compounded on purpose to work out the mixed humors of the
Army; and to work in those simple downright inimical spirits in stead thereof,
as would produce the utter destruction, not only of the body, but indeed of the
very soul and vttals of this Commonwealth. It was a bloody Papist, whose ENMITY
was so great to the poor Protestants, that he would make them first abjure the
reformed Religion, and immediately upon it massacre them; saying, O noble
revenge! that did reach as well to the killing of their souls as of their
bodies; And some are much of the Orators opinion ( Pythea an Athenian) who
thought he never did evil, but when he did the worst sort of evil! as if to
suggest a false witness, or to calumniate, were a little matter, and venial;
(...). But it is not only an evil to do an injury, but to imagine or design it.

His 7. Prop. is, Mr. B's 7. Prop. or PILL for the Army.
That it is not the PARTY that has owned, and now owneth the fore-described
cause, that have the right; nor is any man to be divested of that right for not
owning it. Answ. The fallacy lies, 1. In that PLEONASM of his own invention,
viz. fore-described cause: as he has described it, we grant; but as the
Healing Quest. describes it, we deny his Prop. Two Extremes wisely declined in
the Healing Question.
There be two Extremes men have a mighty propension to, in their stating of the
cause; both which are wisely avoided by the Healing Quest. 1. That wherein men
do give up our Cause to merely Natural right; without respect at all to the
forfeitures of them that have warred, fought against it, betrayed it, 1. The
mere Commonwealths-man, as M. Har. principle.
and given up their Interest in it to the King or a Single person; putting all
into a like capacity, (viz.) The Cavaliers, Common-enemies to this right, and
the faithful Adherents to the Cause; the Conquered and the Conquerours; upon
such Grounds too are very dangerous and destructive to the Cause, (Mr.
Harrington and others go that way.) 2. The rigid fifth Mon. man; (or that goes
under that Name) his Principle.
2. That wherein (upon the single account of our Conquests) others go to the
challenging of their Rights and Liberties, and staring of the Cause, without
any consideration at all, of the Natural Rights and Freedom which people have
to choose their Representatives in the Commonwealth (this way Mr. Feake and
others go.) The first fix it upon a mere humane Foot, and the last upon a mere
Religious (in's Beam of Light.) The scope and substance of both in the Healing
Quest.
But both these Extremes are very excellently waved, and yet the substance of
both, as admirably and amiably comprehended in the Healing Quest. wherein the
Cause is set upon both it is feet: 1. Both to men as men: And 2. to Christians
as such; upon the twofold Right, 1. of Nature, and 2. of Conquest, page 3. or
rather their Natural right to freedom in CIVILS and in SPIRITUALS, which we are
restored unto; and fortified in (under God) by success of Arms. And in this
state of the Question we may close with Mr. B's words, That it is impious and
injurious to set up a party for the whole: The equal Temperature of the
Commonwealth, wherein it does consist.
but not as he states it; Wherein no distinction must be put between
Commonwealth- Traitors and True men; or between the Conquered, and the
Conquering: between Kinglings, and the faithfullest friends of the cause: It is
as just and honest to call up Thieves and Murderers at the Bar (that have
forfeited their Natural Rights and Liberties) to sit upon the Bench, and there
to judge in their own Cause, their Accusers and the Witnesses; as it is for
those Men who have forfeited their Liberties, etc. betrayed their Country,
robbed, plundered, and destroyed the People, in the Kings quarrel, to be
invested or possessed with the Power, or Privileges of the Commonwealth
equally with others of untainted and spotless integrity. The truth of this I
find confirmed in all the Commonwealths that I have met with, and most in the
most eminent, where as Arist. tells us, in 3. lib. Polit. c. 7. Bonos and
aequos dominari oportet, autoritatemque habere omnium. So a little after,
speaking of the exercise, power and privileges of the Republic, he says,
Quos si Boni semper habeant, necessarium est, alios excludi ab honoribus
Rei-publicae. The good, just, and faithful ought to Govern, and others to be
excluded, that are insane and unsuitable to the Weal of the Public; For it
must be an (...), and not a (...), not for all without distinction, but for
them to Govern that are the best Tempered, with justice and mercy to do right
to all, in the exercise of their Functions; as Physicians say of the Humane
body, that it must be (as to the sane Constitution of it) of a due Temperament
both ad pondus and ad justitiam, and so must the Political body. 1. Ad Pondus,
i.e. so as the first qualities or best sort may be brought into such an exact
Proportion, that no one may domineer it ore the other, viz. in Faction or
Parties striving for the mastery; but so as one may balance another; and all be
kept together in the orderly exercise of all the Functions of the Body in an
equal and good Temperature. But 2. Ad justitiam, that is, so as to keep out
evil and corrupt humors from obstructing the use of Functions in the body; and
this is the Eukracy and Timocracy which all sound Commonwealths have
maintained; and ours must. I might instance in the Lacedaemonians, Cretians,
Athenians, Corinthians, Arcadians, Rhodians, Chalcedonians, and others later;
The Romans themselves observing this as the Rule to keep out Tarquin and his
crew; this Rule did keep out Tarquin, and must keep out C. Stuart.
who had a considerable Party in the Commonwealth, as Charles Stuart has in
this, even amongst Brutus's sons; and as like to have repossessed and restored
Tarquin; until this distinction was maintained with justice, (not sparing)
between the absolute Tarquinians (that were unexorable, and would never be for
the Commonwealth, but ever plotting against it;) and the freeborn Citizens, or
faithful Denisons, that did all to maintain it, not forfeiting their Liberties
and Rights (as Livy tells us.) So for other Commonwealths, (...), etc. I hear
that the Mantinians in Arcadia, and also the Locrians, Cretians, Lacedaemonians
and Athenians had such Laws: And in this respect the Grecians were called
(...), not only Greeks but Vindices Libertatis, Great Sticklers for their
Liberties. But I am afraid, lest some consult with the same Oracle that Clement
the fifth did, to destroy the COMMONWEALTH: Si non licet per Viam justitiae;
licet saltem per Viam expedientiae; by Policy and expediency; I mean such as
Caiaphas and the Council condemned our Lord Jesus by, Joh. 11. 50. and 18. 14.
and so may this Cause. But justice is a pure intemperate Virgin, till she be
deflowred by one of the two unchaste Suitors, viz. NIMIUM or PARUM. Both which
must be avoided as extremes, and the Healing Quest. does it excellently; But of
M. B. I may say, (...). Thou have lost the sweetness of the Rose, and the
fragrants of the Cause, by thy Adulterating Art, and mistaking of it. But I
have proved, says Mr. B. that it is a false and wicked cause; Wicked in the
Nullity of the Magistrates duty and power; (but the truth thereof let the
Reader judge; and the Magistrate himself, if he please;) And a false Cause
(says he) in giving the people the Natural Sovereignty; who have but a power
of choosing (that men miss-call a Sovereignty.) The truth is, I am from my
heart, with thousands more, (as well as Mr. B. says he is in matter,) for a
Theocratick or a godly COMMONWEALTH (of which I had prepared a draught in my
imprisonment at Windsor Castle) and O! that we could see it with our eyes so!
both in the Constitution and Administrations of it in these Nations! subjective
to Jesus Christ that absolute Sovereign! 8. Grounds of hope that we shall have
a holy Commonwealth under Christ the head, who is the head of every man, 1 Cor.
11. 3. as well as of the Church, or of every Christian.
Who is 1 Timothy 6. 15. The blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Rev. 19. 16. For whom all things were created, Rev. 4. 11. and 5. 12,
13. Col. 1. 16. Whether Thrones, DOMINIONS, Principalities, or POWERS! etc. 1.
Seeing all Nations must be subservient to him under the seventh Trumpet, Rev.
11. 15. Whom he will either BOW or BREAK. 2. Seeing all these Shakings and
Concussions are to that end, Hag. 2. 6. (Veani Maryish) I making them to
TREMBLE, Ver. 7. (Ve hiryashshetti) and I will make them TREMBLE (with
commotions and troubles) until ( Chemeddat Col Haggojim) the Desire, the
Delight, the Beauty of all Nations come. 3. Seeing the Army have Declared
themselves to be upon this very Bottom and Foot of account, often; but more
particularly, in Declaration at Muscle-borough Aug. 1. 1650. in these words: We
have have not only proclaimed Jesus Christ, the King of Saints, to be our King
by Profession, but desire to submit to him upon his own terms, and admit him to
the exercise of his Royal Authority, etc. Yea, 4. seeing we are already so
forward in it in this Nation; both by the extraordinary Session of this
Parliament: And 5. by their Declaration on the 7. of May last; for our Rights
and Liberties, both as Men and as Christians, i.e. in Civils and in
Spirituals^. Also 6. by that Golden Vote of Parliament; The most excellent VOTE
of Parliament for it: the Lord keep them to it.
somewhat like the Golden Reed which the Angel gave John, Revel. 11. 1. saying,
Arise! and MEASVRE by it, viz. That and their late Votes, That none be put into
Trust, but men of Ability, fearing God, of a Latitude of Love to all the people
of God, (and not to this or that Faction or Party) and of Fidelity to the
Commonwealth, without King, Single Person, or House of Peers. Yea, 7. seeing
there is such a readiness of consent in the Adherents to the Cause; (that are
not partified nor putrified, for a faction nor corruption; (and Mr. B. himself
proposes it, from p. 210. to 241. of 's Holy Commonwealth;) Yea, 8. seeing we
are as a Rouling Stone never fixed, or at Rest, till we fall into it, do we
what we can, Psa. 83. 12. -- make them as a Wheel or a ROVLING Globe; and are
likely to find no settlement without it, Ezekiel. 21. 27, I will overturn,
overturn, overturn! till he comes whose Right it is; or to whom the JVDGEMENT
is given (asher lo hammishpat,) and this can be meant of none but Christ, Joh.
5. 22. to whom all Judgment is committed, Dan. 7. 9. until his Government be
settled in the NATIONS, ( Gnavah, Gnavah, Gnavah assimenah!) I will place in
them a PERVERSE, Perverse, PERVERSE spirit; or as the Sept. has it, (...),
until they be subverted, and brought to this Settlement of God. So that for the
matter, Theocracy, not so well with a Single Persons exercise of the Power of
Sovereignty, as with Judges as at first, and Counselors as at the beginning,
Isai. 1. ^6. in Israel.
i.e. A Theocracy, I agree with Mr. Baxter in: yet notwithstanding I cannot be
of M. B's mind, for the manner of it; as that it consists so well with the
interest of God and Christ, (our absolute Sovereign!) or with the interest of
the People (Adherents to this Cause) which stand together; that a Single Person
should exercise the power of a Humane Sovereign over us! seeing, 1 Samuel 8. 6,
7. the thing displeased the Lord, and was a great evil in Samuels eyes (as the
word is, vajierang) when the People said, Give us a KING; and on that, the Lord
said to Samuel, They have not rejected thee, they have rejected me that I
should not reign over them; or (maasu) they have loathed my Government over
them, wherein I alone was their King, or the Single Person. Much less can I
think that the Natural being of it under Christ! ought not to be in the whole
body of the people (Adherents to the Cause!) which from all it is Integrantia
Membra, Christ is the absolute Sovereign; but the people under him have a
Supremacy
must and may set up persons to execute, and exercise it for the benefit of the
whole. Hence in Dan. 7. 27. it is, that the Kingdom, (Authority, shaltana, in
Sept. (...),) under every part of heaven, is to be given (leyam kaddishe) to
the People of the Saints, (or of the Holy ones) of the Most High; not
immediately to the Saints, as if all Saints, or none but Saints should be in
Power; but that their People, Deputies, and Representatives shall be in Power,
and rule for their interests, in the Cause and concernments, of them and of the
whole People that adhere to the Cause, and go on with them jointly, for a Godly
Commonwealth. Now this whole People cannot give what they never had: if they
have not a Humane Sovereignty, or Supreme Power under Christ, they cannot give
it to their Deputies, That the People have a Supreme Power (under Christ) in
this Government to give to their Deputies in trust! and so the Government is
the Ordinance of Man, 1 Pet. 13. 14. but as a Theocratick Government^, or that
wherein Magistrates are the Ministers of God for good, so it is the Ordinance
of God, Romans 13. 2, 3. and wherein they are the Ministers of the whole Body for
good, so the Ordinance of man too.
or Representatives. But the Argument is, if they can give it ( derivatively)
then they have it; But they can give a Humane Supreme Power or trust and
Sovereignty, (under Christ) to their Deputies; and therefore they have it in
themselves. We might further Argue; that where the lawful power of choosing and
rejecting Rulers lies, there the Supremacy or Humane Sovereignty (under Christ)
lies; but in this body of the people, ( Sane and well-affected) the lawful
power of choosing and rejecting lies; And this Mr. B. admits, that they have the
Vim eligendi, or of choosing. And by the same reason or law of Nature, they have
the Vim rejiciendi and Ejiciendi, of putting by, and out, as well as of putting
in, or of setting up in the whole Body. We speak of Government, as it is (with
Gods approbation) the ordinance of man amongst us; (so the peoples;) but as it
is the Ordinance of God amongst us, so Christ's. It is a Rule in Natural
Philosophy ( Cum aliqua virtus Duobus inest Uni essentialiter, Alteri
Accidentaliter, or Contingenter and minus principaliter. Where a power is in
two, it is in one more principally and essentially; in the other less, and more
contingently. Thus it is between the people and the Parliament; in the first
the same power which the Parliament have, ( viz. the visible, Supreme or
natural Sovereignty under Jesus Christ) is more principally and essentially (as
to the being of it,) viz. in the People collectively; but in the other
secondarily, accidentally, derivatively, or but contingently and pro tempore.
Mr. B' s 7. Pill of Assa foetida.
And therefore it cannot be the false Cause, or that which subverteth the
foundation of Government, as Mr. B. says in this 7. Prop. A Pill prepared of
Assa foetida, for the Warming of their stomachs (to swallow down the better
those secluded members, and all such as have not owned (but are enemies to) the
CAUSE and Commonwealth. Mr. B's 8. Prop. or Pill for the Army; a scoria ferri.


His 8. Prop. That Conquest neither gives them any Sovereignty, nor right to
deprive them of their liberty, that disown that Cause.

Answ. It is true, Ans. Conquest gives them the benefit and freedom of their
Right
that Conquest did not give them the Right, because they had it before as their
Right; but it gives them the freedom of their Right, which was denied them and
obstructed. As the Healing Quest. told him, p. 3. and 5. Their just natural
Right, (which they never forfeited as others have done) restored unto them by
success of Arms; so that they need not run to Conquest to prove their Right,
but to preserve their Rights, and to claim their Liberties in exerting and
exercising of their just Rights.

2. Some kind of Sovereignty is obtained by Conquest, 2. Conquest giv^s them a
power over enemies from ruining them.
( viz.) over enemies conquered, and captivated ones at least, to keep them
from ruling over us, or ruining of us, who are Enemies to us. Therefore this
Prop. is false, to say it gives not any Sovereignty at all; For a
Sword-soveraignty, or a Law of Force and aw over the unexorable and
inexuperable enemies of the Commonwealth, is obtained thereby; (and the Lords
blessing it together.)

But that we affirm is, 3. Conquest ratifies and fortifies us in our Rights.
3. That Conquest has fortified and ratified us in our natural Rights, (and in
the expectation of our spiritual too;) and helps us to hold them the faster by
far, both in civils and spirituals; so as that we might rather expect the
enlargement of our Borders, then the confinement of our Liberties, either in
the worship of God, or immunities and benefits of the Commonwealth.

4. Conquest (with his favor) does keep up in us, 4. Conquest keeps up a Right
of distinction so long as the troubles hold.
a right of distinction between friends and foes; between well and
ill-affected, between them that owned, and them that never owned (or rather
that ever disowned and appeared against) the Cause; which (both as men and as
Christians) we are concerned to keep up with the most lively Remembrance of
those distinguishing mercies, Answers of prayers, and Appeals, and Victories
which the Lord has given us (almost miraculously) as in the days of Egypt,
Exodus 8. 23. and 11. 17. and 15. 1. Judge. 11. 27. Micah 7. 15. And shall we
(most unthankfully) loose? or confound the sense of such discriminating
appearances of God with us in Pihahiroth (or mouth of our greatest dangers; in
the days of our greatest distress) and this we shall certainly do, if these two
last Prop. were true, or Mr. Harringtons and such men's designs should take
effect, ( viz.) To put all back again into the spirit of the Nation, (upon the
single account of bare natural right) without any respect at all had to this
Right of distinction, which God has so miraculously given us in, (to the
bargain) by the late Wars, and Conquests of them that have adhered to the
Cause. If this be an equal Commonwealth, or tends ad sanam constitutionem
Rei-publicae, to the Sanity or Sanctity of the Body, is worthy the
consideration of the wisest Physicians. And if they please, they may feel the
pulse of Oceana as well as of Mr. B. with what Vibrate Motions that beats upon
the Arteries of our Cause; Mr. B. and Mr. Harrington for an unequally Equal
Commonwealth.
and then tell us whether it had not better beat as it does, though it be not
well, yet with less sign of danger, (viz.) EQUALLY inequal; then so inequally
equal, as he would have it! But thus far for Mr. B's Prop. or Pill composed e
Scoria ferri to work upon the Spleen.

His ninth Prop. Mr. B's 9th Prop. or Pill for the Army
They that pretend the inward Warrant of Righteousness (as the Healing Quest.
speaks, he says, p. 9.) the inward Reason and Spirit of Government for the
violation of Laws, Constitutions, and resisting of Authority; as being above
the Letter, etc. do reject the Government of the LORD, and become their own.
But must Mr. B. still be traducing and Tenterhooking the words of the Healing
Quest. which p. 9. says no such matter as he makes up his Prop. with, ( viz.)
for violation of Laws, Constitutions, and resisting of Authority; But thus
speaking of the Capacities wherein the faithful Adherents to the Cause, have
acted; he says, Sometimes in one Form, and sometimes in another, and very
seldom in all points, according to the Rule of former Laws and constitutions,
as to be justified by them any longer then they had the Law of outward Success,
and of inward Justice and Righteousness to encourage them. The Healing Q. for
the Inward Rule of Righteousness with the Outward; and also where the Outward
is deficient.
So that without tawing or stretching his lines like Leather, into what length
or shape he please; they amount but to this, 1. That the Adherents to the Cause
were not without an inward Rule of Righteousness, as well as outward. But 2.
when the outward failed, or that they were not justified by the Letter of the
Law, they had an inward line of Righteousness and Justice to measure their
Actions by, (which the Most High blessed and accepted) and that was a RULE far
more perfect and straight then the letter alone of the old Laws, (which were
made most of them, for the interest of a single Person) nor was this to the
Violation, but to the Vindication (of the equity, sense and meaning) of all
good Laws; not to the Resisting but Recovering of all true Authority from the
Griffen-Gripes and Talons of all Tyranny, the Usurpation and violence of the
Norman Race, or of any other Family or Interest whatsoever, innoculated into
such a Stock or Stump.

2. Is this any more then what the PARLIAMENT (when it consisted of King, 2.
The Kingdom-Parl. in An. 1642. did go by this very Rule.
Lords and Commons, as Mr. B. would have it) did justify to be good, and
consonant with the CAUSE then? in that very action of taking away the Militia
from the King; which being contrary to the letter of the Law, they resolved it
thus; There is in Laws an Equitable and a Literal sense: when there is a
grounded suspicion the letter of the Law shall be improved against the Equity
of it, (i. e. the Public Good) it gives liberty to obey the Equity of it, and
to disobey the Letter. Now where was the Rule of Righteousness? was it in the
Letter of the Laws, which gave away all the Militia to the King? or was there
such a thing as an inward Warrant of Justice to do that Action for the public
Good? Thereby Defending, and not Deflowering the Equity of it.

3. Yet the Spirit, 3. The Inward Rule of Righteousness has the Right hand of
the outward, as the Root of it, and the Fundamental.
Reason, and inward Rule of Righteousness is to be preferred (with his leave)
before the written Rule or letter, as more inerrable, inalterable and radical,
(where the one is repugnant to the other) as the Orator Cicero has it, Non
SCRIPTA sed NATA Lex (against Tarquin) si Regnante Tarquinio, Nulla erat
Scripta Lex de Stupris, etc. Tamen vera Lex est Recta Ratio, Naturae Congruens,
diffusa in omnes, Constans Sempiterna, etc. it is not a Written but an innate
Rule, which is (as Chrysostom Rhetorically tells us) (...). The
self-Disciplining or Fundamental Law that is planted in the very Being of
Mankind; and from thence it buds, blossoms, fructifies, and dilates into the
fairest BRANCHES of Morality. Right Reason is the Law and Rule of Righteousness.
So that if there were no Law written (says the Orator) during the Reign of
Tarquin to check his Lust, yet Right Reason is a sufficient Law, of an
Excellent Complexion and Congruity with Nature, and of as admirable a
Latitude, diffusion and extent to the Good of all; and which never fails nor
fades. PHILO as elegantly gives his Testimony, (...). That Right Reason is the
certain and unshaken Law; not written in corrupt PAPER, or on a Lifeless stone
like a dead Letter (by the greatest Art or greatest Industry of any creature)
but ingraved in the most retentive and living understanding of Man, as with the
finger of God himself, or of an eternal or immortal Spirit. Plutarch tells us
as much tooa,s a Moralist can tell of any Man. (...), etc. The LAW it is self,
is not shut up in Paper or Writings, or limited to any outward Letter or
expression of it in Tables of Stone, or the like; but living, and situating
(like the soul in the body) in a Rational Being, or in Reason its Self. Hence
came that ancient Adage; Inter Bruta silent Leges! Amongst Brutish and
Irrational Creatures, Laws are mute; muzzel'd and unintelligible! why? because
they have not this inward Rule, Laws are silent among unreasonable Creatures,
for want of this inward Rule.
Reason, and Spirit of the Laws. The Formality and Letter of our Laws did
indeed flow from the Interest or Power of some particular men; but the strength
and life of humane Laws must be found and founded (under GOD) in Reason and
Natural Right; which when the Letter or written Rules oppose, they become no
longer Laws, but Flaws in a Commonwealth; lose their vigor, and are but as a
dead letter.

4. Both together (so long as they can consist together, 4. Both inward and
outward together* where they agree.
and are in their vigor (vizt.) the Inward and outward, we make a Rule for
Righteous Actions, between Man and man, (and not the Inward warrant as
sufficient without the outward in such a case, viz. (where they agree together)
nor yet the Outward (as Mr. B. would have it) without the Inward Reason and
Spirit of it, which the other indeed is deducted from, and is more Radicaliter
in intellectu. So that this Mr. B. might have better said, That where the
Outward is deficient, inconsistent or corrupted, But where the outward fails,
not to use the inward Rule, is to reject the Government of the Lord.
Not to use the Inward Warrant or Rule of Reason and Righteousness, is to
reject the Government of the Lord; and to become our own Murderers; and
Tame-Slaves, Brutified to the Lusts and interests of Men, rather then
beautified for the Common Good, as Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken
in Judgment, because he WILLINGLY walked after the Commandments of men. Thus
far for his 9th Pill, and a pitiful dry one, to drink up the Radical Moisture
with, under pretense of a Pill, Lucis Majoris, to evacuate the humor of the
head with.

His tenth Prop. M. B's 10th Prop. in fallacia Homonymiae.
has little in it, only a fallacious conclusion, from what the Healing Q.
predicates in p. 10. That to the wisdom of the Laws and Orders of the Supreme
Judicature, the sword must become subservient; Therefore (says he) your sword
should have been so to the Parliament that was violated; the late Parliament.
But the Healing Q. speaks not a word of a Parliament consisting of King, Lords
and Commons (which Mr. B. means) he speaks of the Representatives of the
Commonwealth, chosen by this Body of the Sound and well-affected to the CAUSE.
So that Mr. B. contrary to all Catholic Laws of Reasoning, Eartheth, or Roots
his disceptation in an Homonymy; and thence concludes it for the late
Parliament that was dissolved; Telling the ARMY that no small fruits would be
procured upon their CONVICTION by these reasons to a repentance, His 10. Pill
or Diacatholicon, to haste them to the stool of Repentance.
i, e. of returning to the secluded Members, and old constitution of King,
Lords and Commons. So that this is the Nature of his Diacatholicon or tenth
purging PILL, (if it operates as he, and those of his mind would have it) they
would bring them first by Lenitives, Vide my Plain Case of the Commonwealth,
near the Desper. Gulf of the common w^.
Anodines, and Emollients, to the Stool of Repentance! And then to ply them
with more asperity, till they make them (like Arrius) purge out their very
bowels and all; and then brand them with the like Infamy for the veriest --
that ever breathed on English Earth, or in English Air.

And now let the Parliament, Army, and all good people, that are sound in their
senses, judge it seriously; Whether it is the Honorable Author of the Healing
Question (as much as he is maligned and menaced by all Parties) or Mr. B. in 's
Wounding Answer) that has asserted the Ill Cause, and deserted the Good? And
which of them come nearest to the constitution of a Free State? and which of
the TWO it is that has given away that worthy Argument by which he should
prove himself an honest man (to use Mr. B's own words) vizt. his Charity? Mr.
Harrington introduced by M. B under color of engaging against an OLIGARCHY.
But in the winding up of our Discourse, I am surprised or waylaid with Mr.
Harringtons correspondence with him, against an Oligarchy (I wish it had been
as much against Anarchy and Atheism,) if he means by it, the present
Parliament, or such a Parliament; or the Body of Adherents to the CAUSE, as one
of them I believe he must, and some say, All (wherein Mr. B. and he agree) but
when he tells us his meaning without mumping or scoffing (which we must
understand before we reply) He may hear further: And at the present in the
words of Hen. 8.) but on better grounds, From their Old Mumpsimus and his New
Sumpsimus, Good Lord deliver us!

But I shall give you my grounds, Mr. Har. and the Petition of July 6. to the
Parliament.
seeing Mr. B. has brought him to hand as his confederate, and shall modestly
discuss it with him, and them of the late Petition, July 6. to the Parliament,
many of whom I dearly respect; and yet I cannot but wonder how busy some are
in this work of refunding, retunding and confounding us in our Cause; not only
with old Popish Mumpsimus's, but with new Paganish Sumpsimus's and Idea's
exhibited to the Parliament like the CHAOS indeed: The Preamble of that
Petition upon a Prolepsis and Presumption; for the Parliament provided for a
Free State, and laid a foundation for it in several Acts of Parliament.
but to enucleate first, the Preamble of that Petition.

1. I judge it is a little too positive and reflective, though couchant under
smooth and candid expressions, as if we had been hurried after an appearance or
shadow, in lieu of our undubitable Rights; and as if that since the dissolution
of that form of Government by K. Lords and Commons, a new constitution ( viz.
of Free State) had not been provided for; which was evidently done, and settled
in several Acts of Parliament, as Jan. 20. 1648. March 17. 1648. May 14. 1649.
July 17. 1649. The words of one are these: Whereas the Parliament has
abolished the Kingly Office in England and Ireland, etc. And having Resolved
and Declared that the People for the future shall be governed by its own
Representatives, and National Meetings in Council, chosen and entrusted for
that purpose, has settled the Government in a Commonwealth and Free State,
without King or House of Lords: Dangerous to insinuate that the Parliament are
SETTLED on no Foundation of GOV. as well as Erroneous.
Be it Enacted, etc. And yet say these Friends, in their Petition, p. 4. Your
minds are not Settled on any known Constitution of Government, or Fundamental
Orders, according to which all Laws should be made; wherein they are too
positive, and upon such mistakes and pre-occupations might gratify our Enemies
too too much, had they (upon this false conception) come up to any maturity by
the late Apostasy or in this NEW-CONSPIRACIE against the Commonwealth. For Mr.
Harrington and that Petition strike at the very Root, Fundamental and
Constituting Acts of Parliament, as well as at the very BEING and integral
Parts of our Cause so long contended for; and crowned (at last) through the
Lords blessing.

I cannot proceed without precaution, M. T. Cic. in M. Ant. Philip. 5.
seeing as Cic. says, Omne malum nascens facile opprimitur; inveteratum fit
plerunque Robustius; it is easy to crush Evil in the Egg; and as Solomon says,
Eccles. 8. 5. A wise man discerns both the time and the Judgment.

1. At the Foundation of our Settlement in Anno 1648. for that they propound
Two Houses of Parliament, 1. Two Houses of Parliament under what names soever,
is inconsistent without settlement laid by Parliament, Anno 1648.
(under new names indeed) viz. of a Senate, and of a Popular Assembly) so
Oceana, p. 13, 14. and Petition, p. 8. which appears to me repugnant and
Diametrick to our dear Cause, to the Acts of Parliament, and to our
Engagements, viz. To be faithful to the Government as it now stands, without
King or House of Peers. Now Aristotle in's Politic. 5. lib. c. 4. tells us of
two ways to destroy a COMMONWEALTH, Quandoque per vim, Two ways to destroy.
the commonwealth.
Quandoque per dolum: Per Vim, aut statim aut postea compellendo; Per Dolum,
non nunquam enim decepti ab initio, Sua demum sponte Recipient alium Gubernandi
Modum, etc. Sometimes it is done by Force, and sometimes by Fraud; in the last
sense, when mistaken at the first laying it, they (by persuasion) or
voluntarily fall into another manner of Government. This is a dangerous CRISIS,
and the Athenians had the sad experience of such Commutations through
proclivity to Noveltie and New Changes, as Act. 17. 21. They spent their time
in it. So AELIAN. Lib. 5. c. 13. (...). The Athenians were given to change in
the State of the Commonwealth, (...). But I cannot commend it; it is an OMEN,
which shall never have my AMEN, so long as I see it conduceable to the
dissolution of the Whole, if they have not special care to preserve the
Constitution; (which with two such Bodies, I do not so well understand.) And I
wonder which is more monstrous in Nature, a Vast Body with two Heads, or a Head
with two Huge Bodies; and how prodigious and dreadful will their motions be, if
one go one way, and the other another, (like the Amphisbaena) let right Reason
judge. But besides this, that which has the most impression, The Danger of a
Single Person to rise as a Third Estate, or to Head those two Bodies.
is the easy Access of a Single Person (called with us, the Third State) by
it: And this is evident not only in Reason, but in Practice; as in the
Lacedemonian and Athenian Commonwealths; For in the First (after Lycurgus's
death) (...). The Lacedaemonians instituted the Court of the Ephors, who had the
chief Power in the Commonwealth, for none stood or were raised up, but a King
and the Ephor; So that a single Person had an Executive Power there: But if a
nimble Wit will without ground, object that this Commonwealth was imperfect or
degenerate, we might instance in Athens (the Pattern of all that they set
before us) (...). Ex Heraclid. de polit. Athen.
In like manner the Athenians instituted eleven men to take the care of
Prisoners; and nine Archons, of which were the Thesmothets, who were thoroughly
tried and sworn to do righteously in the Magistracy, not to take Bribes, nor
to set up again the Golden Image; But the King (who is said to be one of the
Archons) did administer the Laws which belonged to Sacrificing and to Warring.
So that after this Platform, are we exposed to the open Danger of a Single
Person or a King, and of giving the Power of Religion and Worship into the
hands of the Magistrate; not answerable to the Rules of Christ, our Cause, nor
a Christian Commonwealth, but of Heathen Lawgivers, or Nomothets.

2. In my apprehension (submitting to better judgment) it casts it is keenest
Arrow at the very being, The Pet. strikes at the cause.
principal and integral parts of the Cause (which we have proved to be our
Rights in civils and in spirituals, without imposing upon Conscience by a
National-worship.) For,

1. In Civils, 1. In Civils, giving away our cause to the Kings party, or
spirit of the Nation.
they have not stated their Aequale cum justitia, neither in Righteousness to
the Cause, nor indeed to the Reasons or Prudentials of their own Authors; I
mean the Heathens whom Mr. Har. most follows, (for they admit not the Holy
Scriptures; or our (heavenly) Politics ad Theocratiam, (though it is like they
have said it often ( Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven) as the Woman
used to say her Prayers and feed her Hens together, Our Father which art in
Heaven! Coop, coop, coop, coop! etc.) Nor vouchsafe they such a value upon the
series of Mercies, Providence, Prayers and Victories all along the late Wars,
as to give in one Word for Jesus Christ or his Interest in the Nations; Nay,
leave him like a Pelican, and account it Ridiculous, some of them, having
scoffed at it openly; and therefore to make my self intelligible (even to
Barbarians, if they will be such) I shall sum up an evidence against them out
of Mr. Har. own (Oracular) Tutors; and begin with Arist. in lib. 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5. for his Correction in that most inequally equal Liberty that he and they
allow to the Kings Party, and them that have forfeited all, not laying justice
in the Foundation of their Commonwealth, but planting it upon the whole
multitude and community; yea, Oceana p. 46. says plainly, That the Royalist
for having opposed the Commonwealth in OCEANA, can neither justly for that
cause be excluded from his full and equal share in the Government, This agrees
with M. B's Prop. to the Army.
nor prudently for this, that the Commonwealth with consist of a Party. But how
imprudently and differently from his own Authors! (as well as how irrationally
and unjustly as to the cause!) Mr. H. would call the Malefactors from the Bar
to the Bench? and so (in little time) worm us quite out of our Possession and
Rights that have adhered to the Cause, by their Majority of Votes throughout
the Nation that have not; is worth considering. That so if that Thesis be true
(in's Prerog. of Pop. G. lib. 1. chapter 10.) That a Commonwealth well fixed can
never be conquered by force! yet this Hypothesis is as true, that not fixed,
but inconstant, it may be conquered by fraud; and the Cavalier may win it at
the last Game, though they lost it at the first. Wherefore this I find was
their first Policy and care at Athens, as it ought to be in England; (...).
THEMISTOCLES, Heathens deny such a foundation of Commonwealth, as too evil for
them.
Aristides and the Senate of the AREOPAGITES were able to do much in the
Commonwealth; and first of all, Care was taken of this; That none should
unsettle the State, or exceed the limits laid to it. This is not the Policy
they follow, I am sure; and it is obvious out of their own Authors, how ill
they would found the Commonwealth, that take so little notice of the Cause, (of
the interest of Christ,) or of the distinction that is made between Delinquents
and Adherents: Lib. 5. c. 2. de Carthag. Republ.
thus Arist. Pol. Horum igitur Principium est magis, quam Patrimoniorum
exequatio, civitatem sic instituere; Ut boni quidem Viri plus sibi quam
competat habere non quaerant: Improbi autem etsi quaerant, habere non possint,
etc. That the beginning of them, ( viz. such Governments) ought to have more in
it, then a mere equality or exequation of Patrimony (or of Natural rights,)
viz. that good men may not seek to have more then is fit for them; Nor bad men
have it though they seek it. So in the 4. lib. c. 11. he speaks, ad omnem rem
and rhombum, to the Case in hand from the Laws of Lycurgus, Charondas and
others; The Conquered have lost their Rights.
That if any Risings, Tumults, Seditions, ( aut Pugnae fiunt inter Multitudinem
and opulentes, quibuscunque Vincere contingit; Hi neque Communem amplius habent
Rem-public, neque Equalem) or Wars be waged between the People and the Rich
ones (such as the King's Party were, and therefore called Cavaliers;) and it
happens to them to have the Day; these that were conquered, have neithe^ common
nor equal Commonwealth privilege, after that. And this he ( de optima Repub.)
affirms to be of the best Commonwealths in the World. For otherwise (says he)
not only the (...), His Reason for it, why they have not equal privilege with
others.
the little Deliquents, or offenders in small things, but the (...), very great
offenders, and greatest Enemies in the Nation, will be ever and anon doing
mischief, and most capable of it (do what we can!) This may invite them from
beyond the Seas, with a change of Projects, but not of Principles, (Coelum non
scelus ii mutant, qui trans-mare currunt;) and it is a pretty toy (for fools to
play with!) to think that frames (of men's making) can keep them in, Unruly
spirits of men not to be kept in, like Italian Cats to turn Spits.
like Cats; when the Laws of Gods making cannot hold them, without new hearts!
But a prettier sport for the mimick Ladies by half to laugh at; (after the
Italian mode) if our Englishmen (were put into frames) like Cats to turn their
SPITS and bast their MEAT, and (in the mean time) they fall a MEWING and a
MADDING, till they have broken loose, tore all off of the Spits, and served
themselves with it in the first place. As sure enough they will, seeing such
Cats are strong, and (for all his frames) will be Cats still: nor can they be
made to turn the Spit without a Rack; and when they are enraged, I would be
loath that Mr. H. should be basted, as they will bast him to make up the
Mumming. Nor can we trust that Maxim of his (p. 48. Oceana,) Give us good
orders, and they will make us good men! so much, as give us good men, and they
will give us good orders; and Government too, with Gods blessing.

Tristes Quaerimoniae
Si non Supplicio Culpa reciditur.
Quid Leges sine moribus
Vanae Proficiunt? --
Therefore if the Petitioners mean with Mr. Har. by the free people (p. 6. of
the Pet.) all the Nation, without any distinction, To put the Government into
the spirit of the Nation, is destructive to the Cause.
or Cognizance of any difference between Royalists and Realists, Delinquents
and Adherents, such as have forfeited, and such as are well-affected (that have
waded through their own blood to recover and hold these their Rights) they
strike Mortally at the Cause, the Blood, the Treasure spent; the Prayers,
Tears, Skulls, Bones and Limbs of thousands in the Cause! yea, at all the
distinguishing Mercies, manifestations and Victories that we have had. And when
(by this fraud) the Cause is thus far gone; and all the Blood in the Veins of
the Commonwealth mingled, Then the Rotation will be a mere Rottation to Parl.
adherents and the Cause.
with ten times more corrupt then is sound? (forsooth!) what serves your
Rotation for, but for Rottation, and inevitable ruin to the Commonwealth?

Besides all this, it is contrary to all forms of Commonwealth, to lay such a
foundation for the Civil Government! See Arist. Pol. lib. 5. c. 1. Plures sunt
formae rerum Publ. and in his confitentur quidem Omnes justitiam and
convenientem aequitatem (additur in Marg. secundum Proportionem equale,)
Contrary to all true forms of a Commonwaalth, to lay the equality as Mr. H
does.
Nam populus constat ex iis, qui cum sint SECVNDUM QIUD Pares, Putant se
SIMPLICITER Pares. Many are the forms of Republics, and truly all acknowledge
justice and convenient equity, (or equality proportioned;) for the people
consist of such as are simply equal; or else so, in some respect, and not
absolutely. Thus also did the Syracusans after good success against the
Athenians; They fell into a Popular State, and planted it upon the sound part
or body of the people (as what wise Master Builder, but would lay the best and
soundest for a foundation? 1 Cor. 3. 10.) lib. 3. c. 7. Verum bonos and equos
dominari oportet, Autoritatemque habere omnium, etc. But it is fit that good
and just men Rule, and that such as they have the whole Authority; and not the
known Enemies of the Commonwealth: for those that will not yield to the
Government of it, must never weild the Scepter in it: Neminem been imperare
posse, qui non prius sub Imperio fuerit; it is unreasonable to set up him over
us, that will set himself against us; Some under tempt. of running out of one
extreme into another, from Oligarchy into Ochlocraty. What Oligarchy is, and
what it is not.
and no man can Rule well, that is not first in subjection to that Rule and
Government. But as Mr. H. (and those friends with him in the Oligo-machy are)
so incessantly afraid of an Oligarchy, so I wish they would not hazard us with
an Ochlo-craty; And if he had defined it, like a Logician (rather then a mere
Etymo-logist) or an Oligo mathist, he would have told us, that every few ruling
(be they but 1, 2. or 300.) are not an Oligarchy; but when those few are a mere
Party, faction, or but part for the whole; of one judgment, way or design, for
themselves or their party, without respective and due Aequi-libration to the
whole, but imposing upon the whole: which cannot be said of our Parliament now
sitting; who consist of the several judgments, principles and parts of the
whole Body (of adherents and in sanity.) The Saints to Rule how not? and how.
But, it seems the Scheme is cast, and jealousy is laid, lest Saints (as they
say) should get into the Government; who (of all the Rest) says Oceana, p. 47.
are the most dangerous (and I must confess, such as would be accounted so that
are not; or would set up any one Party, Sect or Opinion whatsoever, over all
the rest, and call themselves the Saints; or that are for Saints merely as
Saints, and for none but such whom they so account, (excluding men as men) are
dangerous: nor are we of opinion that this Government under the seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15, 16. is initiated or matriculated by the personal
appearance of Jesus Christ; but all we hold is, that the most holy, able, wise,
pious and (every way) qualified persons, men fearing God, hating covetousness,
of the highest capacity, reason and latitude to all (as Solomon had a heart
like the Sea!) and of the liveliest courage for the cause and interest of our
dearest Jesus, and of the whole Body, be set up over us. Not that they should
be all such, or none but such (for that we cannot expect) but to do our best to
find some such; to pray for them, and to empower them; and that the highest
principles have the highest places (which they are suited to and for) in
Harmony and Symmetry with the whole, and not otherwise. Now if this be
Dangerous, We will be tried by God and the Country; I mean by the God of order,
and orders of God himself (in his Government.) For M. H. and those
Philo-demoticks that skew at this, They admit not so much in the foundation and
equality of it, as the Heathens.
would set us to dance the beginning of the World, or with Mr. P. and B. the
Spanish Galliard (after Contzen and Campanella:) not admitting us so much as
the very Heathens (their Teachers) did allow in the laying of the foundation of
the Commonwealth, viz. upon the sound and most untainted parts of the whole
Body, and not upon tag and rag, good and bad, Adherents and Delinquents
together for that ( in disparibus non existit Proportio) there is no
possibility of making this equal. Arist Pol. l. 3. c. 3.
The dispute in Arist. is, whether the Virtue and worth of a Good man? or of a
Good Citizen, as such, should carry it; and Arist. is for both: but not so much
as hesitates or Questions whether wicked men, or Bad Citizens should be in it,
or equal with the rest; for he positively concludes it, What Government wicked
and unstable.
in these words: Civitas non ab Improbis, sed ab Optimis gubernetur! yea, he
tells us, where the Government is not laid so ( i.e. upon the best men) it is
wicked and unstable. See lib. 5. c. 1. Propter inaequalitatem oritur seditio;
sed Duplex est aequum, Vnum Numero, Alterum dignitate; 1. Numere quidem ceu
multitudine and magnitudine, idem and aequum; 2. Dignitate autem dico id quod
est secundum Rationem, fatentes autem Simpliciter esse justum, id quod est
secundum dignitatem contendunt. Simpliciter omnino secundum Alterutrum (i.e.
Numerum) statuere aequalitatem improbum est, patet autem ex eo quod contingit,
nulla enim hujusmodi Rerum Publ. recipit stabilitatem; Causa vero hujus, quia
impossible est, ex primo Errore in Principio Commisso, non evenire ad extremum
aliquid Mali. It is because of an inequality, that sedition arises; but there
is a twofold equal: (1.) one in the Number (of all the people together,
Equality to lie in the multitude or mere number, is injurious to the
Commonwealth
tag and rag as they come.) 2. The other in the dignity (good and most
deserving of the People.) In the number, or in the multitude and magnitude of
them, is the same equality; but in the dignity, (or good, sound and best of the
whole body) I say, is that which is according to Reason. But such as profess
for a Commonwealth, do simply contend for that which is laid upon Dignity (or
goodness) as that which is the Just (Government) and equal. But it is a wicked
thing to appoint the equality simply, altogether according to to the other (i.e.
upon the whole number, or Promiscous Chaos of the people.) And it appears from
what happens, that no Commonwealth of this kind, has stability, or can stand
long! (mark that!) and the reason is this, because it is impossible from the
first error committed in the beginning (or first laying of the Commonwealth)
there should not happen some extreme evil, or other. Thus far for the sense
(and sentence) of his own Oracle (to name no more) against such an unjust
Equality of Pandemick Government and foundation; without distinction of
Dignitaries, This will certainly rob us of all at last.
or discrimination of the Good from the Bad, as a very unadvised thing, that
will certainly rob the well-affected of their Rights! give them up to the
Dammees of the Times! and but put them into an equal capacity for present! and
into an under-capacity for future! (or by unavoidable consequence, through
over-balance of Number) with their enemies! who so shall be sure, to swallow
all up at once! Lib. 1. Prolus. 2. Host.
And Strada calls this, the (...) or ungodly Rule. But because Mr. H. thinks us
all bare-wall'd Idiots, and illiterate in Republi. (that run not his way,) as
if we were not able to lay down the difference between a Wood-cock and a
Wag-tail; although I have read diverse others beside Aristotle upon this
subject, I shall leave him to commence Master of that Art, and Doctor of that
Conceit; and conclude with Cicero's words, In M. Anton. Philip. 2.
Dolebam, dolebam, P. C. Rempubl. vestris quondam, meisque Consiliis
conservatam, brevi Tempore esse perituram; Neque vero eram tam indoctus,
ignarusque rerum, ut frangerer animo propter vitae cupiditatem; quae me manens
conficeret Angoribus; dimissa molestiis omnibus liberasset! It troubles me! it
grieves me! (O renowned Fathers!) that the Commonwealth kept formerly by your
and our (care and) Counsel, should perish in so short a time; neither was I
(nor am I) so unlearned or ignorant of affairs, that I should break my heart
through any greedy desire after life; which remaining in me, would fill me with
Anxieties; but leaving of me, would free me from all my Troubles. And there I
leave the first Part.

2. The other part of the Petition respects that Integral of our Cause, 2. Part
of the Petition wrongs us in our cause, which requires equilibrity at Gods
worship.
which asserts our Religious freedom and Aequilibrity at the worship of God;
which the Petition would entrench upon, p. 9. proposing to the Magistrate a
National-worship or Religion (says M. H. suitable to the National Conscience,)
which when the Powers that are, have defined, resolved and ordained; They offer
(in the same Petition) two things: 1. That all who shall profess the said
Religion (which succeeding Parliaments shall appoint) though of different
persuasions (in the said Religion) be equally protected. 2. That no Religion
contrary to Christianity (it being left to them to define, and to defend what
they mean by that!) be tolerated, or allowed. If this do not endanger, or leave
us exposed to Popery, The danger of committing to Parliaments chose by the
spirit of the Nation, the worship of God National.
Prelacy, the old Hierarchy, Common Prayer, or any thing that they shall call
Christianity, (in case it be committed to Parliaments chosen by the Spirit of
the Nation) I submit to the judgment of the Reader, upon what I have said
before in Answ. to M. B's 6. Prop. and do find my fears (raised by the
Libanius-like or Julianick scorn and contempt, some of them put upon the Lords
servants that assert Christ's interest in the Nations,) that they would not
leave us a Pent-house to stand under when the storm comes.

The two Expedients, Their two Expedients defective in diverse particulars.
p. 10, 11. to secure the Cause, and keep the People from betraying their
Liberties (if any yet remain, when the life of our Cause is fled to the
Antipodes; for quarters, if any can be found) are: 1. That it may be I reason,
for any member of either Assembly, or any person whatsoever, to move or propose
in either of the said Assemblies, the Restitution of Kingly Government, or
Single Person; or against the equal freedom and protection of Religious persons
of different persuasions. But 1. they never tell us who must make that
Law-Paramount; for if they say this Parliament has the Legislation in that,
they must acknowledge it in other things too, and why not in all? 2. Will the
People stand to it, when it is done? or what Use or previous signification will
such a Law have, before the convention of the whole body of the People? whom
they suppose to be above Law, and what can bind them? or the two Assemblies
met, and till there be their own ( Spontanean) consent? before which time the
King will be entered, and the Scene be altered. 3. And how not speak against
the equal freedom of Religious persons? when the freedom of them is far from
being equal, or indeed Religious? That it is not equal, is evident in their own
words, viz. That those who fall in with the National worship, be maintained;
but others (accounted Sectaries, must only) be protected from bodily violence,
(or tolerated:) and is this equal? or to all alike? 4. They would have nothing
else made Treason (p. 11. for no other matter or cause whatsoever) so that all
risings, rebellions and other preparations for the King may go scot-free. 5.
And this is only for them too, that shall propose it in either of the
Assemblies; so that in any other part of the Nation else, or in any Market
Town, they may do that, and more too, without Treason or Reason. There be many
other things of less weight, which will admit of just exception; The Order of
Their Rotation.
as p. 8. in the Order of their Rotation, That a Third Part of the Peoples
Representatives (and no more) do sit at once? (but how that can be the
Representative Collectanean of the whole Body, I understand not.) Also as to
Time; why with such inequality, And in the Timing of it unequal.
that a Third part be but for one year, another Third for two years, and the
Next for three years? why none (be he ever so able) may be chosen again? to
serve his Country, till some considerable Interval, or Vacation? albeit he have
a more excellent Anointing then others, and a Testimony like to Job's, Chap.
29. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. for Righteousness, Merit, and Works of of Mercy? I
cannot conceive for the* Public Advantage; seeing that his own Oracle tells
him, Arist. Polit. Lib. 3. Chap. 9.
In optima Republica si Quis excellat Virtute, quid de eo faciendum? Non
dicendum est ut Talis Vir sit pellendus, atqui neque Gubernationi Aliorum Talis
Vir, erit Subjiciendus. That Such a one is not to be cast off or put away,
neither to be subjected to others, who is so fit to Rule over others.

And whether this way be not (of any) the most liable to an Ostracisme, Danger
of an Ostracisme by this Rotation.
let any judge? by discouraging, laying aside, or driving out of the Land, the
most publicly Spirited Worthies that are in it; Men of the greatest Ability,
Gallantry, and Fidelity (by which means a many brave Governments have been
utterly destroyed:) As the Athenians, Argives, Thebans, Rhodians, and others.
It is said in Athens, (...). That Hippias played the Tyrant, and he brought
forth the Law of Ostracisme; but others were cast into exile by it, such as
Xantippus, Aristides, etc. Nor can we but foresee, how fast the Wheel of their
Rotation would Boult or fling out the best and ablest in the Commonwealth, Mr.
Har's Cake made by this boulting. Oceana, p. 13.
for Bran, leaving the worst behind In, of all others. And yet of this must
his Cake be made, which (after it is baked) he would have divided by silly
Girls! A pretty sport for the Mummers indeed, or those nimble-witted
House-Wives (that with Vice can outvie the Virtues of the best) to learn so
lightly the whole Mystery of a Commonwealth, and most abstruse Intrigues or
Cabals of State (page 13 Oceana) That when these Joans are weary with their
Bobbins, they may bob our ears bravely, with a Garrulous Rule: and when they
lag in their Bone-lace, they may lace our bones, (for Logger-Heads,) to let
them lay down the Distaff, and take up the Scepter; leave the Spindle, and
divide the Spoil; yea, then sit like Meg-Pies at their doors, Dumb Saints in
their Idols Churches! Goats in their Gardens! Devils in their houses! Angels in
the Streets! and Sirens at their Windows! as they say of the Italians; for when
they can live no longer by their Work, they shall live by their Wits, in Mr.
Har's Commonwealth, that sifts our the best, and keeps in the worst to make his
Cake with. But in Lacedemon, (...). Lycurgus the Son of Eunomus, willing to
endow the Lacedaemonians with their dues in Righteousness and Justice, took not
away any worthy or good Reward from any one. And the Thebans, to encourage
Dignity, and keep up the Honor of Magistracy from contempt, made a Law, Vt
nemo habilis esset, ad Honores Reipublic. suscipiendos, nisi December Annis a
Mercatur a destitisset, etc. That no man should be accounted qualified for the
Honors of the Commonwealth, i.e. in Magistracy) unless he had first left his
Merchandising ten years: Such a care had they to keep out the Joans and Toms,
which M. H. admits (by turns and times) as the Rotation boults them into the
Government, and their Betters out. And what was said of Clisthenes an Athenian,
(...), might possibly be applied to Mr. H. were their Rogation effected; that
he was one of the first that introduced this Government by Ostracisme, and one
of the first that felt it, and would have retro-duced it; The first that
brought it in, and the first that it wrought out. Therefore let him secure his
own Bull, before he baits another, and take his Play! (...).

Lastly, His Platform would more gratify Popery, Athiesm and Paganism; then
the Platform of a Christian Commonwealth
I would willingly be informed how his New Platforms or Principles Paganish or
Popish, fetched from Athens, or from Venice, can without cruciating extremities
and applications) be adequated to our Commonwealth under Christian profession?
so that Quae semel possidebant Papiste, semper possideant Rapiste; what the
Papists once had, Rapists and Ravenous ones would ever have, ( viz. our Rights
and Liberties from us;) Nor could it be acquired (I think) without greater
Advantages to Papists and Atheists then to us, seeing the very interest of the
Son of God, and Saints in the Nation, the best and noblest Cause on earth (in
all the integrating Parts thereof) and Adherents thereto, is not taken Notice
of in his Platform; neither in the Balance nor the Wheel; in the Ballot nor
Rotation, (or Rogation) of it; so that, Differs curandi tempus in Annum?
Quicquid delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achivi. I may conclude with Mr. B. p. 240.
His holy Commonw. from p. 224. to p. 240.
That God having already given us the best Fundamental Laws; Let us have but
good Magistrates, and we shall have good Derivative Laws (or humane.) It was a
Law amongst the Cretians, that (...), etc. that their children should learn
their Laws with Melody; that from the MUSIC they might take great pleasure in
them, and more easily commit them to memory. We need no such Law, to endear or
dulcifie our Cause or the Laws of it in the Commonwealth. If the foundation of
it be that, which the Hand of the Almighty has laid amongst us both for Church
and State; from Christian principles, rather then from Paganish or mere Morals;
it will make most excellent Harmony in the ears and Hearts of all men and
Christians; And the Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The
Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my Strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God,
What our Governors in Parl. once thought of those called Sectaries, the poor
despised servants of Christ.
Zach. 12. 5. Thus our Governors thought (of them) in the days of straits (and
will again see it) one of their best interests, to have their Prayers and their
God, as well as their Purses and Blood engaged for them; and not disoblige them
(upon jealousies suggested by the enemy) who for their virgin-fidelity and
untainted adherence to the Cause, may be called (...), as the Lacedaemonians did
their wives after their innocence did break out, and get above the clouds of
suspicion and reproach. But if (after all) they will be planting and founding
us again in the spirit of the Nation, as if God had owned no Cause, or made no
signal discrimination; or shaken no such foundations of the earth, etc. (which
their Lord General pretended as one ground of their interruption) which Mr. H.
and others would hurry them into, to the endangering of the Cause, and the
disobliging the Adherents; Then will the Jehovah, that keeps Covenant with
his people, and not alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89. 34.
Acts 2. 30. and 3. 20, 21. raise up others in their stead, to carry on this his
cause, both in the civils and the spirituals; and to form another People for
himself to show forth his praise, Isa. 43. 21. Then they that Rule over men,
shall be just, ruling in the fear of God; and they shall be as the light of the
morning when the Sun arises; A Morning without clouds, and as the tender grass
that springs out of the earth, by a clear shining after rain, 2 Samuel 23. 3,
4. which that these may be, agrees better with my Prayer then with his
Proposals I am sure. But thus I leave him whom Mr. B. had Coyted as a
stumbling block before me: whom I am not only gotten over, but I presume have
given a good lift to the removing of him out of others way, (as to the right
foundation of the Commonwealth, and stating of the Cause.) So that from this
time forward, we need no Luxuriant wit (or (...)) to fain (...), him a
vomitting (as Mr. P's followers Pamphlet it a Commonwealth) and others (qui
sputum lingunt, who lick up any thing) as haurient and attractive of the stuff;
as Galaton did picture out Homer, in his strains, and other Poets a supping up
what he so exuberously vomited out. Neither need we answer him with much more
then the German Min. wrote in his Study, when the Devil did disturb him, and
look over his shoulder,) But the Son of God came to dissolve all the works of
darkness; which his enemy no sooner read, but vanished. Now to conclude with
Mr. B. (for Mr. H. I met with but in the way, The Author's impartial and
respective close with Mr. Baxter.
with his Mummers; and those that ride in post, use to take fresh horses for
present Service, but look no more after them: thus does Mr. B. make use of Mr.
H. no otherwise.) I would, if he were capable of hearing me (for the noise of
DRVMS) assure him, that not a desire to rake into any Man's failings (having so
many of mine own, by which the Lord is pleased to keep me most busy at home,
under the sense and burden of them*) or to pick out the evils, without due
acknowledgement of the good in many of his Books, that gave edition to this
decertation; but indeed a sincere affection to my dearest Christ, his cause and
the Commonwealth; to truth and righteousness, and the Assertors of it, that lay
too much under the most unchristian Trajections, supercilious and oblique
censures of his Pen, prepared (it is feared, from the effects) to sharpen the
most malign influences and aspects that could be cast upon them by the common
enemies; who would as much rejoice in their destruction, as in their
traduction; (who lie in ambush to murder the innocent, Psalm. 10. 8.) and like
the Q. of Scots once of the Protestants (slain in the days of Joh. Knox) would
look upon it with a Protestation that their eyes never beheld a better
Tapestry! But they that have the Record of the Highest hand, and protection of
the Holiest to preserve their Memories (and embalm them to Posterities,) are
above their reach. For he shall bring forth their righteousness as the (or)
shining light; and their judgment as the (tzohorajim, dual. N.) double, or as
two lights and splendors, Psalm. 37. 6. in our Transl. as the Noonday, i.e.
shining both in the former and in the Afternoon (or future) Light. Nor do I
desire to study the Alphabet of Great Men's dispositions, but to obviate that
STRATAGEM (made in the same forge with his Key for Cath.) devised and timed to
divert our Worthies (who (we hope) will raise up the Renown of this Nation)
from minding the Public, by their own Private Vindications; or else to raise
round about them such a SUMMER-DUST, that we might be sure to loose them, or
have them hid a while, in the midst of it, but that a shower has allayed it;
and it is hard to say whether Sir H. Vane and our other Patriots be of more
unblemished honor, integrity, and desert (beyond any bad-mans blasting or
contrivance;) or Mr. B. Mr. P. and such unsober Pick-thanks, (yea, Pickroones
(of good men's reputations,) of more sin and shame, for slandring so (beyond and
good man's blessing or connivance.) (...). Pythagoras himself was wont to say,
These two things (which are very beautiful) are given to men as Divine, viz. to
embrace the truth, and to do well to others. Neither of which are much seen in
Mr. B's company all the way of his Aeromachy, nor Hairesiomachy, as he
pretends; neither is his Tongue the Pen of a (mahir sophar) ready Accomptant in
the matters of the KING, i.e. Jesus Christ, Counsel to Mr. B to scum his own
POT first.
Psalm. 45. 1. Wherefore I could have wished, he had so much weighed his own
Reputation, (as well as Christ's Ministry,) seeing a good name is called an
ointment, Cant. 1. which Olfactum afficit! Spiritum reficit! and cerebrum
juvat! that gives at savor,) as first, to have scummed his own POT! seeing the
Prophet says, Ezekiel. 24. 6, 11, 12.
Woe, woe! to the pot whose scum is in it! and whose scum is not gone out of it!
how does that appear? Verse 12. Wearying with lies; and the great scum went not
forth; but it shall be in the fire! therefore says the Lord, Verse 11. Set it
empty upon the Coals! that the Brass of it may be hot and burn! and the
filthiness of it in it! So that he shall hurt none but himself! burn his own
brass! and the filthiness of his own pot. And indeed I was the better content
to undertake this duty to the Public, and to deal thus with M. B. because he
is a man of such severity and Eagle-eyed acuteness in others men's faults, that
I may thereby learn more to my own PROFIT, then by the best Book I ever yet met
with; and as one said to Antisthenes, (...). Strike me home! if you will! only
let me learn what I can from you! neither can you find a Cudgel so cruel to me,
that it should drive me from the benefit of the occasion of it. Wherefore let
us look to it diligently! (...), Heb. 12. 15, 16. lest any man fail ((...))
from the grace of God! lest any root (...) (or radicale humidum) of bitterness!
be springing up in you, etc. he that does ought presumptuously, reproacheth the
Lord, Numb. 15. 30. yea, the very Heathens (as Numa Pompilius) instituted
Priests called FECIALES, whose office was to preserve the peace (between the
Romans and others) not to disturb it, or destroy it: and our Lord Jesus has
left us most ample and excellent Rules and examples of love, peace, and
estimation of each other, without striving for the mastery, Mar. 9. 34. Luke
22. 24, 26. Joh. 13. 34, 55. and 15. 12. Ephesians. 5. 2. and 4. 32. Tit. 3. 9. 1
Cor. 1. 10. and 11. 17, 18. 1 These. 4. 9. 1 John 4. 21. Romans 16. 17, 18. Mat.
24. 23. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. and oh! that the same mind were in us also! each
striving to serve the other in love! keeping up a commensurate and equal
latitude of liberty in matters of worship amongst all the members of the BODY,
though differing in their several forms, The most probable way to reconcile us
ALL IN ONE.
seats, offices, and functions, for the service of the head and of the whole,
as it is in the Humane Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13, 27. Romans 12. Were all an eye (says
the Apostle) where were the hearing? or were all an ear, where were the
smelling? And could we impetrate it at the Hands of our honorable Senators,
(as I hope we shall) a General or Grand Meeting of some of all different
judgments (who are most comprehensive and large in their love to all Saints
(as the Apostle says Col. 1. 4.) a little to argue the Case together like
Brethren in love, without heat of passions or provocations) to advise with the
Lord, his Word, and one with another, upon the way and means of Reconciling,
Uniting, Indearing, and Injoynting of the WHOLE BODY of Adherents and
Believers, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. (for which end is the variety of Gifts,
Administrations and operations given, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6.) until
we find out the proper places, joints, graces, offices, and usefulness of all (
collectively;) and every individual part, party, or form of the Body
(distributively) under one and the same head Jesus Christ; I am persuaded it
would have a wonderful blessing in it, and might tend to settle us most
sweetly, satisfactorily and Symmetrically in this Nation; (if the Lord please)
both to all Parties, and to the WHOLE; no one seeking to set up a Party for the
Whole; or a Party-growth, but the growth and increase of the whole Body. Col.
2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. or the Communion of all Saints; and of all sorts of
Saints, as of necessary use and functions even in those things that differ.
That all the whole building may be fitly framed together, and growing up into
one Temple, one Tabernacle, one House, one Vine, one Kingdom, one Body, and one
City compact: and though the Temple has many Parts, and the Tabernacle Courts;
the House many distinct Rooms, and the Vine Branches; the Kingdom (of Christ)
several divided Provinces, the Body Members, and the City Streets and Companies
(in the same Corporation) yet they are all but one. And truly with strong
cries, sighs and groans for Sion thus pulled apieces and into PARTIES! with
struggling Prayers, Faith, and Tears to the Lord! shall I labor after this
Uniting, and Injoynting of all good men! and for Mr. B. P. and that Party, I
wish they would be quiet, for their own sakes, as well as SION'S.

Ut quiescant porro moneo, and desinant
Male dicere; Malefacta ne noscant sua.
TO THE Parliament of the Commonwealth, NOW Returned to the Great Exercise of
Supreme Trust.
YOu are brought together to do your last Works, by the same hand that blessed
you together in your first. Neither have we been wanting in our poor Prayers to
the Almighty, and incessant endeavors with the Mighty (particularly the Army,
Council of Officers, and others) to effect your Return and the late Turn. By
which we see how ( Ludit in Humanis Divina potentia rebus!) the Lord plays with
the Affairs of men, and tries them with the most Golden Opportunities (to serve
his interest in the Nations) that may be; wherein never men met with more
Concurrent significant and glorious Providence then your selves; and this for
one, that you might revive the Plant of Renown in this Nation, or it revive
you; and the most orient Luculency of your former Actions aspire and sparkle
out in your Latter, if the Lord so please. Et ita praeclara erat recuperatio,
Libertatis Rei-pub. ut ne Mors quidem fuit (aut fit) repetenda Liberate
fugienda. Of such Renown and eminency is your second Arrival, and this Revival
of the Commonwealth, that verily Death it is self, neither was (nor is) to be
bawked in the further pursuit of it. But ah, alas! -- how quickly are our
windows shut up again? The present Cloud over us, what it is made up off.
and our matutine irradiations muffled up with Clouds? The Vesper tilio's of
our times have taken their flight again over our heads! and the Rubbidge that
was left is so immense, that the strength of the Bearers began to decay! Neham.
4. 10, 11. At which our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see,
till we come in the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.
Oh! are we not rather warmed a little with a Widdows-joy, then with the joys of
harvest? of them that are entered into the possession? or of them that divide
the spoil, Isai. 9. 3. O the Threnody of some of your dearest friends! whose
sighs have lately issued with such confusion! Jer. 8 20.
as if our harvest had been over, the summer ended, and yet we never the nearer
saved! and would that were the worst, that the welcome report of your first
sitting might never be setting! or veiled with such a Sable, as is cast upon
it: for either you faithful friends are (a many of them) slighted, What Enemy
is most dangerous.
or you are slandered. And it is not so much an Enemy in ARMS, as an Enemy in
ARTS that amazes us so! for though the first have sallied, yet it is the last
have sullied our faces again, that began to cheer; having disshevel'd our
expectations, sent our hopes flying, and your Votes fluttring into the air. Ah!
must we like DOVES (in our Clifts and Holes!) go MOURN again in secret, till he
that sees us in SECRET, does reward us openly? Then we will! -- But alas! we no
sooner say it, but the Alarm of your Enemies makes you see it best, not to
disoblige your faithful friends too fast, The Authors Address on the behalf of
Christ and his interest in the Nations.
for Super-numeraries: And O! that I could utter it from the Most High, as his
Oracle unto you! that it might reach you to the quick, home, close, and fasten
like an Arrow feathered with the fullest love to the Cause that can be!
(without respect to persons or Principles repugnant,) O! that I were such an
(...), a Champion for Jesus Christ, and his interest in these Nations, that I
might rather choose to die, then to deny it: I hope, I shall never be of that
number that would flatter you for base ends; for verily, Science, Conscience,
and the sense of duty, Prove. 29. 26.
will not flatter me then for better ends; and I know it, that many seek the
Rulers favor, but (yet) every man's judgment is of the Lord. Nor is it an itch
after meddling with the Arcanis Imperii or Intrigues of Government, (unless it
be in my own soul and family;) so much as the Arcana Evangelii, fidei, and
Christi mei, that have suggested these lines in very faithfulness to you,
amongst other Lucubrations and Evigilations of this season. Aristotle used to
sleep with a Bullet in his Hand ore a Basin, that by the fall it might wake
him: Pythagoras, with a thread that tied his hair unto a Beam; that with a Nod
it might Check him: and if the Bullet in hand do not awaken you, I am sure the
Nod will quickly check you and us too. When the Prince of Orange was in his
Camp near the D' of Alva, he slept so secure, that his enemies that Night got
to his very Tent; but a little Dog lying by him, barked and cried, and scratcht
his face, till the Prince awaked, and so saved his life: and I would at least
do you as good service, in a more concinnate language then by scratching,
should you use me like a DOG when I have done it; for to him that sows
righteousness shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11. 18. if not from man, yet from
the Lord, Psalm. 58. 11. which is the best of all.

In the Transition of our Disceptation, The first Ground of this humble
Application and warning unto them.
I am engaged by your foes to a just Vindication of your honorable Persons and
the Cause, from that contumely most unjustly cast upon you: But the
transposition of your affections in the observation of your dear friends, did
as much require this discriminating dispensation again in the Nation, that you
may know whom to confide in, and keep most constant to. For wise men began to
dread what a Labyrinth of confusion we had like to have been involved into, by
some men's over-valuing of unfaithful ones, and over-vilifying of some of the
most faithful ones in the Commonwealth. In the first encounter, I have tried
your enemies, and I find them weak; but in the last, they have tried your
friends, and we found them strong; especially when they struck so hard at our
Patience, to have conquered that, by the many unkindnesse that we have met
with. In the first, they intended to divert you (or some of you) from the
Public service; but in the last, they intended to divert the Public from you,
(or from some of you) as well as you from us. Both which are so apparent now,
that the evidence of it (at the Lords appointment) is like to be written down
as legibly to the Readers observation with the Point of the Sword as of the
Pen; Our readiness to give up our lives to the Public service, with all
alacrity.
in either of which if the Lord shall call us, (for the interest of Christ and
this Commonwealth) those of us that have been most despised, are as ready as
Any to offer up our Lives, and sacrifice our all for the service; In the choice
of Tribunes, the Romans were wont to pitch upon them that could show the most
Marks, Scars or Wounds in the service of their Country; and some there be yet
alive, (though little looked upon) who can like Veteranus (whom Sueton. in Aug.
C. tells us of) but open their Garments, and show you the GASHES which they
(gladly) received either in suffering or doing for this Cause; that had rather
(a thousand times) see the Blood spin out of their own Veins, then drop out of
Christ's, by another Agony! Et totum hujusce rei consilium non periculo meo,
sed utilitate Reipubl. metiar; and for my own part, I will not measure my
business by my danger (which is as great as most men's) but by the benefit of
the Public.

2. A stander by may see more of the Game which the Enemy is playing (with Art
and with Arms too,) 2. Ground is the Enemies Art or endeavor to make a Game,
out of your hand.
and the great advantages which our friends may give them in their dealings)
then they see themselves; so that I hope such diligent observers, (who have
ever betted on your side, and to the Cause,) may without offense, or the brand
of (...), inform you the best they can of those, that are peeping into your
hands; and do make their Game by it accordingly (or endeavor it) for the
interest of a Single Person, or of Charles Stuart. It was said of Queen
Elizabeth, that like an ill House-wife she swept the house, and left the dust
behind the door; but we hope you will not sweep the door (as you did at your
first entry, to our great rejoicing!) and now leave the dust within the House,
(to breed Spiders and Cobwebs, which will be sure to hang in the highest
places:) And therefore as we do in times of danger and robbery, be pleased
first to search well within doors, and then without in every corner; seeing the
Enemy may steal in at so many secret and imperceptible ways.

3. The grounded jealousies and certain fears, 3. Ground. If this cause
miscarry, Christ, Gospel, and all suffer Slavery.
that if this Cause should miscarry, CHRIST, the Gospel and good People of the
Commonwealth would all suffer slavery; do nib my Pen with the more Promptness
and Acuteness (in the presence of Him that is higher then the highest) to call
upon your Prudence and utmost care, to preserve it in its Purity. Nor am I
herein beyond my line, whiles in pleading the Cause, I plead for Christ, the
Gospel, and his Saints (the best support, column and interest) in the Whole
World.

4. The great and growing desires which I have to be serviceable to the
Public (ere I die) Secundum singulas species Evangelii Christi necnon
Reipubl. both as a Minister and a Man, 4. Ground is the Enemies use of these
Princip. (here opposed) to intricate the Counc. of Parl. and to carry on their
work with.
with the deep resentment of that desperate Design of the Enemies now on foot,
to the utter extirpation of us, (and of all whom they call Sectaries) as well
as perplexing of your Councils if they can effect it! set forward from those
very Principles that I have opposed, and which they had calculated for the
total interfection of the Cause, interruption of the Parliament, and infection
of the People, from 1. Principles of Falsehood, 2. Confections of Calumny, and
3. Concoctions of Crudity. 1. Mr. P's Perditory Anatomy.
The first, in Mr. Prynne's ( Perditory) Anatomy of the Commonwealth, which is
no more to be followed then the School of Alexandria (in Gallen's time) who did
use to quarter Bodies for their Scholars, and not allow them the dissection or
discovery of the Whole Body, neither does P. to his Followers; only in this
(against his will) we may commend him for an Artist, that he has found out the
most sound, solid, and untainted parts of the whole Body, to show his SKILL
upon, ( i. e. of cutting and calumniating, Psalm. 10. 8. and 50. 20. and 89.
51.) 2. Mr. B's Purgatory-Art.
The second in Mr. B's Purgatory Art of curing the Army; whose Pinion or Pen is
hardened into his own Opinion for the Government of a single Person, and
recovery of the Kingdom again; and not so for a due and equal Temperament of
the whole Body, by an even Balance and proportion of the four Elements, and so
Aliments of this Politic. Body, conducing to the most concinnate and right use
of all the Functions in it; as for the Mastery of the One above the other, and
all the Rest; which would be the inevitable Ruin of All at last: and all the
OPERATION of his Pills, is but to cast the Commonwealth out of an Acute, 3. Mr.
H's Pulsatory-Method.
into the most Chronick and irrecuperable Diseases. But the 3. is in Mr. H's
Pulsatory Method, which tends more to the maintenance of the Diastole then of
the Systole of the Commonwealth, By the 1. sort the Repub. is handled quatenus
immedicabilis.
i. e. for the promoting then expurging the putrid humors of the Body. By the
first sort (or Mr. P's) is the Commonwealth considered quatenus immedicabilis,
and so he cuts it all to pieces; as the Levite did his Concubine, Judge. 19. 29.
and sends them into all Quarters to raise the Rebellion. By the 2. sort
quatenus est Sanabilis.
By the second sort (or Mr. B's) is the Commonmonwealth considered, quatenus
est Sanabilis, or restorable to a Kingdom, and so he gives his Pills, his
Powders, and his Portions, that by strange operations they might enervate and
deforce the Vitals of the Commonwealth, but animate and revive the spirits of
the Cavaliers, and corrupt ones for Kingship in the Nation; (and accordingly
are the humors, spirits and armies of the Enemy up.) By the 3. sort quatenus
est Mutabilis.
By the third sort (or Mr. H's) is the Commonwealth considered quatenus
Mutabilis, and so he exhibits new Forms, Platforms, Orders and Foundations, in
the first Concoction Heathenish, but in the second Concoction Popish; which he
presumes will be as easy of digestion as the Jusculum or decoction of an old
Cock, ere he has cooked it. Now although these last have done the least hurt,
and are our Friends, yet the Enemy might presume upon it, that we judged our
State very unsettled, to hang by Geometry (like Mahomet's Tomb in the Air) or by
a Charm, or without a Foundation: which is a great mistaste. And by all these
have I learned in Politics, Arist. lib. 4. c. 1.
that Non minus est corrigere Rem Public. jam institutam, quam ab initio
instituere, etc. It is nothing less to govern well a Commonwealth when it is
instituted, then to institute a Commonwealth when it is not as yet governed, or
as yet a Commonwealth. So that your Lessons (most Noble Senators!) are no less
difficult, which you learn ex post facto ((...)) then those that you learn ante
post facto: wherein we had all need (and hope we shall) help you (all we can)
with our prayers, counsels, and endeavors; and none to Hinder you, in the
least, nor yet You to Hinder one another. And therefore (though from a worm and
no man) I beseech you (RIGHT HONORABLE) to admit of a few praevious
Considerations, 12 praevious Considerations presented to the. Parl. for
Settlement.
for the better Settlement of the Commonwealth to the satisfaction of all Parts
and Parties of it; not exempting the sober-minded and most capable of ALL
Judgments, (whether they follow Mr. P. in Dissection, Mr. B. in his
Physick-Administration, Mr. H. in his Politics, or us in our
Theo-cratick-Constitution) according to the Reason of all Rules and Principles
(whether Historical, Practical, Political or Theorical) that agree with their
own Art, Judgment and P^ofession, and wherein they must necessarily acquiesce
at the last. As,

1. That a most Demonstrative Care may be ever had to the Balance of the
Government, 1. For an equal and certain Balance
by which judgment and Justice is Weighed out to All. This Rule of a
Balancing, equal and even Hand (as well as Habit) is with Demonstration to be
observed in a true and sober Anatomy, distinguished from a rash, irrational and
vulnerary Dissection (such a one as Mr. P's) of the Commonwealth. 1. By Mr. P's
Rules of Anatomy
Such a special care is to be kept up (also) in all Physical Doses (to the Hum.
Body, which Mr. B. is far from accommodating) as may most exactly Balance all
the humors, 2. Mr. B's Rules of Physic.
elements, spirits and parts of the Body, in an Equal and orderly Temperament
for the whole; that one have have not the mastery of another, or over all the
rest, 3. Mr. H' s Rules of Politic constit.
to the Ruin of the whole. And in Politics (Mr. Har. has demonstrated it) to
be most absolutely and accurately requisite, so as the EQUI-LIBRIUM of it be
not imposed upon, obtruded or obstructed by fraud or force, neither in the
Equal Libration of encouragements due to Good Men, and Adherents, nor yet of
punishments due to Bad Men, and Delinquents: Vid. Case of Commonwealth, near
the Gulf of Common woe.
(which I have offered in a former Book) that the Frame of it, be so held, as
may keep the Scales even to All Men, and not more leaning to one party then
another: which is most certain and perfect in a Theocratick Government, where
the frame is good, the balance even, the Strings sound and certain, 4. In our
humble tender of a Theocratick Balance.
the Hand that holds it, most just, steady and exact; and the Weights and
Measures are all Sealed and Authentic with GOD and Men, in all Nations under
Christ: so that no one can complain of violence and spoil, injustice,
oppression, or injury done unto them by that Balance, the Equity of it is with
such Conviction and Demonstration to Men, Dan. 5. 2. Ezekiel. 5. 1. Isa. 26. 7.
and Delight to the Lord, Prove. 11, 1. and 20. 23. and 16. 2, 11. whiles a false
or uneven Balance is abhorred, Micah 6. 11. Hos. 12. 7. Prove. 11. 1. A false
Balance is abomination to the Lord: But a just weight is his delight; and
therefore says Job, Chap. 31. 6. Let me be weighed in an Even Balance, that my
integrity may be known.

2. Consideration. 2* Consideration, to avoid faction.
Let as exquisite a care be had to keep out or kill all faction, or
party-interest in the Parliament; which like a Canker-worm, will be sure to eat
into the very body and being of the Commonwealth; 1. This Rule agrees with true
Anat. or cutting up a body.
if not prevented; which will pain it for the present, and kill it in time.
This Rule Mr. P. ought to have observed in the true Anatomy of the Commonwealth
(as Artists do,) so to consider a Part, as co-hering and co-alizing with the
whole, and as that which does integrate and accompish the whole; and so to have
cut up (...), This with respect to that and the other, and so all parts of the
Commonwealth. 2. With true Physics and methods of cure or recovery of a body.
This Rule was as requisite too for Mr. B. to have observed in his Physical
Directory and Dispensatory to the Army; for in all Methodical Cures of
distempered bodies, such means must be used, as suit best with the State of the
whole body; and not with the state of that or those parts of the body only
which are so morbous and ill-affected; for the easing of them, may be with the
destruction of the WHOLE by it; and this is his dangerous prescription, to
promote a faction, gratify a party among ill-affected Presbyterians or
Cavaliers, and utterly ruin the Commonwealth by an universal and most certain
revulsion of all those vicious humors which he complains of. Wherefore to avoid
this dangerous DESIGN of curing a part (who may cry him up for an able Doctor,
to give them present ease) by killing the whole; All Curatory and Conservatory
means of health to this body of the Commonwealth, must consist with the
constitution, indications, and co-indications of the whole body; and not of a
part for the whole. 3. It is a special Rule in Politics and Governments.
This Rule is also most exactly observed in Politics, wherein the indulging of
a faction did ever presage the fatal destiny of that Commonwealth: so did the
Factions of Hanno and Hannibal in Carthage; and of the Decemviri in Rome; so
Sylla and Marius, Pompey's and Caesar's parties: but what need we go so far?
seeing this our Parliament may remember, that Tarquin was never nearer his
return to the Throne, by the factions of Rome, and Conspiracies of Brutus's
sons; then the King was by the contentious and factious parties in the Long
Parliament (both before the eleven Members were accused of Treason, and since)
between Presbyters and Independants, not wanting the widest Bellows of others
to effect it, by the blowing up of every spark to a burning flame or shame. But
ah, alas! whither go we? is it not too notorious, and talked of already, as if
such a faction were now in the House at the old Game? to the extraordinary
Regrete of your friends, Few can find the Art of curing a faction
and rejoicing of your foes, which WISE MEN profess will be past the skill of
any mortal wight on earth to cure, (if the Lord prevent not!) so few there be
that find the Art of killing this Canker, or of curing the Commonwealth. But
yet a many offer it; M. P' s Prop.
And 1. Mr. P. by cutting off the new Members so infected: M. B' s Prop.
2. Mr. B. by calling in the old Members worse corrupted: M. H' s Prop.
But 3. Mr. H. by an innovation of all together, and so of all the Malign
humors (in one) which are sure to maintain it. The Authors Prop. or way to cure
a faction.
Whereas the only way to cure it (in my judgment) is to find out the Cause of
this Gangrening faction, and 1. to state the true interest of the Commonwealth
and Cause; that we may know what to call a faction or Deviation from it to any
party. And then to prevent it by MEANS inward, 1. The inward means to cure the
Canker of faction.
and outward. 1. INWARD, in a moderate purging out the most dangerous humors or
spirits of Malignity; and in keeping cool and clean the Liver, i. e. (the seat
of Natural Life in the Commonwealth both as to the inward and outward, or most
Gibbous parts thereof, which I have formerly described In plain Case of
Commonwealth near gulf of common woe, p 20, 22, 23 The Liver goes along with
the Head and Heart of the Commonw. altogether.
) for the benefit of good blood throughout the whole body; not distinct (as Mr.
H. would have it, upon the single account of natural right and freedom) but
conjunct with the Animal and vital spirits, viz. of the head and heart; (which
is Jesus Christ and his precious servants that are truly godly (without respect
to any judgment or opinion,) who are indeed the very seat of the vital
faculties and sense of this Commonwealth; as much slighted as now they are:
this will one day appear, when we are a little wiser, and better skilled in the
state of the whole body.) And if Cor (as Arist. will have it) be a Currendo, we
can tell you, that no men in England did more (if so much) move, run, write,
meet, Counsel, pray, sit up night and day to effect your return into the Places
of Trust where you now are, then those whom you grieve, slight, frown upon, and
do least for, in point of justice, Conscience and encouragement. Now this is
grievous, and must needs prove dangerous to the whole at the last, A Symptom
of danger, to see so little Harmony between the Naturals, Animals, and
Spirituals of the Commonw. or men as men, Mag. as Mag. and Saints as Saints,
all in their places, and yet joint in the Commonw.
to see no better an understanding or correspondence kept up between the
natural faculties, and the nervous, or spirituous, viz. the Liver, Heart, and
Head of the Commonwealth, i. e. in the common or natural rights, and in the
special and spiritual rights and concerns of Christ and the people: until
which, the Canker-worm of faction will be sure to eat into the most excellent
parts and life of the Commonweal. Now when this inward means, of settling all, (
viz, Natural, Animal (or Political) and vital motions of the Commonwealth, as
men, as Magistrates, as Saints) in a good correspondency and consistency
together in the state and constitution of the whole body, 2. Outward means of
curing this Canker of faction, is by wise, godly, hearty, sober, experimental
reasonings.
comes to be effected; then the outward means may be used to good purpose, viz.
such as these are; Sage-water, or wise Counsels and Reasonings; and
Herb-of-grace, (which through corruption is called Rue) or godly and gracious
reasonings; and White Wine, or Cheary hearty reasoning, well-boilded until the
scum be off, and it be cleared from all frothiness and dregs. And if you will,
you may mix therewith the Burnt-Allom, or experiences of them that have passed
through the FIRE of sufferings, being much refined, Both the inward and the
outward must go together.
and the more fitted to kill rather then to keep up this Canker of faction, or
of Party-interest. But it is in vain to use the outward means, till the inward
have effected or prepared the way of it. Both together being the most probable
(if not infallible) means of cure, not only of the present faction, but a
Preservative from the future; 4. It is a most peculiar rule in Theocracy, to
avoid faction, or Parties.
And this is in a most peculiar manner to be observed in Theocracy under one
head Jesus Christ, Hos. 1. 11, Isa. 4. 1. to serve him with one consent, Zeph.
3. 9. seeing the Magistrates Trumpet is but one, Numb. 10. 4. and is made all
of one piece, (or of the whole piece, Ver. 2.) and not to be bandying of it by
Parties and Factions, lest they be broken all to pieces, Isai. 8. 9.

3. CONSIDERATION. 3. Consid. to stop the horrid flux or looseness of pens and
tongues.
That the Liberty which loose pens or tongues take to traduce, and revile our
Worthies in Parliament, to the prejudice of the State, and hindrance of them in
their Public faculties, actions and functions, may be provided against. 1
Anat. care to keep out manglers.
According to this Rule the Anatomists make provision against unskilful,
mangling, butchering Akrotomists; of which number Mr. P. might Commence Master,
for his cutting, 2. Physicians care to keep out Empericks.
calumniating, wounding, and slandring. The like care is taken in the College
of Physicians, against Empericks, Mountebanks, and such like Impostors, whose
practice is most in undervaluing or vilifying of their BETTERS, to gain the
more credit to themselves; that every stinking stuff might go off for a rare
secret or mystery of Art. Mr. B. and P. are both guilty of this Arti-tomy, or
most cutting false accusations. So in all concinnate, orderly and well-setled
Governments (or Polit. 3. Politicians care in all Governments.
Bodies,) was there ever a most vigilant eye over such; as in the Lacedemonian
Petatism, and Roman Turpilian. Not but that a just and lawful liberty be
admitted to charge any man orderly, and before a lawful Authority. For Maxim
interest Reipubli. liberate, ut libere possumus civem aliquem accusare, etc.
it concerns the interest and liberty of the Public very much, Vide Thucid.
Hist. li. 3, and Livii, lib. 28. and Tacit. Hist. lib. 15.
to maintain that freedom, and to keep all men accountable and responsable. But
yet an unjust, unlawful License of Slandring and Butchering the Reputations of
our honorable Patriots, to the view of the World, and shame of our Government,
must have a remedy suitable to the constitution of it. 4. In a Theocratick
constitution are excellent Laws against it.
And so in a Theocracy is most excellent Provision made against it, as we find
not only in the Canons of Israel, Exodus 22. 28. Numb. 12. 1, 9, 10, 11. but in
the New Testament, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jam. 4. 11. Speak not evil of one another
(brethren:) he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law! but if thou judge the Law, thou
art not a doer, but a Judge. So Jude 8. 10. we must not speak evil of
Dignities, or of persons in Government; such an ill tendency it has to the
disturbance of the Peace, Livii Hist. lib. 28.
as well as defamation of the State. It was an excellent Oration of the P.
Scipio to the Senate of Rome upon this Subject, in Ans. to Q. FABIUS. Neutrum
faciam P. C. and si nulla alia re, Modestia certe and temperamento linguae
adolescens senem vicero, etc. So that wide meuths may be in fashion in Cumena;
but not so in the Commonwealth, to complain of Freckles as sore as of
Plague-spots: which some do very indiscreetly.

4. Consideration. 4. Consid. to secure us from a Lapse.
That the Lapse of the Commonwealth into a Kingdom (so much threatened from
Causes inward and outward) requires the utmost skill, wisdom, care and
vigilance that can be, to keep it off, and to secure it from the Causes of it.
How agreeable and obliging this Rule of preventing a Lapse is, 1. A Rule with
Chirurgions and Anatomists.
for the perfect Sanity and Recovery of the Body, is obvious from the daily
practice of all skilful Surgeons, Anatomists and Physicians; 2. With
Physicians, which Mr. B. practices contrary unto.
who ought to take as much care; and use as much judgment to keep off the
Lapse, as to recover the Patient of a dangerous Disease; and this is usually by
an Universal Evacuation of those vicious humors out of the Body, that caused
the Distemper; that so the same peccant and malignant spirits may neither
revive, return, nor yet retire into any place of the same body, (be it the
remotest;) and so the Body will be the better secured both from the reversion
and revulsion of those morbifick Causes. 3. With all the wisest Statesmen,
Grecians and Romans.
And it is as necessary in the body Politic to be observed and preserved; if
we value the examples of the wisest men that ever laid a Commonwealth, or
served in it, Zaleucus for the Locrians, Archytas for the Tarentines, Solon for
the Athenians, Bias and Thales for the Ionians, Gleobulus for the Rhodians: so
Charondas, Socrates, Xenophon, and a many others, which Thucydides recounts, in
Hist. l. 3. particularly, when the Mityl^ans left the Athenians; and in later
Republ. what extraordinary care was always taken to keep off a defection, Ex.
11. lib. Polybii. Ex. l. Dion. Romans Hist. 45. and Livii lib. 28.
we find by the abundance of terse and quick Orations made by P. Scipio to's
Soldiers, but especially M. T. Cicero in the Roman Senate, and to the People
after Caesar was slain, when he moved for an Amnesty for Brutus, Cassius and
others that were fled into the Capitol; and in his Orations against Catiline,
his Philippicks against M. Antony; And de Lege Agraria against P. Servilius,
Rullus the Tribune and others; to all which we might add Brutus's practice to
prevent the Lapse, by obliging the Romans in an Abjuration of KINGS; and so
they disposed of all the Crown Lands to the Public sale, and tore down
Tarquin's statues. The like did the Hollanders by an Oath of Abjuration, and
the like did you before the late Apostasy: but alas, alas! though this shows
your care, yet somewhat more must go to show your skill, before you perfectly
cure us of this disease (or of the danger of it) which (in the judgment of
some of your mourning friends!) can never be by Mr. P's, B's, or H's Advice;
nor so long as the very same Humors and some of the most dangerous remains of
the late Apostasy, are so far from being evacuated and expulsed, that they are
returned again into their former Places and Capacities, yea, seated about in
several, Not only by outward means, but by taking away the inward causes Lib.
5. c. 4.
(and some in the eminentest) parts of the whole body; which are shrewd
Symptoms of our returning again to folly (if the Lord prevent not!) for in a
course of Reason, what will the aforesaid outward means signify, if these
inward causes shall remain? Corruptioni conservatio est contraria, (says
Arist.) Not that the Parliament ought to use the utmost rigor or severity, in
all cases of mal-administration or the like; This Austerity in the Gracchi's
(Livy tells us) did keep up the deadly feud between the People and the Senators
of Rome, till the Rupture of a downright War: And indeed Cleon's Oration for
the utmost severity upon the Apostates from the Commonwealth of Athens, viz.
the Mitylenaeans, after they were brought under ( Vt omnes Mitylenaei Puberes
capitis supplicio afficerentur: Venderentur pro Mancipiis conjuges and liberi)
that the very flower and Cavalry of them be wholly cut off; Thucyd. Hist. l. 3.
their wives and children sold for slaves, etc. was as quickly revoked by
others, for the utmost lenity and clemency they could show them, that did
consist with the safety and tranquillity of the Commonwealth, when they saw the
inconvenience of extremity on either part: in another Oration; At nos nunc
contriarium faciemus, si liberos homines qui indomiti repetiverunt libertatem,
rursus oppressos crudeliter puniamus. Oportebat autem non post Defectionem in
homines liberos saevitiam exercere; sed ante eos valde custodire, and cavere ne
consilia talia instituant; post recuperationem quam minime eis hoc delictum
exprobare. But now let us do the contrary: if they who were so unruly, have
repented, and re-petitioned or desired their liberties (as freemen) in the
Commonwealth, we may let them have them; and if they offend again, may punish
them the more severely. But it did not so much behove us after their defection
or Apostasy to be cruel to them that are freemen; but before, rather to beware
and watch lest such Counsels should establish them in their way, then after
their recovery to upbraid them with their Apostasy. And the like Counsel was
given about others, whom the Athenians decreed should loose a finger or a thumb
of their right hands for their defection, (...). that they might be disabled
from using a spear against them, and yet able to work, or Row with their Oars.
(...), etc. but the Mitylenians were worse used, and their youth slain. So that
such severity we abhor; but withal we wish that the Parliament would be wary,
if not weary of them that yet do, and will (do what they can) retain the same
spirit of malignancy and Malevolence to the Cause and suffering servants of God
that they had before; so as to eye them diligently, Sad symptoms of a Lapse
into the late disease.
lest they settle and involve a Lapse to the Commonwealth, either by revuision
or reversion. For what Physician (to this body Polit.) that sees not these the
very signs of a Lapse into the late or like disease or Apostasy; which arose up
in this very manner? from the same seat of (black) choler? and shall we ever
forget by what steps their late General mounted to the top of temptation, (and
slept upon the top of a Mast, Prove. 23. 34.) when he had procured that Act of
Indemnity, and gotten an interest in that Party; and is not this, this
over-iudulgence of vicious, corrupt and inimical spirits in the body, that
which has shortened the lives of many excellent Commonwealths? was not the
Roman Republic in continual fluctuations, motions, and a thousand hazards
(daily) of being destroyed by the Tarquinian Parties keeping up an interest in
the Commonwealth? opposite to the interest of the Commonwealths? and of all
Governments, they are most alterable and unstable, Arist. lib. 5. c. 12. that
nourish such spirits and humors as are all for a Single Person, and Ran-counter
the true state of the Commonwealth to effect it. So in Corinth, it is true
Cypselus was the longer up, through his interest and favor which he had with
the People as a Popular man; and Periandrus his son after him, being he was a
brave Soldier, and kept the Sword girt about him; but Pisistratus who
succeeded him, was twice driven out of his Government, and the People restless
till they had secured themselves from the like attempts of a Single Person. So
among the Syracusans some had a mind to keep up the interest of a Single
Person, which the Commonwealth could not endure; and until secured from such
attempts, was never without commotions, particularly by Hieron and Gelon, the
last of whom got in for seven years, and the first for ten years and all that
ever (after that) attempted it, Till the inward causes be removed, the outward
means will never cure us in the Commonw.
brevi tempore duraverunt, says the Historian, were but shot-lived. How many
instances might I give besides, to secure us from the Lapse, by a rout of those
malevolent humors Heterogenean spirits and inward causes which endanger the
Commonwealth, and are inconsistent with it, (at least from PLACES most
considerable, or near the heart of the Commonwealth) until which no outward
means will or can be a Preservative sufficient. And as in Politics, so in
Theocracy it is a sure Rule, and requires the highest diligence, 4. In
Theocracy special care to secure us from the Lapse.
industry, and insight that can be, Josh. 24. 22, 23, 24. 2. Chron. 15. 2. and
the promise is, Dan. 2. 44. His kingdom shall never be destroyed, nor left to
other people. Because, Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked and
condemns the just; even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Besides,
the saddest Tragedies we might tell you amongst men, have had their rise from
an over-indulging, I mean nourishing and impowering inimical spirits in the
Commonwealth, as of Brutus's sons (for his fathers sake) Maelius and Manlius,
and so Sylla and Marius, and a many others in the Roman Republic; besides,
Agathocles in Sicily; Cosmos and Savaranola in Florence, Castrucio in Luca; and
of late years it is observable how the Jesuits served the King of France (Hen.
4.) who to gratify the Pope and the People, recalled the Jesuits (that were
before exiled, and a monument of it set up for posterity) into that Nation
again by the Parliament of Paris; but to his own cost: for they stabbed him
quickly; so dangerous is a Lapse, or a Revocation of them again into trust,
that are or ought to be evacuated the Body. Wherefore a Commonwealth in
aequali, must first be considered ex quali as to the quality of them that rule
and are entrusted in it; and not first ex quanto (as Mr. H. and others would)
if ever we mean to keep it stable, sound, and immovable in it is foundation and
constitution.

5. Consideration. 5. Consid. all extremities avoided, both an Oligarchy and
Ochlocraty.
That all extremities be wisely avoided; and particularly this of falling into
an Ochlocraty, by flying out of an Oligarchy pretended. As this Rule of
Mediocrity is requisite in the Anatomist, to make a curious and complete
Section; so in the Physician, as to every Potion he gives the Patient, so
corrected and composed, as may at once both kill the Disease and keep up the
spirits. Mediocrity in Anatomy and in Physic, and in Politics.
So in Politics it is the Golden Rule; and that which (says Arist. Polit.
lib. 4. c. 12.) has ever been the Cause of the long continuance of a
Commonwealth ( Mediocritate quadam, durationis causa fuit;) and it is
observable, all the time that Corinth flourished, it was said, (...). to
administer a most righteous and Moderate Government, as Ovid says, Medio
tutissimus ibis. Now it is very often, that a sickly or distempered body does
fall out of one extremity into another, out of one passion, humor, or danger,
Danger in running from one extremity to fall into another.
into another; ( Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charibdim,) so to shun the
Sands, OCEANA would cast us upon the Rocks in his Platform; or for fear a few
should Rule us, he would (to run wide enough) flinch us quite out of the way,
and put it into the hands of the mere Multitude or Confusion together, without
discrimination (of friends and enemies.) Oligarchy in the meaning of it, is the
Tyranny of a few: so in the Roman Oligarchy.
Whereas an Oligarchy indeed, is not meant the Rule of a few (as p. 76.) but
the Tyranny of a few; as in the Triumvirs and Decemvirs of Rome (whom Livy
describes, lib. 2. to have been rather Butchers then Rulers, Tormentors then
Magistrates) keeping up a Monarchick-interest and spirit repugnant and
repudiant to a Free State; so that Mr. H. and those friends so afraid of
Oligarchy, would do well to tell us, if such a thing (rightly defined) be in
being or no, amongst us! Such were the thirty Tyrants or Oligarchy in Athens,
So the Athethenian Oligarchy. Lib. 2. Xenoph. Reb. Gest. Graec.
rising from the corruption of a Free State, who (to use the Historians own
words,) Non solum Improbos ac Seditiosos e medio repellerent; sed etiam bones
(maxim ditiores) aut necarent, aut ex urbe repellerent, were so cruel and
unjust, that not only wicked and seditions, but good men and the best were cut
off, or banished; which made Socrates complain so to Antisthenes of it: (...),
etc. When he saw so many men of repute and worth, rich and of great esteem in
the Commonwealth, to be made away, ensnared, or cruelly slain by the ill
Government of the thirty Tyrants, he said to Antisthenes! Now brother, let it
not trouble us that we have hunted after nothing great or considerable in our
kind of life: seeing such Tragedies are daily perpetrated and bleeding before
our eyes. Such a Government of a few (or Tyranny rather) was an Oligarchy
indeed, Malice it is self cannot say this Par. Government is an Oligarchy in the
Definition of it.
which MALICE it is self cannot say of this Parliament, or of any now in Power.
This was that which Theramenes (one of the thirty, a wise and prudent man) did
oppose very elegantly and gallantly, and hortari collegas suos caepit, ut
moderate non insolenter concessa sibi potestate uterentur: sed eam ob causam a
Critia, apud collegas reliquos accusatus fuit, quasi perfide ageret, 30.
Tyrannorum proderet causam, parts populi tueretur, ideoque puaiendus and e
medio tollendus esset, etc. and began to exhort his colleagues that they would
use the power granted them moderately, and not so imperiously; but for this
cause was the good man accused by Critia to the rest, as if he had done
perfidiously, betrayed the cause of the thirty Tyrants (or, Oligarchy) in
defending the Peoples Rights and Liberties, and therefore would have had him
punished and put to death. But his Oration, and Theramenes his defense, though
worth our reading, I think not fit to commend to writing, but refer to lib. 2.
Xenoph. and Junii orat. 3. pt. p. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. The main Argument being
taken from the example of the Lacedem. Ephors. By all which, we find an
Oligarchy far different from what good people are apt to take it; and so
through mistake, to hazard us with a mere confusion or Ochlocraty, An
Ochlocraty, what it is and the danger of it in our days. Under the Decemviri to
avoid an Oligarchy they ran into an Ochlocraty, so in Florence.
i. e. the Tyrannical and unruly spirit of the Multitude, which has no more
mercy nor bounds in it, then the Sea when broken loose. And this the sad
experience of old Rome has left upon Record: the people (in the days of the
Decemviri, to avoid that Oligarchy) ran into it, like mad, committing the most
flagitious outrages of any, that they might be revenged upon them of the
Oligarchy. And in the State of Florence, one Soderino and some others kept
themselves up in a Monarchick spirit of Oligarchy over the people; which to
avoid, they ran into Tumults, and fell at last (like the Flounder out of the
dish into the fire) into a remedy as bad, The sad effects of an Ochlocraty
or worse then the disease, by calling in the Spaniards. It is out of doubt,
that an Ochlocraty, is little better then a daily Massacre of the most eminent
Worthies that the Commonwealth has* and it saddens my Spirits to see, how eager
(upon Mr. H. his Principles) some are to put it on, under a pretended danger of
an Oligarchy. In Theocracy there is nothing more obvious, obnoxious, or liable
to disturb the Peace and order of the Commonwealth: This Ochlocraty the people
ran into, in the days of Moses and Aaron.
and it occasioned that notorious Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb.
16. 2, 3. who with two hundred and fifty others (in anger, like the Secluded
Members,) of the chief, rose up against Moses and Aaron, etc. (as against an
Oligarchy) saying, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are
holy every one of them; So that they fell into such an Ochlocraty as cost not
only the two hundred and fifty dear, but the lives of 14700. in the tumult by
the hand of the Lord against them; so little pleasure has he in such
extremities; and under the color of flying from an Oligarchy to involve us in
a worse.

6. Consideration. 6. Consid is, that Reason of State be not our staff or
strength, or only principle to act by.
That you be exceeding wary how far you rely upon that broken reed of REASON
of STATE, or trust to that deceitful BOW, either against your enemies, or for
the Cause and Adherents thereof; seeing it has destroyed so many that have gone
before you. We mean not here the Public Reason, or right reason; Reason it is
self rightly qualified and fitted for the Public good; but Private reason, or
the reason of a few, for their own own ends and interests, pretending them the
Public; 1. In Anatomy private reason to be exploded.
or Opinionative reason and understanding; which in all true Sciences are
avoided. As in Anatomy mere and empty notions like Mr. P's, which make much
noise, but with little substance, and to little service for the Public, 2. In
Physic private reason to be avoided, when adminster to Patients.
either in the (...), Inspective or Instructive parts of Anatomy. So do wise
Physicians, leave private disceptations, opinionative and impractical Notions
to mere Upstarts, as fitter for Schools to be troubled with, then to perplex or
endanger sick Pati^nts. And as requisite is it for the Body Politic, that we
disquiet it not with perplexable Platonian speculations, 3. In Politics, as
dangerous and deceitful.
or the rolling Political Idea's of every ones private reason, or with Reason
of State; like to Machiavils Prince, whose principles of Policy and knavery I
have answered, and encountered with principles of piety and honesty, in a
Treatise long agone, Sagrir. or Doomsday drawing nigh, etc. p. 142, 143, 144,
145, 146. True reason from false, or public reason from private.
so shall say the less here. This is the very cause of all excentrick Motions
in the management of our Cause, and that which sets up the reason of the State
(which is most shameful and unreasonable) in many things directly opposite to
highest and bravest Acts of Justice, Piety and Innocence, to the great grief of
all the upright in heart! Reason (true Reason) is indeed the very life of
motion in matters of outward Government: But Private Reason, false and
flattering Reason, (called ordinarily Reason of State) is the life of all
dangerous Motions and stirs to the ruin of the Commonwealth: Whereby men can
play fast and loose, smile and smite, Complement and kill at once; Give good
words and bad deeds; and that which is worst, under the mask of Piety manage
iniquity with both hands, Mic. 2. O horrid principle! the break-neck of all
good Government as well as bad. How destructive Reason of State is to Commonw.
to make that the Principle of Gov.
For by this Principle or Reason of State, Pharaoh thought to have ruined
Israel, Exodus 1. 10. Come! let us deal wisely with them; and ruined himself.
Saul spared Agag, whom he should have destroyed, 1 Samuel 15. and destroyed
himself. Jeroboam by this Reason set up his Calves! and Iehu kept up the
Statutes of Omri. Daniel's enemies by this prevailed with the King to cast him
into the Den, where themselves were destroyed, Dan. 6. By this, Pilat
condemned, and the Pharisees accused our Lord Jesus, Joh. 11. and 18. And what
mischief is it (even to themselves as well as others) that this ( Single)
Principle leads not headlong to? Jesabel's brains did the mischief, so Jesabels
brains received the mischief, and were dashed against the stones; and as by a
Letter she had Naboth's blood, so by a Letter she lost her own. This Reason of
State, is the Ruin of State; and that which withholds the Truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. For which the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven. But there is a Reason (in Theocracy) Public, 4. In Theocratick Gov.
not private reason, or mere Reason of State, but pure, and Public Reason.
Pious and Pure Reason (which men as men, as well as Saints, are the Subjects
of, and may be restored unto) and a Cicero could say, Lex nihil aliud est nisi
Recta and a numine deorum tracta Ratio. Now for as much as Christ is ( 1 Cor.
11. 3.) the head of every man, and of every man's reason, or rational life, as
well as of every spiritual; which acts and moves, as (...), not (...) nor
(...), a Principle of Nature for the Common good of all, and not as a Principle
of expediency or of Policy; not of Fortune (as they call it) nor of Art; it is
Divine as well as Humane, and agrees in all things with Honesty, Justice, Piety
and Simplicity. In which sense it is said, Prove. 8. 14, 15. Counsel is mine,
and sound wisdom; I am understanding, I have strength. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice: by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth; and so all motions are sure to be concentrical for the service of
that head and of the whole body. Heathens had some sparks of this fire, or
Candle of the Lord, as it is called, Prove. 20. 27. The understanding of man, is
the Candle of the Lord. (...), Sept. and Aqu. Symm. Theod. (...) or (...).
It was a worthy piece of wisdom and reason in the Roman Senate (when Pyrrhus
had wars with them, and his own Physician Cineas for reward, had like a Traitor
written to them, that if they would, he could easily kill him with a Purge) to
repudiate and abhor such perfidy (which Policy in many, or Reason of State (so
corrupt it is) would have admitted) and send word to Pyrrhus what a Plot Cineas
had against him, saying, (...), The Romans have learned to overcome by Virtue;
they are good men, and scorn to conquer their ENEMIES with Treachery, tricks,
or frauds. This (as the APOSTLE says, Romans 2. 14, 15.) was doing by nature the
things of the Law; much more will the true Reason or light of Nature derived
from above, abhor to hurt or injure your friends by subtlety and Policy. Not
but that (...), How far right reason is Artifical?
this natural reason (we speak of) is in all things exact, in many things
artificial, and in nothing defective (for such a use under Christ) nor yet
luxuriant; yet so is it Artificial only, as tends to accommodate Righteousness
and Truth, with good Government, the Public Interest, and the Cause of God.
And Peter (the Apostle) tells us, Acts 10. 34, 35. That in every Nation (of the
Heathens) he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted; which they
may do from the best, or purest Light of Nature and Intellectuals they have;
which therefore was accounted Divine and immortal by the Heathens, (...) and
indeed, as it is renewed and restored by Jesus Christ, and recovered in any
measure from the fall of the first Adam, by him ( who is the head of all
Rational and Spiritual beings, whether in heaven or in earth, visible or
invisible, whether thrones, dominions, principalities, or powers, Col. 1. 16,
17.) This right Reason amongst men, and Governments of men! may be said to be
Divine, and to have it is heavenly birth and being in the Creature, as it had in
Adam, (as I have largely and lucidly expatiated upon it, in Doomsday, etc.
Chap. 2.) under this Adam or rational righteousness and dispensation, is, or
ought the Dominion, Psalm. 8. 5, 6. to be over others; and when this Principle
is perfectly restored, the Lord alone will be exalted in that day, Isa. 2. 11,
17. Psa. 18. 46. and 46. 10. and 97. 9. but as this Principle of right reason
is rejected, the Beast or brutish spirit is set up and exalted in the
Governments, and the worst of men put in on all sides, Psalm. 12. 8. Hab. 1. 4.
but Prove. 11. 11. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted.

7. Consideration. 7. Consid* for Instruction of people in the principles of a
Christian Commonwealth. A Rule with Anatomists and with Physicians.
That there may not be such an universal neglect of a due instruction and
education of all people, and PROFICIENTS in the true and genuine Principles of
a Christian Commonwealth; the knowledge whereof would be the most probable
means of a plenary satisfying, convincing, acquiescing, and establishing them
therein; and to see their best or only interest to lie in a Commonwealth. This
Rule of Instruction and education, agrees with all Arts and Sciences, wherein
they had need to Commence some degrees, before they become Professors,
Practitioners, or Doctors to others. So in Anatomy and Physic, a man must
first find out all the difficulties, mysteries amazing Meanders and hard
Labyrinths in the whole body, before he undertake to meddle with it, -- aget
mercede Caballum, Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis ullius unquam, commissumque
teges, etc. Hence had they an Oath given them of old, which Hippocrates would
have all Physicians take; not only to acquaint themselves with the utmost
secrets, intricacies, and mysteries of those Sciences, before they fall to
practice; but to oblige them wholly in the contemplation thereof, without
deviation or intention of mind to any other thing, that they might have a most
excellent inspection in the State of the body (both inward and outward:) which
I wish Mr. P. and B. had done with a due and more mature judgment. And with
Politicians, the most prudent and best Commonw.
But in the Politic body, such provision has ever been made to principle the
people and their little ones in the knowledge and practice of a Commonwealth,
as seldom but they made it one of their first precepts, to secure and
perpetuate the Government, as Horace has it, Lib. 1. epist. 20. Hoc quoque te
manet, ut Pueros elementa docentem, occupet extremis in vicis balba senectus.
And so the Druid^s did educate their very children in the principles of a
Free State, says Caesar. Thus in the Grecian Commonwealth, Plutarch,
Isecrates, Aristotle, and a many tell us the extraordinary care they took in
this, In the Schools of the Lacedaemonians
tying up the Paedagogues and Schoolmasters to such Rules as were most
accommodate to the constitution of a Free State. And the Lacedaemonians, in
their public Festivals had their three Courses brought in thus: 1. By the old
men rejoicing in a Free State or Commonwealth.

We have been young and strong! and valiant heretofore, Till crooked age did
pull us back! and hid us do no more.

2. By the young men in their prime, with this Song. We yet are young and
strong! and ready to maintain Our Commonw. against all men! that on the earth
remain.

3. The last Course was brought in by little children singing and leaping.

And we do hope erelong! to pass you all at last! Of this the world shall
witness be, ere many years be past.

They were admirable examples in the education of very little ones, The
Lacedemonian Laws for instructing youth in Commonw. Principles.
Aristot. lib. 8 c. 1. Quod igitur a legis-positore maxim intendendum sit
circa disciplinam juventutis, nemo utique dubitabit; nam id quidom neglectum in
civitatibus affert Reipublicae detrimentum. Oportet enim ad singula Gubernandi
genera disciplinam accommodari. So a little after, Laudari possunt in hoc
Lacedaemonii: nam plurimam circa pueros diligentiam faciunt, and quidem Public
quod igitur Lege providendum sit, circa disciplinam juventutis, and hoc Public
faciendum patet. Therefore that the Lawmakers do in a special manner mind the
disciplining of youth in the principles of the Commonwealth, is questioned by
no man; for indeed the neglect of it exhibits detriment to the Government of a
Commonwealth: and it behooves that the education and institution be adequated or
accommodated to the kind of Government we are under. In this the Lacedaemonians
may be praised highly; for they gave much diligence to the bringing up of their
children (in the principles of a Free State) and that publicly; which
therefore ought to be provided for by a Law. So lib. 7. c. 14. Similiter quoque
posterorum quidam Scriptores opinionem suam eandem ostenderunt, a laudantes
enim Lacedaemoniorum Rempublic. admirantur, etc. Also late Writers have highly
applauded the Commonwealth of Lacedemon for this. Also the Laconians, l. 8. c.
4. are commended for it, Xenoph. li. 7. Pediae Cyri.
and accounted it necessary in their establishment. Yea, long before that, at
the rise of the Persian Monarchy most excellent Arguments did Cyrus lay down in
an Oration to the States for the instructing the Persians and their Children in
such principles as suited with that establishment. Educatione liberorum
diligentur Publico in loco instituta ab ipsis parentibus; qua fit ut and
Parents in officio contineantur, exemplo bono liberis praecant; and liberi
etsi velint, tamen improbi facile non evadant, cum turpe nihil vel audiant vel
videant. By an exquisite education of their Children in some public place
appointed of their Parents; by which it would happen that their Parents (in
office) by their good examples shall go before them; and their Children (if
they would) shall not easily be wicked, when they hear or see nothing that is
shameful or base. So that as this was ever accounted a requisite Point in
Politics, 4. In Theocracy as necessary to educate them in the principles of a
Commonw.
it is no less enjoined in the Theocratick Government of the Commonwealth,
Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thou shall whet them diligently upon thy children, and talk of
them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and 11. 19. Prove.
22. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4. Genesis 19. 19. And to make it practicable, is the easiest of
all things: as Arist. lib. 7. c. 17. How delightful it is, to make it
practicable in Schools and Colleges.
tells us, in their public Schools, they were wont to acquaint their YOUTH
with the Histories of their Free State (as well as with the Principles) Quas
autem Narrationes and fabulas illa aetate, pueni audire debeant; cura sit iis
qui pueris Public praeficiuntur: Which Stories of that Age, the Children ought
to hear and know; and special care be on them that have the education of them!
Thus the Children of Israel did often repeat the Histories of their coming out
of Egypt to their little ones, 1. To acquaint them thoroughly with the Histories
and occurences of our Commonwealth, such as are fit for Posterity to keep in
Memory.
and tell them of their mercies, deliverances, Victories, and establishment of
their Commonwealth, how they came to be so formidable a People in the earth,
Deuteronomy. 4. 9, 34, 35. and 11. 19. and 31. 13. and 32. 7. and of their Purim,
Esther 9. 27, 28. Also in their Schools the Lacedem. were wont to have suc^
Orders as if every School were a Commonwealth, in their several forms, 2. To
have such orders in every School and College as consist best with a Commonw. I
had thoughts long since of presenting a Platform of it, both to the advantage
of learning and of the Commonweal.
places, parts, functions, offices, and honors, graduating and degrading,
making one entire body; Cuncta enim talia ad conversationes postea futuras
accommodanda sunt, itaque ludi utplurimum tales essent, debent, ut sint
imitationes eorum, quae postea serio erunt, facienda. For all such things are
to be accommodated now, as to their after conversations; and therefore they
should be such, as have much of DELIGHT and PLEASURE in them to the CHILDREN,
that they be imitations of those very things which afterward, and in time,
must be done seriously and in earnest by them. 3. To prohibit and punish all
obscene language, and sordid discourse or unsavory words.
Furthermore, Omnino obscaenitas verborum, ut quicquam aliud per Legislatorem
exterminanda est de civitate; ex turpiter enim loquendi licentia sequitur and
turpiter facere; potissimum igitur statim a pueris, neque dicant neque audiant
quicquam turpe, etc. Obscene naughty words, actions, or any such filthy thing
that would not be approved or admitted in the good Government of a City or a
Commonwealth, must not here be suffered; for if they take a liberty to speak
evilly, they will quickly take it to do evilly. And therefore of all things,
this must be most strictly eyed in children (brought up for a Christian
Commonwealth) that they neither speak any thing, nor hear any thing that is
filthy or shameful; if any do, that they be forthwith punished, fined, or
degraded their honor, and put into a more servile seat, office and capacity.
Many such Rules might be given in the education of youth, that a Commonwealth
of all Governments may be the most destreable to them, and they see it to be
their very Interest, indeed, to keep up that Government, in opposition not only
to Charles Stuart (as it is de facto offered in the late Book called Interest
will not Lie; at whose Author, I had almost said, Scripta pudet recitare, etc.)
but to any Single Person or Family whatsoever.

-- nunc adhibe puro
Pectore verba (puer!) nunc te melioribus offer.
8. Consideration. That a wide and welcome door may be set open (and kept so)
to the merit of those Persons, 8. Consid An open and honorable door to merit
and virtue.
who climb up into the Chair of honor and dignity of the Commonwealth, by
steps of public virtue, wisdom, fidelity, fortitude and ability. That this
Rule is observed by the masters of Anatomy, Physics and other Sciences, It is
so in all the Arts of Anatomy, Physic, and Politics.
we all know, platting wreathes of honor upon the heads of the most deserving,
able and experienced in those faculties; and he must be as monstrously ignorant
of History, as of the Minerval, that knows not this to be the very PATH in all
Politics, and well-governed Commonwealths -- aut virtus Nomen inane est,
Aut decus, Hor. lib. 1.
and pretium recte petit experiens vir. Epist. 17.

Seeing honors and places were not exposed to sale, or given away by favor,
but purchased and possessed by virtue and merit, to the Great Renown of those
Nations and Commonwealths. Among the Grecian Commonwealths.
As first, among the Greeks, men of mean parentage, and of extreme poverty
(most of them) that were raised (merely by merit) to the highest pitch of
Honor and preferment. Aelian lib. 2 c. 43. and lib. 11. c. 9.
(...), etc. The best and most famous of all the Grecians were very low and
mean, as Aristides, renowned at home and abroad, (...). and Epaminondas a
General of the Thebans against the Lacedaemonians, so low in the world, that
when his Garment was mendding, or at the Fullers, he was glad to lie in bed,
all day-long, for want of another to put on. So Phocion, who when Alexander
sent him an hundred Talents, asked the reason of it; the Messenger said,
Because of all the Athenians ((...)) he thinks thee alone to be the honest and
good man, (...) Then (says he) let him suffer me to be such a one, and to keep
so, for I scorn his Bribes. Thus Pelopidas the Theban; Lamachus the Athenian;
Socrates, Ephialtes, and a many others, that all rose into honor by merit and
exceeding worth. The like we find in the Roman Commonwealth, And in the Roman
Commonwealth.
as Attilius Regulus, Quinctus Cincinnatus, Paul. Aemylius, Lucius Tarquin (not
the Tyrant,) Horatius Cocles, Fabricius; and abundance more then came into
request and renown by mere worth and excellency for Publick-spiritedness and
service, Vid. Aurel. de Viris illustriss.
being men of very mean descent, and estates, (if any.) And that this is the
Rule in a godly Commonwealth (or Theocracy) we have it highly exemplified in
the holy Scriptures, 4. A Theocratick Governm. Win it and Wear it; the Palm is
given to merit and dignity.
as 1 Chronicles. 11. 6. And David said, Whosoever smites the Jebusites first,
shall be chief and Captain. So 2 Samuel 23. 8. to the end of the Chapter, all
David's Worthies and honorable ones were such as won their honor and
preferment by merit and worth. It is observed that Moses, Numb. 3. 38. when he
settled the People, (in eight Wards, as the Hebrews say) in order and dignity,
did not so much as prefer his own Sons, into any high places, so much respect
he had to worth and dignity in the Commonwealth. And Nehemiah, Chap. 7. 2.
would not give his Brother Hananiah a Commission but for this, that he was a
faithful man, and feared God above many. By this Rule all such Lori-pedanean
Parasites, pitiful Time-servers, and splayfooted Suitors for Places or
preferment, upon the account of kindred, friendship, interest in persons, or
any thing else but worth and honor, According to the Parl. Golden V. could we
see it enameled with silver practices.
should be sent back ( re infecta) for a better Testimonial, then that in Prove.
30. 20. She wipeth her mouth! and says, What evil have I done? and by the
Parliaments most excellent Vote to be otherwise qualified; which O! that it
were put in practice! and written upon a Pillar of Marble! Luxuriantia
compescet, nimis aspera sano
Levabit cultu, virtute carentia tollet.
to put an end to our Controversy! raise up the Renown of our Nation! and open
the door of preferment to the faithful of the Land; to the depression of Vice
and Luxury, but to the highest pitch and emulation of Virtue and Desert! Psalm.
101. 3, 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me! Some there be like Heart of Oak have stood to it in all turns
for the Cause, and have not warped in the least! Now shall our (Renowned
SENATORS!) make a staff of Osiers to lean upon? that will bend any way? or are
little worth? Time will come, When time shall be no more, Rev. 10. 6. this may
be sad to them, that serve the Time! but sweet to them that serve Eternity! How
can ye believe (says Christ) Joh. 5. 44. which receive honor one of another?
and seek not the honor that comes from God only?

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus;
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio Popularis aurae.
9. Consideration. 9. Consid^r^. that the spirit of Monarchy and malignancy
pass not out of one form into another form of Government.
That the temperature of this Body Politic or the Commonwealth may be such, as
that the spirit of Tyranny and injustice, may not pass out of one form into
another, to persecute the people (or any of the parts) with, either in Civil or
Religious matters. For as in Anatomy the body is to be opened according to the
Structure, conformation and constitution of every part, wherein as the
substance is considered both from the form and matter of it by sensible
qualities; so also is the Temper that depends upon and seats in substance, in
all which Mr. P's Anatomy is most defective. So in Physics, the whole body (as
I said before) is the Patient, The care, in Anatomy and in Physics, and in the
Body Politic, as in Athens.
and not this or that part only (as Mr. B. makes it;) now as a disease may be
driven out of one part of the body into another, where it may as certainly kill
it as before; So it is in the BODY POLITIC. And of this had Athens the sad
experience in the Oligarchy of the thirty (as I said before) for when they laid
aside Kingly form (as Tyrannical) they let the same spirit rise up again in
the thirty, to their cost. Also when Tarquin was turned out of Rome, And in
Rome it did; to the almost ruin of the people, and the extinction of the
Republ.
and the people had declared for a Free State, they wanted wisdom to evacuate
the Monarchick spirit, quite out of the whole body; but they let it rise again
in another form of Government, viz. the Consulary, so that says Livy, (Lib.
2.) Regni quidem Nomen, sed non regia potestas Roma fuit expulsa: The name of a
(King and) Kingdom was expelled with him; but (alas!) yet Kingly Power and
spirit was retained in the CONSULS; whom he calls Carnifices, non Consules,
rather Hangmen and Tormentors of the people; and so tells us, Consules
immoderata infinitaque Pratestate omnes Metus Legum in Populum, etc. the
Consuls by an immoderate and boundless Power, turned all the dread and fears of
the Laws upon the People; And after that they had laid aside this form,
succeeded the Decemviri in the same spirit of Tyranny, and imposing still,
keeping up a Monarchick spirit and power of presecuting; And after that was
laid aside, arose the Consuls with Dictators, and also Tribunes, as bad as any
before. So that it is not the laying aside of any one form of Government, so
much as of the spirit, Tyranny, injustice, private interest, and self-seeking
in every form, seeing Potentes Potenter torquebuntur; preferring the Public
good and freedom of the sound body of Adherents to the Cause, above life, ease,
honor or any thing. 4. I^ Theocracy, an exact justice and freedom weighed out
and measured by the spirit of a Commonwealth
And to make up a Theocratick Temper of Government, it is (of all things)
expected (both from God and men,) that in every form, justice, righteousness
and freedom be administered by the Plumb-line, Amos 7. 7, 8. and the
measuring-line, Zach. 2. 1. to all the people, suitable to the nature of the
establishment. Isai. 9. 7. and 1. 26, 27. and 32. 1. and 58. 2. and 59. 4.
Psalm. 85. 11. and 97. 2. Genesis 18. 19. Deuteronomy. 33. 21. Eccles. 5. 8. Prove. 8. 5.
and 21. 3. Jer. 31. 23. etc. So Amos 5. ^4. and 15. Hate the Evil! and love the
Good! and establish judgment in the Gate! seeing (...), etc. Caesar himself
was then glad to frequent the gates of Aristones, and Pompey of Cratippus;
prefessing (...); they desired not so much to Rule, as to rule well, worthily
and with righteousness.

10. Consid. 10. Consid. to keep up the recovery of the Commonw. by all
suitable means So as Phys. deal with the Natural body recovered, must the
Parlia. with this Politic body.
That the special means for preservation of what is recovered, be kept up and
maintained; seeing we have as much need of the (...), helps to keep health, as
of the (...), helps to procure health to the Commonwealth when it is in danger.
This is one of the special Ends of Physic; so that the Patient must be as
careful (after he is recovered) of his Diet, Air, Motion, Rest, and of the
Temper of his Body, and Pathemata or passions of his mind, as may be: so it is
in the Commonwealth; it is not enough to have health, but to hold it! to be
re^^ored to it, but to be secured in it, and corroborated with suitable
Aliments, such as consubstantiate into the whole, with temperate, clear and
nitid air, and moderate motions, such as may conserve health in an almost
recovered Patient; with such rest and refreshing of the spirits of the
Commonwealth, as will further the concoction of the whole body. And not to fall
in again or feed upon the very same corrupt, hurtful and unwholesome trash as
has spoiled the blood, endangered the life of the Commonwealth, or generated
malign humors in it. The Locrians observing how many sickned, and were in
woeful hazard with a wine they drank, made a Law, (...), that if any one of the
Locrians sick, should drink any of that Wine, yea, although he were in a way of
recovery, he should forthwith be put to death, because he did it without
command. So there must be a most strict order to keep us off of that wine which
did lately poison so many in the Apostasy; and as Aristotle says to the very
Case: Lib. 3. c* 1.
Respublicas autem videmus specie differ: and alias esse posteriores, alias
priores. Quae enim aberraverunt, ac prolapsae sunt, necesse est ut posteriores
sint integris and incorruptis, etc. Commonwealths we see to differ in specie:
some are so at first, and some at last; for those Commonwealths that have
Apostatized, slipped, erred and fallen, it is necessary that at last (or after
that) they consist of such as are sound, untainted, entire, incorrupt and
faithful (both as to persons and things!) or else they are never like to stand
long. Now this is the Way to preserve the health after it is recovered and
restored. Cicero tells us (in orat. 1. in Catil. about the end) that the danger
of a Commonwealth is more within it then without it, or from open invasions. So
orat. 2. Intus insidiae sunt! intus inclusum periculum est! intus est host is,
etc. So orat. 1. Periculum autem residebit, and erit inclusum penitus in Venis
atque in Visceribus Rei Publ. ut saepe homines aegri morbo gravi, cum aestu,
febrique janctantur, si aquam gelidam biberint primo relevari videntur, deinde
multo gravius, vehementiusque afflictantur: sic hic Morbus qui est in Republ.
etc. the danger of the Commonwealth lies close, in the veins or bowels of it.
As oftentimes a man that is sick drinks that which may a little refresh for
present, but inrage for future the Disease; In a Theocratick Government,
special heed must be had to keep the health recovered in the State.
so it is with the Commonwealth. The evil and danger of this in a Theocratick
Government, is evident, by the Lords own complaints of Israel, after he had
restored that State, Psalm. 78. 8, 9, 10. 36, 37, 41. again and again! so Hos.
7. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, etc. And therefore seeing you are
made whole again, Sin no more! lest a worse thing befall you!

Narrares Medicis: quod quanto plura parasti
Tanto plura Cupis; Nulline Saterier audes?
Si vulnus tibi, MONSTRATA radice vel Herba
Non fieret levius --.
11. Considerat. 11. Consid. Perilous to the Commonw. to admit of so many
alterations in the form or foundation A Rule in the Anat. of the Repub.
That it is very dangerous for a Commonwealth, to be in a fluctuating and
uncertain State of Establishment; or proclive to any, or many alterations
either in the form or FOUNDATION of it. As in Anatomy there is (a Nimium) an
over-doing as well as underdoing, which puts the part (as well as body) into
many or any shapes, and not into it is proper; (neither according to the
Structure, conformity nor Constitution or Composition of it; neither in a
Mathematical sense, in a Coherence of Quantities; nor yet in a Physical, in the
adherence of qualities, use, and union of life with the whole body:) Also in
the Physical administrations of it.
So it is in Physics, whereby the Doctor may make so many changes and
alterations in the blood, and body, as will render it incapable of recovery:
and this is frequent, as by over-physicking, so by undue administering it; I
mean, without the Reason, Rule, experience, or Analogy of it, as Mr. B. does
constantly in his prescriptions; and all the Cure is but (by alteration of
humors or parts incident) out of one Disease with the Introduction of another
(as bad or worse) till the Body be destroyed. As in the altering of a
Melancholic distemper or humor (Mr. B's disease) which is most gross and
earthly (as to the Elements of this Body Politic) being cold and dry, must be
obviated by means that are hot and moist: So in all the true Politics of it.
but because the same things that will heat and attenuate, will not also
moisten; how easy is it to prescribe such means as may alter indeed that humor
or indisposition into a far worse? and put all into a Fever or inflammation
past Recovery, according to Mr. B's Rules? Thus in the Politic body, it was
one of the worst Symptoms that Athens had, (...), etc. that they were ever
variable in the Polity of their Government, and the most propense of any People
alive to vicissitudes and alterations; for sometimes they would be under the
Government of Cecrops, and Erechtheus, and Theseus; after that, they found out
a Tyranny under Pisistratus; after that, they fell into an Aristocracy;
sometimes striving for Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy together; A few
years after, (...), etc. some ten of the prime Citizens managed the Government
of the Commonwealth. After that, they constituted the Oligarchy of the thirty
Tyrants, and so were always in an unsettled condition, to their utter
destruction. Which is a fair warning to us, that we yield to no more
alterations then needs must: for Arist. in's Polit. l. 5. c. 1. tells us, In
the Causes of such mutations are the most dangerous Commotions, that tend to
the inevitable ruin of all; whether made ex presenti statu ad alium, ceu ex
Populari Gubernatione ad paucorum potentiam, vel ad Popularem ex Paucis, etc.
out of it is present state into another, as from a Popular Government to an
Oligarchv, or the like. This proclivity to change in Lacedemon, gave Lysander
such grounds and temptations to assume the Government of a Single Person; and
would not this animate the vigilant Enemy at all Essaies to step in for Chapter
Stuart or a Single Person? to see us so changeable or unsettled? Tarquin's
friends by this means missed but little (many a time) of restoring the Tyrant,
and destroying the Commonwealth, it being the occasion of many (if not most) of
their disturbances, and the enemies designs, 4. In a Theocratick Government is
settlement, to be found.
till they were better settled. But in the Theocracy of it, it is an absolute
requisite that it retain the foundation inalterable and for ever; as the
foundation of many Generations, Isai. 58. 11. and 44. 28. and 28. 16. Prove. 10.
25. But the righteous is an everlasting foundation; therefore Prove. 24. 21.
Meddle not with them that are given to change. Wherefore when Mr. Harrington
has put upon us the Magic Garment called Industum necessitatis, or shirt of
necessity, Vierius li. 5. c. 15.
once in high esteem with the Germans (Nothembt) which they say, Was spinn'd
upon Christmas Day out of Mud, Bromhal's Spectr. 245 p. 89.
by a company of Maids (well-skill'd in the Cake it is like) in the Devils
name; we may see a necessity to change our Government with a witness; but not
before, without a witness of our folly and madness to all men, and in the sight
of all the Nations. Therefore renowned Senators! Quoniam quatuor omnium genera
hominum violarunt: Unum eorum, qui odio Rei publi. quod eam ipsis invitis
conservarem, mihi inimicissimi fuerunt; alterum, qui per simulationem
amicitiae, nefari^ prodiderunt; tertium, qui propter inertiam suam, eadem
assequi non possent; quartum, qui cum custodes Rei publi. esse debuerunt
salutem, statum, and dignitatem, etc. vendiderunt. There be four sorts of
Invaders and Violaters of our Liberties, which I have had in Chase to refute
for your sakes and the Cause; (that their shirt of necessity, might not put us
upon any perilous alterations.) 1. The open and professed Enemy, an Enemy
enraged, fell, and rankled; and become mine, for very faithfulness to you and
the Commonwealth, being charged up to the Mouth with Volleys of falsehoods and
aspersions (which he lets fly with a Powder, upon all the faithful of the
Land;) who fell upon the Project of altering the State with a most imprudent
and unhappy Procacity; such a one as will rout his Argument with dint of
Reason, as easily as his Army with dint of Sword, (the Lord our God blessing
with his wonted and signal appearances.) 2. The close, knavish and Projecting
Enemy; he seems our friend, to be our enemy the more safe and unsuspectedly;
and has the prettiest tricks, but the highest Treacheries to ensnare us with
his Petty-forgery. 3. The befooled and possessed enemy, that declines the Cause
for want of wisdom to serve it, being so pitifully over-reached with the
Paltrycraft, or Petty-foggery of the former. But 4. the Lavish and most
Plausible, perplexing enemy, that pretends to preserve us, whiles he does
expose us, and sell us to the L^ugh, scorn, and contempt of our enemies, who
upbraid us with our fidelity and integrity, that (to use the Athenian Proverb)
have had an Atticam Fidem for the Commonweal. The 1. sort are Prynian, an enemy
now in Arms, that have laid their Wits a little aside, to become Bustlers,
Bufflers, or else brutish. The 2. sort are more Baxterian, an en^my in Arts,
and upon their Guard; whose Wits are working and on every side. The 3. sort are
enemies in Hearts, but (poor creatures!) Whiflers in Reason, Triflers with
Treason, and fiddlers in weighty Affairs, beside their Wits, Reason or sound
judgment. But the 4. sort, are an Enemy with Parts and Principles, pretending
the Commonwealth, but cruel to us who have suffered bonds, banishment,
plunderings, perils of life, liberty estates, five or six years together, in
many prisons one after another; and yet no reparations, restitution, provision!
or encouragement for holding out like fortresses against so hard a siege, and
the profers or preferment. All this for the Cause and Commonwealth, worthy of
thanks at least, who have been Instruments of your restitution; but these are
slighted by friends and foes! the Pipers, Dancers, and Devisers of new forms
to trouble us with! that are rather the Incubus's then the Incumbents of a
Free State!

12. Consideration. 12. Consid. so to govern as may be with the greatest
evi^ence of God and Christ with us; in the demonstrations of his wisdom and
power.
That the form and FOUNDATION of our Christian Commonwealth be so kept up and
maintained before men, as may most teach us the mind of God, and Jesus Christ
(the sole SINGLE PERSON, or absolute Sovereign of it) in his righteousness,
truth, peace on earth, and goodwill toward men under every administration of
Govern. both civil and military, unto all sorts, parts and degrees of Subjects
in the whole body. Thus in the true Anatomy of a Body, is abundance to be
learned of Gods wisdom, power and wonderful workmanship, bounty and goodness to
the creature; which therefore some call the Book of God; to see all parts so
Homogeneous, above 200. Bones, more Cartilages, more Ligaments, and yet more
membranes; near 400. Muscles, and millions of veins; In Anat. and in Physics
much of God.
to make up one body complete, is most admirable to see, and observe the hand
that made it too. Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16. I will praise thee! for I am fearfully
and wonderfully made! marvelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right
well! So in Physics, is much to be learned of the most high, seeing (...), the
Nature of the body is the first thing to be spoken of in the ART OF PHYSIC;
which Mr. B. observes not his Pill's or Prop's to the Army, but exhibits them
as one utterly ignorant in the History of this Body Polit. So in Politics,
which the very Heathens noted.
or in the mystery of it. For in a Commonwealth-Government is more to be
learned of Gods righteousness and goodness to a people in continued Series and
Emoluments of mercies; and of his wonderful wisdom, to see all parts in such
order, symmetry and service, then under any other form whatever. And as the
very Heathens did acknowledge it the best Polity with respect to Piety; so
Christians and the Scriptures most amply. Many Elegant Orations are upon
Record, with this Argument for the precedence of a Popular Government: As after
Cambyses (the Persian King's) death, and Smerdes; the Persian States consulting
upon the form of a Commonwealth, one of them ( Otanes) made an excellent
Speech, laying down five Arguments against Monarchy (as Herodotus tells us,
lib. 3.) too large to transcribe here; And with two terse and tearing Arguments
for a Commonwealth, batters down all the high conceits, which some of the
State-holders had of a Monarchy, or of an Aristocracy at least, for which
Megabyzus made his Speech (with elocution enough.) But Otanes his first
Argument is common, or (...), from the most eligible equality of liberty and
benefit to the Commonwealths-members or adherents. The second Argument from the
evils of Monarchy in intrenchment upon the peoples liberties, with the
Retrivement and Retrenchment of the Monarchs Lusts (in things Civil and
Religious, we may add.) And in the Romans Republic, how many Orations by Cicero
and others do we read for piety in the Commonwealth? (which was after their
manne of Heathen worship, knowing no better,) as ad Pontif. and De Harusp.
Respons. etc. but to our shame, if our Commonwealth be more deficient for
Christ, and for the true God (whom we worship.) For says he, Nihil
praeclarius, quam quod vos eosdem, and Religionibus deorum immortalium, and
summae Reipubli. praeesse voluerunt; ut amplissimi and Clarissimi cives
Rempubli. been gerendo, Religiones sapienter interpretando Rempubli.
conservarent. And to instance but in one Oration more; and that is of Agrippa
to Aug. Caesar (lib. 52. Dion.) he says, Reipubli. forma illa optima
judicanda, in qua injuriae prohibentur, virtutes excitantur, foventur,
praedicantur; Odio vitia habentur; Singulorum Damna communia judicantur, quae
omnia in Democratia non Monarchia fieri, etc. That is the best form of a
Commonwealth, in which injuries are suppressed, virtues excited, cherished, and
promulgated; Vices detested, etc. which cannot be so in a Monarchy as in a
Popular Government (and I may say, in no kind of Popular Government like to a
Christian Commonwealth.) He tells us the Grecians never thrived, nor grew up in
their flowery renown, till they came to this; and instances in the Thebans,
Athenians, Megarians, etc. The like he avers of the Romans, (Romani oderiat and
detestati sint Vnius Dominatum, permutarint Monarchiam utiliter, etc.) And
Guicciardin says, That Free-States must needs be more pleasing to God, then
any other form of Government, because of the Common good, and impartial
distribution of justice, and emulation in men's minds to Virtue, and their love
to Religion is usually more enlarged then in other Governments. It is said of
the Grecians, (...): that of all men, they delighted in piety in their
Commonwealth, (...), their very enemies confessing that they carried themselves
bravely for piety, to them that were such; and toward them that reverenced
their Parents, and toward their very enemies, equal, honest, and easy to be
appeased. But oh! how much may be seen of God then in a Theocracy! So in a
Theocraty.
which with Mr. B. I must affirm to be most after Gods mind; and to use his
own words, The more Theocratical or truly godly a Government is, the better it
is. Better in it is Principles, and in it is ends! better in it is constitution,
and in it is administrations; yea, better in it is head, Psalm. 2. 9. Acts 10. 36.
and 5. 31. Mat. 28. 18. Romans 14. 9, 10. Joh. 13. 3. and 17. 2. and it is
Members, orders and Ministers of all sorts, in such a Commonwealth, all holding
a capits their power from Christ and for Christ, Rev. 4. 11. and 11. 15. Col.
1. 16. Holy Commonwealth
And Mr. B says further in's Preface, That this governing power must be
exercised in the Name of God; the Officers of it being his Ministers for good.
Romans 13. Non propter hominem, sed propter Deum; for the Lords sake they keep
the Piety of the State, Not but that they are the peoples Creature also, 2 Pet.
2. and therein for man's sake, they keep the peace of the State. It was an
Oration of Theodos. to Valentinian junior, that was called the Orthodox, and
yet a (...), or Emperor that held for the Reign of Christ, (by Binius,
Baronius, and others,) so to govern as might be most for piety and for Christ,
for these Reasons; First, For that non Armis, sed Causis justis imperatoria
Stet Acies. Furthermore, Nullius nisi Christi in Pugna invocari Nomen and
Auxilium possit, etc. the EDGE of Government is not made so keen by Arms, as by
an honest Cause; And in Engagement; with your enemies, you must make use of the
name of Christ, and of his help to overcome with. So, si Christum non videmus,
quem invocabimus Pugnaturi? whom should we call upon for conduct and conquest
with our Armies? but our Christ? now is it gratitude to lay him aside? or as
Themistocles used to say (of the Athenians, that they used him like an Oak
indeed; for in danger, and when a storm came, they ran under it! but when it
was over, they unthankfully crop'd it, and lop'd the boughs off of it?) to cast
him off till they need him again? to crop or lop him? as if they should never
need him again? or at least not to Rule, but to save only; and as occasion
serves. RIGHT HONORABLE! in this Name it was that our Prayers (as hearty as
ever) went forth with YOUR ARMIES even in this Cheshire-expedition; and another
link is added to the long Chain, by the same hand that was wont to be with us,
when we declared for Jesus our only King; and we cannot imagine that you should
lop off any thing that is his due; or ever undervalue either him, his
Government, or his dear servants (if they yet must go with the brand of
Sectaries) seeing Valentinian, Theodosius, Constantine, and others, did style
themselves so long since, vassalos Christ, the very servants of jesus Christ;
and Theodosius professed he accounted it more his honor to Rule like a
Christian, then like a King! yea, Augustus himself said, Ei gratius erat Nomen
pietatis quam Potestatis; For Theocraty, M. B. his own words.
he had rather be PIOUS then powerful, and it was more grateful to him. O! then
let our Parliament be holy! and Magistrates holy! But to conclude, Mr. B.
himself says, (whom I presume you will hear when you will not me) p. 221.
These. 206. It is this Theocratical polity, or Divine Commonwealth, which is the
unquestionable Reign of Christ on earth, which all Christians are agreed may be
sought; and that temporal dignity of Saints which undoubtedly would bless the
world. So in p. 223. These. 207. I think the promoting of this holy Theocratick
Government, is the point of reformation, that we are called to desire, by them
that now plead for the Reign of Christ and the Saints. And what do we desire
more? Wherefore (we hope) you will see no Reason to explode them called fifth
Monarchy men, that are gracious and meek, or Sectaries (as Pope Zach. did
Virg.) that say, there is an Antipodes and a Nadir, as well as a Zenith in this
Cause (seeing Mr. B. is so positive in it) and alius est mundus, and alii
homines sunt sub terras, and that the Lord has his hidden ones, Psa. 83. 3, 4.
dear to him, that ought to be (and we hope are) so to you, ( Right Honorable!)
which you would do well to look after and encourage; seeing the very Romans
have found out the bravest men of their Commonwealth by such noble inquiries,
and have taken them from their Dinners of Turnips and Watercresses (as the
Curii, Fabritii, etc.) to the service of the Public; and saepe sub attrita
latitat sapientia vest. This fit Location of the best, holiest and ablest in
the body, This settlement will satisfy all parties.
and Theocratick Government, will with Gods blessing prove such a settlement,
as shall satisfy all parties and (honest) interests in the Commonwealth, and
the best, most; by obviating of fears, dangers, threnodies, temptations, and
our enemies designs, which are very dangerous and in the Deep) to invade,
innovate, or alter; when all our supplies, our supports, our wisdom, power,
courage and our protections, shall be assured and secured unto us by the Holy
One (to whom all power is given by the Lord, (and ought to be by men) in heaven
and earth.) For which Cause and the Commonwealth, (without blandishing
discourses, or blending affections) I do profess for one ( amongst the
thousands of Israel) I am ready, hearty, and resolved (with the Lords grace and
assistance) to live or to die; if every drop of blood in my Veins spin out! and
Gobbet of flesh on my bones (against the common enemies of Christ, this Cause,
the Commonwealth and the Parliament) be sown like seed upon the earth; let who
will plow or harrow upon it, I care not; so it may have but a fertile Harvest
for Posterity! And Resurrection with the Just men made perfect.

-- quod si
Frigida curarum fomenta relinquere posses,
Quo te Caelestis sapientia duceret, ires.
Hoc opus! hoc Studium! parvi properemus and ampli.
Si Patriae volumus; si nobis vivere Cari.
TO THE READER.
SIR,
IT is Civility to your self, and service to the Truth, that lets you know,
these Papers were in their first draught ready, and intended for the Public
above six weeks since; (before the Rebellion, and in the nick of Time;) but the
Press fell sick, and has had a Disease; it was at first Costive and bound;
which tenasm continued till our Emollientia, and Medicamenta resolventia, by
the help of a Silver-clyster-pipe set it a work again: but then, with as much
danger of a Lax or Flux, (for these times, the Press has such a Looseness as
lets out the thinnest matter with the most applause) but that the supine care
of the Corrector applied such Astringents as were ready (and requisite;) and
yet some Errataes have given him the slip; which the Author had no leisure to
Supervise: Sed ubi non sunt Errata, non sunt Narrata; there is nothing without
them I am sure. It is a pretty tale, and yet a Truth, (for as there be
Erroneous Truths! so true Errors!) which the Press let pass upon the Bible,
An. 1612. in Psalm. 119. in stead of Princes have persecuted me, that Printers
have persecuted me; and it is not long since Princes hindered us: but to say it
now (of these in power) is the Errata of the Times; Sithence our Privileges
and Liberty to serve the Public do publish the contrary; being so piously and
peaceably revolved upon us after a sable night and scandalous hour of
Temptation What is scattered with the Fork, I would have gathered with the
Glean; but that I need not be so curious, if thou be Courteous or Ingenious;
and (as Cato said) I care not much for them, Who have a better judgment in
their Mouths, then in their Minds, in their Palates then in their Pates.
Besides, I am called aside (of a sudden) into another Part of the Harvest, and
must leave somewhat for the Rakers, as well as for the Reapers here behind me.
Nor indeed did I cast eye upon all the Sheets or Proofs of the Press, much less
time had I to Read or to Correct them. At a Perfunctory View of some Papers, I
saw these Errataes: Page 26. l. 28. read REPUNCTION, p. 27. l. 18. Autopathy,
p. 63. l. 26. in it, p. 67. l. 16. inoculated, p. 82. l. 22. Papistae, l. 22.
Rapistae, p. 93. l. 23 r. and no considerable man, p. 95. l. ^ and so to all
parts, etc. What else I know not; And all I desire, is but as good
constructions from you, as I am ready to give (with the Lords grace)
instructions to you, and to receiv from you in the furtherance of the Gospel,
this Cause, the Kingdom and Interest of Jesus Christ and of this Commonwealth.

FINIS.

