THE PETITIONERS VINDICATION from CALVMNIE and ASPERSION. And the Young Man's
Animation to the building up of ZION. Published in their Defense, against a
scurrilous Book or Pamphlet lately written against them by I. W. and
scandalously entitled, Petitions against Bishops and their Votes in
Parliament. Subscribed unto after a Clandestine, delivered after a tumultuous
manner, and falsely going under the name of a whole County or Town, proved to be
both contrary to our late taken Protestation, as also utterly unlawful by many
other clear and evident Reasons. Now answered and refuted, and Petitions
delivered unto the PARLIAMENT, by impregnable reasons proved to be both
lawful, and according to the Petitioners duty, and the late taken
Protestation. With many other remarkable passages worthy of observation.

By T. Robinson. Veritati Devotum.

Prove. 26. 24, 25. He that hates will counterfeit with his lips, but in his
heart he lays up deceit.

Though he speak favorably, believe him not: for there are seven abominations
in his heart.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. and are to be sold at the Castle in
Cornhill. 1642.

COurteous Reader, for your better understanding of this Book, I have first
recited the Author of the book, I answer his matter, with the folio of his book
wherein it is: then as I handle his particular sayings or assertions, I denote
them alphabetically both in his matter and mine (as for example) In his
Ingression or entrance, fo. 2. of this book he says, viz. For him who is but a
private subject and no Lawmakers, to give his hand in a factious way, etc. I
first undertaking to clear that scandal set the letter (a) at the words
factious way: and so likewise in my answer thereunto: And thus throughout the
whole Treatise: that wheresoever a letter by it self is in any part of my
Answer, you may look back to the same in my Authors argument just precedent,
and discern more plainly the thing by him affirmed or employed, and by me
refuted. And if I had not so done, I know not how you would rightly have
understood him. For he has observed neither rule or method in his discourse or
argument, but heapeth up many things confusedly together, thereby to perplex
the mind, and darken reason, that so like a cunning Merchant, he may the better
in a bundle put off his suffisticated ware for sound and current unto men.

T. R.

THE PETITIONERS VINDICATION FROM Calumny and Aspersion. And the Young Man's
Animation to the building up of ZION.
THe Author of the aforesaid book, folio 1. does by way of Introduction, first
imply the importuning will of some friend (by him there called Mr. Cachisme)
for his hand to a Petition, such as by his discourse appears, have of late by
several parts and persons of this Kingdom been delivered to the Honorable
House of Parliament; Secondly, his unwillingnesse to subscribe the same, and
willing mind to satisfy him therefore, albeit (as he says) he shall be
always ready and willing not only to give his hand, but his heart and purse
likewise for the good of the Commonweal, County, or Parish wherein he lives,
and for that cause has been both active and passive several years together.

Where he properly lives, or what his proper name is, I know not, nor has he
declared, it may be he does here but reside or sojourn upon some negotiation,
and his true living may be in Spain, France, Flanders, or elsewhere, and so
what he has apologized may be For the good of the common weal, County, or
parish wherein he lives.
good: otherwise the sequel of his writing (in my judgment) does plainly
render him evilly affected to our good, viz. to the Republique of this our
England, and the common cause in hand. For his pretended satisfaction tends
merely to the diminution of the courage and constancy of good men, the
freezing of the cold, and the encouragement of the wickedly bold. And his
Ingression, But for me who am but a private Subject, etc. is palpably a slye
insinuation of a matter of The best glosses are often put on the worst
commodities, and the worst wine into the purest glasses. The Authors Ingression.
conscience, for the not subscribing his friends Petition, the better the reby
to gain credence and persw^sion from the hearts of people, and that principally
from the greater multitude, the ignorant and indifferent. But by the way a word
of that, viz.

But for me who am but a private (b) subject, a (c) Protestant, and no (d)
Lawmakers, to give my hand in a factious (a) way, and without (e) command from
Authority, to will that there should be (f) no Bishops, and that they shall
have no voice in the House (g) of Peers, is against my (h) conscience, and that
(i) light of reason and understanding which I have received. And I dare not
comply with the (k) distempers of the people, and follow the stream of a
multitude to do evil on these grounds follooeing. Ye have him in his own words
verbatim.

Lo here he concludes both Petitions and Petitioners to the House of Parliament
to be (a) Mark, does he not impudently asperse the whole Parliament hereby? as
if they did countenance both factions and factious persons, for they accepted
both the Petitioners and their Petitions.
factious: a phrase wholly scandalous Answer.
and used to deter others. For what disturbance or commotion was thereby either
plotted or practiced through them, either against King or State? what breach of
Law? or public peace? only as members sensible of the great jeopeardy the
whole Body was in, they humbly fought for redress to the Fountain of succor
and justice. And every one as a private (b) man has an interest in the
public state and cause of the Land. For it is not only one man's cause, but
every ones, and we are all members one of another. And as every particular
member does participate of the universal health or sickness of the body, and
as every member natural, does grow and prosper according to the distemperature
or sound constitution of the heart or brain, from whence and on which its whole
life and motion does depend: so is it in every member politic. And as the
members corporal being hurt; sick, or any ways grieved, do by a natural
instinct and way inscrutable forthwith look and send unto the prime parts
before named for strength and comfort, yea and secretly excite all the other
parts also to be assistant. So questionless may the members of the Body
politic, finding themselves wounded, weakened, and many ways grieved by their
oppressive foes, and distractive fears, lawfully look up, and by humble
Petition sue unto the King and Parliament (both which are one) the very heart
and head, life and being of this pristine land and Nation, and of every true
member of the same, yea and invite others also to assist them therein. The
woman in her distress cried to the King of Israel for help, when it was not in
his power to help, 2 King. 6. 26, 27. And shall not we pray help my Lord O
King? Nay help, O ye Noble Senators, ye Parliament, in whose power it is
(through Gods good hand upon them) to help us. For (blessed be our God) our
case is not yet like the woman's. And if mine Author be a (c) Protestant, (as he
boasts himself) and that in re, and not only nomine: he ought the rather to
sue in the Protestants behalf, and be the more forward in promoting their cause
unless he be a withered branch, and live insensible of the general calamity,
and so more fit to be cut off then nourished. Who will seek and sue if the
Protestant do not, neither the Papist, nor the Atheist? nay, who should seek
but the Protestant? For his cause it is even his only. But mine Author is like
the men of Ephraim, that being called would not go, Judge. 12. 2. and will abuse
his brethren for going, ver. 4. But let him take heed, as like as he would seem
to be a Anguis later sub herba.
Gileadite, he will be found but an Ephraemite, he pronounces Sibboleth for
Shibboleth, ver. 6. And if none but (d) Lawmakers ought to petition, then the
Parliament men themselves should only petition, and what needed that? know
they not their own minds? and if the thing, to wit, petitioning, be (ipso
facto) unlawful, as he argues against the Petitioners, then I conceive it is
much more unlawful in the Lawmakers, (as in Majore) then it is in others: But
if it be lawful in the Lawmakers, as by that word (d) Lawmakers he inferres,
then it is also lawful in others, and so in the Petitioners. Besides, freedom
of information, and to make our grievances known is a chief privilege of
Parliament, and of us by the Parliament. And what (e) command more authentic
then liberty confirmed by Law? And although many have petitioned that there may
be (f) no Bishops, yet have they but done what they ought, and what their oath
does require. For both their standings and present titles (as shall hereafter
be fully proved) are altogether Popish and unlawful: and to will that these
Prelates may have no Votes in the house (g) of Peers, who can deny it to be a
thing not only lawful but expedient? for can a man serve two Masters? no more
can they serve two offices. And therefore all this sure can become no such
heavy burden to my Authors (h) conscience, especially having received so much
(i) light as he boasts of. Nor need he fear to comply herein with the people,
for these their humble supplications cannot by any judicious Doctors be
accounted (k) distempers. Indeed well he may do, not to follow the (l) stream
of a multitude to do evil, for at this time it is so violent and strong as that
perhaps it may suddenly carry him to ruin headlong. But the Petitioners part
is not this multitude: for (comparatis comparandis) comparing them with the
Adversaries they are but a manual. And it is certain they are fewer in number
that desire the good of Zion, and of the City Jerusalem, then they that hate
it. But all this by the way upon his Exordium or Entrance. Now to his grounds,
and I will repeat them in his own words as follows, fol. 2. of his book, viz.

First, because I have by the example and recommendation of the The Authors 1.
ground.
Parliament solemnly (m) taken the Protestation whereby I have seriously
protested to maintain and defend so far as lawfully I may, the (o) true
reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the Church of
England, against all (n) Popery and Popish Innovations, contrary to the said
doctrine. Now in the 36. Article of the said expressed doctrine, the office of
Bishops is inclusively confirmed.

Here he confesses himself solemnly to have (m) taken the Protestation for the
maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion: Answer.
and yet is his writing against all such as according to this Protestation and
their conscience do arise and apply themselves to the maintenance and defense
of the same Religion, making the Protestation which is the very ground and
strongest obligation of the Petitioners performance, his prime argument to
dehort them therefrom; so perniciously inverting the end of the Protestation,
as if it had been ordained, and by the Worthies of the Land taken and to us
commended, rather for the quenching that little love of the truth, and zeal of
Gods worship which is in men, then any ways to inflame and excitate the same,
and for the shutting men up in silence, and tying them up from action, rather
then to imbolden and strengthen them both by word and deed to further the work
of Reformation, and the building up of the house of God. And although he has
sworn to defend this Religion against all (n) Popery and Popish Innovations,
yet he makes his oath the cause of his refusing to join with others in lawful
means for the defense thereof, and thus he overthrows his first As read and
mark it.
ground and plea from thence. For if the Protestation does bind a man (as
indeed it does, and so himself confesses) to defend the true reformed
Protestant Religion, and to oppose all Popery and Popish innovations, how then
is he left free? what excuse can it be to him? not only for his sitting still
and giving way to Popery (for he that is not with us is against us) but also
for his opposition against such as in discharge of their oath do stir in
defense of the true Protestant Religion, and expulsion of popery and popish
Innovation. The Protestation has not Twins in it, it comprehends not
contraries, nor does it leave a man to his own pleasure. Therefore being thus
taken by him, it does for his negligence and averseness plainly condemn him:
and better had it been for him never to have taken it, then having taken it not
to keep it, Eccles. 5. 4. for the oath is not with man, but with God. When the
people of Judah and Benjamin had sworn and entered into covenant with God, Ezra
9. 5. so soon as the Priest had told them their sin, and what they should do to
glorify God, they presently consent and put it in practice, ver. 10, 11, 12.
We have sworn and entered covenant with our God, and our Priests, the faithful
Ministers of God, have told us our sin, and what the strange thing is we must
put from us, that God may be glorified by us: and is it not lawful for us to
sue for a Bill of divorcement, yea to divorce our selves? For we have loved our
strange Ceremonies and Service, as well as ever the Jews loved their strange
wives. And although we lay not hands upon vain crosses and pictures, Copes and
Surplices, Organs and Cornets, and the rest of the Whores Dress, yet give us
leave at least to petition, that they may be all abolished; and that with all
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 31. 1. we may now at length break down all the Altars and
Images, and cast away all vain Ceremonies out of the service of God throughout
the whole Land. For these must be removed before our oaths can be fulfilled, or
God truly worshipped. And whereas in the close of his first ground he ratifieth
the reason of his refusal, by virtue of the 36. Article of the said expressed
doctrine of the Church of England, wherein the office of Bishops is inclusively
confirmed. I answer. The Protestation binds not to the maintenance of the
whole and sole Doctrine comprised and expressed in that book, nor of any part
thereof, otherwise and further then it consents with the wholesome words of
Christ, for the very words in the oath are, the (o) true Note I pray.
reformed Protestant Religion; Now in that same book, and in many of those
devised Articles, are many things contained and enjoined, which are not truly
reformed, (or rather conformed) to Gods holy Word. And therefore our Oath is of
a larger extent, and we are thereby bounden even to oppose those Articles, and
the whole form of Doctrine and discipline comprehended in them, so far forth as
they and it be not opposite to Popery and Popish Innovation, and dissent from
the truth of Reformation: and this is more amply and obviously expressed in
that resolving clause next under and adjoining to the Protestation. It is true
that in the said (p) 36. Article the consecration of Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, are there allowed, according to the manner used at the
first beginning of Reformation in the time of Edw. 6. But that therein or
thereby, either Archbishops or Lordbishops, are justified or justifiable by
Gods Word, I do neither read nor believe And therefore his secret fear of
transgressing an ^bsolute Act, or unlawful constitution of the Church, is no
sufficient plea for my Author to break his oath, and to induce others to do
likewise. Besides, grant what he pleads for: that the present office of the
Bishops as it is at this day executed by them, be by a Law of Parliament
confirmed, as lawful by Gods Word: Is it therefore lawful by the Word of God?
No. There is neither Law nor Counsel against Gods Law: his Statutes are like
himself pure and unalterable, and need not the frothy device of men either to
illustrate or authorize them. And as for Archbishops and Bishops (nay and
Prebends and Archdeacons too) I am certain there is neither precept, nor
pattern in holy Writ for them, many against them. Matthew. 23. 8. 10, 11. Mark 9.
35. and 10. 42, 43, 44. Luke 22. 25, 26. and 1 Pet. 2. 3. Nor does Timothy or
Titus justify our Bishops, they were men of another order and stamp. 1 Timothy 3.
2, 3, 4. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. Neither does the word (...), on which they so much
stand, prove (...), id est, ab inspiciendo
their standing true; the Etymology thereof has no Analogy with them, their
jurisdiction is originally from humane invention, for their institution is not
jure divino, but jure pontificio, not by God, but by the Pope, and for that
cause the Pope calls himself Pater Patrum, the Father of the Fathers, that is,
of the Bishops. Episcopus idem quod Presbyter.
The word signifies no more then an Elder or Overseer, Act. 20. 28. One that
has the charge or Homer an Heathen Author many ages before Bishops, calls
Hector Prince of Troy, Episcopum, quod esset Troje praecipuus inspector, and
propugnator, ejusque curam gerebat. Magistratus Atticus dictus fuit Episcopus.
Cicero himself was called Episcopum or ae maritimae a Formiis. Epist: Famil.
lib. 6.
care of any place: and so it imports all the painful Ministers of God as well
as the Bishops. And that a Bishop and an Elder are one (to omit other
Scriptures) it is evident by comparing the 7. verse of the 1. Chap. of Titus
with the fifth verse. And if there be any difference between a Bishop or an
Elder, and another Minister, a true Pastor or a Teacher, it is in this that the
Bishop has the greater care and burden, and therefore ought to be more humble
and watchful: But our Bishops will have other Ministers to differ nothing from
them in pains and care, unless it be in taking more then they do; for indeed
they take none at all. But for dignity and honor, they will have a great
distance betwixt them and their brethren, even as great as that betwixt Dives
and Lazarus. They must be the Lords, (nay gracelesly) gracious Lords, and their
Brethren the true laborers of Jesus Christ Sometime the Bishops of Oxons
phrase.
Rogues and Rascals. Their very Titles are usurped, and such as Christ the Lord
never appointed: for there is but one Lord, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5.
Isa. 42. 8. and had they not made more use of the Temporal Sword, (whereunto
they have no right) then they have of the Spiritual (for they and Gods Word
could never accord) their tyrannical jurisdiction had not continued until
this time. Seeing all this, what sufficient ground then is there for mine
Author to plead the Protestation in Bar against such as petition against them
and their temporal power? what cause of scrupulositie for him to refuse the
endeavor of their removal? Nay what cause is there not for him to endeavor
it? if he was well affected, or had so much light to walk by, and a conscience
so tender as he speaks of. Therefore for as much as they are justly deemed
Antichristian (because whatsoever office or officer in the Church, (Gods house)
is not by, or is contrary to Christ's own institution, the only King and Lord
of the same, Psalm. 2. 6. Joh. 13. 13. is against him) the Petitioners have but
done their duty, and discharged their oath in seeking to have them expelled.
And so I will recite his second ground, fo. 2. viz. Secondly, I am engaged
thereby also to maintain and defend the The Authors 2. ground.
powers and privileges of Parliaments, which is chiefly to be understood of
the (q) established Laws concerning the same. Now several (r) Acts of
Parliament do not only confirm as aforesaid the office of a Bishop, but by the
powers and privileges of those Acts of Parliament they are also to sit as
Members of the Lords House.

I pray observe how this man does preposterously tie the privileges Answer.
of Parliament on the (q) Acts of Parliament. Cujus contrarium verum est, the
contrary whereof is true. For (as I humbly conceive) the Laws by them made,
make not their privileges: But they by virtue of that inherent privilege and
power, ab initio, established on them, as the representative body of the whole
kingdom, are enabled both to enact Laws, and if cause be, to repeal them, as
the cause produces the effect. Otherwise it could not be that we should be our
own Lawmakers: and in my understanding we are called a free people, because we
are governed by a free Law, and not by constrained Ordinances violently
obtruded against our wills upon us. The bounds of our Law being Meum and Tuum;
and the Ends, Defense and Freedom. And therefore we are not free because the
Laws do make us free, for by our Laws we are bound and must obey: But because
we have free power to make such Laws unto which we willingly do assent and
obey. Now that these privileges of Parliament are confirmed by Law, is
undeniable: and therefore he that violates the least of them is punished as a
Law-breaker: But that there may be Laws or Acts altered and repealed, and no
privilege broken is manifest, and one Parliament may, and we know does often
alter and abrogate what another did establish and enact. Ergo the maintenance
of privileges of Parliament is not to be understood chiefly of the Laws
thereby established; but of the legislative power, privileges, and liberty,
wherewith they of the Parliament are invested as of right, and (as I may say)
in feodo simpli, for the doing of whatsoever shall seem good unto them for the
honor of the King, relief of the Subject, and good of the Kingdom, the which
they lively personate. Therefore it is that their power, their privileges, and
personal liberties, which we are more principally bound to defend, and most
nearly does this concern us. For the life and liberty, estate, welfare, and
very being (under God) of you and me, and of every man and member of this
Kingdom is wrapped up in them and their privileges: And if we stand only in
defense of the Laws enacted (as they of the The Kings Army in the North, who
under color of maintaining the Law, would have employed their Forces against
the Parliament for the support of Bishops.
Army in pretext would have done) and not of their persons and rights to them
adherent as they are Parliament men: We may have still our old Laws (if not our
old oppressions) but no execution of them, our Lawmakers being illegally taken
from us, as woeful experience of late had almost The case is plain, because the
accusation was palpable.
taught us. And albeit several (r) Asts of Parliament do confirm both Bishops
and their Votes in the Lords House, yet neither Bishops, nor their votes are
therefore lawful nor yet necessary: Neither custom nor antiquity can
justify falsehood, or tolerate incommoditie. As for Bishops, I have spoken
somewhat already sufficient (as I suppose) for this Treatise, they are a theme
requiring a more ample discussion. And as for their votes in Parliament, it
has been proved, and long since adjudged that a Parliament may be absolute
without them, De Doctor Standish.
7. H. 8. and often have Laws been made and ratified by the Parliament without
them, 25. E. 1. and 35. E. 1. and 7. R. 2. and what may be done, in this case,
at one time may be done at any time, and therefore it follows there is no
necessity of them, and what should any member unnecessarily do there? Besides,
the Bishops right in Parliament is of another nature then that of the Noble
Peers, for that of the Peers is inherent and hereditary; but the Bishops theirs
is only durante been placito, during the Kings pleasure, or so long as they
shall please him. For they sit there but by their Masters favor, and what hope
of good from him that is dissuaded through fear or persuaded for favor? Again
it is incongruous and inconsistent with their See the Speech of the Right
Honorable the Lord Say, against the temporal power of Bishops.
function. The Bishops have often used that Proverb, Ne suitor ultra crepidam,
let no man meddle out of his calling, to silence the just reproofs against
them; when as indeed it might more justly have been objected to them: Ne
Episcopus vero ultra Ecclesiam. But let not a Bishop leave the Church. But I
will desist from further prosecution of this point, because (blessed be God) we
have our desire in this matter most rightfully already granted. Howsoever thus
much may suffice to prove that such as have petitioned against Bishops and
their votes in Parliament, have done nothing against their oath, as my Author
does subtly infer, but truly done their duty, and discharged their
conscience. And so I come to my Authors third ground in these words following,
fol. 3. viz.

Thirdly, I am bound by the said Protestation to (s) maintain and The Authors
3. ground.
defend the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and if this extend to
every subject in particular, much more to a Parliament man Now they being
Subjects, and their rights and liberties being lawful, I am bound to maintain
them, so far as lawfully I may, in those lawful rights and liberties. Again
the (t) making and repealing of laws for the good of the Commonwealth, is a
special and peculiar power, privilege, and right, proper (t) only to
Parliaments. Therefore not to be (v) forcedor coacted by me being no Parliament
man. For that may be lawful and warrantable in my governors to do by reason,
which is altogether unlawful and unwarrantable in me to require by will. This
is rather to be a tyrannical (w) Judge then a legal witness, to break Laws
rather then to preserve them, and in stead of Reformation, to bring in
confusion.

Here is much chafe, but little corn. Now he acknowledges that he is bound to
(s) maintain the lawful rights and liberti^s of Answer.
every subject, and therefore much more of Parliament men: before he takes care
only for the established Laws, but as for the Lawmakers he argues nothing. I
had almost thought him to be of those that would lately have had them in
prison. And again here he grants that it is only (t) proper to Parliament men
to make Laws and repeal them, the which I am sure they can never do without
their liberty, to convene and consult, and therefore (as I have already said)
it is not so much the established Laws, as the power, privileges, and
personal liberties of Parliament men (whilst they are so, and do only what
is meet) that we must defend. Nor has any man assumed this power and
propriety, but they (as I know) though my Author does insinuate (t) so.
Unless it be such as would limit their Councels, and propose them a way after
their own fancies, accounting all that is done by the Parliament, contrary to
their crooked will and liking, to be contrary both to law and justice: for
there is a generation, with whom only quod libet licet, what pleases is
lawful. But the Petitioners are not of this kind, and therefore not thus
presumptious, for they only sue for justice, not directing but begging
redress. But toward the end my Author imputes an enforcement (v) or coaction
to such as petition them. What impulsion he means I am ignorant, for I am
privy to none (I am sure not that By the Cavalliers and broken Soldiers.
martial commination Januar. 4. for in all his discourse he does not so much
as blow upon it.) And what way more humble and less offensive then
supplication? and what way more submisse and tolerable then petition? Sure he
is rapt in the spirit, intimating divine deprication, then which with God
nothing indeed is more forcible: But I think I may rather say unto him, Satin'
sanus es? is he well in his wits? for what is more lawful, nay more needful
and commendable? then to ask things lawful whether from God above, or of the
gods below, especially with this conclusion, humbly subjecting to their grave
wisdom, as it is well known all our Petitioners have done. Again what man
distempered in mind, sick, or maimed in body, or crazed in estate, will not
discover to his Divine, Physician, or Lawyer, his grief, yea, and the cause too
if he can? earnestly imploring help and comfort from him, nay not cease until
(if it may be) he has in some good measure obtained it. And has not the whole
mind and body (to wit) both the Ministry and Magistracy of the Land, and
every living member thereof, been grievously distempered, sick and wounded? and
whom should we inform and make acquainted with our desperate maladies and their
causes? But that most wise and ever approved skillful Minister, Physician, and
Lawyer, the all healing Parliament, whom we have chosen, and in whom (under our
God) we do confide for the diligent search of our distempers, redress of our
grievances, reparations of our estates, and restoration of our perfect health
and strength again. Yet as the Patient does always find and feel somewhat more
in himself then the Doctor can discover or discern: So does the great Patient
our Land and Kingdom, find and feel many close and inward griefs, which that
learned Doctor the Parliament cannot of it self epsy, and therefore on
necessity must be by their great Patient the people, informed of, or else they
can minister no remedy. My Author has forgot the old Rule,

Egrotare malum, sed pejus nolle sanarl.

It is ill to be sick, but much worse not to seek cure. Besides, he is but an
ill servant and a negligent, that while his master is busy in private
consultation within, or in serious examination of his estate, will not have a
careful eye into the shop and affairs abroad, and in case he discry any
danger, theft, or other evil act, do not speedily give his master notice for
remedy. The happy Parliament is our Privy Council Chamber, or the great
withdrawing room of the Kingdom, where they, as so many great State Masters,
do sit in consultation and strict examination of our public estate and
welfare. The whole Land is the shop of all manner of intercourse and
negotiation. We should prove our selves but very bad members, remiss servants
and careless, if while our great Masters were thus busied within, we should
not once look about in the shop in the commonwealth, every man according to
his several place, and if we see or foresee any evil present or approaching,
not yield them intelligence, that so they may happily make prevention. And now
do I remember the urgencie, yea, and the variety of vehement arguments the
poor widow of Tekoah used to bring back banished Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 4. to 21.
a wretch and of no relation to her. Ought not we much more to be instant, and
that by many Petitions with our David, with our Parliament, (who are indeed
even as an Angel of God in hearing of good and bad, therefore the Lord their
God be with them, verse. 17.) for the bringing back, not of a murderous Absalom,
but a poor dejected, distressed Kingdom, spoiled and stabbed (as I may say) to
the very heart, not by one, but many fair looked false-hearted Absoloms; yea
and as all the people throughout the Tribes of Israel, 2 Samuel 19. 9. were at
strife to bring back David to his Kingdom, whom ambitious Absalom his
unnatural son had put to flight: so why should not we contend? what City?
what company? and what County? should be foremost with our pains and petitions
to bring back, I cannot say our King Charles from exile (God forbid) but I may
say His Person to his Parliament.
his ancient glory and honor, and the old renown of this Land and Nation,
which the aspiring Absoloms of our time (unnatural Brats) have so far as
they could even put to flight and banished out of sight, yea out of many a
heart. And I know no sound and honest heart can deem this a mark of a (w)
tyrannical Judge or an illegal witness, or of a transgressour of the Laws,
or one that seeks confusion, as my Author implies against the Petitioners.
But he will say they came with weapons, as swords, bills, staves, etc. It is
true, but neither to offend nor enforce, but to defend their own persons from
such as for their good will to the common good As Lunsford and his company: the
Bishops imps, and Dam-me Boys at Whitehall.
did malign them, and (to their eternal contempt and odium be it spoken) did
despightfully use them. And thus much for his third ground. Now you shall hear
his fourth, fol. 4. viz.

I am likewise obliged to maintain the Kings royal person, honor, The Authors
4. ground.
and estate, and to preserve the union and peace between the three kingdoms,
(much more among our selves.) Now there is no better way thereunto then to (x)
keep his laws: for both the honor and safety of the King, the liberty and
peace of the Kingdom, and welfare of them both are involved in them.

Here is little to be gainsaid, for who knows not that the Answer.
prime way to honor his Majesty, and to preserve peace in the Kingdom and
commonwealth, is to keep and obey the Laws, (provided always they oppugn not
Gods Laws) and I would they had been always kept as they should have been, and
then we should have had less trouble at this time. Yet one thing more then
mere obedience to the Law, is every one that has taken the Protestation bound
unto (that is) to do their best to bring every one that does disobey the Laws
to condign punishment, otherwise there can be but little peace, be you and I
never so obedient: and the best way to conserve peace, is to endeavor the
correction of all the perturbers thereof, which are the violators of the Laws,
the bonds of our peace: and herein have the Petitioners but justly also
fulfilled their oath, in praying the execution of the Laws upon all Recusants
and Delinquents, who have ever been the only Authors of our unquietness,
seeking still to break our bands, our Laws, and to cast our cords (to wit) our
Statutes from them. But as for my Author, I do not understand that he desires
any such execution, for he rather judges the Petitioners for justice, breakers
of the Laws, then keepers of them, and this he secretly (x) implies, though
not openly averreth* And so I come to his fifth ground, fol. 4. viz.

Fifthly, I am engaged also to oppose as far as lawfully I may, and by The
Authors 5. ground.
all good ways and means (y) to bring to condign punishment, all such as
shall either by force practice, counsels, plots, and conspiracies do any thing
to the contrary of any thing in that present Protestation contained. How then
dare (z) I be so far from bringing to condign punishment the offenders, that
I shall wilfully consent to the breach of it, and procure others thereunto by
practice, plots, conspiracies or the like.

Here himself does confirm what I last above did affirm, concerning the (y)
bringing of offenders to punishment. But he does Answer.
withal subtly (by way of (z) interrogation intimate, as if the Petitioners
for these things had both broken their oath, and procured others also to do the
like, and therefore dimerited punishment. Now he confesses that all men by the
Protestation are bounden by all good ways and means to endeavor the
punishment of Delinquents. And the Petitioners have been so far from the
neglect of this, and the procuring others thereunto, as that by the best and
most justifiable means (humble petitioning) they have principally endeavored
it, and therefore in this thing have not made the least breach of their oath,
nor incurred punishment. But,

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

It is a shame for a Teacher to reprehend that in another, he is guilty of
himself, or to lay his own fault to another charge: the case in this place is
my Authors, and by this he plainly proves himself to be a Delinquent, at the
least of the Delinquent party, (utrum vult) let him take his choice: for he is
not content in this particular to violate his oath alone, but also by his
writing and slye suggestions, seduceth and procures others to do the same. But
as his accusation is by way of question, so shall my answer be. If he know of
any that have been so far from bringing others, offenders, to deserved
punishment, as that they have wilfully consented with them to the breaking of
the Protestation, and procured others likewise by plots and practices to do the
like; How dare he conceal them? nay why does he not reveal them, and bring them
forth to their just punishment according as he has sworn? Lest whilst he
condemn others, himself be found culpable of more severe judgment. And so
till then I will leave him in question, and come to his sixth ground, fol. 5.
viz.

Sixthly, I am neither for (c) hope, fear, favor, or other respect The
Authors 6. ground.
whatsoever, to relinquish this promise, vow, or Protestation, much less to
(a) break it for the same ends, and to make others to do the like. This (b)
betraying others thereunto, and making them guilty of so solemn a vow, is an
offense of an high nature both to God, and our governors.

Here is nothing to the purpose: only he does seem to (a) tax Answer.
some body, but nominates no body: and therefore indeed does justly deserve to
be taxed himself. For if he know any man guilty of the (b) betraying he
speaks of, let him detect him openly, and touch him boldly, or else (as I
said before) himself is conscious of what he objects against others. But to
invite others unto good and lawful actions, is not to betray them unto
wickedness, and therefore the Petitioners are innocent in the thing he
intends, to wit, of doing evil in the procuring hands to their Petitions: for
both the matter and manner was lawful. And if any has for (c) hope, fear, or
favor, relinquished the promise and vow, it is he, and such as he, (and not
the Petitioners at whom still he secretly girds) for albeit he has taken it,
his own mouth witnesses that he has departed from it, because instead of
opposing Popery, and Popish Innovation, he pleads for Popish Bishops, and
their Papal government, and opposes all that oppose them, instead of applying
himself to defend the Parliament, he applies himself to deter and dehort
others from doing it: and instead of using the best means for bringing
Delinquents to be punished, he uses the best means to excuse them, and to
accuse others who have endeavored their punishment. And sure if he was not
some Bishops favorite, stood not in some place, credit, or grace by their
favor, or at least a favourer of their faction, and so in hope by them to be
remunerated, or in fear to be damnified, he would not have taken such a
circuit, and traced such a round, for their defense and justification. As for
the Petitioners, what hope could they have more then to be delivered from such
soul-oppressing Tyrants? what should they fear but the spite of the
prelaticall party? and what favor could they expect? when all men for the
most part then favored the prelacie. And thus do I come to his last ground,
fol. 5. viz.

Finally, I am not bound in any Article thereof further then I may The Authors
last ground.
(d) lawfully perform it. The Law being the harmonious (e) scope, bounds, and
limits of my Protestation. And therefore I may not unlawfully do any thing,
that may tend to the breach or contradiction of any Article thereof.

True it is, that he is bound by the Protestation to the performance Answer.
of nothing further then he lawfully may. Nevertheless let him not use this
argument for the maintenance of things unlawful, and for the discouragement of
such as rightfully seek the ablation of them. For as it enjoyneth only a
lawful defense: so it injoyneth the defense only of lawful things. By which
word (d) lawfully, I do chiefly understand according unto conscience: otherwise
we should be bound by our Protestation to the maintenance of some laws and
things thereby established, altogether unlawful and against the Word of God,
even such as are most offensive, and we have sworn against. But that this (even
conscience) is the principal (e) scope of the Protestation, and of the Authors
and commenders thereof, let him that reads it consider, and he shall find it
evident: and not that our actions either of opposition or defense* should be
further* bounded or restrained by the Laws National, then that they concur
with the Law of God, and conduce to the advancement of his truth and glory; if
it was not thus, we had sworn to man, and not to God, nay we had sworn with man
against God. But it is clear, and whose soul tells him not, that this oath is
unto God, and with God, yea and in the presence of God. Let no man therefore be
deceived, God is not mocked: He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who
has hardened himself against him and prospered? Job 9. 4. The law of the Land
therefore is not to be taken principally for the bounds and limits of our Oath,
but the law of God; and lawfully may we oppose the law of man so far forth as
it opposes the Law of God, and consents not therewith, and yet prove our
selves both loyal* Subjects, and conserve our Oath, Acts 27. 28, 29. Thus much
for my Authors grounds, the which I hope have been sufficiently refelled. Now
he comes to show you further cause why he would not subscribe his friends
Petition, nor conjoyne in a petitionary way. And this he usshereth in with an
Adverb, saying, fol. 5. viz.

Moreover, the manner of the proceeding does not satisfy me. The Authors 1.
cause.


First, because it is not done in that (f) right way it ought to be. For that
which is to go under the name of a County or Town, ought to be first (k)
assented unto by the Sheriff, Justice of Peace, or other Magistrates
respectively: and then they may be publicly propounded and condiscended unto,
or contradicted, that men may be encouraged, or dissuaded by good reasons pro
and con. And this is that (i) lawful and usual way for the (g) election of
Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, and of other Officers and matters
concerning the public. Wherefore (h) clandestine and surreptitions actions
going about from house to house by (h) night, and without the (l) consent and
commission of Authority, to (m) engage people to the breath of their
Protestation, and to make it an Act of a County or Town, and in a manner to (n)
force men thereunto, are but unlawful works of darkness, and will not (o)
endure the light.

All his former grounds alleged for his non subscription to Answer.
their Petition, are taken by him (though falsely) out of the Protestation. Now
these subsequent which he calls causes, are taken, a modo, from the manner of
the action, viz. because it was not done in (f) the right way. For that which
is to go under the name of a Town or a County, ought to be first affented unto
by the Sheriff, etc. then publicly propounded, etc. and this he subtly
does exemplify by the (g) election of Knights and Burgesses. And for that
their Petitions were not so obtained and approved, therefore he most
ignominiously terms them (h) Clandestine, that is, close, surreptitious,
nightworks, and works of darkness not enduring the light. How forcible are
right words? but what does this arguing reprove? Job 6. 25. In what manner the
petitioners gathered hands I am ignorant: But that is not pertinent, the action
being free, and the end lawful* For it is not the doing of a lawful work by
(h) night, or in a private assembly that makes it unlawful, more then the
doing of an unlawful work by day, and in a public assembly, does make it
lawful. And to frame a Petition to the Parliament, comprehending (not factions
or As the last of the County of Kent, so much countenanced by Sir Edw. Deering
and others, may justly be suspected.
factious implications) but the just fears and grievances of a City or County,
and the causes of them, and to get others like sensible of them, for testimony
to subscribe the same, is lawful I am certain, and past all controversy, for
neither the matter nor the manner is contrary to Law, nor by Law prohibited;
nay the matter is for law, and the manner both humble and peaceable, free and
voluntary, and therefore also lawful. And a man may as soon (and sooner if the
heads or chief proposers be not honest and sound men) be seduced and drawn to
set his hand contrary to Law, against his will, and Witness the Petition above
noted.
Protestation, in a public Assembly or meeting, (as at a general Assizes)
then in a private. Because the greater sort of men are like sheep led by
example; some relying on the judgment of particular men, who are eminent
amongst them for knowledge; others being afraid to refuse the thing (though
they doubt and inwardly are unwilling) lest they should be counted singular,
and more nice and wise then all the Country. Whereas whatsoever is propounded
in private, or at home, is always more maturely digested, the person taking
boldness to require respite, both to examine and consider it. And for my
Authors (i) example, it is not consonant, it concurreth not. For what is done
in that election, is according to the great Charter of England, and by the
Kings special power and Prerogative. The Sheriffs, Justices, and other
Offices, do nothing therein of their own free motion, by virtue of privilege
only as the Subjects do which petition: But in obedience to his Majesty's Writ
and precept. And how expedient it is that the whole County or City, even to the
lowest member, should consent to the election of the person which is to be
instead of their persons, and the head and mouth of them, I appeal to all men.
For the particular estates, interests, and liberties of every one of them is
entrusted with him: But in case of petitioning, there is no such necessity,
every man feels the general evil, but every man desires not the expurgation
of it, nor does every man know the cause of it, and therefore cannot make a
particular remonstrance, and sue for peculiar redress. And because every man
sees not the reason of the epidemicall malady, and so knows not what means
to use for remedy, and others that do see it as dead members desire no cure of
it, shall not therefore such as both know the cause and way of cure, and thirst
after it, use the means, law and liberty has allowed, for the effecting it? it
were unreasonable to deny it. Neither does the assent of a (k) Skeriffe,
Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate, argue any thing lawful, no more then
the preaching of false doctrine by a public Minister does prove it true; the
Laws are to be the rules of our civil actions, and not their license. Too many
things (fresh still in remembrance) have been both commanded and countenanced
by Sheriffs and Profanation of the Sabbath, seizing of men's goods, and
imprisoning of their persons.
Magistrates, which we know will neither stand with the Law of God, nor of the
Nation. And if the Sheriffs or Magistrates assent and proposition make an Act
lawful, then the bloody Rebels in Ireland are justifiable. For (as report
tells) they had for their beginning the consent both of Sir Phileme Oneale, and
ochers, Peers and Justices of the Peace there.
Sheriffs and Magistrates; yea themselves affirm authority for their present
actions. Again, as there is no general rule without its particular exception,
so there is no particular or extraordinary example to be taken for a general
rule. Ergo, though a universal suffrage and assent be necessarily required in
the choice of Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, yet it follows not
that the like is requisite in the way of Petitions to the Parliament. Now
whereas he calls the Petitions Clandestine actions, that is, hidden and close,
done in hugger mugger, and surreptitious, that is, as it were by stealth, how
unsavourie this is, let every one that has but a clear sense prove and try.
These are breathings of a corrupt stomach, and the stench thereof is odious,
even as that of a rotten sepulcher. Insomuch that he may justly be challenged
for one of those the Psalmist denotes, Psalm. 5. 9. (But herein he resembles
those shagg headed Sages, who call the Kings best Subjects Thus (it is said)
the Damme Boys or Long-heads at York served the Lincolnshire Gentlemen, and
others that petitioned the King to return to His Parliament.
Roundheads. I am sure they are Gross Heads, making good the old Proverb,
More hair then wit: Mere Caca-fucoes: and would you know whose Agents?
Plutoes. But their madness is apparent to all men, and their own venom will
in the end burst them.) For were not the Petitions and the Petitioners
purposes, evermore notified and made known, even before they came up and
presented them? how then were they done in private, and in the night time? (it
may be some man's hand might be had in the night, whose business kept him all
day abroad*) Truly they may rather be said to have done it on the house top, so
public have they been: Nor is there any reason why they should be so close in
this good action; For of whom should they be afraid? it is neither Rebellion,
Treason, nor Commotion (the black deeds of Papists and Bishops) which they
contrived, and what man good and wise would go about to bar them of so just a
privilege? And for that he says they did it without the (l) consent and
commission of Authority. I answer: They had authority both strong and
sufficient. First, their own right. Secondly, the Parliament, the only object
of their suits, a Commission better then any that issued out of the High
Commission, and such a one as my Author (though perhaps he love them not) dares
not question. For this is one of the prime proprieties appertaining unto
Parliaments, to receive and hear the grievances of the people, and a grand
privilege of the Subjects, freely without curb or prohibition of Magistrates
and Officers to See the right worthy Worthy, Sir Arthur Haselriggs Speech in
defense of himself and the other accused Members,
impart their grievances, and seek for relief to the Parliament. And if we
might not petition without the Sheriffs, Magistrates, and Officers consent of
the City or County where we live, we should be but still in bondage. For our
taskmasters would but revile us when we should come to crave their assents,
and say (with my Author) that we were idle and factious. For it may be these
are the very causes we must complain of, and it cannot be that they will write
against themselves. And so the evil causes might still remain, and we poor
Subjects still groan under the miserable effects. For the evil the Parliament
knows not, it cannot amend. Besides, admit that not only Magistrates, but
all sorts of people (as there are too many evilly affected) should dissent to
join with me in petition for redress and reformation. Is it unlawful
therefore for me to petition, because I am left alone, and the cause is
diserted of all men? No. (to omit private interest and respect) In case that
the welfare and being of the Land and Nation, City or Country where I live,
and whereof I am member, is in jeopardy and danger, I ought and it is my
bounden duty, (though it be with my life in my hand) to make known the
distresses thereof to the Ministers raised by God for preservation and
redress, and also to use those means God has put into my hands for the
redemption and deliverance of that place and people. Read that history of
Esther from the 4. Chap. to the last. Ecclesiastes 9. 14, 15. Then he further
shamelesly affirms, that people are thereby (m) engaged to break their
Protestation, (he might better have said, they were thereby engaged to keep
their Protestation, for that had been truth.) But this is like the rest, and
ill will never spoke well. For is a certifying of their griefs with humble
supplication that they may be eased, and all things troublesome to conscience
(against which they have vowed) removed, a breach of their Protestation?
Contrarium vero verum. It is only the real keeping of it, indeed had they
been persuaded to subscribe for the maintenance of such things as they have
protested against, then had my Author hit the nail on the head. But none of
them against whom he intends, have been thus As were of late some Kentish men.
ensnared, and therefore-his words here are both unjust and scandalous. Neither
have any been (n) enforced (as he despightfully speaks) to subscribe their
hands, for their own free wills have been their first movers, and their own
understandings their chief Counselors. Nor is their ground or reason to force
any in this action, where is their authority? where their justification?
neither would it ought avail or be profitable. Yea it would prove very
pernicious and prejudicial: But because my Author has seen such great
multitudes to accord in this thing, therefore (I believe) the greater has his
spite and grief been. And now I hope I have effectually proved those works by
my Author injuriously called unlawful, and works of darkness, to be both
lawful and works of the light, as clear as the Sun in his strength. And
whereas he says they will not (o) endure the light, Omnibus est notum. It is
well known to all men they have endured the very eye of light, for all they
against which my Author writes have had the full approbation and kind
acceptance of the Parliament, who are even as an Angel of light. And so I come
to his second and third cause why he is not satisfied with their manner of
proceeding. For I will put them both together, because they are both of a
nature, fo. 6. and 7. viz.

Secondly, it is justly to be feared, that these ways are sinister in The
Authors 2. and 3. cause.
the undertakers being very probable that some of them do it out of ill will,
hatred, and malice, as well to the government and governors, or for favor and
affection to some whom they suppose it pleases, or for (q) gain and profit, or
fear of displeasure of (p) Landlords and Customers, or for (r) vain glory, that
it may be said, this is the Babell which they have wrought with their own
hands: and some few of those shall engage and prejudice others, (and not
without cause as it is to be feared) by false informations and reasons to make
men subscribe. Thirdly, the like sinister proceedings are to be supposed in the
subscriber. These kind of ways by tumults and multitudes without legal
allegations and probations, to compass that by will which you cannot obtain by
reason, is of a dangerous (t) consequence, and threatens (u) the subversion of
all government and governors. For which of them, be they never so good, shall
be secure if the multitude of distempered people please to will the contrary?
These cause much distractions, hinder the (s) proceedings of the State, and the
relief of the oppressed; break our blessed (w) unity, and bring the Actors
within the compass of a (x) punishment from the law of God and man, for not
walking according to the expressed Statutes contained therein.

In both these second and third causes I conceive little said, but Answer.
what has already been spoken and inserted. See his sixth ground where he
secretly accuses some for breach of their oath for sinister ends, as fear,
favor, etc. and see his third ground where he condemns the Petitioners for
enforcing that by will, which they cannot obtain by reason. See also to the
latter end of his first cause, where he speaks of engaging men to break
their oath, and of enforcing them thereunto, etc. all which particulars are in
their proper places already answered. Yet by the way mark with me, I pray, how
slily he seeks to divide between the Landlord (p) and the Tenant, a man and
his friends; as if dependancie, alliance, and relation, was sufficient cause to
avert the one from persuading, and the other from according to concur in a
good action. Howsoever I will say somewhat more in the behalf of the
undertakers and subscribers, because in this place he speaks loud. How can
any man in common sense think the Petitioners (against whom he inveighs) did
what they have done in a sinister way, either for fear or favor? nay in humane
judgment, they might at that time have rather feared for doing it, and have
reaped disfavour, for was not then both wind and tide against them? were not
our chief adversaries (the cause of all our troubles) then pregnant and
powerful above measure, threatening not only the particular opposers of them,
but even the ruin of the whole State and Kingdom? And for this cause to my
knowledge many that were willing For they said, the popish Lords and Bishops
will get the upperhand, and then all that give their hands against them will be
questioned.
durst not underwrite against them: and many that did, were drawn thereunto
more by force of conscience, through the Protestation, then any free will of
their own, (though ardent in desire) by reason of the dread they apprehended
from the might and malice of them against whom they petitioned. So that if God
had not wonderfully brought our foes down, the Petitioners had in stead of (q)
gain sustained incomparable loss, for those the enemies would certainly have
devoured us. And as for (r) vain glory, that it might be said, this is the
Babell they have wrought. It never, I am confident, entered into the Petitioners
hearts, for their desires and endeavors are to pull down Babel, and to raze it
to the very bottom, even that Tower of confusion which has been here so long
upheld by the Babylonish Priests and party: that fame may tell future
posterity, this your fathers did. Laid Babylon waste, expelled her Idol
Priests, pulled down her high Altars and pleasant pictures, and trod all her
rich ornaments under seet, that so they might serve the Lord in truth and
peace. And this is both lawful, and by God required, Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. 2 Chronicles.
14. 3* 5. Isa. 30. 22. And that the Petitioners and their petitions have not
hindered, but furthered proceedings of State, and prepared a way of relief for
the oppressed, the blessed effects do testify, and so apparently the (t)
consequence of these petitionarie ways are not dangerous: and in stead of (u)
threatening the subversion of law, government, and governors, they do promise,
nay almost assure us an establishment of Law, government, and Governors, and
that especially of good ones; for if they be good, what cause will there be to
petition against them? much less to hurt them. Nor has this way broken the
(w) unity amongstus, but the bonds it has broken of our sweet unity breakers.
And what (x) punishment can there be incurred, where no transgression (as is
proved) is committed? I am sure God by his good success, and the Parliament by
their good acceptance, have in stead of pronouncing the Petitioners guilty,
spoken them both innocent and honest, careful and provident for their
Country. And now am I come to my Authors Furthermore, saying, fol. 7. viz.

Furthermore, this does not agree with the light of reason and The Author
(y) understanding which God has given me to walk by, nor that Christian
experience I have found under (z) the cross.

In his sixth ground, fol. 5. of his book and elsewhere, he inveigheth Answer.
vehemently against such as seduce others to break their Protestation: But if
there be a more diabolical mean or manner of seducement then this he here
uses, judge ye: pretending conscience against conscience, with the more
facility to ensnare conscience. For thus does he lead captive the simple,
vanquish the feeble, and repel the fearful and faint hearted. As if he was
the only man, and (y) knowledge dwells only with him. But if he have no more
light then here shines from him (for all his brags) he sees no more then a
Beetle, and his understanding is no more then the Asses: sensual and earthy.
But he has been taught by (z) affliction, and therefore you must believe him.
I must confess affliction makes many wise scholars, but not every one, nor
has he (so far as I can see) yet perfectly learned his lesson, for if he
had, or was sensible of trouble and oppression, sure he would omit no lawful
means for help and deliverance. I never knew but in any straight or trouble, I
might make use of all lawful ways and occasions for the procurement of my
ease and enlargement, and that when God opened the door, I not only might
(but ought) (otherwise I should be guilty of contempt) to come forth and
escape, Genesis 8. 8. 12. 18. Jer. 38. 12. Act. 12. 9. 11. And we have all been a
long time in bondage and sore affliction, I hope seeing God is pleased by the
Parliament, to open a door unto us, yea and a wide one, it is lawful for us
to use our liberty, and to use those means he does so freely afford us for
our Restoration and re-establishment. And so I come to more of his grounds,
causes, or reasons, or rather repetitions, for I cannot tell what truly to call
them: But you shall have them exactly as I find them, fol. 8. viz.

First, that for the vice or abuse of any thing, the right and lawful The
Author.
use thereof, or execution of the office should be (c) abolished and taken
away, or that for the (a) present particular offenses of some, the innocent
posterity shall suffer. For I am not convinced in my (d) conscience of the
unlawfulness of the office of a Bishop, and am persuaded that there have been
many (b) godly and zealous Martyrs for the truth, and many of them still
remain godly and religious Protestants.

What reasonable man will deny all this? only let my Author Answer.
prove, that the office of a Bishop, as it is now by our Bishops held and
exercised, lawful and lawfully used: it is much more easy to prove both,
altogether unlawful, and utterly to be abhorred and abandoned. And that for
the (a) present particular offenses of some, the innocent posterity should
suffer: we have many presidents both Divine and Civil, ancient and modern,
especially where the offense is of so high a nature, as to strike at the
public authority and honor of God, and the very being or well-being of his
people. Witness that ever dreadful ingurgitation of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, with all their families, Numb. 16. what there had the poor infants and
children done? So likewise that universal desolation of Amaleke, 1 Samuel 15. 3.
and that of Edom Obediah, ver. 10. Both which Nations were wholly destroyed, as
well young as old, children as parents, for the iniquity done (not by them,
but) by their Progenitors to the people of God many ages before they had any
being. Touch not mine anointed (that is, my chosen) says God, and do my
Prophets no harm. God will not endure that his people shall be vexed and
troubled in the way of his worship: this was the ruin of Pharaoh, and of all
his host, and shall be of the stoutest Prince or Potentate under the Sun,
and of all his force, Psalm. 76. 12. if he will not let Israel go to worship the
Lord their God: even Kings will he reprove for their sake, Psalm. 105. 14.
Amongst our selves is it not a Law, and held for reason? that he who seeks to
ruin an innocent posterity, should have his innocent posterity ruined, this
is also ratified by Gods Word. Because Agags sword had made women childlesse,
therefore shall Agags mother be childlesse amongst women, 1 Samuel 15. 31. And
thus was it done to Haman, Esther 9. 10. he and all his sons perished, and
his goods were given to others, yet he alone contrived that lethall plot
against the Jews, Esth. 3. 8. 9. And truly it is equivolent to the rule of
proportion, that what measure they meet unto others, should be meted unto them
again: this even dealing was Adonibezeks portion, Judge. 1. 7. True it is, there
is some exception in that of Amaziah, 1 King. 14. 6. But it is where the wrong
is personal, not National; and principally concerning man, not God. But
perhaps my Author here means not this manner of suffering: but that for the
faults of these Bishops, future posterity should be deprived of the like state
and preferment, power, and revenews. Truly custom is no sound plea for the
continuance of an evil cause. And seeing these men have usurped the place and
authority not due unto them, and have enjoyed more wealth and honor then has
been fit or profitable for them, all which merely tend to ensnare and corrupt
men of holy function, fraighting them full (as experience plainly proves) with
all manner of pride and insolence, impiety and idleness. It cannot be
adjudged either improvidence, or injustice, to abolish these exorbitant
usurpations, of honor, authority and power in them, and to convert their
superabundant rents and revenews to some more necessary and pious uses, that
so the like enormities which in these persons have by these means hitherto
accrewed, may in succeeding ages be prevented. And this can be no suffering to
the future generation, because they are spoiled of nothing. But this I humbly
refer to them, whom it does more principally as Judges concern. Only thus much
for answer herein to my Author, and so I come to his other matter. I deny not
but there have been godly (b) Bishops, and many of them Martyrs, but not
because they were Bishops: Nor for the Service Book, though sir Ed. Deering
implies so*
and the martyrdom of those men does no more hallow and uphold their standing
therefore, then Naamans conversion does justify his Idolatrous action, 2 King.
5. 17, 18. or Luthers persecution and For a man may be martyred living.
martyrdom, his idolatrous transubstantiation. And (in charity) I will hope
with him, (though few tokens appear in assurance) that there are some of them
still godly Protestants: But as he will not have the impiety of the person to
abrogate the (c) office: So I hope the pretended piety of the person shall not
justify the impiety of the office. And as for the conviction of his (d)
conscience, it is a work only proper to Gods holy Spirit, and when he comes
into his heart he will convince him, Joh. 16. 8. In the mean time I will do my
good will to inform him. And so I proceed to his own words, fol. 8. viz.

Secondly, though time of (e) prosperity has made some of them The Author.
guilty of (f) foul offenses, and it may be with the children of Israel, they
have not worshipped the true God as they ought, and have inclined to Idolatry,
and thereby justly provoked the Almighty to wrath and indignation against them.
Yet I am persuaded that for the very execution of their (h) office, and the (g)
Ecclesiastical Laws for the (k) unity and peace of the Church they suffer
instrumentally by diverse ill (l) affected to government, or by such as have
been punished by them for doing (i) contrary thereunto: and if the like
proceedings may be suffered against all (m) Judges, and other (n) executioners
of the Laws of the Kingdom, there shall be no (o) secure execution of the Laws
against offenders, and so we shall live lawless, and let in all manner of
disorder and vice, murder, rapine, and the like. Those Bishops rather (under
correction) that have done contrary (p) to the Law, are to be punished by the
Law, on due and true proofs, and not according to your wills.

In this instance and what follows, you may plainly see Answer.
what stamp my Author is of, what I all the way feared, he has here verified.
For he is a worshipper of the great gods of these times the ambitious Prelates;
who lifted up themselves above all that is called God. But as they have been
exalted, so (blessed be God) have they lately been humbled. But he says, that
(e) prosperity has made them faulty: it is true. For many of them before they
were Bishops, were daily and diligent fishermen, drawing many unto God: but
having caught what they fished for, (the world and preferment) they presently
left both their nets, and the waters their Ministry and the Word, and
forthwith fell to drive men from God; with Demas giving themselves up to the
present world. Howbeit in as much as their exuberancy of wealth, and lordly
power, instead of advancing them forward, has become an impediment to the
discharge of their duties, and are the chief means to canker and corrupt them:
the grave and gracious Parliament, (I believe, as is most meet) will impair
and lessen them, that being rid of so great a clog, they may the better gird up
the loins of their minds, and be more watchful and sober. And I pray note,
that my Author himself pronounces them (f) foul offenders, false worshippers
of God and idolatrous (a thing which themselves (vile wretches) would never yet
confess) yet is he not willing to have them removed, yet or justly taxed, for
he unjustly imputes their justly deserved punishment to such as have been
punished by them for disobedience to their (g) Ecclesiastical Laws, and such
as are all affected to government. I verily believe no man has prosecuted
them, as they have been instruments under God to afflict him: but as they have
been enemies of Jesus Christ and his members, depressours of true worship, and
promoters of false: not for executing their laws, but because they falsely
executed them, and turned justice into persecution, not punishing men for
disobedience, but for conscience. For the Papist, the Atheist, the drunkard,
and whoremonger, and profane person whatsoever, that would but bow down and do
them homage, should not only have peace, but be promoted by them; but the good
and the godly, even the most painful and conscionable Ministers and Servants
of Christ Jesus, that would not, nor durst for their Lord and Masters sake and
their own souls, fall down and worship them, were the only objects of their
Romish power and tyranny, using their Laws only as spiders webs to take the
painful Be and harmless Fly in, and so to make a prey of them. They do not
therefore suffer for the very execution of their (h) office: but because they
have perverted and neglected it, and intermedled with matters that they ought
not; they would be Courtiers, Statesmen, Lawyers, Politicians, Magistrates, nay
Witness, that Bellum Episcopale, the war between us and our brethren of
Scotland.
Soldiers, or any thing rather then Ministers of Gods Word, and attend upon
their office. Like their Grandfather Pope Boniface the eighth, making use of
both Swords at once. And was it only for their persecution and idolatry, we
ought all, and every one is bound both by Scripture and the Protestation to
extirpate, and utterly expel them, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. to 11. Ezekiel. 44. 12, 13.
Although Saul the King will spare Agag, yet will Samuel hew him in pieces. And
Moses was bid to vex the Midianites, and smite them, because they vexed them
with their wiles, and caused them to turn unto Idols, and sin against God.
Numb. 25. 17, 18. Why should Gods House be any longer a den of thieves? Our
Bethel be made Bethaven? the performance of this service is acceptable to God,
and for this Jehu and his house was blessed. 2 King. 10. 30. and as for many who
have done (i) contrary to those their Ecclesiastical Laws, I cannot judge them
punishment worthy, albeit I know they have had it without desert, for they did
neither act nor omit any thing in contempt, on purpose to oppose, but in
tenderness of conscience, because their Laws commanded things Gods Word
forbids; and prohibites what God commands: and whether it be better to please
God or man, judge ye? Act. 4. 19. for in truth many things are comprised in
their Laws that are neither of God nor Christ, nor according to reason, but
like those prodigious Cannons they last made, thinking therewith to blow up
the whole Kingdom, at least wise to have blown out all godliness and good men.
But (praised be God) the snare is broken, and we are delivered, and they
themselves are blasted with their own Ordinance. Nor can unity and (k) peace be
within their principles. For Christ the Prince of peace and Head of his Church
never appointed any such Constitutions, or A devised government must always have
a devised Law to support it.
Cannons to govern his people: his last Will and Testament is full and
sufficient for the declaration of his mind, it needs no superfluous codicill or
appendix of the Bishops forging. In vain therefore does my Author say, that
they suffer for executing their laws for the peace of the Church, for by them
they altogether broak the peace of it, and did mightily raise troubles and
turmoiles both in it, and in the Commonwealth. And could it be otherwise? for
the government of the house being contrary to the Masters will, must on
necessity beget a reluctance in the servants, and produce discord and
division. And the government being found thus ill, why should it not be ill (l)
affected? nay utterly rejected? It is more then high time to cease to do evil,
and to learn to do well: to seek peace and pursue it, Isa. 1. 16, 17. and 1
Pet. 3. 11. We have received more light, and therefore must walk more
circumspectly, not as foolish (now) but as wise, redeeming the time because the
days have been evil. Now touching that instance of his concerning the (m)
Judges execution of the Laws temporal: his similitude holds not, unless it be
in this, that he calls the Judges the Laws (n) executioners, which may truly be
taken the Laws Hangmen, and indeed it is too true that some of them have (as I
may say) both hanged the Law and drawn it, yea and quartered it, and (I think)
had not God timely prevented them, would before this, have set up the As the
young man's were, because he did terrify that St. Canterbury.
quarters thereof on the gates, as an Archtraitor and Perturber of the Land.
And I verily believe there are many wish as well to our Law, as the Papists do
to our Bible. But the Judges administer punishment by a lawful power, and by
virtue of laws lawfully enacted upon persons offending: and the Bishops
administer punishment by a false power, and by virtue of Laws falsely
constituted upon persons not Where have they punished one scandalous Minister?
who can resolve me?
offending. For it has been their common course to justify the wicked, and
condemn the righteous; therefore is that curse their due, threatened in Isa. 5.
23. and that because people will not for conscience sake, suffer or subject
unto an unreasonable and most unlawful spiritual power, they will not
therefore bear with, and submit unto a most lawful temporal power, it
follows not, but rather that they will be the more obedient according to the
word, because they are so conscientious, and fearful to offend the Lord. And
the like just proceedings being taken against unjust Judges, as has and (is
likely to be) against impious Bishops, is the absolute way to (o) secure the
execution of the Laws against offenders, for then will there not so many
wilful desperate murders, notorious robberies, public transgressors,
grievous oppressors, and extortioners, of widows, fatherless, poor, simple,
and helpless, for briberie, promotion, greatness, fear, and favor, be
pretermitted or connived at, and escape with impunity; and so we shall extrude
all vice, and the Law have his proper power and free course. Otherwise dum non
metuunt, nil curant. And that the Bishops for their offenses (p) against Law
should be punished by Law, the Petitioners only sue for, and their wills are
none other: Only as they have been ill stewards, and wicked in the House of
God, so we humbly desire that they may be put out, and others according unto
God placed in their stead. They have been false in much, how then can they be
faithful in a little? They have not well governed their own house, how then
can they govern well the house of God? 1 Timothy 3. 4. 5. And so I come again to
his own words, fo. 9. viz.

Thirdly, because that which is or seems to (p) be a prejudice now, ^ Author.
may in Gods good time prove a great benefit. We many times earnestly pray for
those things, which afterward we give God thanks for not (q) granting our
requests, and this has many times been for the removal of our present
afflictions: I am confident if there were good care taken (as there may be)
that (r) good men may be made Bishops, we shall never (p) repent of their
lawful office or place: for (s) greatness with goodness will much advance
the cause and welfare of the Church and commonwealth. And further I know it is
possible for some (t) inferiors to execute the Law and the Gospel likewise in
a far more imperious and tyrannical way, then some Superiors have done.

True it is that many things which seem (p) hurtful at the Answer.
first may in due time prove very good: in taste they may be bitter, but in
digestion profitable. But it must be considered whether things be simply evil,
and fundamentally; or by occasion, and accidentally. Now what is simply evil
and fundamentally, can never prove good, nor produce any otherwise then God by
his all ruling providence, shall dispose it, but that is not thank-worthy to
the instrument. And such is the power and jurisdiction of the present Bishops,
and therefore both we and ours need never fear (p) repentance for seeking to
have them removed, but (q) heartily praise God if it may be granted. I know it
is possible to have (r) good men for Bishops, but then they must be chosen
according to the rule of the Gospel (and not after the Articles of their
Doctrine) Act. 1. 15. 24. to the end, and 14. 23. and not one Bishop be elected
by another as they are, receiving the holy Ghost from such as (may be
suspected) never had it. And my Author and the whole world (in my opinion) do
mightily mistake whilst they imagine, that such external (s) state and
greatness is requisite in the Ministers of the Church. This was that delusion
wherewith the devil blinded the eyes of the poor Jews: they looked for a
triumphing Messiah with stately attendants, and in pompous trappings; but lo he
comes meekly riding on an Ass. Surely if outward state and glory had been
expedient for Christ's Church, He himself being her head and husband would have
put it on, and left it for a rule and an example to his Apostles and their
successors, especially at that time when he came from heaven to marry her and
occupied the place of a Bridegroom, Matthew. 9. 15. But we do neither find it in
his person for imitation, nor in his doctrine for direction: nay his rules are
contrary, and so were his Apostles practices. Paul that Architect in the house
of God, and chief Planter of Churches, although most worthy (if any more then
other) was content to live in mean estate, not seeking his own but the good of
others. I find not in all the new Testament that any of them had either lands
or livings, (I am sure not glebe or Ecclesiastical as they call them) if they
had other they did sell and communicate them, Act. 2. 45. and 4. 37. no nor set
allowance. Indeed they eat of the fruit of their labors, as is most just,
according to that in the 1 Cor. 9. 1. to the 24. and it is our duty to take
care for them: Romans 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6. But I know no precept for any positive
means. The Leviticall Law is abolished, tithes and tents are certainly ended;
the Priesthood being changed, their rights are likewise changed: Hebr. 7. 12.
and for certain the Apostles were not ignorant both of the force and extent of
this Law. I speak not this to abase the Ministry, or encourage any in their
neglect or disrespect toward them: The Labourer is worthy of his hire, and (God
forbid) but they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9.
14. and that comfortably void of care. For if the servant of the old Law was so
honorable, much more is the Minister of the new. How beautiful are the feet
of them that bring glad tidings of salvation? Isa. 52. 7. But (again I say) I
conceive neither rule nor reason, why they should have so many thousands, and
so many hundreds per annum: tithe of all, even to an egg: yea and all will
hardly Witness that unreasonable demand, and unsatiable pursuit of 2. s. 9.
d. in the pound.
suffice, being most of them too much like those greedy dogs in Isaiah 56.
11. for by these means they become puffed up, and set themselves in competition
with the men of this world, contending for pre-eminence and priority,
forgetting that godliness is great gain, and that they ought to teach the
Gospel of a Christus ob gratiam Christi, non muneris mundi praedicandus est.
ready mind, and not for filthy lucre: they plough not in hope, they thresh not
in hope as the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 9. 10. But they will be at a surer lock:
they will know before hand what they shall have; (like Judas, quid dabis?) and
if their own terms and conditions be not fulfilled, they will neither Witness
Mr. Finch, Mr. Hutton, Mr. Davies, Mr. Swaddling, etc. cum multis aliis, quos
jam praescribere longum est.
preach, pray with you, administer the Sacrament to you, nor bury your dead:
nay if a man put not into their mouths, they prepare war against him, Mich. 3.
5. Thus by practice making good the old popish Proverb, No penny, no Pater
noster. These things have caused them to mind the Fleece only, and not the
Flock, and given them horns to gore the poor Saints of God. And besides, for
these Quisquis ad praemia velox.
things sake, have many crept into the folds, who have not been shepherds, but
ravening wolves. And I have observed, that corruption came first into the
primitive Church by the door of ambition: and the coveting of worldly pomp and
dignity was the very Basis of the Seat of Rome, and the first step of the
Beast his throne; for under the color that exterior wealth and power would
elevate and advance Religion, crept up that man (not of God, but) of sin,
with all his lordly train. But some will say, was it not for these
encouragements, few or none would apply themselves to the Ministry. I commend
encouragement, it is not the use but the abuse, not the end but the excess and
unequal disposing of it I condemn. And fear not laborers whilst there is a
harvest, for God has promised to send (or thrust) forth Laborers into his
harvest; and to that end has he commanded us to pray unto him, Matthew. 9. 38.
he will make his word in all those whom he appoints unto this work, as it was
in the Prophet, like fire, they cannot withhold it, they cannot keep it in,
Jer. 20. 9. it will be more then their meat to them or any worldly respect,
Joh. 4. 32. 34. Now the glory of the Church (Christ's Spouse) and of all her
Ministers, is inward in the graces of the spirit: God has chosen the poor of
this world rich in faith, Jam. 2. 5. and the weak things of this world to
confound the wise, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. The Kings daughter is all glorious
within, Psalm. 45. 13. It is the propriety of a harlot outwardly to paint and
adorn her self: but the honest woman arayeth her self in comely apparel with
shamefastness and modesty, as it becomes one professing the fear of God: 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. and 1 Pet. 3. 3. Thus does the Spouse of Christ, whose
apparelling is not outward, but the hid man of the heart; her voice is sweet
(but not seducing) her sight is comely (but not gorgious,) Cant. 2. 14. Here I
have somewhat digressed, because most conceive that outward estate is so
exceedingly advantageous to the Church of God. But I say such abundance is
rather disadvantagious, as woeful experience palpably testifies: and the
Apostle says, that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (that is, in the
things of this life) but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost (in
virtue and grace) and he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved to men, Romans 14. 17, 18. Wealth indeed is good and
profitable, but it edifieth not: Let us follow therefore after the things which
make for peace, and the things wherewith one may edify another: Romans 14. 19.
Now I come to my Author: To whom I grant, yea I fear that others though (t)
inferior in place and power to the present Bishops, may prove as imperious and
tyrannical as they have been, if not worse; and it is most probable if they be
not rightly chosen and constituted. And who knows if that little horn spoken
of in Daniel, 7. 8. be not now to come up? For it must rise up among the ten
horns in some of the ten kingdoms, and this shall look well, but it shall speak
big, and before it there shall be three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots, it may be A. S. H. but I prophecy not, nor am I a Prophets son.
Howsoever it is justly to be feared (and may be expected) that yet within this
Nation there will be a general apostasy in Religion, which in fine will
produce a general desolation. For light (and that in abundance) is come into
the world, and men love darkness rather then light. Like Jannes and Jambres
they resist the truth, men of corrupt minds that turn their ears from the
truth unto fables, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate: 2 Timothy 3. 8. and 4. 4. Tit. 1. 16. Oh how averse is the whole
kingdom to a Molu^ omen. For, for this very cause has God a quarrel with us,
and if we will not bow, he will break us.
through Reformation? Will God, think you, always brook our loathsome Laodicean
like quality? No certainly; Revel. 3. 16. The Here I understand the regallor
Imperial State.
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the The Church, or Ecclesiastical
State. The Author.
Moon (by persecution) unto blood, before that great and terrible day of the
Lord come: Joel 2. 31. Nevertheless, all this argues not, that because
through ignorance or negligence, as great inconveniences may come in, these
present known evils are not to be taken away, no more then it follows that a
man should not repair his house because it may in time want repair again. Yea
we had the more need to remove the evils present, and to use the best means and
heed to prevent the like for time to come. And so I come again to cite his own
words, fo. 10. viz.

Fourthly, that though there be obstacles and mountains in the way, and the
supposed (u) enemies of Gods Church and children: yet as I am a Christian I (w)
dare not judge them, or curse them, as they do or use any unlawful (x) means
to remove them, or under the pretense of pulling down one Babell to set up
another. What David did by way of prediction, as he was a King and a Prophet,
against the inveterate and (y) incurable enemies of the Church of God; I as an
ordinary Christian ought not to do. I may live peradventure to see mine
enemies desert upon them which I may not desire to see.

That there are mountains in the way and (u) enemies to the Church and children
of God, my Author acknowledges; but Answer.
judge or curse them he (w) dare not. Indeed I believe him, lest the curse
being just should come, and so he suffer with them being a Dependant on them.
Touching the unlawful (x) means used, and Babel raised (by my Author so much
objected) read my answer to his first Cause, fol. 17. etc. of this book, and my
Answer to his second and third Cause in the 22. fol. of this book: in both
which places and elsewhere, that gross aspersion is refelled. Judgment I
confess, is only proper to the Lord, and so is vengeance: nor may we either
curse or prosecute for any personal injury; yet of their outward actions and
obstinate transgressions we may judge, and ought to be jealous of them, until
we see some assured testimony of their good will to Zion. Act. 9. 26, 27. and
have we not good cause to suspect those for inveterate and (y) incurable foes,
that in stead of confessing and repenting their Popish superstition and
Ceremonies, usurpation and violenoe over Gods people, do still persist therein,
and Witness the Bishop of Peterborough, Elies, and Glocesters, beastly
bowings, rotten Sermons, and Popish prayers.
justify their actions, yes and still would (were they not restrained)
exercise their Antichristian power and cruelty by obtruding Witness at the
Kings return from Scotland, their violent pressing that grand Idol the Service
Book: to all good men so detestable and burdensome.
on the conscience things offensive and idolatrous. And under favor so far
forth as they manifest themselves the professed foes of Christ and his Kingdom,
I hold it lawful to curse them, and that without prediction; for if they
remain hardened, as may be justly Feared, God has already told what shall
become of them: Psalm. 129. 5, 6. And do not I hate them that hate thee, and
contend with those which rise up against thee? says holy David, Psalm. 139. 19,
20, 21, 22. yea I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine utter
enemies. Now did ever any man hate another unfeignedly as his utter enemy, and
not curse him? I think not. But see Psalm. 28. 4. Lament. 3. 64. to the end. If
Meroz deserved a bitter curse for not coming forth to help the Lord against the
mighty, Judge. 5. 23. a place considerable: Much more then deserve they to be
cursed, that help against the Lord, and take part with the mighty against his
people. Even so let thine enemies perish O Lord: But they that love him shall
be as the Sun when he rises in his strength. And so I return to the words of
mine Author, as follows, fol. 11. viz.

I am to judge charitably of the (z) actions and intentions of my The Author.
Governors, what I think (a) peradventure is for my hurt, may be (b) intended
at leastwise turned to my good. I must walk by the (c) rule of Gods Word, and
follow the (d) examples and precepts of my Savior. To pray for them that hate
me, and do good to them that persecute me: and not to forget to pray for all
that are in authority, that I may live a godly life under them in all peace
and quietness. Why may I not suspect that this long enjoyment of the Gospel in
peace and plenty, has produced (e) ill effects in me, as well as in my
governors? But be my governors what they will, I have learned to obey all
their (f) lawful commands, and (g) thank God that I may live under so happy a
command. If they command me to do no otherwise then what is just and right, I
must and will willingly do it, neither dare I (h) neglect my duty to them,
though they forget theirs to me. For their offenses and neglects to me, shall
not excuse me to God for them, for my offenses and non performances of mine to
either of them.

We are not only to judge charitably of the (z) actions and Answer.
intentions of our governors, but of the actions and intentions of other men
also; yet with this proviso, that they be not obstinate, and persist not in
their actions and intentions, when as they see, or are informed, that either in
themselves or the issues of them they are evil and ungodly: and that they do
it of ignorance and misunderstanding, and not of wilfulness, despite, and
malice, as many of the Bishops works and plots (yea and of others in authority
too) have been and are proved. Nor must we go upon (a) peradventures, in cases
so fundamentally adverse to the universal good. For it is not peradventure,
but most sure: that he which seeks to raze the And by the Bishops and their
faction, the very foundations both of Church and State have been shaken.
foundation of an edifice, seeks utterly to subvert it; nor will any man be so
charitable as to let him alone, saying, he perhaps may intend some better
structure or other work to it. Nor is it wisdom in any man to suffer a known
evil (if it lie within his power to avoid it) in hope or mere conceit, it may
be well (b) meant, or at least so prove. This is a tempting of the most holy
One. We know God turns all things to the best of his chosen: but ought not
therefore his chosen to use the lawful means for the avoiding those evils which
palpably threaten them, or the State and Nation wherein they live, or whereof
they are members? Yes sure: Otherwise Mordecai and Esther might have done well
to have sat still, and said in secure charity, or uncharitable security,
sure Haman intends not such deadly mischief against us as he seems, or
howsoever it may peradventure turn to our greater good. But they took another
course, or else they had been in a doleful case, and all their people. And
even so had we, and this whole Land, if we had not used the means God called us
to. Mine Author says he must follow the (c) rule of Gods Word. I wish he may,
for as yet in this he has not, to call evil good, and good evil: and the (d)
examples and precepts of our Savior, who teaches us to pray for them that
hate us, etc. and for all that are in authority, that we may live godly, etc.
that precept of praying for our enemies, is (as I conceive) principally meant
as they are private enemies to our persons only: so prayed Stephen for them,
Acts 7. 60. not as they are public and irreconcilable foes of Christ and his
Church. Anathema Maranatha, says Paul, to all that love not the Lord Jesus.
And for praying for all Governors; I agree with him: provided they be in
lawful authority, and with his own conclusion, that we may live godly under
them in all peace and quietness; the which we must not expect under the
Bishops. That long peace and plenty under the Gospel has produced (e) ill
effects in us as well as our Governors, is undeniable. And we are all (like a
ship that has lain long still in harbor) over grown with the moss and slime
of corrupting security: and what then? Must we therefore any longer abide
therein? God forbid. Let us up rather and be doing, and the Lord will prosper
us. Let our sleeping Commanders be either rowsed, or with supine Jonas be cast
over board, better they then the whole vessel, the Nation, perish. And let our
great Bark of Church and State be careined, have her very keele turned upward,
scraped, searched, calked, rigged, and trimmed, and so faithfully maned out
again, to the astonishment of our foes, and the rejoicing of all those which
are embarked in her, and wish well unto her. And although the (f) lawful
commands of evil governors are to be obeyed, yet it argues not, that evil
Governors are to be tolerated. And indeed it is well, nay a Miracle, and a man
has special cause to (g) thank God, if his Governors being evil, command
nothing but what is lawful: But can an ill tree bring forth good fruit? raro
aut nunquam: very seldom, or do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? if it be so, is it not by an overruling hand? are not the wicked
tethered? does not the Almighty turn their wrath to his praise? and restrain
the rest of their rage? Psalm. 76. 10. yea and bridle their thoughts too. But we
have much more cause to praise God, when our Governors be good, men of
courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, Exodus 18. 21. then may we with
boldness expect both good commands, and good effects, and blessed are the
people that are in such a case: Eccles. 10. 17. True it is that we must (h) do
our duty, and perform on our parts, though the Governors be wicked and fail on
theirs, for their neglect shall not excuse ours: every vessel shall stand on
his own bottom. Yet for such Governors as are not lawfully constituted and
authorized, as the Bishops, it is a Quaere: what duty is there due, whether
any. So I come to what follows, fol. 11. videlicet.

Fifthly, I dare not but look at the hand of God, and not at the instrument The
Author.
only of my afflictions; I know nothing can come to pass but by his
permission, I am assured that (i) sin is the prime cause of all my sufferings,
and I fear that ingratitude in not being thankful, and walking worthy of
those great mercies received, has been a principal cause why God has shut
the hearts of some of our Governors at this present as is much feared.

This whole argument is good and godly (let the Devil have Answer.
his due) and worthy of practice in all Protestants; yet it tends nothing to
prove that the Petitions, against which my Author has undertaken his
discourse, are unlawful, or that the authors of them has therein acted any
thing either against God or man. And I do confess, that for the wickedness of a
people, God sends wicked Governors, and that (i) sin is the prime cause of
all our miseries: But that ingratitude, or other sin of the people, is the
principal cause why God does shut up the hearts of Governors, I do deny: that
is their own wickedness. Witness Pharaoh and Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 23. 26. Many
people have suffered for their Governors, but to my knowledge I never read,
that ever any Governor suffered for the people. Saul the hypocrite deals
falsely, and slays the Gibeonites, but the people endure three years famine
for it: 2 Samuel 25. 1, 2. So David sins, but the people are plagued, 1 Chronicles.
21. 7. 17. For the sin of Manasseh the King, was all Judah carried captive, 2
King. 24. 3, 4. And were they not the high Priests and Elders that crucified
Christ? yet was the whole Nation therefore destroyed. And that it is the
Governors own sin that causes God to harden them, I further prove it thus.
They having a will to fin, and no regard unto God, nor unto his word, therefore
does he in his just judgment give them up to a reprobate mind, to do things
that are not convenient: Romans 1. 28. 30. Had Gods Word been by Saul regarded,
Saul by God had never been rejected. And thus fall they to sin the more freely,
and abuse their authority, eating up Gods people as bread, until God by their
hand has sufficiently punished them: and then does he break those rods in
pieces, and consume them in his wrath, for the evil of the people shall not
excuse their ungodly government, no nor extenuate their judgment. And so I
proceed again as follows, fo. 12. viz.

Sixthly, I know God will correct his children for their sins, and in The
Author.
the exceution of his judgments on the world he will begin at his own house,
either to work out sin, or to work in grace, or to make that grace more
manifest which is already wrought. I know that the end of Gods correction is
reformation, till then if smaller afflictions will not prevail, greater shall;
if not one kind then another: if the sword of our enemies do not, the swords
peradventure of our own amongst our selves shall; if not they, peradventure the
pestilence, or the famine, or some other shall: sundry of which sometimes come
together to let the world know, that our afflictions come not immediate from
any one (k) secondary or instrumental cause but that it is from the will and
pleasure of the Almighty, so to order and to dispose it, who will not take off
his judgments as the effects, till our sins as the cause be removed.

Herein likewise is nothing to be gainsaid. Only I must still Answer.
notify, that whatsoever is here alleged, does not justify mine Authors
clandestine aspersions against the aforementioned Petitioners and Petitions, or
any ways condemn therein either their actions or persons. That our
afflictions come not immediately from any (k) secondarie cause, who knows
not? Is there evil in the City and God does it not? Amos 3. 6. Lam. 3. 38. Yet
this does not therefore prove, that such instruments as a^^ manifestly the
secondarie causes of our troubles either justifiable or tolerable. And as mine
Author would not have us account the Bishops the immediate cause of our
perturbation and affliction: so I wish he would advise them not to take us for
the only cause of their shameful fall and confusion, but their own detestable
impiety and abomination: the which the righteous Lord has justly brought on
the heads of them to the astonishment of the whole earth. So I come again to
his own words, fo. 13. viz.

Seventhly, I dare not (l) use any unlawful means to ease mine The Author.
affliction, I know no better way then by (m) humiliation and prayer to God,
for a sight of those sins whereby I had provoked him to wrath, and for grace
and true repentance for the same, and remission by the merits of my Sav^our
Jesus Christ. And then to apply my self with all diligence to all lawful means
to remove them; yet I am not to put too much (n) confidence in them, I could
never yet find any benefit by (o) impatience under the hand of the Almighty, I
have found more afflictions procured thereby, and I am assured that the Church
and children of God never lost by their (p) patient suffering.

What this man (l) dare not do, I am sure as yet we have not Answer.
done, as has been plainly proved, albeit he secretly involves our rebuke, in
his dare not. For as not he, so no man can prove a petitionary way unlawful:
and other means then humble petitions and modest solicitations there has been
none used by us, (excepting that principal means of (m) humiliation by himself
so much preferred, the which by the goodness of our King and Parliament has
rather been president then subsequent to our other endeavors.) And I verily
believe men have been so far from putting too much (n) confidence in the use
of means, as that they have not given due credit to the promise of God made
unto them. For how many but a while since did even despair Witness every man's
arming himself, and standing upon his guard.
? notwithstanding the means used. And of (o) impatience who can reprove us?
what people have so easily subjected their necks to such grievous yokes as we
have done? and that not for days but years: illegal taxes, impoverishing
Patents, forcible impositions, popish Inquisitions, cruel censures, and bloody
sufferings. And now the waters are moved, and God has sent his Angel to cure
us, shall we not stir? shall we not enter? shall we not lay hold upon so happy
an occasion? if we cannot make means our selves, we may with the lame man at
the pool of Bethesda, sit still long enough: there are none so charitable (many
otherwise) to make means for us. We have not with the traitorous Papists,
rebelled for our oppressions, but like a woman with child patiently waited,
(though in great anguish) the Lords appointed time for our deliverance, and it
being come, and we in pain, may we not seek for help to the Midwife of our
heavy burdens? the skillful Parliament: yes doubtless lawfully, and ready and
willing are we to undergo whatsoever charge or trouble they shall enjoin and
put upon us, so that we may be eased, and acquit of our abortives. And as never
any through (p) patience in obedience to Gods will, has in the end been
damnified: so I am confident we shall not; but on the contrary be greatly
benefited, for he that has begun the good work for us, will not fail to
perfect it. And so I come again to mine Authors own words, fol. 13. viz.

Eighthly, as I know that Gods (q) decree in his determination of The Author.
judgments shall be fulfilled, so I am confidently assured, that when the time
of his deliverance is come, all the power and subtilty of the devil and his
instruments, as they shall go no further then he has limited them, so they
shall not hinder him from taking off his rod when he pleases. For he is able
to bring his will to pass by means without (r) means, and contrary to means,
rather then his children shall not have their due relief. The (s) Sea shall
part, the earth shall open and swallow up their adversaries; or fire shall come
down from heaven and destroy them. And this may (t) comfort Christians, that
God reigns and rules as King in heaven, the cause of his Church and children
is his, and he beholds and governs the inhabitants of the earth, he has the
hearts of all in his hand, he can turn them or overturn them when he pleases
for the good of his: when our ways please him, he can make our enemies be at
peace with us, and the same hand to heal us that has wounded us, it is he
only that can make men to be of one heart, and one mind, and to make all
things to work together for the best of them that love him.

There is nothing here but what is truth; Only to me he seems Answer.
subtly to insinuate, that because whatsoever God has (q) decreed cannot be
altered or averted, we must therefore sit still and do nothing, like those
desperate wretches, who say, if God has ordained me to be saved, I shall be
saved; if he have appointed me to be damned, I shall be damned: what can I do?
But this ought not so to be. It behooves us in the morning to sow our seed,
and in the evening not to withhold our hand, to be diligent and constant in the
use of all good means, omitting no opportunity, for who knows whether shall
prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be alike good? Eccles. 11. 6. we
must do our endeavor, and refer the issue to God; who does all things after
his own good pleasure. True it is, that God can save (r) without means, and by
contrary means, but he seldom or never does either, unless means be wanting,
or that in case all means being used, have failed; then in a case extraordinary
he will show himself glorious for the deliverance of his Church, to get himself
a name that his enemies may be astonished, and his people encouraged to trust
in him. Such was the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt: and the blind man's
receiving sight with spittle mixed with clay. But when the Israelites came to
enter the promised Land, they must use the means (the sword) for it, if they
will have it: although they could not divide the Sea, yet they can fight: And
because they are afraid and will not fight, they shall wander forty years
longer, and perish every one that was unwilling. God could as easily have slain
the Canaanites for them, as he did the Egyptians, and so at once have given
them possession, but he would not, the purchase would have been too cheap: they
would not have valued the prize. And therefore when they come to win that
strong City Jericho, they must take pains, and apply themselves to means,
though it be but walking and sounding on Rams horns. God does not make miracles
his every days work, though truly we may say to his glory, that of late he
has daily showed miracles amongst us: But for the most part they have been by
his blessing through the use of means, though weak and mean; and therefore let
us not be idle, but still be doing. Mine Author appears plainly to be of
their mind (at least his arguments tend to that end) who say, And others, who
thank God their hand is to none of their petitions, or to the Protestation.
what need we trouble our selves to petition, is not the Parliament wise
enough? do they not know what they have to do? Yea undoubtedly, better then we
can teach them; and without question they are most wise. Yet (under favor) I
believe not so fully wise, as altogether needless of instruction and advice:
And though most understanding, yet not so perfectly knowing, as not to stand in
need of information and advertisement. I have known parents hearken unto
children. And Eli that old Judge of Israel advised with and hearkened unto young
Samuel, 1 Samuel: 3. 17, 18. but this by permission. My Authors persuasion,
wherewith he labors to have us do nothing, but fit and expect miracles from
heaven, is much like that I have read of a certain Jew after Christ, who
because God in old time had miraculously brought the Jews by the hand of Moses
through the Sea, persuaded the people that God would do the like for them by
him, and so brought most of them to perish miserably in the waters: Even so
this man infers. As if because God can do such mighty things as he (s) reckons,
and has formerly by his mavelous power delivered others, and us also, as in
that Gunpowder-plot of the Papists, miraculously and absolutely without us,
that therefore he will do so now. But have we not found, and God by proof has
caused us to know, that if we had been thus minded, we almost all, before this
had perished? For the rest of his eighth assertion, that it may (t) comfort
Christians, that God reigns in heaven, rules in the earth, takes the cause
of his children to be his, etc. and turns all to the best of them that love
him, I acknowledge. But as it may serve for comfort to Gods Church and people;
so may it serve for terror and discomfort to all that are his enemies, and
oppose his Church; for God is a most severe Avenger of their wrongs. And so I
come to my Authors conclusion, fo. 15. viz.

To conclude, I hope by this time you have received full (v) satisfaction, The
Author.
why I have refused to subscribe. Yet let me (w) assure you, that if the
Parliament shall think fit to alter that government, I dare not in conscience
and duty to the Protestation, refuse to be governed by it.

And now mine Author thinks that by his slight sophistical Answer:
arguments he has (u) satisfied the whole world for his non subscription,
hoping by this means also to dehort many others. And truly amongst the
ignorant, squint-eyed, and neutrall, his assertions may much prevail, and his
Pamphlet have more faith from them then the Bible. But to the judicious,
zealous, and more quick-sighted, he very obviously discovers himself for an
enemy, and one much to be suspected, insomuch that we may justly say to him
(for all his fair pretenses) as it was sometime said by Joram to Jehu, Is it
peace, I. W.? yet there is hope of him, for in his close he (w) assures us
that if the Parliament shall alter the present government, he will in
conscience and duty submit unto it. Indeed it is well spoken at last, and in
charity I will believe what he has spoken. Yet my opinion is, that his
obedience will be more of necessity then good will. For how can he, or any
man, freely and with affection yield obedience to that government which he
never willed, or desired: and that he desires no change or reformation (albeit
the present estate of the Church is most corrupt) is apparent by his applauding
and servent pleading for it, and his strong opposition against those who seek
the alteration of it. And so I come to his persuasion (as I may term it)
annexed to his conclusion, fol. 15. viz.

Be confident that not only my prayers, but my true (x) endeavors The Author.
have been, and by Gods grace shall continue, for Reformation. I know (y) God
has suffered many of his dear Saints and children to fall into great and
heinous sins and offenses, yet when he has duly chastised them, after true
repentance he has made them greater instruments of his glory, and the good of
his Church, then in former times they were.

Here he shows mighty (x) zealous for reformation: but if he Answer.
mean that Reformation In the Church.
I do, I cannot be so confident as he bids me; my reasons are demonstrated in
my last words above. But I conceive he intends some personal reformation
either in himself, or the Bishops, and so his succeeding words do imply. I (y)
know God, etc. because there he speaks that though God has suffered him or
them the Did not a Bishop or his Chaplain frame the book? without question he
is a Bishops Minion, one that has been confirmed by them, or received some
other ghostly gift from them.
Bishops, as his dear Saints and children to fall into great and heinous sins,
yet when he has sufficiently chastised them (as now his rod is upon them)
after their true repentance he will make them greater instruments of his glory
then ever. Well I together with him do pray (if God so will) for this
reformation in them. But in the interim I shall be in travel and never at
rest, until that long wished for Reformation in the Church be accomplished.
For I desire not to stay till they be reformed and made such glorious
instruments, lest it never be, and that God has no such love unto them, for
they have hated his truth, and loved lies. And thus do I accede to his
following words, which I may justly term an anticipation, as is manifest, fol.
15. viz.

I must (z) expect for this, as well as the rest of my endeavors The Author.
for (a) truth and peace your usual jears, scoffs, and censures, of
reprobation, and the like: but my comfort is, that God knows (b) who are his,
and who are the true friends and enemies of the Church and State, and that I
have sincerely discharged my conscience, according to that weak talent I have
received in obedience to the (c) Protestation for the good of both.

Being conscious of his own merit, and justly fearing reproach Answer.
and hard censure for this his work, he cunningly prevents them at whose hands
he expects it; telling them, that he (z) looks for nothing else from them for
all the good he has done, as if his work was rather worthy of praise then
contumacie: and if he was reviled, it was for (a) truth, and peace, and not for
any evil or hypocrisy, either in his actions or ends. Thus audaciously (like
a Pontifical) using the just man's plea for his unjust attempts. But that God
who knows both (b) who are his, and who are the Churches friends, and foes,
knows the secret windings of his heart; and if he be contrary minded, will in
due time discover him. And touching his obedience to the (c) Protestation, let
him that reads consider. I will not judge him, there is one that judges him,
his own conscience, but I refer him to the single eye of all men. And so am I
come to his final confirmation, or vindication of his uprightness and
innocence in these words following, fo. 16. viz.

If therefore you shall remain still mine adversaries for so doing, The Author.
peradventure I may for a while longer Note that he speaks as if he was in some
durance or trouble,
suffer, yet it shall comfort me it is for well (c) doing: whereas, (e) when ye
shall (d) suffer as evil doers, you may (without timely repentance)
everlastingly perish in the gainsayings of Core: For though (f) hand join in
hand, God will not suffer the wicked to go unpunished. If you find any
material error herein (g) inform me, and (i) convince me thereof, and I do
(h) assure you on the faith of a true Protestant, I will endeavor reformation:
the like I do commend unto you hereby, and expect the same from you as a trial
of your (k) profession, the which I shall plainly (l) discover, if wilfully you
(m) continue and persist in a known error. And so I bid you farewell. Farewell.

Here is nothing observable, but a self (c) justification, still laboring
Answer.
to persuade the people that his refusal to join in petition against Bishops,
and for the public good, has been in tenderness of conscience, and that
therefore whatsoever he does undergo either for that or this his work, is for
well doing: thus secretly at last (as well as in the beginning) endeavoring
consent even unto imitation, from the weak and simple, through a vain conceit
of his conscionablenesse in religion. Touching the Petitioners (d) suffering
for what they have done, I say as he does, (e) when they, or any others in the
like case, for that cause shall suffer as evil doers, they may without timely
repentance perish in the gainsayings of Core. But in what they have done, they
have well done and not evilly (nor does he prove the contrary) and therefore if
suffer they should, they cannot as evil doers, far then are they (for this)
from the danger of perishing with Core. As far may he be, for he speaks more
like one of that gainsaying congregation. It is most true, that although (f)
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished: let him therefore be
warned, and not take part with the ungodly: for the wicked and all that forget
God shall be turned into hell: Psalm. 9. 17. Then my Author promises upon (g)
reformation of any material error, to endeavor reformation also. I hope he
will not deny, (if he do the world will justify) that, to maintain that by The
Authors errors denoted.
color of his Protestation, which he is thereby bound to oppose, and by all
good means to seek the abolition of, is an error material and condemnable.
And further, that to vilify and inveigh against those that in pious discharge
of their conscience and Protestation, have endeavored the Parliaments
security, and a reformation, and likewise by cunning craftiness, and
sophistical arguments, both to dissuade others from doing the same, and to
animate and confirm other some in their indifferency, lukewarmnesse, and
neutralitie, to the great dishonor of God, their utter shame and souls-hazard,
are errors of the same nature; all which my Author by his book has done: But
I hope being now informed, he will repent of his first work, and forthwith
fulfill stis last (h) promise. But he must withal be (i) convinced of these
his errors; The same objection has the blind Jew, concerning Christ, against
all the testimony of holy Scriptures: and it is the work of God to convince the
conscience, and not of man. And so I will leave him, expecting better fruits of
his (k) profession, for by his fruits he shall be (l) known, according as he
does (m) persist or desist his errors. Only I would as a friend advise him,
nay as a brother entreat him, not to resist the known truth, nor wilfully to
shut his eyes against the light, lest he be found a fighter against God, and so
perish suddenly in the way when his wrath is kindled but a little against him.
Let him weigh well what I have said, and the God of all knowledge (if he see it
good) give him understanding in all things.

Vivat Rex, vigeat grex, valeat Lex. Amen.

Thus according to my poor ability have I answered particularly all his
Assertions. For whatsoever he has written is but barely affirmed by him; He
has neither positively nor by consequence proved any thing: Sophistry and
color of Conscience, are his strongest Arguments.

Some were persuaded with the things that were spoken, and some believed not.
Act. 28. 24.

THE YOUNG MAN'S ANIMATION TO THE building up of ZION.
Now my desire is to write something for the encouragement of my Brethren and
companions, that as they have begun, so they may go on to further by all good
means the building up of Zion. And chiefly I write to the young men, for they
through the might of God, have done worthily; they have indeed excelled their
Ancestry. And I had as much need (if not more) to write a word of comfort to
the old men, for I think their hearts are even dying, if not with Nabals
already dead within them; But to all of them both old and young, it may be the
dead may hear and revive.

WHen Cyrus King of Persia had made Proclamation for the return of the Jews,
and for the reedifying the Temple of the God of heaven at Jerusalem, it is said
that the chief Mark old men.
Fathers amongst them, and the Priests and Levites, rose up with all them whose
spirit God had raised to go up to build the house of the Lord, Ezra 1. 1. to 5.
In which words you may observe, it was not the great men, and the Church men
only that rose up to build Gods house, but all others also, whose hearts God
had moved unto that work, were they old or young, rich or poor, bond or free,
of what degree or condition soever, and we find none of them prohibited neither
by the King, nor by any of their own heads or Governors. Be not then my
brethren, discouraged, or dis^^^ded for any reproaches or invectives of railing
Rabshekehs, or jeering Sanballats, and Tobiahs the enemies of the Church of
God: Nehem. 2. 19. and 4. 2. let not your hearts be faint, nor your hands weak,
for there are more with us then against us. The hand of our God is upon all
them that seek him in goodness: but his power and his wrath is against all
them that forsake him. Ez. 8. 22. yea though Rehum the Chancellor, and Simshai
the Scribe, (the great popish Lords, and popishly affected Officers) with the
rest of their companions, Ezra 4. 9. do consult and combine, yea and misinform
the King too, calling ye the Rebellious City, ver. 12. that the work of
reformation may be hindered, the house of God still lie waste and defaced by our
popish adversaries; yet it shall go on, the God of heaven shall prosper us, and
therefore let us his servants rise up and build: be still diligent in the use
of all good means; and as for them, they have no portion, nor right, nor
memorial amongst us, Nehem. 2. 20. When the people of the Jews laid the
foundation of the second Temple, at Jerusalem, many of the ancient men that had
seen the glorious fabric of the first, wept to consider how inferior the last
was unto that of Solomon's, Ezra 3. 12. But blessed be God, we shall have no
such cause, for if our Ancients, who have know the first structure of our
Temple, (the first Reformation in King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth's
days) are not more blind then aged, they shall (if God be pleased so far to
honor them) see the second frame of our Church, (this Reformation now by Gods
good hand intended) far more excellent beautiful and glorious then the first:
but I doubt many of them will rather weep then rejoice at at; for then will
they be like fishes drawn out of the waters, not able to breathe, though
brought forth into a more pure element: for their great Idol the Service Book
being taken away, how shall they pray or serve God? Howsoever ye young men, ye
glory of this dull age, (my brethren and companions) be ye merry and rejoice,
yea shout for joy, for the day of Redemption draws nigh. The Lord has
brought again the Captivity of Zion, he has done great things for us, whereof
we will rejoice, Psalm. 126. 1. 3. Come then let us go up to the Mountain and
bring wood (our prayers, and petitions, our care, cost, and pains; yea, and if
occasion be, our arms, Nehem. 4. 17, 18.) and build this house; for the Lord
will be favorable in it, and he will be glorified, Hagg. 1. 8. Therefore be
now of good courage, O Zerubabel, (O Princes, O Worthies of Parliament) says
the Lord, and be of good courage, O Jehoshua, son of Jehozadek the Priest, (ye
true Ministers of God) and be strong all ye people of the Land (ye masters and
servants) says the Lord, and do it: for I am with you, says the Lord of
hosts, according to the word that I commanded you when ye came out of Egypt:
(When I called you this Parliament, and ye came out of prelaticall tyranny,
Popery, and Superstition, when you solemnly vowed before the Lord against it.)
so my spirit shall remain amongst you, fear not, Hag. 2. 5, 6. And the glory of
this last house shall be greater then the first, says the Lord of hosts, at
the 10. verse. Fear not therefore, nor be weary: only be strong and very
courageous to observe and do according to all that the true Moses (Jesus
Christ) has commanded you, Josh. 1. 7. The great mountains shall become plain,
Zach. 4. 7. and the swellings of Jordan shall down, and ye shall go over, and
drive out all your enemies, and enjoy rest and peace again. And Babylon shall
fall, even that great City Babylon, that has made all Nations drunk with the
wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth to commit
fornication with her, Revel. 18. 2, 3. Be therefore neither dismayed, nor
afraid, but down with her, down with her even to the ground, that there may be
no more remembrance of her. Blessed shall he be that does reward her as she
has served us. Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth her Brats against
the stones. Psalm. 137. 8. 9. Sic sit. So be it.

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? To the Neutrall Atheist, or Atheistical
Neutrall.
HAlt no longer between two opinions, lest with Absalom, as unworthy the earth
and unfit for heaven, you be suddenly taken away by some exemplarie judgment;
If the Lord be God follow him, if Baal be God follow him; If Christ be the
Head, honor him; and if the Bishops be Head, honor them. Be not so easily
removed from the sound form of doctrine, received from Christ Jesus by the
mouth of his Apostles. Whosoever speaks not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in him. Isa. 8. 20.

Magna est veritas, and praevale^^t.

FINIS.

