THE PICTVRE OF The CONSCIENCE drawn to the Life, by the PENCELL of Divine
Truth.

Wherein are set out 1. Its Nature. 2. Infirmities. 3. Remedies. 4. Its
Duties. Consisting first in the truths to be believed. 2. The virtues to be
practiced 2. The Vices to be avoided. 4. The Heresies to be rejected.

All seasonable for these distracted times.

By Alexander Rosse.

London Printed by Tho, Badger, for M. M. and Gabriel Bedeil, and are to be
sold at their Shop near Temple Bar, at the middle Temple Gate. 164^.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Scudamore, Viscount Sligo.
My Lord,
WHen the orb of learning is illustrat by the irradiation, and benign aspect
of Princes favors, then all things in a Kingdom are conspicuous and
beautiful; but when the great Luminaries and Patrons of knowledge are
eclipsed, the orb must needs be obscured, and every thing within its
circumference darkened; hence (as in the darkness of the air) men are troubled
with strange and misshapen apparitions, which they verily believe are real
visions, whereas indeed they are but phantomes and imaginations of our brains,
which upon the introduction of a candle are easily dissipated; even so in the
intellectual darkness, men are troubled with uncoth and hideous opinions,
believing and embracing them as real truths, whereas indeed they are but
illusions.

Morte obita quales fama est volitare figuras,

Aut quae sopitas deludunt somnia sensus.

Which upon the approach of the light of Scripture and Truth, do vanish into
nothing. In this time when darkness has overwhelmed the minds of many men,
who are molested with strange fancies, which they call new lights, whereas
indeed they are but the glating of rotten wood, or of glowwormes, or those
skipping lights (which we call jack in the candle) I have adventured to bring
in this little tract, as a piece of wax candle, after so many bright torches,
that men may be undeceived, and that the true abjects both of faith and
practice may be manifested; to which small piece J have prefixed your Lordships
name, as being bound in the obligation of duty and affection to Your goodness
and eminent parts in general; whose knowledge, judgment, conscience, and
sincerity are such, and so well known, both at home and abroad, as they need
not the help of any pen; so likewise, J am tied by this small mite to express
my gratitude, in particular for your Lordships favorable aspect on, and respect
to me; which I cannot better testify, then by acknowledging my self.

Your Lordships humble Servant to command ALEXANDER ROSS.

The Contents of the diseases and cures of the Conscience.
1. COnscience what it is?

2. An erring Conscience, how far it binds.

3. The Conscience how ruled by opinion.

4. The doubtful Conscience not to be followed.

5. The scrupulous Conscience both a punishment and a trial.

6. Six causes of a scrupulous conscience:

7. Ten remedies against the diseases of the Conscience.

The Contents of what we must believe.
8. Our Conscience binds us to believe 1 There is a God. 2. That he is one. 3.
Immutable. 4. Eternal. 5. Omnipresent. 6. Omnipotent. 7. Infinite. 8. The
chief good. 9. Most perfect. 10. Most simple. 11. Incomprehensible. 12.
Invisible. 13. Truth it self. 14. Ever-living. 15. The Trinity, and the
reasons why.

9. Our conscience binds us to believe 1. the Creation. 2* Christ's Incarnation.
3. That in him were the Passions of fear anger and sorrow, and how? 4. That in
him were two wills. 5. That his Mother was a perpetual Virgin. 6. And the
Mother of God. 7. And that Christ was accessory to his own death, how? 8 And
that in his death the divinity was not separate from his body. 9. And that he
rose the third day, with the scarres of his wounds. 10. And that he ascended
above all heaven. 11. And that he sits at his Fathers right hand. 12. And that
he is Judge of the quick and dead.

10. Our Consicence binds us to believe that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Son as well as from the Father.

11. We are bound to believe the unity and universalitie of the Church.

12. And the communion of the Saluts with Christ and among themselves.

13. And that God only forgives sins.

14. And that our bodies shall rise again.

15. And that there is an Eternal life of glory, after this of Nature and
Grace.

16. Our Conscience binds us to believe the truth and authority of Scripture.

17. We are bound to believe that there are An gels.

18. And that God created man, whose body he made of earth, and infused his
soul, which soul is immortal, and not by traduction, and how infected with
original sin.

19. We are bound to believe the doctrine of predestination.

20. Our Conscience binds us to believe that we are justified by Christ's
Righteousness, or by his active and passive obedience.

21. And we are bound to believe that the good and evil things of this life,
come to pass by Gods providence.

Contents of what we must practice.
1. Our Conscience binds us to fear. love, and obey God.

2. To call upon God, when, where, and how, but not to use imprecations.

3. We are not strictly bound to certain hours, places and gestures.

4. We are bound sometimes to fast.

5. And to make confession of our faith.

6. And to detest openly Idolatry and sin.

7. And to fly when we are persecuted.

8. And to hear Gods Word; how.

9. And to hear profane Ministers, and to receive from them the Sacraments,
when there is no other means.

10. Parents are bound in Conscience to bring their Children to Baptism.

11. Godfathers also are bound in Conscience to see there God-sons perform
what they promise in Baptism.

12. What in conscience we are bound to perform, who have been baptized.

13. We are bound in conscience to receive the Lords Supper, when and how.

14. The Minister is bound to give, and the people to receive the Cup.

15. We are bound in conscience to love one another.

16. And to worship God only; not Angels, Saints, or Christ's humanity.

17. We are bound to swear only by God, and not by the creatures.

18. Christians may swear with a safe conscience, why and how.

19. We are bound in conscience to keep our oaths, though to our prejudice.

20. We must not falsify the oath which we swear by the creatures.

21. What oaths are not to be required.

22. Vnlawsull oaths must not be kept.

23. Nor oaths made to our Neighbors prejudice.

24. Nor oaths made by them who are not of their own power.

25. Equivocation in oaths unlawful.

26. What oaths must be kept that are forced.

27. What erroneous oaths must be kept:

28. We must not make one swear a falsehood, though he think it to be true.

29. A second oath contrary to the former that was lawful must not be kept.

30. The oath must be kept, whose form remains.

31. The oath ex officio unlawful.

32. The oath to conceal a Thief must be broken.

33. What vows we must make and keep.

34. The Monkish 3. vows unlawful.

35. What works must be done on the Sabbath.

36. We must hasten our conversion.

37. We must meditate on Gods law; why.

38. And we must make our Election sure; how?

39. We are bound seriously to repent.

40. And to cherish the spirit; how.

41. And to be holy.

42. And to hope in Gods promises.

43. And to be comforted in afflictions.

44. And to resist temptations.

45. And to be cheerful in our spiritual desertions.

46. And to be comforted against the fear of death.

47. And in all our infirmities to be cheerful.

48. We are bound to obedience for many causes.

49. And to humility.

50. And to the knowledge of God in Christ.

51. And to sincerity.

52. And to speak truth.

53. We are still bound to speak the truth.

54. We must speak truth when commanded.

55. The duties of Judges.

56. We are bound to be zealous.

57. We must labor for contentation.

58. We must do good works.

59. And must search for true wisdom.

60. And are bound to be vigilant.

61. We may use worldly policy; how.

62. We are bound to forgive wrongs.

63. We may safely go to Law.

64. We may safely in our own or brothers defense kill the invader.

65. We must not kill our selves.

66. Wars when and how lawful.

67. Soldiers should know the justice of the cause for which they fight.

68. We are bound to suffer for Christ.

69. We must labor for patience.

70. And for sobriety or temperance.

71. We must avoid drunknesse.

72. Heretics may be punished; how.

73. We must submit our selves to Gods correcting hand.

74. We must love God for himself.

75. And we must love him above all things.

76 We must subdue our pride.

77. How we must pray at all times.

78. We must avoid evil spirits, Witches, Southsayers, Inchanters, etc.

79. We are bound to confess our sins.

80 Lotteries how far lawful.

81. Marriage, how and when lawful.

82. Consent is required in marriage.

83. Polygany unlawful.

84. The mutual duties of husband and wife.

85. Divorce when lawful.

86. Wanton and fleshly lusts to be avoided

87. In what cases we may separate our selves from a Church or congregation.

88. The Ministers duties, and of excommunication.

89 How they should be qualified.

90. In what cases we must make restitution.

91. How we are bound to reprove.

92. And how to receive reprooffe.

93. How we must love our neighbor as our selves.

94. The necessity of a holy life.

95 How far schism must be avoided.

96* We must be careful of our good name

97 We must speak and think well of all men, till we know the contrary

98 How far we may conceal our neighbors sins.

99 We are bound to employ our talents well.

100 The duty of Magistrates and people

101 Of Masters and Servants.

102 Of Parents and children.

103 Of Ministers and their Flocks.

104, When we are to stand to our bargains.

105 What usury is lawful, what is not.

106. Callings needful, Beggars condemned

107 Rich men's duties.

108. We are bound to be bountyfull.

109. And to shun covetousness.

110, What we are to eat, and when to refrain.

111. Of apparaell, and cautions in wearing it.

112. Of recreations, and when to be used, and how.

113. We are bound to abhor slanderers.

114. We are bound to avoid sin.

115. In things indefferent, we must use liberty.

116. We must not omit duties for fear of scandal.

117. How far forth the Law is necessary.

118 We must rely on Gods Providence as not to neglect the means.

119. Ministers marriage is lawful.

1.20 Religion ought to be the Princes chief care.

121. Christians may be Kings or Magistrates.

122. Princes may with a good Conscience demand tribute.

The contents of Heresies and Doctrines to be avoided.
1 COncerning God we must avoid Idolaters, Epicures, Atheists,
Anthropomorphits, Blasphemers, Manich^es, Gentiles, Stoics, Orpheus, Homer,
Hesiod, Chrysippus, Tertullian, Simon Magus, Cerinthus, etc.

2 Concerning the Trinity, Samosatcnus, Arius, Servelus, Jews, Sabellius,
Tritheits, Antitrinitaries.

3 Concerning Gods Omnipotency; Euripides, Simon Magus, etc.

4 Concerning the Creation, Aristotle, Democritus, etc.

5 Concerning Christ, the Ebionites, Arians, Cerinthus, etc.

6 Concerning Christ's Nativity, Saturninus, Basilides, etc.

7 Concerning Christ's two natures, Samosatenus, Monothelits, etc.

8 Concerning Maryes Virginity, Cerinthus, Carpocrates, etc.

9 Concerning the personal Union, Nestorius, etc.

10 Concerning Christ's death, Simonians, Saturninians, etc.

11 Concerning the indissoluble Union, Nestorians, etc.

12 Concerning Christ's Resurrection, Jews, Ceri^hians, etc.

13 Concerning Christ's Ascension, Christolyts, Manichees, etc.

14 Concerning Christ's sitting at Gods right hand, Papists etc.

15 Concerning Christ's Judiciary power, Astrologers, etc.

16 Concerning the Holy Ghost, Macedonians, Servetians, etc.

17 Concerning the Catholic Church, Papists, Pepuzians, etc.

18 Concerning Communion of Saints, Nicolaitans, etc.

19 Concerning Remission of finnes, Donatists, etc.

20 Concerning the Resurrection, Menandrians, etc.

21 Concerning life eternal, Millenaries, etc.

22 Concerning the Scriptures, Marcionits, etc.

23 Concerning Angels, Sadduces, etc.

24 Concerning man's creation, Rabbis, etc.

25 Concerning man's soul, Epicurees, etc.

26 Concerning Gods Jmage, Saturninians, etc.

27 Concerning original sin, Armenians, etc.

28 Concerning Predestination, Celestinians, etc.

29 Concerning Justification, Papists, etc.

30 Concerning Gods Providence, Epicures, etc.

THE Picture of a Christianmans Conscience, Where in we may see 1. its nature,
2. Infirmities, 3 Remedies, 4. Duties; Briefly and plainly Delineated, with the
Pencill of Divine Truth.
COnscience which is the invisible Judge that sits upon the Tribunal of our
Souls, sentencing our good and bad actions; showing us what is to be done,
what to be undone; a witness either excusing or accusing us; a schoolmaster
having in one hand a book to instruct us, in the other a rod to to correct us:
and like a Horsman having a bit to curb us, that we may not run out, and a
whipe to slash us when we are unruly: which the Poets expressed by the snakie
haired Furies, by the raven of Prometheus, continually eating up his heart, and
by the dart that sticks in the side of the wounded Dear. This Conscience I
say, is an act (not a habit) of the reason, or intellect (not of the will) by
which it prescribes what is good or evil, right or wrong, to be done or undone;
if we do well it affords us a continual Feast; if evil, Phalaris his brazen
Bull is not such a tormentor; and so much the crueller in that it is
unavoydable, accompanying us where ever we go, as the shadow does the body as
the evil spirit haunted Saul.

There are four infirmities to which the Conscience is obnoxious, 1. Error, 2
Opinion, 3. Doubts, 4. Scrupulosite.

1 An erring Conscience is a bad Judge; yet the Dictats thereof must be obeyed,
because it is conceived to be the law, will, and Oracle of God; who therefore
resists such a conscience, resists Gods will in his own interpretation and
conceit, and goes against his own belief; for he believes that he is in the
right, though indeed he is an error; now, What is done either against or
without Faith, is Sin. Romans 14. For the Egyptian Mid-wives who believed that
they might with a safe Conscience lie to save the Hebrew infants from drowning,
had done against their faith and conscience and so been guilty of murder
formaly though not materialy, if they had not lied.

But we must note that though we are bound never to resist the erring
conscience, yet we are not obliged, always to follow it; for if the error be
voluntarily contracted, we are not tied by any obligation to yield obedience to
it; yet we are bound by a simple ligation not to do any thing against it,
because the Conscience believes this error to be truth, and remains as yet not
convinced; until which time, these actions which in themselves are materially
evil, yet are not evil formally; as when a man lies with his neighbors
wife, believing her to be his own, he commiteth adultery materially and in
effect, though not formally or in his conscience and intention; and for the
same reason the Dictates of an erroneous conscience, are to be preferred to the
precepts of a Superior until the error be removed by the Superior, who cannot
injoyne us to do that which destroys the law of nature, but to do any thing
against our conscience, were to thwart and oppose that very law of nature.

2 Opinion is the second infirmity to which the conscience is subject in this
life, by reason we are ignorant of the true causes of things, without which
there can be no knowledge; for Scire est per causas cognoscere; but opinion is
a bad rule for men to square their actions by; seeing we can never give a firm
assent unto that which we perfectly know not but by way of probability,
therefore the assent is timorous cum formidinecontrarij; yet it is opinion that
for the most part bares rule in the world, and causes men without scruple of
Conscience to run headlong into many errors and absurdities; it is opinion
that imboldens men to persecute without remorse of conscience al such as
dissent from them, and in this they think they do GOD good service; hence the
Arians of old thought they were bound in Conscience to persecute the Orthodox
Christians, and so the Papists are led by the same opinion, at this day in
persecuting the Protestants, dissonant opinions have as well armed men's
Consciences with boldness, as their hands with fire and sword against each
other; the opinion of universalitie and antiquity has kept the world so long
in blindness of Popery, causing them without scruple of Conscience to swallow
down their gross errors which notwithstanding Luther could, not digest;
neither he of late nor Athanasius of old, could satisfy their consciences with
the opinion of universalitie; the opinion that the scholars have of their
teachers worth and integrity, make them without any check of Conscience
maintain and defend even to their own undoing, and of the place where they
live, their masters errors, be they never so absurd; and this is the cause that
the Church has been still pestered with so many Heresies; the opinion that the
Subject has of the Princes authority and power, as also the necessity of
obedience to his commands, makes them without any controlement of conscience
put in execution what soever he commands, be it right, or wrong* and when they
take an evil opinion of the prince, though he deserve it not, their Conscience
sets them on work to rise against him: some Physicians think they may kill men
with a safe conscience by trying experiments: their conscience does not check
them for murder, because they have an opinion that what they did, was for the
furthring of their own knowledge, and the benefit of others: so from the
opinion the Lawyer has that it is lawful for him to live by his Profession,
he makes no scruple to receive his Clients money, and to plead for him in a
wrong cause.

3. The third infirmity of the Conscience is doubting; to which so long as we
are subject, our actions can neither stand with love nor faith, nor goodness;
not with love; for how shall we love God, when we do that which we doubt is
not consonant to his will: not with faith, for faith is an assurance and firm
assent; but that can be neither assent nor assurance, where there is doubting,
and what is done without faith is sin, says the Apostle. not with goodness;
for that action cannot be good which is done without knowledge; but where
doubting is, there cannot be knowledge. Maximum malae mentis judicinm
fluctuatio: therefore if the action be doubtful which we go about, it were
better be for borne then put in execution; for there may be danger in
performance, there can be none in forbearance: a man that doubts of his
impotency and ineptitude for marriage, were better abstain then marry; he that
doubts whither the goods or estate which he enjoyes be his own or not, were
better restore then retain them, if he can find the right owner, if he cannot
find him, then he were best bestow them on the poor, or else retain them
with that intention and resolution, to restore them to the right owner, and for
that cause use his best endeavors to find him out; so when we doubt whither
the Princes command imposed upon us, be just or not; we ought to be resolved
either by the Prince, or by some other wise and religious man, of the
lawfulness of that command. If the Usurer doubt whither he may lawfully take
use or not; he were better forbear then demand it, for there may be sin he
doubts, in taking, there can be none in forbearing.

4. The fourth infirmity of the Conscience is scrupulositie; a disease that
gives it no rest; for after it has assented to one part, yet it remains
anxious and wavering, whither that be the rightest part, it has assented to,
and is easily removed from its assent which it gave to this part, and inclined
to assent to the contrary, being troubled at every small conceit, and scruple,
perplexed with every shadow, and imagination of sin; sometimes making us fear
that we have omitted what should have been done: and sometimes that that we
have committed what should not have been done; this sickness is sometimes laid
upon us by God, as a punishment of our sins, and sometimes as a means to try
our Faith, Constancy, and patience, and its a part of our sprituall warfare;
let us not then be dejected; the end of this trial is not to hurt, but to help
us; not to kill, but to save us; neither has Satan any more power to vex our
minds with such scruples, then he had to afflict Jobs body with soars; he
does it by permission from God for our further weal: these scruples like the
Angels of Satan are sent to buffet us; but let us not despair, Gods grace is
sufficient for us.

The causes then of our scruples are principally, 1 God himself, 2.
instrumentally satan 3. the conversing with scruplous and rigid men, 4. hearing
such Sermons, reading of such Books, as beget and increase scruples in us, 5.
the evil constitution also of our bodies, and the bad disposition of the
spleen, and brain.

The chiefest means to cure us of these four Diseases, are 1. principally
Prayer, 2. then meditating on Gods word, 3. hearing of such sermons, and
conversing with such Ministers as are judicious, learned and Pious, who with
the good Samaritan can pour Oil of comfort into our wounds, and apply the
Balm of Gilead to our souls; and who have more need of such spiritual
Physicians, then they who are troubled in miude? For a wounded Conscience who
can bear? 4. abstaning from conversing with such persons, reading of such
Books, hearing of such Sermons, as will rather make the wound wider then heal
it. 5. diligence in our particular Calling; for often times idleness breeds
doubtings and scruples, 6. striving to be cheereful and merry, and to converse
with such as are of a cheerful and merry disposition; for the life of a
Christian consists not in sadness, pensiveness and melancholy, but in
cheerfullnesse, mirth and alacrity, rejoice always in the Lord, I say again
unto you rejoice, says the Apostle. 7 temperance in our diet, moderation in
our passions, and a fit appliction or use of physic, whereby diseases may be
prevented and our humors rectified 8. let us not intertain any scruples in our
minds when they come, but reject them and resist their first' motions;
principijs obsta: 9. We must set before our eyes the death of Christ which is
of infinite value to save all sinners; the blood of Christ cleanses us from
all sin, says Saint John. Christ gave himself to be a ransom, says St.
Paul 1 Timothy 2. 6. likewise the greatness of Gods mercy which is above all his
works, Psalm 145. 9. The plentifulnesse of Redemption with him, Psalm 130.
7. The sufficiency of his Grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. even in pardoning of grievous
sinners, as of David, Solomon, Manasses, Peter, Paul, and others; he does not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; he did not despise the
Canaanitish woman though a dog, nor Matthew though a Publican, nor the woman
possessed with a Devil; nor the Thief upon the Cross, nor the Apostle that
denied him, nor the Apostle that persecuted him; He is a Father who will not
reject, but embrace his Prodigal son if he return; he is a Physician who
will not hurt, but cure the Patient that comes to him, he invites all that are
weary and laden, to come to him, and he will refresh them, Matthew. 11. 28. he
calls upon all that are thirsty to come to the water and drink, Esaias 55. 1.
He professes that he came to call sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 13. many
such places may be alleged. 10. if we will not be troubled with the scruples
of Conscience, and the temptations arisihg thence; we must avoid
solitariness, and too much retiredness; for Satan takes occasion to assault
us, when he sees us alone, as he dealt with Christ in the desert. 11. Let us
strive for true knowledge, faith, love, and obedience, which are the maine
remedies against all these diseases of the Conscience; for opinions prevail
where true knowledge fails; and where there is but little faith, there will
be much doubting; want of love is the cause of so many errors; and want of
obedience to spiritual Superiors is the cause of so many scruples. Thus having
poynted at the diseases of the Conscience, and their remedies, I will show the
credenda and agenda of a good Christian, that is what we are bound to believe,
and what with a safe and good conscience we are bound to do.

WE are bound in Conscience to believe that there is a God; for even the
greatest Atheists that ever were, have been accused, checked, judged, and
affrighted by their Conscience, even for their secret and invisible sins,
intimating thereby that there is a secret and invisible Indge, to whom they
must give an account of those hidden actions; many men have been checked by
their Conscience for doubting or denying that there is a God, but never was man
checked by his Conscience for believing the Diety, but rather encouraged
thereto, and cherished, being directed to believe this both by the light of
nature, and the light of Grace.

2 And as we beleve there is a God, so we are bound to believe that there is
but one GOD, having both reasons and Scripture, to induce us to this Faith; the
simplicity, and perfection of Gods nature, as also the unity of this universe
force this belief upon us.

3 We are bound in Conscience to believe that God is immutable, because he is
not passible. 2. and that he is eternal, because he is immutable, 3. and that
he is the only ubiquitary entity, both 1. in regard of his essence, by which
all things have existence, 2. in respect of his knowledge, by which all things
are naked to his eyes, 3. in respect of his power, to which all things are
subjected. and 4. that he is infinite, because he is not confined, by form or
matter, or his own nature. and 5. that he is the chiefest good, 1. because he
is chiefly appetible. 2. and the chiefest end of the creatures. 3. and the
chiefest cause of all that perfection and goodness that is in the creature. 6.
and that he is most perfect. 1. because he is the cause of all things. 2. in
whom are contained the perfections of al his effects, that ever were or shall
be. 3. and because he is not a passive, but an active principle. 4. neither is
there in him any defect at all, 7. and that he is most simple, because in him
there is neither composition nor parts, nor act and possibility, nor can he be
the effect of things, 8. and that he is incomprehensible, because he is
infinite, 9. and that he is invisible, because sight is a bodyly act, which has
no proportion to a spiritual substance; and we see the species and similitude
of the object, but Gods perfection excludes all similitude, 10. and that he is
truth it self, because of that transcendent Conformity which is between his
intellect and entity, 11. and that he is the ever-living because he is the ever
working God, for the excellency and eternity of his operation show the
excellency and eternity of his life 12. and that he is omnipotent, because his
essence is infinite, and no ways confined or limited.

4 We are bound in Conscience to beleev that there is in God a trinity of
persons, or three ways of existence, because in the nature of God, there are
three real relations, to wit, Paternity, Filiation, and Procession; the Father
alone is unbegott; the Son is of the Father as of his original, not as of a
cause, which includes, 1. prioritie, 2. dependence, and 3. a different essence,
which things are not in God: the HOLY Ghost is of the Father, and the Son, not
by way of Generation as the word is from the intellect, which is the property
of the Son, who is therefore called the (Word,) but by way of procession, or
love; for the HOLY GHOST is said to proceed from the Father, and Son, as
these two persons love each other mutually; hence the Holy Ghost loves
essentially and personally; essentially, as he is the love that proceeds from
the Father, and the Son; personally, as he from whom this love proceeds.

5 We are bound in Conscience to believe the Creation of the World, because we
know this is affirmed by Scripture, and learned men of all ages; because God is
omnipotent, wise and Good; because the world is not God, therefore not infinite,
nor eternal, neither in it self wholly or in the parts thereof.

6 We are bound in Conscience to believe that in the fullness of time God was
made man that his invisible atributes of wisdom, goodness, justice, and power,
might be made known to us; his wisdom in finding out a way to pay so great a
price; his goodness, which is communicative of it self, in that he despised
not the infirmity and baseness of our nature; his justice in making man, whom
Satan meant to destroy, the means of Satan's own destruction: lastly his
greatness; for the Incarnation of the Son of God, was far greater then the
Creation of the World.

7 We must believe that in CHRIST were the three passions, of sorrow, fear,
and anger, 1. of sorrow or pain, for the faculties of his Soul were natural,
and his body was sensible; for as the evil of pain is apprehended by the
outward sense of touching, so is the evil of sorrow, by the inward sense of
imagination; these I call evils, not of sin, but of puishment, 2. Fear was in
Him, as it is from the apprehension of future evil; but not as it includes
either the incertainty of the event, or the perturbation of reason, for the one
presupposes ignorance, the other sin; 3. There was in him also the anger of
zeal which proceeds of Justice, but not the anger of revenge arising from sin,
or of the perturbation of reason.

8 We may with a clear Conscience believe that Christ had two wills, other
ways he could not have had two natures; notwithstanding, Apollinarius,
Einychus, and Onefurious, maintain the contrary; for an intelligent nature
cannot be perfect without the will; therefore as God, his will was divine; as
man, his will was humane; but as he was man, he was also a sensitive creature;
therefore not only had he a rational will, but also a sensitive appetite; by
this, he willed the cup to pass from him; by that, he drank of the cup, here
was a diversite of wills, but no contradiction, because it was not secundum idem.

9 We may safely believe that Mary the Mother of CHRIST, lost not her
virginity, neither before, nor in, nor after the conception; for otherwise this
could not have stood either with the dignity of the Father that sent Him, nor
of the Son that was sent, nor of the Holy Ghost that conceived him; nor yet
with the end of CHRIST'S Incarnation, which was to make us the sons of God, by a
pure and virgin like regeneration.

10 We may safely believe that Mary is the Mother of God, though not of the
Godhead; because she was the Mother of that person, who is both God and Man;
for this cause there is in Christ but one Filiation, if we look upon the
subject or person, but two filiations if we respect the two natures.

11 We may safely believe that Christ was the cause of his own death; because
he did not hinder it, when he might, either by suppressing his persecutors, or
withdrawing himself from them, or by immortalizing his body, but he was
accessory to his own Death indirectly only, and without sin, that by it he
might destroy sin, and death, and him that had the power of death.

12 We may believe safely that though in Christ's death and burial, the soul
was separated from the body, yet his divinity was not separated either from the
soul or the body; for the gifts of God are irrevocable, and without
repentance; and the gift of this Hypostaticall union was the greatest of all
Gods gifts; therefore all Christ was in the grave but not wholly, totus sed non
totaliter; because neither the body, nor the soul was separated from the
person of the Son of God.

13 We must believe that Christ rose the third day with the scars of those
wounds which he received in his passion, both to confirm the truth of his
resurrection, and by them to make intercession to his Father for us; for they
were as so many powerful Orators, employed by our intercessor to plead for us;
besides they were honorable badges of his victory; and love tokens of his true
affection toward us, and marks of his enemies implacable malice.

14 We must believe that Christ ascended above al heavens, not by his own
power, that is, of his humane nature, yet by his own power, that is of his
Divinity; and though it was against the nature of his earthly body to ascend,
it was not against the nature of his body as it was the body of the Son of
GOD, and as it was glorified, to ascend. and this he did, that he might prepare
a place for us; that from thence, as our King sitting on his throne, he might
give gifts unto men; as our high Priest he might enter into the holy place to
make intercession for us; and as our Prophet he might, by sending his Spirit
from thence, in wardly instruct us.

15 We must believe that Christ sits on Gods right hand, not as man only, by
being Hypostatically united to the divinity, but as God also by eternal
generation, enjoying the same glory, felicity and power with the Father from
eternity; therefore although the humanity of Christ is not to be honored with
divine worship: yet the man Christ is to be adored as being united to God; the
word humanity intimating the nature, but the word man, the whole person,
because of the Hypostaticall union.

16 We must believe that Christ is Judge of the quick and dead, not as God
only, but as man also; for as in both natures he is our Mediator, and head of
the Church, so in both he is our Judge; and as in his humane nature he was
judged by the world, so in the same nature he shall judge the world; and
because no man has seen God at any time, and the Judge should be visible,
therefore it is fit that Christ in the visible form and nature of man should
judge the world.

17 We may with a clear Conscience believe against the tenure of the Greek
Church, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, as well as from the
Father; for otherwise in the persons there would be a dualitie only, and not a
Trinity, neither are the Son and holy Ghost otherwise distinguished but by
generation and procession; and if the Son be the Wisdom and Knowledge of the
Father, and the Holy Ghost the love of both; he must doubtless proceed from
the Son, because Love proceeds of Knowledge.

18 We must believe that there is one Church universal, in respect of time,
place, and person, which neither has erred, nor can err, in things
fundamental and absolutely necessary; and that the head of this Church, is
Christ only, both in respect of eminency, dominion, efficacy and perfection,
as containeing al those graces of spiritual sense, motion, life, and other
good things, which he imparts to his members; and the Church of Rome is not
this Catholic Church, but a misshapen and lame member thereof: and that neither
her antiquity, nor multitudes, nor succession, nor miracles, nor continuance,
nor unity, nor outward splendour, etc. are true marks of a true Church.

19 We are bound in Conscience to believe, that there is a Communion and
Fellowship of the Saints, among themselves here on earth, consisting in their
mutual loves, in imparting spiritual gifts, and supporting each other, with
their mutual helps: as also with the Saints in Heaven, they praying for us,
and we earnestly desireing to be with them. and with Christ also, as the
branches with the root, builders with the foundation, the wife with the
husband, the members with the head; he imparting to us his righteousness,
merits, and prerogatives: and we imparting again to him, our sins,
punishments, and infirmities.

20 We are in Conscience to believe that God does forgive sins, and that he
alone has this power; the Minister only pronounces the pardon; and that all
sins are pardonable, though not actually pardoned, by reason of impenitency,
and unbeleife; and that our sins are pardoned, not for our merits, but for
Christ's obedience:

21 So we are to believe the resurrection of bodies, because otherwise the
members cannot be conformable to their head, nor can God be the God of the
living, but of the dead; Christ rose in vain, our faith is vain and we are of
al men most miserable; and this resurrection must be of al, because al must be
rewarded or punished; but this resurection shall not be the work of nature,
because naturaly from the privation to the habit there can be no regresse; and
though there may be a natural disposition in the matter to be reunited to its
form, yet there is no active power in nature to cause this union; and though
there is an inclination in the soul to be united again to its body; yet in
the dust there can be no natural inclination to the soul of man.

22 We are also to beleeeve that besides this life of Nature, and of Grace
here, there is a life of Glory hereafter eternal in the Heavens; which in
Scripture is called Peace, a refreshing, a rest, our Masters joy, our Fathers
house, the Kingdom of Heaven, Abraham's bosom, Paradise, the new Jerusalem,
this life must be Eternal, because God is Eternal, the soul is immortal,
and we that suffer for Christ without it, must be of all men most miserable;
the testimony of Scripture, the translation of Henoch, the rapture of Eliah,
and the ascension of Christ do confirm the truth of this doctrine.

23. Our Conscience also binds us to believe the truth of Gods Word; and that
the Scripture which we call Canonical are the dictates of the Holy Ghost; if
either we consider the majesty of the style, or the efficacy of the phrase in
working upon the heart, like a sharp two edged sword, deviding between the
soul and the spirit, the joints and the marrow; or if we look upon the
Antiquity of the Scripture, or upon Gods providence in the miraculous
preserving, and divulging of them against, all opposition; or if upon the
inveterate hatred of Satan, and of the world in persecuting, and laboring to
falsify them if they could; or if upon the fearful and horrid ends of those
men who have hated and persecuted the Scripture; or again, if we take notice
of the divine matter which is contained in them, of the truth of their
predictions, and accomplishment of their Prophesies; of the wonderful harmony
and consent of doctrine through all the parts thereof; of the general consent
of the Church through all the world maintaining and preserving the Scripture:
of the transcendent miracles recorded in them, of the Constancy of the Martyrs
in suffering all kind of tortures for maintaining thetruth of them: if lastly
we consider the miraculous calling, the self insufficiency, and yet the
extraordinary abilities of the men that penned them; our Conscience will assure
us that the Scripture were indicted by Gods Spirit.

We must are believe, that there are ministering spirits which in Scripture are
called Angels, Gods, Sons of God, morning Stars, Seraphim, Cherubim, men of
God, etc. These wait upon the Throne of God, and are employed by him to
comfort, instruct, defend, and deliver from danger the children of God, to
carry their souls into Abraham's bosom, to gather their bones together in the
last day, to pnnish the wicked here, and to separate these Goats from the
Sheep hereafter; these were created in the beginning all good, some of which
persevered in their integrity, partly by the goodness of their own will,
partly by Gods decree before time, and by his assisting grace in time, and
partly by reason of the excellent knowledge they have of God, both natural,
experimental, and supernatural or revealed; and some of them fell by pride
and envy, affecting equality with God, and maligning man's felicity, for which
cause they were thrust out of Heaven, and struck with blindness in their
minds, and perverseness in their wills; yet much knowledge they have, both
natural, experimental, and revealed; and much strength also, by which they
work upon the bodayes, the mind, and senses of men; yet they know not our
thoughts, nor things to come, except by revelation or conjecture.

We are bound also to believe that God made man after his own Image, which
consisted in righteousness, holiness, and immortality, which Image being lost
by sin, was restored again by Christ, and that man's body was made of earth,
but his soul of nothing, and not of the Heaven, or the fire, or the air, or
the divine substance. And that there is not one soul of all men, nor a
transmigration of souls out of one body into another, nor that the souls were
created before the world, or that they are mortal; being they are simple and
uncompounded substances, and not made of matter, or contrary Elements; besides,
that the Word of God, the Consciences of men, the excelency of the soul, the
inorganicall faculties thereof, and the consent of all ages and nations do
prove its immortality; therefore it is not educed out of the matter as other
forms are, but introduced, and infused by God immediately, who breathed into
Adam the breath of life; and albeit the Soul is infused pure by God, yet no
sooner enters it into the body, but is infected with original sin, not by any
physical contact of the body, but by Gods just judgment, imputing Adams sin to
all his posterity, being in his loins when he sinned, upon which imputation
follows an inclination to sin, as a punishment of Adams transgression: so the
child is infected with original sin, not because his Soul is united to his
body, but because he is the son of Adam.

25 We are also to believe that God from all eternity decreed to create man to
his image, and foreseeing his voluntary fall, ordained to elect some in Christ
to salvation, and to pass by others, which election depended not on man's
foreseen Faith or works, for God could foresee nothing in himbut what he was to
give him, nor could the cause be posterior to its effect, but election is the
cause of Faith, and good Works, for we are elected, that we might be holy. Ephesians.
1. 4. therefore Faith and Works foreseen, are no more the causes of election
then of Vocation, and justification.

26 We may like ways safely believe, though there be no inherent
righteousness in us, whereby we may be accounted just in Gods sight, yet that
we are justified by Christ's righteousness being imputed to us; not only by his
passive odedience in dying for us, but also by his active; in fullfilling of
the Law; for Christ is totally ours; both in doing and suffering; and as Adams
active disobedience made us unjust, so Christ's active obedience has made us
just; and as our sins were to be expiated, so life eternal was to be procured
for us; his suffering expiated our sins; therefore his fulfilling of the Law,
did purchase life eternal for us.

27 We are bound also in Conscience to believe that the good and evil which
befalls us in this life, comes not to pass by any Stoicall or fatal
necessity, nor by fortune, or haphazard; but by Gods special providence, by
which he guides the world, not only in general, but in every particular
creature and action also, so that the evil actions of men, which he ordained
not by his predestination, are ordered by his providence; for God infuseth not
evil into men's wills, but directs unto good ends that evil which they
perpetrat of their own accord.

Thus having briefly showed the Credenda, or what in Conscience we are bound to
believe; now I will as briefly set down the Agenda, or what things with a safe
Conscience we are bound to perform.

WE are bound in Conscience to fear God as our Lord, and able to cast body
and soul into hell fire; and as being our Father, to love him with all our
heart, all our strength etc. and patiently to bear his corrections, as being
arguments of his love, and knowing that he will lay no more upon us then we can
bear; also to obey him with the same cheerfullnesse and alacrity, that the
Angels in heaven do, and to be thankful to him, from whom we receive all good
things, and the blessings both of his right and left hand; blessing God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in CHRIST.

2 We are bound in Conscience to call upon GOD upon all occasions, and to lift
up pure hands in all places, so that our prayer may be accompanied with Faith,
fervency, love, reverence and humility, and grounded not upon our own worth,
but on Christ's merits; and not directed to Angels or Saints, but to God
himself, who alone is omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, and will not have
his glory given to any other; and we are not to pray only for our selves, but
also for all men, even for our enemies; therefore must not use imprecations
against the person of any man, though against their sins and errors we may;
for the imprecations we read of in scripture, were either predictions, or
temporary execrations, or else they were uttered only against sin; or by such
as had the gift of discerning, or to whom Gods will was known in that case.

3 We are not bound in Conscience, to observe all canonical hours in prayer,
but we may at all times call upon God; nor are we necessarily tied to any
place, but in all places we may lift up pure hands; nor to any particular
gesture, but we may use any gesture that is reverend; nor are we tied to use
the voice; for God can hear the inward cries of the heart; [non vox sed votum.]

4 We are bound in conscience not only to pray, but use sometimes to fast, that
our prayers may be the more servent and effectual, that the untamed lust of
our flesh may be kept under, that our unworthiness, humility, contrition, and
repentance may the more appear; and this we must do not only when Gods
judgments hang over us, but also when we have any great blessing to procure,
or any great work to perform; and not only must we abstain from meat and
drink, but also from all delights, and comfortable recreations, so far forth
as the strength of our bodies will permit; but withal we must take heed of any
conceit of merit, or of distinction of meats for Conscience sake, or of set
times urged as necessary which ought to be arbitrary.

5. We are bound in Conscience to make open profession of our faith, when we
are required thereto by the Magistrate, or by such as may command us, that we
may be known; or when we see by our silence God is like to be dishonored,
and the Church prejudiced; he that confesses me before men says Christ, him
will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven.

6. If at any time we converse with profane and Idolatrous people, we are
bound in Conscience to show our dislike both of the one and the other, not
only inwardly in our minds, but also outwardly by our voice and gesture; for
God will be honored of us, both in our bodies and souls; for he made both;
neither must we think to serve God and Belial at the same time.

7. If at any time we are persecuted for the truth, and a good Conscience, if
we see that there is a lawful way to escape presented to us; if we know that
we have not strength to resist temptations, and fiery trials, if our persons
be chiefly aimed at, if we have no hope to do good by our stay, if our
resolution be not utterly to forsake our public charge, if we have any; but to
return when the times are quiet; we may with a safe Conscience fly, having
both Christ's counsel, and example for it, besides the practice of many holy
men; other ways if by our flight God shall be dishonored, the Church
prejudiced; the Magistrate, or the State where we are, wronged, we are not to
fly, especially when all lawful means of escape is denied us.

8. If we will hear the words of God with profit, and comfort, we are bound
in Conscience to lay aside all prejudicial or evil opinion of the Preacher,
to cast aside all superfluity of maliciousness, and to put away all
over-weaning conceit of our own worth and abilities, and all disturbed
affections, hardness of heart, itching ears, cares of the world, and to
receive the word with meekness, faith, and love to it, that we being
sanctified by prayer to receive it, it may be rooted in us, treasured up in our
hearts and dwell plentifully amongst us.

9. If we live in such a place where there are none but Heretical or profane
Ministers, we are bound in Conscience to hear the Word, and to receive the
Sacraments by their mouth, and hands, rather then be deprived of both; for the
efficacy and dignity of the Word, and Sacraments depend not on the Minister
that convayes them to us, but on Christ, who bestowed them upon us; a Raven may
conveigh wholesome food to Elijah, and Judas may teach true doctrine to the
people; and the Scribes and Pharisees may sit in Moses Chair.

10. We are bound in Conscience to bring our Children to Baptism, when it may
be had, because the sign should not be denied them to whom the thing
belongs, for to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore we must
suffer little Children to come to Christ; we must become as little children, or
else we cannot enter into Heaven; God is the God of our seed after us; the
promise is made to us, and our children; the precept of baptizing is indefinit,
to al men, under which children are comprehended; children are subject to
original sin, therefore ar capable of the Laver of regeneration; children were
sealed with circumcision, therefore should not be debarred from baptism, which
is come instead of circumcision; without regeneration of water, and of the
spirit, children cannot enter into Heaven; all the Israelites that passed
through the Red Sea, were baptized, amongst which were children; so the
Apostles baptized whole Families, and children are part of the Families;
children also have Faith potentially, and in their faithful Parents: yet God is
not so tied to baptism, as if he could not save without it; the danger lies
not so much in the want as in the contempt of the Sacrament.

11. As every one who has bin baptized is bound in Conscience to perform what
he has promised in baptism, by his Godfathers and Godmothers; so these are
also bound in Conscience to see the performance of those things which were
promised by instructing and exhorting their God-children, if their parents be
dead, or negligent.

12 All we which are baptized, are bound in Conscience to rise and walk in the
newness of life, to mortify and drown the deeds of the flesh, represented to
us by baptism, also to forsake the devil, the world and the flesh, to fight
under Christ's banner, to continue his faithful soldiers to our liv^s end,
according to our promise in baptism; to keep our selves clean, and our
vessels in holiness; for seeing we are washed, how shall we defile our selves?
to maintain love and unity, one with another, being all by one spirit baptized
into one body, to adhere to Christ seeing we have put him on by baptism, to be
conformable to the image of Christ our head, in bearing the cross in our
spiritual death, burial, and resurrection, and to cherish the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, who by the Laver of regeneration is abundantly powered upon us.

13. We are all bound in Conscience to receive the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, as often as we have opportunity, if there be no just impediment to the
contrary; for by so doing, we show our obedience to Christ's command, and give
good example to others; by these means also our Faith is confirmed, Christ's
death is declared, and the benefits represented and sealed by this Sacrament
are received; but, we must be careful first to examine our selves, that we may
come with knowledge, faith, love, and repentance; then with a longing desire to
partake of Christ and his benefits: lastly with thankfulness and a steadfast
resolution to amend our lives.

14 As the Minister is bound in conscience to give, so is the people bound to
receive the cup, as well as the bread in the Sacrament; for the bread alone
does not fully represent unto us Christ's death and passion, neither is bread
alone without drink perfect nourishment; Christ instituted the Sacrament in
both kinds; and its wickedness to alter, or impare the will of the Testator:
the Israelits had not only Manna, but also water out of the rock given them, to
represent Christ; they did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same
spiritual drink; and therefore they participate of both; and if there were
not as great need of the one as of the other, it had been needless that Christ
and Paul should use them, and urge the receiving of them.

15 We are bound in conscience to love one another, as we see the love of God
in this Sacrament represented to us; for this is a love-feast; so are we bound
to be charitable, and bountiful to the poor members of Christ, whose bounty
in giving to us his own body and blood, is represented in this Sacrament; and
lastly, we are bound to offer up our bodies and souls, our wills and
affections, to his service, who offered up his precious body and blood on the
cross for our redemption.

16 We are bound in conscience to fear God both inwardly in our minds; and
outwardly in our bodies, and to serve and worship him alone, because he made
and redeemed both Soul and body, and is the preserver and defender of both;
and none but he; therefore this honor we must not give to Angels, for they are
our fellow servants, nor to the departed Saints, for they know us not; nor to
reliquies and Images, for we must not fall down before them nor worship them;
nor to Kings and Princes, for though a civil respect is due to them, as they
are called Gods, yet they are but flesh, and shall dye like men; nor lastly is
the humanity of Christ, though united to the person of the son of God, to be
worshipped with divine worship, considered by it self; but the whole
Hypostasis, or person of the Son of God, is the object of divine adoration;
therefore to give Dulia to Saints and Images; Hyperdulia to Christ's humanity,
and to his Mother; Latria to the cross, is to commit idolatry.

17 We are bound in Conscience to swear by none but by God only; for swearing
is a part of divine worship, which is not to be given to the creature; besides
to swear by the creature takes away the majesty of an oath, which should not
be taken but with reverence, and fear; lastly such kinds of oaths are
scandulous, and offend the weaker brethren: and so much the rather because, they
were used and commended by heretics, as Austin shows l. 19. cont. Faust. c.
22. where he reproves the Manichees for sweareing by the creatures.

18 A Christian may swear with a safe conscience, when he is required thereto,
by the Magistrate; for in the old and new Testament, we read that Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Paul, and other holy men did swear, yea Christ himself swears,
and so does God swear by himself; and he commands us to swear, Deuteronomy. 6. and
10. Ierem. 4. The Apostle shows how needful an oath is for the ending of any
controversies* Heb. 6. Swearing is a part of Divine worship, Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God etc. and swear by his name. Deuteronomy. 6. which the Gntiles knew,
who in swearing laid their hands upon the Altar; but we must take heed that we
swear not rashly, for that is to take Gods name in vain; nor falsely, for that
is to add a lie to an oath; nor to the prejudice of our neighbor, whither in
his goods, name, body or soul, for this is to break both the Tables at one
time; by dishonoring God in sweareing falsely, we break the first Table; by
wronging our neighbor, we break the second Table.

19 We are bound in Conscience to keep the oath which we have taken, though it
be to our prejudice. Psalm. 15. we have in this the example of that brave Roman
Attilius Regulus, who will rather suffer death and torture by the
Carthaginians, then falsify the oath he made to them* GOD is a special
revenger of perjurie, as we read in the story of Zedichias who falsified his
oath to the King of Babel: and in the story of Johannes Huniades, of the great
overthrow the Christians had for breaking the oath they made with the Turk;
therefore how greivously does the Pope offend, in taking upon him to break the
oath of allegiance, which people owe to their Princes; but we must take heed we
swear not things impossible, or unlawful; for the one cannot, the other must
not be kept.

20 We are bound to keep the Oath which we have made, if the things which we
swear be lawful; though we have sworn by the creatures, or by false Gods; for
he that swears by false Gods thinks them to be true Gods; and the Creature
is instead of God to him that swears by it; therefore Laban that swore by his
false god, was as much bound to keep his oath, as Jacob was who swore by the
true God.

21. The Magistrate cannot with a safe Conscience exact an oath of a profane,
man who makes no conscience of an oath; for so he gives an occasion of
perjury; neither is he to impose oaths about frivolous things, for that is to
take Gods name in vain, neither must he cause any man swear by Angels or the
Saints; for this is to swear by those that are not gods; this is to deifie the
creature, and to give it the knowledge of our secret thoughts and to give it
that justice and power in punishing perjury, which belongs only to God.

22. We are bound in Conscience to break an unlawful oath; for keeping such
an Oath is dishonorable to God, and hurtful to our own souls, and against
the nature of an oath, which was not ordained to be the band of iniquity; such
was the oath of Iepthe, of Herod, of Monks. Iepthe had better broake his oath,
then kill his daughter: so had Herod, then murder the Baptist; so had the
Monks; they were better violate the oath of Coelebate, then commit fornication.

23. We are bound in Conscience to break the oath which is made to the
prejudice of our Neighbor; such is the oath of Monks, prejudicial to Parents
and kindred; such is the oath when we swear never to lend money; for this is
flat against Charity, such was David's oath, 1 Sa. 25. which he broke, knowing
it was better to violate a rash oath, then by keeping of it to murder the
innocent.

24. They are not bound in Conscience to keep the oath which they took, when
they were not in their own power, but under the jurisdiction of an other; such
is the oath Children take either of marriage, or of monastical life, being as
yet under the tuition and power of their parents: such oaths or vows, are to
be broken, we may see in 5. 30. of Numbers; neither does an oath of
impossibilities tie any man to performance.

25 We are bound in Conscience when we swear to speak simply, plainly, and
sincerely, without equivocation, mental or verbal; otherwise by swearing
equivocally, we cannot end controversies, nor confirm and bear witness to
the truth; but we maintain a lie, and by deceiving others we make them assent
to a falshoode; and so we abuse Gods name, in making it a witness to our lie;
besides that by this means any kind of lie may be maintained.

26 If an oath be drawn from us by force or fear, we are bound to keep it, if
it be lawful and in our power, though it be wrongfully extorted from us; as
when we swear to a theife, to pay him the sum he demands, that we may escape
with life and liberty, because by taking God as a witness to our oath, we have
bound our selves to him, which band we must not forfeit, without wrong done to
God.

27 We are bound to keep the oath we make, though we were deceived in the
circumstance; so Joshua kept the oath he made with the Gibeonites, though he
was deceived by them, thinking they had dwelt farther off; many are deceived in
their marriages, thinking they marry rich women, who prove but poor, but the
marriage is good still; for this is only a circumstantiall error; but Jacob was
not bound to perform the oath of marriage with Leah, which was put to him
instead of Rachel; for this was a substantial error.

28 We should wrong our Conscience, if we should urge a man to swear that
which he thinks is true, though we know it to be false; for though he sins not
that swears, yet we sin that urge him to it, because we wrong him in making
him swear, to that which is false, and we wrong God in making him witness to
a falsehood.

29 If we take a second oath contrary to the former, which was a lawful oath,
we are bound to stand to the former: for the second oath is not only in it
self unlawful, but also is made unlawful by the former promise.

30 We are bound to keep our oath, so long as the essential form thereof
remains; but when that fails, we are free; thus we are bound to the oath we
made to our Master, so long as he remains our Master, but when that relation
is broken off, we are no more bound to him by our oath.

31 The Judge cannot with a safe Conscience take an oath of any man to accuse
himself, of any hid crime; which is called the oath (ex officio) because no
man is bound to accuse himself, and such an oath will minister occasion of
much perjurie; besides God only is the judge of secret sins

32 I am bound in Conscience to reveal a theife, though I am tied by oath out
of fear to the contrary; for the concealeing of him is wrong to justice, and
prejudicial to the state, and an occasion that others may lose their lives or
goods; besides in concealing him, I am made partaker of his sin: [qui non
vetat peccare cum possit, jubet.]

33 We are bound to make vows only to God, and having made them, to perform
them; for this is a part of Gods worship; he only knows the heart and purpose
of him that vows, and can punish the violation thereof; the Jews were bound to
vow many ceremonial duties, from which we are exempted; but we are tied to the
vow of moral obedience which we took in baptism, and which we renew as often
as we repent; as for the vows of such bodyly exercise which may help devotion,
we are bound to make them, if we see that our devotion will be helped and
increased by such vows, otherwise we are left to our Christian liberty.

34 We are not bound to vow or to keep the vow (if we have made it) of
voluntary poverty for so we make our selves unable to do good; nor of
monastical obedience for so we infringe our christian liberty, and become the
servants of men, in submitting and binding our Consciences to the ordinances of
man; nor of perpetual chastity, which is not in our power, and by which we
wrong our own nature, by hindering the continuation of the species, which is
effected by propagation.

35 As we are bound to rest upon the Sabbath or Lords day from our bodyly
labor; so we are also bound to do the works of piety, of mercy or charity,
and of necessity upon that day; yea the works of liberty too, as to dress
meat, to make beds, etc. if so be they are not scandalous, nor offensive, nor
hindrances to Gods worship; for the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the
Sabbath; I say such works may be done with a safe Conscience.

36 We are bound in Conscience to hasten our conversion to God, with what
speed we can, because God requires it, and delays are dangerous;
procrastiation argues unwillingnesse, and the custom of sin takes away the
sense of sinning* so the longer we put off our repentance; the more obdurate
we grow in sin, and the greater wrong we offer to God and to our own souls,
in delaying to cast out sin, which is his and our enemy, and the more difficult
we make our conversion, by increasing the number and guilt of our sins; thereby
incensing Gods anger the more against us, which fire we ought to quench without
delay, least it suddenly consume us; our life is uncertain, and we are not
sure to live till we be old: or if we live, we are not sure then of that grace
of repentance, which now we reject; the times and seasons are not in our power;
late repentance is seldom true; let us then strike the iron while it is hot,
and enter into this poole of Bethesda, whilst the waters are stirring.

37 We are bound in Conscience to meditate seriously in the Law of God, that
there as in a glass we may see our own filthynesse, and inabilitie to
goodness, and so we may in all humility fly from our selves, and from all
other creatures in which there is no help, and with true sorrow and fear, may
lay hold on the promises of the Gospel, and hunger earnestly after the
righteousness of CHRIST, by true faith.

38 We are bound to make our election and calling sure, by cleansing our
Consciences from evil works, by settling our affections upon God, by harkening
to his word, by obeying his voice by delighting in the company of the Saints,
by slighting the honors, riches, and pleasures of this world, accounting them
but dung in respect of CHRIST, and by cherishing the holy spirit, by whom we
are sealed unto the day of redemption.

39 We are bound seriously to repent our wicked lives, by considering the
majesty of God whom we have offended, the greatness of his goodness toward
us; the fierceness of his anger against sin, the great happiness we have
lost, and the multitude of miseries befallen to us by reason of sin; by
considering also what Christ has suffered for us; how impenitency is the
greatest of all sins; and how without repentance we cannot attain true
happiness; now this repentance consists in sorrow for sin, in a constant,
fervent, implacable hatred against every sin; and in a serious and assiduous
purpose to avoid all sin, to walk in all righteousness, and to use all the
means whereby we may attain the same.

40. We are bound to cherish the good motions of Gods Spirit in us, and not
by our wicked lives to quench or grieve the Spirit; now the means to cherish
the Spirit, are Prayer, Meditation, Obedience, Faith, Hope, and Love.

41. We are bound to be holy, because we are commanded, because God is holy,
because without holiness no man shall see the Lord; neither can there be true
faith nor justification without it; holiness was a part of Gods Image, which
we lost; it is also the end of our Election, and calling; and it is a part of
our future happiness, now this holiness consists in our walking with God,
in our wrestling against the flesh, in running the ways of Gods Commandments;
in avoiding sin and the occasions of sin, and in a perfect Reformation of all
our powers and faculties of our soul.

42. We are bound to trust and rely on Gods promises; for hope is our Anchor;
it is hope that supports us in all our actions and sufferings, and makes us go
on with courage, and constancy; it is the end of our calling; it is hope that
saves us, and it will not make us ashamed, because it cannot be frustrated; it
brings also patience, and true spiritual joy.

43. We are bound in all afflictions, to comfort our selves and to be
cheerful; because we have God who afflicts us, for our Father, Christ for our
Advocate and Redeemer, the Holy Ghost for our guide and comforter, the
Scriptures for our instructers; besides, Gods love toward us, and his decrees
are unchangable; our afflictions are short, our reward is Eternal; no thing
befalls us without Gods providence; God will give us strength with the
temptation: Christ has suffered and overcome all for us; nothing does befall
us, but what has befallen others; and let us consider the fruit or end of
affliction which is sweet and comfortable.

44. When we are tempted to evil, we are bound to avoid all occasions of
entertaining such a temptation, to resist it as an enemy, to extinguish the
first sparkles of this fire; to betake our selves to prayer and meditation, and
to kill this Cockatrice in the Egg; and to put on the whole Armor of God
against it, and not to give way to this enemy; for it is the chief part of our
spiritual warfare, to fight against temptations.

45. In our spiritual desertions, we are bound to comfort our selves with the
remembrance of Gods love and promises, who will never utterly forsake us, but
only for a time, even for a moment will hide his face from us, because we
have angered him; and this is for our good, that we may the more earnestly
seek him, that our faith, patience, constancy, and other virtues may be the
more exercised, and that we may the more abhor our sins: and withal we
should call to mind, how that the best of Gods Saints, even Christ Himself,
have for a time been deserted.

46. Against the fear of death we are bound to comfort our selves, that
Christ has taken away the sting of death, that neither death nor life can
separate us from the love of God in Christ; that death is a gate to future
happiness, that the death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord,
that death frees us from sin, from temptations, from the inticements of the
flesh and of the world, from all the miseries of this life, and the vanities of
the world, that Christ will raise us again in the last day, by the virtue of
his Resurrection; let us therefore in consideration of this, keep a good
Conscience, wait with patience our appointed time till our change come; let us
therefore strive to the newness of life, and to the contempt of the world.

47 We are bound to comfort our selves in our infirmities, in that we have a
high Priest who is sensible of our infirmities; in that we have a Father, who
will take pity of our infirmities; in that we have the holy Spirit who
helps our infirmities; in that the best of Gods servants have been subject to
diverse infirmities.

48. We are bound to obey Gods commands, because we are tied to him in many
Obligations, he is our Father, our Lord, Redeemer, and preserver; because of
his supreme authority, and absolute power he has to punish the disobedient;
because he promises many blessings to those who obey his will; because God
reapes no benefit by our Obedience, but we our selves; because we have the
example of Christ Himself, who was in all things obedient to his Father, even
to the death of the Cross.

49. We are bound to carry our selves humbly and lowly, considering the
vileness of our nature, the greatness and Majesty of God, the benefits which
we receive by humility; for it is the way to glory, it makes us capable of
Grace, of VVisdome, and other virtues; by it we are fitted as houses for God
to dwell in, for God to look upon, for God to exalt out of the mire, and to
set us with Princes; and it is a powerful means to avert his anger and
judgments.

50. We are bound to labor for the true knowledge of God in Christ, without
which we cannot have life Eternal, without which the people perish, without
which all our knowledge is but ignorance, our wisdom but foolishness, and our
light but darkness; this key of knowledge will open Heaven gates to us; this
is that knowledge which will truly open our eyes, that we may see, and be like
unto God; it is the true food of the soul, without which we shall never grow
fat and well likeing in heavenly things.

51 We must conscionably labor for sincerity in all our actions, because God
hates hypocrisy, and delights in sincerity and in the inward man; for he
knows the heart, and searches the reins; because there can be no peace and
security, but in sincerity, which consists not so much in outward ceremony, as
in inward truth and integrity, not so much in service of the eye, as of the
heart; looking rather to Gods approbation then man's; performing not only the
greatest but the the least duties, looking not for reward from men, but from
God, serving him as well in private as in public, as well in adversity as in
prospiritie, as well when he punishes as when he rewards; abstaining not
only from evil, but from all appearance of evil; and that not only in the
light, but in the darkness also.

52 We are bound in Conscience to speak the truth every man to his neighbor;
for God is truth it self; and the Devil is the father of lies; which are an
abomination to God; a lie is a part of the old man, which we should put off,
and mortify; a lie is so hateful to man that stands upon point of honor, that
it cannot be expiated without a stab; lying takes all credit away from the
liar, that he is not believed when he speaks truth; it breaks off all
societe, and communion between man and man, which is grounded on truth; a liar
is injurious to God the author of truth; to his neighbor to whom he ought to
speak truth; and to his speech which ought to be consonant to his mind.

53 We are not bound at all times to speak all the truth, or any part thereof,
when neither justice, Charity, nor Piety, do require it; yet we must beware of
Jesuitical equivocation, or mental reservation, which is indeed plain lying;
they utter that which is false, and this is a material lie; and that which
they knew to be false, and this is a formal lie.

54 When we are commanded by our superior or Judge to confess the truth; we
are bound in Conscience to do it; for otherwise we fall into the sin of
disobedience; and by our silence, we wrong both God, the Judge, our selves, and
our neighbor, and the State wherein we live; for God is honored by our
confession, and dishonored by our silence; by our confession, also sin shall
be restrained, justice advanced, and the delinquent either totally cut off, or
amended.

55 The Judge is bound in Conscience to make diligent inquiry before he
pronounce the sentence, to judge righteously, to bewarre of partiality, and
acception of persons, to beware of delays, and demurrs, by which justice may
be put off, and to beware of corruption and bribery, whereby justice is
perverted; to inform the witnesses of their duty, that they must bewarre of
lying, malice, calumny, that they must discharge their Conscience by speaking
the truth, that so GOD may be honored, the party accused may be either clear
or condemned, the Law executed, and so justice and peace maintained; which
cannot be better performed, then by punishing him who out of purpose and malice
bears false witness, according to the Law of retaliation.

56 We are all bound to be zealous of Gods glory, and of good works; for
without true zeal God cannot be honored, nor sin suppressed, nor Gods
judgments averted, nor our true love to God witnessed; nor true comfort of
Conscience, or life eternal obtained; but let our zeal be according to
knowledge out of true indignation against sin, and true love to Gods glory,
with true sorrow for dishonoring God; let it also be joined with constancy,
fervency in Gods cause, and mildness in our own, as we see in Moses and Christ.

57 In what condition soever we are, we ought to be content; if we consider
Gods providence, in ordering all things according to his pleasure; if the
shortness of this life, if the estate of the richest and greatest men, how
little satisfaction or comfort they reap even out of their greatest plenty; if
the fulness of content and happiness reserved for us in heaven; if the true
tranquillity of mind which we receive by our contentation, and lastly if we
consider the miserable condition, tentations, unquietness, and anxieties, of
those that want this gift of contentation.

58 We are bound to exercise our selves in doing good, because we are
commanded, because good works are the way to heaven, in which we must walk;
they are testimonies of our faith and profession; the fruits of every good
tree; the means whereby our heavenly father is glorified; by them we are made
conformable to CHRIST our head, who went about doing good; they are the end of
our election and calling; and this exercise must be constant, fervent, sincere,
and with delight and readiness, with a true hatred of sin, with prayer and
meditation; yet we must not confide in our works, but lay hold on CHRIST'S
merits by faith, acknowledging our own imperfection and inabilitie.

59 We are bound to search for that true wisdom, which consists in seeking
out and useing the means, of advanceing Gods glory and our own salvation, and
in avoiding all hindrances thereof; especially the wisdom of this world which
is an enemy to God, and by him accounted foolishness; because it will not be
subject to the wisdom of God, nor does it comprehend the things of Gods spirit.

60 We are bound to be vigilant over our selves; for we have watchful
enemies, and we are in danger every hour to be devoured by them; the time,
place, and manner of our death is uncertain; we know not at what hour our
Master will return, or our Bridegroom will come, the eye of the Almighty
which runs through all the world, and is still observing all our actions,
neither slumbers nor sleeps; and that we may be the more watchful, let us
take heed least at any time we be overcome with surfeiting and drunknesse, let
us be sober and watch unto prayer.

61 We may with a safe Conscience make use of worldly policy, as Joshua,
Gideon, David, Paul, and other holy men have done; if so be that this policiy
is not beyond or against our private calling; nor repugnant to justice, nor
injurious to religion, nor opposite to Gods glory.

62 We are bound to forgive the wrongs done unto us, for so Christ has taught
us, both by his example and precept; the Lords Prayer teaches the same God is
ready at all times to forgive us; it is the glory of a man to pass by an
injury; revenge belongs to God, and he will repay; therefore we must remit
both the revenge and the punishment; yet we may take notice of the wrong and
require satisfaction, without the breach of Christian clemency.

63 We may with a safe Conscience right our selves by Law when we are wronged,
as Paul when he appealed to Caesar's Tribunal; for the Law is Gods ordinance,
and Judges are his Ministers to end controversies; but we must take heed of
anger and malice in our law suits, and that we go not to Law upon every light
occasion, or for every trifle rashly; but to use all means of reconciliation
rather then law, and to bear as much as we can with patience, showing our
Christian moderation, and acknowledging Gods providence in this our tr^all, and
with all our love to our adversaries.

64 We may with a safe Conscience kill another to save our selves, if so be we
are injuriously and suddenly set upon, and have no other means of escape; nor
any intent of revenge; for to defend our selves, and to preserve our lives,
though by the death of another, we may by the law of nature, [vim vi repellere
licet] and likewayes by the Law of God Exodus 22. 2. so we may defend our
innocent brother, by killing the theife that invades him; for we must love our
neighbor as our self; and a woman may thus defend her chastity, by killing
him that would ravish her; for chastity is no less precious then life it
self; Abraham sinned not when he rescued his kinsman Lot, with the slaughter
of many men; nor had Lucretia sinned, had she killed Tarquinius.

65 Though we must not upon any pretense kill our selves, because such a
murder is contrary to Gods Law, the law of nature, Justice, and Charity; yet
we may with a safe Conscience suffer our selves to be killed, for a public
good, for the maintenance of innocence, justice, and religion, for the
advanceing of Gods glory.

66 One nation may lawfully make war against another, because they may lawfully
repel force, by force, because God commanded it; neither the Baptist, nor
Christ do absolutely forbid it; the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain;
and national injuries can not be otherwise many times repelled, or
vindicated, but by wars; but care must be had, that all means be first used,
before war be undertaken, that the authority of the undertakers be lawful,
that the cause be just, the means, and ways be honest, or honorable, and that
the end be good, to wit Gods glory, and future tranquillity, and that the
innocent be not oppressed with the guilty; as it is in storming and direption
of Towns, Castles, and Ships; except it be upon unavoydable necessity.

67 Inferior Soldiers whither they be subjects of, or strangers to the Prince
that imploys them, ought to be sure of the justice of the cause, before they
fight; otherwise they fight against their Conscience if they know the cause to
be evil; and if they doubt, they ^^^ht without faith, which is sin; for though
they are bound to obey, yet they are not bound to a blind, or to an
unconscionable obedience.

68 We are bound with a Christian courage and fortitude, to undergo all
hazards and difficulties for CHRIST, because he has suffered so much for us,
and has redeemed us, because this is the end of our election and calling,
because God has promised to be with us in all our extremities, because we
shall be more then Conquerers, through him that loved us; and we know that all
things shall work together for the good of them that love GOD, and that great
is our reward in Heaven, even the Crown of righteousness which is laid up for
us: this courage will not fail us, if we call upon God, if we love him, and if
we put our trust in Him.

69 We are bound to labor for patience, in beareing of crosses, and in waiting
for releife; fot without patience, we cannot possess our souls, nor without
patience can we run the race set before us; therefore we have great need of
patience, that after we have done the good will of God, we may receive the
promise; thus the Apostle labored to approve himself in much patience, in
afflictions etc.

70 We are bound to be sober and temperate, moderating our affections
concerning profit and delight, by making a covenant with our eyes, ears, and
mouth, by considering the vanities, and instabilitie of sublunary things, and
the latter end of unlawful pleasures, and how all wise and good men have
despised them; and that there is only content, satisfaction, and delight in
heavenly things.

71 We are bound to avoid intoxicating our selves, or others with strong or
excessive drinking, and likewise the company of drunkards, and the occasions of
drinking, by which our reason, judgment, and memory are either weakened, or
overthrown, our health and wealth impared, our time misspent, our fame and good
name wounded, good men greived, GOD himself angered, the practice of holy
duties hindered, and our hearts in this finne harnded; besides drunknesse is the
occasion that many other sins are committed.

72 The civil Magistrate is bound to punish heretics, not as they differ in
opinion from the Church, but as they are peevishly obstinate, and disturbers of
the public peace; and if their heretical opinions be blasphemous, he should
put them to death, if they obstinately persist in their blasphemy; for the
Magistrate bears not the sword in vain; yet he must not use violence or
force to compel men to embrace the truth; for compelled faith will never prove
sincere, but hypocritical; and the act of faith is voluntary, and therefore
free.

73 We are bound with all humility to submit our selves to Gods correcting
hand, without grudging or murmuring; or shrinking from our duty and obedience,
or flying to unlawful means of ease, or dispairing; because GOD who corrects
is our father, who will lay no more on us then we can bear, who will not
forsakeus in our extremities, but will go with us through fire and water;
because the time of our afflictions is short, and they not worthy of the glory
to be revealed, because our sins have deserved more grievous punishments then
we can suffer here; and because CHRIST our head endured the cross, despised
the shame, and by patient suffering of afflictions has entered into his glory.

74 We are bound to love God, not so much for his bounty toward us, as for his
own goodness and transcendent perfection; for to love God because of his bounty
to us, is to love our selves before him, whereas our love to him, should be
like his love to us; his own goodness induced him to love us, in whom he found
no goodness at all; so that same divine goodness should induce us, to love
him, who is goodness it self; besides, the love of freindship is more perfect
then the love of benevolence; for the love of true freindship is grounded upon
virtue and goodness, whereas the love of benevolence, is grounded on bounty or
beneficence.

75 We are bound to love God above all things; that is, we must be willing to
forsake the things we affect most, that we may injoye him, we must shun all
such means as may induce us to anger him; nothing must greive us so much as
when we offend him; nothing, neither prosperity nor adversity, must separate us
from him; no company must so much please us, as the society of them that belong
to him; nothing must content us until we be fully united to him.

76 We are bound to subdue and keep under our proud affections, to which
naturally we are all prone; by considering the greatness of God, the vileness
of our own nature, the wrath of God against pride, both in the Angels and in
men, and the many obligations in which we are bound to subject our selves to
God, who has made and redeemed us, and does still sustain and protect us, and
at last will crown and reward us.

77 We are bound to pray at all times in respect of preparation, and
disposition to prayer; so we are bound to pray actually upon all occasions,
because Satan upon all occasions is ready to tempt us; our dangers are many,
our wants are great; prayer is a part of that service we must perform to God,
it is the means by which we converse and confer with God; therefore we ought
to take all opportunities of prayer, as Christ and all holy men were wont to
do; and withal we are bound to pray fervently, having our minds bent on God,
to whom we pray; on the matter for which we pray; and on our own hearts, that
we may know with what disposition and affection we pray.

78 We are bound to avoid all conversation with evil spirits, or such as
commerce with them, as also to reject all such means as they work by, which
means have no power or efficacy at all, either from God or nature, men or
Angels, to produce the effects they seem to produce; but are the tricks of
Satan, to delude and seduce men; therefore Witches, Inchanters, Southsayers,
and such as consult with them, and use their help, do plainly forsake God, and
mancipat themselves to Satan, Gods enemy, by which they show that they have
renounced the faith, and mistrust the power, goodness, and justice of God;
therefore judicial Astrologers, Fortune Tellers, Necromancers, and such as
trust to Physiagnomie, Palmestry, Dreams, and superstitiously are perplexed
with the crossing of a heart, the falling of salt, with such as they call
unluckie days, with characters and charms, and such like, are not to be
suffered among Christians*

79 We are bound to confess our sins to God in prayer, either explicitly, or
implicitly, because in prayer we must acknowledge our own unworthiness, in all
submission and humility, without which we cannot obtain any blessing from God,
nor can our Consciences be eased; nor God glorified, nor Satan confounded; for
if we accuse not our selves, he will accuse us; let us then prevent him, by a
detestation of our sins; but we are not bound to confess every particular
sin to the priest.

80 We may safely use divisory lotteries, for deciding and determining of some
things, if so be we are necessitated, and have no other means, to determine a
doubtful thing, if we dishonor not Gods providence, by ascribing any thing to
fortune, if we use no deceit or fraud, nor have any bad or sinistrous
intentions; but these lotteries, which they call divinatory, and consultory,
are not lawful, for we have no warrant for such, and they are a tempting of
God, and little better are the gameing lotteries with cards and dice, by which
Gods providence is dishonored, time lost, quarrels are raised, and often times
swearings and blasphemies uttered, besides cheating is countenanced, and many
men's estates wronged.

81 If we have not the gift of continency, we are bound to marry; for its
better to marry then to burn; by this means we avoid fornication, we live
more comfortably together then alone, our family is propagated, the state is
strengthened, and the Church enlarged; therefore marriage has been still
honorable among all nations; God ordained it in Paradise, Christ honored it
with his own presence, and first miracle, in Cana; but we must not marry within
the prohibited degrees of consanguinitie, or affinity, because it is against
modesty, against the enlarging of freindship, and the end of matrimony, which
is, to make two one flesh, which is already effected in consanguinitie.

82 We cannot with a safe conscience marry a woman without her own consent and
the consent of her parents; for this is a duty that children owe to their
parents; and has been the practice of holy men; and this consent must be free
and voluntary, not forced; and the parties consenting must be of age, and such
as are guided by reason, and have power to dispose of themselves.

83 We cannot with a safe Conscience have above one wife at once; for God gave
A dam but one Evah; the husband will love one wife better then two; for love
divided is weaker, then united; the children will be more carefully educated;
we read of two, that by marriage are made one flesh, not of three; we see
diverse creatures are by nature taught to content themselves with single mates;
Polygamie is often times the cause of jarres in families, and therefore cannot
be lawful, but where there is an immediate dispensation from God, as is
supposed was among the Patriarchs, before the flood, and sometime after.

84 The husband and wife are bound to love and respect each other, and to dwell
together, to have all things in common; to profess the same truth, and to
communicate to each other the use of their bodies, according to the law of
marriage; the man is to cherish and maintain, to instruct and guide his wife;
and she is to honor, fear, and obey her husband; she must temper her tongue,
and he must keep in his hands; he may reprove, admonish and instruct, but not
strike, which causes hatred and strife, and shows want of true love; she may
not give away his goods, without his consent, neither must they live apart
except upon urgent occasions.

85 A man cannot with a safe Conscience put away his wife, except it be for
adultery, for that unties the band of matrimony; yet this band may be tied
again, upon the desire and consent of the innocent party, in whose favor the
divorce was made.

86 We are bound to abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the Soul;
which destroy the body, which dishonor GOD, which wrong mankind, and are the
causes of many other sins; therefore we must make a covenant with our eyes, not
to look upon wanton or immodest objects whither in apparel, pictures, books,
or lascivious gestures, we must make a covenant with our ears, not to hear,
immodest words or songs, we must covenant with our tongues, to speak only
such words as edify, and not by them utter what is not lawful to be done;
for immodest actions are concealed, so should immodest speeches be, by which
God is dishonored, the soul of the speaker and so likewise of the hearer is
endangered, and good men are grieved, and we should make a covenant with our
hearts not to entertain lascivious thoughts with delight, but to reject them
with detestation; otherwise cogitation will breed delight, delight consent,
consent action, and actions a habit.

Lastly, we must take heed of lascivious kissing, embracing, touching of
Women, and immodest dances; and of luxurious and unchaste speeches, gestures, or
any other such like expressions in stage plays, which have made both the
Actors, and the sports, and the recreation it self hateful, tho otherwise
tolerable.

87. We are bound in Conscience to separate our selves from that Church where
Gods name is dishonored, Idolatry practiced, and wickedness countenanced,
least we partake of her sins, and so of her punishment; but we are not
therefore bound to separate our selves from all Congregations, where some bad
men are suffered; for in this life is no perfection, and the Sheep here are
mingled with Goats; in the same net are good and bad fishes; in the same field
Corn and tares, which must not be suddenly plucked up; we must exercise our
patience in enduring such churches infimities and endeavor to amend them, and
not by our departure increase them, or exasperate our weak brethren and give
occasion of schism.

88. Ministers are bound to preach and catechize their flocks, sincerely,
purely, constantly, boldly, powerfully; to administer the Sacraments without
superstition; to resist schism and heresy, beat down sin and iniquity; to
suspend from the Sacrament, and to excommunicate in cases of extremity, which
censure is indeed the act of the whole Church, whereof the Minister is the
mouth; but one Church is not to excommunicate an other, not being subordinate,
although upon just cause there may be separation or desertion; but although
the Church may refuse to cast pearls before swine, or give that which is holy
to dogs, and is bound to purge out the old Leaven; yet she cannot debar men
from hearing the Word, unless they be obstinate dispisers and scoffers of it,
nor can she keep them out of Heaven, except they be impenitent; nor can she
break off the Oeconomicall communion that is between husband and wives,
Parents and Children, Masters and servants, nor yet the Political society,
that is between Magistrates and Subjects.

89. Every Minister is bound to have learning, integrity of life, dexterity of
preaching, and a will bent to do God service, and to edify the Church, and
not to respect his own honor, wealth or profit, or to intrude himself into
that sacred function, without both inward and outward calling, as many do, who
by friends, Simonie, or any other sinistrous way creep in at the window, but
enter not in at the door; neither must they forsake the charge once undertaken,
except they be forced or necessitated.

90 We are bound to make restitution of our neighbors goods whither we detain
them by loan, fraud, or theft; for it is a theft to detain the owners goods to
which we have no interest, against his will; and it is both a violation of
justice, and also of that love we owe to our neighbor; which restitution must
be made, either really (if we are able) or else mentally, and in our
resolution, if we cannot; we must also restore to the right owner if he can be
found, or else to him that is next a kin; if there be none, then dedicate it to
God, in some pious or charitable use; and we must restore the very thing it
self if we can, or else the full value of it; so we are bound to restore his
good name, which we have hurt, either by recantation, or accusation of our
selves, or compensation for the wrong he has sustained; or if we have hurt him
in his body, we are to make such satisfaction as the Law requires; or if we
have hurt a woman, in the loss of her chastity, we must make restitution by
marriage, or by paying her portion.

91 We are bound in Conscience to reprove sin in whom soever we find it, for
it is an argument of love, and no less needful then alms to him that is in
want; if it be mercy to pull our neighbors beast out of the mire, much more to
pull himself out of the pit of sin, where his soul will perish; but our
reproof must be grounded on Gods word, must be sweetened with mildness and
discretion, and uttered in love, opportunity of time, place, and other
circumstances must be observed; our superiors must be reproved with reverence,
our equals and inferiors with love, and benevolence; and because charity begins
at home, we ought first to reprove our selves for that sin, which we reprove
in others, and not to take more notice of our neighbors moates, then of our
own beams.

92 We are bound to hearken to reproof, accounting the wounds of a friend,
better then the kisses of an enemy; and to receive reproves with all humility,
love and patience; and to resolve to make use of such physic, though
unpleasant; sor it is no less wholesome for the Soul, both to cure, and prevent
spiritual diseases, then Aloes, though bitter, yet fit to purge us of our
bodily humors.

93 We are bound to love our neighbor as our selves, by wishing, and doing the
same good for him that we wish and do for our selves, and with the same mind
and sincerity, not wishing him any hurt, except it be for his further good, and
for Gods glory; so we may wish the loss of his goods, for the gain of his
soul; and the death of a tyrant for the safety of the state, nay we may safely
venture the loss of our own bodies, for the saving of our neighbors souls;
and we are to pray for him, as for ourselves; even for our enemies, by this,
sheweing we have committed our cause to God, and that we desire not revenge,
and in this we immitate our heavenly father, who causes his sun to shine
upon the good and bad; and his rain to fall upon the just and unjust; and who
has been pleased to reconcile himself to us his enemies.

94 We are bound by a holy life to show good example to others; for the
employment of our talent is required; God by this is gloryfied, others by our
example in goodness encouraged; otherwise good men by us will be offended,
and by our scandalous life the Gospel will be hindered, and the Church of God
reproached, and profane men in their wicked ways animated and hardened.

95 We are bound to avoid and prevent rents or schisms in the Church; for they
often times make way for heresies, they overthrow the life of the Church which
consists in unity, they hinder the edification of the Church and the growth of
christianity, they also destroy love and charity; and as we are bound to avoid
schism, so must we shun the company of schismatics, least we seem to
countenance their schism, and that we may not be infected therewith, or give
occasion to others to follow our example; yet he is no schismatic, that
separates himself from that Church which persecutes him for the truth; or with
which he can hold no communion without manifest danger of sin and seduction.

96 We are all bound to be tender of our fame and good name, chiefly
Magistrates and Ministers; otherwise God will be dishonored, the Church
hindered, the Gospel and justice scandaled; but if our fame be without cause
wounded, we must with patience bear it, being a part of our cross, which
Christ and his best servants have with patience endured.

97 We are bound to speak and think well of all men, whilst we have no
reason to the contrary, and not to judge, censure, or condemn any man rashly,
which argues in us, either inadvertency, to timerite, levitie, or malice; it is
a sin repugnant both to charity and justice; for every man has as great
right to his good name, as to his goods; we wrong a man more by taking his good
name away, then by stealing his goods; for in this we make him to be pitied,
but in the other to be despised and hated; we also wrong God by usurping his
office, for he is the only Judge of secreets.

98 We are bound to conceal the secret infirmities of our neighbor, least by
divulging them we wrong his reputation; except it be when we have no other way
to reclaim him; or when we see that the concealing of his sin, may prove
dangerous to others; then a public good is to be preferred to a private.

99 We are bound to employ the talent which our Lord has given us, and not to
hide it in a Napkin; we must impart our gifts of knowledge, wisdom, wealth
and such, like unto others; for we are not Lords, but stewards of them; and
the more eminent we are, the more careful should we be, in the carriage of our
selves, least we spoil others by our bad example. If much be given us, much
will be required of us; and inferior men are apt to be drawn by the example
of their superiors: whereas indeed they are bound to respect and honor them as
their superiors, but not to follow them, if they be bad Christians.

100. Magistrates are bound to maintain their people in peace, to defend them
from oppression, to advance Religion, and learning arts and industry; to
reward the good and punish the evil doers; for he is the Minister of God for
our weal, so the people are bound to submit themselves to their Governors, to
honor them, and maintain their charge; to be obedient to their commands, and
thankful for the good they receive from them.

101. Masters are bound to feed and cloth their servants, to pay them their
wages, to use them with gentleness, to instruct them in the ways of
godliness; to help them in their sickness, and to use them according to their
deservings to punish them for their stubbornness; so servants are bound to
love, fear, and obey their masters, to be humble and faithful, even to
untoward Masters, expecting their reward from God.

102. Parents are bound to love, feed, cloth, and instruct their Children; to
correct them to season them with the fear of God, to provide maintenance, and
fit matches for them; so Children are bound to love, fear, and honor their
Parents, to be subject and obedient to them, to bear with their infirmities,
to cover their nakedness, and with thankfulness to repay their love,
charges, and tender affection over them.

103 As Ministers are bound to love, teach, and to edify by their good example
the people, to watch over them, to exhort, instruct, and rebuke them, and to
pray for them; so the people are bound to love, reverence, to obey, and to
maintain their Ministers, and to have them in more then abundant honor for
their works sake.

104 All men that make bargains, are bound to stand to them; if they be not
under years or tuition, or mad, if they be not cheated and deluded besides
their meaning, and intention, if they be not forced to the bargain by fear or
violence; if the thing for which they bargain be impossible, unusefull, or
unlawful, that is either sinful, or sacred, (this is called Simony) in such
cases no man is bound to perform these bargains.

105 We may with a safe Conscience let out money upon use; seeing our money would
bring in gain, if any otherwise employed; seeing there can be no tradeing,
without lending and borrowing; seeing it was lawful for the Jews to to take
use of strangers; CHRIST borrowes a similitude from the Vserers without
reproving them, which he would not have done, had usury in it self been
unlawful; neither do the Scriptures condemn any usury, but such as is
against charity, and such as is exacted of the poor, and which tends to the
detriment of the borrower, this is called biting usury in Scripture.

106 Every man to whom God has given strength, and means, is bound to
profess some calling, whereby he may honor God, benefit the commonwealth,
injoye the peace of his own Conscience, and provide for his family, and not to
be burdensome to others, as sturdy beggars are who will not work, but by
begging wrong those that are truly poor; giving themselves to idleness, the
mother of mischeife, and practicing nothing but profanesse; whereas the Apostle
will not have them to eat who will not work, and God has enjoined labor to
man as a part of his punishment; nay Adam had not been idle in Paradise.

107 Rich men are bound to imploye their wealth to Gods glory, to the good of
the Church and state, to the releife of the poor, to the help of their
families, and not to waste them too lavishly, and vainly, nor to hoord them up
too miserably, as many do.

108 Every man is bound according to his ability, to be bountyfull to those
that are in want and misery; for so God is gloryfied, our charity is declared
toward our neighbor, and our love toward God, and so is our thankfulness;
for what have we which we have not received? but we must take heed of pride,
and contempt of the poor, and repining; God loves an humble and a cheerful
giver; humility, piety, and charity, readynesse, cheerfulness and prudence
must accompany our bounty, which shall not go unrewarded.

109. We are bound to avoid all coveteousnesse, whether it consists in
desiring, in acquiring, or in retaining of our wealth inordinately: For this
sin is the root of all evil, it argues mistrust of GODS goodness and
providence; it wounds the heart with many thorny cares, and makes it commit
Idolatry with the world; which sin we might easily subdue, if we would with
David pray heartily against it, if we would seriously meditate upon the vanity
of riches, and their uncertainty, and the shortness of our life, and the
Fatherly care or providence of God toward us, and the hidden riches of grace,
and the permanent riches of glory treasured up in Heaven for us; these
considerations would keep us from immoderate desire of wealth, or unlawful
ways of attaining it, or setting our affections with Ahab upon Naboths
Vineyard; or enslaving our selves to that which should be our servant, or
abusing our wealth to Gods dishonor, our own and our Neighbors hurt.

110. We are bound to abstain from those meats which the Magistrate forbids;
because otherwise we shall seem to despise authority; and we shall scandal
our weak brethren; yet in case of necessity we may eat of prohibited meats,
as David did of the Shewbread; but we must be careful that what we eat
be our own, not stolen or got by Oppression, cheating, or any other wrongful
way; that we eat moderatly, and to Gods glory, and for the satisfying of
Nature, and strengthening of our bodies, and at seasonable times, and to
remember the poor, and to use prayer and praises.

111. We may with a safe Conscience wear rich apparel, if our calling and
dignity require it, and if our estates will bear it, and if the Laws and
customs of the place where we live will permit it; but we must take heed of
pride and vanity; our clothes must be decent and comely; in wearing of which
let us be humble for Adams sin, which brought shame on him, and his
posterity, which we must cover that our filthy nakedness may not appear, and
let us be careful to cast off the old man of ^in, and put on the Lord Jesus
that being clothed in the rich robes of innocence, and righteousness of our
Elder brother, we may obtain a blessing from our heavenly Father.

112. We cannot with a safe Conscience use such recreations as tend to Gods
dishonor, the prejudice of our Neighbor, or the scandal of weak Christians,
and even in lawful recreations; we must observe time, place, and moderation,
not to set our affections too much on them, nor to lose too much of our
precious time which we ought to redeem; nor to neglect our callings, nor to
forget the afflictions of Joseph; nor of the account we must give of our
Talent; nor refused to consider the work of the Lord.

113 We are bound to stop our ears against detractors or slanderers of our
Neighbors good name; whither they slander him by belying him, or by
aggravating his offense, or by concealing his good parts, and blasing abroad
his infirmities, or by sinistrously censuring his intentions; which sin is
repugnant to Charity and, is the daughter of envy; if it were not for
receivers, there would be no thieves, and if it were not for hearers, there
would be no slanderers; for as the slanderer has the devil in his mouth, so
the listner has him in his ear.

114. We are bound to avoid sin, and all occasions of sin, because sin
excludes us from the Kingdom of God; by sin we grieve the Holy Ghost, by
whom we are sealed unto the day of Redemption; by sin we offend God, who
wills not iniquity, neither shall any evil dwell with him; by sin the name
of God is dishonored, and evil reported amongst the Gentiles; by sin we are
made slaves to Satan, and captives to his will, by sin we are made subject
to the curse of God, and to al his plagues public and private, temporal and
eternal, corporal and spiritual: by sin the Gospel is dishonored, our
faith weakened, our conscience wronged and al goodness in us destroyed

115. We are bound in things indifferent to keep our Christian liberty, and not
to make our selves the servants of men; but let us take heed we do nothing
doubtfully and without faith; for though nothing in it self be unclean, yet
to him that thinks it to be unclean, it is unclean; and we must be careful
in things indifferent, not to offend our weak brethren; for though the Apostle
had liberty to eat of any thing that was sold in the Market, yet rather then
he should offend him by his eating, for whom Christ dyed, he would not eat
flesh for ever; but withal we are not bound to abridge our selves of our
liberty, to please the obstinate; for Paul that circumcised Timothy, that he
might not offend the weak Jews, would not circumcise Titus, to please the
obstinate Jews.

116 We are bound in Conscience to go on cheerfully in the service of God,
and performing of our Christian duty, although men should be offended, and
scandalized thereby; for this is a scandale received, not given; and it is
better to obey God then man; Christ himself was a scandal to the Jews, he was
a stumbling stone, and the rock of offense to the house of Israel; Christ's
sermon concerning the eating of his flesh, was an offense to the Capernaits;
the Jews were offended, because Peter preached to the Gentiles; but Blessed are
they says CHRIST, who are not offended in me: for God is pleased to permit
such offenses, because of men's blindness, pride, malice, and contempt of his
word and Ministers.

117 We are bound to receive the moral Law, and to square our actions by it;
for though the just man has no Law to compel and condemn him, yet he has a
Law to direct and instruct him; therefore the law is a schoolmaster to bring
us to CHRIST; a lantern to direct our feet, a looking-glass to let us see
our filthiness, and a rule whereby we must square all our words and actions;
by the threatening of the law, out of Nathans mouth, David was brought to
acknowledge his sin; and by Peter's preaching of the Law, the Jews were
brought to compunction, and repentance; therefore by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin; and the Law works wrath, and is the Ministry of death;
because it lets us see our sins, it denounces Gods wrath against sins; and
it lets us know that we deserve death for sins.

118 We are bound through the whole course of our life to lay hold on the
means of Gods providence, and not to neglect them, relying upon his
extraordinary and miraculous works; for he has decreed the means as well as
the end, meat as well as life, physic as well as health; he is absolute Lord
of his creatures; who uses them as the means of his glory, and of our
comfort; wherein we may see the love and goodness of God toward us, making
all things work together for our weal; therefore we are bound to acknowledge
in this, his wisdom, goodness and power, and to put our trust in him as in
our Father, to fear and reverence him who can command all the creatures to be
for us, or against us; to be as constant in serving him, as he is in protecting
us; in adversity to put our trust in him, in prosperity to praise him.

119 The Ministers of the Gospel may with a safe Conscience marry; for we read
of Priests, Prophets, Apostls, Evangelists and Bishops in the primitive Church
were married; a Bishop must be the husband of one wife; marriage is honorable
among al men; the Levits of old were permitted to marry; it is a note of
Antichrist, and the doctrine of devils to forbid marriage. GOD has made
Ministers as fit for marriage as other men; and it is better to marry then to
burn, or to commit fornication, adultery, incest and Sodomy.

120 Kings and Magistrates are bound to have a care of religion; for they are
keepers of both Tables; they are called nursing Fathers of the Church, they are
the Ministers and officers of God for this purpose; they are commanded to kiss
the son, and to serve the Lord in fear: so David had care to transport the
Ark to Jerusalem, Solomon to build the temple, Josiah to overthrow the
idolatrous Altars, Groves and high places; Ezechiah to take down the brazen
serpent, to purg the Temple, and to reform the Priests; so Moses was chiefly
careful in the constituting and ordaining, of Priests, Levits, and the
Tabernacle with its utensills, and in destroying of the golden Calfe.

121 A Christian may with a safe Conscience be a Magistrate, for GOD himself is
the author and constitutor of Magistrates; every power is of God, the powers
that be, are ordained by God; by me says Wisdom Kings reign; it is God says
Daniell, that sets up Kings, and translates kingdoms; Christ commands us to
give unto Caesar what is Caesar's; therefore Kings are called Gods servants and
officers; Abraham prayed for King Abimilech, Jacob blessed King Pharaoh;
Jeremiah will have the Jews pray for the King of Babylon, and the Apostles
will have us put up our prayers and supplications for Kings and all that be in
authority: we read of many excellent Christian Kings and Magistrates, such as
Constantine, Theodosius, Ludovic the godly, Edward the confessor, etc.

122 Princes may with a safe Conscience demand tribute or tole of their
subjects, for the supportation of their charges and greatness, and for the
defense of themselves and people; for David and other Kings imposed it without
reproof; CHRIST himself paid it, and so did the Christians in the Primitive
Church; but Princes must be moderate in their demands; for they are called
Fathers of their country; and shepherds, whose office is to sheare their
sheep and not to flea them; Rehoboam for want of this moderation lost ten
tribes.

And so much briefly of those duties which in Conscience we are bound to
practice; having then poynted at the Credenda, and Agenda of a Christian, I
will now as briefly set down the Fugienda or what we are bound in Conscience to
avoid and fly from, and these are of two sorts, the one is error and heresy
repugnant to what we are bound to believe; the other is sin and iniquity,
contrary to what we are bound to practice.

COncerning GOD we are bound in Conscience, to reject and detest all Idolaters,
who give Gods glory to Idols; Epicures, who make God idle and careless;
Atheists, who deny God; Anthropomorphits, who make a corporal God;
Blasphemers, who speak against God; Idle swears who take Gods name in vain
Manichees with their two Gods, and such like wretches.

2 Concerning the Trinity, we are bound to reject Samosatenus, Arius, Servetus,
and Jews, who deny the divinity of the second person; Sabellius who held there
was but one person of the Divinity, the Tritheits who make three essences, or
Gods; and in a word, all Antitrinitaries; so we are bound to reject the
Gentiles, and other mad opinions concerning God; Homer and Hesiod, who say that
the Gods were borne; Orpheus, who affirmed God to be begotten of the air, the
Stoics who will have God to be a corporeal substance, which was also
Tertullians error, Orpheus Homer, Hesiod, Chrysippus, the Stoics, and others
who brought in multitudes of Gods, which also was the heresy of Simon Magus,
Cerinthius, Menander, Basilides, Valentinus and diverse others.

3. Concerning Gods Omnipotency we are bound to reject Euripides, Simon Magus,
Pliny, Valentinus, and diverse others who affirm God to be omnipotent in
some things; as the Israelites of old who thought God could not prepare a Table
for them in the Wilderness.

4. Concerning the Creation, we are bound to reject Aristotle's opinion who
held the world Eternal, Pliny who held this world to be an Eternal deity,
Democritus who held infinite worlds, and he with Leucippus and Epicurus
affirmed that the world was made of atoms, meeting by haphazard into one body;
Anaxagoras and the Stoics, who thought there was before the world an eternal
Chaos.

5. Concerning Christ we are bound to reject the Ebionits, Arians, Cerinthus,
Carpocrates, the Helchsaites, Acacians, Marcellus, Photinus, Arius, Eunomius,
Mahumetans, and all others who have denied the Divinity of Christ; as also
Carporates who held that Christ was begot as others are, to wit by the help of
man. Manes who held the Son of God to be a part of his Fathers substance.
Bonosius who affirmed that Christ was only Gods adopted Son; the
Priscillianists who subjected Christ to the fates and stars, affirming that
he did al his works by fatal necessities.

6. Concerning Christ's Nativitie we are bound to reject Saturnius, Basilides,
Marcion, Cerdon, and others who have denied the humanity of Christ, affirming
that he only appeared in the shape of man. Valentinus who said that Christ
brought his flesh down from Heaven, and passed through Mary as water through a
Channel. Apelles who affirmed that Christ made to himself a body of air,
which vanished into the Elements at his Ascension. Apollinaris who thought that
Christ took our flesh, but without the soul; the Armenians and others who
denied that the substance of Christ's body was al one with ours, but
incorruptible, impatible, and heavenly

7. Concerning Christ's two natures, we are bound to reject Samosatenus, who
said that God was no other ways in Christ then he was in other Prophets.
Eutiches, who taught that there was in Christ but one nature, which was made up
of the comixture of his flesh and divinity as water mixed with wine. The
Monophysits, Monothelits, and Acephali, who affirmed there was in Christ but
one nature, one will, and one operation.

8. Concerning Mary's virginity, we are bound to reject Cerinthus,
Carpocrates, and others who taught that Christ was conceived, and borne of
Joseph and Mary, and after the manner of other men. Julian the Apostate,
Iovinian, and Paulitians, who said that Mary lost her virginity, and had other
children besides Christ. The Helvidians and Antidicomarianits, who believed that
Joseph had other children of Mary after Christ's birth, called the brethren of
our Lord; too many of these are tolerated in Poland and elsewhere.

9 Concerning the unity of Christ's person, we are bound to reject Nestorius,
who would give him too personalities, because he had two natures, and therefore
denied Mary to be (...) or the Mother of God.

10. Concerning Christ's death and passion, we are bound to reject Simonians,
Saturninians, Basilidians, Cerdonians, Marcionites, Docets, Apellites,
Manichees, who affirm that Christ suffered and dyed only in show, not really;
so the Eutychians, Theopaschites, Severits, Armenians, who teach that the
Divinity suffered. The Noetians, Sabellians, Patrispassians, who held that the
Father suffered: Pelagians, and Celestinians, who deny death to be the wages
of sin; Pontificians, who are daily sacrificing Christ in the Mass, and by
their indulgences, purgatory, and merits, annihilate the death of Christ.

11. Concerning the indissoluble union of the two natures in Christ, we are
bound to reject Nestorians, Cerinthians, Gnostics, Christolyts, who part Christ
into two persons, as the Valentinians into three; so the Eutychians, Armenians,
Iacobites, who teach that the humane nature was swallowed up by the divinity;
so the Acephali, and Severits, who though they grant that the two natures
remain yet they confound the properties, which is indeed to destroy the
natures; for [tollens proprietates, toll it nature as.]

12 Concerning CHRIST'S Resurrection, we are bound to reject Jews and
Cerinthians, who deny the Resurrection; the Manichees who teach that Christ had
no scarrs of the wounds after his resurrection; the Eutychians who say the
humane nature was converted into the divine nature after Christ rose; the
Vbiquitaries, who give to Christan uncircumscribed and omnipresent body, the
Gnostics who would persuade us that Christ remained 18. months here one earth
after his resurrection.

13 Concerning his Ascension, we are bound to reject the Christolyts, who say
that Christ's divinity ascended only; the Manichees, and Seleucians, who teaeh
that Christ's body ascended no higher then the Sun, where it remains; the
Carpocratians, who affirm that only Christ's soul ascended; the Vbiquitaries,
which make Christ's ascension nothing else but his invisible and gloryfied
condition, after his resurrection, and heaven to be only a spiritual place
diffused every where; lasty the Apellits, who make Christ's ascension a
dissolution into the four Elements.

14 Concerning Christ's sitting at Gods right hand; we are bound to reject the
Pontificians, who make Saints and Angels our patrons and mediators; the
Seleucians, Proclianits, and Hermians, who deny that Christ in the flesh sits
at his Fathers right hand; the Vbiquitaries, who make the sitting of Christ at
Gods right hand to be nothing else but the Majesty and omnipresence of CHRIST'S
body.

15 Concerning Christ's comeing to judge the World, we are bound to reject
Judicial Astrologers, Euthusiasts, and Circumcellians, who take upon them to
point out the determinat day of Christ's coming, the Millenaries, who say that
Christ will reign here on earth a 1000 years, the Originists, who will have
all both men and Angels to be saved after those 1000 years are expired; lastly
all profane scoffers who laugh at the doctrine of the last judgment, and ask
where is the promise of his coming.

16 Concerning the Holy Ghost, we are bound to reject Macedonians, Servetians,
Arians, Originists, Acatians, Aetians, who affirm the Holy Ghost to be a
creature; Simonians, who say the Holy Ghost is only the power of God in the
world; some Anabaptists who teach that the Holy Ghost had his beginning after
Christ's resurrection; the Hierachits, who would have the Holy Ghost to be
Melchisedec; Manes, who called himself the Holy Ghost, so did Simon Magus and
Montanus the Helcesaits, who called the Holy Ghost CHRIST'S sister; the
Sadduces, who deny the Holy Ghost; Theodoret, Damscen, Rusticus, Diaconus, and
the rest of the Greek Church, who deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Son.

18 Concerning the Catholic Church, we are bound to reject Papists, Pepusians,
Donatists, who confine her to one place, being diffused every where;
Schismatics, Heretics, who disturb her peace and break her union;
Hypocrites, Tyrants, who openly, or secretly wrong her; Profane livers, who vex
and scandal her; Novatians, Audians, Donatists, Anabaptists who require
absolute purity and perfection in her; the Luciferians, who confined the Church
to their own sect alone; the Eunomians, Severians, Aetians, who allowed all
sort of impurity in her.

19 Concerning the Communion of the Saints, we are bound to reject the
Nicolaitans, who would have wives common among Christians, as also the
Anabaptists, who would have all men's goods and estates in common.

20 Concerning Remission of sins, we are bound to reject the Donatists,
Novatians, Catharists, Meletians, Quartra^cimans, and Apostolicks, who deny
remission of sin to those that fall; the Pelagians, and Celestinians who deny
original sin; the Iovinians, who make all sins equal; The Messanians, and
Euchyts who taught that sins were pardoned only for good works and prayers.
The Priscillianists, who adscribe our sin to the stars and fates: The
Monks, who deny concupiscence to be sin, that Original sin deserves not
death, and that Mary and John Baptist were conceived and borne without
original sin; the Manichees and Acatians, who make sin the very substance
and nature of man, and not an accident.

21. Concerning the resurrection of the flesh, we are bound to reject the
Menandrians, Hymeneus, and Philetus, who taught that the resurrection was
already past; the Originists, and them who say that our bodies shall arise
heavenly and spiritual substances: The Atheists, Sadduces, Gentiles,
Saturninians, Simonians, Carpocratians, Basilidians, Valentinians, Marcionits,
Cerdonians, and many others, who deny the resurrection. The Arabians and
Psyehopannychits, who say the souls of the dead sleep in the Grave till the
Resurrection, and then are raised. The Saracins and Mahumitans, who assign
corporal pleasures to men after the resurrection. The Tertullianists, who say
that wicked men's souls shall in the resurrection be turned to Devils; The
Pythagoreans, Basilidians, Carpocratians, Manichees, Originists, Marcionits,
who dream of a transanimation: and lastly the Manichees, who in the
Resurrection give new bodies to men, but not the very same that fell.

22. Concerning life Eternal, we are bound to reject Millinaries Cerinthians,
Nepotians, and Mahumetans, who place it in corporeal pleasures. Atheists,
Epicures, Democritus, Pliny, Galen; who deny any life after this. The
Peputians, who say that life Eternal is in this world. Pope John the
twentieth, who taught that the blessed souls see not Gods presence till the
Resurrection.

23. Concerning the Scriptures, we are bound to reject the Marcionits,
Manichees, Valentinians, Tatians, Cerdonians, Simonians, and others who deny
the Old Testament to be Gods Word. The Guostics, and Priscillianists, who
counted the Prophets mad men; The Saducees, and Samaritans who acknowledge the
five books of Moses only for Gods Word. Papists, Eucratits, Manithees, who
equal there traditions to the written word. Montanists, Donatists,
Enthusiasts, Monks, Anabaptists, who obtrude their dreams, and revelations to
us, instead of Gods word. Those that reject the book of Job, Ecclesiastes, and
the Canticles; and lastly the Papists who subject the Scriptures authority to
the Church; who account Apocryphal books as Canonical, and forbid the people
to read the Scripture, shutting it up in an unknown tongue.

24. Concerning Angels we are bound to reject Sadducees and Samakitans, who
taught that there were no Angels or Spirits. Plato, Tertullian, and Origin who
held that Angels were corporeal substances. Basilides and Proclus the
Philosopher, who taught that the Angels begot one another. The Manichees who
affirm that God begot the Angels of his own substance. Mahumet, who held
that the Angels were created of fire, and that they were mortal. The Sethians
who taught that the Angels had carnal commerce with women, and of them begot
man; the Nicolaitans, who said that the Angels were begot of light and
darkness; Basilidians, Archontics, Gnostics, who held that the wisdom of God
was the mother of the Angels; the Manichees and Priscillianists, who said that
the evil Angels were created so; lastly the Originists, who taught that the
evil Angels should at last be saved.

25 Concerning man's creation, we are bound to reject the Rabbis, who held that
the Angels assisted God in the making of man; the Manichees who denied that
Adam and Eve were made by God, the Patricians, who will not have God the
creator of man's body; the Pelagians, and Celestinians, who taught that Adam
should have died, though he had not sinned; the Eunomians, and Paterninians,
who said that man's lower parts were made by the Devil; lastly Aristole, who
held that man had no beginning.

26 Concerning Man's soul, we are bound to reject Epicures, and Sadduces, who
deny the immortality of the soul, Themestius, and Averrois, who thought that
all men had but one soul; Apollinaris, who said that one soul begetts
another, the Originists, who taught that the souls were long in heaven before
the bodies were created; Platonics, Mannichees, Gnostics and Priscillianists,
who would have the soul a part of divine substance; the Pythagorians, who held
transanimation; the Nazarreans, who will have the souls of men and of beasts
to be of the same nature; the Arabians, who will have the souls of men and of
beasts to sleep, or dye with their bodies; the Tertullianists, who say that
men's souls are corporal, and that wicked men's souls after death are turned
into devils; and that all souls are by traduction.

27 Concerning Gods Image in man, we are bound to reject the Saturninians, who
by Gods Image understand celestial light; the Anthropomorphits, and Manichees,
who will have this Image to consist in some corporeal shape, making God
himself corporeal, Flaccus Illyricus, who taught that the righteousness and
holiness, wherein Gods image consisted, to be the very essence of the soul.

28 Concerning Original sin, we are bound to reject the Armenians, who deny
that there is any original pollution; the Carpocratians and Catharists, who
bragged of their own purity, and that they were by nature the sons in God;
the Manichees who will have concupisence to be a substance, and not an
original infirmity; the Pelagians who deny that original sin is derived by
propagation, but contracted by example and imitation, and teach that Adams
sin was hurtful to none but to himself, and that he should have dyed though
he had not sinned.

29 Concerning Predestination, we are bound to reject the Celestinians and
Pelagians who deny predestination; the Priscillianists, who attribute it to the
stars, and to the fates; the Pelagians and Semipelagians who teach that there
is no election, but that the cause of man's salvation is in himself; the
Libertins who think they shall be saved or damned without the means,
therefore do what they list; Pontificians, and others who attribute the cause
of election to foreseen works and merits; so did the Basilidians and
Pelagians of old.

30 Concerning Justification; we are bound to rejectthe Papists who teach we
are justified by works, and by the Sacraments; that CHRIST satisfied for our
sins only, not for our punishments; the Libertins who think that a justified
man may do what he list; Osiander who taught we are justified by the
essential righteousness or essence of God, and all such as confound
justification, with sanctification, lastly Epicures; who reject good works as
needless, because we are justified by Christ's righteousness.

31 Concerning Gods Providence, we are bound to reject the Epicures who held
the world to be guided by chance or fortune; the Stoics and Priscillianists who
taught that destiny, inevitable fate did rule all things, even God himself;
the Astrologians who will have the stars to rule all sublunary things; the
Simonians, Carpocratians, Severians, Marcits, Manichees, Menandrians who held
that the inferior world was guided by the Devil, therefore gave themselves to
the study of Magic: lastly all such as make God either careless of inferior
things, or so employed that he is not at leisure, or sostately, as that he will
not abase himself to behold the things that are here below.

Thus have I briefly set down what every man is bound in conscience to believe,
what to practice, and what errors concerning matter of faith he is bound to
avoid; it remains that I should also show what is to be avoided in matter of
practice, but because I have already spoke of some of them, which are most
remarkable, and rectum est index sui and obliqui, he that knows what he is
bound to do, cannot be ignorant of what he is bound to avoid; therefore what
we have already set down may suffice to pacify a man's conscience, and to make
him a perfect Christian; in these unhapy times of ours; we see christianity was
never more professed, conscience never more pretended; but alas truth never
less believed; goodness never less practiced; and consequently the conscience
never more cheated; so that in name we are Christians, but in many doctrinall
points plain Heretics, and in our practice very Pagans, or rather Atheists;
God grant we may endeavor to be, what we would seem to be, and lay aside our
Hypocritical Vizards, by which we deceive the eyes of men; but the peircing
rays of that all seeing eye, who sees us in the dark, and knows of our down
sitting, and up-rising, and our thoughts long before, we cannot delude; our
consciences are seared with a hot iron, or fast asleep, if they can content
themselves with a mouthfull of Scripture phrasses, having our eyes full of
wantonness, our hearts full of malice, and our hands full of blood; be not
deceived, the Conscience of a Turk or Pagan will not be thus satisfied: St.
Paul's conscience was void of offense toward God and toward men; and he shows
that a good conscience is still accompanied with charity, a pure heart, and
with faith unfeigned; neither can that conscience be good, which is not purged
from dead works to serve the living GOD.

FINIS.
Septem. the 14th. 1646.
I have perused this judicious and learned Treatise entitled The picture of a
Christian man's Conscience, and finding it to be very profitable and seasonable,
I adjudge it worthy to be printed and published.

Io. Downame.

ERRATA.
Page 27. l. 5. read Oneserus for Onefurious. page 41. l. 1. read, We must also
believe that there are ministering spirits. page 114. l. 12. for heart, read
hare. page 133. l. 7. read temeritie. page 145. l. 21. put out off. page 146.
l. 1. read refuse. page 160. l. 12. read Carpocrates. page 161. l. 5. read
Saturninus. page 163. l. 17. read (...)


