A LETTER FROM THE Right Honorable Sir Thomas Row, Extraordinary Ambassador
for his MAJESTY at vienna. Esquier one of the Members of the House of Commons.
July 8. 1642.
I Was confident that the whole course of my life, and the wariness I have
learnt by long experience, would have prevented any necessity of making an
Apology, especially to the honorable House of Commons (whereof I am an humble
Member) either of my intentions, or actions. But having understood, that I have
been accused by the French Ambassador, to have offered to the King of
Hungary, in the name of his Majesty, my Master, a league offensive, and
defensive against all men; upon conditions of restitution, and reintegration of
the second Elector Palatine to his Lands, and dignities: which being in
contravention of the League between his Majesty, the French King, and the
united States, was offensively taken, and therefore reparation required: I have
thought it my duty both to his Majesty, and for the justification of my
fidelity, and the tender care of my reputation, Wounded in the high Court of
Parliament, to desire this Office of frie^dship from you, to represent my
Answer.

First, That I never re^eived any such power, or instruction, from his Majesty
my master, nor that any respect could so far decline me from my duty, to
undertake of my self to transgress both my Orders, and against my own
judgment* Therefore I must protest, with all reverence to the thrice Christian
King, and due respect to his Emdassador, as his representant, and without
relation to the command of the one, or obedience of the other: the whole
accusation in form, and matter, in substance, and circumstances, is unjust, and
in the first inventor false; and against innocence, truth, and faithful
service scandalous.

It is very easy to Blot, and Stain the purest innocence: But I am confident
in the equity, and wisdom of the House of Commons, that they will not only give
credit to my assertion: but that they will so far regard the reputation of one
of their Members, as to blot out, and expunge all record, or memory of this
imputation, and that they will please to believe, that I both understand my
duty, and the present state of the troubled world; and that all my negotiations
have principally respected the honor, and convenience of my King, and Country,
of which I shall render such account, as every accusation shall turn to my
advantage.

I will not reflect upon the scope of this complaint against me, knowing well,
their wisdom will easily penetrate, that there may lie hid other designs,
then to disgrace a private man; but humbly desiring, they will be pleased as
far and wide to publish my integrity, as it has been defamed, I will no
further trouble them, nor You, but rest,

Vienna 3. June 1642. Your most affectionate Friend Kinsman, and humble
Servant, Thomas Row.

London Printed for Abell Roper.


