THE EIGHTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator,
WHEREIN Certain DOCTRINES (Vindicated in Print, by such as are reputed of
Party with G. Fox) are Examined, and in order to a Decision of the Controversy
(which seems to depend on the Truth or Falsehood thereof) an Adress is made to
a Book Entitled, An Adress to Protestants; Given forth by W. P. Anno 1679. and
may now be termed, a Proper Vmpirage in the case.
By W. R.
BEfore I proceed to say any thing in pursuance of the Title Page, I think it
meet to give a brief account of the chief matters aimed at, or treated on in
the first seven Parts of the Christian-Quaker; not knowing, but that this small
Tract may be extended amongst the People called Quakers, farther than the rest,
and so may occasion such as are desirous more fully to know what The Reader may
Note, that when I use the Words us, or we, it is with respect to such (besides
my self) as encouraged the Publication of other Parts of the Christian Quaker.
we stand for, and against, to enquire after other Parts of the Christian
Quaker.

In the First Part, a part of those things touching which we were once at
Unity, the ways and means whereby that Unity was broken, are manifested.

In the Second Part, Doctrines of Truth (cleared from Objections) are laid
down, that so it may be known more perfectly, than by the First Part, what the
Christian-Quaker stands for.

In the Third Part, Government is more largely discoursed on, than in the two
foregoing Parts. Showing, That the Christian-Quaker owns but two sorts. The one
is the Outward Government under which we live, unto the Laws whereof we owe
either Active or Passive Obedience, and ought not by outward Force to endeavor
deliverance from under such Laws, as we have, or may tern Oppressive.

The other is, The Inward Government of Christ (who alone is Lord over the
Conscience) which is not represented by persons visible by carnal Eyes,
invested with Power from him to execute Outward Laws, Edicts or Decrees, in an
Outward Form of Government, visible as aforesaid.

In the Fourth and Fifth Parts, It Is manifested, That G. F. has Erroneously
concerned himself in the Divisions amongst the People called Quakers, and is
therein become a Reproach and Scandale to the Truth, which the Children of
Light profess and walk in.

In the Sixth Part, is manifested, The wickedness of Two small Tracts written
on the occasion of the Publication of the first Five Parts of the
Christian-Quaker. One by Christopher Tailor, Wherein he has abused me at a
sordid rate, as by his Book appears, and yet has not quoted one Word out of my
Writings to prove any Recriminating Reflection on me, more than the beginning
of my Title Page, viz. The Christian-Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator. Had not the said Christopher Tailor supposed himself (as he is a
Public Preacher) a Church-Governour, and that it is the Duty of some others to
pin their Faith on his Sleeve, How could he have attempted so unconvincing a
Work? Had he no Credit on a Religious score to loose, methinks he should never
have hazarded his Reputation as a Man (if ever he had any) to write at so
Envious a rate as he has, telling his Reader, That the very Title of my Book
was Blasphemous. It Is hard to Imagine wherein the concludes the Blasphemy to
be, unless in these Words, George Fox Detected; which then must imply, That, in
his sense, G. F. is, at least, the Christ of God.

The other small Tract taken notice of, is given forth in the Name of John
Pennington, worthy of no better Character than that of C. Tailor; the matter
therein aimed at, is to show, That I abused his Father, and performed not my
word in not citing all his Fathers Testimony: whereas If I had quoted all his
Fathers Testimony, I had been worse than my word. But that which adds to his
Sin, is this, he has charged me with making Inferences or Deductions that were
untrue, when as I made no Inference nor Deduction at all from his Fathers
words, as is manifested more fully in the said 6th. Part. I do not doubt but
that the aforesaid Treatises were approved by the Second-days Meeting, else why
have they in their Book Entitled See 12th. Page of the Introduction.
The Accuser, etc. Signified that the Names of some are already concerned in
Print, meaning in relation to the Christian-Quaker in Five Parts. What man of
Reason, Conscience, and Religion can conclude other than on this wise: That the
pretended Government (under which such irreligious and unchristian-like
treatment is approved) is a mere cheat, giving a kind of safe conduct (so far
as is in their Power) to the Instruments of Satan, when fraited with
Antichristian-Arrows to wound the Children of Light, and Lambs of God. But
notwithstanding this evil Treatment, the said 6th. Part contains Christian
Propositions for a Reconciliation. Therein is also something said to discover
the emptiness and weakness of Thomas Laurence his three quarters of a Sheet,
who telling the Reader that he is 81 years of age, Charity oblieges me not to
be severe upon him.

In the Seventh Part are detected a part of the Forgeries, Prevarications, and
Errors wherewith a Treatise Entitled, The Accuser, etc. given forth in the
Name of the Second-days Meeting against the Christian-Quaker in Five Parts, is
stuffed, and is an additional Evidence against the said Meeting that they
themselves are espousing the Cause of Apostasy and Innovation, and by the scope
of some Parts of their Treatise of nameless Authors (referred to Richard
Richardsons small Tract styled, A few Ingredients, etc. sufficiently
Papistical) have shown themselves more nearly related to Popish Principles and
Practices, than to the Principle and Practice of the Ancient and Christian
Quaker.

This small Tract is now written for the sakes of such among the People called
Quakers, as are not yet principled to pin their Faiths on another Sleeve, but
rather to hear, to see, and understand for themselves in matters relating to
the Kingdom of God, and Salvation of Souls. In confidence that 'twill find
acceptance with such; it is now published chiefly to evidence what from the Title
may be expected.

Of late days this Doctrine has been published by such as are reputed of
George Fox's Party. That in some Cases that Consciences of Believers ought to
be bound by the positive Sentence of others, (meaning other Believers
pretending to Authority as a Church, and not by election of Persons) without
leaving any liberty for a Believer to refuse on the account of not seeing it
his Duty to submit; and forasmuch as the Submission treated on, had no relation
to my Power given to others by the Believer, from whom Submission might be
expected; but in stead thereof to the Power wherewith the Church (as is
pretended) is invested, we therefore as disliking the aforesaid Doctrine, did
thus assert, This Meaning and Government over the Consciences of Believers, we
take to be contrary to the Principle of Truth, and Liberty we have in Christ
Jesus, for that no Outward Sentence or Matter whatsoever can obliege the
Conscience, to be approving this or that Exercise or Practice, or to be in the
Belief of this or that Sentence, Judgment, or Decree, until such time that the
Conscience through the inshining of Christ's Light therein, comes to be
satisfied, and thereby to be bound, and obliged, see Christian-Quaker, First
Part, page 48. and Third Part, page 53. to 69.128. and therein the Reader will
not only find that the Book of Government given forth by R. B. wherein the said
Doctrine is held forth, was approved by the Note, It Is certainly known that
great Endeavors are frequently used to obstruct the Printing of Friends
Papers, unless they can submit the Contents thereof to the Second-day Meeting
Sentence. Let but the Description of the said Meeting be considered, and that
the Office assumed by such uncertain unselected Persons, is that which renders
them Judges in a Spiritual Concern of another man's Conscience (whether gifted
therein, or no) and I am persuaded that not one Canon of the Church of Rome
admits of greater Darkness, or more unwarrantable Presumption, nor yet that any
one Principle with respect to Government was ever read or heard of to be
espoused by any sort of People on the Face of the Earth with respect to such as
were accounted Members of their Society, that has a greater tendency to
abridge the Conscience of her free Exercise, or to introduce a more perfect Map
of Confusion and Anarchy. See more on this Subject, the Third Part of the
Christian-Quaker, etc. page 29.30.31.32.
Second-days Meeting at London (being a Meeting of uncertain numbers of
Persons, unknown by any Constitution of whom to consist, before assembled) but
also a confutation from the Scriptures of Truth of these Arguments and Reasons
given for the same, further showing that the Scriptures quoted for Proof
thereof, are misapplyed, and remote from the purpose.

But yet notwithstanding I find in the aforesaid Treatise, Styled the Note, If
by the word Rebellion, they mean Rebellion against the Dignities, which, in a
Tract Entitled
Accuser, etc. That occasion is taken by the Penman thereof, to render our
Assertion, PLACE="marg" See Pages 64.65.66.108.109.
or the Consequences deduced by him from it, tending to Confusion, An exalted
Diotrephes, the Authors say, I poured out contempt upon, then I conclude the
Rebellion is against sixty six Subscribers of a Note The said Paper is detected
in the 2 d. Part of the Christian-Quaker, p. 72. to 92.
Paper against John Story and John Wilkingson in the year 1677.
Rebellion, and Ranterism, etc. And forasmuch as it has been declared that the
said Paper was the Act of the Second-Days Meeting, as well as of the
Yearly Meeting, I may then reasonably query, Whether the word Rebellion, used
on the aforesaid Occasion, may not be taken as the Symptom of Abominable-Pride,
by subjecting the Authors thereof to the repute of sounding a Trumpet to their
own imagined Dignity. But should I now make three distinct Columes, viz. one
for the Names of the said sixty six Subscribers; another for their
qualifications and abilities (or rather inabilities, with respect to their
being See the Accuser, etc. p. 116. 117. and consider well the Contents of the
42 d. Disafection.
Representatives of Christ's Inward Government;) and then in the third,
signify, these are the Dignities proclaiming something tending to Rebellion
against themselves, and that the Matter of Rebellion, as well as the Rebels are
known by this Doctrine, viz. No outward Sentence can oblige the Conscience in
point of faith and duty before conviction by Christ's Light. Would they not then
appear most miserable Objects of Derision and Scorn, especially if in that
dress presented to one of their learned Richard Richardsons Authors cited in
favor of G. F' s Error, namely, Note, Who can otherwise think but that G. F's
Cause is at a low Ebb, since he is now beholding to a Presbyterians Works
(heretofore much despised by him) to bear it up. See R. R's Tract styled A few
Ingredients, etc. pages 13.18.
Richard Baxter of Kiderminster, great amongst the Presbyterians, whose
Directory I suppose, does not teach any thing so contradictory to their
fundamental Principles, as the aforesaid Doctrine rendered tending to Rebellion,
is known to be contrary to the ancient Doctrine of the People called Quakers;
for thousands were convinced of the truth of these two plain Sentences, namely,

First, That every man that comes into the World was lighted with a measure of
Christ's Light in his own Heart.

Secondly, That 'twas safer to have a dependency on this measure in our selves,
than to have an Eye out to the measures of others. But if the first Publisher
of these Doctrines did thus design that such as were convinced thereof should
at any time after be excomunicated, if they should not follow some Outward
Order of his before convinced of its need or service, from the measure of Light
in themselves; then it may in truth be said, That a greater cheat never
appeared under a religious pretense. But I conclude, that no such design was in
the beginning, and that when G. F. one of the first Preachers of the Light in
these latter days, did begin his Declaration with these words. I am the Light
of the World, his meaning was, that Christ was that Light, and not himself. To
return to my Concern with the Second-days Meeting again. But if this discourse
should come to the view of the Author of a small Tract styled Controversy
ended, it is to be doubted that the Second-days Meeting (though they may account
themselves Dignities) would then be more derided. And why? Because he was
rendered a very Night-bird, a Wanderer, one that looks and creeps up and down
like a Vagrant, as in a small Tract Entitled, A Winding Sheet for Controversy
ended, appears (being also reputed to be approved by the Second-days Meeting;
and the reason why he was so termed was, because he put not his Name to his
Book. Of the like crime the Second-days Meeting are now guilty in relation to
the Book styled The Accuser, etc. and therefore very unfit to be accounted
Dignities, for dignified men are not usually ashamed of their Names. Alas! Who
so blind, as not to know that the Business of Church Government amongst one
part of the People called Quakers, is so engrost between the Yearly and
Second-days Meeting, or amongst a few of them, as that a Dislike, whether by
particular Churches or Persons) to either of their Papers, Prescriptions or
Orders, is become matter of scandal, if not of Excommunication, and now as
worthily reprehended as those aimed at by W. P. in his adress to Prot. page
115. were by these his words. Alas! who knows not, that loves not to be blind,
that the Church amongst them is the Priesthood, the few cunning men govern the
majority, and entitle their Conceits, The Canons of Christ's Church: and all
this comes from the ignorance and idleness of the People, that give the Pride
and Industry of the Clergy an opportunity to effect their Crafts upon them, for
so mean Spirited are the People, as to take all upon trust for their Souls. At
present let thus much suffice on the occasion of the Second-days Meeting using
of the word Rebellion.

And whereas in the Third Part of the Christian-Quaker, page 9. We say that
there is no ground either from the Scriptures of Truth without us, or Light of
Christ within us, to believe that any Christian Professor can in truth affirm,
That there are Outward Prescriptions and Orders given forth by the Spirit of
God, through any one or more mortal men in this our day, which others ought to
obey and follow, whether they see it their Duty or no; this in the 122. page of
the Accuser, etc. is termed very frivolous and loose, and will serve only for a
pretense to loose Spirits, etc. who will be apt to pretend they see it not
their Duty.

I must confess it is cause of great amazement, when I do but consider with
what confidence the Penman of the Book styled The Accuser, etc. writes
touching Rebellion, Confusion, etc. and that when all is said relative thereto,
I cannot find the least real ground for using those Terms, nor yet any
pretended ground more than such an one, as in the view of a rational man may
seem to bespeak the nameless Penman, and his nameless Brethren, dignifying
themselves by their own Constitution, and being pleased with a whimsical
imagination of being (as I take it from their 42 Dissafection, pages 116. 117.
etc.) visible Representatives of Christ's Inward Government, are even drunk with
desire after Submission from such as were their Brethren. Alas! What sort of
Dignity can Persons hiding their Names pretend unto, or how can they expect
that any should submit unto their Government. They would be reputed to aim only
at an Apostolic Dignity, but therein the Penman has evidently betrayed their
Cause. For who so ignorant as not to know that the Testimony of the Primitive
Quakers seemed the more piercing, when in the Name of the Lord they had
declared unto the Sons of Men, that as in the Apostles days the Lord was
pleased to make use of mean Persons, exercised in Outward Callings to publish
the Everlasting Gospel, so is it at this day, but yet I doubt the Pride of the
Penman of The Accuser, etc. is now so great as to account the Exercise of a
poor Shoemaker therein to be contemptible, for page 201. he thus signifies in
his own very words, By all which he endeavors to make G. F. as contemptibbe as
he can, Meaning my declaring in the Fourth Part of the Christian-Quaker, etc.
page 64. that G. F. was a poor Shoemaker, which G. F's Letter to John
Wilkingson did naturally lead me to speak of; but least any should think I was
so irreligious as to think his Meanness or Trade matter of contempt, I did
thereupon thus write. For his meauness he neither was, PLACE="marg" See 4th.
part C. Q. page 64.
nor is despised as we know of, for that cannot savor of a Christian Spirit.
And further also thus. I can truly say, and so I believe many more can,
PLACE="marg" See 5th part, p. 48.
that in his Person I accounted the Testimony of the Apostle Paul fulfilled,
who said, God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the wise
[and God has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the Mighty, and
base things of the World, and things which are despised has God chosen, yea
and things* which are not, to bring to naught things which are] that no Flesh
should glory in his presence. And partly on this score, can I in the Fear of
the Lord say (and that justly too) that he was to me, whilst he kept his Place
and Habitation in the Truth) truly honorable. This clearly shows that my
Principle and Practice gives no countenance to such a Contempt spoken of by the
aforesaid Penman, and if ^is Pride had not led him really to believe that the
knowledge of G. F's being a Shoemaker, is matter of Contempt now, why has he
not taken care to quit himself and his Brethren from that censure, as I have
done, but of that I remember not a word in his whole Tract.

It Is well known that the Sin usually besetting some sort of Governors, is
Pride and Scorn. T^is seems to be one part of them complexion of the nameless
Penman of the Accuser, etc. For from his work, he seems to me, that he is not
only proudly puffed up with the mere empty conceit of Government, and with the
thoughts of being a Governor (whilst in reality opposing the exaltation of
Christ's Government in the Heart) but also as if he were perplexed that the Trade
of the Person whose Cause he has espoused should be Recorded, least it should
eclipse the Glory of G. F. as no suitable Ornament to the Attendance and
Outward Enjoyments wherewith he has been acquainted of late years: But this is
not all to show the Pride accompanying Truths Opposers. For it is known to many
that G. F. has been much disturbed at the relation signifying that he was a
Shoemaker, and is that which has seemed to be uppermost in his Head, when some
Friends have had occasion of discourse with him, which I take to be a mere
badge of his Pride and Scorn. Who can reasonably suppose that G. F. and his
Adherents did ever make it the subject Matter of their Discourses to signify
that poor Fishermen and Tent-makers were called to the Work of the Ministry,
and that in order to the confounding those Learned Rabbis that despised their
mean Education, though now such like are searched into by their Learned Rich.
Richardson to save the Head of G. F's tottering Cause. Alas! it is but too plain
to me that G. F. etc. are better affected with such Grandeur as is obtained by
the great pretended Successor of Peter, than that little worldly Reputation
that the Apostle Peter in his day was accompanied with: and further to clear my
Conscience on this subject, let G. F. know (whether he can receive it or no)
that in probability the Name of a Quaker might not have been so much despised
by many, as it now is, had he but followed the Example of W. D. (one of the
first Preachers of the Light) and other his Fellow Laborers, keeping, (as they
did) at some honest Outward Calling, instead of muddling his head to bring
about a Conformity to his Outward Orders; for I am fully satisfied in my
Conscience that that noisome sent which has arisen like a smoke from the
bottomless Pit has been occasioned from an Antichristian Promotion of his
Outward Orders; and indeed how can it be otherwise, since he himself has
testified in a General Epistle Printed for M. W. in these words, They that do
so, viz. Set up Outward Things, gathers to themselves, not unto God: which is a
notable Proof that for many years past, he has been gathering to himself, not
unto God: and what is the Fruit of such his gathering? To answer that question
would require a large volumn: I shall only say it has scattered many of the
Flock from the green Pastures whereon they were feeding, and Shilohs Streams
wherewith their own Cisterns were filled, to feed upon the four Leaven of some
Hypocritical Pharisees, and to drink of their muddy waters. If any shall think
this a digression from the Matter expected to be treated on, to such I say, The
ill Savor and groundless occasion of our Adversaries aforesaid words
Confusion, Rebellion, Looseness, and Ranterism, from one whom I took to be in
his own sense a Dignity, were the occasion thereof, and I question not but such
as are gifted to discern things as they are, will perceive that those words, as
applied by the Penman of the Accuser, are only to represent Men fearing God,
and loving Righteousness, in a Bear-Skin, to be worried. It Is very apparent
that our Opposers have frequently shown their Teeth by their clamorous
Treatment, but blessed be the Lord, they have no power to Bite: And having
rejected many Warnings, are now worthily discovered according to their Merit;
whereby, if they are rendered a Derision to the Heathen, and a Scorn to Fools.

Let them know it is but a part of the Reward and Recompense of the Fruit of
their own doings.

I shall now return to speak more particularly to the matter which from the
Title Page may be expected.

In the Third Page of a small Tract, Styled, A Brief Examination and State of
Liberty Spiritual, lately Published, I find it written in these words.

It Is a dangerous Principle and pernicious to True Religion, and that which is
worse, it is the Root of Ranterisme to assert, That nothing is a Duty incumbent
upon thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty.

This Doctrine is near of kin to the aforesaid Doctrine mentioned in the
Accuser, etc. and as it relates to Christian Religion, is Repugnant to the
Testimony of W. P. in his Adress to Protestants, Page 144. in these words.

Christian Religion ought to be carried on by that way by which it was
Interoduced, which was Persuasion. But yet to do the Penman of the Tract
Styled, A Brief Examination, etc. Right, He in his following words makes the
Application to seared, dark and dead Consciences, as if thereby such were
uncondemned; To take his meaning thereon, yet it cannot reasonably be
understood otherwise than thus, Viz. That his aforesaid Notion must have a
Tendency that some Religious Performance is incumbent on such, though they are
not persuaded thereof. Let us now suppose that the seared dark and dead
Conscience should strictly perform some Religious Exercise, as his Duty merely
from the direction of another, we are now to enquire, What is the benefit
thereof to such? To this let W. P. in his aforesaid Adr. to Prot. page 146.
answer, his words are these, If I believe what she (that is to say, the Church)
believes, only because she believes it, and not because I am convinced in my
Understanding, and Conscience of the truth of what she believes, my Faith is
false though hers be true. And indeed well might W. P. so testify; for if a
blind Offering under the Law was condemnable, it is not justifiable under a
Gospel Dispensation. Having laid down the Doctrines on which our Opposers
ungodly Constructions are founded, I need not enlarge to remove such
Constructions; let the Reader peruse what he is already referred unto in the
Christian-Quaker, and compare the same with W. P. his Adress to Protestants,
pages 77. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 140. 141. 144. 146. and diverse other Parts, and
the Righteousness of what we stand for and against, will be sufficiently
manifested.

One other Doctrine, pertinent to my purpose, occurs in my Memory, it is in the
eleventh Page of the aforesaid Tract styled, A Brief Examination, etc. namely,
that this is a loose Plea, Viz. 'What have thou to do with me, 'leave me to my
Freedom, and the Grace of God in my self: which leads me thus to Observe.

If our ancient Friends John Story and John Wilkingson when articled against
for not * acting in things against their Conscience, PLACE="marg" Witness a
part of the 44 Articles exhibited against them.
should have told the busy Persons concerned therein, What have you to do with
us, leave us to our Freedom, and the Grace of God in our selves, might not this
have merited a just Approbation from the Primitive Preachers of Christ's Light
in these latter days, whose Doctrine has been, That the Grace is sufficient,
and that every one is to be left to his own measure, anciently understood by
this manner of speech, Viz. Our own Freedom.

Every Reader is now left free to consider whether a rendering such a Plea of
being left to our own Freedom and the Grace of God in our selves to be a loose
Plea, is not the mark of one that is departed from the ancient Principle of
Truth, a Discourager of having a Dependency on the measure of Grace in our
selves; and so by natural consequence may be looked upon as one holding forth a
loose or false Liberty, the tendency whereof is to depart from the Blessed
Spirit of Truth, and rebel against the perfect Law of Liberty in the Heart.

It needs no large Coment to show that such, as slightly esteem of a Plea to be
left unto our Freedom, and the Grace of God in our selves, may easily be led
like Blind men into any Ditch. It is observable that G. F. his Party have not
only slighted such a Plea of being left to the Grace of God in our selves, but
have a sort of Veneration for the Outward Directions of another: C. T. his
Epistle, and the Accuser, etc. are to me an evidence of such a Veneration. How
much credit this may add to any so minded, that have manifested a dislike of
the Presbyterian Directory, not altogether for the matter therein contained,
but also that an outward Directory should be exalted as a Christians Rule under
the Ministration of Light in this Gospel Day, let the wise in heart judge.

But to state a case in favor of the Doctrine which we oppose, let us behold
how it will then look. Suppose that the Lord had in every Age under the Gospel
Dispensation, placed one outward and visible man to be an eye to see for the
rest of the Body, which I dare not grant, and that on that foot G. F. should be
declared to be that Eye in this our day; yet it would be irrational to require
submission to his Prescriptions or Decrees from such as are not convinced that
he is placed as such an Eye. If thus much be granted, then the Doctrines
already cited, as vindicated by his Party, falls to the ground, because such a
grant implies a convincement, as necessary to submission. But if otherwise it
be affirmed, that he is placed to be an Eye for the Body, and that on that foot
his Prescriptions and Decrees are to be obeyed by Believers in Christ, whether
they are convinced that he is such an Eye, or no, then it opens a Door for many
heads, and many horns to arise in one day, for that others may pretend to be
that Eye as well as he, and may obtain Proselites to aver the same; and if it
so happen, that from amongst Brethren once in Unity, many through the desire of
Vainglory should arise and claim that Office, the rest of the Flock might not
know unto whose Precepts they ought to submit, this is not the only ill
Consequence that might attend, for as on the one hand a Door would be opened
for many Antchrists to arise undiscovered, whilst the Grace of God in our
selves is neglected, (which is no other but that Unction from the Holy One
spoken of by John, as ground of Consolation to such in whose days many
Antichrists did arise, for that by it all things were known) so on the other
hand a Door might be opened to many Hyppocrites for sinister ends, to entitle
themselves to Membership in such a pretended Church, and to nurture up a Brood
of Shechemites who rather than run the hazard of that influence which the
Frowns of some may have on their Trades, or their desired Marriages, may
readily conform to the Dictates of others, though on no better ground than the
PLACE="marg" Genesis 34.24.
Shechemites did, when at the Request of Jacobs Sons, and Persuasion of Hamor
they were Circumcised, not only to obtain Dinah the Daughter of Jacob, but
other seeming Advantages in their Eye. As a Warning to all, I cannot but say,
beware of the Snare and Gin that accompanies the espousing of such beloved
Interests with no less than the making Shipwreck of a good Conscience toward
Good, least that which was thirsted after, as sweet and pleasant, do not only
become bitter unto you, but also least the Indignation of the Lord should break
forth, and you come to suffer a Spiritual Death as to your Inward States and
Conditions toward God, even as he suffered Jacobs Sons to slay the Shechemites
with the Edge of the Sword, after they were Circumcised for sinister Ends.

The sense I have of the Snare attending many through Conformity to other men's
Lines, made ready to their hand in a blind obedience, occasions me to bless the
Lord, that there are yet a Remnant who can rejo^ce together in the Remembrance
of this joyful sound, TO YOUR OWN, TO YOUR OWN: meaning The Measure of Gods
Gift and Grace in our selves. The embracing that Exhortation became an Ancert^^
many a weatied Soul, who were hurryed from Mountain to Hill, seeking Rest, but
finding none. Oh! that the skirts of the Deceiver of Nations under these rusty
Doctrines (now furbisht up in our day) may be more and more discovered, that so
no Allegiance thereto may be entayled to our Posterities, least some proud
Pharisee despising, as well as neglecting his lawful outward Calling, make his
Fingers heavier than the Loins of the decryed Prelates. And if this small
Tract, as well as other Discoveries of Apostasy and Innovation become as so
many Darts to pierce the Bowels of that Cause espoused by those nameless
Persons, terming themselves The Second-days Meeting, ev^n as an arrow shot at
an Adventure pierced Ahab between the joints of his harness, when disguised to
save hiself, then let us say, Blessed be the God of our Salvation.

To return again, I shall further demonstrate the inconsistency of the
aforesaid Doctrines with what W. P. in his Adress to Protestants teaches in
page 139.140. Viz. That we should have external Guardians of our Faith and
Religion upon us, after we are come to years of discretion, is not to obtain
greater Freedom, it is a knowing and reasonable, and not blind Obedience that
commends a man. Children should be rused, because they have no understanding,
or choice, but because it is not so with Men, Reason ought to conduct them in
their Duty, that the Service they perform to God may be such as the Apostle
calls a reasonable one. The Noble Bereans -- such as would see with their own
Eyes, and that dare not to transfer the right of Examination to any mortal Man.

It Is now with me to treat of some things which I take to be the fruit of the
aforesaid Doctrines espoused by such as are reputed to be of G. F.'s Party.

John Blaykling made a challenge in writing on this wise; Let that man come
forth in the whole Nation that can justly charge him (meaning G. F.) with such
a Spirit from his Childhood, meaning, as his foregoing words did show, a
careless, loose, libertine or dark Spirit, which I signified to G. F. with this
Answer; If thou will acknowledge that the publication of Lies, the making use
of a Certificate in thy favor given forth by a man that thou thy self knows,
knew nothing of some of the Matters whereof by the words of his Testimony he
undertook to clear thee, giving Instructions to others to perform Duty, and yet
take Liberty to violate the same thy self, as if thou would have Friends to
follow thy words, but not thy Example, be the fruit of a careless, loose,
libertine, or dark Spirit, then I am the man in this Nation who am ready to
come forth to charge thee with the fruit of a careless, loose, libertine, dark
Spirit, and to justify the charge against thee.

But notwithstanding such my Answer, and my frequent Endeavors largely
signified of in the Preface and Postscript to the Christian-Quaker in Five
Parts, to this effect; That G. F. might condescend to a hearing before Friends
of what I had to lay to his Charge, yet he has not so condescended, but is
kept like a guilty Person behind the Curtain. In order to a discovery of part
of his Errors, see his Name is the Index to the Christian-Quaker in Five
Parts, taking especial notice of that loose, if not ranting Spirit accompanying
John Blaykling, when he ascribed that honor and Work to G. F. which we
acknowledge to be due to, and proceed from, none but God himself; his words are
these; Whose Eternal Honor and Blessed Renown shall remain, yea his presence,
and the dropping of his tender words in the Lords Love, was my Souls
nourishment. We know Eternal Honor is due to none but God himself, according
to the frequent conclusion of Friends in Prayer to God; (namely, To thee alone
be Eternal Honor and Renown for evermore) and therefore it may well be
queried, whether such Language has no a relation to such sort of Ranterism,
that has termed a mortal man to be God: and if to put no distinction between
good, and some things that are evil, be also the fruit of a ranting Spirit, I
doubt not but that G. F. and many of his Party are in a high degree guilty
thereof, with respect to their conceptions of him, as well as his own
conceptions of himself; for I doubt not but that he and others on his behalf
are so puffed up with vain Imagination, or that which is worse, as that they
conclude that for many years past, if not from his Childhood, he neither has
nor can err; and on that foot, let his tongue run ever so extravagantly evil, I
am perfwaded that neither he, nor many of his Adherents do put any difference
between that and the thing that is good. See the Fourth, Fifth, and Seventh
Parts of the Christian-Quaker, for further manifestation of Principles and
practices whereof G. F. and his Party are guilty, to the dishonor of God, his
Truth, and People, and when compared with all that is said against any of the
said Parts, then consider whether many things therein contained, and not denied
by G. F. or his Party, do not worthily merit the censure of a grand deviation
from the anti^nt professed Principle and Practice of the People called Quakers,
and so far as they have a tendency slightly to esteem of leaving Friends to the
Grace of God in themselves (and instead thereof, to introduce a Submission to
some proud Persons endeavoring to dignifie themselves by a zealous promoting
of G. F.'s Orders amongst such as are dissatisfie therewith) whether they may
not properly be termed the very marks and tokens of such a loose libertine
Spirit, That by the measure of Gods Grace in the Children of Light, is, and for
ever will be condemned.

The very mentioning a zealous promotion of G. F.'s Orders brings to my
remembrance, that W. P. in his Adr. to Prot. page 91. tells us, That it
(meaning the Scriptures) concerns the whole Life and Conversation of a man, but
every Passage in it, is not therefore fit to be such an Article of Faith as
upon which Christian Communion ought, or ought not to be maintained. This leads
me thus to query.

First, Whether then such amongst G. F's Party as declare disunion with another
Person, on the mere foot of that other Persons conscientious refusal to propose
the Intentions of his Marriage to a Meeting-of Women distinct from Men, be not
a Badge of Apostasy, especially when the least Footsteps of such a Proceeding
is not to be found in the Seriptures of Truth.

Secondly, Whether the declaration of disunion on no other ground, compared
with the last cited words of W. P. carries not with it this Construction, Viz.

Though Christian-Communion may be maintained without making every Passage in
Scripture an Article of Faith, as essential to such Communion, yet not one Jota
of an Order approved by G. F 's Party, can be dispensed with to maintain the
ancient Fellowship of the People called Quakers.

Thirdly, Whether this be not to put a greater esteem on such an Order, than
the very Scriptures of Truth themselves, let the ingenious Reader judge.

What Credit can our Opposers think will ever accrue to their Cause, whilst W.
P's Adr. to Prot. shall pass for sound and Christian Doctrine. Our Adversaries
must needs be reduced to this Dilemma, either to condemn the Christian
Discourses contained therein, and so in opposition thereto hold up their Ensign
of Church Authority and Imposition, saying, Lo here is Christ, by which the
ancient Principle and Practice of the People called Quakers will be condemned,
or else to stand by the same; and then their late flight of leaving to the
Grace of God in our selves, and approving the Doctrine of Submission to the
Church, whether Believers see it their Duty or no, must be repudiated, as that
which can nourish no better Devotion than that whereof Blindness and Ignorance
is the Mother. And though the nameless Penman of the Accuser, etc. has
endeavored to render himself and Brethren as acquitted of Apostasy and
Innovation, yet he has been as successless therein, as if he had undertaken to
sodder Iron and Clay together. And why? Because he has become an Advocate for
men who have departed from the ancient Paths (as is largely manifested in the
first seven Parts of the Christian-Quaker) the Footsteps of purest Antiquity
and best Examples, which is such a sort of Presumption, as that W. P. Adr. to
Prot. page 92. tells us; That it was just with God, that Error and Confusion
should be the Consequences of those Adventures, nor has it ever failed to
follow them. Our Opposers may come in as Living Witnesses to the truth of such
his Testimony, or their work is manifested (in the seven Parts of the
Christian-Quaker) To be the very Map of Confusion and Error; showing no more
Charity (so far as I can perceive) for some such as were their Brethren (now
dissenting from them) than Bishop B^nner did, for such as answered not to his
satisfaction this Question. What say you to the Sacrament of the Altar? Blessed
be the Lord that our Opposers have not so much Power as he had; How remote the
uncharitable Constructions of such as were our Brethren, are from the Discourse
mentioned in 92 page of the Adr. to Prot. he that runs may read. The words are
these. What man loves God and Christ, seeks Peace and Concord, that would not
rejoice if all our Animosities and Vexations about Matters of Religion were
buried in this one Confession of Jesus, the great Author and Lord of the
Christian-Religion, so often lost in pretending to contest for it. And page 95.
is cited by way of Approbation the words of that great man J. Hales, VIZ. That
it is the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and not the Identity (or
oneness) of conceit, which the Holy Ghost requires at the hands of Christians.
Much more might be cited out of the said Adr. to Prot. in our favor, with
respect to what we stand for and against, but at present let this suffice as a
proper Umpirage in the case.

I shall now conclude with what does freshly occur in my memory, as the sum and
substance of many sweet and heavenly Declarations in the Name of the Lord by
our ancient Brethren, on this wise; Draw water out of your own Wells, let it be
your own, and not another. Look not unto us, but unto the Lord. We can be
taken from you; but your Teacher can never be removed into a Corner. We preach
not our selves, but Christ in you. We are but Ambassadors in his Name to turn
you from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan unto God, that so by the
measure of the Light of Christ in your selves, you might be establish in the
Truth which changes not. It is the Gift of the Fathers Love that we come to
exalt over all, Christ in Male and Female the Hope of Glory. Our Labor is,
that you who were not natural Branches, may come to be engrafted into Christ
the Vine, and then to live under your own Vine; that so if in your day the
Voice of a Stranger should be sounded in your Ears, saying, Lo here is Christ,
or There is Christ; you might no more go forth, but stay at home, as those who
are engaged in a Spiritual Warfare, having this encouragement from the
Psalmist, She that stays at home divides the Spoil.

This was the sound of the Ancients of Israel in the Spirit, when the Word of
the Lord through them was piercing like a Dart to the Liver, terrible to the
Man of Sin, but yet as a lovely Song to those whose Faces were Sion ward; and
the same Spirit that led them to treat as aforesaid, did frequently move on
their Spirits, to enform us of those Rocks whereon the Sons of Men have been
inclined to split, and those Bypath wherein the wayfaring man has been apt
to err, on this wise. In Ages past the Sons of Men have been inclined to set
up, or be in the Observation of some Outward thing, and to have their Eye
thereto more than unto the Word nigh in the Heart. This was Israel Sin before
then appearance of Christ in the Flesh, when they made unto themselves a Golden
Calf saying, These are thy Gods, Oh Israel, Exodus 32. This was the Sin reproved
by Paul on this wise, But now seeing ye know God, yea, rather are known by him;
How turn ye again unto the weak and beggarly Elements?

This was and is the mistake in most Societies and Churches professing
Christianity in Modern Times, whereon I need not dilate.

The Testimony of our ancient Friends, by Declarations, Disputes and Printing,
are yet as living Evidences in many Breasts; the Remembrance whereof seems to
be cause of Astonishment, That any of the ancient Flock should give occasion to
Jew or Gentile, or the Church of God to Impeach them of falling into the like
Snare. But that which seems to render the matter yet worse is this; That they
should speak well of those Ancient Laborers ( whose Doctrines, as aforesaid,
dropped as the Dew) whilst Persecuting others abiding therein; much like unto
those Who Garnished the Sepulchers of the Prophets that Prophesied of Christ,
but when He came, were found Persecutors of Him and his Followers.

The Lord Establish his People on CHRIST JESUS, The ROCK OF AGES, and turn the
Hearts of our Persecuting Opposers, that in a sense of their Backsliding and
Errors, They may confess unto God, and through True Repentance be made
partakers of his Mercy, and then, no doubt but the Ancient Love and Fellowship
in the Truth, will be again Renewed, to the Consolation of one another Souls
in the Lord.

Amen, Amen, says my Soul. William Rogers.

FINIS.

