I Have perused this Sermon, tending much to the Advancement of Military
Holiness and Orders (with these) the success of this present War; and do
therefore conceive them very useful for the public, especially the Armies.

April 16. 1646. Joseph Caryle.

A SERMON Preached at Balderton March 27. 1646.

Being a day of Humiliation thorowout the whole Army before NEWARK.

By ROBERT RAM Minister of Spalding in Lincolnshire, and Chaplain to Colonel
ROSSITER.

PSALM. 124.8. Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1646.

TO THE Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons residing at the
Leager before Newarke.
Right Honorable:
I Will not excuse my self or these unpolished Notes by the shortness of
warning, nor by the monthly Fast the same week, but only by your Honors
command, which must be my best plea, both for the Preaching and Publishing of
them. Such as they are, I am humbly bold to refer both them and my self also
to your censure, which I am confident will be favorable enough, because I have
already tasted of a great deal of undeserved respect from you, which does
mightily engage me to be

Your Honors most humble servant, Robert Ram.

A Sermon preached before the Army at NEWARK.
LUKE 3.14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall
we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages.


Right Honorable, and welbeloved in the Lord:
I May begin my Sermon as Chrysostom did one of his at Antioch, preaching upon
the conversion of Paul; who (says he) will despair of any man, though never
so vild and Hopeless, that shall hear of Paul's Conversion. In this Chapter we
have mention of three sorts of men converted to the grace of God by the
Ministry of John Baptist, as unlikely to be wrought upon as any in the world:
First, The common people, verse. 10. who usually are ignorant and rude.
Secondly, The Publicanes, a most wicked generation, ranck't by our Savior with
Heathen men, and worst of sinners; so odious amongst the Jews, that none would
match their children into that family which had a Publicane of it. Thirdly, The
Soldiers, as unbopefull to be brought to goodness as the other; Barbarous
Miles, the rude Soldier, was wont to be the common word. But such is the
unlimited power of the grace of God, and such is the infinite mercy of Heaven,
that even these ignorant people, these heathenish Publicanes, these barbarous
Soldiers are converted to goodness, and received to mercy.

My business at this time is with the Soldiers; I wish it may be as
profitable as it is seasonable; These Soldiers, you see, are inquiring of John
what they should do; And what shall we do? is their question. O it is a
hopeful thing and a comfortable sign when men will be asking Questions of
this kind, it is an argument that there is something of God in their hearts,
when they are unfainedly willing and desirous to know the mind of God. I hope
it is so with you, Gentlemen, and fellow Soldiers, that are come together this
day; I hope you have the same question in your hearts, that these Soldiers in
the Text had in their mouths; What shall we do?

In the words we may consider:

First, the persons that move this question, The Soldiers; And the Soldiers
likewise demanded.

Secondly, the question they propound, which is concerning their own duty,
What shall we do?

Thirdly, the Baptists answer; which consists of three Lessons, 1 Do violence
to no man. 2 neither accuse any falsely. 3 Be content with your wages.

John does not bid them, Lay down their Arms and give over that calling, he
gives not the least intimation of any unlawfulness in this military
profession, but only hints at the usual miscarriages that martial men are
prone to, and labors to regulate these new converted Soldiers, instructing
them how they should behave themselves in this calling. I will reduce all that
I have to say at this time, upon this Tex, into this one point of Doctrine.

Doct. That good Christians may be Soldiers, and all Soldiers should be good
Christians. The point has two parts: First, Good Christians may be Soldiers.
Secondly, All Soldiers should be good Christians. I will handle them
severally: First, Good Christians may be Soldiers.

1 Because to be a Soldier is a lawful calling, it is a profession that has
sufficient warrant in the Word of God, being often mentioned, but no where
spoken against or forbidden either in the old or new Testament. Christ commends
the Centurions Faith in the Gospel, but speaks nothing against his calling.
The other Centurion mentioned Acts 10.1, 2. has an Angel and an Apostle sent
to him to instruct him fully in the way of salvation but not a syllable against
his military profession; which doubtless Peter would have done, if his
employment, as a martial man, were not good and lawful.

2 Because it is a necessary calling; States and Commonweals can hardly
subsist long without it; there is great use to be made of the Soldier, for
preventing of oppression and violence, for defending of Rights and Liberties,
for the preserving and maintenance of Religion, for bringing of offenders to
Justice: Saint Paul says, Romans 13.4. That the Magistrate bears not the Sword
in vain, but the Civil Sword many times would be vain and useless without
the help of the Military Sword, Jer. 48.10.

3 It is a very honorable calling to be a Soldier, not only amongst the
Heathen, but even amongst Christians and the people of God: The Title of a Duke
comes from Dux, a Captain, a Knight in Latin is Miles; 1 a Soldier, an
Esquire, Armiger, one that bears Arms, etc. The Spirit of God makes honorable
mention of many that have been famous in this Profession, as of David's
Worthies, 2 Samuel 23. Of the Governors of Israel, My heart is toward the
Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly amongst the people;
Bless ye the Lord, Judge. 5.9. And in Psalm. 149. The Prophet speaking of the
activenesse of Gods people, against the Churches Enemies, how they should have
a two edged Sword in their hands, to execute vengeance and punishments, To
bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters, says in the close of all, This
honor have all his Saints.

4 Many men famous for Religion and Piety, have been of this Profession;
Abraham was a Colonel, he had a Regiment of 318. trained men in his own house,
and he himself that was called the friend of God, and the father of the
faithful, marched in the head of them in that Expedition against Amraphel,
etc. Genesis 14.14, 15. Joshua was a gracious man, and a renowned Warrier: David a
man after Gods heart, yet a man of War: That Centurian, whose faith Christ so
magnified, Matthew. 8.10. was a Captain over a hundred Soldiers; And so was
Cornelius, Act. 10.1, 2. yet highly commended for devotion and godliness. The
Apostle speaks of some of whom the World was not worthy, Hebr. 11.38. and
before 34. That they were valiant in fight, and turned to flight the Armies of
the Aliens. So then there is president enough to warrant that godly men may be
Soldiers.

5 God himself disdaines not to be counted a Soldier: The Lord is a man of
War, Exodus 15.3. And JEHOVAH TZEBAOTH, The Lord of Hosts, is one of the most
frequent attributes that God is set out by in the Scripture, which is as much
as to say, As the Lord of Armies, and implies, that he commands in chief, and
gives orders to all creatures both in Heaven and Earth.

6 The Holy Ghost gives Rules and Directions, almost in every point of War,
as about preparations, Making War with good advice, Prove. 20.18. for Marches,
for Quarterings, concerning stratagems, summoning of Towns, ordering of Camps,
etc. Besides there be many metaphors, and many comparisons, both in the Old and
New Testament taken from Soldiers, and that Profession, as Ephesians. 6. etc.
Which doubtless the wisdom of God would not have permitted, if good
Christians might not be Soldiers.

7 None are so fit to be Soldiers as good Christians and godly men, especially
in Gods Battles: This will appear in these four particulars:

1 They, of all men, will be most courageous and valiant; The righteous is bold
as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The word Geber, Psalm. 37.23. translated a good man,
signifies also a strong man, importing, that a good man and a strong man is all
one; as if none could be truly valiant but good men.

2 They have most understanding, and will be well advised in their business;
they will be sure of a good Cause, they will not draw their Sword against God
or his People, (as our Enemies now do:) The War must be well warranted that
they engage themselves in; good men will not fight, unless they have written
Orders from their General, the Lord of Hosts.

3 They will behave themselves like Christians and good men, they will obey
Orders and Commands; no danger or hardship shall discourage them, they will
scorn all cowardice and baseness; godly men will be as religious in the Camp
as the Church; the customary deboystnesse of that profession cannot prevail
upon them; when others are playing, they will be praying; when others
blaspheme, they will bless; They dare not do any violence or wrong, nor accuse
any man falsely, they will be contented with their Wages, etc.

4 God will undoubtedly bless and prosper both the councels and actions of a
good man; The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in
his way, Psalm. 37.23. They that honor God, God will honor them: How did God
go along with David in all his Wars? And how has the Lord prospered our New
Model?

I hope I have said enough to clear this point, That good Christians may be
Soldiers; That godly men may lawfully take up Arms, and fight when a just
occasion is offered.

Object. But it is objected by some, That Christ Mat. 5.29. commands his
Disciples, That they should not resist evil, etc. from which place they infer,
That it is utterly unlawful for Christians, in any case whatsoever, to be
Soldiers.

Answ. To this I answer, That Christ there speaks only against private
revenging of our selves upon those that do us wrong, not forbidding public
Justice to be done upon wrong-doers, nor the use of Arms, when necessity
requires.

Object. But Christ rebuked Peter for drawing his Sword in his Masters defense:
Therefore christians should not fight, no not in the cause of Christ.

Answ. Christ came to suffer and to die, and therefore forbids Peter to make
any resistance against the Officers.

Object. But some there be that hold Christians ought not to fight for Religion.

Answ. To this I answer, First by Scripture, secondly, by Reason; Deuteronomy. 13.12,
13, 14, 15. where the express command of God is, That if any shall withdraw
the people to serve other Gods, such should be smitten with the Sword, and
utterly destroyed. Again, Josh. 22.11, 12. All Israel gathered themselves
together as one man, to go up to War against the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, etc.
for setting up an Altar beyond Jordan, contrary to Gods command.

This may be further cleared by these Reasons:

1. Religion is the glory of a Nation. 1 Samuel 4.22. And she said, The glory is
departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken: Surely the Wealth, Peace,
Honor, Strength and Prosperity of a Nation, are bound up in the trunesse of
its Religion; so that there cannot be a better cause in the World to fight for,
then Religion, Presidium and dulce decus nostrum.

2 The true Religion would soon be rooted out of the World, if it were not
defended by the Sword of the Civil Magistrate; The Church (according to
ordinary means) could not subsist long, if she were not backed with Arms; she
has many mighty, cruel and crafty Enemies; They have said, Come let us cut
them off from being a Nation, they have consulted together with one consent,
etc. Psalm. 33.4.12.

3 We may take president from famous Churches abroad, that have taken up Arms
in defense of their Religion, when Idolatrous Princes have gone about to
deprive them of that. The stirs in Germany, in Luthers time, were about
Religion: The Protestant Churches in France, and the Netherlands, have
recovered, and do still maintain their Religion by the Sword.

Object. But what warrant have we to engage our selves in this present War?

Answ. God calls upon all his servants and friends to help him against the
mighty; the Lord says now, as Iehu did once, Who is on my side? who? who will
take my part against my Enemies? and woe be to him that sits Newter now: You
have a fearful doom against newtrality, Judge. 5.23. Rev 3.16. And wrath is
upon them from the Lord that do help Gods Enemies against him, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

2 Nature calls upon us, and bids us defend our selves from thieves and
cutthroats: We are but upon the defensive part, men are risen up against us,
and would swallow us up, and shall we make no resistance? May Beasts, Birds,
and Worms, by their provision and instinct of nature, defend themselves from
injury, and shall not Christians?

3 The highest powers under God do call upon us to arm our selves at this
time, against the Enemies of our Church and State. By the highest powers I
mean the Parliament, which, according to the constitution of our Government
here in England, has the most Sovereign power over us: The King, we grant, is
the highest person in his Dominions, but the Parliament is the highest power,
and the command is, That every sold should be subject to the Higher Powers,
Romans 13.1.2.5. even for conscience sake, and as they would avoid damnation.

4 Religion, Law, Liberty, and whatever is dear to us, do now call upon us to
take up Arms: These are mightily invaded, and unless we stand forth manfully,
we shall be spoiled for ever, and England will quickly become the most slavish
Nation in the World.

5 All the well-affected of the Land call upon us, that we should stand to one
another, and quit our selves like men, like fellow-Citizens, like Brethren,
against the Common Enemy; for the divisions of Ruben there were great thoughts
of heart, Judge. 5.15. And may not we stand and wonder, that any that pretend
any thing toward Religion, should mind their pleasures, or their profits in
such times as these; or should lie lazing at home, when so many of Gods dear
Servants are engaged abroad. This may both awaken and encourage every one that
would be accounted a Member of this Church in England, to come forth and join
with his Brethren, to the uttermost of his ability.

6 Our Children and posterity call upon us, that we would not leave them
slaves; That we would continue that Gospel to them, which their Grandfathers
conveyed to us, signed and sealed with their dearest blood.

Use. Now for Application of all this to our selves, Go on Gentlemen and fellow
Soldiers, let me speak to you as Ioab did to his Army, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of
good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our
God, and the Lord do that which seems him good. Truly Brethren, your
encouragements are great and many, never had any Army greater, or more then you
have; your calling is good and warrantable, as has been shown, and that may be
a comfort to you, whether you live or die.

2 Your Cause is good, for it is Gods, you fight the Lords Battles, you are
engaged in a business that does mightily concern Gods glory and his Churches
good.

3 You fight for your King too, to recover him from his, and the Kingdoms
Enemies; and even the King himself has justified our Brethren of Scotland in
the like action.

4 You have the hearts and prayers of all the good and praying people of the
Land; And prayer is a mighty thing. The last Queen of Scotland protested to
her friends, That she was more afraid of Master Knoxes prayers, then of an Army
of ten thousand men.

5 Your Enemies are Gods Enemies; Then surely you need not fear them; they
fight against the Lord, and his Christ; against the people of God, and that
Reformation which would advance the glory of God: It is impossible then that
they should prosper or prevail against you.

6 God has mightily blessed our Armies and Preparations; What multitudes of
glorious Victories have we been crowned withal, in the compass of a few
Months? the like has hardly been known in any age of the World.

7 Honor and Success will undoubtedly attend you; your names will be famous
to Posterity; It will be your childrens honor another day, that their fathers
were Soldiers in this Cause; that they did help the Church, the Commonwealth,
the Parliament, and were means to prevent their ruin: And for a reward for
your pains and labors in this Service, look for a full recompense, both here
and hereafter; And make no more question of being victorious over all your
Enemies, in Gods time, then of Gods Power and Truth, for if God be able, and
his Word true, your Enemies are undone men, Zeph. 3.19. And no weapon that is
formed against his people, shall prosper. Isa. 54.17. Our help stands in the
name of the Lord, he has been with us, and he will be with us; and if God be
with us, who can be against us?

Do violence to no man, etc.
The Baptist knew that men of this Profession were prone to these evils; and
indeed woeful experience tells us, even in our times, that these are the too
usual practices of Soldiers, which John labors to rectify and reform in
them. So then this is the second part of the Doctrine, or the next lesson, that
I desire every Soldier here to take forth; namely,

Doct. That Soldiers should be good Christians. As godly men may be Soldiers,
so Soldiers should be godly men. This I shall endeavor to prove by these six
Arguments:

1 The Lord of Hosts is our generalissimo, and he is a God of purer eyes, then
to behold iniquity; He requires that all that come near him, or belong unto
him, should be holy as he is holy; Read for this purpose, Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the
Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing,
Whatever they were or did before, they should be sure then to forbear all
wickedness, that so the Lord might go forth with them and bless them. And in
the 14. Verse of that Chapter, Moses gives some reasons why Camps and Armies
should be holy. 1. The Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, he can
soon see what is amiss then in our Quarters: If there be any good exercises,
as praying, reading, conferring, or the like; Or else if there be Drunkenness,
whoring, gaming, swearing, mutining; the Lord cannot but take notice of it. 2.
He insinuates, That if good Order be kept in the Camp, then will the Lord both
deliver such godly Soldiers from their Enemies, and give up their Enemies
before them. But 3. If our Camps be unholy, there will not the Lord stay, he
will quickly be gone if our wickedness be there.

2 No calling allows men to be deboyst or wicked; indeed every Profession has
its peculiar corruption, but we find not any dispensation for such
corruptions; It will not excuse a Soldier another day to plead That it is
usual amongst Soldiers to be drunk, to swear, to plunder, etc. Certainly
Almighty God will not be so answered; you must not think to carry it so; men
may be as holy and religious in this Vocation, as in any other Calling amongst
men; and there have been as good and holy men of this Profession, as of any
other in the World: You must not live by custom, or example, you must live
according to your rule; and the rule of a Soldier is to fear God, and to
abstain from sin and wickedness: The grace of God that brings salvation,
teaches all men (Soldiers as well as others) to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World, Titus 2. v. 11, 12.

3 Soldiers of all men are in continual danger of death, they have vitant in
manibus, mortem in oculis, their lives in their hands, and death in their eye:
It is therefore most fitting and needful, that they should be continually
prepared for death. O Sirs, did you but consider what a sad thing it is to die
without pardon of sins, without faith, without Christ, and how casual your
lives are at all times, but specially when you go upon any service, you would
be more careful to keep your selves from wickedness, you would be more
diligent to make your peace with God, you would not sqander away your time so
prodigally as many of you do, you would not dare to be such as many of you are.

4 No men stand more in need of Gods presence and assistance, then Soldiers.
It is through God that men do valiantly; alas, what are Armies and
Preparations, without the Lords blessing? let men be never so skillful, never
so courageous, never so well furnished with all the Instruments of War, yet all
is nothing, except the LORD JEHOVAH bless them: Now God will not help evil
doers, Job. 8.20. How can a loose, lewd, profane Soldier, expect that the
Almighty should cover his head in the day of Battle? That he should put by the
bullets, or blunt the Enemies Sword? Can such godless wretches, as provoke God
daily by their abominations, hope that he should be any ways helpful to them?
The Lord may make use of such men, to serve his providence, as he does of
Devils, but never shall they obtain any special favor from his hand.

5 Soldiers are Instruments of Justice, a kind of Magistrates, the Sword is
put into their hands to bring those to justice and condign punishment, which
the civil Magistrate could not reach: Now for the Devil to rebuke sin is not
proper; for men that are guilty themselves of violence and wickedness, to be
employed in the punishing and reforming of the same faults in others, is not
like to be well. If I should say to every Soldier here, that he is a Justice
of Peace, you would think it a strange speech, but truly, upon the matter, it
is so, your business is to do what the Justice would not, or could not do; you
are better men then you took your selves to be: O that the consideration of
that which you are employed about, might make you better men indeed.

6 My sixth and last Argument, to prove that Soldiers should be godly men, is
because else little good can be expected from them. Truly Gentlemen, it is an
ill Omen, when Armies are made up of profane persons; had I not better hopes of
this, yea, did I not know, that there are some amongst us, both Commanders and
others, that do truly fear God, I should withdraw my self from this Service,
as despairing of any good success against this place; we have been twice
already foiled here, and have been made to turn our backs upon our Enemies,
God grant our wickedness (which truly is great enough) cause not the Lord to
blast our Design the third time? let me tell you, that the sinfulness of our
Soldiers may cause us to fear the worst. First, Because wicked Soldiers
cannot be valiant, wicked men may be foolhardy, but never truly valiant; and
what can be expected from a company of cowards, whose guilty consciences will
make them fear that every Bullet will be their Mittimus to Hell? Secondly,
Godless men are not likely Instruments for God to work by, or to make use of
in glorious achievements, he will not honor them that dishonor him; they
know not therefore what they do, that send forth the scum and basest of their
Countries into this Service. Thirdly, The wickedness of Soldiers, and the
sins of a Camp, will provoke the Lord to forsake them and it. If God forsook
Israel, and suffered his people to be baffled and beaten by a small Party of
their Enemies, for the sin of one Achan. Josh. 7. What may we fear, when we
have many plundering Achans, multitudes of blasphemers, numbers of beastly
Drunkards in our Armies? It is enough to make God forsake our Tenths, and not
go out with our Armies.

Use 1. This in the first place serves to reprove those (as well Commanders as
Common Soldiers) that do not conform themselves to the rule of this Doctrine;
it is very sad and lamentable, that men, Christians, fighting and dying men,
Soldiers engaged in this Cause, the best and noblest that ever men were
employed in, and having the great JEHOVAH for their General, should carry
themselves no better ^^en many do: Are horrid Oaths, swinish Drunkenness,
shameful filthiness, and violent oppressions, with many other gross
impieties, suitable to such a Cause as ours is, and such Soldiers as we
profess our selves to be? Brethren let me commend unto you these six
considerations:

1 That it were too much for Turks and Pagans to be guilty of such abominations
as are daily committed amongst us, that are called Christians, and have
undertaken to fight for Reformation.

2 We condemn our Enemies the Cavaleers, for their blaspheming and outrages,
when indeed we justify them, by committing the same things, or rather
surpassing many of them in acts of wickedness.

3 Consider that we fight for Religion and Reformation; who will believe that
we can be real and zealous for either, when we express no more Religion in
our lives, and our selves hate to be reformed.

4 Remember this, That God will not hold a Soldier guiltless that takes his
name in vain, or that provokes him in any other kind, more then another man.

5 Think upon this; That we cannot hope for Gods blessing, either upon our
counsels or actions, if we walk so contrary to him; he has protested that he
will walk contrary to them that walk contrary to him.

6 Lastly consider; That such ungodly Soldiers will increase our misery,
rather then help us in them, for certainly they do but more and more inflame
the wrath of Heaven against us, and provoke him to enfatuate our Counsels, and
blast our Designs.

Object. It is common with men of our profession to be more licentious then
others, and of all men we may be allowed to take our liberty, and not be tied
so strictly to the rules of Keligion, least our spirits be snib'd and our
hearts grow soft and cowardly.

Answ. 1. The more pity, that licentiousness should be so common amongst
Soldiers; I am sure it should not be so: A Camp should be a School of
virtue, wherein men should learn and practice fortitude, chastity, sobriety,
holiness, etc.

2 Sin is so far from breeding of good blood, and making men valiant, that
nothing does more uncourage men; a good courage ever springs from a good
conscience.

Use 2. Next let me commend a word of Exhortation, 1 To you that are
Commanders. 2 To you that are Common Soldiers.

1 To Commanders.
1 Be you men fearing God your selves; piety is as fitting and necessary for
you, as for any under your command; you will never govern well, nor fight
well, nor live well, nor die well, if you do not truly fear God.

2 Make choice, so near as you can, of honest and godly men to be your
Soldiers; one such is worth a hundred that have nothing of God in them, let
such be entertained, let such be countenanced.

3 Use your Power and Authority to restrain wickedness; you may do much this
way, and God looks for much from you; punish swearers and drunkards and
prophaners of Sabbaths, least their sins be put upon your scores.

4 Walk you so before your Soldiers, in soberness, chastity and holiness,
that your examples may be a law to them; And let them not have occasion to say,
My Captain, or my Colonel, will swear, will be drunk, etc. and why may not
I do so to?

2 To Common Soldiers.
My exhortation to you shall be this in the Text, the very same that John
Baptist gave to his Soldiers; me thinks I hear you asking of me, as they did
of him, What shall we do? I say as he did, Do violence to no man.

That is, use no cruelty, nor injustice, do not oppress any man, nor put men
in fear, as the Marginall note has it. That you may be persuaded to this,
consider;

1 That Almighty God hates violence, Psalm. 11.5.

2 That grace abhors all such actions.

3 That all injuries shall be avenged, Proverb. 28.17. Colos. 3.11.

Neither accuse any man falsely.
Take heed of making offenders of innocent men, raise no slanders upon your
superiors, wrong not your fellow Soldiers by false reports: Now against this
evil consider;

1 That a man's good name is very precious.

2 That it is extreme injustice to accuse any man falsely, Prove. 25.18.

3 That though a Soldier may outface a poor man, yet can he not outface God.

And be content with your wages.
This prohibits mutining, plundring, detayning of Pay by Officers, any kind of
fraud, improvidence, and profuseness, etc. Now to persuade this consider,

1 It Is a brave thing to be contented.

2 That a Soldier should be content with a little; Food and Rament is enough.

3 That a good Soldier has the Public Faith of Heaven for better Pay then
State Wages.

And now for a close of all, give me leave to add but one thing more, which I
should have been larger in, had not the time prevented me; It is concerning the
business of this day: You know it was desired and appointed by the Honorable
Committee, and our worthy Commanders, that this day should be set apart for the
whole Army to seek God in a solemn way of Humiliation, for his blessing upon
our designs against this place; Blessed be the Lord that put it into their
hearts; and blessed be our God that vouchsafes us this liberty and
encouragement: O it is a hopeful business that begins with God. And now that
we may engage the Lord of Hosts to take our parts, and to prosper our work in
hand, let me tell you, that there are three things chiefly required of us all,
for the crowning of our desires, and for the obtaining of the help of Heaven
against our Enemies.

First, That we should search out and bewail, even with godly sorrow, and
bitterness of soul, the evils of our own hearts and ways, and labor what we
can to be afflicted in our spirits for our provocations.

Secondly, To take up a resolution, and to enter into a Covenant with Almighty
God, of more conscionable walking before him; this is a main part of such a
days duty, and the Lord expects this from every one of us; God grant we may do
it.

Thirdly, We must pour out our souls to God in fervent and faithful prayer;
This is our best weapon, both for defense and offense; Moses prayer, Exodus
17.11. prevailed more against Amalek, then Josua's Sword; and truly prayer
ought to be added to all other preparations; so that as this is our business
to day, so should we make our most earnest requests to the Lord, that he would
bless our Army, our Counsels, our Preparations, and our undertakings: I
beseech you then let every one of us put these things in practice; which if we
do, I dare promise that Newark will soon be ours, and we shall suddenly see
our desires upon all our Enemies: The Lord of Hosts will encamp with us, fight
for us, cover our heads in the day of Battle, and make us both valiant and
victorious. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.

