COLLECTIONS, OR BRIEF NOTES Gathered out of Mr Daniel Rogers's PRACTICAL
CATECHISM for private use: And now hereby communicated to some private friends,
toward the building of them up in their holy Faith.

By R. P.

COR VNVM VIA VNA

Printed for the Author. Anno Domini 1648.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe Author of these Collections or notes out of Mr Daniel Rogers's PRACTICAL
CATECHISM (which may not unsitly be called an epitome thereof having
experimentally found much benefit and comfort by them in his own private
conversation, had diverse times transscribed several Copies to bestow upon
special friends, to the intent, that they might with himself, be promoted in a
religious course. But now, growing old, and weary of transscribeing so many as
he desired, he thought of a more exped te way and less troublesome, though with
some charge to communicate them to his frinds in this form. Such is the
diffusive nature of good, that it contain's not it self in a private closet;
but spread's further and enlarge's its quarters, where it may find
entertainment. Give God the prais, and enjoy to thy benefit and comfort the
pious labors of this thy friend, who undertook this pains for thy sake.

Collections gathered out of Mr. Daniel Roger's PRACTICAL CATECHISM for Private
use, and now dispersed by some few Copies for the use of private Friends, to
whom I desire to communicate the same comfort which I have experimentally found
by them. GOD give a blessing unto them, to the Soul's health of those who shall
be partakers of them.
ARTIC. I.
In Adam mankind was created in perfection of light and holiness.

He was not miserable at the first: for God created man male and female in his
own image.

1. For the matter, in respect of his Soul, he was made a spiritual, immortal,
invisible intelligible Being, as God, a little spark of Divinity.

2. For the manner: as God's Essence being One is subsisting in three persons:
so one soul in three powers, natural, sensible and reasonable.

3. In respect of endowments, pure, lightsom, orderly, righteous, holy and
perfect, though not in actual power and stabilitie, yet in habitual integrity.
He was righteous, but not righteousness (for that is the Gospel-work) not
immutable, but left to his freedom of will.

4. In his body, although of earth, yet by the breath of God, putting life
into the earthly frame thereof, he was made a creature of great authority
and majesty, a Lord and Sovereign (under the Creator) of all his creatures
under himself. A little lower then the Angels, a petty Viceroy under the Lord
himself.

This Image of God is more distinctly confidered in three things,
1. Body. 2. Soul. 3. Person.
I. In the Body: in which we consider two things.

1. The Production of it. 2. The Frame of it being made.
For the first: the Lord addresse's himself more solemnly to it then to other
creatures: Let us make Man: not thus, let man be. The Trinity is called to
this work, noteing it should be divine, excellent and complete.

For the second: a special resemblance of the Creator. Consider it in three
things.

1. Created with peculiar aptness and fitness for the service and execution of
an immaterial and divine Soul: yea every way and in all points most
instrumental.

2. Out of so base and earthly substance the Lord raised up an immortal and
durable nature, never to die, free from all alterations.

3. A difference of habit, of proportion and gesture from other creature: in
him such reverend marks as cause all creatures to stoop and do obeisance to him.

II. In the Soul: considered two ways:

1. In the Nature of it. 2. In the Functions.
1. In the Nature, like God's immortal, incorporeal, intelligible, free to will
or nill.

2. In the Functions, both inward and outward.

Inward: 1. The understanding having perfect knowledge of God. 2. His Will
perfectly righteous, wholly subject to God's will: and so the operations and
actions suitable to both. God then sat in the throne of the mind as supreme,
the Will was subject to the mind, the Actions to both.

3. The Conscience pure.

Outward ordered by knowledge. There was positive power and free will to good,
and to evil negative: (as now in the unregenerate there is a freedom to evil
and not good, and in the regenerate, partly to good, partly to evil) only not
unchangeably so.

III. In the whole person.

1. In his reverend and awful behavior. 2. In his honorable entertainment
vouchsafed by the Lord, even as a Prince into his Palace.
All the world being sinished in her due parts and ornaments, man is brought in
as the Royal creature, possessed of all the rich treasure of the Creation, set
therein as in a theater of the Workmanship of God, that all should be subject
to him.

Although the crooked nature of man think's it but her misery to think how
happy she has been, yet the Lord purposes by this means to bring her back
to her first excellency, if she will be ruled by him.

Use I. This should teach us to adore that deep workmanship of God, which once
enstamped such a livelie image of himself in man, as cannot be quite defaced,
no, not by sin it self, I mean in some characters of it, which by his merciful
providence he has left in common nature.

This stir's us up to two meditations. First, if sin (as defaceing a blemish as
it is) yet could not so quite root out that honor and majesty of God in man,
but still he has reserved (for universal ends) some relics thereof (for else
whence is it that the Lord has denied those useful creatures, the horse and
the ox and others, to feel their own strength, and the curs of man, so that
they should quite renounce his service: do they not still fear the shadow of
God's image? and are they not awful? nay, do they not yield themselves to his
tameing and subduing power?) what an indelible character is there in his second
image of righteousness enstamped by the Spirit of Christ? who dare say that any
thing can deface that lasting image?

Secondly what reverend respect should we yield to the ruined image of God in
the Creature? who should dare to mock and disdain those whom God has doubly
impaired his image in? even the lame, the blind, the deaf, the imporent and
crooked.

Use II. This should smite a terror and aw into us of Magistrates, Ministers,
Parents and Superiors: let us behold God perfecting his authority in them,
though they have razed it out by their sin.

This recognisance of the first image of God should occasion us 1. to shame our
selves, by the reflex of our odious and degenerate qualities, upon our own
spirits. 2. To provoke us (if we are not quite forlorn) both to mourn, that
for so base objects and lusts sake we have despised so great graces as have
been offered us: and also to excite our appetites to long after it, and to
groan under our inabilitie to beleev it; saying, O Lord I was born to
excellency and honor, and shall not thy persuasions draw my heart to recover
my lost estate? and should not each day seem ten to us (when we may regain it)
till the Lord has settled it again in Christ upon us?

Use IV. It should teach us much more to believ, how admired he can make
himself, in all his Saints by his second Creation, especially at his second
coming: and the whilst, in repairing his image more perfectly in those that
believ; faith being a greater excellency and tending to a nearer Union then
ever any perfection of Adam, Oh! it should convince us of the goodness of
mercy, and cast out that emnitie of ours, which cannot beteam God one good
thought.

ARTIC. II.
ADAM fell from his integrity by wilful transgression.

HIs sin was a Compound of all sins in one: a proud, disloyal, needless,
distrustful, revolting, discontented, unthankful, rebellious departing from
the blessed GOD to a base Creature, even when he was set in the midst of all
perfection above all base objects.

He was indeeed actually God's image, but not unchangeablie so. Therefore
having his will left in her freedom, and unestablished by gracious determineing
thereof to good: Lo, when a sensible object is presented by the Devil, first
she (as the weaker) then he by her means, freely chose to leave God and to
embrace the Creature. And hereby, when he was made able if he would to stand,
(although, so as he might fall) he turned this voluntary might, into a
necessity of falling, and impossibleness of return by himself.

This sin is more fully set forth by two things.

1. By the description of the holy Ghost. 2. By the parcels of the sin.
I. The Scripture call's it That disobedience, That offense, That
transgression. Sol. Eccl. 7. ult. call's it a findeing out of inventions. No
man can find out any thing that good is beyond God. God had found out and
bestowed on Adam and Eve all goodness in perfection: yet they would find out
beyond him, and be wiser then he: supposing to better their estate: but they
found out nothing but their own findeings, Sin and Sorrow, as it was just they
should do, who would go beyond God: they found out work which God never set
them, and then devised lies and shifts, but they found out misery to their
portion, when all the rest vanished and left them in sad confusion.

II. By the parcels of their sin: considered

1. By the circumstances, 2. By the fall it self.
The circumstances are as the persons belonging to it: viz. 1. the Serpent the
subtillest creature, the fiittest instrument for Satan to work by: he set's
upon the woman the weaker, and that alone. 2. Satan, who had been an Angel of
light; but fell by pride, and now full of rage against man. 3. Eve and Adam
jointly: who did most immediately concur to their own transgression.

In their fall consider two things.

1. The remote causes. 2. The more near and proper.
The former were

1. Changeableness of their will, whose habitual holiness wanted a confirmation
in grace, and so was corrupted to a passive capableness of evil, but they used
not that power to stand, which God had put into them.

3 The aptness of the temptation. By the strong bait of sweetness he attempt's
the affection, and so corrupt's the judgment.

The near or proper cause is threefold.

I. Inward tickling of their affection: not suddenly, but by steps. Satan
suspend's the act of goodness in them, bring's them to a slack remissness, and
corrupt's their bent of spirit. This was the first spawn of the sin: which
stood in foolish credulity, curiosity and dalliance. Credulity, to secure
herself of her own welfare, as if nothing could or would hurt her. Curiosity,
to enter change talk with a creature, she being the Lady of all creatures.
Then Dalliance, in bandying so many replies one after another (who know's how
many?) and ventureing to prate of so weighty a thing as her happiness, not
doubting that so nice a point threatened her ruin.

These three brought forth the second, which was

II. Snareing: for by this tickling of her she take's the Devil's snare into
her will and thoughts, so far, that as a bird in the grin she could neither go
backward nor forward, but is limed and hampered with that which at first she
was free from.

And so in the third place succeed's

III. Secret assent to the temptation, and yeeld's up the inward weapon of her
innocence to the Devil. So God leave's her to call evil good, and good evil.
And so she took it, eat it, gave it her husband, who, though he were not
first, yet he was last in the transgression, and yeeldded to do as the Devil
had drawn her to do, and so both of them disobeyed.

In the fall it self consider, not only the act of the transgression, but with
it a fardel of abundance of foul corruptions of heart: and these are of two
sorts, Special, or General. The Special were, 1. Pride. 2. Security and Sloth.
3. Vanity. 4. Sensuality. 5. Discontent. 6. Salriledg. 7. Cruelty and
Injustice with the like. The General: 1. Woeful distrust of God. 2. Rebellion
against God. 3. Unthankfulness. 4. Apostasy totally from God.

Use I. Learn from the Serpent, who abused his parts, not to boast our selves,
or rest in no outward gift of God for it self: Seeing (if unsanctified) it may
be instrumental to such villainy and dishonor to God, either in our public or
private places, and so prejudicial to our own Salvation, as we should wish
rather we had been Idiots, then so egregious,

Use II. From Satan, learn to suspect him in his sweet enchantments: and when
he attempt's Eve, that is out sensual part, overthrowing our Adam and judgment
thereby, then to handle him roughly, knowing him (by his messenger) not to be
far off.

Us* III. From Eve and Adam, learn to beware of dalliance and admitting parlee
with temptations of sensuality, least we fare as Sampson by Dalilah, and
would fain get off the hook, but cannot, being snared.

Use IV. Bless God, that in Christ has changed old Adam's perfection to a
better and surer: from a self-subsistence in grace according to our own
freedom, to a subsisting in another. Betrusting us no more with our own
treasure, but keeping it under the lock and key of his own power in Christ.

Use V. It teache's us highly to esteem of selfdenial: Adam fell by too much
trusting himself, we stand by the grace of self renouncing.

ARTIC. III.
Adam's sin made him miserable.

Both in respect of sin, and punishment.

1. HIs actual sin brought forth Original: his Original all Actual sins: and
both these procured all penalties. So that by the wrath of God was inflicted
upon him the loss of God's image standing in righteousness and true holiness; a
deprival of the glory of God both in Soul and body. Hence came that utter
impotencie of mind and members, to purpose, to will, or execute any good. Nay,
an utter aversness from it, an utter uncapableness of it, a contrariety of
Spirit unto it, Jo. 14. 4. and 5. 14. Psalm. 5. 15. Romans 7. 23. propension to
any sin, and unaptness to any good.

2. So for the penalties, a seed of utter impenit^nci^, disobedience,
obstinacy, apostasy and excommunication from God. From this fountain
proceeded both actual sins and actual penalti^s. Sins of commission, omission,
ignorance, presumption: inward habits, as hypocrisy, earthliness, ignorance,
error, profaneness, unthankfulness, hardness of heart: Outward acts,
impiousness, unrighteousness, intemperancie and the like. So penalties actual,
as the impuritie and curs of conception and birth, the loss of the right and
dominion of the creatures, the curs on God's blessings, hellish terrors,
diseases, poverty, discredit, imprisonment, fear of death, guiltiness of
judgment, and utter misery of loss and sens in hell. Such a penalty upon
Adam's nature, as made it truly miserable in stead of being truly happy.

This misery has two branches.
1. The misery of sin. 2. The misery of punishment.
1. Misery of sin is either of the root, Original: or the branches, Actual
sin, both making the Soul truly, though not equally miserable.

The misery of Original sin stands in two things.

1. Original guilt. 2. Original stain or pollution: both being the fountains of
all actual guilt and pollution of conscience.
Original guilt is that privitie and reflection of conscience, whereby he told
himself continnally that he had fallen, and therefore must die the death in
each kind of it, body and Soul. This perpetual Alarm of conscience in his
nature was the first part of his finfull misery. And to say the truth, what
misery is like to this? to be ever on the rack of a man's own spirit,
suggesting and boading him sad things to com for his sin, threatening him with
perpetual ruin.

Original stain, or pollution is set forth either in the whole, or in the
parts. Touching the whole, the holy Ghost expresses it by the word Death: for
as death is the resolution of nature; so is this death of the Soul a total
abolishment and corruption of that blessed frame of creation, in Mind by
light, in Will by holiness. Touching the parts, in the mind there is a death
of all pure light and knowledge: in the will, of subjection: in the affections,
of direction to the right objects: in the conscience, of all welfare and
pureness: in the spirits, senses and members, there is a death of that ability
and serviceableness to the Soul in good things; and a proneness and tickling to
be employed profanely and unholily. To conclude, there is a death of the
Person, in respect of that right and sovereigntie over the creatures, with a
slavish proneness rather to idolize them, both in the worship of some, and the
love or use of others; a declenfion from God, and a revolt to the base
creature, as Eve did to the forbidden fruit.

The misery of Actual sin is the depravedness of death of all the operations
flowing from the soul within, or the body without.

11. The misery of punishment stand's in the manifold penalties both of soul
and body. In the Soul first, an aversness from God, an uncapableness of
admitting of any means to draw the Soul out of misery to any better estate, a
spirit of resisting and opposition to any such: a proneness to be riveted more
and more deeply into this woe, with less or less feeling or believing it.
Touching the body, what languors and diseases are incident to it: what
poverty, baseness, beggerie and want to the estate? what reproach to the name
and credit? aspersions, slanders, dishonors? what misery in family, Church
and Commonwealth? Crosses, streights, pursuits, losses, forfeits, death of
friends, imprisonment, bad tideings, famine war, pestilence and a thousand ways
for him to go woefully out, who came but one way into the World: besides grief
of mind, melancholy passions and distempers of the spirit, bad conscience,
ill marriage, lewd children, ill success, ruin of estate, and at last a
miserable death: and yet the upshot of all is worst after, viz. a final
separation from GOD, and loss of his eternal presence, with the sens of
unutterable, intolerable, unavoidable wrath of God in Hell upon the whole man
for ever, without the least hope of help or redress in or from himself.

Use I. To consute the Papists, who deny this death of nature, and say, there
be left in the unregenerate such abilities and devotions as may congruously
dispose God to pardon them, and by some help of grace merit also full
forgiveness. It likewise reprov's natural Papilts, who dote upon their civil,
moral, or religious duties: except ye also deny your selves, and behold the
miseries of your natures ye will fare wors in time even by your righteousness,
then if ye had none. For why? do not ye graff upon a rotten stock, and guild a
rotten post? So also such as commend men's natures, saying, oh such are so
sweetly natured, courteous, loving, mild and harmless, that there is but
little between them and heaven: alas, how many of those sweet creatures are as
bitter enemies to God's grace, as friends to civilitie and fair carriage. And
also such as defend their passions by their nature, saying, it is my nature to
be so hot, I have soon don: fool, think thou thy nature is more excusable
then thy passion? Men think the Minister should only reproov gross sins, but
should not be bitter against infirmities: oh, God would fain draw thee from
the open to the secret sins of thy heart, least thy freedom from the gorsser
should destroy thee.

Use II. This should cause thee to look upward, and to gage the greatness of
Christ's love, which could sinde in his heart to satisfy for such a misery,
and to fetch happiness out of the depth of it. The height and depth of mercy
cannot be sounded, till thou take measure of it by the depth of misery.
Little sin to forgive will make Christ little loved. Let us not lessen and
mince our sins in hope of more easy pardon: but if we should magnify the
grace of Christ, let us first magnify, and enlarge our sin to the uttermost:
if Christ see that we rather hope in our small sin then his great grace, we
are dead men. The way to get pardon is to equal his price to all our misery.
That love that would rather satisfy for all, then any should condemn me is of
infinite dimensions.

Use III. This should cause us to wonder at the goodness of Gods dispensation of
this misery, that both in the sin and in the penalty it should be so
mitigated by the providence of that God, who for universal ends restrains the
force and violence of this misery. Let us acknowledge the singular patience of
God to dispens so mercifully with man: all save hell being mere indulgence of
mercy.

Use IV. It teaches us to judge aright of sin: to count our selves miserable by
it: to judge of it not by the matter or act of it, but by the villainy of it
against the majesty of God, his crown and dgnitie. And the truth is, from the
slender esteem of sin com's that base esteem of Christ with many.

ARTIC. IV.
The whole race of mankind is guilty of Adam's sin.

AS a Leprosy it has overspread the whole nature of mankind, all sorts,
sexes, state and degrees, without exception, Romans 5. 18. All the sin, all the
penalties of sin belonging to Adam himself, belong to us: no man is exempted
from this mass of corruption. That first actual sin of Adam and Eve in eating
the forbidden fruit is conveyed and made over to us: then original, then
actual, then penalties, all hanging each upon another, as the lesser boats tied
to the greater ship. So then, although we did not individually and personally
see, talk with the Serpent, put forth our hands, and put the fruit into our
mouth: yet did we eat it as well as he: why? because Adam's sin was the sin of
nature, not of a person. As God would have imputed Adam's integrity to us, if
he had stood therein, so might he impute his sin.

And thus by partakeing with him in the act, we also partake with him in all
the consequents of sin and penalties following.

Use I. This should teach us, when we see what a lump of mortality it has
leavened, to lie down with horror under the hugeness of it, and to feel it
crush our souls yet more sensibly. How deadly a poison is in the sin of Adam,
which could not be washed out in so many hundred generations. Nay the stain of
it is as fresh, and will be to the world's end, as at the first, and the
fruits much fouler. It Is a true speech, Old Adam is not as other old men,
crazie with old age: but his age is renewed in every new generation, as the
father in the son. This should take away all prideing our selves in our brats,
being the generation of vipers.

Use II. It should make us tremble to think that we have put into them a
leaven, which Grace it it self will never thoroughly purge them of in this world.

Use III. It sharply reprov's such as soder up this fearful ruin by any
outward accomplishment, which make's them glorious in the eye of man, and so
blind themselves willingly from seeing their abomination before God.

Use IV. It teache's, that if God exempt any from this leaven and infection,
they must count it a peculiar grace: for he is tied to none.

Use V. Let all Pharisees learn to take this razor and cut the comb of their
own conceitedness, when one and the same misery shall be laid upon the
proudest hypocrite, and the prophanest Publican, when one hell and judgment
belong's to both. Oh what ground of self-denial and humiliation ought this to
be?

ARTIC. V.
There is no possibility for man of himself to escape this misery.

He is incapable of any way offered him, therefore much less able to embrace
it. Nothing in nature, art, education, nothing of worth or congruitie, nothing
from self or other men, or Angels to help out of this desperate ruin.

Use I. This should quite sink the heart of a proud Sinner. Hopeless misery
should make an helpless Soul, lying panting at the mercy of a Savior, and
gasping for breath, that if there be no more for her out of herself then
within her, she may give over all.: And while she see's no hope in herself,
she may despair in herself, Those that com to Christ must be wholly beaten
out of all holds, and those strong holds of self-hopes and self-loves either of
mere nature, or mix't with some help supernatural. Give now up all weapons, and
say, If it be thus Lord, thou have overcom, I am bereft of all, and I must
stand to the mercy of a Conpueror: I have nothing to merit or help me: it
remaine's now that utter misery provoke mercy at the hands of a merciful GOD,
with whom the fatherless shall find it.

Use II. It quasheth all Popish pride and arrogancy, all Pelagian conceit of
the remnant of Free Will in us toward our own Recoverie. Man is as truly
blind as in a dungeon of darkness. Though light be offered, he is as impotent
to see it, as unable to procure it in the want of it.

Use III. It teaches what a mystery Grace is. When grace finde's a man, it
does prevent him, even as the light com's upon the Drunkard in the depth of his
snorting and Surfeit. Oh the sweet peace the Sinner finde's in his misery! As
Israel made their bondage ease, so we hell it self our heaven by custom. We
add delusions to our blindeness and senslesness by falls errors of our own and
others. Nothing can work the Soul to humiliation save woeful experience, when
all is too late.

ARTIC. VI.
The convincing Ministry of the Moral Law reveale's our misery.

THe Apostle 1 Timothy 1. 5. divide's the work of the Law into two sorts: 1. One
upon the righteous as an eternal pattern and direction of righteousness. 2. As
it is a means to convince the ungodly, and to reveal to them their sinful and
cursed condition. The Law work's two things in particular: 1. Know. ledg. 2,
Conviction.

The Law first searche's the Soul, it is the Candle of the LORD, and pierce's
the bowels of the Spirit, those secret windeings and corners, shifts and
evasions of it, be they never so colorable and subtle. The Lord has given it
authority over the Conscience as his own Bailief, to hunt out and discern sin
in the colors, in the kinds of it, open, secret, thoughts, affections, yea
concupiscence: not the bare letter of the Law but the Spirit. And the
conscience of the unregenerate being once thus stirred, is as the light of the
Law to bring God into each privy part. That most holy and wise God who first
contrived the Law, put the light of his own pure majesty into it, and enabled
it to discover sin to the Soul, not as other laws to speak to the ear, but the
conscience. And as light, so conviction also, both are put into the law by the
same God, whose fingers wrote it.

The Law discover's not the unbelief of the Gospel: for it is a model of the
righteousness of creation, in which there is no need of faith: therefore it
only reveale's those sins which make us guilty without a remedy, thatt might
drive us to seek a remedy.

The Law discover's all sort of sin, Actual and Original, and the curs that
lie's upon us: And this it does 1. by dispersing those mists of ignorance, that
suffer not the light to enter. 2. By removing the bars against it: which are
chiefly these:

1. Prejudice against the light, the means of light and instruments of light,
which hinder's them from Knowledge.

2. Custom in darkness: they have lived as their forefathers, and don well
enough.

3. Hardness of heart and purpose to to live in their lusts still.

4. Woeful bluntness of edg and bluntness of Spirit, by which they make
themselves incapable of Knowledge.

5. Generalness or slightness by which they pleas themselves, to know the mere
common sins, which every one may read in great letters running; and through
eas seek no further: because indeed knowledge in not their aim, but their policy
to avoid the shame of gross ignorance.

6. Self-love, by which he is loath to be informed in truths: his partiality
and subtlety, which suffer's him not to bear such truths, as are like to
oppose his personal, precious and beloved evils, whereby he is loath to hear
of any sins, save other men's, not his own.

7. Errors of our own conceit of sound righteousness, to wit, that we have
served God well, both in shunning of sin, or doing duty, when we have been
drawn to it only by foreign compulsion, or outward occasions.

The Law enlighten's us in the discerning actual sins both in themselves, and in
their Penalties.

1. In themselves, sundry ways.

1. By her authority in commanding, setting up herself in the conscience the
most privy chamber of the Soul: this no law of man can do.

2. By her harmony, consent and coherence: this no man can see except
enlightened. Jam. 2. 10. be that break's one, is culpable of all. As he that
break's one Link of a golden chain, breake's the coherence. As he that break's
his neighbors fence trespasse's him as well as if he ranged over all his
ground, because the bond is broken.

3. By her royalty: That as a King is not prescribed against by the quality
of any Subject offending, why he may not hold him guilty: So in this no
person is accepted of God in this kind. This royal law is impartial, it will
show a Queen her sports as well as a poor woman.

4. By her integrity and soundness: that is, it open's sin to the soul in one
kind as well as the other. Such is the corruption of Adam that it will suffer
much of the body of sin to vanish in the survey. But where God enlighten's he
discover's sin in all her sexes, male and female, strong and weak, remembered
and forgotten, ignorance and knowledge, in a word, one and other: for want of
which many a Soul never com's to the bar of God's conviction.

This rule shows the difference of these:

First, sins of Omission are passings by, and balking of some duty behooving to
be don whether against, or without knowledge.

Secondly, sins of Commission are actual doings of some evil (in thought, word
and deed) against the revealed will of God, whether we be convinced or not
convinced convinced thereof, to be sin: as to work upon the Sabbath, to speak
vainly, to nourish base thoughes.

Thirdly, sins of Knowledge are transgressions of the Law of God against a man's
conscience, and the check of it, whether greater or smaller: as when Shimei
paised Jordan against his own covenant, or, when a man goes against his own
light. Sins of Ignorance are, when a man transgresses, but yet not knowing his
sin to be sin, as Abimelech coveting of Sarah, Paul's persecuteing the Church.

4. Sins of weakness or Presumption differ only from sins of knowledge in the
intention of him that sins: Not each sin of knowledge amounts to a sin of
presumption, though all presumption must need's be a sin against knowledge. Sin
of presumption then is a sin of knowledge committed with an high hand. Sin of
weakness is a sinning against such knowledge as yet is prevented in her work
through accident: as either inabilitie of grace to stick to knowledge, or,
through timerousness and fear, although dalliance and wantonness be absent,
and though conscience be present to accuse. 5ly. Sins of presumption it self
are not all one: for some are only presumptuous in act, as David's adultery
and murder: others are total, when a man is totally and finally carried in a
presumptuous stream of habited sinning. This trencheth most horribly against
the patience and long-suffering of Grace it self: and commonly drawe's
impenitencie of spirit upon it self, which cannot repent when it would. 6ly. A
just fruit of this dalliance with grace habitually, is that total and final
Desertion of God's spirit, giveing over the presumptuous heart to such a
sinning against grace, as at last despiteth that grace, which it has so long
slighted; as the Gnat which burns it self in the candle: and this is called
sinning against the holy Ghost differing from habited Presumption in this, That
in that a man sins against the grace of the Spirit: but in this, a man
despiteth the Spirit of Grace it self.

5. By her extent: it is a great piece of the light of the law to extend it
self in the soul to all parts and degrees of sin: 1. in her Spiritualness,
teaching us not to rest only in open, gross, moral offenses, but to go to
spiritual wickedness. 2. In her inquisition and search: it dare and can go to
any part of the whole man, and fetch out any poison out of any corner. 3. in
her aggravateing power: whereby she inlarge's sin by her circumstances,
causing it thereby to seem the more odious, and setting the wors colors upon
it; as because such a person committed it, a public man, against such light,
when he needed not, from mere malignitie of Spirit, in the midst of
blessings, against mercy, gospel, vows, covenant, etc. 4, in her purity: the
law does not go tell the Soul of each sin; but set's the mirror of God's
pureness before her, that she may according thereto discern and judge of sin;
good and bad, true and evil.

These are helps to serve the work of the law in convinceing, not to forestall
the work of the Spirit. she more sound light the soul has, the better:
Howbeit, God is free to work in what way and measure h^e pleas.

II. The law discover's sin by the Penalties. The Lord take's away all
distinction of venial and mortal sin from a man: present's himself to him in
his full justice of revenging all sin without exception: tell's the Soul,
deferring of punishment is no remoovall of it, that all sins deserv all
punishments; that the least cost the Lord Jesus his blood, and he that
beleev's it not, shall pay for it in hell: there is no lying hid from God's
eye; no shift, or evasion besides faith and repentance.

The Lord discover's Original sin to the soul many ways:

1. By the special terms of his Word: the Lord is in no one thing so
emphatical, as in the names he give's to this poison. He call's it the old
man, the flesh, lust, concupiscence, the law of the members, the law of sin
reigning in the members, the body of death and the like.

2. By comparison. For when the Soul has had the view of actual sins before,
as most irksom, and now com's to see greater abominations then these, as the
Lord tell's Ezekiel. Chap. 8. 15. Oh! how out of meature sinful seems it to the
soul? how does she cry out, miserable man! for mark, thus she speak's,
although actual sins were enough to sink me into misery, yet I see they were
but evil in respect of their part: but now I see a body of all parts and
members, a King in his throne. I see now my self cursed double and trebble.

3. By the properties of Original sin. as,

1. It is eminently sinful: it is more sin then other sins: Whatsoever is in
any of them, is here more notoriously: whatsover filth and base quality may
be spied in all, or any sin, is here more singularly: as light and heat is in
our fire, or the air, or the Moon, but eminently in the Sun, the first subject
and seat of it. All the poison of actual evils is seated in the Original, after
whose copy they write: and therefore Original is greatest, as the seed, which
in her power contain's thirtie-sold.

2. Predominantly, both in respect of fullness and force. For fullness, it has
all sin under it, and in it, as the perfect body has all the members: it is
the fuel of the fire of sinful acts. For force, Paul call's a Law. Princes
rule strongly by their laws, they are as a soul wholly and en each part:
nothing so forcible, there is a necessity in a law: it break's down and
carrie's all before it.

3. Perpetually. We say the King has a perpetual patrimony that is not
alienable: so has a Sinner by his original sin: He may fail in his
spending-money, as in his policy and strength, and industry to oppress, to
defile his body: but his stock and patrimony never fail's. If it be so in
the best of God's servants ( Luther himself little molested with covetousness,
yet he had this Stock still within) how much more is it true of each sinner.

4. It is an Overflowing sin and natural. Fire and water are ill masters, but
they burn and overflow naturally. It please's us because it is natural, and
has a self-perswasion which carrie's it smoothly, unsuspiciously, and by
priveledg. It is my nature to smite when I am angry: it is my nature to be soon
hot: it is therefore the more dangerous and cursed.

5. The bondage of it. It binde's up the Soul in death, hardness,
insensibleness, incapableness of any good, aversness to all means of grace.

6. The unlimitedness of it: Not only an utter impotencie to any present
obedience urged by the Law: but so rooted a languor, as reject's whatsoever God
might impose.

Use I. Touching the sin of ignorance, bless God, that has freed us from the
darkness and corruption of Popery, whose principles do for ever keep Souls far
from the possibility of sound knowledge of their natural estate, eitther by
actual or original sin. Beware likewise of nuzzeling thy self in places under
ignorance, or to abide ignorant under the use of means: bring not God a
sacrifice which want's this eye of knowledge of thy sin.

Use II. Admonition to all sinners, to go to work aright, to get sound knowledge
of their estate. Consult not with dead teachers, go not to blind guides, to
such as thy self, to deceivers. Consult not with thy wits and carnal wisdom,
thy corrupt hopes, blind devotions.

Refuse no informations for fear of losing thy liberty in sin.

Use III. Exhortation to all that would be kindly convicted to com to the
light for sound information of sin. The want of this will be a flaw for ever
in thy Religion. They who never knew themselves, never were humbled ones, nor
believers. Discourage none for measure. That light which make's all manifest,
is enough, be it never so little, if sound.

Use IV. Every one ought willingly to open himself and the door of his
conscience and the light of this law, coming into it. Although the law has no
Christ in it, yet the maker of it uses it as a Schoolmaster to him. Grace
begin's at the root of enlightening: examine thy self in thy uprightness therein.

Use V. This lays open the unspeakable justice of God in suffering such
darkness to spead over the world for so many ages, and still in many nations
who sit in the Valley of death.

Use VI. This may teach us how deep a blindeness is cast upon the Soul in point
of discerning her own sin and danger. Nothing is further off then the reflex of
her own corruption upon conscience: nothing more tedious then to be informed
of sin in the kind: He that com's to tell us what we are, is our deadly
enemy.

Use VII. This should teach both Ministers and people to loath all
Generalities, and to learn the Law in the true sens and the thorough
enlightening of it.

Thus much of the first work of the law, i e. knowledge of sin as sin.

II. The second work of the Law is Conviction; and this is twofold: I. Simple
conviction, viz. of the judgment. 2. Conviction with terror, viz. of the whole
Soul, or whole man.

When once the soul is thoroughly enlightened, if the law proceed in her work,
she com's to apply her light to this convincing of the soul: and first by
causing the conscience to join against itself, and to say, thou art the man.
Again, by a due yielding of the soul to lie under the bondage and fear of
punishment belonging to such a sinners woeful estate.

1. This work of the Law, viz. Conviction of the judgment, is the second work
of the Ministry of the Law, by the efficacy whereof, the soul beleev's
herself to be that which she knowe's, to wit, this sinful and cursed one. A
most powerful work: yet no other then the poor Minister of God enabled by the
authority of the Law, may and does perform. The Law effect's this conviction
by removeing three letts: 1. Deadness of spirit. 2. Sloth and eas. 3. Subtlety
and hollowness. And contrarily put's a quickuing, and a diligent and plain
consent to the light, into the soul.

1. Deadness of Spirit. Love of lusts and custom therein with delight, does
defile and besot the powers of the mind, that as one busy in his game does
not listen to a sad tale: so neither does this mind to the end of the law in
enlightening.

2. Loos incogitancie and carelessness, by which men run up and down with light,
as the dog with his chain broken loos. So does a sloathful heart, even cut's
its own throat.

3. The worst of the three, Subtlety and slyness, when men pretend they have
received the light to believ it: but they lie, and their falls hearts are
defiled with some secret root of bitterness, which will not suffer them to be
plain.

Now the Mnisterie of the Law grapple's with these, by jogging the soul, and
not suffering her to be any of these, but being more forcible in setting the
Word home to the soul, and breaking open that lock which will not shoot of it
self.

And this it does many ways:

1. By entering into a solemn judicious course with the soul, and by applying the
light to her by particular evidence-giveing in against her, that she is this
child of death. When the Lord meane's to go thoroughly to work, he will suffer
no lust, no sloth nor falsehood to keep off the soul from her light, but (will
she, nill she) she shall not only almost, but altogether be convinced. Now
to bring the light and the soul close together is the great wisdom of the
Spirit in the Ministry of the Law. Sometimes he first insinuate's into the
heart by slight or cunning, and trap's the soul ere it be aware in his net.
Thus Nathan came upon David. Sometimes he take's the soul napping in the midst
and her sin, while the sent is fresh: thus he deal't with Saul. Sometimes, by
contesting with conscience, and urging her to speak truth upon experience.

2. By violence and necessity, when no other course will serve. This the Lord
does by threats apart, and sometimes by the addition of some works convince. Thus
God deal't with Saul, and with Achan. Sometimes the Lord is fain to circumvent a
Sinner in his own course, and to bring forth the long-concealed marks of his sin
to his face, bidding him deny it if he dare. Thus Tamar deal't with Juda.
Sometimes by crosses, so was Manasses taken in the bushes. So the Prodigal.
Sometimes by patience and long-suffering, and thus Saul (in a pang) was
convinced of David's innocence.

Use I. Of sad mourning for the days we are in, in which this spirit of the
Law seems to be lost: even as the Ark and Ephod were in the days of the
second Temple. Oh! it is heavy to ponder, how few consciences are rouzed up
and gastred from their dregs under Ministeries of 7, 10, 20 years continuance!
but still the same men and change no color.

Use II. Of Admonition both to Ministers and people. First to Ministers, that
they pray and strive for the Spirit of conviction, It Is God's gift: and one
chief part is to be Ministers of the Spirit, not of the Letter. The manner of
of our dispensation is more then our voice, and as much as our matter.
Secondly, to people: They must be warned to shake off their lets of
conviction: Let the righteouus smite you, it shall be as a balm. Thus Abigail
was welcome to David. Self-love is an Adder, which will not hear the voice of
the Charmer. The sweetness of usurie, pleasure, lawful liberty,, eas will be
as a Delilah to keep off the least conviction of the law.

Use III. Examine thy self about this weighty work of the law, that thou may
hope to go on more safely. Try it by these marks: 1. By the love of a
convinceing Ministry, and loathing of the contrary. 2. A clearing of God,
and the righteousness of his law: call thy self the Slave sold under sin. As
he to Achan, give glory to God. Hugg the Surgeon that lanceth thee. 3.
Shame and confusion for sin. The Publican durst not look up. 4. By thy thanks
to God for this merciful work. 5. Be thou under this confusion till God raise
thee up. Let rottenness enter into thy bones, that peace may be in the day of
trouble. Crust not over thy sore. Wax not weary of this work of God, as most
do. 6. Let it end in the true consternation of Soul and terror for thy sin.

Thus far of conviction of judgment.

II. The second work of conviction, is of the whole Soul, called Terror and
Bondage. For when the former work of conviction has prevailed, it work's thus,
that such a Soul is under an arrest, and seeing it self this sinner, this
cursed one: he is thereby killed: and the Spirit brought into terror and
bondage. Romans 7. Paul says, When the Law came I died. Meaning in spirit and in
conscience. That self of jollitie, eas and security which sin affoarded was
nip't and quash't: and in stead of it a sad item given to the soul, taking
away the taste of her morsels, mixing the gall of Asps with her drink, and
stinging her as an Adder, and stabbing her to the heart as a sword for her
convinced villainies: Yea and none more then this body of death, which still
dogg's her, and wound's her as fast as she lick's herself whole with all
duties or abstinences, and works and shifts, prooving her a slave sold under
misery, and showing her by nature a world of sin and woe to bear down all her
morality and hypocrisy. And yet this terror is not grace, but in the Elect a
seed of it: This work in Scripture is called the Spirit of fear, or bondage:
not bondage to sin, but by it: whereby, as they who are prisoners under chains
do lie in sorrow and horror without escape and hope, so do these. Their spirit
is enslaved to fear, their conscience to guilt, accusation, to the whip of
wrath and justice, yea crush't down to hell by the torment of such a spirit as
cannot sustain it self for the restless anguish thereof, but abide's and hang's
between earth and hell.

This Legal terror is explained by the consideration of three things especially.

1. The difference. 2. The nature, effects and end of it. 3. The extremities or
abuse of it.
I. By differencing of it from the former conviction. The work of enlightening
cast's out ignorance: the work of convincing resist's deadness and
insensibleness. But this third of consternation and terror resist's that pride
and jollitie of a sinner, over-bearing himself and lifting up himself in his
sin without check or remors. And this later is of all other, the most proper
work of the last, to tame and beat down the lofty heart of man, setting up a
law to it self to walk as it lists without law or fear. It is as Leviathan
pulling down all children of pride.

II. By the nature, effects and end of it. Touching the nature of it, It is a
presenting (more or less) of the wrath and penalties due to sin, unto the whole
man, by the conscience, for the casting of it down at the feet of God. First,
it is a presenting: for the dead bare letter of the ten Commandments cannot do
this by any magical power: no, it is the powerful ministry of the Law which
can do it. Although in appearance it be weak, yet God setting it on work with
the authority of his spirit, with power to carry his errand into the soul, it
shall be able without fear or flattery to do it, and to do that which no law
of Princes can effect, even to flait and gaster the Conscience Secondly, it
does present the wrath and penalties of sin especially. Till these com, sin is
at peace. This wrath, I say, in the peanalties of it, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal, the law present's to a sinful soul. Thirdly, unto the whole man, by
the conscience: for as the law is the worker, so the conscience is the
immediate object of this wrath. God has made it the laws object: created it
with a merveilous power of sensibleness (above all parts) to record and to
apprehend all sin and wrath for it. It exceed's the apprehension of any the
tendrest part, when it is stung with an Adder, scalded with water or oil, burnt
with fire, cut with a sword: The sens of conscience seized with this wrath of
God is unspeakable and cannot be uttered by man. In this it is differenced,
first from the ignorant, erroneous, and superstitious conscience not fearing at
all, or fearing amiss. Secondly, defiled conscience, dallying with God, half
convinced, and half whole. Thirdly, seared and hardened conscience, which by
long rebellion and resistance of the law has got the masterie of the law, and
is waxen senseless and useless, forgetting her offices.

Fourthly, The act of the law in all this, is, to cast down the soul at the
feet of God. For there is in nature an intolerable bearing up a man's self in
his estate, a prideing of himself, boldness, boasting of sin. He is so far
from being ashamed, that, till the law com home to him thus, be is alive,
Romans 7. 9. that is, jollie, jocand, merry, as the fool that cast's arrows,
darts, and says, Am I not in sport? A Sinner's crown is not his bare sin in
corners and by stealth: that is his woe, his law: but his crown is his liberty
of spirit in it, to do what he list, to run, ride, talk, practice, to drink,
swear, lie, and cousen, and no man control him. Now this jollitie and boldness
and pride in sin, the Lord in his ministry of the law resist's; and that he
does when he pull's the sinner upon his knees, cast's his crown in the dirt,
dismount's him as he did Saul from his Palfrey, Acts 9. and the desperate
Jailer in his profaneness and cruelty, Acts 16. 27. And those killers of
Christ Act. 2. saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Oh, then has wrath
seized upon the soul, when it has killed this jollitie, and let out this
pleurisy out of it! And hence it is called, the Sacrificeing-knife, sharper
then any two-edged sword, the killing letter, that which slew Paul, not by
mortification, but by shedding the blood and bowels of sins jollitie to the
ground.

The effects of this terror are usually three:

1. Stoopping in a course of evil. This differ's from the effect of providence,
whereby the Lord does limit the number and measure of sin in the wicked for the
preservation of peace and civil society: For though that be a divine work,
yet it is not the immediate work of the law: but either a Providence without a
word, or else by the general power of the word restraiing sin: but this is a
special kind of restraint, issueing from the work of the law, for the good of
the soul so restrained. And it is a loathsomness of the soul, findeing no joy
in old courses, beholding them with repenting and irking of thoughts, wishing
them undon, and abhorring to return to them, through the terror of conscience,
being under this whip of the law.

2. The second effect is, shakeing of a rotten peace: scil. falls, secure peace
which it take's to herself, when God debar's her of all sound peace. Esaias 57.
ult. A sinners life is his rotten peace, both without a law, and with, or under
a law by sumdrie practice and colors; viz. 1. By nuzling himself under
flattering means. 2. Withdrawing from stirring ones. 3. Holding off conviction
with obstinate error or faneness, and coloring with half yielding and and show
of consent, the heart being rotten.

3. The third effect of the law is the spirit of bondage. The Lord aime's by
this to hold and keep the soul whom he will save, from all revolt to former
lusts and liberties. The spirit of bondage is the frame of a fearful heart held
under slaverie and chains of the law from all escapeing. As we say, such a
man has the spirit of mirth, or covetousness in which he is rooted. So the
Woman is said to have a spit of infirmity, when her diseas had so prevailed
over her that she was crazed by ha bit. So the Spirit of bondage Gal. 4. 7. is
to be one sold to it that cannot get out.

Use I. Of Admonition, to beware we rest not in this servile estate. For it
differ's from true fear as much as from true liberty: for, 1. True filial fear
is a lodestone to attract the soul to God: this rather of it self drive's from
God. 2. This fear has a respect to sin as the occasion only, to punishment as
a cause: as the slave look's not at sloth, but at the whip. But true filial fear
look's at sin as the proper cause of fear, but at punishment as the occasion.

3. True fear soften's: this rather harden's and imbitter's the heart. Examples
in Josiah and Ahab. 4. It has excess in it, both for the constant assault of
it without all intermission in all places, duties and occasions; and also for
the dangerous inconveniences it bring's after it oftentimes: hinder's all
fitness of spirit both to duty and in duty, and defile's all. 5. It differ's
from true filial fear, as does the fear of an harlot and a loyal wife: the one
fear's danger and hurt from her husband: the other reverence's him for love.

Use II. Let none stumble at it; for although it be no better in it self: yet
the Lord can moderate, correct it and guide it so, that it shall be a special
medicine to prepare the heart for that which lightness and giddiness would
disable it from attaineing.

God's End in setting thus his law on work, is to make way for a sinners
reconciliation, which otherwise were not possible to work. As Soon catch an hare
with a taber, as a wild wilful sinner by the charm of the Gospel.

This appeare's sundry ways:

1. By this means God joine's all wholesome doctrine together. For it is not
his purpose to leave the soul in this case, to seek out of herself after eas,
seeing it is not in her power. But he himself will have his Minister to join
all doctrines together in the order of Catechism both of remedy and misery,
in their due order.

2. By this consternation he does try and weary the spirits as in a
Labyrinth, working them to an utter hopelesness in themselves to be better:
that in such a case the least inkling of mercy might be as news out of a far
country.

3. That by the hearsay of it, their hearts might be raised up to make
serious inquisition after it, and not to perish in their misery. When the
Prodigal was brought to husks at the trough, then, and never till then, the
notion of a father pierced him really.

Use I First observe how God prevent's a sinner by his wisdom. For what is all
the complaint of a poor soul, when the promise is offered? Oh it is true, if I
were laden, I doubt not of eas! thou lie against thy self, thou do doubt
of eas by the promise: for of the former thou can not doubt having been
enlightened, cast down and convinced by the law. That then which is the more
easy to grant, the Lord work's first, as a part of the condition of Grace,
that is to be laden: that, when the harder com's to be urged, that is, Faith,
then the condition already wrought, might be ready to comfort the poor soul.

2ly. Wonder thetefore at this wisdom, which most fitly to the soul's
condition, does even work by contraries, life out of death, and order out of
confusion, and descant not by carnal reason against it.

3ly. In all the ministry of the Word, let the Minister and people of God,
still fix their eye upon the scope of God, moving onwards with him; and going
even pace with his ordinance, for the effecting of his own ends, and the glory
of his grace in our salvation.

III. The extremities and abuses of this legal work. The extremities are two.

1. Legal presumption. 2. Final despair.
1. Touching the first, it is called Legal, because there is another and a more
dangerous one by the Gospel. This presumption is twofold: One this, when the
sinner waxe's bold and venturous, to shake off this yoke of the law, before his
spirit be convinced and cast down: this sin made Adam, and all us cursed, even
presumption against threats. The second is, when the consternation of the law,
seazing without addition of the Gospel, cause's the soul to wax confident of
it is own welfare, because it has been humbled, and perhaps hold's some
impression of it still, not dareing to resist her light. But this is rare, and
where it is, dangerous.: for it is a sign that the heart is secretly falls.

2. The second extremity is Despair, offending as much on the left hand,
through the excess of terror. Thus Saul and Judas. And it commonly growe's from
the first: Satan never seeking more to poison with presumption and dalliance
with the law, then where he meane's to snare with the contrary of Despair.
Doubtless it is the sin of the damned to live in the perpetual despair of
releas; and in persuasion that Grace is unable to do them good.

Use I. Learn we daily to root this cursed root of bitterness out of us, by
two things ensuing: First, a Spirit of Humility and Fear to keep our selves
under the bondage of of our Schoolmaster rather then to affect the liberty of
presumers: and in so doing to beseech the Lord to proportion out our stripes
according to our strength and to keep our despair within the compass of our
selves, and any thing in us: but to be far from the least thought of enlargeing
our baseness above the infiniteness of mercy. Secondly, to nourish in our
hearts above all, those meditations of mercy and grace in Christ, which may
set us upon a rock above our-selvs, and all fearful distrust, and carry us in
the stream thereof with holy irresistableness. Frequent, holy, and loveing
thoughts of God are the surest remedies against this hideous monster.

The abuse of the Law is double:

First, on the right hand: many abuse it, when they nourish themselves in a
needless bondage, whereas they know they are in case to hearken after the
remedy, and will not, pretending they have not been cast down or troubled
enough. What madness is this to nourish a diseas against Physic? or to think
that our trouble pleases God? or to think that to be of substance of Grace,
which only is for preparation to it?

Secondly, on the left hand, those who do far wors abuse this doctrine, who
being weary of terror and bondage, as soon as they fall into it, cast with
themselves how they may shake it off, pretending that this is no estate to serve
God in: and so they return, some to their sport and pastimes, some to their
pleasures, some to their profits, some to their old companions. Let these know,
that the course they take is violent, and much like to them, who to stop the
cry of their infants put into the brazen belly of Moloch, did oppress their
own ears with the nois of pipes and tabret.

Obj. Paul Romans 7. 7. says: When the Law came, sin revived: how then is terror
the law's work?

Answ. Both may stand together in one unregenerate man according to diverse
parts. For when the law had slain conscience, then concupiscence revived: and
we must distinguish between the natural work of the law and the accidental.
Terror is the proper work of it, and when it is wrought, it is as it ought to
be: but when rebellion arises, it is otherwise then ought to be. When the Sun
arises and sweeten's the earth, it work's properly: when it drawe's up the
noysom stench of a dunghill to poison the air, it is accidental, coming from the
loathsomness of the dunghill. So when sin rebel's, she does her kind: yet
this rebellion shall not hinder the killing power of it. It shall rather
encreas it: for when the soul come's to see, how loathsome sin has made her,
this make's her conclude her self, out of measure woofull by sin, and out of
measure sinful. And when rebellion begin's to be tamed, the heart growe's
more and more under fear; although nothing hinder, why both may not at one time
be together. Only in the bad, commonly it increases, till it has cast out
all terror, and strengthen's the jollitie of sin. In the godly, the Lord will
enlarge terror and conviction so far, that rebellion shall not stand it out,
but stoop with confusion under the power of it. Paul, by Sin, mean's Original
sin, body and members: by himself, he mean's the powers of soul and body.
Sin was alive in point of her stilness, peace and quietness, without any
distemper: Paul was alive: that is, merry, jollie, lusty, secure, without any
fear. Again, note sin's death, and Paul's life, caused this deep consent
between them both: I say her quietness and his jollitie made them as close as
buckle and thong: For why? Sin was glad to see Paul lusty: and Paul was glad
to see her quiet. Thus it was between them ere the law came. But how since? oh
quite contrary. Sin revived, Paul died. How? Sin perceiving the law, resolved
not to give over, till it had divided her and Paul (who had so long lived at
peace together, and traded with gain and pleasure each by other) and to scour
her house of her guests whom she so corrupted, (the mind, the will,
affections, conscience and members of Paul being the creation of God) begin's
to revive, to be no longer quiet as before, when her trade prospered, but to
fret, rage and be unquiet. On the other side Paul also seeing the law also to
gaster him out of his wicked haunt, what does he? Die's, is all amort,
forsake's his old mistress, Concupiscence, and begin's to be weary of his
trade. Now, what is it against Paul's dying, that sin reviveth? what is it
against the guest's shame and dying to their trade, that their old hostess
rages? Rebellion is in her, not in them: they are ashamed and flaited, though
she will know no law: conscience and concupiscence are two things.

Three sorts of Rebellion:

1. Natural. 2. Penal. 3. Mix't.
1. Natural: when the Word or Law com's so to the corrupt Soul, that as yet it
carrie's no power or authority over the soul with it, but still the soul
hold's her own: for then so close is sin and the soul, they so consent, that to
be parted from their filthy fellowship is even death to them both, sin
incorporateing herself into the soul, that she is as one with them, that it is
as easy for Sampson to part with Dalilah as these to be sundred: here
therefore as both band in evil, so do they conspire against all the laws of
God: it is as eastie to rob a Bear of her whelps as these of her sinful
pleasures. The Minister is to such as the Marshall in London is to Harlots: an
ey-sore, a reproach, a common wonderment. This is the first rebellion in the
unconvinced. This is not here meant.

2. The second is Penal, a fruit of this, only increased by the just wrath of
God upon the rebels, whose chains the Lord make's stronger Esaias 28. 22. by
how much the more they kick against the pricks: I say, when the Lord penally
smite's them, and suffer's them to encreas and fulfill the measure of their
lusts to grow frozen in these dregs, desperate in their lusts, so that they
find no place of repenting. See these texts, Mat 23, 32. 34. Act. 14, 19. Act.
28. 27. Neither is this meant here.

3. The third is mixed: When rebellion is allayed with terror of conscience, and
not permitted to her self: as we know a thief in hold is one thing, and at
liberty, is another. This mixed terror is the accidental work of the Law,
working corruption to a rebellion and resistance, that sin might be odious and
the soul more humbled. To apply then the distinction, I answer, This objection
hinder's not this truth, That the proper work of the law is to cast down and
embondage the guilty soul.

Qu. How a troubled Conscience, privy to much reviveing of corruption may
discern that it comes not from herself, but from sin?

Ans. This may be discerned easily by many marks. First, from the work of the
law that has separated her from sin, and that amity which was between her and
it.

This is no hard matter to prove, if once the soul can say, her old lusts and
she are divided by the law's terror: How can she then think that she should
rebel against the good law, for working that which she is glad of.

2. It will will appear by this, that whereas true rebellion must com from a
free will and principle of the agent: but that cannot be conscience, nor
herself, because she is convinced by an over-ruleing law, which has killed her
freedon: therefore this rebellion is from sin.

3. By this, that rebellion where it is unconvinced does not only fret in
respect of somewhat she is denied, but also at that which crosses her for it
self. But in this legal rebellion, when the soul is in chains, the scope of
this is as much in respect of that which is denied, as at the law simply.

4. Try it by this; when rebellion com's from the soul, it encrease's
ordinarily; but when from sin, it decrease's, because the Lord more and more
weaken's her by terror of conscience.

Use I. Let us from hence conceiv the woeful estate of a wretch, ere the law
com's in terror to him: he and his sin are in a cursed league, and commit
hideous villainy together. As Simeon and Levi sworn brethren. My soul com no
more into her counsel and consent: how much better is the Law's little-eas,
then such Liberty of hell.

Use II. Let this teach God's Ministers of the law to plie their tools. God
has put a weapon into their hand able (if well urged) to separate even sin and
the soul: do not suffer this law to perish for lack of execution.

Use III. It confut'es the world's aspersion upon the powerful ministry of
the Law: they call it debate, and raising up strife (as I said) but oh ye
liars! we do not envy your neighborly peace, nor lawful consent; but your
close league in your lusts: we would divide you and your concupiscence, that
God might rule by that division, whom ye barred out by your consent.

Use IV. Beware of all such as nourish rebellion against the Law, in the point
of her holy pureness! if this rebellion here be odious under terror, what is
rebellion of sin and conscience jointly, I mean, wilful and wicked? Beseech the
Lord to use any means, rather then such rebellion should be nourished in thee!
oh beg of God, rather he would divide thy sin and thee, by the hardest courses
then thou should rebel against the Word for doing her office: Clear the Law
and say it is holy, I am the slave that is sold under sin.

Use V. Let it be exhortation to all such as God has thus humbled, to bless
him that he has chosen to tame the soul by terror, and stirring up of
rebellion rather then to leav it to it self. And let such be comforted in all
their fears of their own rebellious hearts against the Law of GOD, that the
rebellions committed under terror, are none of hers, but sin's work within her,
which she abhor's.

Use VI. Mean while, let all such comfort themselves in their rebellions of sin:
they are marks of Good, signs of the battering of Satan's and sin's kingdom.
Sin would never so rage, if she were at as good peace as formerly. Beware of
closeing the second time with this harlot. Beseech the Lord to nourish terro;
though it be not grace, yet it is a seed of it: pray him for a time rather to
quash rebellion, then to suffer rebellion to destroy it. And be of good cheer:
the Lord does all this for good. When he has cooled and rooted out rebellion,
he will after a while root out terror also, and in due time bring thy soul out
of all her adversity, turning both into a sight of the promise, and hope of
the remedy. And thus much for the use of this point and objection from
rebellion.

The general use of the former point of Terror.

Use I. It may teach us to esteem duly of sin, according to her foul nature.
For must it not be a foul odious thing which should bring in such confusion,
as to turn the law of God which was given for comfort of conscience, and rule
of life, to become the greatest terror, and matter of vexation.

Use II. To discover what sin is in her kind, when she may act herself upon
her own stage of ignorance. She is an hideous monster.

Use III. To all who would be truly molded by the truth thereof, in the fear
of God, to look to themselves and take in kindly and readily this point of the
sword into the bosom of their soul, that this spear may let out the water and
blood of it, I mean, that quiet, jollie and secure heart in sin, which hold's
it as with cords, to be content to be slain, and to go into captivity. Abhor
then first to stand out in rebellion: put up thy weapons and fight not against
God, whose naked arm is against thee. Abhor secondly a dead, blockish and
sensual heart, not affected nor moved with this voice. Abhor thirdly a
presumptuous heart, which having heard of some hope, abuses it to forestall
the Lord's work. Abhor fourthly all means of Satan, which might turn off quite,
or dash and quench this work. Yield not to the impossibility of recoverie, run
not into despair, take not thought for thy sweet sin, God will make thee no
looser. Sculk not into corners to eas thy self of this yoke: let God that put
it on, hold it on his time, till he has truly tamed thee. If it seem long,
know there is a cause.

Use IV. Let it teach us to pity the loos and jollie in sin: oh! they make
either work for hell, or (if God re-call them) for the law: for their chains
must be hereby increased, and they shall meet with a Jailor that will handle
them accordingly. Oh! hear counsel betimes, the counsel of minister, husband,
wife, parent, master, friend, yea child, or servant, to yield to God at the
first, that so thy yoke may be the easier.

Use V. Of exhortation. Bury not this work of the Spirit under these clods of
flesh: streighten not the spirit of conviction. Beg of God that by all these
six stairs thou may fall lower and lower, till thou art brought to the
earth. Ask thy self, When Lord, shall my laughter, light, frothie, merry,
quiet heart be met with thoroughly? Lie under this work and suffer affliction.
Say, I see the Lord is in earnest; hell is no painted fire, the eas of a
sinful course differ's from that little eas of the law: I am in a straight, I
know not whither to turn me: No wealth, friends, credit, marriage, honor,
eating, sleep, play, or music can help now. Away now all old companions: the
Lord has laid sorrow upon my soul: such as no tales or jigs can put by: my
meat is now mingled with gall, and God seems to forsake me: wrath, hell, and
horror are upon me, my nights are wearisom, and my days miserable. Choose
rather to be thus for the killing of thy flesh, then at liberty for the death
of thy soul. And wait in this estate upon God till he cause light to break out.

ARTIC. VII.
The LORD leave's not the Souls of his Children in this misery, but uphold's
them by the hopes of the Gospel.

The Lord, where he mean's to save, keep's not the soul always in this anguish,
but cause's some upholding of his secret spirit to keep up the soul of him whom
he will save from utter extremity. This he does by showing them a door of
hope in the wilderness, as he says in Hos. 2. 15. causing some glimps afar off
to appear to them, as a crevis of light in a Prison-wall: as to consider that
God has had a gracious meaning to thousands whom he has thus humbled, that
by hell lie's the way to heaven: that God delight's not in this course, if the
rebellion of the heart did not require it, that God does that which the soul
shall not know till after, he mean's to make Christ sweet, precious and
welcome; he begin's to lay some ground of mortisication, which in due time the
Gospel shall perfect. By such glimps of the gospel, which God require's to be
joined with the law, the Lord keep's his from revolt to old base lusts, from a
despair of mercy and undoing themselves, or from a careless dissoluteness which
end goe's forward. And so having upheld them by the chin from sinking for a
time, he does let in light by such degrees, as he see's them meetest to bear,
and to keep them low from waxing bold and venturous, till at length he s^ttle
them upon his promise.

The Reasons why God uses this method, are

Reas. I. First, to keep the Soul from extremities of presumeing or despairing,
both being dangerous rocks, the one separateing the means from the end, running
to their old liberties, and yet hopeing to fare well: the other separateing the
end from the means, after all their humblings yet thinking there is no mercy
for them. See Jer. 2. 25.

Reas. II. Secondly, he encourage's such to bear the yoke of the law, which
otherwise for the tediousness of it would shake it off.

Reas. III. He deale's according to the capacity of their weakness: because
they cannot bear much terror, he ease's them: and because they dare not hearken
to much comfort at once, he giv's them little at once.

Reas. IV. He does it for the honor of his own work of calling: he has
promised to call those whom he has chosen, which he should not do, if he
left them in these briers.

Reas. V. By this hope he shewe's them, he is as able to give them his full
promise, and the effect thereof, sound peace, as he can stay them up from
sinking, when they are at, so low an ebb of casting down.

The LORD work's this hope

By presenting to them duly the sight of a possibility to get out of this
terror. That he deal's not in afflicting his, as with the wicked. Esel 27. 7,
8. He will do it in measure. That he abhor's excess in his terrors, Esaias 64.
12. That he bar's none from him, who bar not themselves, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. That
there is a necessity of afflicting them with such tedious terrors, or else he
delight's not in it. That he has not don this to destroy, but to humble: And
all these does he cause them to digest, and to stay themselves by, and fasten
upon in more or less measure, to keep them from extremity: causing terror to
decreas and hope to succeed, as we see in his course with Job, as tedious as it
was.

This hope goes before faith: yet it is such as the Lord enableth to uphold
them between the horrors of the law, and the grace of the Gospel.

The marks of this Hope

1. the entrance it is very weak and staggering, between fear and hope, very
doubtful.

2. Yet this little hope keep's from the hardest and desperatest attempts.

3. It rather bend's the eye to the end why God troubles the soul, then at the
trouble it self in a plodding manner: who know's whether he will assuage and
show mercy for all this?

4. It Is weary of trouble rather by that eas which God shows, then by
tediousness. See Hab. 3. 16.

5. It weakly turn's the thoughts to muse what would follow upon it, if God
should show mercy? Oh, this is great news to one that was so oppressed: Oh
now therefore to swither up with thoughts of welfare, is a great change.

6. And lastly trouble decaye's, and hope encrease's as that little oil and
meal wasted not till plenty came.

Use I. Instruction to God's Ministers, to discern wisely of the season of
staying the troubled heart. For else they may spend much labor in vain. It
fare's with an heavy heart as with the bleeding wound and the deep humor of
Melancholy, while the dint is, they refuse plaster and counsel. And again,
when they see the season com, let them apply God's fittest mid'cines. Let
terrors serve for the desperate and refractorie sinners, that they may com under
God's chain: but as are bound in it already must not be oppressed more, as if
there were no succor for them, no Balm in Gilead.

Use II. Let such as are to receiv their counsel beware of being stout and
obstinate by melancholy and sullenness. Many people make their chains heavier
then God make's them, and will not suffer a thought of hope to enter through
the anguish of bondage. All such, as, because they cannot feel so strong
comforts as they fancy, therefore quarrel with God, and reject such as he
offer's them. No, let not God be tempted by thy frowardness, when he seek's
to try thy humility.

Use III. It Is exhortation to all poor troubled souls. First, to get and pray
for ready and willing hearts to hear and see God's voice and steps for for
eas: and do not devour their own flesh, Prove. 9. 12. Get Abraham's wisdom Genesis
22, 13. who, although Isaac had the knife at his throat, yet had an ear to hear
the Angel, and an eye to see the Ram caught in the bush, instead of his son.
Secondly, although your hope be small, yet because your straight is great,
consider whether it be not better to venture upon uncertain hope, then upon
assured woe, 2 King. 7. 4.

Use IV. Suffer not bondage to swallow you up in legal sorrow: think not hell
an heaven custom, but as speedily as you can, get out at this privy door,
blessing God for such a mitigation of misery, that in the discharge of the
duties of your places, you may attend upon the further work of God, abhorring
to think your selves well, because the Law has you under bondage, till the
Gospel has comforted you.

THE SECOND PART.
ARTIC. I.
That there is a deliverance ordained and granted to miserable Man, out of this
thraldom.

TItus 3. 4, 5, 6, etc. But after that the kindeness and love of GOD our Savior
toward Man appeared, not by works of righteousness which he had don, but
according to his mercy he saved us, through the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holie-Ghost: which he shed on us abundantly by JESUS CHRIST
our Savior.

Here is a clear view of a deliverance of a Sinner from this misery, together
with the use of it to all that want it. The scope is to oppose deliverance to
misery: q d. Thus indeed it was by our deservings and God's justice: but yet
the Lord could not find in his heart to let us lie in this woeful and shiftless
estate: but when he saw none to save, himself saved us, as a man seeing a
perishing creature in a ditch, and ready to despair for lack of present help,
himself stepped forth to help it out (he of duty, the Lord of mere goodness)
he found out a way to set man on dry land out of the gulf of misery, so that
the one was not so hideous as this is precious and gracious.

So that

First note, that in this woeful ruin of man there is a deliverance, Ephesians. 2. 1.
1 These, 1. vlt. Luke 1. 74. Esaias 63. 5.

Secondly, it is appointed by the LORD, out of the uusearchable treasure of his
wisdom. And this appears partly by his eternal purpose within himself: and
partly by that expression of himself to his Church and to his elect. Both
these, the intention of his heart toward them, and the declaration thereof to
them in his word, do show that it was not the will of God, that man sunk in the
dungeon of woe, should lie there still and perish, but recover out of it and
live: and this he would have no secret in his own bosom, nor hidden from us,
but known and revealed.

The Lord from eternity purposed with himself to exempt a number (known to
himself) out of this destruction, and out of his justice to pass by others (as
not bound to rescue them) and leav them in their corruption still: and this to
manifest his infinite justice against sin.

The Covenant of Grace is the promulgation and publishing of this his purpose,
in and by his word, i e. by his Son, the eternal word of the Father: And this
Covenant reache's equally to Election and no further, and the sum of it is that
GOD will be their God, to pardon, sanctify, protect and save them, will not
be ashamed to be so called by them, nor of them to be his own beloved, but
hold them in this everlasting Covenant of his, till he receive them to
immediate fruition of himself.

There is another general Covenant of ordinary calling by the ofter of the
Gospel and the common badg of Baptism, which is made to all without exception
(who exclude not themselves) but differs from the former, and is much larger
then Election.

This offer must be universal

1. Because whom the Lord call's, he call's and cull's out of the universal
world: those who receiv it show themselves elect: those who finally reject it
perish by their own unbelief, and show themselves to be none of God's number.

2. His Ministers being his ordinary instruments cannot put difference
between the elect and the not-elect: therefore they are to publish it generally
to all.

3. If the Covenant should be dispensed with restraint, this might strengthen
the rebellious in their cavilling against the decree, and fasten the cause of
their perdition upon God which is only from themselves.

Use I. It should teach us to adore the wisdom of God in this manner of
manifesting himself. This Covenant was darkly before shadowed by ceremonies:
but in due time revealed clearly.

Use II. Break off thy league with sin, and embrace the Covenant of mercy, the
sure mercies of David.

Use III. Thouh Redemption be the undivided work of the whole Trinity: yet
even in this there be several and incommunicable works of every person
concurring. The Son merit's and work's out the way of redemption: The
holie-Ghost work's the persuasion of it in the soul: But God the Father is the
first mover and ordainer of it, as the wel-spring whence the purpose and also
the manifestation thereof proceeded. Beware then least we either confound
these three actions, or yet exclude any of the persons from their own
operations. But let us adore them all. The Spirit in the work of applying
Christ, and the Father in the work of giveing Christ, and in that love of his
from which both Christ and the satisfaction came.

Use IV. Behold in the Father an infinite depth of love and mercy toward
sunken man thus to repair him. Here is love, not that we loved him first, but
he loved us, having nothing but odiousness in us, even that he might show
what was in his heart, and what he could do. Therefore judge aright of this
first love; and secondly profit by the meditation of. Judge of it to be the
very fullness of all in all: to be a length, depth, height, and breadth neither
to be reached unto, searched into, comprehended or attained: but only by
faith embraced and rested upon. Let it likewise comfort all poor souls that
need it, both as concerning the propensness of God to love them, and his
constance of love toward them whom he already loved. If thou had procured
this love, well migh'st thou fear the loss of it? But if insinite goodness and
a breadth incomprehensible were the fountain of it, (I speak to a poor soul
under the condition laden or lost) what doubt is there of his loveing thee? If
he freely first meant it and cut off the way of justice, and the bridge of
vengethat he might not pass it over, why should thou think he should
destroy his own work? why should he not be willing to love thee, whatsoever
thy sin be? and having loved thee eternally, what shall or can enter into him
to change this principle in him, or cause him to repent?

Use V. This Doctrine serves especially to stay the heart of a distressed
wretch in the sight of his misery, by this light and door of hope. Oh! bless
that fountain which could not be dried up by sin. Wonder why Angels were left
remediless, not we: Ponder it in our deep fears, and remember the Gospel of
deliverance is from God as well as the law of terror. Despair not, the Lord
cutt's of none, who cut not off themselves.

Use VI. It teache's us to gather to our selves a strong bottom against that
slavish fear and emnitie of our spirit against God. Why, oh, man! if God were
as thou framest him, where had thy hope been? Dare thou call him an hard
Master, the adversary, who of his own will and love cut off his own plea, and
devised a deliverie, when no man or Angel could dream of it?

Use VII. Let it teach the Ministers of the Gospel to look to the order and
substance of their teaching. The order, not to mis-match these two doctrines,
teaching this before the other be well grounded. For the substance, taking
heed least they defraud the soul of this point, when she is brought low.

Use VIII. Let this be a mean to carry a poor heart quite beyond and out of
it self. The meditation of this freedom of God's purpose, should ravish the
heart, and carry it out of the baseness of self and self ends into the stream
of this Sovereign will and glory of God. It should be above our own
salvation. Let us diligently try our own spirit from the true spirit of Grace
by this mark.

Further, we must observe, that GOD in accomplishing man's deliverance out of
this miserable estate, is also the most free and sovereign Worker and applier
of this deliverance to the soul. For what else should it profit us that he has
devised such a way as Christ, and such means as the Gospel believed, except he
took it upon him to possess the soul of it also?

Use I. This will teach us to conceiv in what sens the Lord does offer us his
Christ, command us to believ, and promise us to eas us, if we hunger, mourn,
be poor in spitit: to wit, that he is far from intimateing any power, or will
in us to concur with him in the least of these, or to asscribe ought to him
that wills or runs: but rather to show what those excellent Graces are,
which he freely works in all whom he will save.

Use II. This will help us to judge, who those parties are, in all likelihood,
whom God will concur with and assist in the use of means tending to
deliverance. Such is the base slaverie of man that he distrust's him sooner in
no one thing, then in that where in God offer's himself to the soul. As
appears in Manoah's and Gedeon's example. For though he be free and tied to
none, yet (I say) with reverence he tie's himself graciously to such as do
seek him, not themselves: for else should he contradict his own ends, which is
blasphemous.

Use III. To instruct us how we may so go to work io the use of means, as our
own conscience may not accuse us for taking God's office of freedom and
sovereigntie out of his hands. The honest soul sets up God in his own way, of
Christ in his own ends: she seek's the glory of his wisdom, power, mercy and
freedom, who sought out such a deliverance and work's it in her, and all that
concern her, faith and conditions of it. All seeking grace for a man's own
happiness, is poor seeking, (for the present till God wod work better) and all
seeking for self must be from self and by self. But when the boat is tied to
the ship of God's glory, she need's no more rowing of herself then the boat
does, it is enough for her that she is set upon such a stream, and ti^d to such
a ship as can carry her of it self, and drown all her own welfare in the Lord.

ARTIC. II.
The only instrument of working out this deliverance is the Lord JESUS.

NO other name under heaven is given to save us by way of mediation or
instrument, but he, Act. 4. 12. God set him forth as a propitiation, that all
might see the salvation of God.

The father of our Lord Jesus Christ was content to part with his own Son, and
to make him the worker of this deliverance, rather then it should fail in the
execution thereof. For in him the Lord purposed as in a mirror to declare the
infinire grace of his election, the freedom of the offer, the efficacy of
calling, faith, sanctification and eternal life, all being established in him,
and nothing toward salvation subsisting without him: therefore at the end of
each gift Christ is mentioned as the gift of that gift, Romans 7. 24, 25. 1 Timothy
1. 10. all the whole frame of grace and godliness is founded and sustained by
him.

The whole work of his Mediation may be referred to two heads:

1. The qualification of his person, to be in case to satisfy. 2. The actual
performance of the satisfaction it self.
1. The qualification of his person has two parts Union and Unction.

Union comprehend's three distinct things: First, The incarnation and flesh of
Christ. 2ly. The Divinity of Christ. 3ly. The joining of these two natures
into one person: or, the assumeing of the nature of flesh unto the second
person of the son of God, not to swallow it up, but to retain still his own
distinct nature, yet within union.

2. By Union is meant the calling or separation of the Lord Jesus being thus
united in his natures, to be a meet Mediator: which was the sanctification of
him in time actually to the work of a Mediator, to which God before all time
had deputed him.

The Performance it self stand's of two parts.

1. Either Meriting this price for all the Elect: 2. Or actual applying it to
them.
The Meriting part consist's of a double performance, both of actual obedience
to the Law: and suffering the curs required thereby and due to sin.

And he performed these two by way of real suretiship, and no otherwise: for
taking upon him the Person of a Mediator, to stand between wrath and us, not
by arbitrament (as in humane sequesterships) but by payment for us: Lo,
therefore he take's our person upon him, becom's piacular, that is, first
seized with our sin by imputation, that by his righteousness he might deface
it, and fulfill the Law broken by us: and secondly, seized with our curs, that
by his suffering death, he might quit us of the fear and punishment thereof.

His Suffering, or Passion, has two parts, the Sacrifice it self, or Passion;
and the Conquest or Victory ensuing it, whereby he gave the Passion a full
power to become, or rather to be declared satisfactory.

The Applying part, is, the act of his intercedeing Mediation here on earth,
and especially in heaven serves to settle the merit of Redemption upon all the
Elect in the due season thereof.

These are called well-springs of salvation, Esaias 12. 3. because they are so
many grounds of justifying faith. Their number is seven: 1. Incarnation. 2.
Divinity. 3. Personal union with anointing attending it. 4. Actual obedience.
5. Passive. 6. Conquest. 7. Applying all to the Elect.

I Branch: Incarnation.

By the power of the holy Ghost sanctifying the flesh of the Virgin, the Lord
Jesus being conceived in and born of the poor Virgin, did submit himself to
such unspeakable abasement as to take upon him the nature of man: that in and
by it he might obey and suffer those things which the divine nature could not
beee capable off.

Touching this point observe further three things.

1. The realness of the flesh of the Lord Jesus: he took very flesh of very
flesh, and not (as some Heretics thought) a similitude and shadow of it.

2. The differences of his incarnnation I. In respect of his father: he was
not ordinarily begotten by man, but by the holy Ghost, who fulfilled the work
of a father. 2. In regard of his mother, a Virgin before and in and after his
Incarnation. Divines make the Four differences of Generation: I. When man is
made man without father or mother, as Adam in his creation: 2. When man is made
without a woman, as Eve was. 3. When man is made both by man and woman, and so
are all her posterity made. 4. The last when man is made without either man or
woman, and so was the flesh of Christ made. Thirdly he took our nature, the
seed of Adam, and caused it to subsist in the second person of Godhead.

3. Resolution of some doubts about it, as, I. Why was it necessary that our
Savior Jesus should be flesh? That he might thereby be fitted and
accommodated for the work of suffering. The Godhead could not suffer: the
manhood could not merit infinitely: the Godhead therefore must merit by a flesh
that could suffer. 2. Why must the flesh of a man and his nature be taken to
satisfy? The flesh of a person could have reached only to a personal
satisfaction: but the flesh of our nature might satisfy for natue it self, and
all persons contained under it. 3. Why must the second person in Trinity take
flesh? 1. because the word of creation and first subsisting in created goodness,
must also be the instrument of the uncreated. 2. It behooved, that as Christ
is the engraven form of his fathe'rs likeness, and the brightness of his
person: therefore so, he should be the instument to bring us to partake the
same image after we had lost it. 3 It was fit that the righteous servant and
naturural son of God should make us his servants and obedient children.

Use 1. To confute Heretics and Papists, who destroy the realness and truth of
the body of our satisfier, by their Ubiquitie, which destroye's the properties
of the true body, and so the body it self.

Use 11. Of instruction teaching us to magnify this mystery of Godliness,
Jesus incarnate. It Is a model of the unspeakable justice, love, wisdom of God
in one, a far greater excellency is in it then in the creation: It was, and is
the song and wonderment of Angels: it was then, and still is that which bring's
glory to God, peace to the earth, good will to men. It caused Mary to exult
and to magnify God, the Shepherds to report it, the Wisemen to travail after
it, Herod and Jerusalem to tremble, Simeon and Anna to rejoice, and all the
Church of God to triumph: and and shall we hold our peace and want affections
and admirations? Again, it should teach us to cast off all base carnal reasons
and distrusts, either touching our salvation, or protection. Hereafter judge not
God by outward apparences: in the fullness of 4000 years flesh came: If the
body of all promises be com, how shall the branches be performed? He that
has given us this deliverance, what can. he deny us?

Use 111. Let us learn whither to go, when we want any preferment in
priveledges, or any grace to to furnish our hearts or lives, or to fill us for
our places, duties, and callings, or for use of odinances, especially when we
are under streights and bitter enemies. Let us be persuaded that our flesh
glorified in heaven, bear's such stroke with the Father, that he will hear him
in all his requests: yea let us remember, that he therefore took flesh and
felt all our ailes and infirmities, that he might pity us, and be afflicted
with us in all our affictions and temptations, as Esaias 63. 9. and will not let
us lie under any streights which he can rid us off. For he count's ours his,
and our selves his: and will do for us in this, as in all other things, as for
his own flesh.

Use IV. To exhort us to sundry duties. 1 In the difficulty which we find in
the life of our faith, let us draw near to the flesh of our Mediator for
influence and succor: oh! how far off do promises seem to be unto us? Christ
is our peace in guilt of conscience, strength to sustein us with patience in
our crosses: liberty from all bondage: sufficiency to enable us to walk with
God, to crucify corruption, to persevere, to attain the resurrection of the
dead. 2. Again, it should encourage our faint timorous hearts (so many as are
laden with our burden) to com to the flesh of this Mediator for eas. For first
in this flesh of Christ there is a general fitness in him to receiv every one,
whose nature he bears, for in that nature each person is enclosed. Secondly,
it should help our weakness in coming to God the father, by coming by this
flesh of the Lord Jesus. Thirdly, let us com and plead our part in the Lord
Jesus for our portion of forgiveness and mercy. Fourthly, by faith com and
draw waters from this wellspring of salvation.

II Branch: the Divinity of Christ.

The Lord Jesus our Mediator was true God also. It was not only the second
Person, and no other, who took flesh, but a Divinity which enabled an
Humanity to obey and suffer, that God's justtce might except against neither
as insufficient. The Acts and sufferings of Christ (as flesh) reckoned to his
Divinity made an equal satisfaction to God's offended Majesty. The influence
and valor of the divine nature assisting the humane, for the fulfilling of the
merit: for if the Surety fail in any point, his undertakeing is uneffectual.
The Mediator then being to mediate between God and Man must needs be God. 1.
In respect of those evils he was to expiate, as sin and uncleanness. 2. those
enemies he was to vanquish, as Satan, death, and wrath. 3. Those good things
he was too purchase, eternal righteousness, the image of God, and glory
hereafter in the presence of God.

Vsn I. Let this teach us to adore the Mystery of the Godhead of Christ, that
we rest in no inferior object whatsoever the world can affoard us. But
remember he is God, blessed above all, and has merited by his glorious power
a glorious deliverance for his Church from death to eternal life.

Use II. This affoard's us a notable ground of understanding a real difference
of the persons in Trinity. God the Father send's God the Son into the world to
save it by the power of God the holy Ghost, conveying and sealeing his merit
to the Soul of the Elect. Now except there be admitted a real distinction of
the persons in Trinity, how shall one and the same God for being, be the
party satisfying, and satisfied?

Use III. Of Exhortation to all that are laden with their sin desireing eas:
to com to this second wellspring of salvation and to drink water of life
freely from it, that is, believ it for themselves. Especially let this beat down
self in us in the matter of our conversion. What should we bring to God for
our Redemption? can we bring any light to the Sun, or drop to the Ocean? all
fullness is his; he must do all for and in us, before and in conversion. Again
let us lay hold on Jesus Christ, who has satisfied God, and taken away wrath.
Let this give a being and bottom of truth to all the promises of God in our
soul. And let us draw near with confidence to the God of promises: and comfort
our heavy heart in the view of the heinous circumstances of her sin, making
it out of measure sinful. Be not dismayed, he that is thy Surety made not thy
peace for small and some, but all and the greatest, so that thy thought must be
how to receiv this fullness, not for the greatness of this sin.

III Branch: The Personal Union.

Union of both Natures into one Person, by the unconceiveable work of the
Spirit: it is much that Soul and Body, but much more that Flesh and the Word
should be really in one Person. The person of the Word took the nature of
flesh, therein to subsist.

It is called Personal Union, to distinguish it from other Unions in Christ,
and all other Unions whatsoever. In Christ there is a wellspring of Unions, but
no personal Union in them. The Union of Christ's Godhead with the Father and the
Spirit is Essential: with his invisible Church, Spiritual and Mystical: with
Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, Sacramental. In
other Unions, the things united are One, either by bare notional apprehensions,
as things understood by the fancy: or else One by compounding, as when of three
or four drugs is made one medicine: or else by mixture and confusion, as when
Water and Wine are made one substance: or else by Divine institution, as when
man and wife are made one flesh: none of these are personal Unions. But
Personal Union is such an one as whereby both natures so retain their distinct
properties unconfounded, that yet they remain indissolubly united in the person
without the least seqaration, no not at death in the grave.

Use I. This teache's us to conceiv aright of the person of Christ: we must
com to God, in and by the flesh of the Son, the second person. The equal term
and object must be the personal Union, i e. the Manhood must as truly be
prayed unto and adored as the Godhead.

Use II. It teache's us a difference between the subsisting of Christ's flesh,
and all other subsistings: we subsist in the union of body and soul, which
two make one and the same person: but the manhood of Christ is no person or
subsistence by union of soul and body, but by assumeing the nature of man into
the person of the Son of God: so that the flesh has no subsisting at all, save
in the upholding power of the Godhead: as the plant Misselto has no root of
its own to subsist in, but subsist's in another tree.

Use III. To encourage the soul that is afraid to draw near to God for
reconciliation and mercy in Christ, because of the estrangement of it self from
God by loss of image. Lo, the Lord is willing to unite himself unto thee (poor
soul) in his Son, by virtue of his union with thy fearful and frail nature. For
by this union he has purchased a spiritual union between himself and the
sinful soul. How singular an encouragemement then should this be to a poor soul
to fasten on the promise, when he see's it assisted by this all-sufficient
merit, issuing from the union of both natures, both suffering and meriting.

Quest. What is the Unction of Christ?

Answ. It is a consequent upon this personal union: whereby the Godhead made
the Manhood full of himself, and of all gifts and graces of the spirit, meet to
enable him to his work of mediation, and by name, separated him from men to be
excellent, as to be the Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church. He was
Priest to satisfy and pray for, Prophet to teach, and King to rule and deliver
his people.

I. Unction of Priesthood.
The Uuction of Priesthood is the chief part of the Unction of Christ, because
by virtue of that office he performed the great work of satisfaction. Two
things are to be considered in this Anointing of Christ our Priest: 1. The
peculiarness. 2. The furniture of gifts. For the first, although there were
many things in the ordinary Priesthood of Aaron which resembled Christ for the
general: yet because there were many things very different, therefore the holy
Ghost set's him forth by the type of Melchisedeck's Priesthood. For as he was
without beginning and end in his story, so was Christ, not as Aaron, mortal,
mutable, sinful. Secondly the Furniture which this Unction filled the Lord
JESUS our High Priest withal, and that without measure. For as the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, so all the communicable gifts and excellencies
thereof dwelt in him. Eminent wisdom, rightousness, humility, unblameablenes,,
holiness, separation from sinners, and all other graces: but (as I take it) one
fruit of his Unction was his peculiar fitness to satisfy. That holy, free
consent of his to the will of his Father to do, and suffer and fulfill all
righteousness: I say, this absolute and unstained Obedience to go through all
difficulties, meekly, long-sufferingly, cheerfully, universally, and
constantly, emptying himself to the death of the Cross, was the main effect of
this Unction, and the bottom of that infinite complacencie which his Father had
in him saying, This is my well-beloven Son in whom I am well pleased.

All the three Offices of Christ do conspire most sweetly together. The
Priesthood before the other two, because else we can have no right to them. But
then the Prophecy and the Kingdom do return their aid to the Priesthood.
First the Prophecy teache's what the Priesthood is, and by what order and
degrees the Lord settle's reconciliation and peace upon a poor sinner: open's
the doctrine of Faith, and mystery of Salvation. Then it teache's how to put
on the Lord Jesus daily, to apply him continually for forgiveness as our daily
sacrifice, and how to live by faith, and to be guided in our particular course
and conversation according to knowledge. Secondly the Kingdom convey's the power
of the Priesthood into the Soul, and effect's that which the prophecy
teache's: and then having so don, it set's up a perpetual rule in the soul,
giveing it power to obey both in doing and suffering, according to the truth
revealed.

II. Unction of Prophecy.
The unction of Prophecy is that insusion of divine light into the manhood of
Christ, by virtue of which he did all at once habitually receiv all that
knowledge and wisdom of God, whereof he was possibly capable, far above all
that nature, art, experience, or education could attain unto: yea far above all
that which Angels could comprehend. Only those mysteries excepted which finite
flesh could not conceiv. as the day of Judgment, etc. our gain hereby is this,
that he is made unto us by virtue hereof true wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. both in
the purging our corrupt minds from all blindeness, and our judgments of all
rashness, error, headlong conceit, and our spirits from all misleading and
misguiding of us in our conversations: so that neither the delusion of Satan,
nor dice-play of men, nor other error can carry us from the truth as it is in
Jesus.

III. Unction of Christ's Ringdom.
The uuction of Christ's Kingdom is that influence of the Godhead into the
Manhood, by virtue whereof Christ our Mediator is the Viceroy of God the
Father, deputed under him to govern the whole world, but especially is Church.
Briefly the end of it is, to support the Priesthood and Prophefie in their
vigor and efficacy: that he may be a Prince and Captain of Salvation to the
Elect to bring them to God.

This Kingdom of Christ assist's his Prophecy by susteining and strengthing
the means of salvation, that his Gospel, Sacraments, Sabbaths, and all his
ordinances, together with the ministry thereof, not only in being, but also
in their full effectualness of working in the hearts of his people with
conviction and authority. It is no small Power to preserv these pillars of his
Throne from ruin. For how many enemies are risen up since his asscention openly
or secretly to persecute or undermine the truth? how has Satan bestirred
himself by those lion-like Emperors in the first 300 years, and since by those
wolvish Popes, and by Heretics and other instruments of the Devil to raze the
Scri^^^res, to deface the chief truth of God, the Divinity, the Humanity, the
Union, the Purity of spiritual Worship, the Integrity of Sacraments, the
justification of a Sinner by Faith alone, the Works of the Spirit, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the whole power of Godliness. To this very hour
he works against all these: but in vain: for this our King looks down from
his throne and laugheth them to scorn, and destroys their policies: no deluge
or flood of his malice could ever prevail against these; but still they
continue as a brazen pillar, and shall survive them all till his second coming.
And not only so, but still he support's these in their authority to
overruled the consciences of men, to pierce, persuade, convince, convert, or
condemn, whether they believ or despise them. and to settle on the Elect all
the liberties of Redemption, Adoption, Holiness, and Glory.

This Kingdom of Christ's assist's his Priesthood by sustaining and upholding
his believing servants in that estate of grace both faith and sanctification in
which he has set them. For it is the Kingdom of Christ which gives efficacy
both to his satisfaction and intercession for the keeping of all such as are
given him by the Father in his truth and name. He enable's his sacrifice to
forgive them and reconcile their persons: his holiness to sanctify them, to
change their natures, to subdue their iniquities, to set up his Kingdom in
their hearts, to make them spiritual Kings and Priests to God in the mortifying
of their lusts, and their liveing to God in the power of Faith and Godliness.

Moreover Christ as a King subject's all his people to himself by the laws of
his kingdom. For he rule's not by tyranny, but by law and command. These
laws he settle's upon his Church both in respect of conversation and
administration.

As a King likewise he protect's his people: shelter's them against all
enemies ghostly and bodily: for he has fought for his kingdom valiantly, and
got it as well by conquest as inheritance; having overcom Satan, Death, and
Hell, triumphing over them all.

Use I. What an happy estate is it for all true believers to be Kings,
Priests, and Prophets to God tbrough this Unction of Christ: the Beard of Aaron
and the skirt of his clothing were not more fragrant with the overflow of his
oil of consecration, then the persons and souls of the Elect are precious and
savorie and accepted of God in the Unction of Christ. Whither then shall we
go, when we want wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, save to
this fountain which is made to us of the Father to convey them unto us?

IV Branch: Actual Obedience.
The Lord JESUS became piacular for us: not only by bearing our punishent, but
by translation upon himself the real imputation of our guilt. He was made Sin
Original and Actual: all the sins of the Elect were charged upon him; that he
by his perfect obedience might disannul them, and bring in and settle upon us
perfect righteousness. And as the misery of man stand's in both sin (and guilt
and stain) as well as in curs, so must our surety perform righteousness as
well as bear the curs. Now this righteousness of Christ is both his natural and
his actual, opposite to this natural and actual unrighteousness af* Adam. His
obedience does consist in his whole conversation, but more specially from his
baptism to his death: in which he fulfilled all both general and personal
righteousness. His whole conversation toward God and man was holy. But
especially for the manner, measure, end, and ground of all he did most sincere
and entire, adding thereto perfection both of parts and degrees, so that there
was nothing amiss. He was a righteous servant, no guile found in him.

V Branch: Passive Obedience.
His Passive Obedience is his whole humiliation, both in the abasement and
sufferings of his whole life, through the which he was one smitten of God and
humbled, yea, a man of sorrows, and especially that one main suffering upon the
cross, whereby he emptied himself most thoroughly, and yielded himself a
sacrifice most freely to the wrath of his Father by his death: that thereby sin
with all her penalties inward, outward, and eternal, with that power which the
law and all enemies, hell and death, had thereby over us, might be abolished,
justice appeased, and righteousness and life obtained, Romans 3. 25. Heb. 9. 13,
24. 1 Pet. 1. 19.

The Passive Obedience stand's in two things:
1. The Preparation thereunto. 2. The Passion it self.
1. The Preparation stood in two things: partly the condition he undertook:
partly the antecedent suffering of his life. For the first, it was a willing
putting of his neck into the collar of subjection, emptying himself of his
glory so far, as being the Lord of all, to com into the fashion of a servant,
in which respect he refused no terms, but despised all shame, Phil. 2. 4, 5,
6. Heb. 12. 2. 3. 2ly. Having subjected himself to be a meet object of
suffering and sorrow, he became indeed a man of sorrows through his whole
life: and therefore he concealed his glory, further than it made for the
discharge of his office of Mediator, as a Prophet, or a King, for then he
step't out of his baseness. See Matthew. 21. 12. Luke 13. 32.

2. The Passion it self: considered two ways:
1. In the Parts of it. 2. In the moderation of it.
For the Parts: first he endured the forsaking of his dearest disciples, taken
by his own servant Judas, to suffer intolerable indignities, etc. Secondly, to
be put to the shameful death of the Cross. Thirdly, to these add the greatest
of all both in the Garden and upon the Cross, the most bitter cup of wrath
which he drank from the hand of his Father: which made him in an agony to
sweat drops of blood; and to pray that that cup might pass from him; and to
cry out, My God, why have thou forsaken me? The Moderation of it appeared in
this, that in all this abasement, yet that measure was imposed and no more,
which suited to the dignity of the person suffering, and to such an one as by
suffering merited, and could not be overcom by suffering. Hence it was that
we had intermission of all his agonies and fears, etc.

Use I. The doctrine whereof may affoard us a sweet meditation concerning the
excellency of the grace of the gospel, purchased by this satisfaction, which
will appear by a comparison of the Work of Creation with the Work of
Redemption. The former was a solemn work, when the eternal Word made man
according to his own image: But when the same eternal Word create's man the
second time, a few words will not serve, but God himself must empty himself of
his fullness and glory; No other price will serve turn, but the Actual
fulfilling all righteousness, and the shedding of his heart-blood. At this
work, not only men, but Angels stand and wonder: Oh! that the view of this
might ravish our souls with the worth of grace to say, The least dram of Grace
is more worth then the whole work of Nature: If the breath of Creation were
such a thing, what is Regeneration, that cost not a breath, but so great a
Workmanship of this Active and Passive satisfaction?

Use II. Let us abhor the conceit of such Sectaries, as imagine there was no
necessity at all of any such price-paying to justice: it is an horrible
derogation to Scripture, and to the wisdom of God, and savoreth of a profane
and audacious spirit: rather let it present to us the hideous nature of sin and
justice: if sin in our selves will not break our hearts, let it break them in
the view of Christ broken by them: Oh! unspeakable love, to be willing to be
pierced by murderers, that they might escape; to say, Oh Father, here is the
surety, lay no debt or punishment on these debtors! I have taken all upon me,
if thou will needs have the uttermost, power out thy wrath upon him that can
satisfy, not upon them that cannot: try whether there be any drop of
mourning in thee, by this due sight of sin and justice, and say, O Lord, if I
were left to be my own satisfier, if thou should have said to Christ, as
once to Moses, Them that sin against me, I will punish, of thee I will require
nothing, oh, how terrible had our condition been?

Use III. Let this Doctrine consute, First all Sectaries who teach that Christ
had no guilt cast upon him by justice, that Christ suffered nothing in his soul
from God's Wrath. Let us abhor such novelties, and know, if Christ suffered no
more the the malice of man, there remaineih a necessity of a second suffering
for us, from justice. Let us beware, while we go about to mince and lessen the
sufferings of Christ, we dstroy the truth of a Mediator, and bereav the soul
of that which should uphold her conflict with justice. Secondly, Let it teach
us to abhor the opinion of those Lutherans, who teach that we must be
possessed wtth the very self-same righteousness wherewith Christ obeyed and
suffered; and this they imagine to be the matter of our justification, and
that else God cannot in justice acquit us. But thus they make Christ serve for no
other ends, but to make us become our own Mediator, and to destroy his own.
Thirdly, it confute's those Sectaries who affirm God seeeth no sin in any of
his, if he have once imputed Christ's righteousness to them. This error
arise's from not-distinguishing these two, Imputation of perfect righteousness,
and perfect imputeing or accepting of imputed righteousness. No man is
justified without the former, but our faith failing in the acceptance, must
needs be looked on by God. I confess he see's no sin, but he pardon's it to
his in Christ, upon faith and repentance, but he punishe's it for their good
in mercy. Again, what if we grant, God see's no sin in them in respect of
their justification? Is therefore their Sanctification perfect? Why then did
David's Adultery displeas the Lord? or why do we pray, forgive us our Debts?
or why says our Savior, say, When all is don, ye are unprofitable? Fourthly
it confute's all such as cut off the active obedience of Christ from the
satisfaction, as they cut the garments of David's servants by the middle. It
may be granted them, that the passive is the more immediate consummation of
the satisfaction: but to exclude the active, is most audacious.

Use IV. To teach all God's people to abhor the slaverie of hypocrites, who, if
they could shun Hell, would never care for Rightousness. God's people, although
they could sin unseen and unpunished, yet would loath it. They take as deep
thought for God as for their own welfare. Shall a believer rest in his pardon
more then in the righteousness of God, which may make them accepted and
beloved? No: the Liverie they wear is, The Lord our Rightousness.

Use V. Let this raise the price of the Lord Jusus's love in the hearts of all
his children: the more cost, the more love.

Use VI. How should it teach us to abhor all enemies of the Cross.

Use VII. If this death of the Lord Jesus be our satisfaction, and the freedom
from sin and curs, our pardon, peace and heaven, where is the dwelling of our
hearts upon it, the delight of our souls in it? how is it that each base shadow
of joy can affect us, when this cannot? if our hope were here only in Christ,
of all others we were most miserable. Nothing here can keep thee from misery,
what is then thy happiness? This satisfaction only. Let it be all in all to
thee, the seasoning of thy blessings, supply of all wants.

Use VIII. Especially, let the chief stream of this point's use, be this:
First, to all Ministers to teach it, and the people to apply it to themselves
in all their fears, yea, the greatest agony, yea, death it self. Whatsoever
thou foregoest, hold this. Stand with open face, and hold this mirror to poor
finners, that they may behold the LORD our Righteousness. Secondly, to all
People: Consider ye who have truly felt that Serpent of the Law sting ye
mortally in the other part: com, apply the remedy in this: look upon this
brazen Serpent and live: and first, I say, feel the strength: Secondly, take
hold of it, and make peace for the former: Know, without a promise from God,
there is no peace unto you: and promise there can be none without
satisfaction. This is the strength of an offer and a promise. Anger abide's in
God, without this price, and thou art but as the bush, and dry stubble before
it. Be assured then no promise speak's to thy soul, and to thy heart, except
it has this strength of Christ, in whom each one is Yea and Amen. Hence com's
all wrath to be turned into love, and this will make God willing to offer, and
faithful to perform, else not. That bottomless depth of mercy in thy Judge and
Enemy cannot be gaged without this bucket: by this thou may reach it.
Again, as this is sufficient strenth, so it is that only which can redeem
thee. He redeemed us, not with pearls, but with the precious blood of the
Lamb: Will thou go to thy duties, performances, grace? Alas, they have no blood
of expiation in them: all these will say, satisfaction is not in me: where
then? surely here only.

Use IX. If so, abandon all, and cling to this only. Take hold of this
sufficient, and only sufficient strength, as the Prophet bid's thee. Whatever
enemy pursue thee at the heels this is thy refuge, that here thou may have
strong consolation in all fears, against all enemies: fear thou the sins of
thy youth, or age? The Lord Jesus was conceived in the Womb, that the infant
[Elect] which never saw light migt be saved by him: Youth, notwithstanding her
disobediene, age for all her rebellion, might be forgiven. Do thy moral sins
of murder, stealth, uncleanness, swearing distress thee? This Lord Jesus
fulfilled all righteousness for thee. Do thy spiritual wickednesses oprress
thee? an unbelieving, secure, hard heart by the contempt of the gospel? The
Lord Jesus suffered the pouring out of his blood, to break the heart of those
that pierced him upon the Cross. Art thou poor? Thy satisfier was so. Rich? He
was the Lord of all. Are thy sins great? He died for Noah's drunkenness, Lot's
incests, David's adultery. Small? Lo, even thy least vain word cost him his
lifeblood. But perhaps not some sins, but perhaps sin it self and the body of
death trouble's thee: He was made sin that knew none. Oh! then, whatsoever sin
can say, yet go on to the throne of grace, as Heb. 4. 16. and look to find
mercy in time of need. Does the Devil, gates of Hell, Conscience, or the
Justice of GOD threaten thee? They cannot save for sin: if they do, thy
conscience has her answer to God against all. And so plead this thy pardon to
the Lord. Say thus, Oh Father, even thou cuttest off thy plea in giving this
price, in accepting it, in offering of it to me; J (Lord) am here before thee
pinched and damned by my sin: if thou do reckon it to me. Oh! Lord, I put
this blessed price beetween me and wrath: Lord have no power to deny it me.
Even I, if I were left with an Orphan's estate, could not keep it from him.
Lord, I am fatherless, my orphan's stock is in thy keeping: thou took'st it to
bestow it. Lord let my Soul have strong consolation in her seeking refuge to
thee, because this price warrant's me.

VI. Branch: The Conquest of Christ.
He overcame all enemies, rose again from the dead, and gave a full being to
the merit of his satisfaction.

Conceiv of it in three estates of Christ:

1. Before his death. Though the Lord Jesus was not exempt from mortality and
infirmity, but subject to all through our sin: yet he conquered in suffering:
for he endured no more then himself pleased.

2. At his death: Although our Mediator must needs drink that cup which his
Father gave him, yet he was a conqueror then too, and above any enemy.

3. After death: when they had got his dead body into the grave, he resumed
his body and soul again, and gave them another blow wors then all: he rose
again, conquered their malice, never more to be conquered, to die no more?
Act. 2. 24. Romans 1. 3.

Use I. This inform's us of the assurance which a poor soul under a condition
of grace may take to it self in pleading her part in this satisfaction. For by
his conquest he sent his Church into a lively possession of all his merits.
Let us therefore com with the assurance of faith to the throne of grace. Heb.
10. 22. saying, Lord give the poor needing servant the fruit of the Lord Jesus
his obedience, the power of his conquest, the full efficacy of his redemption.
Oh, let us not want the strength of this persuasion, but press it, and say,
Lord, I com to thee in the merit of a Christ, not dead, but alive, a Conqueror
that made good to me all his sufferings by his victory, and gave all his
enemies a dead blow, when they looked all to have overthrown him.

Use II. Sundry consolations. Touching Faith, how many are the fears that a
poor soul has, that she shall never be able to believ? Within herself what
weakness, forgetfulness, melancholy, guilt of conscience through corruption,
and dead heart, slavish and fearful, presumptuous, hardened by the deceit of
sin, unworthiness, neglect of the season of grace, this body of death,
opposing all savor of goodness? and so even death of body make's them afraid,
they may die ere they believ. So without them, what temptations against God and
they Scriptures? what enemies have they to darken and dull them, their senses,
understandings and heart? what enemies of the wicked have they without them?
III Husbands, Wives to dismay them, telling them that they cannot be assured
in this life of their salvation. How do enemies affright them with malice,
threats, big-looks, disclain and scorn, putting them in fear they shall never
escape out of their claws? In this variety of affliction, what is there to
sustain them? What is it which teaches to kiss the rod, take up their cross,
and bear the indignation of the Lord, till he plead their cause, and bring
forth their light? Surely the strength of their Captain, and Conqueror the Lord
JESUS, who has told them, In the world they shall have affliction, but be of
good comfort, I have overcom the world. It Is he that tell's them, till God's
season of their suffering be com, so much, so long, and that very cross God
has ordained for them, no enemy shall do them hurt. And when they do, he
will make it tolerable and easy unto them, do them good for their sakes that
hurt them. But above all, they are made Conquerors, and their chin is kept
above water, they fight under hope of victory, and say with the Church, Micah
7. 8. Rejoice not over me, Oh mine enemy, for when I am down I shall rise;
and when thou art fallen, thy wound shall be incurable.

Lastly, it comfort's them by faith, in the conquest of our Lord Jesus, against
the power of death and the grave. For as it was with their head, he could not
be held in it, so with them, their flesh rest's in hope of that triumph. This
conquest make's us happy in all our misery; For why? Even by that very
death, which is the last enemy, and the gate of utter misery to the wicked,
the Lord open's a door of full and final redemption to the faithful. Their
lowest ebb is the next step to the highest tide of their soul's happiness, and
final freedom from all sin, sorrow and enemies. We shall be as much out of
Gunshot of them, as the Lord Jesus himself was after his Conquest.

VII. Branch: Applying of Christ's Merit.
The Applying work of Christ's merit is that solemn part of his Mediation, for
the sake whereof he forsook the earth, and was exalted above all
principalities, and sits at the right hand of God his Father, that by his
intercession always made for his Church, he might apply to all the members,
the power of this satsfaction, that it might work faith in those that want it,
and confirm it in those that have it. Therefore he is called Advocate, that
the Church may enjoy the fruit of his death continually. And as the ends hereof
are many, to wit, to present the prayers of his people unto God, to hold them
close to his Father, and keep them in his love, to cover their daily offenses,
and continue their justification and acceptance, to unite them one to another,
and to protect them from enemies: so especially to bless the Ministry of the
Gospel for the breeding Faith in the souls of the Elect, by the preaching of
this his Blood and Death. So that when we see the prevailing power of the Word
and Sacraments in the weak ministry of flesh, what shall we asscribe unto
it, but the power of this applying work of our Advocate, who convey's favor of
life, of brokenness of heart, faith and regeneration thereby into the souls of
his? and in this respect, he is the key of his Fathers bosom and fountain, to
unlock and set it open (being sealed before) for Judah and Jerusalem to wash
in.

Use I. As it is singular for all uses to the Church in general, and all the
lively members thereof in all concernments of it whatsoever; as acceptance of
their prayers, being perfumed with the sweet incens thereof, protection of
their persons, safeguard against enemies, sustentation of their souls in grace,
perseverance and the like: so especially, seeing by the blood of Jesus we have
a liveing way made unto us by his flesh, let us draw near with a pure heart in
assurance of faith. Oh! it should be as a wel-spring of salvation for every
dry soul to com unto, even in the greatest barrenness, deadness and fear of
heart, that the merit of Christ should not belong unto it. Therefore go not to
the Word and Sacraments any more with a dead and sad heart, as if there were*
nothing in them, save an outside of man's voice and efficacy to persuade:
behold Christ in them, who by his applying power, convey's into them strength,
savor, persuasion and grace, that his poor people may not hear his Word as a
dead letter, or receiv the Seals as dumb elements, but as divine ordinances
assisted with the Spirit of Christ: and therefore able to breed faith in the
soul, and truly to carry it into the stream of his satiafaction. Deceiv not
thy self in the condition of faith, and assure thy self, the Lord Jesus will
give thee both meat and appetite, the object of his righteousness, and faith to
believ it also.

Use II. Let us be exhorted to deny our own strength, conceits, hopes, or
fears, and and as often as we go to the Word, remember it is a word of
reconciliation.

Use III. Let all the faithful Ministers of God comfort themselves in their
weakness and defects of preaching, in the little success of their labors, of
woeful hardness of heart in their people. The Lord Jesus, by his spirit of
intercession, hold's them as his candle-sticks in his right hand hand: and he
will uphold gospel, ministry, and the power of both in the midst of their
enemies: and although they be never so furious, yet Mic. 2. 7. his spirit
shall not be straightened: but his word shall still be good to such as walk
uprightly.

ARTIC. III.
GOD'S imputation of the merits of CHRIST'S righteousness to a sinful Soul is
the formal cause of our justification.

IMputation does import such an act of GOD the Father satisfied, as does take
this righteousness, and reckon it to the needing Soul as her own (although it
be inherent in another) to cast upon it an estate of as full and perfect
freedom and acceptance as if it had never sinned, or had fully satisfied: for
look how he dealt with our Surety, he made him sin for us, that is, imputed
it to him as his, so does he take his righteousness and count it ours, that it
might be really ours indeed.

This doctine of imputation is expressed by diverse phrases in the Scripture.

By the term of not-imputeing sin, and imputeing righteousness, he intimate's
in how many respects Christ has helped us, to wit, both to forgiveness in the
one, being made sin for us, and to acceptance in the other by cloatheing us
with his righteousness: yet so, as by both Active and Passive righteousness
jointly, not severally considered.

By imputeing righteousness, and imputeing faith for righneousness is meant
one thing. Not that faith in any sens can be our righteousness; but because
Christ apprehended by faith, is the same thing which faith it self in the
Scripture. Beesides, faith must needs concur with imputation in the act of it,
and therefore the holy Ghost honor's it with the name of being imputed to
righteousness. For first, God enable's the soul to believ on the Lord Jesus by
the promise and the spirit thereof. Secondly, the soul yields and consents.
Thirdly, God casts hereby this righteousness (thus believed) on the soul, and
impute's it to pardon and life: So in the point of justification, faith is said
to justify, because of her necessary concurrence: which phrase is tropical,
the instrument being put for the principal agent.

The issue of this imputation of God is the Act of God justifying us really and
freely from all our sin and guilt, and all the curs due thereunto, quitting us
by proclamation (as I may say) from heaven, by the voice of his spirit through
faith: so that having disabled all enemies from giveing in evidence, lo, he
absolveth us, as having nothing com in against us.

Use I. Let this be consolation to all faint and weak children of God, in the
sight of their little grace and mean gifts, and in the fear of persevereing to
the end: If one should com and tell thee, thou art as holy as Job, as Upright
as David, Believing as Abraham, Zealous as Phinehas, would it not make thy
heart leap within thee? Surely, though I dare not say these of thee, yet I say
this: If all these had not the robe of Christ's imputed rightousness cast over
the holiest of all their Graces, their unhallowedness had defiled them, and the
greatest of their holiness had not profited them. And lo, this robe thou have
as fully, largely and deeply as the best of all these ever had. Thy
righteousness of imputation is as large as the largest of theirs. Again,
touching thy fear of holding out, proov to thy self thy faith in this act of
imputation, and that thou have received that from God, and then I assure thee,
that eternal Spirit by which the Lord Jesus offered up himself for his Elect,
(the weakest as well as the strongest) shall sustain thee: it is the stock
which thou art (by imputation) implanted into, which hold's thee, not thou it.

Use II. Teaches us the excellency of faith: first, in respect of the nature
of it; other Graces of inherence dwell in the soul, and are active within the
soul more or less, as patience, sobriety, etc. But the nature of faith
(although it be a gift put into the soul, yet) stands rather in a passive
receptiveness, then an activeness. Secondly, in respect of the constancy of
it: other graces, while they last, stand us in great stead, as patience under a
cross, thanks for blessings: but faith always receiv's his imputation of
Christ from the father, as well to cover and beautify us all our life, as at
our first conversion, and carrie's her influence into each grace, both to
strengthen and keep the life of it, as also to cover the wants of it, yea the
defects of the whole course. No grace can supply faith properly: but faith
suppleth all them. Thirdly, in respect of the prerogative of it, that it is
admitted to be all in all with God for the soul: for it is Faith only that
maintain's Union, and thereby communion with God.

Use III. Let it provoke all that partake this imputation to be thankful to
God, for his most wise and gracious providence, that has cast their portion so
in this life, that if there be any defect, it should be in things of less
necessity: but for those that are most essential he is most large and full in
his provision for them.

Use IV. Let it be a ground of self-denial to us. As we would obtain this
righteousness of another, so let us be naked of our selves. It is witten of Mr
Rollock, that being on his death bed, and much encouraged by them that visited
him, by his worthy labors, I abhor (says he) my Rectorship of the
Universitie, Readership of Divinity, and Pastorship of Edenborow (all which
with great profit to all he under-went) that I may be found in Christ,
clothed with his righteousness, all mine own is dung in comparison of this.
Com as Mephibosheth, a limping cripple to David, when I was a dead dog my Lord
accepted me. I Sam. 19. As poor Abigail sent for to be a Queen, said, Let me
be an handmaid to wash the feet of thy servants, 2 Samuel 25. She knew, mere
marriage to a King would make a Queen, without bringing any thing. And thus
doing, thy unworthiness shall not hurt thee, but help on this robe upon thy
bare shoulders. Com thus to the Lord and say, here, Lord, is a naked wretch,
put on the Lord Jesus upon me, I have no clothing to hinder thee: thou bid'st
me put him on, Romans 13. vlt. But Lord do thou fit him for me in particular,
for my soul, for my sin, against my curs: and then take him Lord, put him on
me also, reckon him to me, account with me in him, and make me his
righteousness, as thou made him my sin, and I shall count it as real, as if I
had it of mine own.

Use V. Let it stablish and comfort every believer against all his fears. Oh!
it cannot sink into a poor soul privy to all her defilements, that the Lord
should ever pardon or accept her. Remember imputation is not taking all sin
out of thee at once (that must abase thy heart as it abased thy Surety) but a
not-imputeing it unto thee. Our blessedness stand's not in the want of sin, but
in the Lord not imputeing it. The bush burned, but the wonder was, that it was
not consumed. The Lord imput'es not thy sin, cover's it, take's away the
condemning power, impute's not the actual offenses thereof to thee. He look's
at his own image in thee. In all thy duties, prayers, there is thy dunghill and
his pearl, he behold's that which is his, cover's that which is thine, (not to
make thee bold, but thankful and humble).

Use VI. Let this excellency of faith, as comfort us in one respect, so humble
us in another. For imputation is only for this life, and argues a defect of
that which shall be in another: the thing imputed is perfect: but the person
to whom is corrupt: and faith herself shall ceas and be abolish't. We will
perhaps confess that we should be blank for our corruptions of pride and
covetousness: but the truth is, our grace and virtues should humble us: yea
faith it self, because still our life of inherence and perfect holiness is
wanting.

ARTIC. VI.
The Gospel and the offer of Grace in it is the Revealer of this deliverance.

THe Soul in her distress has to do with God, to his tribunal she stand's as
her Judge.

Now it is not the hearing of his giveing of Christ, nor of a satisfaction,
which can quiet her: but this, that she may know it is given and performed for
her. The offended Father has accepted this satisfaction, is well pleased with
it, his heart is made placable by it, and now his heart is opened, and his
bosom of love bared toward a poor wretch: and this he utter's by a
proclamation, and by an offer of grace to them, if they will believ him to mean
as he speak's, See 2 Cor. 5. 20. 21. Him that knew no sin, he made sin, ctc.
And what of this? Therefore he says, be reconciled to God. Now when the soul
hear's of this ground and building, she feel's herself to have somewhat to say
for herself in this her dealing with God: I thank thee, O Lord, for thy
granting it, and for the price paid: but now, seeing thou have don it, that in
thy being satisfied I might have my part in it, as offered and pinned on my
sleev, when I see a thing more precious than the world laid in my lap by thy
hand, I tremble to think I should refuse my own salvation.

The Gospel in the Ministry of reconciliation, is the instrument of this
Revelation, and that both fully and only. Paul tell's us, that when the love
of God appeared, then he saved us. This appearance is the light of the Gospel,
and the arising of the day star thereby in the heart. Now yet this Gospel is
not the mean, in respect of the bare letters and syllables of it, but in the
Ministry of reconciliation. Paul speaking of this great gift of Christ, twice
joine's this with it, and he has made us Ministers of reconciliaton; as if
this were a material point: We the Ministers of God, beeseech you, be
reconciled: receiv not the grace of God in vain. It were a great help to our
faith to consider God has sealed Ministers to engage their truth for God, that
if God do not mean as he speak's, they are liers. We had never known sin, but
by the law: so neither Grace, but by the Gospel.

And surely who so will profit by this Article, must get this lesson by heart;
That the Lord who freely purposed, and faithfully sent his Son into world,
still continue's his freedom, and does offer the Lord Jesus with his
excellency most freely. A bottom of most unspeakable comfort to all poor
bruised reeds and broken souls. For if he be freely offered, what poor soul
should doubt to accept him? What is freeer than gift? He that gave him freely,
cannot withdraw him again, nor keep back his satisfaction from a needing soul,
as if he repented. It behoov'd us then much to understand the truth of this
freedom, which in a few particulars I willname.

First, God offer's Christ of his own accord, therefore freely.

Secondly, he offer's us better then that Adam lost: The burning down of our
house was the occasion of our greater repairing. As he said, I had perished if
I had not been taken prisoner.

Thirdly, he offer's to the undeserving. We were Thieves, Traitors and
enemies: when we did all we could to pull him out of his throne, yea slew the
Lord of life, then died he for us.

Fourthly, he offers freely who offer's instantly upon our need. No sooner
did Adam fall, but the offer followed: the seed of the woman, etc. No sooner
does a poor wretch need mercy, but it prevent's him. Ho every one, com, etc.
He that offer's leasurely, is but a cold giver: but speedy offering is double
grace.

Fifthly, when he has offered and given, he repent's not. Of all works of
which God is said to repent him, it is neverr said, he repented to offer
mercy. Nay, he is so far from it, that he has sworn and will not repent.
God never repent's of mercy, that he might repent us of our unthankfulness
and unbelief.

Sixthly, the Lord is exceeding glad when his offer is taken, and no way so
displeased, as when its in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 2 Heb, 2. 3, 4. No disobedience is
so odious to him as unbelief, Joh. 3. 19. Nor for which he will so severely
punish, 2 Cor. 4. 4. He is master of his richest gift: count's it his honor to
give the best most freely, Joh. 6. 27. He has a royal heart, and can beteam
to the basest worm the priveledg of pardon, adoption and glory: and he giv's
an heart capable of his offer also; else how could an oyster-shell contain this
fountain, all to teach the soul to recover it self out of her cursed distust,
and measureing the Lord and his gift by her self and her capableness, whereas
all his are enlarged by him with his offer to be comprehensive of it, the Lord
making a poor shallow heart meet to receiv his fullness, Ephesians. 3. 17.

Seventhly, he offer's without expecting again: as we say, he lend's freely
who expects no requital: the Lord indeed look's for honor at the hands of his
servants: but first he giv's the gift; and secoudly the heart; and thirdly
accept's it as honor, being no addition to perfection. The Lord offer's grace
to none, whom rather he might not be ashamed to own. Such is man's baseness
that even in his greatest freedom he seek's himself. A father will give his
child his Land; but when? after death when it cannot pleasure him. Till then
he will have rent. And we have a secret end in our gifts, I give, that he
may requite. But the Lord offer's to such as can no way content him, or be
pleasing: He giv's first to make them so, but finde's them odious, that he
may show what he can find in his heart to do, and make all men astonished at
his mere gracious grace, and to boast of the Lord.

Eighthly, he require's nothing in us toward the accepting his offer. All our
own make's our accepting frustrate. Rev. 1. 22. Com and drink freely of the
waters. Joh. 7. If any man thirst, let him drink freely. God giv's, and
upbraid's not our nothing. Nay our emptiness is our best plea. Esaias 55. 1. Com
and buy for nothing: self denial is our best price; and he that com's and
offer's to God any thing, and bring's cost to God, loose's his gift.

This offer will appear so much the freer, if also we mark the circumstances
in which the Scripture expresses the offer, called the cords of love by Hosea:
by which he draw's the soul to see his meaning, sometimes by his long patience
and waiting upon her; notwithstanding all her deafness of ear, and deadness of
heart, and dallying with his offer. Oh! his locks are bedewed with the drops of
the night! His long suffering and patience is a bottomless depth beyond all the
expectation of man! It is long ere thy unbelief could weary him; he has
lengthened out the season of grace, according to the length of grace it self;
forborne thee long, kept off judgment a long while, which might have swept thee
away from hope many years since. He has recovered the lives of many of us
twice or thrice, that we might renew our covenants and keep them. And he has
spared us when we have broke them, pressing in upon us with renewing of good
motions and affections which we had quenched, as being loath to lose us,
giveing us helps and means even out of season, after long contempt, confessing
himself to mean as he speak's: Why lay you out your money, and not for bread,
and your silver for that which profit's not? Hearken unto me! eat good things!

So sometimes by his protestations of his loathness that any poor soul should
perish! Why will ye die oh ye house of Israel! Anger is not in me, why should
flame consume the stubble! What should I do to my vine that I have not don?
Sometimes by his passions and lamentations; Luke 19. 42. Oh! that thou had
seen, even in that day, the things that concern thy peace; but now they are
hidden!

Those tears and mournings over Jerusalem for her hard heart and contempt, have
been and are still over thee! If there be any dampings and streightnings of
spirit, thou have caused them by thy dalliance and heart that would not repent.
But the Lord for his part still crie's, How often would I have gathered thee as
the Hen does her chickens? Sometimes by his writeings to this feast of his Son,
sometimes by his contestation,, sometimes by his entreaties and earnest
exhorting, sometimes by his allurements, to persuade and toll on the heart that
hang's off, by the promise of all the good things which he offers; sometimes
by his severe threats to all that refuse his offers: all these show how willing
and cordial he is to part with his grace: and lastly, sometimes by the
universalitie of it, that he dispenceth it without all respect of persons,
age, sexes, states and conditions, who exempt not themselves. But the special
properties of this offer are three:

1. Liberty. 2. Simplicity. 3. Fidelity.
First, he offer's to whom he pleases, passing by millions of people in the
world: so that it is merely unconditional and free, as, when Paul came to
Athens or Ephesus, who had never heard of the Gospel before. Secondly, the Lord
being truly pacified in Christ offer's it simply hithout grudging, with an
open heart, meaning as he speak's. Thirdly, Fidelity, whereby he does most
readily and fully perform whatsoever he offer's to all, who put him to the
trial, and accept it.

This is the main hinge, whereupon the door of Hope and Faith turns. For an
Offer is no otherwise differing from a promise, then as a general out of which
a particular issues: the promise is included in an offer, but yet in special,
expressing the covenant of God to all that express the offer, that he will
receiv them, be their God, both in pardon and all-sufficiencie. Into these the
soul does wholly power out herself: which that we may understand, consider this;
that we have to do with the Father immediately, but with our Lord Jesus only
mediately, as a mean to lead us with confidence to him. The Father properly
look's at the Son as our Surety, and us for his sake: but we look at him
directly; and to our Lord Jesus, as our Mediator. So that look what we can
show for our reconciliation, must com from the Father, and that is his offer
and promise, oath and covenant of mercy. Into that therefore the poor soul is
to resolv it self, all her doubts, fears, temptations and distempers whatsoever.

Use 1. This teache's us to adore the depth of God's justice against sin, that
has still left so many Nations in their utter darkness and brutish ignorance
of the Gospel. How should this woeful desertion provoke us to prize the
revelation of this Mystery to us? as for them, how should we pity them?

Use II. Secondly, this is terror to all Papists that maliciously hide and
darken this precious offer of God in the Gospel, from the eyes of the blind
people; terror to all profane scorners, who reject the Gospel, and prize their
swine, their pottage, their pleasures, eas and pomp, more then the Gospel;
reproof of all Non-discerners of this Grace of the Gospel, the feet of a
Minister shoul be beautiful in this main respect, (though others also) beecaus
he bring's glad tidings of peace!

Use III. Reproof to all that slight the Gospel in the offer thereof, prefer
their oxen and farms, their self-love, ends and liberties before it.

Use IV. Advertisement to God's Ministers, to magnify their Ministry in deed
and practice, by beseeching the people to be reconciled to God.

Use V. This should scare all from infidelity and contempt of God's offer: Oh!
it is free and from mere good will, the Lord is tied to none; He has rejected
millions of Jews and Turks and Baptized ones, and chosen to offer grace to
thee. And, shall the contempt of the free offer of that which thousands would
have been glad of (upon the price of going from sea to sea for it) be
pardonable? Do but consider what woeful punishment will lie upon thee, who
refusest such an offer laid in this lap. When as many poor souls would rejoice
if the spending of days and nights might procure them a tender and believing
heart to receiv it; and yet complain, that they cannot com by it. Oh, tremble
at the freedom of this offer! Be humble and base in thy self to consider but
this; I am a poor wretch, standing to the mercy of a free God who has it to
give where he will, and to deny it at his pleasure. If he give it to a
prodigal son, and deny it to a moral civilian: if he give it to one that came
into the vineyard at the eleventh hour, and deny it to him that came in at the
seventh: if he deny it to the willer and runner, and be found of such as
sought him not, who shall alledg against freedom? May he not do with his own
as him please's? Oh! despise none! least the Lord make the despiser seek to the
despised, and be glad of their portion. Oh! turn all emulation and scorn into
humility, and deep adoring of this freedom.

Use VI. Dally not with this offer of grace. There is a while of it, a season
annexed to the offer. The same breath which urges to receiv the grace of God,
add's a charge: For he has said, In an accepted time I have heard thee, and
in the day of salvation have I succored thee. Oh, that in that thy day thou
had seen! Now when is this day? Surely it is not the day of possible mercy,
but of seasonable mercy: Then when as, (besides health, means and the offer of
grace) the Lord putt's a special spirit into the Ministry of the Word, so
that it pierce's into the heart with persuasion: when the terrors of it are
weighty and serious, the promise it is (as the early fruit in Summer) welcome
and savorie: when sin is bitter to the soul, and when it is irksom to it, to
be out of God's favor: When the heart break's and mourn's after God, and can
spend nights after days in seeking: and it cannot be quiet, but is held on by
peculiar tenderness to attend grace.

Alas! there will be a season of God's weariness; and his spirit shall not
strive with man. He will have also a season of leaving thee to that contempt,
which despised the counsel of God for thy salvation. Abhorring of light,
preferring darkness, despising the Ministry and Ordinances, revolting from
those insinuations of grace which once seemed precious, I say these are
spiritual wickednesses, and far exceed moral evils.

Use VII. Let this be a sweet preparative unto us, to frame us to believ.
Entertain we not any base cursed thoughts of God in the simplicity of his
offer. Nourish all possible persuasion in the soul of his unfeigned meaning
toward thee in this kind: thou can honor him no better, than to agree with
him, in his meaning well to thee. There is no greater difficulty of faith then
this seed of bondage in us, to judge of God by our selves. We muse as we use.
If we have an enemy, we cannot forget his wrongs, we meet him not without
indignation: and therefore so we think of God also to us, and the rather,
because he has so much vantage over us. But oh poor wretch, jealousy aagainst
his love? Is it not rather oil to the flame? Pull down thy traitor's heart;
hate not him whom thou have hurt; put on an holy and childe-like opinion of
him, who when he needed not, yet purposed, sent, received this satisfaction
for thee, and therefore cannot lie in offering it to thee. Say thus: Lord, thy
sweet offer, naked bosom, cords of love, passions of sick love, sometime to
allure, sometime to contest, command, urge, threaten, and beseech, turning thee
into all forms of persuasion, to win my soul: all these convince me of thy
wel-meaning toward me. If my own enmity to my enemy, and the slander of
Satan that thou enviest my good, do assault me never so much, and my own
traitorous heart conspire with them, yet this thy gracious offer in thy Gospel,
shall bear down all. Read Esaias 55. 7. For my ways are not as your ways, nor
my thoughts as your thoughts: but as far above them, as heaven above the earth.
Add this: All the understanding of man cannot comprehend the love of this
offer, no more then the eye of a needle can the great Camel: and shall I go
about to lessen it?

Surely this should be a great stay to my heart, that God has offered me
this grace; and as base as I am, what though it cannot enter into such a narrow
breast as mine is, that he mean's as he speak's: yet if it be the pleasure of
a great God to give it (as his offer import's) shall I look at my baseness, or
at his greatness, whom it were a dishonor unto, to give mean things? Oh Lord,
rather by this bounty open my narrow heart, and make it large. If the offer of
a Minister of God be precious, who dare seal it upon earth to my poor soul;
shall not the offer of God himself, the strength of Israel that cannot lie,
much more sway with me! Oh Lord captivate all my hatred of spirit, and base
treachery against thee! It Is reported of a certain Merchant of LONDON (in the
story of England) that he made much of a poor Cobbler that dwelt with him, a
cankred Papist, and did as good as maintain him; yet this Traitor went about to
betray him to death: This Merchant having escaped his hands, yet out of his
love used all means to be friends with him again, and used him as before: all
this would not do, his heart was so villainous, he would shun the way of him,
and not look at him. It fell so out at length, that he met him in such a
narrow Lane, as he could not balk him; but must needs talk with him. The good
Merchant take's him to him, and told him, he was glad he had met him, and he
wondered what he meant so to decline from him. What said he, do you think
me your enemy? if I were, could I not crush you with a word speaking? Alas, I
am not offended with you, for all your treachery, but forgive and forget it.
The words of this man so pierced the Cobler's heart, that it brake instantly,
and he falling down upon his knees, and with bitter tears confessed his
villainy, and repented of it: told him, This love should for ever tie him unto
him, and so he continued. This base Papist is the heart of every child of old
Adam: this royal Merchant is the Lord: this narrow lane is the straight of
conscience beset with sin and curs: this kind behavior is this offer of Grace:
Let us not be wors to it then a cankred Papist: but break our hearts, and melt
into tears, and with Saul to David say, Where shall a man find such love, as
to spare his enemy when he had him in his hand, and to be content to cut off
the lap of a garment, when he might have cut my throat? Break my heart in the
bosom of his love.

Use VIII. We learn hence to understand the Covenant of God, a naked thing,
but filled with all the merit of an eternal Satisfier, and with all the
strength, mercy, justice, and faithfulness of an unchangeable Promiser, even
the Lord fully satisfied; and so concerning it, beseech the Lord, so to write
it in thy soul. God's offer is founded upon Christ and the well-pleasedness of
the Father by him, Why then, there is no more anger in his heart, Esaias 27. 3.
for if there were, what should dry stubble do? But now, lo, he is reconciled,
he cannot be angry with a poor Creature. He has taken order to satisfy
justice by his Son: to the end that he might abolish the proceeding of
Justice, and cut off his own advantage, and power to condemn. For a time he
was angry, for the iniquity of thy sin; but not for ever, least flesh should
fail before him. Oh! let us well observe this, That all in a promise and an
offer is little enough to settle a poor soul against her fears. And this will
cause us to be glad to cling to the word and say, If I perish I perish.

ARTIC. V.
The LORD offer's CHRIST to the Soul furnished with all his benefits.

THe LORD offering Christ to the Soul, does* not offer him nakedly and barely,
but furnished with all the benefits of his satisfaction. This is that which the
Apostle in Ephesians. 1. 3. urges* Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all
blessings in Heavenly places.

All these benefits are not of one sort: for order's sake we will help our
conceit with a distinction.

Some of these benefits of Christ belong to the being or estate of a believer,
and contain the full right and title to Chist himself: and are concurrent with
our first engraffing with him, and accompany our first conversion. Others are
consequent upon this condition, as royalties and priveledges following upon it,
whether inward graces, or outward blessings, according to the several promises
in and by which God convey's them.

Concerning these benefits of Christ, consider three things:

1. The Difference. 2. The Order. 3. The Nature and use of them to the Soul.
I. There is a fourfold difference of them.
First: Election is before time, and presupposes nothing but the first cause of
God's good pleasure and will: justification, reconciliation, and the rest in
time, and presuppose Christ really theirs, and issue immediately from him.
Secondly, in respect of the benefits that follow Christ: In which respect
Vocation differ's from all the rest: for Vocation is not the fruit of Faith as
the rest are, but of Election, seeing whom God elected, he called to know it*
the rest are fruits of calling to faith, as to be justified, adopted etc.
Thirdly, in respect of those which concern us in this life, and those that
reach to a better. The former being such as reliev the necessity of our
present condition, in which we are imperfectly conformed to Christ in his
estate of humility, and beset with sin, Satan and enemies: of this nature are
our justification, reconciliation, adoption and the like: which all shall ceas
(as faith, hope and patience shall) in respect of the evils they do here
conflict withal: those that concern the life to com, belong to that Image of
God renewed in us in righteousness and holiness, which abide for ever, begun
here in grace, and perfected in glory. Fourthly, in respect of the benefit it
self which shall abide for ever* instead of an earthly paradise with old Adam,
we shall enjoy heavenly mansions with Christ in the presence of GOD, and there
have this image and our mortality perfected.

In all agree, that they are the work of the Spirit of Christ settling all his
benefits upon the believer.

II. The Order of them:
1. Is Vocation (or regeneration, as it concerns the way and mean of
begetting to God). 2. Is Union. 3. Is Regeneration 4. Is Justification. 5. Is
Reconciliation. 6. Is Adoption. 7. Is Redemption. 8. Is Sanctification,
immediately issuing from it, (containing the mortifying and quickening work of
the Spirit). 9. Is Glorification.
III. The nature and use of them to the Soul.
1 Vocation, which is a work of the Spirit, issuing from election, whereby whom
the Lord has chosen to be his he bring's to know it: And that by the voice
and call of the outward Word and inward Spirit, crying to their souls thus, Com
out of her my people, and return to me. Com out from thy former corrupt estate
of sin, subjection of Satan, curs, misery, lewd customs, error of the wicked,
hell; and return to that blessedness which thou have lost. Calling, is that
whole workmanship of God, whereby he pull's the soul from a bad estate to a
good: be it longer in working or shorter, darker or cleerer, easier or harder:
it is the drawing of it from darkness to light. Act. 26. 18. From whence it is
drawn, is an unregenerate estate. That whereto is faith, between these, the
whole work of God is Calling.

It stand's in these two parts:
1. The prepareing Work. 2. The finishing.
The former is that by which the Lord findeing the heart incapable of a
promise, bring's it and prepare's it to be such an one as may see it self
capable, and under condition of believing, such an one as may believ.

The later is that by which the LORD does finish the work of faith with power:
which is the condition of the Gospel, without which no man can partake any of
the priveledges following. For it succeed's the condition of the Law: and in
stead of Do this, says, Believ this and live, Note well these: Preparation is
the condition of faith, and faith the condition of the covenant.

These preparations are partly Legal, partly Evangelical: When the Spirit of
God by both, leav's such an impression in a troubled soul under the spirit of
bondage, it com's (by the sight of the Gospel) to so much hope, as work's the
heart to mourning and brokenness, to desire mercy, to esteem it, and to be
nothing in its own eyes in comparison of it: together with diligent
unweariedness till it have obtained it. All which are the preventions and
assistance of the spirit of Calling, drawing the soul home to God, by such
steps and degrees as the soul is capable of.

II. Union: which is the work of the Spirit of Christ, making the Lord and the
Soul one spirit, and causing the soul to partake, by virtue thereof, all that
power of his, both in priveledges and graces which follow. For it is sure, the
soul can no more receiv ought from God, till it be one with him by Christ,
then Christ could merit any thing for us, till the Deity and flesh were really
united: and no more then the body and soul can impart or receiv to or fro,
till they be one. Till we be one with God in Christ, we are without him in
the world: The Lord abhorring all relations that want Union; but if once
united, then he is in us, we in him; he dwell's in us, we in him, as an
inhabitant in his house, and the soul in the body: he is one with us, we are
of him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. in him, Joh. 17. flesh of his flesh; he is our husband,
and we are his spous, and therefore hence issues all virtue, vigor and power
into us, that is meet for our support, either earthly or spiritual, till our
union be perfected in glory.

In this Union four things are considered.

1 The Necessity of it. 2. The difference of created Union from gracious
Union, with the cause of it. 3. How this Union is wrought in the soul. 4. The
Effects which follow upon it
First, Union with God is necessary to all that would partake his graces. It
was in the Creation, till the Lord had breathed the spirit of life and himself
into him, Adam could have no communion with God; so it is in this second
Creation; No benefit, no fruit thereof can com to the soul, till this second
creation and union be. But by this as by a channel the rest follow,
Reconciliation with amity, Adoption with worship and liberty etc.

The second thing is the difference of Unions. The Union of grace is not like
that of creation; neither in the measure, nor in the instrument of it. Not in
measure: for in the creation there was a total and immediate Union (in that
kind) and it was a perfect one, having God's image in it without set or
impeachment. This Union of grace is an imperfect Union for measure in this
life: beecaus the relics of corruption and old Adam as dross mixing themselves
with the soul, suffer not God and it to knit fully. Secondly, instruments of
Union are unlike. That of the Creation needed no other tie or band, save the
immediate presence of God in his image, which had then no sin nor let to divide
it. That Union, which now is encumbred with lets and enemies, must needs be
maintained by a band of greater perfection then any is in us.

The third thing is the instrument by which Union is begot in the soul: and
that is (on our parts) faith; on the Lord's part, the Spirit of life in Christ,
conveied by the promise and baptism.

The fourth thing is the effect of this Union, even in habiting and dwelling of
the Spirit in that soul which is become one with himself: so that now God in
Christ by the Spirit, is that to the soul which before her lusts were, all in
all, Lord and King, light and defense, heaven and happiness.

Use I. It is a terror to all hang-byes and time-servers, who have it at their
tongues end, they are Gods, and they be saved, how few soever they are. But
they cannot proov it by any ingrafting or union. The old stock appears in
them, no planting into a new, no life of grace, no Chirst to be theirs, no
bringging to God by his flesh and the union of it to God, no promise to fasten
upon, by which they may com: no Spirit of God to be between them, and to unite
both, as the spirits Knit the body and soul in one.

Use II. All you that will needs claim it by union, Try your selves about it:
if ye be united to God, then has the Lord chased you from your wandering
vagaries and old haunts, and brought you back like the prodigal.

Use III. It Is use of thankfulss and comfort to all God's people. 1. Of thanks;
for who art thou that the Lord should thus unite himself to such a lump of
earth and sin? Secondly, comfort against all thy bad inmates and lusts which
disquiet thee, and make thee rather a Stie of uncleanness rather then an House
of God: Be of good cheer; the Lord esteem's thee not by these necessary
inmates, but by the voluntary: Keep out them, and the Lord will look upon his
pearls, not thy dunghill.

Use IV. It is to teach us, both what dignity and what duty lie's upon God's
people in this respect of their union. The dignity must needs be great, to
be one with God: for by this means all his and our things are common, he
suffer's in and with us in all our crosses: He is honored or reproached in all
our obedience or disobedience: we stand not, nor fall to our selves, but to
him. Secondly, it is to teach us our duty; viz. To be sensible of this union
continually, wheresoever we become. A wife that honor's her husband, will so
carry her self, that her husband may not be impeached by any unseemly
carriage, idle looks, speeches, or liberties; she look's at his credit whose
she is. Such a narrow eye should this union with the Lord work in us: That his
honor and name should be the mark we shoot at, and look what we think would
jarr with his affections, trench upon his glory, that we should cut off.

III Regeneration. The order of Gods working whereof is this. First, the word
present's to the soul her loss of God, not in a few beams or rays of his, but
his whole divine nature, life, and being. Secondly, it present's hereby the
succession of misery upon this loss, and that most deserved: all the curses,
wooes and penalties written in the law, are written also and engraven by the
finger of God's convinceing Spirit upon this person as a book written all over,
within and without. Thirdly, the Lord present's this soul with her fearful
condition, in this respect, viz. that dangerous eas and quiet, which the
deluded soul lie's in, in the midst of all this privation of God. A most
miserable spectacle to behold, a creature miserable, and yet thinking it self
posse'st of all; rich, clothed, and furnished with all necessaries. Fourthly,
where the Lord will regenerate to a new life, he bring's the soul to the sens
of her lofs by the light of his law shineing as in a dark place (as the light
in the morning discover's to a man robbed in the night of his treasure at once,
what a case he is left in) and sease's it with a spirit of misery and
beggerie, really ignorant now what to do, wringing his hands and saying, What
shall become of me? how shall I live and pass my life? how shall I avoid the
pinch of beggerie, the shame of an undon man, and the sorrows that will ensue?
I say when once the Lord saveingly work's this, (for else it may vanish) he
does in season present the soul with the news of second life (to prevent utter
sinkeing) and staie's the heart thereby. He shewe's it, that as lost and
forlorn as she is, yet there is a way to restore her to her former integrity
again.

Now as touching this way, the Lord

1. First, enlighten's the Soul in it. 2. Secondly, applie's and fasten's it
upon the same.
1. He enlighten's it in two kinds,
First, about the Order of this way. Secondly, about the way it self.
Touching the Order of it, he tell's her, that forasmuch as she once had this
image of God created in her, and has wilfully lost it; therefore, before he
can restore her to it the second time, his justice which is wronged by her sin,
and has justly accursed her for it, must first be satisfied, and the soul
must apprehend this satisfaction to herself, as her own: and by this means, her
guiltiness and curs must be washed off and removed out of his way: For
otherwise how can he and the corrupt soul be brought together? What communion
can there be between sin and pureness? Secondly. He enlighten's the soul in
the way it self: To wit, that in his wisdom and love he has granted his own
Son, true God, and the nature which was offended, to suffer the imputation of
guilt, and the death which it procures, in the nature and for the nature of
guilty man: and by this suffering he satisfied justice to the full, so that
hereby the way which sin had shut up, might stand and lie open for the
restoring of the poor lost soul to her former nature and life of God again.

Having thus enlightened the soul about this way, he then applie's it to the
soul; And that by a second and closer work of his grace. For first, he
applie's this work of Regeneration by the instrument of his word and promise,
which is as a seed of Regeneration cast into the womb of the soul by hearing it
preached: As Saint James says, Of his good will begat he us, by his word of
truth.

This word carries with it a forming power of the second birth; even a
creating of God in the soul again. Secondly, the efficient cause is the Spirit
of Regeneration, taking this word, and casting it into the soul, and there
hatching and cherishing the same, till it have formed Christ therein, who is
the second Adam, the true way, and life, that quickening Spirit. And thirdly he
effect's this in the soul by the power of Faith, which receiv's this seed of
the word, and this quickening of the spirit: and possesses the soul therewith.

Only note this, that Faith does these two things: 1. First, it receiv's the
way of this life into the soul, which is, the putting away of guilt and curs
which Adam's sin contracted, and that is, pardon forgiveness. Secondly, it
receiv's therewith and at once, the actual and real properties and nature of
God, to inhere and dwell in the soul.

Now the spirit of Regeneration by this promise work's three distinct Acts and
steps in the soul. First, Conception: Secondly, Quickening: Thirdly, Birth. By
conception I mean, the least step to this life, by which the soul retain's and
keep's this seed of life: suffer's it not to pass away and be spilt, (as in
hypocrites) but digest's and hold's the promise to it self, till it have bred
its longings after this life. Conceptions provoke longings of the appetite,
lusting after a kind of alteration of spiritual appetite, and a desire after
this life. This is that Esaias meane's Cap. 55. 4. Incline your hearts and
hearken unto me. That is, Be so affected with this promise of life, that ye
do incline toward it, and make to it, that ye walk in God's way appointed to
bring you to it: Be affected seriously with the excellency of this life, and
the happy change which God offer's you: that your souls do diligently ensue it
in the means: That it stirr's the soul to mourn for so long liveing a dead
life, and resisting the offer's of life, and resting in a show of a falls
conception: It does long after this exceeding great priveledg, to be partaker
of the nature and life of God: It use's all means which God has appaointed
with all earnestness of soul, restless till it obtain it.

The second work is the quickening power of the Spirit of promise, whereby the
Lord infuseth this life of God into the Soul; which is nothing else save the
soul's breaking through the manifold struglings and strifes, which self and
unbelief do work within her self; does obey the voice and command of the
promise that so it may live.

The third work of the Spirit is the birth of this speritual life: When the
Soul com's out of the womb into the light, that is, discover's her self to be
alive, and apprehend's (as I may say) her own life, and that God has begotten
her to himself, which is the highest step and decree of life which is bred in
her. The poor soul having received the life of God into her, by her weak and
poor faith, scarce felt and perceived, yet by the secret power of the Spirit,
growe's from degree to degree: That although she has no other life at the
birth, than in the quickening: Yet this life is more apparent and sensible every
day then other, till at last the Spirit fall in travel and bring forth Christ
formed in the Soul, so that the soul appears to herself and to others, to live
and to believ; because now she is in the light perfected and brought forth: So
that appears in the operations and works of the new Creature

Use I. Let it be a terror to all such as being void of this life of God (as
unregenerate ones are, Ephesians. 4) yet walk as alive, merry and jollie in the
death of their corruption. Thus was Paul Romans 7. alive to sin ere the Law came,
and who but he? till the killing letter came, and slew him, and made him pull
in his horns.

To all Counterfeits who adorn their dead carcasses with the ornaments of
religion: Duties of life and worship of God they will be full of; but the life
of duties (faith to apprehend the Lord Jesus for restoring of themselves to the
life of duties, and of obedience) they care not for. Oh! rest not in any
iuferior base life, when the Lord offer's thee true spiritual life! Abhor all
falls colors of life, duties and performances, when there is no substance.

Use II. Learn here the price of faith! It Is that whereby the soul live's here,
the life of God, a life better then a Princes without it.

Use III. Pray for the Spirit of the Lord Jesus his Resurrection, (by which the
soul is regenerated to his new birth, 1 Pet. 1. 5.) and never lin, till by the
Word and Baptism he has inspired thy soul with this life of Regeneration.

Use IV. Try thy self about this birth, and be not cozened by Satan! Be
content to resign up the best hopes thou have of life here, so that the Lord
would give thee sound marks of true life. True life is a life of hope of
Eternal life, yea lively hope: it rejoiceth under the hope of it. It is a
clensing life and purifie's the soul. It is a noble precious life, and will not
pollute it self with dead carrion. It is a waitting, patient life under
crosses, because the upshot of it is hid with Christ in God.

IV. Is Justification, which is contrary to the state of guilt and curs by
sin. And by this benefit, the soul obtain's an estate of quietness and peace
toward God. And that by a clearing and acquitting her at his Tribunal (as if
she had never offended,) fully, and perfectly. Which I add for a difference
between justificaton and sanctification, the former is an whole purging us from
all our sins, as Saint John Ep. 1. Cap. 1. 7. speak's. The other a purging us
in part, of which read Heb. 9. 14. For purging is from guilt and curs, and that
must be perfect by imputation (for else how should sinful flesh stand before a
perfect God). The latter is from the Dominion and Rule of it; which in this
life is imperfect.

The issue and effect of justification is peace and quiet of soul, a most
peculiar blessing: contrary to those garboils and horrors which the conscience
felt, being under wrath; as also to that rotten peace which the unconvinced
conscience walked with, through error: Either one, or other of these is the
estate of all injustified ones.

Hence, the holy Ghost never cease's to magnify this benefit, as Esaias 57. I
create the fruit of the lips, peace to him that is near, and afar off. It Is a
work only belonging to God, and above the first Creation, for here peace is
made of a contrary, even war. The Lord is the only former of the conscience,
and therefore it is a work equal to God's power to create peace in it, and to
restore it being lost, is far greater; he was anointed Esaias 61. to that
purpose, to preach glad tideiugs (of peace Romans 10. 15.) to the meek. For look
how one sufficient witness in a Court may by his verdict settle a man's whole
estate upon him; and recover his right: So the Lord Jesus by his blood, bear's
witness that our sin and curs is gone, settleing Pardon and Salvation upon us,
decideing the question, and making peace. And in this sens we read Heb. 12.
That the blood of the Covenant speak's better things then the blood of Abel;
That cried in Cain's conscience nothing save revenge and horror; but this
cries peace. The like is that which I Pet. 3. 20. the Apostle says of Baptism
(the seal of this Covenant in the blood of Christ) viz. That it saves us, not
by washing away the filth of the flesh, but by the answer of a good conscience
to God by the Resurrection of Christ. What is that? Surely this, that when the
Lord ask's the soul in what plight it is, the conscience step's out and
answer's, Lord, it is well with me. It was as ill as could be: but now it is as
well as can be. Thou have changed all in a moment, for in stead of war I have
peace.

Use I. This first teache's us the woeful state of all unregenerate ones, in
point of guilt and curs of sin. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
The ways of peace they have not known, Romans 3. and they have not seen the
things which concern their peace.

Use II. Secondly let all that hear this, behold the wonderful priveledg of a
believer, and admire it, yea, seek to have it their portion: This is the first
step to all other benefits: Do thou look upon a believer? Thou see a
precious object, a son of Peace. He carrie's that within his bosom, which cost
the Son of God his heart blood, which far exceed's all Gold and pearls; For
why? He has peace within; he is at league with all fears, and in the suburbs
of all prosperity.

Use III. Let all such as have got this, prais God and keep it. Pray ye with
the Apostles: The peace of God rule our hearts and minds: Lord establish our
feet with this preparation of the Gospel, and let it be as the Soldiers shoes
of brass, enabling us to walk upon the pikes safely. Oh! buy this jewel, but
sell it not: Nourish it in your souls, first, by abhorring all sins that waste
the Conscience. Ensue peace, if we desire holiness: Take heed of any secret
closeing with sin, upon any falls colors, dispensations, and distinctions in a
nibbleing kind, and dallying with some degrees, when we dare not attempt
greater; preserv it from the daily soil of appearances, of lawful liberties,
from the encroaching of eas, worldliness slightness, formalitie, and the like

V. Benefit, Reconciliation.
The fifth Benefit is Reconciliation, contrary to the blemish of Enmity with
God, and God with us: bringing us into amity and favor with him again. Ephesians. 1.
5. Paul call's it our acceptance and belovedness with God. The substance of
this doctrine is opened in three points.

1. Wherein the nature of this benefit stand's. 2. How God confer's it on the
Soul. 3. What use may be made of it.
For the first, The benefit of Reconciliation offered by Christ, is the firm,
solid agreement and friendship of the soul with the Lord of heaven, who before
was our deadly adversary. For the opening whereof, survey a little these few
branches.

First, from hence issues a Covenant of God made with the soul, and of the
soul with him. Deuteronomy. 26, 17, 18, 19. The Lord has avouched thee this day to
be his peculiar people, as he has promised thee, etc. A sweet text. As the
Lord disclaimed and disavowed us in Adam: so by the reconcilation of the second
Adam he vouchsafes and acknowledges us to be his.

Secondly, hence our behavior and course becom's acceptable, as Abel's sacrifice
for his persons sake, was accepted: so that in all our service and allegiance
we are wel-pleasing though in him whom first God was wel-pleased.

Thirdly, hence also flow the most excellent favors and graces of his Spirit
conferred upon us, that he might the more take pleasure in us, as a Bridegtoom
does in his Bride and spous whom he has and adorned.

Fourthly, the All-sufficiencie of God as as a fauntain is set open by this
sluice of Reconciliation. For hereby the Lord can beteam the soul all support,
and all that is needful for this and a better life. And this All-sufficiencie
reaches to soul and body. All things are yours, as you are Christ's, and
Christ God's.

Fifthly, the Emnitie of the whole frame is reduced to an Amity with them:
there is a league made with heaven, earth and hell, that nothing shall hurt
them Heaven shall not be as brass, nor the earth as iron. The beasts of the
field shall be at league; enemies shall turn friends, because their ways pleas
God.

Sixthly, it restore's us to our blood (not only to our dignity in person,
but) in our posterity,

Seventhly, hence issues the gift of perseverance, to be endued with a loyal
spirit, and with faithfulness, never to depart from the fear of God.

Eighthly, hence issues a sweet Reflex of this Amity of the Lord with the
soul, a very pledge of that felicity in heaven, which shall fill the glorified
soul in the sight of God: Faith (I say) present's a privitie and consciousness
of this holy agreement with God, with unspeakable security of heart and soul:
which none can utter, save they that feel it.

Secondly, the way how the Lord confer's it, and that is by the spirit of
Reconciliation in the Word, working by the ambassadors of it. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
whereof there are four steps: 1. By this spirit the Lord discover's and
present's a light to the Soul in the right colors, (and in the glass of the
Law) of her inbred and natural contrariety to God and treacherous enmity of
spirit: such and so deep, as does perpetually fight against him, yea reject the
covenant of amity offered by him.

Thirdly, he discover's himself to such a soul, that he has afforded to her
a price of reconciliation, even the blood of the Covenant: not only to
compound and mitigate some extremities of Enmity, but even to abolish it all,
and nail it to his Cross.

Fourthly, if this prevail, to break and show to the soul the bottomless love
which lay hid in the bosom of God, who was in Christ, and is in the Spirit and
Word of Christ reconciling the world to himself.

Fifthly, the Spirit of Reconciliation fasten's the offer of being reconciled
to God, upon this poor soul by the instrument of faith, the best make-peace
that ever was; which faith, over-power's the enmity of the soul, by the excess
of amity and mercy in God: and (as it were) compell's it to be reconciled:
She apprehend's so much compassion in the bosom of God, as to drown all
enmity therein as in the bottom of the sea. And so to kiss the Son, swear
allegiance, and com in.

The third thing is the Use of this Doctrine.

Use I. Terror to all unreconciled ones! Oh! ye are out of favor with God. Is
there not enough in this to scare you! Tell a favorite whose life rest's in the
Princes favor, that his Prince is out with him, and his breath is stopped, ye
choke him! What a plight was Haman in when his face was covered? Tell me if
God's favor be as life, What is his enmity?

Use II. This is instruction to teach all sorts the excellency of this
priveledg. No other amity is like it; only in this, and by it, other amity
is blessed: But all other is but dung to it.

Use III. Let it be an use of trial to us, whether we be reconciled. If we
are not, we are cursed. If we are, then this Covenant has drawn from us an
Oath and Covenant with God again. As the singular Amity of David and Jonathan
begat a Covenant and a renewing of it with an Oath of God. Oh! such a soul
will swear to keep God's righteous judgments, and to walk in all well-pleasing.
This is the last mark of all: as our Savior says, You are my Friends, Joh. 15.
14. if you do whatsoever I command you.

Use IV. Improov this benefit. Seeing the Lord will have us his beloveds, and
crown us with such favors, let us not decline them. Do as favorites do with
Princes: they choose favor above all boons, because it is the fountain of all.

Use V. Abhor all base roots of bitterness rising up to defile this Amity, and
weaken it! First, abhor all enmity of unbelief; suspicion of God, distrust of
his promises, as if he meant nothing less. This is the deepest villainy!
Never lin till thy large heart can better answer the Lord, then Jehonadab
answered Jehu's question, Is thy heart as mine? Yea doubtless. Make use of all
Ordinances, especially the Supper of Christ (the Symbol of this Amity) to
seal it up to the Soul. Secondly, take heed of all falsehood in thy Covenant
with God. If thou be loos to him, and yet expect's him to be close with thee,
thou will be deceived! He will avenge the quarrel of it.

VI. Benefit: Adoption.
Adam was the Son of God by Creation, Luke 3. ult. By this fall he lost it; is
become a bastard, stripped of his royalties, birthright, and inheritance, the
dignity of the firstborn, dominion and Lordship of the Creatures, title to
Paradise and immortality. Adoption is the enfranchisement of the soul into her
former estate of Sonship again, being freed from the spirit of bondage and
flavish fear, Gal. 4. 6. For as a man freely, and without desert, take's one
that is not his own child, to become his own, changeing his name, adopting him
into his family, and settling that inheritance upon him, which belonged to one
descended from his Loins: So does the Lord here, he restore's the Sinner to
his former livelihood, Sonship, Lordship, and Coheirship with Christ the heir
of all.

We shall understand this priveledg of Adoption the better, if we consider it
in three things:

1. What we had and lost in Adam. 2. What we recover and hold in Christ. 3.
What use we should make of them both.
1. What we had and lost in Adam. Although we were no adopted sons in Adam
(for what needed it)? yet we were sons by creation: As Adam, Luke 3. is called
the Son of God, being inspired with the breath of God, and framed in body
according to his own image: We bare the similitude of God about us in both,
even as a son resemble's the father: We carried both in mind, will,
affections, senses, body, gesture, authority and presence, the glory of our
father about us: were to God most accepted in our walking before him: to the
Creatures most honorable and awful, as God's Deputies: in the sight of the
Angels most excellent: and in our selves most happy, by the reflex and view of
our own integrity of Sonship: so that we had whatsoever an earthly vessel
could contain. Being thus heirs of all, and sons of immortality, planted in a
Paradise of exquisite perfection: even in the habitation of our glory; when
we were full of it, we prostituted our selves willingly to transgress the
bounds of children and sons, and the law of our creation: so that we must
either be better then sons, and equal with God, or else nothing: and so by
yielding to the Devil, we fell to God, ate the forbidden fruit: tainted not
our spirits only and beeings, but our blood also and became degenerate
Bastards, and slaves in our condition, not having one dram in us of that
son-like nature, temper and integrity which we had: in stead of bearing the
image of heaven, we bear the image of earth, stripped of our honor, and put
down to the lowest form of baseness, and made mere shadows of what we had
been: forfeited all our royalties, not only of inward content, esteem, peace
and beholding of the face of God as children; but also of outward title to the
Earth and to Paradise, dominion of creatures, brotherhood with Angels: and
being thrust out of the Garden, we became drudges of the earth, slaves to
Satan, and lived in continual fear of death and wrath: only having a poor
hold and corner of the earth to confine us as prisoners, and to hide our heads
in.

2. What we recover and hold in CHRIST. He being God by nature, the eternal
Word, and also flesh by the power of the holy Ghost, did by his bloody
satisfaction over-entreat our father, pacified his justice, and washed off our
rebellion and guilt, with the curs thereof from us; that so we might pass into
the former priveledg of Sonship, and whatever honor of grace appertained
thereto: and that by adoption. For as a rich Prince, having lost his son
take's another child, not his own, and strip's him of his name and family,
cause's him to take his own name upon him, and to become his own, and giv's him
right to all he has, and make's him his heir; so does the Lord take us poor
lost bastards; strip's us of our name, and take's us into his stock, arraie's
us with his own robe, sett's us at his own table, cause's us to forget our
father's house and all the baseness thereof; restore's us to the right of Sons
of the Almighty, begot of his seed and spirit, giv's us the liberty of sons,
the title to all his creatures with pureness; without fear of ever being cast
out any more: till we com to possess heaven with himself for ever.

3. What Use we should make of them both.

Use 1. It should teach us wisely to digest and carry that disproportion of
our condition below in the mean time! Oh! what humbleness, meekness, mean
opinion of our selves, selfdenial (to subject our selves for a while to this
state of conformity to our elder brother) should we seek for? What faith
especially, need we, firmly to cleav to the word of promise, which assure's us
that the Lord esteem's us as we are.

Use 11. This should scare ungodly men, and make them tremble at their
condition, that they are bastards and no sons or daughters of the Almighty.
Men boast themselves that they are the sons of men, Anakim's like their
Ancestors, men of brave stomachs, as proud and rebellious as their parents:
such as Gyant-like do fight again heaven, and walk according to the sway of
their lusts! but to be the Sons of God, they regard not! Oh! therefore howl
and mourn all ye bastards for your degenerate condition!

Use III. If the Lord shall indeed prick your hearts for this (I speak now to
great ones whom this point much touche's) let the promise of receiving you soke
into your hearts. If God justify, who shall condemn? if he reconcile and
restore you to your blood, your Sonship; if he vouchsafe your restitution to
the inheritance of such as are sanctified by faith in him, Who shall defeat you
of it? therefore com in, receiv this Offer, and God will be your God, yea your
father, ye shall walk in and out before him as his own, with the confidence of
sons, he shall guide you here till glory.

Use IV. This should exhort all God's people that they deceiv not themselves in
this great priveledg, for fear that they forfeit the comforts of it. Try it
first, and then improov it: a true son and danghter of God partake's of the
sonship of Christ their head. The Angels worshiped Christ the Son, when he was
brought into the world, and for his sake the Angels are Ministering Spirits for
the good of us, and of ours. The Father acknowledged Christ saying, This day
have I hegotten thee. So does God in him acknowledge thee for his child, and
himself thy father: The Father made Christ the Heir of all things; and all
things which thy father has are thine, as thou art Christ's. Christ was
pitied and heard by the Father in that he feared, and thy father will be
afflicted with thee in all thy afflictions. Christ was faithful in all God's
house as a Son, fulfilling all rightegusness. If thou be a son, what, save thy
faithful fear and obedience should proov it? The Lord Jesus being the Lord of
all, yet denied all; even to a Pillow to lean his head on, and an Hole to hide
himself in. And thou (if a son) shall and wilt deny thy self, and take up thy
Cross, and learn obedience by his suffering; despise the world and count all
dung to win his acceptance. Briefly, if a son, thou art an heir of God, and
coheir of Christ: Whatever is wanting here, shall be supplied in heaven: and
yet here thou shall partake all the good things of God: For why? Whom does a
father provide for, but for his children? whose is all that he has, save
theirs? Again, if a son, then thou know the way to the throne of grace, even
to the Father, in the Mediation of Christ; and there can with the spirit of a
son groan at least un-utterable desires to the Lord, that thou may be once
free from bondage to this body of death; from unbelief, from an unsavorie
heart, from worldliness, from the error of the wicked, and this sinful world,
and the like. Oh! with humble confidence thou will make kown thy request to
God, and that in secret, such as none but thy self can be privy to: and will
improov this liberty, when strangers and slaves shall not dare to com near.
These few try; and if thou find the Spirit of Adoption to be a stranger, lin
not till the Lord have created it: if he have don it, stand fast in this
priveledg and maintain it by thy awe and fear of thy Father, not least he
should cast thee off again, but because being once a Son thou shall never be
dispossessed, either of thy right here, or thine inheritance hereafter.

VII. Benefit: Redemption.
Redemption is opposite to two things: First, Thraldom and slaverie to sin, and
so to all enemies, who by sin strove to hold the Soul under fear and bondage.
Secondly, to the sting and dint of all such crosses as sin has brought into
the world, as the tokens of God's displeasure for it. The first Redemption
set's the soul at liberty from all that servitude and tyranny, it buy'es out
and restore's the soul to the liberty of released and ransomed ones: makes it
free only to righteousness and that for ever. From hence issues's an heart
enlarged to God: so fearing him, as fearing nothing else. Hence secondly,
flows a right to the Protection and Providence of God. And lastly to these
two may be added freedom to God's service, to find it an easy yoke, and a
light burden; yea, to count it our happiness to deny our own wills, because
bodies and souls are bought with a price, that we should not be at our own,
but at his will that dearly bought us, 1 Cor. 5. 15. Christ has bought and
redeemed us: I. From Sin. 2. From all our Enemies, Satan, the Law, bondage
under Ceremonies, Death, Wrath and Hell, unto freedom of Righteousness. The
conclusion of the Doctrine is, That Redemption is a peculiar benefit, wherewith
Christ is offered to the Soul,

Use I. Terror to all that lie yet in their state of Unregeneracie, in what
degree soever it be more or less, who either count this slaverie to be
freedom, or else live in it as if they were free men, and fear nothing. Know
ye, that till the Law has left you under the Spirit of this Bondage, to count
your selves as ye are, and lie under this estate, as sensible of it, and in
your selves past hope, Cain's and Judase's case is not more wosul then yours.

Use II. It Is Instruction to all sorts, to make them behold their natural
condition as in a glass. Sin is no such tame and harmless beast as you imagine.
Nothing but this blood of Christ is able to ransom you. For sin has set the
door open to all, to Satan and all enemies, wrath, hell, law, conscience, and
death, to have their wills on us. So that an infinite strength it needed to
deliver us.

Use III. This should teach all who would not be slaves, to proov their
redemption by the marks of it. First all truly redeemed ones of the Lord, see,
sigh under, and are weary of this their bondage, desirous to be freed from
it. Secondly, the offer of this Redemption in Christ is precious to them: both
the purchaser, the offer of it, and the purchase it self.

Thirdly they cleav to the promise, that seeing the Lord will have it so, they
embrace and choose it, and believ if the Son make them free, they shall be free
indeed.

Use IV. This should exhort us all that are redeemed to true liberty to
understand wherein it consists, and apply our selves duly thereto. True it is,
that we are adopted sons to the frrdom of children, but we are redeemed also
to the liberty of service: we are not made free from the law in point of
obedience; but serve in holiness and fear, to delight in the law in the inner
man.

Temporal Redemption stand's in three things:

1. Either in God's saveing his from afflictions: 2. Or his susteining them in
and under them: 4. Or his delivering them out of them, and that either in part,
or finally.
They are all three expressed in the 63. of Esaias, verse 9. by name. The First,
The Angel of his presence (Christ, as verse 1.) saved them, and bare them on his
wings continually. The second, In all their afflictions he was afflicted;
(that is, succored and upheld them). The third, In his pity and mercy he
redeemed them, (that is, delivered them).

The first is usually called the protection of God over his own in Christ their
buckler and shield: in which sense it is said, The beloved of the Lord shall
dwell under his protection all the day long. It is God's people escape all such
crosses as befall the wicked, as wicked.

Use I. Oh! how patient should we be in such crosses as befall us in all
kinds, if we considered, that the greatest part of them which light upon us,
is not the least of them that pass by us?

Use II. The truth is, God's Saints ought to give thanks for they know not
what, how many, how great sorrows.

The second, viz. Sustaining Redemption is that act of Christ, whereby he
succoreth and supporteth all his in trouble. And this stands in the communion
of the sufferings of Christ and his grace: viz. 1. Of his sweeet Peace which
he giv's us: My peace I give you, my Peace I leav you: 2. Of his meek and
patient self-denial. 3. Of his courage to bear and endure. 4. Of his innocence
and good cause to defend them. 5. Of the Spirit of prayer, which crie's and
grone's to him that can eas them. 6. Of purgeing power, whereby Afflictions
prepare us for glory 7. Of the issue of the Cross, even the quiet fruit of
righteousness. 8. Of Victory beforehand, even while they are under the Cross.
9. Of patience to wait till the hour of darkness be over.

Use I. This point should exhort us to apply our selves to this privilege, in
each cross that befall's us! Is it not a mercy to be thus cared for and
pitied as children, when the Lord put's the wicked to their shifts? and
regard's not what betide's them: Saul falling upon his sword desperately,
Ahimelech thrust through, Achitophel and Judas hanging themselves? Is it not
worth the while to see a believing Soul at his death lying as a Lamb, as a
Preacher, as one burning but not consumed; above fears, above loves, hopes,
wife, children, world, self? able to do any thing through Christ that
strengthens and susteineth?

3 The third is Redemption or deliverance from Crosses, either particular ones,
or all. The Lord has his healing in his wings even here for his people. I
grant there is a righteous Abel, who perishes in his righteousness, But
ordinarily when God's Mastick patch has dried the rheum, it falls off of it
self. David, Moses had an end of their crosses, and as James says, Ye have
heard of the afflictions of Job, and what end the Lord made. Long sickness,
long poverty, long persecutions, have had their end. There is a day for us if
we can wait. How many weak complexions in youth have enjoyed healthy age? how
many prisoners have been loosed? how many poor ones bin enriched? how many men's
later days have proved better then the first.

But because all redemption goe's not aforehand, therefore there is another
Redemption far more sure, and that is full and final at their death and
resurrection, wherein all tears shall be wiped away.

Use I. This should make all afflictions seem light in comparison, Romans 8. and
cause us to embrace it by hope, saying, If our hope were only here, of all
others we were most miserable.

Use II. Let not thine heart mutter at the frequencie of thy crosses, by the
Devil, by men, or from the Lord; but bless him for such partial deliverances as
he vouchsafes thee in thy trials.

Use III. Learn hence really to pick out the sap of that truth of Paul Phil. 2.
To desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ which is best of all.

Use IV. Beg of God two things: 1. To give us his Spirit of Redemption to frame
us for this very thing (as Paul 2 Cor. 5. 4.) to prize our full redemption upon
any terms. 2. That he would feal us up thereby to an holy security.

VIII. Benefit: Regeneration.
Regeneration is taken for the begetting of God in the soul, and the effect
thereof, Sanctification, called in Scripture, the New Man, the New Creature,
the renewing of the holy Ghost, the workmanship of God etc. This Sanctification
stand's in 2 things: 1. The killing power of the Cross of Christ, called
Mortification. 2. The quickening power of his resurrection, called Vivification,
sealed up in the Baptism of the Spirit, whereby we are engrafted and emplanted
into them both.

IX. Benefit: Glorification.

The last benefit is Glorification of the whole man after the resurrection in
heaven, which is the overplus of Christ's purchase, and exceed's Adam's
happiness, consisting in the partakeing of that purchased possession of Glory
and immortality, not of Paradise upon Earth, but in the presence of God. And
this benefit is the fullness of all the rest: it is the execution of the
election of God: for we are chosen to glory: it is the perfection of our
imperfect union in this life: it is the end of our calling: for we are called
to honor and immortality. It Is the ^^^ness of our Adoption: for we have here
the right, but there the inheritance of Sons: It Is also our final Redemption
and Sanctification, because there all tears shall be wiped away, and death
shall be no more, and we shall do the will of God as the Angels, and be
sanctified throughout in body, soul and spirit, without spot or blemish, and
so live eternally. See Romans 8. 30. and ult.

It stand's in two things.

1. Negative happiness, viz. The absence and voidness of all which com's short
of this, or opposes it. 2. Positive happiness, viz. When the persons of the
elect shall be so enlarged in their souls and bodies, and in each faculty and
member thereof, as to enjoy and comprehend and behold the Lord perfectly, as
they are comprehended.
Use I. Let it teach us to avoid curiosity about inquiry of this depth, and
seek humbly and wisely to get our part in it here: so shall we know it one day
by experience indeed.

Use II. What persons should we be in spiritual respects, if we look for
such promises? how should we purge our selves in body and spirit from all
uncleanness, finishing our Sanctification in God^^ fear.

Use III. How should we long for this happiness, counting all our afflictions
as light things through our hope revealed.

The Use of all these Benefits.
Use I. If Christ be offered thus together to the soul at once in all these,
and not in a bare manner, it should be a marveilous encouragement to each poor
soul to believ.

Use II. Examine whether Christ be ours or no.

Trial 1. Did Christ offered in the Gospel ever affect our hearts, and ravish
them with his loveliness? the Lord we see offer's him not bare, but with all
his furniture: which way soever we look, we shall discern his excellency,
he is one of ten thousand. Can we make a song of our beloved, of his head,
his eyes, locks, neck, body, feet? Surely else we were never married to him,
except for his sake even our fathers house was despised. When Eliezer came to
Rebecca to fetch her to be Isaac's wife, he discoursed of his wealth, cattle,
silver and jewels: and for the purpose brought her out his gold, bracelets and
ornaments which Isaac sent her. But what came of it? did she slight the offer?
No, but went with the messenger immediately. If God's Spokes-men, in bringing
forth these benefits of Christ, have won us thereby to go with them it is well.

Trial 2. No man is married to Christ, except he has his dowry to show: A
Christ without a dowry is no husband. 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is our wisdom,
righteousness etc. if we can show our marriage-ring set with these jewels, we
may be believed.

Trial 3. If thou be justified, where is that boldness of a debtor discharged
by his Surety, that can say, I know the hardest, I shall not perish, I dare
look my creditor in the face?

Trial 4. If thou be reconciled, where is thy joy and welfare then of heart?
how should thou be beloved of God, and be such a stranger to this joy.

Trial 5. Thou say thou art redeemed but proov it also: for if it be so,
then that bondage of thine to sin, and the lust thereof, and that bondage by
sin that keep's thee from believing is taken away in some measure: thy tongue is
none of thine own, thy eyes, ears, feet, members are bought with a price, and
the Lord's yoke is sweet to thee.

Use III. Instruction to all Christians, to ponder wisely this article of the
difference, order, and nature of these benefits. It would help much to the
understanding of the Scriptures with light and profit.

Use IV. Exhortation, that we ceas not to adore that most divine depth of
wisdom and love in God, who when he might have forsaken us, and cast us off
quite in our first fall, was not only content to restore us to the same
estate, and make us as good as we were, but also took occasion by this ruin
to set us in a better estate then ever Adam knew, not only in the grace of
perseverance, but in the gift of eternal life in his heavenly presence.

Use V. It is exceeding consolation to all believers. For why? The benefits
which they receiv all at once by faith, are a namo scit of price and plenty.
God in Christ is above all we can ask or conceiv.

ARTIC. VI.
The Church of GOD is the true and only object of all the former Good things.

TWo things are considerable in this Article.

1. The subject of it, the Church herself. 2. The proper adjunct of it,
Communion.
I. Concerning the Church, it is necessary to open some terms touching the
distinction of names given to the Church, viz.

1. A Church Constituted is gathered by the Word, professing the same truth,
does enjoy the free, peaceable and settled use and administration of all
essentials to salvation, the Word, Sacraments and outward Assemblies
established by Christian authority. And contrary to this is that Church which
consist's only in toleration and connivence, doubtful and unsettled.

2. A Church Visible is an Assembly of such worshippers of God, as enjoying
the liberty of the Ordinances, do partake them visibly, audibly and sensibly
to the eye and observation of man.

3. The Church Invisible is that Communaltie or fellowship of the Elect of God
(when, or wheresoever throughout the world in all ages and times), as, being
called to God, and given to Christ, become his mystical body, and are built up
unto one habitation by the Spirit. She is called Invisible, not as if she
consisted of such members as may not be seen and bodily conversed with, seeing
that they do usually reside in the Church Visible, worshipping God with others
externally: but because that by which she subsist's is an invisible grace of
the Spirit, not sensible to the eye of man, but known to God alone, and to
others only by the judgment of charity, more or less.

4. The Militant Church is that part of the invisible, which here upon earth
walks and warreth with, and for God against all his and her enemies,
according to that vow and oath she took in her Baptism, or prest-money,
wherein she covenanted to be God's faithful Soldier against World, Devil or
Flesh.

5. The Church Triumphant is that invisible, which having cast off her harness
after the victory obtained, abide's in soul with God, and triumph's there over
all conquered enemy; both these (although in diverse state) are the same Church.

6. The Church Malignant is that special kind of Church Visible, which
although it retain's Baptism and some such truths as are of the Essence, yet
has degenerated in the most of her tenets from the truth of the Gospel.

Now, the Church Invisible is the equal and only subject of Christ and his
benefits: Only with this difference; that although the whole Church enjoy all,
yet because the Triumphant differ's from the Militant in the fullness and
possession, the one by sens, the other under the assurance of faith and hope,
therefore here we especially aim at the Militant, as it contain's the whole
army, the soldiers, the body of his members.

Use I. Confutation of the usurped and pretended title of the
Pseudo-Catholick-Popish-Church, who claim to themselves this privilege to be
the treasury of all the benefits of Christ.

Use II. Terror to all the malignant enemies of the Church: if all this store
be laid in her lap, righteousness, redemption etc. be afraid to pursue and
oppose her.

Use IIL Admonition to all God's people to honor even the Church Visible.
Disdain not her assemblies, separate not from her members, renounce not her
fellowship: prize the field highly wherein the pearl is hidden. Bless God that
make's her a sanctuary for the distressed, a mother of Orphans and desolate
ones, an Ark for perishing ones. Again, admonition to all that live in the
bosom of the visible Church, not to rest there, nor give their eyelids sleep
till thereby the Lord has drawn them to the invisible. For out of this Ark is
no salvation.

Use IV. Consolation to the true Church of Christ, for the portion of these
benefits given her in Christ. Wonder that the Lord should so look upon the
lowliness of thy poor despised state, as to make thee his jewel-hous of these
treasures.

Use V. Be not high-minded: learn that of Paul, That the root hold's thee, not
thou it, Romans 10. 18. The body hold's the members, the Vine the branches, not
they them. Be not high-minded but humble thy self, and be lesser then the
meanest of the members. The Lord has bestowed life and blessing upon his
Church for ever, Psalm 33. ult. not upon thee in several. Thy grace is a
member's grace, as the blood of a finger, and the sens thereof, and the spirit
thereof is from the heart, liver and brain, carried to the body, and thence
derived to each part. Humbly therefore be glad to receiv thy part, see thy
wants, supply them by the body, and disdain not the grace of the meanest: for
if thou abide in the body, it is thine and thy supply.

II. The Adjunct of the Church of Christ.

The Adjunct of the Church is the Communion of Saints and members of this
mystical body of Christ, which is nothing else but the due entercours and holy
fellowship, reciprocally between member and member, for the good of the whole.

Two things we are to consider in this Communion of members in the Church.

1. Due qualifying of the persons that are to communicate. 2. Due exercise of
communion among them that are so qualified.
1. Qualification, generally stand's in this, that they be brethren. No sooner
is a man a believer and a new creature, born to God, but he is also a brother.
No bastard, no stranger, no Gibeonite, no blemish't one may enter the temple of
this Communion. More specially, they have the true Spirit of brethren, of
members, by which the former is manifested to be true.

We must know that this Spirit of Communion is the privilege of the whole
Invisible Church, before it be the spirit of any particular member: for, the
members draw spirit from the body, as the body from the head. Now this spirit
is flowing from Christ, who has therefore shed his blood for his Church, not
only that he might unite it together with it self, but also that it might
edify it self in love. And the Lord Jesus has obtained this Spirit from his
Father.

This Spirit of Communion may be discovered in these two particulars.

First, in the spirit of Preserving her self in her estate and integrity.

Secondly, in the spirit of Furniture for the several operations, whereby
communion may be supported.

I. In preserving Communion: and this it does

1. By separation of falls parts, or contrary, which threaten ruin to her.
Metals melted will go together and unite their substance, but sever the dross
which is of another nature from incorporateing with them, the Citizen of the
heavenly Jerusalem, he loathes swearers, liers, forswearers, usurers, and so
of the rest: No communication between Christ and Belial, light and darkness.

2. By gathering together of new. This preserving Spirit is also a drawer of
like parts to her self, for the filling up and strengthening of Communion: she
is still aiming at the bodies increase: and therefore as the waters of the sea
win upon the banks, so does this spirit of Communion seek out and enlarge her
borders. Our Lord Jesus the head of this communion, spent his life in gathering
members to this body. Peter gathered 3000. at once: and each member of it
does, or ought to become all in all to gain some.

3. By preventing of any thing hurtful to herself. This Spirit is wary to
defeat whatsoever attempts may be made against her communion either by
opposite persons, or properties.

II. The Spirit Furnishe's the Church with all such gifts as serve to maintain
communion.

Such are

1. Love, mother-grace of all the rest: that which Saint John so magnifie's 1 John 5. 1. He that loves him that begat, love's him that is begotten. It Is
the band of perfection, that hold's in all the duties of Communion as the
cornerstone does the sides of the wall.

2. Sociableness, a compound of three coards not easily broken, viz.
1. Amiableness, which is that holy suavitie of spirit, which opposes
tartness, austeritie, sowreness and sullenness; whereby men are like ragged
unhewen stones, unmeet to couch in this holy building. 2. Humbleness, which
opposes pride, which is a vice excommunicate from true fellowship of Saints,
causing men to think themselves, their parts, their persons too good for
communion. It Is discerned by two marks, peaceableness and equalness. 3.
Self-denial, contrary to Selflove the bane of communion, when men seek their
own esteem, credit, end, profit and prais: and if they fail thereof, they
little look how the public welfare goe's forward.
3. Tenderness, and compassion. Gal. 6. 1. If any be prevented by error,
ignorance, Satan, sudden temptation, let him that is stronger set him in joint
again (so the word is) and restore him in the spirit of meekness.

II The Exercise of Communion stand's in three things:

1. Graces. 2. Means, or Ordinances. 3. Services, or Duties.
I. In Graces: In the tradeing whereof these rules must be observed:

First, bring in thy stock into this bank: each member in this staple of
Communion must get the gift of exchange: he must maintain a due entercours.

Secondly, Humility is an excellent mean to exercise communion in graces:
condescending to men of low degree. Proud ones get little, and do little in
this communion of Saints.

Thirdly, Covet others graces, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet the things that are most
excellent. Appetite after the graces of communion is the instinct of God's
spirit, for the growth of Graces. Men that hunt the Bezar, seek not her flesh,
but that which is precious in her, the stone which is so cordial. Base
respects are nothing to the Saints in regard of this jewel.

Fourthly, extract graces from others. Solomon says, Prove. 20. 6. There is
wisdom in the heart of the wise, and a man of understanding will get it out.
Delilah lay at Sampson till he had told her his whole heart. So should thou
that seek the grace of others. First, by putting thy case in their persons
whom thou tradest with, as if thou would learn what patience in sickness and
pain is, or how thou might die well, ask others, how should ye do in this
case? make mine your own. Secondly, observe wisely what falls from the godly in
their communion and conversation: over-see not their words, behaviors,
affections, zeal, scopes. Thirdly, let faith be the chief extractor. All
things are yours, says Paul: meaning all graces in all the members: it is a
great help of profiting when as we believ all the graces of others are ours,
allotted us by privilege from Christ whose we are.

Fifthly, Rest not only in the outward object, but pierce into the inward.
There is more in a Saint then a bare sentence or carriage will express. Look
into the bottom as the Cherub into the mercie-seat.

Sixthly, Be wise to choose thy object. Each man excell's not in each grace or
gift. And when we meet not with that we look for, we think meanly of men as
Naaman did, being crossed by Elisha. But the Graces of God are to be marked
as they be most eminent: As in Moses, his meekness; in Phinehas, his zeal; in
Abraham, faith.

II. In Means or Ordinances. These edify the Church, First, as they are ties
and bands of Communion. Secondly, as they are active instruments or helps to
beget and nourish it.

1. As ties and bands. Psalm. 122. Jerusalem is called a compacted City, knit
together by the Assemblies, by the Sacrifices, by the Thrones of Judgment. Act.
2. 46. The Church continued and ^lave together, in the use of the Ordinances,
the sacrament especially of the Supper. Experience teaches that the fellowship
of the Word, Prayer, and the like, is the life, strength, blood and marrow of
communion. We see that the common ties of nature, education and place do much
tie men together: to have had one father, to have lain in one womb, to have
dwelt in one town, to have fed at one board, to have been brought up in one
family or nurserie, are bands of fellowship, how much more all these spiritual
ties in one?

2. As begetters and nourishers of Communion. First, as for the Word preached
how many thousands did one Sermon of Peter gain to this Communion? And it no
less preserves and holds the faithful therein. For eieher it finde's them
staggering in this Communion, and then it restore's them: or sad and heavy,
and then it encourage's and comfort's them: or ignorant, and then it
enlighten's them: or unruly, and then it admonishe's them: or standing, and
then it establishe's them: So that it does all offices of communion. Secondly,
so the censures duly administered and the like. Thirdly, so the sacrament of the
Supper, how active an instrument it is to reconcile them that be at odds, and
unite them more who are brethren? Fourthly, Prayer: what office is there which it
has not don the Church? what was the means of converting Paul? what delivered
Peter out of Herod's prison? etc. Fifthly, Fasting joined with it, what good
thing has it not don? a key to open the treasure of heaven, and to bring upon
the bodies and souls of the faithful plenty in famine, victory in war,
protection in dangers, eas in distress.

III. In duties and service. These are of two sorts. Some concern the body,
viz. Charity. Some the soul, viz. Holy example, savorie instruction,
admonition, reproof, correction of errors, exhortation and quickening to
holiness, comfort in heaviness, sickness and distress, and in each spiritual
respect, wherein member may be useful to member.

Use I. Warp from the Communion of all Popish, profane and excommunicate ones
from this fellowship: complie not with them, turn from all inordinate,
malicious, scandalous, revolting and profane ones: true communion abhor's such.

Use II. It Is Admonition to all of God's household to beware least any bitter
root rise up in them to defile this communion. When there were not above four
or five in the Church, how did Satan pollute them; as Cain against Abel, Ismael
against Isaac, Esau against Jacob, to overthrow communion? so does he still.
Again, Let it admonish God's people also, that if by any occasion Satan has
cast in any bone to divide them, and to provoke them to wrath, heart-burning,
distemper: that they presently cast it out and repent, least the breach grow
greater. And let the falling out of such be the renewing of love. Let them so
much the more narrowly look to themselves after, to prevent the like, that so
they may nourish the communion of Saints in the bands of peace.

Use III. Exhortation, to couch in this building of communion, to practice it,
to impart to each one his gift to the use of edifying the body: let not this
dead world cool grace in us.

ARTIC. VII.
That every Soul make this deliverance his own in special.

Whosoever by the former part has been convinced by that of his sin, and been
kindly pinched and pricked thereby by each of those Articles, so let every
such soul be now also convinced of righteousness, and believ himself to be the
party to whom this deliverance of Christ belong's, by each of these five
Articles promised.

Quest. What is it to believ this?

Answ. To believ this is the Work of the Spirit of GOD, by virtue of which a
Soul under the condition of Faith, does cast it self and rely upon the offer
of God, for pardon of sin, and for Eternal life.

The condition of Faith is such a qualification, as God require's of one who
may believ the promise of reconciliation to belong to him.

That which God aim'es at in offering mercy, is the magnifying of his
Attributes of Mercy, Justice, Wisdom and the rest, which he will have more to
appear in man's Redemption, then they could in Adam's Integrity. He will have
the eternal doors open themselves, as he says, Psalm. 24. ult. not that our
own ends, forgiveness and happiness, but the King of glory might enter in:
even as he ordained our Lord JESUS not to obey and suffer for any ends of his
own, but merely the Fathers to whom he was subject: as we see in Romans 15. 3.
and therefore he would have him lose all glory, and empty himself, that he
might fulfill the ends of him that sent him.

The Lord usually proceed's by these step's.

1. Where the Lord will work kindly, he will so present the glory of his
grace to the soul in distress, that, whereas before it was under confused
despair; First, it shall see a crevis of light, and an hope a far off of a
possible deliverance: which hope shall melt and dissolv the heart into a spirit
of mourning and breaking, not so much for fear of hell, as for the Lord
himself. See it in Jona. 3. compare ver. 9. with ver. 6, 7, 8. when once hope
began to spring up secretly, who can tell whether God will repent him of his
fierce anger, that we perish not? Lo, they melt into tears, they fast put on
sackcloth on themselves and their beasts, and make a rufull spectacle. So does
the soul here leav taking thought for it self, and take thought for the Lord
saying, O woeful man that I am, whom the Lord should be found of, when I
sought him not! who had care of my happiness, when I cared neither for him, nor
for my self!

2. The Soul rest's not here, but break's out into desire, that it might live
to glorify his grace, and partake of it, that it might magnify it before all
the world, and give witness to it against all despisers of it.

3. The Soul set's an high price upon this salvation, and recount's the
severals of it, that it may see the unvaluableness of this pearl, Matthew. 12.
44. having spied the pearl, withdrawe's it self, hide's it, ponder's the worth
of it, viewe's the particulars of it, as one would do of a purchase, and by so
museing of it, set's the whole man a fire with it, in the esteem and value
thereof.

4. It lastly emptie's the soul of herself. Even as the Queen of Sheba,
beholding the glory and wisdom of Solomon, had no spirit left in her, but was
ashamed of her own silliness: and as Peter Luke 5. beholding the glorious power
of Christ in bringing so many fishes into the net, when he could catch
nothing, was amazed: so does the Lord in this case. He cause's that loathness
and resistance of that proud heart that savor's no grace or faith, to quail and
fail utterly, take's away the corrupt self, and self-love which is offended at
his grace. Especially it turn's away the soul from her own ends in seeking
salvation: she dare's not now ascribe to her own duties, hearings, prayers,
affections, preparations, but cast's them into the sea, that life may be
preserved. She feel's the great ends of God's glory to work all these in her,
but no way as works commending her to God, but as sparkles of the Spirit of
Grace, which by these steps drawe's her home to God, because he will save her.

Use I. Terror to all that dream of their estate to be good, when yet they lie
in their sins as whole men: they think Christ is offered them barely; Be
reconciled to God, be they what they will be. And in this they are the more
strengthened by the opinion of such Divines as dislike these preparations. The
which opinion as it take's away the benefit of trial and comfort from many
poor souls, who would fain find the least seed of faith to be begun in them,
and keep's them long at a dead point with themselves for lack of faith it self:
so it nuzzle's many hypocrites in a conceit of themselves, that be they what
they will, yet they may be reconciled at their pleasure. Again, all such as
remain blind and dead-hearted blocks in the midst of this grace of the Gospel,
they see no light, nor feel any warmth therefrom, but still are cold Snakes,
and are neither affected with good nor evil. Where is the hope of your faith,
where no dram of the condition of it is wrought? Thirdly, to all dalliers with
the season of this grace, and putting off this rich offer of God, pinned on
their sleev; thinking they might have God tied to them, and because they have
tasted of his grace with the tip of their tongue, therefore they may have it at
their command; whereas having once despised it, they grow further and further
from it daily. They should have learned that the condition of faith is the
preparation to faith: Dally with the one, and forego the other. Fourthly, to
all hypocrites, that rest in some appeareance of these preparations, not wrought
in them by the spirit of Grace, but from their own principles: which appears
in this, that if they be reprooved, they cannot endure it, dare not enter into
the trial of their mournings, desires, and proov them to com from the spirit
of Grace: but love their own eas better then the rules of God, and while their
own pangs last, who but they? but when their own sparkles be out, then full of
sorrow. No constancy, plainness, self-denial can be found in them: grace is
nothing worth of it self, except some mixture of their own concur with it. A
sign they have felt little sweetness in it, and therefore are far from
believing it.

Use II. Let this doctrine remove those fears and objections which arise in weak
consciences as touching the greatness and measure of preparations. But let them
know, first, that in these, stand not their happiness, but in Christ believed
in. Secondly, if they had these in the measure they would, they would be
ready to rest too much in them, as Peter in his tabernacles. Thirdly, that the
truth of these, not the greatness has the promise: even the smoking flax and
the bruised reed: Yea, commonly such honor God soonest by believing. And with
these cautions let them go on and prosper.

Use III. Exhortation to poor souls, whom God has truly brought under the
condition of faith, to bless him for that handsel, I say, first, to acknowledge
it great mercy, although they have many doubts and fears, and distempers to
hinder them, and the devil to com between cup and lip, that they might not
drink of that cup of salvation. Oh remember, it is mercy to be brought within
these suburbs of heaven. Be thankful for any thing, especially a pledge of
faith: nay be humble, and say, Lord, what ever is not hell, is from mercy. I
will rather comfort my self, that the Lord meane's me the fullness of this
earnest: rather then grudg that presently I have not my will, and so wax weary
of waiting. And secondly, this should expel slavish fear from them, because the
Lord has given them a condition of faith. Beware ye do not abuse it. Pledges
are well kept by honest men, not spoiled. Do not tempt God by your distrust:
nor suffer the good preparations of the Spirit to die or wane, through
boldness, looseness, worldliness, pleasures; least God make them as bitter to
you, as Samsons dallying with his harlot.

Use IV. It discover's the ignorance and vanity of such Ministers and people
who though they be not leavened with Popery, yet partly from confounding
mourning and sorrow with repentance, and partly from blindeness and error of
the common sort, teach and think that repentance must go before faith, and
here they flourish exceedingly; for (say they) What? does not Peter say, Repent
and believ? Think you that Christ will dwell where corruption is? Must we not
repent, because the kingdom of heaven is near? Will God meddle with such as live
in their sins? Hence they mightily urge mortification of Lusts, before we dare
apply Christ, etc. But Oh ye blind guides of the blind! See you not how
under color of your devotion you overthrow Christ? What use is there of
Christ, if our sins (before we believ) must first be mortified? shall Christ
die for sin already mortified? can we dispose our selves to grace, when as all
that is in us is graceless? No: Christ must be, not only before our
mortification, but also before our believing; yea, before our preparation to
beleiv. Oh! but John the Baptist, bid's the people to repent, because the
Kingdom was at hand. I answer, This objection com's from mere ignorance of the
text: For that Repentance there signifies only a penitencie of heart, irking
the soul for sin. And yet Christ only is the worker of it. And it is a
preparing grace of the Kingdom, raised in the hearts of all that God will save.
It confound's the order of sanctification, with the order of Regeneration; For
although Mortification go before Vivification, yet repentance never goe's
before faith.

Now, to cast the soul upon a promise, or, to believ, is the last work of the
calling spirit of God, whereby an humbled sinner does cast himself upon this
word of God, Be reconciled, com and drink, com and I will eas you, or the like
offer, will, charge, or promise of God for pardon and life. This point is of
all others the chief, and therefore I choose to refer it to this place, as the
use of all that has been spoken, jointly considered; for we know, a five-fold
cord is not easily broken, and yet no one twist thereof might well be spared.

Five diverse grounds have been handled in this second part:

1. God the Father our enemy has cut off his plea, and found out our
deliverance.

2. The Lord Jesus accordingly has satisfied the justice of God; that mercy
might have free course by the procuring of a righteousness.

3. God the Father accept's this for a poor sinner as if he in person had
satisfied, and therefore offer's it to the soul most unfeignedly, without hook
or crook.

4. He offer's him not nakedly, but with all his rich furniture, to draw the
soul to fasten upon him.

5. He offer's him to each poor member of his Church, there to dwell for ever
both in grace and glory. Now to conclude; I demand, what one link of this
chain were not strong enough to draw the heart to settle it self upon it? And
yet I must say this, That the word and promise of God is the immediate thing
which faith relie's upon: although strengthened with all the rest

To this consideration two things generally are required.

The one, to gage the promise and offer of God, as a Mariner would sound the
depth of the sea, least his ship should be on ground; so see whether it be
able to bear the weight of the soul or no, and answer all her distempers and
fears fully.

The second, if it appear that it is able to sustein it, then to rely and cast
it self upon it confidently, for her own pardon and salvation.

Although the Mariner cannot himself by his own fadom touch the bottom of the
sea, yet by his line and plummet he can sound it as well, as if he could
reach it with his hand, and so fasten his Anchor upon it: So here, the plummet
and cable of the Word, wherein this strength and depth lie's, will help us out
so far as may serve our turn. The hand of faith touche's the depth of mercy
contained in the offer, by the direction of the Spirit in the Word, which
tell's us what is contained therein.

Three things the Soul must look at to bottom it self upon the promise of
reconciliation and deliverance. First, the Wisdom of the Lord. Secondly, the
Strength. Thirdly, the Faithfulness: All which are sure grounds the Lord has
hidden in the promise of mercy to a poor sinner, that is under the condition.

1. Wisdom of the promiser. I may say of it, as the holy Ghost said of Solomon,
when he called for a sword to cut the child: All Israel saw that God had put
the Spirit of Wisdom into him to do justice. So, God has showed all wisdom in
the promise, to settle the soul. And that in two respects: First, of himself.
Secondly, of us; in respect of himself, because in revealing his heart of love
to the soul only hereby, and no other way he teaches us, that he who is God
only wise, 1 Timothy 1. 17. could in the depth of his counsel find out no other
way so wise and sufficient as this, to ground the soul in sure peace toward
him: Christ, and the promise in him, was that, which seemed the wisest of all
ways, in the thought of God, especially to us under the Gospel. See Heb. 1. 1.
After sundry ways the Lord spoke unto our Fathers in dark times, as dreams,
Urim, visions: but now by his Son and Word, the engraven form, etc. Note how
this course is called the best, and wisest and holdingest of all, as having
more in it then all the rest. Oh! we would think in our shallowness that one
from the dead, Angels or revelations were better. But wisdom it self has
pitched upon this way (all things considered) as the wisest of all. Secondly,
in respect of us, for it is such a way as call's us to faith, a promise having
relation to believing it, without which it cannot profit us. Now if it be
without us, how wise a way is it to quash and damp our base spirit of
self-conceit and selfendeavor, and to abase our Pride, that he who boasts
might boast in the Lord? So that the promise is like a Map which a wise man
showed once to a fool that boasted of his lands, bidding him to point out his
lands in the Map: which being narrow he could not do, and so went away
ashamed. Note then for this, First, we all would be counted wise: many in
these days choose to be counted rather dishonest then unwise. Well, let us
then be wise for our selves, and wise to salvation in choosing this way of a
promise to ground our souls upon. We see not the Lord: But if this be a wiser
way then that, think there is somewhat in it then at first might seem more and
fasten upon it.

2. The strength of God: Read 1 Samuel 15. The strength of Israel cannot lie:
meaning in his word. So then in the Word of God is his strength also, enough to
bear up the poor soul in believing, Heb. 1. 3. He bear's up all (the weight of
the World) by the word of his power. How much more the weight of a weak soul?
See Esaias 27. 5. Anger is not in me, there is a word. What fallows? Or take
hold of my strength, and make peace: q. d. if I be reconciled, there is
strength enough, and that for a sinner to take hold of: either this or nothing,
Read 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the promises of God in him are Yea and Amen, that is
sure and strong, but mark how? In him the words that I speak are spirit and
life. But wherein is this strength? Surely in the forenamed grounds of this
second part: Christ's satisfaction, the Father's acceptance, are those pillars
of strength to a promise, without which it would not avail to go to a promise.
Weigh seriously that noted text, 2 Corin. 5. 20, 21.

The Ministers of God in his Name offer and seal up, in the Word and Sacraments
that word, be reconciled to God. What says the soul to this? I dare not, God
is a consuing fire. True says Paul; but anger is not in him. Why? because he
has made (and accepted) him that knew no sin, to be sin, that we might be
the righteousness of God in him: he that said, In him I am well pleased. Shall
a poor soul be then as Noah's dove upon the waters? Why say ye to my soul
fly to the hills, if God be his strong hold? If thou be under the condition
of the promise, he is no less in his promise. Take a similitude. A man lie's
in prison for debt of an hundred pound. A friend com's to him, and bid's him
com out: he answer's, I cannot, I lie here for debt; and then there appear a
strength unto him, and laying hold of it, he com's out. Read that in Romans 3.
25. God has set him forth to be propitiation: that he might be just in
justifying him who is of the faith of Jesus. What says the poor sinner to
this? Oh! but it is just with God to punish sin wheresoever? Nay, having made
and accepted him the propitiation for a broken soul, it is even just to pardon
him. It was mercy to grant such propitiation: but having so don, it is also
justice to pardon: even as it is not just to take one debt twice. Therefore
David plead's, Pardon me according to thy righteousness: Christ having turned
just wrath into just mercy. To conclude this, note yet a second strength in
the promise: for the poor soul still cavill's. But this is to a believer, I
believ not. I answer: But the promise (by the power of the spirity of our
Advocate) is able to do that which it required: it is not a killing letter as
the Law, Do this and live: but a quickening one, Believ and live: it giv's that
it command's: the soul being under a promise, is under the authority of him
that bid's her be reconciled. It is as with Naaman, 2 King. 5. 15. Wash and
be clean: so he washed, and lo, his flesh became as a childs. Act. 3. That
cripple that beheld John and Peter, being bidden to arise, felt strength and
streightness to com into his limbs; How? In the Name of Jesus, verse 12. This
name of Jesus is much more in the promise of Reconciliation, Mark then; if the
strength of the promise be such, say not, it is nothing, but take hold of it.

3. The faithfulness of God, the faithfulness and undeceivable unchangeablenss
of it: this is a strong bottom, 1 Timothy 1. 25. This is a faithful speech, and
worthy of all acceptance, Christ came etc. Read that sweet place Esaias 55. 3.
The sure mercies of David, and the opening of it, Heb 6. 18. Surely blessing I
will bless thee. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of
his promise the immutabilitie* of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by
two immutable things, (Covenant and Oath, in which it was impossible for God to
lie,) we might have strong consolation: why? Because they are as two Cities of
Refuge to a poor distressed fearful soul (in the pursuit of Satan and
conscience those two avengers) to lay hold upon. Mark then, if the Lord descend
so low to a poor sinner, as to answer all doubts, by adding an oath and a seal
of his Sacraments, and a pledge of his Ministers faithfulness, to assure the
simplicity of his meaning: then doubtless it must be his honor to perform it,
and he that believ's it not, must needs make him a lier, Joh. 3. 33. as he
that believ's set's his seal to the word, that it is true. Number. 22. 19. It came
from a wretch, yet by God's Spirit. God is not a man, that he should lie. Oh!
then bottom this soul upon his faithfulness. Read Esaias 54. 9. Having made this
covenant of mercy with the Church he add's, This is as the waters of Noah
unto me: for as I have sworn that they shall no more destory, so I will be
wroth no more with thee: with everlasting kindeness I will show mercy upon
thee. And again, If my Covenant with the Sun, and Moon, and Stars shall fail,
then shall my Covenant fail with thee. We rest upon the promise of a man that
never failed us: much more his oath, Heb. 6. 16. An oath is among men a
confirmation and end of all strife. Oh! beware then of struggling against God's
promise, because it carrie's the force of an oath with it. Let me exemplify it
by a text, 1 King. 1. 22. The Prophet Nathan and Bathsheba go to David and
press him; Did not my Lord the King say, Solomon shall surely reign after me?
How is it then, that Adonijah reign's? What did David? He, rowsing his weak
body up, swear's, As the Lord lives, who has delivered my soul out of all
adversity, as I have said, so I will perform it this day: Solomon my Son shall
reign. Was not David as good as his word, and durst any hinder or cross it? No,
it ended the strife, and scared away all the Traitors. Oh beware then that thou
cross not the Lord in his promise, to make him a lier! And I may say the like
of all other attributes of God: for the promise is that by which God seek's
himself and his own glory infinitely: and therefore he has put himself wholly
unto it.

In applying of these grounds unto the soul faith should do these things:

First, she ought to ponder well, and muse upon the promise. Secondly, be
thoroughly convinced thereby in her heart, of all these grounds. Thirdly, she
should cleav close to the promise against all objections. Fourthly, she should
humbly and wholly obey and consent to the promise. And lastly, she ought to
plead the promise, and improov it to her own peace.

1. Pondering a promise. Pondering is, when a man lift's any thing, to esteem
what weight it bear's: so ought faith to do with the promise: and that in these
three kinds: 1. To mark it: set a Star upon the Margin of a special promise:
Buy that book which call's out promises of note in this kind. 2. To muse upon
it: chew upon the cud: dwell upon it: therefore it is said of Marie that she
pondered the Angels words in her heart. 3. To familiarize with it: get it by
heart till it be easy: make it thy bosom-friend. So did David make promise
his Counselor, and companion.

II. The second work of the soul, is to be convinced of whatsoever has been
said of the wisdom, strength and truth of God in offering and promising pardon
to a sinner. Joh. 16. 9. The Gospel shall convince the heart of righteousness.

III. The third work of application is, cleaving of the soul to the promise
against all her fears, doubts, cavils; for when it is convinced of clear truth,
the scales of darkness fall from her eyes. The soul is set between vanity and
mercy; if mercy prevail, then lying vanities ceas Hence it is that a
convinced heart com's forth and faith, I renounce my slavish fear, I abhor my
base mixtures of self and duties, virtues and preparatives of mine own. I
abandon all my former props of nature, art, experience, religion, which kept
me from mercy: and I cut all knots in sunder which I cannot unloos, and let
all my tackling fall into the sea, and commit my soul to thy promise, through
rocks, waves and shelvs, that if I perish, I may perish, only I will for ever
cling to thy promise, do with me as thou will. If I be deceived, thou have
deceived me. Thus the soul being convinced, clasp's to God, and affiance's it
self to him, as the Ivy to the Oak, so that break the one and break the other.

IV. This affiance causes that sweet consent and naked obedience to the
promise, according to the Word, and the extent thereof. Esaias 1. 19. If ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat of the good things, etc.

V. The last work of application differ's not from the former, save in degree,
and it is the pleading of a promise, when there is a strong unlikelihood
presented to the soul: either from the Lord's leaving it to herself, or in
temptation, or in deep sens of unworthiness, fear, etc. then she labor's to
cling to the promise by pleading it secretly, as we see in that rare example
of the woman of Canaan, who was content to be put off by silence, denial, yea
taunts: and although she was called a dog, yet she held close to the Word,
that Christ was the Son of David: a true dog, and happy in this that she
would not be beaten off. Therefore our Savior says she was of great faith.

Use I. Confutation of the Papists, who say, to cleav to a pomise by faith,
with cleaving to it for salvation, is a doctrine of presumption. But we
answer; that as their doctrine of Justification is the true doctrine of
presumption of their own works, so their doctrine of Faith is a mere idol and
fancy.

Use II. Instruction to all that have believed the promise of Grace once, and
seem cause to cleav to it nakedly, to use the same method in recoverie out of
their particular falls.

Use III. Admonition to avoid all lets: such are these:

1. Resting in devout complaints of the want of Faith. Good complaints made in
season to such as can eas us, from the depth of a broken heart, are good
friends to faith: but counterfeit complaints are the greatest lets thereof.
Therefore, instead of complaints, do as Ester did, she complained of her
weakness, but rested not in that, but went to the King saying, If I perish, I
perish; and so found the golden scepter held out to her.

2. Sloth and eas: dallying is dangerous. It is the Divel's may game to see
men shipwrack't in the haven. Our nature is to seek grace most, when it is most
out of season: But that is God's season to deny.

3. Worldliness. Overmuch filling our hands with the delights of this earth, as
lawful liberties, pleasures, wealth, credit, farms, oxen, wife, posterity.
These are the seaeatings of the banks down, and destroying all. It is as if a
man a drowing should hold his gold so fast that he cannot take hold of a pole
to save his life: or as if ones hand could not receiv a pearl, being full of
nut-shels.

4. A root of bitterness. Go not to the doctrine of Reconciliation with a
surfeit of any privy lust, which thou would not gladly know and forego for
the promise: for this will so defile thee, that whatsoever comes in the way
thereof will be defiled. Nothing mar's God's bargain so much, at the presage
that it will cut off our lusts. This bitter Root is discovered two ways.
First, it is naturallest of all vices. Secondly, the often return of the same sin
after the seeming departure of it.

5. Carnal reason, or else rooted cavils ariseing from an unbelieving heart,
disputeing against the promise.

6. Unwillingness to submit to God's way of believing. Men look, God should
wait upon us, and fill us with goodness, while we are idle. But learn to know
God's way, and yield humbly to it in the use of means, and be not your own
carvers. Submit with an innocent heart to be led as the Lord will have thee,
coveting the best measure, but resting in God's measure. Peter was ready at
Christ's command to let down his net against his own experience. The Lord
deal's out to the poor soul, as once a wise friend deal't with an acquaintance
of his: he sent her three tokens: a brass farthing, a mill-sixpence, and a
piece of gold; bidding the messenger first to give her the farthing; if she
took it thankfully, then the other.

Use IV. Exhortation.

1. To self-denial: and renouncing all other ways of cleaving to a
deliverance save this of faith, counting them all, even self, and self-love as
dung and dross unto it. No relic in our nature can comprehend a way of
recoverie, it must be only naked faith given for the nonce to embrace the
Lord Jesus by a promise. We have no preparation of our selves neither
preventing, nor assisting, nor perfecting. We cannot cooperate with any grace
of God: and although we could, yet the common grace of the spirit is not able
to reach the work of conversion. It com's infinitely short of it. There must
be a special spirit infused to apprehend it, not only by supernatural, but by
spiritual and peculiar grace. Grace exclude's all else, viz. 1. Common gifts. 2.
Natural or artificial endowments of learning, wit, reading, memory, judgment,
strength of parts, etc. 3. Education and moral virtues. 4. Religious
performances. 5. No self in any kind. 6. Privileges. Only the Lord Jesus in
the merit of his satisfacton, of his offer and promise, assisted by his
Advocateship for the breeding of faith can bring this work to pass Christ by
his spirit take's upon him the effecting and perfecting of this work, as well
as the meriting of it by his death. Oh! that this could cause to rest in God
offering, Christ meriting, the Spirit persuadeing by a promise, which has all
the fullness of God in it. Let us cast our bread upon the waters, and forsake
our own abilities, believing that God can create in us of nothing, or wors then
nothing, the grace of faith, the privilege of sonship and adoption, that all
our happiness may stand in believing, as the sea is made all of water.

2. To receiv this Offer: to esteem and embrace Christ, as this all-sufficient
store-hous of mercy in grace. Remember the issue of Christ's inquiry will be
for faith. Luke 18. 8. Those that have it, the Lord will be admired in them
that day. 2 These. 1. 7. And woe be to them that want it. Better to be a
drunkard, a thief, (though very damnable) then to want faith, to give God the
lie, and to sin against the remedy.

3. To be earnest with God, never to lin persuadeing the soul by the promise
and the good things of Christ, till his persuasion become forcible and
unresistable by an holy necessity with us. There is no power in thy soul to
fasten upon this promise, except God draw it, and make the persuasive of it,
irresistably and by over-powering it. Beseech the Lord not to be offended with
thy long dalliances, half-persuasions, as not to strive with thee any longer;
but to draw thee still with uncontrouled power, making a way in thy spirit,
and as Jeremie speak's Jer-31. 31. causing thee by an inward motive to be
unable to resist. When thou find this work, then faith must follow: for it
is the work which the compelling spirt leav's behind it, causing it in the
midst of all her contrarieties of dissuasion, yet upon due consultation to
obey and yield. I see here I perish, but there I may be happy. I will venture
therefore, if I perish, I perish.

Now for the better drawing of us to so difficult and main a duty, let me use
one motive, which I am persuaded will prevail with the most, if God vouchsafe
to be with it to set it home: that is, That our free naked cleaving to a
promise will carry down all thy distempers at once, and drown them in as in a
sea. For whereas thou fear perhaps thou shall die or ever thou believ, the
promise will tell thee, if the Lord may be trusted for the grace it self, much
more may he be so for a time: a thousand years with him being as one day.
Thou alleadgest, there is nothing at all wrought in thee toward believing: But
why then dare thou not turn thy back upon God, and return to folly? Because
thou have not what thou would, all is nothing unto thee: But from what (save
from free mercy) is this, that (I say not) thou still mai'st hear the word,
(which is a favor for an Angel) but that thou breathest in the air, or
treadest upon the earth? Thou objectest, If thy hard heart were not so hideous,
upon thee, thou could hope: But I answer, What has caused it save thy self
(that woeful hardner) which would get out of her fears by her own way, and so
has dallied out the time, and hardened thee. But the promise tell's thee, if
thou would trade with it, thou should find a contrary effect. Thou will
say, True, if I were elected I might, but I feel that I am not. The promise
will show thee God's cords in thy dungeon, and the robes which he offer's
thee, and will ask thee, Do thou not see mercy at the bottom? At which end
of the ladder would thou go up? What have thou to do with Election, when the
cords are so near thee; or why would thou to heaven, when the word is thy
heart? Thou will say, Thou art most unworthie, sinful and cursed, and thy sin
is ever before thee: Yea, it is so. But why els^ should mercy offer it self,
save to the miserable? Yea, but then thou have long continued a wretch, and
saped thy self in sin; The promise will tell thee, This objection from
self-deceit: as if thou might plead mercy if thy sins were smaller, or thy
self better; whereas thy plea must be, the greatness of grace, not the
smalness of sin. But my heart has been hardened against mercy it self, and
dallied with it! The promise will tell thee, The Lord JESUS died for them that
slew the Lord of life; and for sins against the Gospel also. Yea, but thou
say, many have been converted since I began! The Word will reply, God has
all the hours in the day to work in, if thou will attend him; the eleventh as
well as the seventh. Thou will object, If God had meant me good, I should
have felt it long since. The Lord will tell thee, so thou have, if thou were
not unthankful for it, and rather delightest in descanting than believing. Be
encouraged to hearken to the promise, if thou would see all distempers
drowned in the sea.

A second motive to believ, may be the heavy doom of unbelievers; Their
condemnation is of all others deservedly the fearfullest; wors then the furnace
of Nebuchadnezzar, heat thrice hotter: They had the Son of God in the midst of
it with them, therefore felt it not: these contemn the Son of God, they tread
the blood of the Covenant under foot, and count it a vain thing: and count
eternal life unworthy of them; Therefore it shall consume them without
consumption for ever. If our Gospel be hid, it is so to them that perish. The
condemnation of the world is, That they hated light: that is, not the light of
the Law, but of the Gospel, the promise. He that has surfeited his body by
intemperancie may die, but he that throw's the potion sent him (the only one
which can cure him) against the walls, must needs die. If they who despised
Moses Law died, how far greater judgment are those worthy of who sin (and that
finally) against this Remedy? can they resist the force of this Rock falling
upon them, and grindeing them to powder? I deny not but even moral sins,
standing in relation to infidelity, either as causes, Joh. 3. 19. or as
effects, 1 Timothy, 1. 13. are in themselves damnable: How much more unbelieving it
self which make's them so? Do not think this still stream is safe: it is the
most deep and deadly gulf. It oppose's the wisdom, the counsel of God, the
depth of his riches of love, the second love of mercy (above the first
creation) the providence of God's dispensation, appointing this as the best way
for redemption, the direct way for the magnifyiug of his bottomless grace, who
could find in his heart to love enmity it felf, and hate holiness (in a sort)
that he might love sinful enemies: it resist's the omnipotent power of God in
creating man: The second time of wors then nothing it disannul's his
attributes: his offer, truth and faithfulness: make's God a lier: chuse's a
wors choice then Eve and Adam did; hell before heaven: and therefore deserv's
to die that death which it has chosen: Oh! therefore, judge of this sin by the
spiritualness of it: and prevent a treble hell by humble accepting and
believing promise.

Lastly, to conclude; this doctrine should teach all God's people to keep their
eyes upon this Mirror of the Promise so closely, till it transform them from
glory to glory. The least glimpse of mercy in the promise is glorious: yet
the Lord is not idle in his peoples hearts, but that he can reveal himself
more clearly and gloriously to them day by day, if they be not in fault, and
lay bars in his way. For, as the day from the dawning to noontide, so the
promise increases in light, where once the Day Star is risen. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, there is a spirit of the
promise whereby God seals his people, after they have once believed: so that
as Romans 8. The Spirit fellow-witnesseth with us about our adoption, our
redemption, our reconciliation, all are ours, we are the Lord's. Many having
got some flashes of hope by the Wo^d, rest there, go no further; wax waily,
wanton, frothie, thinking any of their own humors may well complie with the
glad tidings of Heaven: and so shake off their fears, and turn grace into
wantonness. But if the true Spirit of the Promise were in them, their Covenant
would draw them to seek more assurance, evidence and hold then before.
Therefore let us look to this work of the Spirit. And to this end try it by
these few marks: First, such an heart growe's lower and lower in it self daily,
by how much grace growe's higher, and the reproach of God in his fullness,
cause's the soul to cry, Depart from me a sinful wretch. It work's not
lightness. Secondly, such an heart, has much busied it self in and about the
faithfulness of the promises, that so the Lord may as by an earnest, 2 Cor. 1.
22. give her his seal to assure her. Thirdly, she feel's the privileges
accompanying pardon to be hers, and out-grow's her fears, bondage, doubts,
assaults, temptations by the spirit of liberty, peace, joy, thanks,
admiration, etc. Fourthly, she grow's in the seal of holiness as well as of
assurance, being more zealous, fruitful, upright hereby. Fifthly, she covet's
the use of Baptism, appointed to seal her. Sixthly, she grow's more real,
savorie, settled; more confident in prayer, and more lively in hope, more ready
to die, more mortified in lusts; more cheerful and fruitful in communion of
Saints.

THE THIRD PART.
ARTIC. I.
That he who is in CHRIST is a new Creature.

THe Scripture expresses this sundry ways, all tending to the same end, all
may be reserred to these heads: for, either they look at the main principle of
the Spirit of sanctification, as when the terms of renovation, new man, new
creature, regeneration, new birth are used: or, at the operation of this
principle, as when the terms of repenting, casting off the old man, putting on
the new, purgeing, forsakeing, denying unrighteousness or lusts, are used, etc.
or else at some actual inward virtues, as love, fear, obedience, subjection, and
the like: or, at some outward performances, as walking with God in all his
commandments, or departing from iniquity, or abhorring evil, or cleaving to
good, ceasing to sin, learning to do well, or the like: these all, although in
phrase differing, yet in sens are all one: and they import this, That the Lord
require's of all believers in Christ, that their hearts be renewed, that they
purge themselves, finish their sanctification, fear him for his mercy, walk
with God, order their conversaton aright; all is one thing; get one and get
all: but the holy Ghost does include all in that golden sentence. He that is
in Christ is a new creature.

Four points here considerable:

1. The Author of this regeneration, or new creature, the holy Ghost. 2. The
inward instrument of this author, Faith. 3. The subject wherein this
regeneration, is wrought, the whole man. 4. The parts. These four will proov
the chief. For as for the other which are taken for granted, we need not dwell
much upon them, to wit, the seed whereof we are begotten, which is the Lord
Jesus: the immediate instrument used to beget, the Word of God: the seal by
which the spirit assure's and convey's his Regeneration, Baptism.
I. General.
The spirit of God is the Author of the new creature, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3 5, 6.

In this new creation of nature, and infusion of qualities the Spirit does
three works.

1. By Perswadeing. He draws the soul to be willing to take all Christ as
he is offered, and to reject no part of him; and succoreth the poor soul in
her application of the offer and covenant of Peace.

2. By Working. The Spirit effect's that in the soul which the promise
import's, infuseing into her an habit of cleanliness, and taking away all her
filthy rags.

3. By Sealing. The Spirit seals these to the Soul. Matthew. 3. 11. The Lord
shall baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. What is that? The very
divine gifts of Christ, which as fire do purge and cleans our dross and bring
forth our metal as pure and clean.

II. General.
The Inward instrument of this author, Faith. Faith saveing and effectual. Act.
26. 8. Act. 13. 38. Romans 5. 1. and 3. 25. Act. 15. both in regard of
justification and sanctification. Christ is not only offered to the to be for
them in pardon, but to be in them to dwell, to rule, to command, to exercise
power over corruption; and for government, to be as a soul in the body to
act, guide and bear sway in them, as the branches in the Vine, out of which
they wither: so that the promise offer's Christ both for union of
reconciliation, and also communion and influence of grace. Faith does two
things in the renewing of the soul. First, it work's the heart to be renewed
by an argumentation. See 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, etc. Mark, faith judge's the matter aright, and passes a
sound verdict upon it. If Christ has so loved us, how should our souls earn
toward him in all conformity to his blessed nature. Secondly, by infusion;
she is the tunnell of the Spirit to convey the renewing of the holy Ghost into
the Soul.

III. General.
The subject wherein this regeneration is wrought, the whole man. 1 These. 5.
23. viz. 1. Mind; the renewing whereof is, partly a pugeing of it from the
corruption and penalties of it, and chiefly a restitution of it to her
integrity of light and soveraigntie. 2. Will; purgeing it from the sin and
penalties of it, and restoreing it to her integrity and subjection. 3.
Conscience, clensing it from contagion, and a restoreing of her to her
integrity of faithful record, accuseing for evil, and excuseing for good. 4.
The Body and members, restoreing them to such integrity, as that the senses
do duly offer to the soul the objects of sens and the members become faithful
weapons of righteousness. Howsoever the holy Ghost does renew all, yet the
immediate and chief subject of his residence is the spirit of man.

IV. General.
The Parts: which be negative and affirmative: the former, a destroying of the
old frame; the later a setting up of the new; which are the exercises of the
inward graces of renovation: Mortification and Vivification.

I. Concerning Mortification.

In general, we must conceiv, that there is no principle, (nor yet seed of
any) in us to oppose corruption: flesh lov's it self: Satan does not oppose
himself. It is the Lord Jesus who is this new man in the soul, and who
expels the old, and his dominion,

In Particular, This spirit of Christ mortifying works by steps in the soul:
and that,

1. By knowledge of sin. The soul conclude's it to be a fearful thing, which
could rob the Lord Jesus of his lifeblood.

2. By power against it.

3. By Subduing the remainder of corruption. Sin shall not reign. Ye are no
more servants of sin, Romans 6. 6.

4. By the seal of Baptism. Romans 6. 3. Know ye not, that as many as are
baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death?

5. By other ordinances: viz. hearing, prayer, watchfulness, renewing of
covenant, etc.

6. By the sweetness of Christ. viz. liveing by faith, and walking in
uprightness. It causes that former base pleasure and sweet of sin, to become
irksom. Since the soul tasted Christ, all other sinful pleasures become (like
the book in the Prophet's belly) as wormwood.

7. By applying Christ, and his power against all sin, in both parts, both root
and branches.

8. By intercepting sins provision: thereof Paul Romans 13. ult. oppose's these
two, putting on of Christ, and taking thought to make provision for our lusts.

9. By remooving the strength of the Law. The Law is called the strength of
sin, because of that itching and coveting property in sin, to do that which is
forbidden: but the law in this point is made to a believer sweet and easy.

10. By combat against sin.

Concerning Vivification.

As the death of Christ is the death of corruption: so the life of Christ is a
wel-spring of grace unto eternal life.

Use I. If all believers be new creatures, what are those that are still old
creatures, and will take no other die? such as boast they are no changelings
are still the same men. Secondly, it is terror to revolters, and returners to
their old vomit and mire: the later end of such is wors then the beginning.
Thirdly, to hypocrites, who still mask over the old man with a new cover of
Christ, but put not off the old. Fourthly, to profane ones, who think
themselves in very good case, if they can carry their beloved lusts and
corruptions closel, and blear the eye of the world, thinking they have for
saken them.

Use I. Of instruction to all new creatures, to wonder that the Lord will
accept them to be so, and take them after their refuse-stuff and service to
old Iusts, to be new men. Who would think it, that the Lord shoud choose such
defiled temples of idols, lust and lewdness to dwell in? Who would think he
would admit of those nastie sties of unclean thoughts, those cagesof pride,
uncleanness, and self-love, powers and members of body and soul that have been
so defiled, to be weapons of righteousness? Oh, what encouragement is it for
old creatures to become new,

Use III. It should admonish all to take heed how they meddle with any
believers in Christ, to hurt, discourage, reproach, or pursue them. Let us know
they are new creatures, and the workmanship of God: him that defaceth God's
image, will God destroy. Beware, touch not the anointed of God, do his image no
wrong.

Use IV. If the Lord will have others to beware how they deface God's creaures,
how much more should we his new cretaures take heed of defileing our selves.
Oh! if God have made ye so, beware ye cast not dung in his face, and pollute
not his image.

Use V. It Is use of consolation to a believer. The Lord esteem's him by his
best part, his bent and stream, and not by his defects. As a man call's a
dunghill precious for the pearl in it: and as a man would call wine mix't with
water, Wine: and corn full of weeds, Corn, because of of the better part: So
here, the Spirit and bent of the heart denominate's a Christian with God:

Use VI. Of Examination for all that would be sure to know the new creature to
be found in them Try it by the room wherein ye place it: the best things
require the best place: the image of God in Christ, drawn by the Spirit, will
endure no room, but the most inward part of the soul.

ARTIC. II.
The whole conversation of a believer must be renewed.

THat is, that holiness be exercised and set on work in the course of our life,
which sometime in the Scripture is called the Ordering of conversation aright.
See Psalm. 50. ult. Sometimes our walking with God, Genesis 17. 2. Luke 1. 6. So
also our liveing righteously, holily, and soberly in this present life:
sometimes, our serving him in fear all our days: sometimes the having of a good
conscience, Act. 25. 1. And lastly, the holding out of a good conversation. See
Matthew. 5. 16. So 1 Pet. 3. 2. Ephesians. 5. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 11.

For explication of this two things are to be considered:

of this Conversation.
1. The circumstances 2. The substance
I. The circumstances concern

1. Either the Persons who must lead this conversation. 2. Or the conversation
it self.
I. Circumstances concerning Persons bind all sorts equally to the good
behavior without prescription or exception: and that in their several
1. Estates; as in 2. Conditions; as in each trade, or calling. 3. Relations;
as masters, servants, parents, children, etc. 4. Degrees; rich, poor, noble,
ignoble, learned, ignorant, etc. Prosperity. Adversity.

II. Circumstances concerning conversation it self are
1. Order, that the chief service of God be preferred before the meaner 2.
Proportion between duty and duty: zeal with wisdom, etc. 3. Beauty, giveing
to each duty her due respect, not only doing, but looking how. 1. In time,
that religious course be first attended, then worldly, Mat. 6. 33. 2. In honor:
lesser must give place to greater.

II. Substance of conversation.

II. Substance of conversation may be referred to these three heads: either
1. To those Graces which qualify a good conversation. vid. A 2. Subject,
wherein conversation consist's. vid. B 3. Object, which it look's at vid. C
A 1. Graces which qualify a good conversation, are of two sorts
General. Special.
General, are either Graces of
Quality. Quantity.
I. Graces of Quality are five:
1. Wisdom, which is a determining of generals to specials both of actions and
circumstances, according to Christian rules, Phil. 4. 6. It keep's a decorum in
all actions. 2. Simplicity, which look's at truths in their naked nature,
without mixture of fleshly conceit. 3. Sincerity, looking always at right
ends: it has a pure aim at God's glory, opposite to hypocrisy, 4.
Faithfulness, not revolting or warping either for allurements or threats. 5.
Integrity toward all the commandments of God, without partiality.
II. Graces of Quantity or measure are two,
1. Prosperity, or welfare of the soul: which has three parts. 2.
Continuance, whereby it giv's not in, nor is weary in weldoing: and it is
contrary to staggering, sloth and eas. 1. Rootedness, contrary to
sleightness, 1 Cor. 15. ult. 2. Fruitfulness, abundant in weldoing. 3. Growth,
2 Pet. ult.

Special graces of the Soul are

1. Righteousness, which giv's every one his due. 2. Prudence, which wisely
accommodate's it self to the occasions of actions, as it judges most
expedient. 3. Courage, which goes through all dangers and streights, patiently,
and waits by faith and hope for a good issue. 4. Soberness, which orders a
man in the use of his lawful liberties aright, and keep's a man from excess
therein. 5. Humility, which teaches a man to think meanly of himself, as
knowing his own wants and shame* 6. Chastity, whereby a man possesses his
vessel in holiness* and honor. 7. Thankfulness, whereby the receiver is duly
affected toward the author of any good.
Sundry other virtues there are, of which is sufficiently spoken in the
Article of Communion, Part. 2. Yet a true Christian must look to nourish moral
virtues in his ordinary conversation as well as religious in the fellowship of
Saints.

B 2. The Subject wherein conversation consist's, i. e. the regenerate person.

It stand's in three things, as the instruments by which a Christian does and
must ordinarily convers, vix.
1. Thoughts. 2. Affections. 3. Actions.
I. Thoughts: they are the first mover in the soul, and from them issues
either good or bad life* they are the master-wheel.

Concerning these, observe three things:

1 Rule. Let it be our continual care to keep the thorow-fare of the the soul
free from the evil of them, as by pardon, so by purgeing of them daily.

2 Rule. Season thy imagination, and the doors of thy senses, with holy
meditations.

3 Rule. Watch over thy thoughts, as men do over thievs, and ask whence they
com, and whither they will, ere they pass.

4 Rule. Attend seriously on holy objects, to fix thy imagination on good
things, Es. 26.

5 Rule. Let all thy springs be in the Lord, Psalm. 87. 7. even the root of thy
whole conversation.

II. Affections. These are the wheels of the soul indeed, and upon them the
soul is either hurried to evil, or led to good.

Helps for the right ordering of them.

1. Nourish the fire of the holy Ghost kindled in us in our first
regeneration, and apply it daily to the sham^ing, purgeing out, and consumeing
of these lusts, Gal. 5.

2. Apply the merit and look at the example of the Lord Jesus in all the whole
conversation of his affections.

3. Learn to take a right mark of the right objects of our affections, and that
will shame us, when by loosing or mistakeing our right mark, we do fasten them
bafely and indirectly. Our anger is too good to be set on carnal revenge: our
love too good for base lusts, etc.

4. Get the soul settled in peace, and this will rule our spirits, that neither
fear nor hope shall much unsettle us, but we shall possess our souls with
patience, in the midst of all distempers.

III. Actions: Touching which observe four rules.

1 Rule. They must be warranted by the Word: either in doing, not doing, or
suspending. Without knowledge the heart is not good, Pro. 19. 3.

2 Rule. They must be don in a right manner: or else we sin. And this manner
of doing require's two things. First, that they be don in the state of
wel-pleasing: Secondly, welpleasingly. The former is an assurance that the
person please's God. The later is a cleaving to the quality of performance
that it be pure.

3 Rule. They must be don in a right measure. The Lord must be served with
the best of us: Within, by the best of our souls: Without, by the best extent
of our abilities. And that we keep no falls measure within us.

4 Rule. They must be don to a right end* viz. The glory of God, good of his
brethren, and peace of his own heart.

^ 3. The Object of our conversation: which is twofold:

1. Spiritual with God himself. 2. With man in common life.
1. With God himself. Godly conversation is that communion which a renewed soul
has with God:

And it is twofold
Inward. Outward.
Inward stand's in two things:
1. Either the life of faith. 2. The exercise of the graces of the spirit
within the soul.
I. In the life of faith, which is soul's enjoying of God, Christ our
sanctification, by all his promises concerning life and godliness. The
particular objects of the life of faith are reduced to four heads.

1. Estates. viz. 1. Prosperity. The soul cleav's to God in the promise of his
All-sufficiencie. Genesis 17. 1. and 1 Cor. 3. end, All things are yours, etc. 2.
Adversity. The soul cleav's to God in the promise of his protection and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
2. Means-useing. The soul cleav's unto God by the promise, for the power and
blessing of and upon all his ordinances. 3. Duties. The soul cleav's to God by
a promise for strength to give us the grace to do what he commands. 4.
Graces. The soul cleav's to God in the promise, and the grace of the Lord
Jesus, for a supply of grace convenient for it self, both for number and
measure. Joh. 1. 17. From his fountain we receiv grace for grace, like for
like, so many for so many.
II. In the exercise of the graces of his spirit. For as Merchants and chapmen
have the policy and traffic for wares and money, so the godly have their
commerce with the Lord for Grace, Phil. 3. 19.

And this stand's in these three things:

1. In the increas of their Graces. 2. In the rejoicing in the growth and
increas they have had. 3. And especialiy their tradeing is in heaven by that
precious hope, which is an earnestpennie of their inheritance: and therefore
they never think of it but it glad's their hearts.
So much of the inward convers with God.

Outward convers of the soul with God is that holy correspondencie which it
hold's with God in outward services.

These are of two sorts:

1. Ordinary.

2. Occasional.

1. Ordinary: viz.
1. First a satisfying of the soul with the Lord's image at our awakeing, with
a saluteing of his promise for renewed pardon and grace. 2. A seeking of his
face as often in the day as may be for renewed humiliation, for pardon of
renewed ^ins, grace to purge and season the soul: thanks for renewed
compassions. 3. A reviveing of covenant with him for closer purpose, and bent
of heart toward him. 4. A daily recording of God's peculiar administrations
and providence to us in patience, etc. 5. A finishing of each day so, as we
viewing it over, may be humbled or comforted, and so lie down in peace.
2. Occasional is the service of the time Act. 13. 36. by which we rest not
only in our ordinary service of God: but reach our souls to the condition of
the times we live in, accordingly carrying ourselvs either in affliction, or
thanksgiveing, as occasion require's

II. Branch: viz. our conversation with men in common life.

This the Psalmist call's the ordering of conversation aright: and it is the
wise accommodation of a Christian to the several passages that befall us
unavoidably in this our common course of life: as, marriage, company or
solitariness, liberties, earthly business, calling, familie-government, common
talk, etc.

Generul rules for all.
Generally touching all note this, That God abhorr's all common profane usages
of the world in these things: and will have his people carry about them the
cognizance of new creatures, and holy ones, that they may not make religion
odious by their corrupt behavior, and making use of each other therein for
their own ends: but that the graces of God may break out and shine in the order
of their conversation to the glory of our profession.

Special rules for Marriage.
Being married first in the Lord, they loath to make it a common thing for the
use of each other; but first, improoving it chiefly for God, and the mutual
good of their souls: worshipping God together, making him umpire of all their
differences: nourishing matrimonial love as a sacred knot, and to that end
observing each others graces for the strengthening thereof. Cutting off all
jars in the beginning, and yet not agreeing together for base ends, but for
holy. If these rules and the like were observed, how might the order of this
one part set in order all other parts of our course? Whereas the disorder of
this wheel cause's all other to be distempered; children unrulie, servants
ungoverned, and all out of frame.

Rules for men's Callings.
First, beware of an unlawful Calling. Then of picking quarrels with your
callings. Change not your Calling at your pleasure: but cling to thy Calling to
keep thee from noisome lusts, eas, sloth and lewd company, which nothing but a
Calling will prevent: As that Martyr blessed God for holy wedlock, so do thou
for an honest Calling. Secondly, use it not for base ends of gain, money and
the like, but to serve providence, mortify thy lust, and prepare thee for
duties of worship. Thirdly, let an order be set in thy Calling that it hinder
not Religion in thy Family; neither let Religion hinder thy Calling; but both
know and keep their bounds. Fourthly, Neglect not thy Calling suddenly, to
attend upon needless pleasure, travels, companies, drinkings, to leav thy
family in a distemper, without either provision or government: but instead of
these, abide diligently in the Calling, in which God has set thee, without
weariness.

Rules of conversation in common life.
The answer of that good woman to the Prophet, is excelleut, 2 King. 4. 14. I
live among my people: meaning humbly, courteously, loving and beloved, usefully
and peaceably. First, in our neighborhood we are to practice innocence and
harmlesness: to maintain civil offices of lending and borrowing necessaries.
Secondly, in Towns-matters, not aiming at overruling others, treading our
inferiors under-feet, saveing our own purses, and over-burdening others, but
carrying equal minds, and doing as we would be don to: not pragmatical and
busybodies in matters not concerning us; but attending our own and keeping
our bounds. Thirdly, in Arbitratorships, not stickling for parties, but for a
peaceable agreement upon equal condition between them.

Rules for Solitariness.
Touching solitariness Heathens may teach us, who were never less alone or
idle, then when private and solitary. Make solitariness a threshold for
meditation.

Rules for Company.
No man is sooner bewraied by any thing then by Company and by the Tongue.
Wherefore seeing it is a great part of the wheel of our life, let us first
beware of a loos heart, ready for all comers, none amiss, a sign of exceeding
emptiness. Then discern of our company wisely. Count it secondly a singular
favor to be rid of bad or doubtful company. Thirdly, be armed in bad
Company: reproov not scorners, cast not pearls before swine, be dumb before
such wicked ones. Among the formal sort (who may sooner be swaied them
seasoned) be sure to cut off evil speech and carriage. Draw on the Company by
amiable behavior and courtesy; and then apply our selves to do them good. To
which end, first, be seasoned with good matter. Secondly bring it out
seasonablie. Thirdly, have a set aim and bent at some special object. Fourthly,
seek truly the good of such as thou conversest with, and God's glory. Lastly,
let not thy mind be sickle, and easily put off from good speech.

Rules for Liberty.
There are many sorts of liberties, as travelings from our own homes,
companionship with such as pleas us, recreations and pastimes, feastings and
the like: all which are lawful in their kind: yet must be watched too, least
too much precious time, cost and heart be spent upon them.

Rules for Family.
Touching the Family, we are to set it in order, not when we die only, but
much more in our life. Let Governors be the life of order themselves. Prove. 27.
23. Let God rule your children, and servants, and wives, and set up his throne
in their conscience, and then a twined thread will draw more then a cable. Let
thy eye be chiefly fixed on the righteous, and encourage them that they may
be guides to the rest.

Touching Inferiors, be wholly for the good of the Family, not your own ends.
Children, downright in subjection, and not insolent; awful, diligent.
Servants, first seek to serve the Lord hrist, that neither ye may obey men
against Christ, nor yet neglect the obedience to men for Christ's sake. Be
earnest in business, yet redeeming time to serve the Lord in secret: to be sure
not unsetling the seasons of familie-worship. Plead not for more liberty in
gadding, then is meet.

Rule for the Tongue.
It Is the chief Agent and Chapman of conversation, and by it conversation
utter's it self. Get a wel-staied heart and balanced with grace, and this will
first keep in our tongues from excess: and then good matter, good heart and
good occasions will set them on work for good, for God, for our brethren.

Use I. Terror

1. To all profane persons, who cross with God, and turn day into night, a
conversation of the new creature into a conversation of wickedness

2. To all hypocrites, and time-servers, who make Religion a cover for their
hollowness, and bearing the world in hand that they believ, love God, fear him,
are very renewed ones and new creatures, yet cast dung in the face of God and
religion, liveing still unreformed in their conversation. If ye be such new
creatures, if ye have slain the Agag of old Adam, what mean the bleating of
the sheep, and lowing of the oxen? how is it that your tongues, your marriages,
families, liberties, companies, have shaken off God's yoke? where is your
inward and outward conversation with God? having a form of godliness, but
hateing to be reformed.

Use II. Instruction to all God's new creatures to bethink them of their work,
and to stir up the grace of God in their renewing. Cast off thine old mixtures,
do not pull back thy shoulder, desire no more eas then others of God's people
have felt. It Is God's way, the way that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, David, Peter,
Paul himself walked: the way which Jesus Christ has chalked out: if it be
tedious, it is to thy old man, to whom thou art a debtor. Thou art redeemed
from him, and his old conversation: thy thoughts, affections, members, tongue,
feet, senses, are not thine own, but his: that thou might now serve in the
newness of the spirit, not in the oldness of the letter.

Use III. Let it provoke each good heart to seek to excel in this fruit of a
new creature.

Use IV. Admonition: Look to those Graces which serve to prop up and strengthen
the wheel of conversation; here one grace is requisite, there another: in a
cross, self-denial, and meekness: in a blessing, cheerfulness and fruitfulness:
in each part of life, faith: sometimes the armor, sometimes wisdom and
discerning* But let no naked man com into this field, nor any barefoot to this
walk, for they will never hold out. Secondly, look to thy conscience, and keep
it sound and tender if thou would hold a good conversation, or order it well.

ARTIC. III.
The Platform of holy conversation is the Moral law.

SEe 1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of the law is love: what mean's he? surely not the
end of the lawe's begetting power (for Christ does that) but of the directing
power of it. Thus Saint James call's it a royal Law, Jam. 2. 8. as being the
scepter whereby Christ our king rule's us. And he tearm's it a glass of
Liberty: meaning to all believers, in that it shewe's forth the will of God
fully in the point of Moral obedience, as a glass represent's the face. For the
Law in God's purpose served for two ends: One for transgressions, to convince
the wicked, to scare them out of their self-conceit: the other to guide such as
are com to Christ, how to live under his government. And to such the Law ceased
to be a killing letter, and began to be a direction for life.

Now Christ has taken away that heavy yoke of the Law, and made it easy and
light to us

1. As a Priest. 2. As a King. 3. As a Prophet.
I. As our Priest five ways:
1. By dischargeing us from that old fence of the Law, the yoke of superfluous
Ceremonies of the old cerimonial and judicial Law, Col. 2. 14.

2. He has freed us from the rigor of moral Laws; especially the whole
burden of the moral Law, Gal. 3. 13. that immoderate impost of doing all
according to the full matter, manner, and measure; so that now the Law is
qualified, and is only required of us as the obedience of faith, and accounted
unto us as full as if we would wholly fulfill it.

3. And especially, he has rid us from that woeful penalty of Curs (more
heavy then all, Gal. 3. 13. even eternal death of soul and body, which
throughout our life enthralled us, Hebr. 2. 15. and that by his blood, Gal. 4.
5. Further; He has taken away that strength of sin, whereby the Law did
excite and provoke sin in us, so that now it provoke's to righteousness.

4. He has remooved that unwelcomness of our persons, whereby all that came
from us was irksom to God, and made both us and our service accepted.

5. He does by his intercession procure acceptance still for us.

II. As a King two ways:
1. He strengthen's and establishes all those ties and bands of obedience due
to himself from us: that the more freed we are from bondage, the more we may
be tied to the liberty of this royal law of his: setting up his throne in the
soul more fully thereby, upon better prerogative: To this end pertain's that,
Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness, to all that
believ. Meaning, that the Law is fully satisfied in her scope of perfect
obedience by Christ: seeing faith in him has obtained a full acceptance of
obedience, as if it were legally perfect.

2. He does by his Kingdom infuse strength into us to obey the Law: incline's
our wits thereunto, and make's it to us actually as Christ found it to himself,
and has made to us, even perfect freedom.

III. As a Prophet two ways:
1. By a declareing work, which is a witnessing to the soul that he is the
true Lord and commander of his people, Esaias 55. 4. that he rule's by his Law,
as by his Scepter, that all his Priesthood and merit end's in his Kingdom and
obedience, that it is his honor that all knees bow to him, and that they kiss
the Son; that he is object of it through whom the Father is honored: that true
liberty stand's not in having our will, but in putting on this yoke; and who
so does otherwise, deceiv's himself,

2. By his revealing work* by this he direct's the soul, and set's the steps
of it in peace: by this he use's his Law to be a lively finger to point our
duty for every occasion, and to frame the soul to draw his Law to every need
and use in the life: according to that, 1 John 2. 20. Ye have an unction from
the Holy One, who tells you all things. Esaias 30. 31. Their ears shall hear a
voice behind them, saying; This is the way, walk* in it. This is a revealing
with direction; by which the soul see's the use of Christ in every
commandment, and is led on by him as her Guide thereby, as if an Oracle should
speak from Heaven; Esa. 55. A leader and commander to his people, ver. 4.

Directions themselves concern either God himself in the first Table; as his
inward worship of fear, confidence, and setting him up to be our God alone in
the first: Or, our outward reasonable service, and worship of him in pure
manner in the second: Or, our faithful abearing of our selves in all holiness,
in such actions of common life as are not immediate worship, in the third: (for
I refer oaths and vows to the second, which I desire the wise Reader to think
of) or the set day of our worship, upon one day of seven (since the eighth day
was turned into God's day, or the Christian Sabbath) and that in the fourth. Or
else our neighbor and our selves in the other Six; Subjection to all Superiority
in the fifth: Maintaining his precious life (as being better then all that
follow) in the sixth: Of his Chastity in the seventh: His Estate in the
eighth: His Name in the ninth: The tenth, forbidding not only that
concupiscence which reache's to the detriment of our neighbor, but under that,
(as most sensible to us) all that wicked propension and bent of nature (before
actual sin) whereby originally we are prone to all injustice, and impiety,
and intemperance.

Rules of direction for the clear understanding of the LAW.

1. That all the Laws of Christ must be understood to be of another manner of
force and authority than the Laws of men, even the greatest: for they are
limited with exception in all kinds, and do but reach to the outward man, and
penalties thereof. But these do reach to the conscience, and they bind the
inner man.

2. Let us know that his commands are not idle things and arbitrarie, which we
may obey at our courtesy; or if not, yet God is as a weak King for whom his
subjects are too strong, as Joab and Abishai for David; but real Laws from an
authority that both know's offenders, and can punish them; yea, which accurseth
all transgressors, and will not hold them guiltless.

3. Observe, that the commands of the second Table, are the Edicts of the same
God whose the First are, Jam. 12. 11. and therefore in which the Lord take's
himself as truly either honored or not, as the first.

4. The Law must be always understood according to the scope, even as every
other part of the Word, as promises and threats. We must not rest in the bare
letter, and so destroy the life and spirit of the Law. Look what God aim's at
under the grossest, let us also aim at, and both abhor each appearance of evil
as well as the most odious, and cleaving to good in the least as well as the
greatest.

5. We must conceiv the Commandments as importing no patch't or pieced
obedience to one or a few charges, but an entire and whole one: as the
coagmentation of the Laws of both Tables does import. Let us always conceiv the
scope of the Law to require integrity; and all partial service to be a
forfeit to the whole Law.

6. The Laws of the former Table are generally to be preferred to the duties
of the Second: yet with an exception, that we conceiv the rule upon equal
terms: thus, That the commands of the first rank in the former Table have
precedencie over the second, not each branch of the former above the second in
their first rank. It is generally more excellent that God have his due then
man: but not particularly, for the neglect or contempt of a Sermon are not
fouler sins then the murder of a man.

7. Understand the Commandments to require at our hands the utmost of our wit,
device and courage to serve God.

8. Let us observe, the Commandments of God never cross each other: if any such
case occur, as wherein one cannot stand with the the other, let us know the one
must always yield to the other.

9. Let us note this, that duties of necessity and mercy, which cannot be
otherwise don, are to be preferred to duties of piety, at that season; as the
Physician does attend the Patient, we help the Ox out of the ditch, rathen
worship God first, and suffer these to despair the whilst: obedience in such
cases is better then sacrifice: and the omission of a duty is no contempt with
God.

Use I. This Doctine teaches us to abhor the audaciousness of Popish and
Heretical and Scismatical ones, as, forgetting this scope of God in
establishing one eternal, immutable and pure Rule of righteousness, dare take
upon them to control this Law of God, and to diminish it, cutting off the
Second and Tenth Commandments: so that if they may prevail, not the Moral Law,
but their Commands must be our rules. It is no wonder if thieves might have
their will, they would suffer no watches to be kept: or, that deformed women
loathe or break al true Glasses. Let us so much the rather abhor them, as odious
enemies to God, and under pretense of the Law of Liberty walk as lawless
libertines, and overthrow the Law of Conversation.

Use II. Let us consider how dangerous a thing it is to worship God according
to our own fancies and inventions: It was a good speech of old, They are the
best Laws which give least power to the Judge. God will have no Judge to be his
Chancellor, to make or interpret, or change Laws; he know's our boldness and
sacriledg in this kind.

Use III. If the Law be the director of our Conversation: Let it be use of
exhortation to all God's people to embrace it, and to submit to this Scepter of
Christ, to establish his Law in our souls, and to lift up him in the honor of
our hearts, who has honored us with his royal Law to be our direction. It is
reported by Mr. Fox of one Crow a Seaman, that being in Shipwreck, and having
cast all his tacklings and wares, and five pounds of money into the Sea, he
kept his New Testament about his neck, so swimming upon his broken Mast, and
after four days (all his company being drowned) yet he was at length by
passengers discovered and taken up, all frozen, numbed and sterv'd; but yet his
Book he held close to him. If we in the shipwracks of this World, would keep
our souls from wrack, what course should we take? Surely keep this Law to us
close, and not suffer it to depart from us: lose money, wares, ship and all,
ere we forego that, least we lose our conscience, and disorder our
conversation. And in all our doubtful cases, whether vows, oaths, marriages,
dealings with men, entercours with God, or any difficulty, go to the Law and
testimony ( Esaias 8. 20.) for a resolution.

Use VI. Let all that find themselves to com short of this platform, I say, let
them live the life of faith in duties: They that know a Command shall fear it.
Fear not him who when he has killed the body can go no surther: But him
fear, whose will is righteousness, and whose power is revenge: yea, who can
cast both body and soul into hell: God's people are taught Obedience from
their youth up, both to do and suffer, without cavils, distinctions, or
exceptions. The first lesson they learned in the school of Christ, was
self-denial, and naked obeying the Promise. That obedience to Christ has
taught them obedience to God the Father: Christ has made their yoke easy, and
burden light: so that now they delight in the Law, being made Christ's Law.

Use V. This convince's all hypocrites obedience to the Law. Alas! It Is no
direction for their lives, they look at the Law still as a whip and bondage.
They dare not suffer themselves to be informed of the Law: When they cannot
resist it, yet they are not convinced in conscience: they think it bootless to
obey, Esa. 58. Mal. 3. They wish the Law were according to their own scantling,
or else were not at all. Hence all their life is nothing but a study to
interpret the Laws of God with favor to their own corruption.

Use VI. Let this teach us to live by faith, for ability in Christ to all
performances: trust we God upon a promise for each part of his course, to God,
men, our selves; in solitariness, company, calling, in Sabbaths, subjection to
superiors, and common life. Say thus, Lord, these duties are above me, I can
do nothing to purpose: enable me to do what thou biddest, and bid what thou will; else the number and weight of them will tire and clog me. Thou have eased
me O Lord of the burden of Moses, but still (even in my liberty from Christ) I
carry old Adam's burden about me. Therefore write these laws in my heart I
beseech thee, that I may delight in the Law in my inner man, and that I may run
thy commandments with cheerfulness.

ARTIC. IV.
The LORD has given helps to his Church to uphold her in Obedience.

REad 2 Pet. 1. 3. Ephesians. 4. 11. Mat. ult. Joh. 14. 26 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7. in
which Scriptures we have the order of this provision of God, and that in four
degrees

1. In our outward Ordinances themselves, as Preaching, receiving the
Sacraments, etc.

2. The Instrumens and lively organs serving to minister therein, as Pastors,
Teachers, Ministers of the Gospel.

3. Gifts and Administrations vouchsafed unto them for the be better dispensing
and officiciateing those services.

4. The Spirit of God to assist and enable them to all these performances.

These helps are of 2 sorts:
Private or Public* both are
Extraordinary. 1. Fasting. 2. Thanksgiveing.
Ordinary. 3. The Word preached. 4. Baptism. 5. The Supper. 6. Prayer. 7.
Meditation. 8. Conference.


1. Fasting is a solemn ordinance of God, attended with rest and abstinence,
wherein the Church lawfully assembled, powre's out her self in affliction and
supplication, with importunity for turning away of some great present or
imminent sin and danger.

2. Thanksgiveing is a solemn ordinance of God, wherein the Church lawfully
assembled powre's out herself in praises and thanks for some rare blessings and
deliverances. And let this also be understood of private in both
extraordinary kinds, terms being observed.

3. The Word preached is a public eminent ordinance, wherein the Minister
lawfully deputed, does distinctly and soundly read the Word, give the sens,
ground the doctrine, and convinceingly apply it by instruction, reproof,
confutation, exhortation and admonition.

4. Baptism is the former sacrament of the New Tastament, wherein by due
application of Water to the infant, all Christ is sealed up to the soul for
regeneration.

5. The Sacrament of the Supper is the second in order, in which by due giveing
and receiving of bread and wine, the Lord Jesus is wholly given and taken by the
believing soul, to be nourished to eternal life.

6. Prayer is a lifting up of the heart to God in the name of Jesus Christ, in
confession and supplication for pardon of sin, the granting of all good things,
and acknowledging of mercies already received with thankfulness.

7 Meditation is a serious reviveing of those truths we have heard, or the
administrations of God toward us or others, that both mind and heart being
seasoned with the savor thereof, we may be furthered thereby to duty.

8. Conference is a wise and loveing laying together (by two or more) of such
things as concern the glory of God, and our spiritual edifying for mutual
information and quickening,

Rules concerning Fasting.
1. Let us arm our selves to the chief work, which is soulaffliction. Let us
consider, if we were pined with necessity of abstinence from meat and drink
for any time, what a fearful anguish would it bring us unto? And is not (think
we) sin that deserv's it, of more afflicting, vexing nature? Let us aim at it
then, and much more that sin do humble us than any sorrow whatsoever. Let us
first, Mic. 7. 9. bear the indignation of the Lord for our sin; and for the
rest, let God alone to plead our cause: for what should it help us to berid of
all other enemies, while our own pride, self-love, hypocrisy, vain-glorie,
worldliness and hardness of heart still grow at our hearts?

2. Apply our selves to all supports of a Fast, which the Lord has granted to
keep us from deadness and weariness; the Word I mean fitted to our occasions,
and the like, yet as serving to the main of humiliation and confidence.

3. Consider that the Scripture in no one thing afford's us greater consolation
and hope than in this. For there is scarce one example of a Fast, which want's
the experience of good success, yea, extraordinary like it self; as in
Esther's, Nehemiah's and Ezrae's, Israel against Benjamin; the Church's Acts
12. does appear.

4. Considering it must be no small grace, either of mourning or faith, which
must prevail against those holds, either without or within which we pray
against; Let us know that our locks had need be well grown (with Sampsons) for
such a purpose. Therefore let none dare to compass this Altar with
unpreparedness of heart.

II. Rules concerning Thanksgiveing.
1. Carry a liveing memorial and catalogue of the chief public mercies
(being the matter of our thanks) and so of our own in particular. Remember the
great providence of settling the Gospel and banishing Popery, and since that,
the strange miraculous deliverances not once or twice from foreign enemies,
home judgments: In secret rceord our own: our first calling; and since that,
our many staggers and revolts: his renewed mercies by occasion, in our changes
of estate, in our streights, in deep desertions, when we could no more sustein
our selves then if we had hung in the air; how he has ever been our portion
when friends have forsaken us unthankfully, and will be so still: our
blessings above many, in gifts of mind, condition and calling, graces of soul,
how God kept us from forsakeing his Covenant in our deepest temptations of
Satan and enemies.

2. Be enlarged accordingly with due sympathy both for the Church and thy
self, rejoiceing with her, with and for whom thou have often mourned, and
preferring her peace to thy chief joy. Affection is the fire to the Sacrifice,
and know that psalm. 50. ult he that, praises God, honoreth him: and the
asscent of praises shall be the descent of blessings, and happy is he who may
maintain this entercours with God for the enlargeing of him to more grace.

III. Rules concerning the Word preached.
1. Be sure thou have right to the blessing of it: the Word cannot build thee
except it has begot thee. See 1 Pet. 2. 3. If ye have tasted how gracious the
Lord is, then com to the Word to grow by it.

2. Prize and covet it. Prize it as that Word which has been the seed of
immortality and glory unto thee. Now if it be precious it will be coveted,
hungered after, attended with all heed, yea, snatched with violence, as precious
things are* 1 Pet. 2. 2. Covet and cagerly tug at the Word, as the child at
the breast. Sleep not, wander not, gaze not, but attend the gates and ports of
wisdom, and understanding, if thou look they should preserv thee.

3. Com from an holy course and practice when thou come to hear: com not from
thy own course of wrath, world, self: purge these first 1 Pet. 2. 1. and so com.
Repent of all old sins of hearing: thy trifleings and dallyings with the Word,
thy base mixtures, and com from a good course, and so the Word shall send thee
back to it with more strength and grace then thou came.

4. Deny thy self, and thine own wisdom, partialities, prejudices of man, of
gifts, of ordinances.

5. Believ God.
1. That in his Word this direction to see life is to be found, Joh. 5. 2.
That he can guide his Word peculiarly to do thee good, and speak to thy soul,
though thou be but one of many hearers. 3. Mix the Word with Faith, believ it,
obey it, fear it, see God true in it in all his promises, charges and threats,
and stand readily to catch that part of it which is thine, as the tradesman
stand's ready with his mould to catch the molten metal to frame his vessel.
4. Depart from hearing as well apaid, well fed: keep your charge, lose it not
in the air of the world, carry it with you in each part of the world, but let
nothing rob you of it. Take forth a new lesson daily, have an ear to hear,
where God has a tongue to speak.

IV. Rules concerning the sacrament of Baptism.
1. As it should teach all that bring their infants to baptism, to dedicate
their children to God by prayer: so especially let all others recall to mind,
how the Lord has been aforehand with them in like sort, even hanging his badg
upon them, when they were cut off and knew it not.

2. Let them hold the Lord sure to them in this covenant, by this seal, as a
Corporation would hold their liberties by the King's Broad Seal. And when the
Devil fill's thee with doubts about thy conversion, the condition of faith, the
believing in the promise, strength to a godly life; fly to thy Baptism, as thy
uttermost assurance; and say, If the Lord were found of an Infant that could
not seek him, and gave me his seal that he would save me, what will he do
now I seek him faithfully? When thou look upon his Rainbow in the clouds,
thou fear no flood any more; but Baptism is better, 1 Pet. 3. 18. It Is God's
Ark, which by water, save's thee from perishing by the waters of Gods wrath:
Remember that that the Spirit by faith does as really dip and drench thy soul
with his pure water, Ezekiel. 36. 25. to rins away thy guilt, blemish, and curs of
sin. and to quicken thee up to the life of the new Creature in righteousness;
as by his Ministers hand he dip's thee into, and take's thee out of the water.

V. Rules concerning the Lord's Supper.
1. The soul knowing that God does sustain her by the same whereby he begat
her, does, upon this Baptism received, with holy confidence go to the Lord for
her due nourishment by, and in him: saying thus, Oh Lord, I am thine, save me,
Psalm. 119. 94. Of thee I am, who art made unto me, not only Righteousness,
but sanctification, with growth and increas in it: I com therefore to plead my
right in all humility: If I had never came to birth, or to the light, I had so
been at an end; but seeing thou have not denied me the life of a child of
thine, do not leav me to shift, but Lord bring me up at thy cost, and let me
have my portion from thy Table, and my daily bread from thy hand. My Baptism I
already enjoy in the death and life of Christ, to make me thine; O Lord let
also his blood, grace, and spirit run in the veins of my soul, to strengthen
me in the inner man with all long-suffering, and wel-pleasing, and joyfulness;
all grace of thy new creature, let it be mine.

2. Prepare thy soul to this feast of the mountains, Esaias 25. as often as thou
come, (which must be often 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30.) and com not without thy
feast-Apparel. And let this be one rule unto thee, Do not catch up this Robe
on the sudden; but wear it daily between Sacrament and Sacrament. That faith in
the Lord Jesus thou walk or would com with to the Supper, live by it
daily; Christ is the same in the promise and the seal. That repentance thou
walk with to the Sacrament, practice it daily: he that in a great frost
would keep the ice thin, must keep it broken every day: so thou, thy
soul-issues lest thine heart harden.

3. Being thus com to the Supper: set thy faith on work; say thus, I know no
Devil in hell can sever Jesus EMMANUEL, my meat and drink, from the Elements;
but this Word has united them for ever. That by sacramental union with them
(as sensible) he might unite himself with me spiritually and really in this
seal of his.

4. Seeing him there thine, take him, eat and drink him, and enjoy him: let thy
soul apply him to thee for that thou lackest, and he serves; that is, to
apply thy wants, where the hedge is lowest with the, to pare off thy
superfluous part, to fill up and supply thy decays and voidness; I mean, such
gifts or graces as concern thee, either in thy particular Calling, or in thy
general.

5. Least thou should stagger about thy right and part herein, remember the
end of the Sacrament is to rid thee of this fear. For why? it is God's seal to
the covenant of his Grace, to make thee his Son and Daughter, and to sanctify
thee: it is his uttermost security for any outward one; nay, it is his
instrument of conveying the greatest measure of his Spirit unto thee.

6. Having so received it, live by him, depart as one well satisfied, enlarge
him both for number and measure of growth to all parts of thy life, all
estates, graces, duties.

VI. Rules concerning Prayer.
1. Retain this heavenly Ordinance of God in that due esteem which the Lord
has graced it with; for all ends, both of humiliation and supplication. The
Lord and thy soul (by experience) do know it to be the key of all the coffers
of God, and that High-priest's liveing way, made by the blood of Christ,
whereby thou have access daily, yesterday, to day and ever, (the oftener the
welcomer) to the Holy of Holies, to the seat of Mercy.

2. God, in the Lord Jesus by a promise, having thy wants in a readiness, and
thy faith on wing: let not thy course in praying issue from a formal platform,
but a lively feeling, and humble pinching of soul for thy necessities.

3. Shake off all extremities of a corrupt heart by faith, which must hold
thine eye fixed upon thy Mediator against all thy presumption, commonness,
dullness, deadness, coldness; and beseech the Lord to stir thee up to pray as
he shall suggest unto thee, by the present occasion (well digested) either for
the Church, others, or thy self. If thou would be heavenly in prayer, first
abase thy self as a worm, dust and ashes, yea, (as Mr. Bradford) hell and the
sink-hole before the Lord who is heaven and holiness.

4. Add these meet qualities of prayer, viz. fervent importunity, as one whom
God cannot be rid of, till thou speed: and frequencie, as having sped well
already.

5. (And above all) com not to pray with any tainted known sin: I say not only
gross, but even secret and close, through a lazy heart loath to cast them off:
or a loos heart, loveing them better then the things thou praiest for, least
the Lord justly leave thee to be wearisom to him and thy self.

VII. Rules concerning Meditation.
1. It take's away letts, either giddiness of mind, or unsavoriness of spirit:
the former like a sieve out of the water loses all it get's, suffer's nothing
either truths heard, or works seen to abide long in the heart: but Meditation
set's them in the heart, that they leak not out. Heb. 2. 1. In stead of the
later it season's the heart with the sap, the life the savor of good things.

2. It make's the meaning, view, scope and order both of particular doctrine,
and the whole scope of Religion to become our own.

3. We com hereby to the eas of practice; the fruit whereof, experience: so
that if once we have found crosses to do us good, we fear not when new ones
approach: if we have felt the gain of a Sabbath, get a delight therein: in a
word, whatsoever is easy, it becom's sweet: and therefore if this be worth
somewhat to find the yoke of God easy, and his burden light, (as to say the
truth, it is the upshot of goodness) well may we then say, Meditation is a
divine help to a good course.

To these may be added three other means of Godliness, viz.
1. Resolvedness. 2. Watchfulness. 3. Experience.
I. Resolvedness is a grace of the Spirit, standing in an holy firmness of
mind and heart, to keep fast the truth of God, both in judgment, and the power
of practice.

Truth, if it be once lost in the judgment, will not long hold in the
practice: therefore we must be well principled and grounded in the Truth,
love it for it self, and embrace it with our best affections: Not being
wheeled and hurried about with the new tricks and devices of men of unsound
judgment: nor yet put on some truths for a time, with great zeal and heat, and
suddenly when a greater heat of opposition arise's, out of a giddie mind and
fearful heart, recant as fast and betray the truth of God to time-servers and
Enemies. Therefore we are bidden, Buy the truth, (whatsoever we give for it)
but sell it not, (whatsoever we might have for it:) Contend we for the faith,
Jud. 2 yea, unto blood. To this end, let us wisely and strongly observe, resist,
and reject all novelties and schisms starting up among us, and abhor them;
bearing witness to the Truth of God to our uttermost, so far as it import's our
calling.

2. Resolvedness to cleav to God in the power of practice. A solemn course used
by all the Saints both in ordinary, and by occasion. Joshua (cap. ult.) tell's
Israel, That he and his house would serve the Lord. David did not only resolv
Psalm. 119. 57. and vow, Psalm. 116. to keep the Word of God, but also swear to
keep his righteous judgments. It was the sum of Barnabas his Sermon, Act. 11.
That they of Antioch would with full purpose cleav to the Lord. The people in
Ezra came to the Oath and Covenant, sealing thereto; to bind themselves to God
the more strongly for starting. Oh that in these staggering, degenerate times,
wherein daily so many fall at our right hand and so many at our left, we might
be sustein'd with this resolution of heart, to be the Lord's for ever*

II. Watchfulness is not only given the Saints to awake out of their dead
sleep: but when the Lord has given them light and grace (in stead thereof) and
purged them from their filthiness; Then does this grace preserv them clean, and
keep them from defileing again. It is like both to the eye and the eie-lid: The
one is the spy of the body to look before and to mark the occasions and
opportunities offered by God of all duty and service, that we may do it: The
other is the keeper of the eye from the least dust or mote which might fall
into the same to annoy it. Concerning the former, the Christian soul must keep
the watch of God, Number. 9. 18. They must observe the Cloud and Pillar of fire
constantly, to pitch or remoov according to the mooving or resting thereof:
That is, look what work the Lord has for us to do, whether in the round and
course of our life, or in our particular Calling, in which God has set us, that
must we watch unto: yea, we must watch against all enemies and annoyances
from without or within us: And this work we must do with the best spirit we
are able.

The Word first must be the light by which we must watch in a world of such
darkness as we live in: There must be a voice behind us saying, This is the
way. Then secondly, there must be a marveilous active spirit in us, attent to
the word of God. Thirdly, there must be a sensible tenderness and
circumspection in the soul, not to suffer any such duty or occasion of it to
escape, as God afford's, but to be awake and aware of it, to welcome and observe
it. Fourthly, there must be a special difference put between such occasions as
are more safe, and such as as are more dangerously beset, as all lawful
liberties are which lie open to much abuse. Fifthly, there must be a very
wakefull heart against the most secret affronts of a good course, not to stay
till Satan appear in his foulest hue, but even to watch the least appearances
of danger; which require's a marveilous jealous and scrupulous heart (and yet
ruled by knowledge) not to be a fool to believ every thing: but wise to
discern, both of persons, things and occasions. Sixthly there must be an heart
watchful as as well to the grounds, manner and measure, intent and meaning of
our Action, as to their nature and unlawfulness. Seventhly, there must be the
Companions of watching, fruitfulness, unweariedness, cheerfulness and fullness
in duty, redeeming our season and filling up the time with plenty, abhorring
emptiness and barrenness. And lastly, such a watching heart to a constant
course, will breed a watchfulness for the coming of Christ.

III. Experience, which is the life of a Christian's observation of the whole
course of God's government toward him, both in his patience, blessings,
corrections: also exemples of others good and bad, liveing and dying; together
with all his threats and promises against evil and to goodness; with the
performances thereof: and especially the watchwords and warnings of Conscience
out of the Word, teaching us what ways to shun and what to embrace.

This experience teaches the people of God to be every one an Ecclesiastes to
another, a Preacher, telling others what they have observed in the course of
things, teach them what is vanity and froth and what is substance. The issue
of which is, That the whole duty of man is this, To fear God, and keep his
Commandments.

Holy experience is out of the Element of a natural man, he is hedged out
from it. But it is the most blessed help to the godly to order their life; a
true mistress, not as to fools.

Use I. And first seeing the chain of these holy helps is so precious and
profitable to a godly life; first, we confute all that break the links
thereof; and unsavorily make comparisons between one and other, to the
overthrow of all. Son between preaching and prayer: some between Word and
Sacraments, as the Papists do. Whereas we hold that they have a sweet harmony,
and neither without other to be set up. Let the solemness of the public, the
familiarity of the private and the need of all, affect us with exceeding
thankfulness; especially for our liberty in the use thereof, which Popery had
debarred us of in each kind by a strange tongue of Scripture, a Sacrifice for
a Sacrament; yea, a confusion of many for a few.

Use II. Secondly, how precious and adored should the wisdom of our God be, in
appointing so many, and neither more of these nor less, then the need of his
Church required: neither pampering nor sterving them, but nourishing them: Oh I
say, how should these list us up to God! As once an holy man rideing by the
medows in the Spring, seeing and smelling such varieties of flowers, said, Oh
sweet Creatures! but how sweet then is your Creator? If this footstool be so
set forth, what is his throne? So let us say, Oh sweet Ordinances, oh beautiful
Assemblies, oh useful varieties, but then how sweet is your Ordainer!

Use III. Thirdly, let this be exhortation to all believers: first, to use,
secondly to live by faith in the use of means. First to use them all, closely,
constantly, wisely: despise not the filliness, simplicity of them: judge them
not by man or outsides of appearance: sever not the things which God has
united: he has ordained both their coherence and use: seek him in all, if by
any means, Phil. 3. 11. we may attain our desire. Forget we not the scope of
the whole Article to be this, That in the use of means under God, the whole
body of godly life is to be preserved. Use all: not knowing in what box our
chief health consists, let not one eclips and stain the other: affect not
private to exclude public; honor not public, to weaken the esteem of private;
extraordinary, to despise ordinary: or ordinary to exclude them.

And lastly, let this teach us to live by faith in the use of Ordinances. And
by Faith let us cry out as the Church in the Canticles, Arise, O North wind,
and blow upon these flowers and spices, that they may com into my nostrils; Else
thou may be in the midst of the Garden, and savor nothing.

ARTIC. V.
The conversion of a new Creature is beset with many Letts.

SEe Texts, Heb. 12. 1. Cast off every weight and clog. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 1 John 2.
16. As it was with Christ, after his Baptism and anointing, instantly Satan set
upon him, Matthew. 4. 1. So here.

These Lets are of three sorts:
1. Sin. 2. Satan. 3. The World.
I. Sin is a Let to us two ways:

1. In respect of it self viz.
Native corruption. or Actual lusts within. Actual evil without.

1 Way, Sin is a Let in our unrenewed nature abiding still. That is a woeful
clog and back-byas, retarding our motion to heaven, and slowing of our race,
Heb. 12. 1. Also a most tedious contrariety in us, and perpetual enemy, Gal.
5. 17. lust's against the spirit, as a continual dropping. In the former
respect I might liken it to that unnatural setting of the Sun ten degrees
back: in the second, to that Peninna, 1 Samuel 1. 7. which vexed Hanna day by
day, and upbraided her as her enemy; or those daughters of Heth to Rebecca,
that were eie-sores, that she could never be quiet for them, her life was
made wearisom to her. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to stink:
so this cause's grace to be unsavorie. As the furnace send's out infinite
sparkles: so does this corruption minister fuel to all our course: what woeful
deadness, distemper, distaste, weariness, loggishness does it bring upon our
course? how does it cast wilde-fire into the thoughts and affections, and the
spirit of a man.

2. In respect of our inward actual lusts and passions; which as Saint James
says, fight in our members, Jam. 4. but as Peter adds, fight against our
souls. These lusts do snib and kill the growth of goodness in the soul, and
over-drip the grace of God as a sour shadow and the bows of a Walnut-tree do
keep under some tender Plant: or as the blasting of the East-winde the blossoms.

3. In the actual breakings out in open offenses and excesses: as oaths,
blasphemies, impiety to God, and open contempt of his Word, Sabbath, patience,
crosses, blessings: open coosenage, uncleanness, intemperance, idleness, wrath,
rage, unmercifulness, revenge, worldliness, and the like. If these waste
families, and states of men, then how do they much more waste and devour the
conscience? what horror, what woo, repentance, complaints do they cause?

2 Way by the Penalties of it. Sin at the at the first did, and still does
scourge her self: She bring's God against her both by spiritual desertions
and outward crosses: being stinging things to grace and to our nature. How
unsavorie does a lust make our hearts? how dead, defiled? how does the heart
wax polluted thereby as a sink-hole? how is it first deceived, then defiled,
then habited to ill Custom, then growing to a nature, riveted and confirmed?
then how sullen, dead and dark do we grow by it, how endless an appetite of
adding drunkenness to thirst does it procure? How avers does it make us to
close with hearing, Sacraments, or to perform duty, prayer to God, mercy,
love to men, patience under the Cross?

II. Let of a Believer is Satan: who although he could not do us hurt but by
our sin, yet by that tunnell let us in a woeful deal of his own into us, wors
then our own, enflameing and exasperateing sin in us by the adding of his own
malice to our sin, as more waters make the flood greater.

Two things here to be noted:
1. The properties of the Tempter. 2. The Substance of the Temptation.
The Properties are these; First Malice ever set's him on work against the
body and soul of the Creature. Secondly Vigilancie and attention always do
assist his Temptations. Thirdly Mischief and woe is ever in the end thereof, to
pull the soul from Union and Communion with God. Fourthly the Method and manner
of his tempting, which is to be weighed according to the parties tempted. If
weak and unable to resist, he tread's down the low hedge, never troubling
himself further needlessly. And thus he is himself, a Lion. First to anticipate
the counsel of the heart in preventing sin by the suddenness of injection.
Secondly, to assault judgment and conscience both at once, in blindeing the
one, and in bindeing the other: Thus he blinded Eve in that speech, God
knows that your eyes shall be open, and ye made as Gods.

Secondly, By his bindeing the will in point of her resistance; and that by the
excessive sweet of the bait. Thus to David in Bathsheba. Thirdly, by putting on
the person of one unsuspected; as sometimes pursuers of a man will prais him to
get others to betray him: And Jael to deceiv Sisera brought him Cream in a
Lordly dish. And thus he becom's an Angel of light, as holy as a Preacher.
Thus he tempt's Christ to leap down, and to make stones bread, out of a godly
end (forsooth) that God's power might be glorisied in a miracle. Avoid Devil,
God need's not my sin to honor himself; I sin too much unavoidably, I need not
add sin to sin willingly!

Thirdly, By the delusions and the deceits which he beguile's silly souls by,
that he may circumvent them and bring them into his snare. He has fine names
to set upon odious crimes: that with the names, the things might enter easily.
Adultery or fornication are but tricks of youth: prodigality, but good
fellowship: fashions, but handsomness: mizerliness, but providence: pride of
heart and life, but good courage, and liveing in good sort: These are his
dice-play and cunning, Ephesians. 4. The Harlot entise's the young man by her
spices, Carpets, and perfumes; her Husband's absence: These delude the heart
and blear the eye, till like a fool his heart be darted through.

The Temptations themselves concern the Godly two ways:

1. Either in the point of their calling to be the Lord's. 2. Or in the point
of their estate being called.
1. Temptations about their first Calling are

either in God's
preventing Call. assisting Call. perfecting Call.
Touching his preventing thus:

No sooner does he see any sinner make toward the voice of GOD, to look into
his old course, or hearken after a new; but presently* he set's upon them even
in their entrance. First, By presenting old sins, with all their circumstances,
order of them, number, hainousness, continuance, long contempt, etc. to dismay
them from possibility of conversion. Or, he assault's them with their
weakness of capacity, or memory, gifts, or parts, that they shall never
compass such great things. Or he discourage's them with their husband's ill
will, the loss of father's love, and land: Or that the things they must forego
both in liberties and laws, are more then they can bear. But, O Satan, avaunt!
The Lord has prevented me, and drawn me out of darkness: shall he suffer
me to perish in light?

Touching his assisting thus:

Especially in the first works of the Law, he corrupt's the mind and spirit,
both in the enlightening part, and the terrifying. The former he abuses to
multiply the fearful view of sin: The later, to make terror intolerable.

Touching his perfecting thus:

Here he labors's to hold them under, especially by the irksom bondage. Oh,
says he, faith only is of the Elect, and thou art none: it is the free gift of
God, and he may deny it as well as grant it. Sometimes hec make's it less then
it is, to puff up up the heart with presumption: Or he hide's the virtuous
savor and strength of the Promise, the simplicity, the faithfulness of the
Promiser, and the offer.

Touching his Temptations of them that are called thus:

These concern them either in point of their faith (and as touching the former,
he tempts two ways:

1. Either about the being, or the life of Faith: 2. Or their Obedience.
I. About the Being:
He take's advantage of the weak settling at the first, and by that
unrenewedness of nature, which oppose's this spiritual grace, he seek's to
overthrow them in the holding of their confidence.

2. About the life:
By the small Life of faith, he seek's to destroy the being of faith.

II. In point of their Obedience he tempt's two ways:

Either about it: Or, against it.
1. About it thus:
He buffet's them in their comfort therein For whereas it is God's will that
he that* walk's uprightly, should walk safely and sweetly; lo, Satan separat's
the end from the means. An hypocrite separate's the means from the end; looking
for peace where there is no uprightness. But here the stratagem of the Devil is
contrary; and therefore, either he hide's that from his eye, which should be
his main comfort in all failings: or else take's vantage by that which should
be his humiliation, to be his utter discouragement. And although he cannot
rob it of the truth of grace, yet he rob's it of the comfort thereof, chuseing
to play at any game, rather then sit out.

2. Against it thus:
Sundry ways he labor's to bring the soul under sin, to renounce a good
course, to be slack, remiss, loos, common, profane, unprofitable, even by
consent. And this is his most natural temptation. For, as he is exceedingly
wicked; so, it is little to him that comfort be stopped, except the conscience
be wasted. Oh what a May Game was it (think we) to see David foiled by
Adultery, Noah by Drunkenness, Lot by Incest, Hezekiah by Pride, Peter by
Revolt? First, He mark's his season and time, when the heart is most naked,
unarmed, at eas, (as Absalom and Amnon) lying most open, and being swept and
garnish't; which perhaps, another time would have been armed, jealous, and
fearful. He concur's not only with the corruption of the heart, as before:
but, secondly, with the constiution and complexion of the spirit of nature in a
man: Is he propens to lust, to uncleanness, to jovialness, to ambition? Oh,
(says he) he is mine! I will tempt him with meet baits. Thirdly. He
watche's the accommodation of occasions; as when excess of cheerfulness, or of
sadness, of praises or disgraces, of welfare and success, or defeat, or the
like; and when the spirits are open, then is his opportunity to work the heart
to wanton speech, to riot, to wrath and discontent, to swelling pride, to
ostentation of gifts, to the making away of a man's self, and the like.
Fourthly, He will make use of their best Graces and Privileges: all men know
you well enough to be one that make conscience, you may do such or such a
thing, and no man suspect you; therefore be not so nice in trifles, defeat an
Orphan, oppress the fatherless, falsify the trust reposed in you, etc.
Fifthly, Sometime of secrecy of time and place: who shall ever find it out?
Sixthly, by fine colors of pretensed meaning. So, by color of justice, my pains
have been such and such in business for others, why may not I pay my self so
and so, they being never the wiser; and perhaps, never the wors, as the case
may stand? Seventhly, By their falls, to drive them to sin for somewhat, rather
then to be punished for a little, over-shooes, over-knees: So, by comparing
themselves with wors then themselves, to be bold and presumptuous in
libertie-takeing: By the often shunning of sinful occasions, to venture beyond
their Calling, and so be snared. Nay by truths of God, both in examples of
the Saints falls, why may not thou do so and repent? and in rules, that the
best men have their infirmities, and therefore why should I be free?

III General Let: the World.

This is a most dangerous Let: it defile's the minds, the wills, and courses
of men both in doctrine and manners, See Ephesians. 4. 14. Romans 12. 2. 1 John 2. 16.

It both contain's in it all evil and sets it forth, and is it self set on
fire by the Devil who is the chapman of it, to set the gloss upon them, and to
vend the wares of it. For the first, of which, see that in John, All that is in
the world, is the lust of the heart, lust of the eye, pride of life. He
speak's of these not only as the appetites of bad men, but as worldly objects.
For the second, she is careful not only to keep in her ware-hous, but to lay
forth upon the open stall, and to set out these wares in the most busy manner
that can be. For the third, the Devil, the god of this World, and the lord of
this Staple and Commonwealth, to whose bank and exchequer all this custom and
tribute goe's, (I mean hell) is not wanting both to suppress all means which
might mar this mraket of mischief, and is at hand to unite, to acquaint, to
accommodate wares to all customers.

The whole world of evil may be called either the
dead World. or liveing World.
By the Dead world we understand thus much, not only, that the world is dead
in sins: but this, that the world, though she does not actually speak out: yet
her very guise does defile and delude:

and that in two particulars:
1. Examples. 2. Errors.
I. By Examples in these respects:

1. By imitateing of them. No way to defile and scatter sin so easily as this:
rules would not so soon do it. Inward lust tickle's, but examples do much more
perfect sin: when Ministers, Magistrates, learned ones, ancient ones, and the
greater part of these be ringleaders; people, subjects, simple, young, easily
follow. Hence that phrase, Romans 12. 2. Be not fashioned according to this
world: the world has a fashioning quality in it, and one Ape will follow
another.

2. By exchangeing them: no sooner has one lick't up a bad example, but
presently he relate's it and gain's thereby. If one teach theft, another will
teach sacriledg. As one said of a decaying world, We are dwarfs, and our
children will be gnats: so I of the increasing: we are strong men, and the
next will be giants: we commit it: they will be hardened and naturalized into
a custom of it: defend, extenuate and maintain it.

3. By the stream of it: the violence and the irresistibleness of it: for sin
in the two former will soon amount to a torrent or stream of universalitie.
Thus we see this piece of the dead world has yet an objective life in it self.

II. By Errors of
1. Tradition. 2. Scandal. 3. Base-custom. 4. Conceit. 5. Cosenage.
1. By tradition: which is when sin prevail's by succession from man to man:
thus the errors of Popery, and old ones new minted pleading antiquity.

2. By Scandal, when the world, glad to rivet herself in evil, delude's herself
with the offenses of hypocrites, and by their scandals laie's blocks in men's
ways, that they might stumble at the truth.

3. By Custom: which deceiv's by prescription of long use.

4. Conceit and opinion: which is an error against goodness, by prejudice: See
Act. ult. We know that this sect is every where evil spoken of. Thus wicked
men to confirm themselves in evil, take up base trivial conceits and errors
against the way, servants, and ordinances of Christ, which being once given
out, proov irrevocable.

5. By Cosenage: whereby falls teachers, schismatics and heretics blanch their
conceits, wresting their wits to abuse the Scriptures, to set falls colors on
their opinions; Jezebel fast's to cover her murder.

The Defilements of the liveing World consist's in
Words. Deeds.
1. In Words: which are the open corrupt counsel of sinners, or their secret
insinuations, Pro. 7. 18. Pro. 1. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 17.

2. In Deeds: alll their wicked, malicious and cruel intents, threats and
pursuits of the godly to quash them, and to uphold their own kingdom. As those
Scribes and Pharisees had a Law to crucify Christ, though they made it for the
nonce. And Dan. 6. those enemies of his.

Use I. Of Instruction, to be humbled, to be comforted and to long after a
full redemption.

For the first, it is humiliation to the best of God's children for their
self-love, and for this misery that lie's upon them. At home begin's our woo:
in our bosoms are those evils of pride* profaneness, hypocrisy, and self-love
which bane us: and what they cannot do of themselves, they do by others, setting
the door open, and letting in devil and world to rifle and rob us of all,
without which no enemy could hurt us.

2. Let it comfort them for the present, that it is no otherwise with them in
their sorrow, then that wise God, their good father has allotted them: so that
if they feel their burden, they may cheer themselves with this, It Is their
pilgrimage, their way home, their Baca, their warefare: the Lord will work them
triumph out of these battles and combats. He will purge and conform them to
his dear Son by them.

3. Wait for that with longing, as Paul did, Romans 7. Who will deliver me? Here
is my pilgrimage, when shall I com to my father's house? How long, Lord, holy
and true, how long?

Use II. Exhortation, to resist all these woeful enemies of our peace, viz.

I. Our own corruption: which we must resist three Ways.

1. By a spiritual combat against, before sin be brought into act: let this
be perpetually maintained: the spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal 5. 17.

2. By watching continually to observe and prevent occasions offered, when we
cannot foil inward motions. Cut off her provision and starv sin. The welcoming
of objects is as casting oil into the fire. As Job for his Sons, so do thou for
thy self, sacrifice daily for mercy of prevention, remooving of vanities which
might annoy thee.

3. By wisdom after we are fallen. Not to be kept in bondage by Satan in
point of our recoverie out of our falls, if we be slip't into any: but
speedily to gather up our selves ere we be hardened. Let thine heart smite thee
and say, I will do so no more, Job 40. 4. and so lay hold upon thy promise,
repent and do thy former works, be zealous and amend.

II. Satan. III. The World.
Against these, put on the complete armor appointed thee by the Lord in this
case and keep it close to thee, wear it and walk in it as the armor of a child
of Light, as the harness of the militant Church, and each member of Christ,
blessed by him to that purpose. Be armed wisely, and constantly, and watch to
it with prayer, and the Lord shall be with thy endeavors, and teach thy hands
to fight and prevail: Take the whole armor of God, Ephesians, 6.

But seeing our selves are our greatest enemies, and those lusts within us
defile us most: therefore observe these Counsels against them.

1. Mark well thine own spirit, and those secret lusts which bubble up in thee:
knowing that they tend to defile and harden thee, and to blinde-fold thy
judgment, so that neither thou should retein any true fight, much less sens
of the mischief of them. Weigh and beleev this thoroughly. Rest not in this, that
thou know this or that corruption by thy self, or can complain of it, or
can keep thy self from the open outrage of it, except withal thou be
quickened up in thy spirit to abhor such scurf as hell, and start at the motions
of it at the first assaults. A dead, faint and still giveing way to any lust
entering, is the next way to make the heart a thorow-fair for it.

2. If they be such as cleav to thy spirit and do salute thee again, (after
long intermission and seeming to be cast out) oppose strongly that mercy of
God, that has forgiven thee even when thou delightest in them without check:
how much more when they return as intruders?

3. Consider, there is no sweet lust or strong object offered to thee, but the
Lord is in it to try the love, loyalty and power of grace which is in thee,
that thou may know all which is in thine heart. Thus the Lord has used his
people, whose lot it has been to receiv much from God. David was tried by the
Lust of his eye: by the object of Revenge to kill Saul in the cave: Hezekiah by
an object of pride of life, those ambassadors of the Emperor. Say then, now my
soul, the Lord is at work, to try and refine thee, to make thee as gold, to
humble thee deeply, if thou be foiled as Hezekiah; or to honor thee highly, as
Abraham. Beware now thou stick to thy tackling, and discover not thy self to
be as dross, of no worth. Here then distrust thine own armor (as David did
Readiness) and cleav to the Lord's Say thus, If I now fail the Lord (as Adam) in
the trial, he may justly suspect me henceforth and let loos my lusts against
me. Often, Lord, thou have saved me from being tempted: thou can also give
me strength in the trial: lead me not into temptation: fail not thy servant,
and I shall not fail thee in the trial of these my sweet objects and lusts.

4ly. Get thee some bosom-friend to impart thine estateunto thy temptations and
buffetings, such an one (Minister, or other) as may both keep thy counsel, and
give thee counsel.

ARTIC. VI.
God's People have many blessed privileges to encourage them against their
Lets.

THat as the Lets and discouragements of the Children of God in this their
militant condition are many, on the left hand by their enemies: so on the right
hand, on God's part, there are many privileges and favors allowed them,
whereby their condition is made both comfortable and honorable: And that, both
to draw on many to be of God's household, when they see what gains and vails
belong to his service; as also to encourage such as are already admitted
members of it; and besides, to compel such as care not to join themselves to
them, (because of some hard conditions to the flesh) when they see their
Privileges, to acknowledge their state to be above their own, and to pine and
consume for the wilful debaring themselves of such happiness.

Their nature consist's in two things:
1. In their Price and worth. 2. In their Peculiaritie.
1. Their Price is in this: The least of them cost the blood of the Lord JESUS:
their nature is excellent, gracious and glorious; their use is suitable, for
they attend the welfare of the best creature in the world; and the instrument
of obtaining them, is no less then that whereby justification is gotten:
Lastly, they are the Legacies of the last Will and Testament of Christ, sealed
with his death, and pledges of his presence, till we enjoy himself, serving to
conduct us homeward in a tolerable manner, as many baiting-places to refresh us
till we com thither.

2. They are peculiar things as well as precious: so ours, that no other's
portion besides us; we know, peculiarness does greatly beautify a precious
thing. A stranger shall not enter into her joy, Mar. 4. 10. To you it is given,
not to others. Joh. 17. 9. I pray not for the world, 1 Peter 2. 7. A peculiar
people.

The whole body of these Privileges are of two sorts:

1. Either exemptions from evils which lie upon the wicked: 2. Or enlargement
to those good things which others cannot com by: as to be kept by the power of
faith, etc.
Generally these Privileges belong to a Believer

either
here 1. In this life accompanying our conversion, as, Righteousness. Peace.
Joy in the holy Ghost.
following, which concern either Persons Estates Spiritual. Temporal.


2. In death
or hereafter
1. Privileges of our person. God is ours in Covenant, and will be so for
ever. Esaias 54. He take's thought for us. Phil. 4. 6. and 1 Pet. 5. 7. all
things shall work together for our good.

2. Privileges concerning our estates in common. God will do for us in both
estates, spiritual and temporal, above all that we can ask and think, Ephesians. 3.
and supply abundantly all our wants. He will supply our bodily wants,
poverty, infirmities, etc. and our spiritual, as want of knowledge, faith, etc.
and besides in neither estate will he require more of us then according to our
abilities. Mat. 25. 15. Not according to what we want, but what we have: he
look's at our talents, and no further, so we be faithful in that little.

3. Privileges touching our temporal estates. Our temporal, reache's to our
estate of the world, and it concern's

either
Blessings: or Crosses.
Touching blessings, thus:

1. Whatsoever is meet for the body, for meat, drink, apparel, health, life,
good days, success, welfare, good marriage, credit, and the like, shall be
given us, Psalm. 84. 11. Psalm. 37. 4. Luke 12. 22.

2. Our labors shall be blessed, and we shall eat the fruit of them, Psalm
128. 2.

3. Be it more or less it shall be enough, and we content with it as our
portion best of all.

4. A little of the righteous is better and shall go further, then a great deal
of the wicked.

5. All they have, they have it from a running fountain, and with the good will
of him that dwelt in the bush. Deuteronomy. 33. 16.

6. We have it without sin, and without sorrow, i e. carking, distrust, or
baseness.

Touching Crosses, thus:

1. No more, no other, no sooner can befall then the Lord has cut out for us,
Jo. 8. 20, 59.

2. He fitteth our yokes for us, as we for our cattle, great and small, Lam.
13. Mal. 16.

3. The extremity of the cross shall shall never pinch us, the straight shall
not annoy us.

4. We shall escape many that the wicked pull upon themselves, Psalm. 32. 8.

5. These must be, we shall be upholden in them, Mic. 7. 8. Psalm. 140. 7.

6. They shall be sent in love, so that they shall not be the envenomed
arrows of the Almighty in our flesh, but the corrections of a father, Heb. 12.
9. and 1 Chronicles. 22. 10.

7. When they have don their errand, they shall return, and we be delivered,
Mic. 7. 8, 9, 10.

8. Lastly, we shall be more then conquerors, Romans 8. 37. and partake full
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

4ly. Privileges concerning our spiritual estate. Some of these concern God:
some our selves. Touching God, this: All his administrations shall profit us, he
will discover himself in them to us: in the way of his govern meant of the age
and times we live in: in his blessings upon his own, and judgments upon his
enemies: his patience and carriage toward our selves in our whole courses, etc.
the administrations of God in all shall teach and profit us.

Touching our own spiritual estate.

These Privileges belong to our spiritual estate:

1. Either in point of Faith: 2. Or, of our Obedience.
Touching our Faith:

1. The just shall not only be forgiven by faith, but also live by faith: as,
Hab. 2. Heb. 10. 38.

2. They shall grow from faith to faith, Romans 1. 17.

3. Their faith shall never totally or finally fail them, Luc. 22. 32.

4. The Lord will count their faith as righteousness to them: impute Christ's
merit and holiness unto them in all their real services, not looking upon that
is theirs, but judging them according to the better part, that Grace which he
has given them. As their afflictions, streights and difficulties encreas, so
shall their faith.

Touching ohedience, some
Negative. Positive.
Negative: No lets, enemies, devil, sin, or world shall pull us from God, or
pluck us from our stedfastness, 2 Pet. ult.

Positive are made
To the whole course of it: or, To the particular parts.
To the whole, such are these: God that begun his work shall finish it for us,
Phil. 1. 6. We shall be upholden in our whole course graciously, Psalm. 41. 11,
12. and that he will guide us by his grace till he receiv us to his glory,
that we shall persever unto the end, Rev. 2. 10.

To the particular parts: which are

either
The course of Worship: or, Of Conversation.
The former may be referred to the means of obedience, or the duties of it: of
which generally this is the sum, That the means are theirs, all blessed to them
for the helping them home in peace. And the Lord who has enjoined them duties,
will give them strength to perform them, and make them easy, Matthew. 11. 30.

Privileges of conversation either concern common life, or, conditions of men
therein. Common life, as marriage, liberties, company, solitariness, or the
like manifold entercourses. Conditions of men, as their callings wherein God
has set them, their places of government or subjection, Magistracy or
Ministry: their relations in family or otherwise, Parents, Masters, etc. to
all which God's people have peculiar promises, that God will furnish them with
gifts, whom he call's to any function. He will cause a voice behind to say,
This is the Way, walk in it, Esa. 30. And according to the changes and
conditions of life which hereafter shall befall, the Lord will pick out meet
grace, and be the same God to them in all.

5. Privileges of the saints in death: they are precious in death to the Lord,
Psalm. 116. Romans 8. vlt. Nothing shall separate them from God's love. That a
good life shall bring a good death. That they shall die in peace, Psalm. 37. 37.
That the day of death is better then the day of life, Eccl. 7. 1.

6. Privilege after death is the greatest of all; that eternal fruition of God,
and all that he has prepared for his elect, in his own presence: things,
which neither eye has seen, ear heard, nor entered into the heart of man to
conceiv.

Use I. It convinces and reprooveth all such profane ones, as cannot endure
to hear there should be any admitting of difference between professors of the
Gospel, one or other. What place is there for privileges if all be alike?
Indeed faith, purifying the heart, takes away all difference, Act. 15. but
till then, what difference is greater then to have hope and none? to swear and
to fear an oath? Again, this convinces all hypocrites, who mutter, that God
put's no difference between good and bad in matter of rewards. Esaias 58. Mal. 3.
Matthew. 25. they are brought in, taking God for an hard master: they fasted,
but God regarded not: they were zealous, but it was bootless. But O ye
hypocrites, where is the fault? Are God's ways unequal, or yours? Beware, when
God make's up his jewels, it shall appear whether he have a discerning eye,
and to your cost ye shall then know it.

Use II. In due time get into this Corporation of God, and buy your freedom of
heaven. Rest not in your outward privileges of hearing, of common faith, of
the sacraments: know it, herein God put's not the chief difference. Get the
privilege of these privileges, the marrow of this bone: the understanding of
the mystery of Christ, and your part in that which the world know's not, nor
shall it ever be taken from you.

Use III. Of Instruction to the Ministers of God, that they preach God's Word
with wisdom and putting difference. God exclude's none, I grant: yet he
receives none to such privileges without the condition of faith and the new
creature. Open not the door of God's privileges for dogs to enter in at.
Remember that sweet promise, If thou shall separate to me the precious from
the vile, then thou shall be as my mouth, Jer. 15. 19. Ezekiel. 22. 6.

Use IV. Of Exhortation to a double duty: First, Consider seriously of these
bequests and legacies of Christ unto thee, whereof any one might make thee
faithful. How should that hope of glory after your toil and travel ended,
encourage you? But especially let not death be unwelcom: as that old man said,
Thus long have I served God, and it irketh me not to die, for I have had a
good Master. Secondly, Let it hearten us to our work, to see what good vails
we have, better then all the wages of an hireling. Privileges are commonly
held by Service. Honors are best maintained by loyalty, by labor and
diligence. Therefore hold our selves close to our holy conversation, and
walking with God, by such privileges.

Use V. Let all free of God's Company be well seen in the enfranchisements
and honors contained in this charter of promises and privileges. Be well
versed in this argument. When the vilest ride on hors-back and Princes go on
foot as lackeys, those that swear and profane the sabbath, and maintain
mis-rule, rule the roast, and seem to be the only men: when enemies to power
and sincerity in all places bear sway; we had need to be well resolved of
it, that our Privileges are peculiar to our selves, and we would not change
portions with them*

Use of all.
ARTIC. VII.
The Truth, as it is in JESUS, require's all Believers to be holy.

Ephesians. 4. 23. If ye have learned the Truth as it is in JESUS, put off the Old
man, and put on the New. As we have felt JESUS in the truth of his
Reconcilation, so let us put on the same Lord JESUS in the truth of Renovation:
for the one intimate's the other. Then we put on the Lord Jesus, when his love
is put into and upon our souls, to enlarge and widen them to go through our
conversation with holy resolution.

Weigh well the scope of the whole Treatise. Surely, by the way of sin and of
the Law, to carry thee to faith in the Lord Jesus, that the truth of Jesus may
lead thee to an holy conversation. This is Christ Jesus the mystery of
Godliness: to feel such persuasion of undecaying sweetness, and such presence
of this persuasion of love, as might tell thy dearest lusts Romans 6. 21. What
fruit have I had of thee? yea, make thee stink before them (as he said of
David) that thou might be Christ's servant for ever: and that he might do
all thy works, pray, read, meditate, hear, do, suffer, obey in thee: in his
strength walk in all holy conversation, Esa. 26. 12.

Use II. To this end, be admonished not to rest only in this, that thou have
faith; except thou have also learned the truth of faith as it is in Jesus. As
thou have received from the Lord Jesus, so walk. Remember to stir up the spirit
of Christ in thee.

Use III. Watch to thy self duly and daily, and to this work of Conversation
and way that God has chalked out for thee. Do as those Numb. 9. 19. who
attended the watch of the Lord day and night, ready from the least warning of
the cloud or the fire from the Tabernacle to remoov, and upon the first rest
hereof to stand still. If God has once purged thy foul heart, and seasoned it
for thee, keep it so: he did it not without much ado: that thou should
undoo it all at once by thy eas and sloth, world, pleasure, weariness and the
like. Let the wise Virgins take heed of nodding in this night of the age we
live in: let them watch to their work: let them see how they grow downward in
rooting and setlednes* upward in fruitfulness, skill, eas and experience,
resolution and full purpose of heart to cleav to God. And by so doing, we
shall watch to the coming also of our Lord Jesus, to translate us from this our
poor walking with him, to be with him: and to be rid of all our clogs which
hinder us from so doing: and go from this our doing God's will as it is in
heaven, to do it in Heaven.

Give GOD the prais.
FINIS.
A TABLE, Containing the Method and Principal Heads of the whole book.
Part
I. Article I. page 1. II. page 7. III. page 12. IV. page 18. V. page 20. VI.
page 22. VII. page 58.
II. Article I. page 64. II. page 72. III. page 107. IV. page 113. V. page 129.
VI. page 172. VII. page 185.
III. Article I. page, 216. II. page 224. III. page 242. IV. page 253. V. page
272. VI. page 291. VII. page 302,

PART I.
Artic. I. In Adam mankind was created in perfection of light and holiness,
page 1. According to God's image, page 1. 1. For matter, p. 1. 2. For manner,
p. 2. 3. In respect of endowments, p. 2. 4. In his body, p. 2.
This image of God is more distinctly considered in three things: I. In the
body 1. In the Production of it. p. 2. 2. In the Frame of it being made. p. 3.
II. In the soul. 1. In the nature of it. p. 3 2. In the functions p. 3.
III. In the whole person. 1. In his reverend and awful behavior. p. 4. 2. In
his honorable entertainment. p. 4.

Uses. page 4. etc.
Artic. II. Adam fell from his Integrity by wilful transgression. p. 7. This
sin is set forth by two things: 1. By the description of the holy Ghost. p. 7.
2. By the parcels of the sin. p. 8.
In the fall consider the causes: 1. Remote: 1 Changeableness. of their will.
2. Unarmedness. 3. Aptness of the temptation. p. 9.
2. More near and proper: 1. Inward tickling of their affection. p. 9. 2.
Snareing. p. 9. Secret assent to the tentation. p. 10.

Corruptions of heart flowing from this fall are of two sorts: Special: 1.
Pride. 2. Security. 3. Vanity. 4. Sensuality. 5. Discontent. 6. Sacriledg.
7. Cruelty and injustice, etc. p. 10.
General: 1. Distrust of God. p. 10. 2. Rebellion against God. 3.
Unthankfulness. 4. Apostasy. p. 10.

Uses page 10. etc.
Artic. III. Adam's sin made him miserable. page 12. This misery has two
branches: Misery of sin, Original. p. 13. Actual. p. 14.
Misery of punishment, Of Soul. Of Bolie. p. 15.

Uses page 16. etc.
Artic. IV. The whole race of mankind is guilty of Adam's sin. p. 16. Use
page 19. etc.
Artic. V. There is no possibility for man of himof himself to escape this
misery. p. 20. Uses page 20, etc.
Artic. VI. The convinceing Ministry of the Moral law reveal's our misery.
p. 22. etc. The works of the Law are of two sorts: 1. To the godly, it is a
pattern and direction of righteousness. p. 22. 2. In the Wicked it work's two
things. 1. Knowledge. 2. Conviction. p. 22.

The Law discover's sin, 1. By dispelling ignorance. p. 23. 2. By remooving the
bars against it viz. 1. Prejudice. 2. Custom in darkness. p. 23. 3. Hardness
of heart. p. 23. 4. Dullness. 5. Slightness. 6. Self-love. p. 24. 7. Errors.
ibid.

The Law enlighten's to discern actual sins both 1. In themselves sundry ways
by her. 1. Authority. p. 24. 2. Harmony. p. 24. 3. Royalty. p. 25. 4.
Int^gritie. ibid. 5. Extent. p. 27.
II. In the penalties. p. 28.
The Lord discover's original sin to the soul, 1. By the Special terms of his
Word. 2. By Comparison. 3. By the properties of Original sin. 1. It is
eminently sinful. p. 29. 2. Predominantly. ibid. 3. Perpetually. p. 30. 4. It
is an overflowing sin. p. 30. 5. It is an enslaveing sin. ibid. 6. Unlimited.
p. 30.

Uses, page 30. etc. Conviction is twofold. 1. Of the judgment which the Law
effect's by remooving three Letts. 2. Of the whole soul, called Terror and
Bondage. p. 37. 1. Deadness of spirit. p. 33. 2. Loos incogitancie and
carelessness. ibid. 3. Subtlety and slieness. ibid.

This Legal Terror is explained by the the consideration of three things: 1.
The difference. p. 30. 2 The nature, effects, and end of it. ibid. 3. The
extremities and abuses of it which are two: 1. Legal presumption. p. 45. 2.
Final despair. p. 46.

Uses, page 53. etc.
Artic. VII. The LORD leav's not the souls of his Children in this misery, but
uphold's them by the hope of the Gospel* p. 58. Reasons of the point. p. 59.
etc.

PART II.
Artic. I. That there is a deliverance ordained and granted to miserable man
out of this thraldom. Note:
1. There is a Deliverance. p. 65. 2. Appointed by the Lord. p. ibid. Uses,
page 67. etc.
Artic*. II. The only instrument of working out this deliverance is the Lord
Jesus. p. 72. The whole work of his Mediation may be referred to two heads: 1.
The Qualification of his Person. p. 73. 2. The Actual performance of the
satisfaction it self. p. 74.
The Qualification of his: person has two parts: 1. Union. p. 73. and Unction.
p. 74.
The Performance it self stand's of two parts: 1. Meriting this price for all
the Flect. p. 74. 2. Applying it to them. p. 75.
These are called w^^l-springs of salvation because they are so many grounds of
justifying faith: whereof there are seven heads. I. InCarnation. p. 78. II.
Divinity of Christ. p. 80. III. The personal Union. p. 82. Hence the Unction
of 1. Priesthoad. p. 84. 2. Prophecy. p. 86. 3. Kingdom. p. 87.

IV. Actual Obedience. p. 91. V. Passive Obedience. p. 91. VI. Conquesi of
Christ. p. 100. VII. Applying of Christ's merit. p. 104.

Artic. III GOD'S imputation of the merits of CHRIST'S righteousness to a
sinful soul is the formal cause of our justification. Expressed by diverse
phrases. p. 108. Uses, page 109. etc.
Artic. IV*. The Gospel and the offer of Grace in it, is the Revealer of this
deliverance. The special properties of this offer are three: p. 120.
1. Liberty. 2. Simplicity. 3. Fidelity.
Uses, page 121. etc.
Artic. V. The Lord offer's Christ to the soul furnished with all his benefits.
Concerning these benefits of Christ consider three things: I. The Difference.
p. 140. II. The Order. p. 131. III. The Nature and Use of them. p. 131.
1. Vocation. p. 132. 2. Union. p. 134. 3. Regeneration. p. 138. 4.
Justification. p. 145. 5. Reconciliatian. p. 148. 6. Adoption. p. 153. 7.
Redemption. p. 160. 8. Sanctificatiin. p. 167. 9. Glorification. p. 167.
Artic. VI. The Church of GOD is the true and only Object of all the former
good things. Two things here considerable: I. The subject of it, the Church it
self, distinguished into 1. Visible. p. 172. 2. Invisible. p. 173. 3. Militant.
p. ibid. 4. Triumphant. ibid. 5. Malignant p. 174.
II. The Adjunct of the Church, the Communion of Saints: in which consider: 1.
Qualification. p. 176. 2. Due exercise of Communion. p. 180.

The Spirit of Communion may be discovered in two particulars: 1. In
Preserving Communion: and this it does 1. By Separation of falls parts* p. 177.
2. By gathering new p. 178. 3. By preventing things hurtful. p. 178.
2. In furnishing with gifts to preserv Communion; as, 1. Love. p. 178. 2.
Sociableness. p. 179. 3. Tenderness and Compassion. p. 179.

Exercise of Communion stand's in three things: 1. Graces. p. 180. 2. Means, or
Ordinances. p. 182. 3. In Duties, or Services. p. 183.

Artic. VII. That every soul make this deliverance his own in special. The
Soul look's at three things to bottom it self upon: 1. Wisdom of the promiser.
p. 196. 2. The strength of God. p. 197 3. The faithfulness of God. p. 200.
Here the work of faith is 1. To ponder the promise. p. 202. 2. To be
convinced. p. 203. 3. Cleav close. p. ibid. 4. Confent and obey. p. 204. 5.
pl^ad. p. 205.
Use of Admonition to avoid all letts, as. 1. Resting in the devout complaints
of the want of faith. p. 205. 2. Sloth and eas. p. ibid. 3. Worldliness. p.
ibid. 4. A root of bitterness. p. 206. 5. Carnal reason. p. ibid. 6.
Unwillingness to submit to God's way. p. ibid
Use of Exhortatioa. 1. To self-denial. p. 207 2. To receiv this offer. p. 208.
3. To be earnest with God. p. 209.

PART III.
Artic. I. That he who is in CHRIST is a new Creature. p. 216. Four points
here considerable: 1. The Spirit of God is the Author, 1. By perswadeing. p.
218. 2. By working. p. ibid 3 By sealing. p. ibid.
II. The inward instrument, Faith. p. 218. III. The Subject: the whole man. p.
119. IV. The Parts: which are 1. Negative: Mortification. p. 220. 2.
Affirmative: Vivification. p. 222.

Artic. II. The whole conversation of a Believer must be renuod. p. 224. For
explication of this, consider two things. of this Conversation.
1. The Circumstance 2. The Substance
Circumstances concern. 1. Persons. 2. Conversation it self.
Circumstances concerning Persons in their several p. 225.
1. Estates. 2. Conditions. 3. Relations. 4. Degrees.
Circumstances concerning-Conversation it self, are, 1. Order: 2. Proportion.
3. Beauty. p. 226. In Time. In Honor.

Substance of Conversation referred to three head: p. 226.
1. Graces of qualication. 2. Subject. 3. Object.
I. Graces which qualify a good Conversation are either General: Special. p.
228. Quality. Quantity. p. 227.

Graces of Quality are p. 227.
1. Wisdom. 2. Simplicity. 3. Sincerity. 4. Faithfulness. 5. Integrity.
Graces of Quantire: 1. Prosperity: 1. Rootedness. p. 228. 2. Fruitfulness
ibid. 3. Growth. ibid.
2. Continuance. p. ibid.
Special Graces of the Soul are p. 228.
1. Righteousness. 2. Prudence. 3. Courage. 4. Soberness. 5. Humility. 6.
Chastity. p. 229. 7. Thankfuln^ss. ibid.
II. The Subject wherein Conversation consist's: i e. the Regenerate person. It
stand's in three things:
1. Thoughts 2. Affections. Actions.
Rules concerning Thoughts. p. 229. Affections. p. 230. Actions. p. 231. III.
The Object of our Conversation which is twofold: Spiritual with God. p. 231.
with Man. ibid.
1. With God himself; And it is twofold: Inward. Outward.

Inward stand's in two things? I. In the life of Faith. II. In the exercises of
the graces of his Spirit. 233
Outward is either Ordinary: or Occasional.
II. With Men in common life. Concerning which observe rules
General. p. 135. Special, for Marriage. p. 235. Callings. p. 236.
Conversation. p. 237. Solitariness. p. 238. Company. p. 238. Liberty. p. 239.
Family. p. 239. Tongue. p. 240.


Artic. III. The Platform of holy Conversation is the Moral Law. p. 242. Now
Christ has taken away that heavy yoke of the Law, and made it light to us. I.
As a Priest: five ways. p. 243. 2. As a King: two ways. p. 244. 3. As a
Prophet: two ways. p. 245.
Rules of direction for the clear understanding of the Law. p. 247. etc. Uses,
p. 249, etc.
Artic. IV. The Lord has given helps to his Church to uphold her in Obedience.
These helps are of two sorts: Private. Public.
Both are Extraordinary. Ordinary. Extraordinary.
1. Fasting. p. 254. 2. Thanksgiveing. ibid. Ordinary, 3. The Word. p. 254. 4.
Baptism. p. 255. 5. The Sacrament of the Supper. ibid. 6. Prayer. ibid. 7.
Meditation. ibid. 8. Conference. ibid. Rules concerning Fasting. p. 256.
Thanksgiveing. p. 257. The Word, p. 258. Baptism. p. 260. The Lord's Supper p.
261. Prayer. p. 263. Meditation. p. 265.
Three other means of Godliness. 1. Resolvedness p. 266. 2. Watchfulness p.
267. 3. Experience. p. 270.
Uses, p. 270. etc.
Artic. V. The Conversion of a new Creature is beset with many Letts. p. 272.
These Letts are of three sorts: 1. Sin. 2. Satan. 3. The World
I. Sin is a Let two ways: 1. In respect of it self: Natural Corruption. Or,
Actual Lusts within* p. 272. Actual Evil without. ibid.

2. In respect of the penalties of it. p. 274. II. Satan: in whom consider 1.
The properties of the Tempter. p. 275. 2. The substance of the Temptation:
which concern the Godly two ways: 1. In the point of their Calling. p. 278. 2.
In their estate Called. ibid.

Temptations about their first Calling, either in God's
Preventing Call. p. 278. Assisting. Call. p. 279. Perfecting Call. ibid.

Temptations of them that are Called are either about 1. The being of their
Faith. p. 280. 2. The life. ibid. Or in point of their Obedience: viz. About
it. p. 280. Against it. p, 481.

III. The World: which is two fold 1. Dead. or, 2. Liveing.
The Dead World defile's and delude's 1. By Examples. p. 284. 2. By Errors. p.
285.

Artic. VI. God's people have many blessed privileges to encourage them
against their Letts. p. 291. Their Nature consist's in two things: 1. Their
price. p. 292. 2. Their peculiaritie.

The whole body of Privileges are of two sorts: 1. Exemptions from evils. p.
293. 2. Enlargement to good things. ibid.
These Privileges belong to a Believer either
here or hereafter 1. In this life 2. In death accompanying our conversion, as,
Righteousness. Peace. Joy in the holy Ghost.
following, which concern either Persons Estates Spiritual. Temporal.




By Examples: viz. 1. By imitateing them. p. 284. 2. By exchangeing them. p.
ibid. 3. By the stream of it. p. 285.
By errors: viz 1. By tradition. p. 285. 2. Scandal. ibid. 3. Custom. ibid. 4.
Conceit and opinion. 286. 5. Cosenage. ibid.
The defilements of the liveing world consist's in Words. p. 286. Deeds. ibid.
Uses, p. 286. etc Learn we to resist our spiritual enemies: I. Our own
corruption, 1. By a Spiritual combat. p. 288 2. By Continual Watching. ibid 3.
By Wisdom after we are fallen. ibid.
I. Satan, By putting on the complete armor. p. 288. II. The World. By putting
on the complete armor. p. 288.
Prviledges concerning 1. Our Persons. p. 293. 2. Estates in common. p. 294. 3.
Temporalestates, either in Blessings. p. 294. Crosses. p. 295
4. Spiritual estates, either in point of p. 296. Faith. Obedience.
Touching Faith. p. 296 Touching Obedience, some Negative. Positive: made To the
whole course. p. 397. To the particular parts. p. 298.

5. Privileges of the Saints in death p. 299. 6. After death. ibid. Uses, p.
299. etc.
Artic. VII. The Truth as it is in JESUS, require's all Believers to be holy.
p. 300.
FINIS.

