PAEDO-BAPTISME: OR, The Baptizing of Infants JUSTIFIED: By the judgment and
practice of Ancient and Modern Protestant Divines, both Foraine, and of this
Nation: clearly proving the absolute necessity of baptizing Infants, from the
authority of sacred Scripture and the force of undeniable reason.

Together with an excellent Letter of Mr. JOHN PHILPOTS to the same purpose.

Collected by ROBERT RAM, Minister of Spalding in Lincolnshire.

PROVERBS 11.14. In the multitude of Counselors there is safety.

Aug. ad Hill. Epist. 89. Tanto magis pro infantibus loqui debemus, quanto minus
ipsi pro se loqui possunt.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, 1645.

To my honored Colonel, Colonel Edward Rossiter.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise I have transcribed Master Philpots Letter for
baptizing infants; to which I have added the universal, and continued practice
of the Church of God, from the Apostles time hitherto; together with the
judgment of the most learned, orthodox, and godly Divines, both ancient and
modern: which may serve as a cloud of witnesses to prove, that infants of
Christians, not only may, but ought to be baptized. I am confident, that these
collections (with the blessing of God) will give full satisfaction to any that
are not fore-stalled with wilfulness in their own opinion. For if Venerable
Antiquity, Universal Practice, un-interrupted Custom, Harmony of Churches,
strength of Argument, and the Authority of sacred Scripture be of any force,
then doubtless we have sufficient warrant for admitting the children of
believing parents to this Ordinance of baptism. The testimonies I have here
produced, lie scattered up and down in several Authors, I sum them up
together in this little Treatise; which I strove to make little, because,
little books do most good, or most harm, being every man's purchase, and soon
read over. My Apology for troubling you with a business of this nature, is
only this, that I am

Your humble servant in the Lord, ROBERT RAM.

The names of the Authors here cited, for the baptizing of Christian infants.
Fathers.
1. CYprian. 2. Origin. 3. Augustine. 4. Athanasius. 5. Gregory Naz. 6. Bernard.
7. Hierom. 8. Chrysostom. 9. Isidorus Hisp.
The Divines of Magdeb. for 1300 years. Foraine Divines.
1. Mercer. 2. Calvin. 3. Sadeel. 4. Junius. 5. Vossius. 6. Polanus. 7.
Aretius. 8. Brentius. 9. Pareus. 10. Spanhemius. 11. Lavater. 12. Gualter. 13.
Musculus. 14. Chemnitius. 15. Marlorat. 16. Beza. 17. Hemingius. 18. Zanche.
19. Daneus. 20. P. Martyr. 21. Bucer.
English Divines.
1. Dr. Ames. 2. Dr. Davenant. 3. Mr. Th. Rogers. 4. Mr. Hooker. 5. M. Perkins.
6. Mr. Ainsworth. 7. Dr. Willet. 8. Mr. Hildersham. 9. Dr. Fulke. 10. Mr.
Hieron. 11. Dr. Whitaker. 12. Dr. Jewel. 13. Dr. Mayer. 14. Mr. Wynel. 14. Dr.
Featley.
Confessions of reformed Churches.
1. Helvetian. 2. Belgic. 3. French. 4. Augustane. 5. Saxon. 6. Palatine. 7
Harmony, etc.
Mr. Philpots Letter.

THE JUDGMENT OF the ancient Fathers in this point of baptizing Infants.
THe Spirit refuses not to communicate himself even to infants; and the holy
Scriptures declare, Cyprian.
That divine grace is dispensed to all, as well infants as others; which was
shadowed out in Elishnes stretching himself upon the infant, insensible of the
good which the Prophet did unto him. Cyprian Epist. ad Fidum.

Because by baptism original sin is done away, Origin.
therefore children are baptized, Origin. Hom. on Luke 14.

We say that in infants baptized, Augustine:
although they be not aware of it, the Holy Ghost does dwell, August. Epist. ad
Bonifacium, of baptizing infants.

Whence may a man know plainly that he has been baptized, Athanasius.
and received the spirit of baptism, seeing he was but an infant when he was
baptized? Athan. in his book of questions, quest. 2.

Baptism has force even upon infants, Gregory Nazianzen.
and therefore it is necessary that they be baptized: For it is better that
they be sanctified without any apprehension of the thing done, then that they
should depart this life without baptism and initiation: And if this thing
Circumcision may afford us any president (for that being the forerunner of
baptism) that was administered to such as could not by the use of reason
discern what it meant: Nazianzen in his Oration of baptizing infants.

He who denies baptism to infants of Christian parents, Bernard.
does declare a diabolical envy, even such an envy as brought death into the
world; this man is not of God, who does and speaks so contrary to God: Bern.
Epist. 240.

Hieronymus.
We hold that there is one baptism, and that this Sacrament is to be
administered to infants, in the same words, that it is administered to them of
elder years: Hieron. Symboli explanatio ad Damasum.

Chrysostom.
Therefore the Catholic Church teaches, that infants ought to be baptized
because of original sin. And the uniforme practice of the holy Church,
throughout the universal world, concerning baptism, whether of infants or of
young men, should not be accounted as an idle thing: Chrysostom. Homil. de Adam and
Heva.

Isidorus.
In such as are of years, baptism serves either to cleanse them from original
sin, or to wash them from the guilt of actual sin: but infants are only
freed from original sin by it: Isid. Hispalensis de officiis Eccles. l. 2.

The continued practice of the Church for baptizing infants for 1300 years
together, from the Apostles times, collected out of the Centuries
Written by the Divines of Magdeburgh.
Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4.
ALthough the Apostles, before they were rightly informed, did forbid children
to be brought to Christ, yet were they reproved for it; and did without
question, afterward baptize infants themselves, being better instructed by the
Spirit of God, as Origin, Cyprian, and others do testify; and that the
custom of baptizing infants, was from the Apostles continued to posterity.

Cent. 2. cap. 4. Cent. 3. cap. 6.
We read no where in this age that infants were denied baptism.

In this age both men and women, infants and those of elder years were
baptized, according to the tradition received from the Apostles.

Cent. 4. cap. 6.
In the same Churches and waters all sorts of people of whatsoever sex, age, or
condition, were publicly baptized. The Churches of Africa baptized infants in
this age. Nazianzen speaking of the Asian Churches, says, That they used to
baptize infants, if they were in any eminent danger; otherwise baptism was
deferred till they were about three years old; nevertheless he says that
baptism is suitable to any age. Nazian. Orat. 3. of Bapt.

That Infants should be Baptized, Cent. 5. cap. 4.
Chrysostom affirms in his Homily of Adam and Eve. Augustine says: That the
Baptizing of Infants came not into the Church by the constitutions of any
Counsels, but has been always retained by the Church; and ought to be
believed as an Apostolical Tradition: Contra Donatistas. lib. 4.

Infants are Baptized, Cent. 6. cap. 4.
not only that they might attain the Adoption of Sons, or the Kingdom of
heaven, but that they may have remission of sins, lest they perish eternally.
Maxentius in his confession of Faith.

We Baptize Infants, although they are not yet capable of Reason; Cent. 7. cap.
6.
And by no means let Baptism be denied to a sick Infant; If any shall neglect
it, God will require the blood of that child, dying unbaptized, at his hands:
Council of Toledo. 8. cap. 7.

By the Obedience of Faith, all ought to be Baptized: Cent. 8. cap. 4.
Beda on Ioh. 1. By the grace of Faith, children being borne again, by the
water of Regeneration, are admitted to the Celestial Joys. Beda on Cant. 4.

Why does not the saying of the Lord, Cent. 9. cap. 4.
spoken to the Universal Church, by the Prophet Isaiah; I will bring thy seed
from the East, etc. deter thee from thy perverse opinion? How have thou
forgotten that in the Gospel, which says, that Christ rebuked his Disciples,
for forbidding little Children to be brought unto him? Do thou not fear to
do that which no Christian ever durst do? For concerning Infants Baptizing
(though they know not the meaning of it) Saint Siricius tells us that it was
the general rule and practice of the Church: Hincmarus Rhemensis, ad Hincmarum
Laudanensem.

Children ought to be Baptized; for by this Ordinance, Cent. 10. cap. 4
our chaste Mother the Church, brings forth holy, pure, and innocent children:
Smaragdus in Epist. Petri.

Neither did they Baptize those only that were of years, Cent. 11. cap. 6
but Infants also; yea young and weak Infants: The son of the Empress was
Baptized the third day after he was borne, because he was sick, and like to
die: Schafnaburgensis.

As well Infants as others were Baptized in this Age; Cent. 12. cap. 6.
for Elianor and John, the children of Elianor Queen of England, were Baptized
presently after they were borne: Sigebert. And Lewis the French King, caused
his Son Philip to be Baptized an Infant.

Baptizing of Infants was practiced also in this Age; Cent. 13. cap. 6
for Hugo says; That the Church prays for Infants to be Baptized, not that
it doubts of their Salvation, but to teach that children are not saved by their
own merits or nature, but only by grace: Hugo on Psalm. 27.

The Judgment of Modern Protestant Divines of Foraine parts, touching Infants
Baptism.
Mercer.
ALthough there be no set time appointed for Baptism, as there was for
Circumcision, yet certainly it ought to be administered as soon as may be; not
that we should doubt of their salvation that want Baptism, if they happen to
die without it; for we do not ascribe so much virtue to the sign, as that
when it cannot be had, we should question the reality of the thing signified.
Mercer on Genesis 17.

Calvin.
It is to be noted, that when a man is admitted into the Fellowship of
Believers, the promise is not only made to him, but to his children: Genesis 17.7.
Therefore he which is not within this Covenant from his cradle, is a stranger
from the Church, till he be brought in by the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance:
But then his seed begins to be of the Family of the Church. Therefore Infants
of Believers are Baptized by virtue of this Covenant, which is made with their
Fathers in their Name; In this therefore the Anabaptists do miserably deceive
themselves. Call. Institutions against Anabaptists.

Sadcel.
If they understand Christ's Institution of Baptism to be necessarily continued
in the Christian Church, even to the end of the World, and that the children of
Christians ought to be Baptized, even so do we understand, and believe: As it
appears in the confeson of the French Church: Artic. 35. Sadeelis opera Theol.
page 428.

Junius.
All the Elect are to be Baptized into the body of Christ; if moreover all of
them, as well Infants as persons of years, ought to put on Christ, then to
separate them from the body of Christ, and not to ingraffe them into Christ,
were a most wicked thing. And again; when Infants are Baptized, God does both
offer, and confer all the good things of the Covenant, and ingageth himself
unto it: Iunius in his Thesis of Baptizing Infants.

Vossius.
Although Infants have not actual Faith, yet this ought no more to keep them
off from baptism, then meat ought to be denied them, because the Apostle
says, he that will not labor let him not eat: Vossius, Defense of baptizing
Infants.

Infants borne of Christian parents ought to be baptized, Polanus.
as may be proved by these arguments:

1. All that are in covenant with God ought to be baptized; but infants are
within the covenant of grace, 1 Cor. 7.14. And Christ blessed and consecrated
infants, Matthew. 19.

2. Because to them belongs the promise of remission of sins by the blood of
Christ, Acts 2.38, 39.

3. Because infants do belong to the Church of God; For theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven.

4. Because they are redeemed with the blood of Christ, and washed from their
sins, and so by the virtue of the holy Spirit have the thing signified; why
then should they be debarred from participating of the sign?

5. Because the holy Ghost is promised to them; yea, they have the holy Ghost.

6. Because they should be distinguished from the children of Infidels,
therefore the sign of distinction should be put upon them.

7. Because the Apostles baptized whole families.

8. Because infants were circumcised: Polani Syntagma, cap. de Bapt.

The Anabaptists deal very presumptuously, Aretius.
in denying infants to have faith; but suppose they have not faith, their
parents have; and their children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and do belong to the
Church, and have the Spirit of God, who administreth the true baptism; why
therefore should they not be baptized? shall our children be more unhappy then
the children of the Jews, which were not debarred the sign of the covenant?
Is our baptism inferior to circumcision, that it may not be administered to
infants as that was? but infants have faith in their kind, their parents do
believe, and they have the Spirit of God; it is our part therefore to hope well
of them, seeing election is one of the hidden secrets of God: Therefore by no
honest reason may baptism be denied to Infants. Aretius com. places: loco. 66.

We ought to believe that Christ died for infants, Brentius.
and that the Father is well pleased with them in him, and that God is not
only the God of men grown, but even of infants also. In this confidence we
ought to pray for the salvation of infants, and to offer them in baptism, that
being incorporated into the body of Christ by baptism, they may attain
eternal life. Brentius on Luke 5.

Pareus.
Circumcision and Baptism do agree in their principal ends:

1. In that both do signify the grace of Christ justifying and regenerating
by the blood and Spirit of Christ.

2. In that both do solemnly bind to the faith and obedience of Gods covenant.

3. In that in both there is a solemn reception of all in covenant, as well
infants as those of years, into the Church, and distinguishing them from
aliens.

4. In that both do belong to all ages, as well infants as men grown. Pareus
on Genesis 17.

Spanhemius.
We conclude the baptism of infants to be justly retained in the Church of
Christ, for these reasons:

1. Because it is founded on Gods Commandment, on holy examples, and on the
promise, as has been showed before.

2. Because the sign of the covenant ought to be given to all that are within
the covenant.

3. Because otherwise the children of believers should have no more privilege,
then the children of Jews or Gentiles.

4. Because baptism succeeds circumcision, and bears a correspondency with
it. The condition of the Jews children under the old Testament should not be
better then that of the infants of Christians under the new, Spanh. Dubia
Evangelica. part. 3.

Lavater.
Seeing the grace of the Gospel extends it self more largely then that of the
Law, it was expedient that a Sacrament should be ordained, divulging more grace
then circumcision; Therefore baptism is administered to women, though
circumcision was not: whereby we may conclude against those who deny the
baptizing of infants. For if children under the Law were circumcised,
notwithstanding they could know nothing of the nature and benefit of that
covenant; why should not our children be baptized now? was the condition of
children better under the old Testament then under the new? none but such as
are past shame will affirm it: Lavater on Ios. 5.

Gualter.
Let no man think we go about to patronize the Anabaptisticall madness: for
they do both err dangerously from the truth, and rage against it, whiles they
contend that the same course is to be taken with the children of believing
parents, and strangers of grown years. For they which were formerly
strangers, and out of the Church of Christ (such as were Jews and Gentiles) we
say ought not to be baptized (unless we would profane that holy Ordinance of
baptism) until they can give an account of their faith: But there is a great
difference between them and the children of believers; for these are to be
accounted members of the Church, and within the covenant: such are holy, and
Christ will have such to come unto him; and it is manifest that such do please
God, in that their Angels do always behold the face of their Father. And
though we cannot comprehend their state and condition, yet Christ testifies
that they have faith, and are capable of the Spirit of God; as the example of
John Baptist and others, who were sanctified in the womb, does testify:
Therefore to deny baptism to such is an extreme impiety, and a wickedness of
a monstrous impudency: Gualter on Act. 8.

By no means the sign of the covenant is to be denied them to whom the right
of the covenant belongs; Musculus.
seeing therefore that baptism is nothing else but a sign of the covenant and
grace of God, in the new Testament, and the children of believers amongst the
Gentiles are no less partakers of this testament and grace of God, which is
given to the elect in the Kingdom of God by Jesus Christ, then the children of
the Jews; what madness is it to deny them the sign of this grace? what else
is this but to account our children excluded, as strangers, from the grace and
covenant of God? he that denies the sign, does certainly (as much as in him
lies) take away the thing signified: Musculus on Matthew. 8.

It is not to be doubted, Chemnitius.
but that the Spirit of Christ does work so effectually, even in infants that
are baptized, as that it makes them capable of the Kingdom of God, although we
do not know how it is done. For baptism is the laver of regeneration and
renovation, which the holy Spirit powers on them that are baptized; whereby
they being justified are made heirs of eternal life, Tit. 3.5. and that
little children do receive the Kingdom of God, Christ himself affirms.
Matthew. 10.15. and this is called the faith of infants; for as circumcision in
the old Testament, was to infants a sign of the righteousness of faith, Romans
4.11. so in the new Testament, because children that are baptized do please
God, and are saved, they neither may nor ought to be rejected amongst Infidels,
but are truly to be reckoned amongst believers; and so unto them belong the
words, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. Chemnitii
loca Theol. de Bapt.

Marlorat.
If you ask, how the children of Christians do belong to the Church, or to
Christ; we answer. No otherwise then the children of the Jews (being the seed
of Abraham) are said to be within the covenant of God, Genesis 17.7. therefore our
children are baptized, as theirs were circumcised; because they are not to be
reputed out of the Church; for we are the sons of the promise, and are
partakers of the inheritance with Abraham; and what was said to him, is
promised to us, and our children: For they may have the Grace and Spirit of
Christ, seeing they are members of us, and of the Church. If the root be holy,
the branches are also holy, Romans 12.16. which things, though they be spoken of
the Jews, yet do they belong to us. And if the Lord has severed the children
of believing parents from the common sort of men, why do we deny them the
sign? This therefore refutes the brain-sicke opinion of the Anabaptists, who
deny baptism to Christians children, whom the Apostle pronounces holy, by
virtue of the promise. Marlorat on 1 Cor. 7.14.

Beza.
The words of the covenant are clear; I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed. Now by seed is meant all the Gentiles that believe with righteous
Abraham, Gal. 38. And the Apostle does manifestly declare, that the children of
believing parents are holy, yea, though but one of the parents believes; by
which holiness, nothing else can be understood, then being within the
covenant; whereby holy persons are distinguished from profane. Therefore we
ought to judge hopefully of all that are borne of Christian parents, as the
indefinite words of the covenant, and the rule of charity teaches us. Beza,
Questions and Answers.

Hemingius.
The command of Christ is general; that all Nations should be baptized, Matthew.
28. therefore we gather that it is sacrilege to deny baptism to infants.
Hemingii Euchiridion de Bapt.

Zanche.
We believe with the ancient catholic Church, that not only persons of
years, (who can express repentance, and are able to make profession of their
faith) should be admitted to the Sacrament of baptism, but even infants also,
seeing we are to account them within the covenant: for the Apostle says; that
the children of believers are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. especially seeing Christ has
no where altered the command of God given to Abraham, for signing the children
of believers with the sign of the covenant; yea he has said, Suffer little
children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.14.
Zanch. de Rel. Christiana.

Because this question (whether infants should be baptized) has been much
perplexed with the disputations of the Pelagians of old, and of late with the
clamors of the Anabaptists; Daneus.
we will collect some reasons to prove that the infants of believers may, and
ought to be baptized. The Papists indeed teach, that this practice has
prevailed only by the degrees of ancient Fathers, and custom of the Church,
and by the traditions of men. But we better and more truly affirm, that both
the doctrine and practice hereof is founded and established by the Word of God;
although the Scripture does not in express terms declare that infants should
be baptized, yet by consequence and the analogy of faith, it will appear to be
the direct sense and meaning of the written Word. We will not insist upon all
the reasons that may be produced to this purpose, but only select some, etc.

1. Infants and children of believers, even they are believers and within the
covenant, and belong to God, even as the fathers themselves, Genesis 17.7. Exodus
20.6. Therefore the sign of Gods covenant belongs to them, as well as their
parents; which now under the Gospel is baptism. For the children of believers
are sanctified from the womb, 1 Cor. 7.14. therefore baptism, which is the
sign of sanctification, belongs to them.

2. Those to whom God gives and applies the thing it self, to them does the
sign appertain: (for no man ought to restrain or withstand the grace of God,
Acts 11.17.) now God does give to infants of believing parents the thing
signified in baptism, which is remission of sins, and sanctification, although
the effects of those gifts do not presently appear in them, 1 Cor. 7.14. for
he affirms, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. So that infants of
believers are heirs of the Kingdom of God, as well as those that are of
years of understanding: therefore to them belong the signs of those graces;
for the baptism of Christ belongs to the whole Church.

3. Circumcision as well as baptism was a sign of the righteousness of God,
Romans 4, 11. and circumcision was to the Jews a sign of mortifying the flesh,
as baptism is to us, Deuteronomy. 10.30. Romans 6.4. and God commanded that infants
should be circumcised; therefore they ought to be baptized; otherwise the grace
of God under the Gospel should be scanter, and intended to fewer, then under
the Law.

4. Christ's command for baptism was general, not excluding infants, Matthew.
28.19. therefore baptism belongs to them; and the Apostles are said to baptize
whole families, Acts 16.15 33. amongst which it is probable that there were
infants.

5. The example of the universal Christian Church confirms this practice:
which may appear by the testimony of diverse writers in several ages, as
Origin on Romans 6. Aug. lib. 4. of baptizing infants, against the Donatists.

6. Heb. 6.2. The doctrine of baptism is called the doctrine of imposition of
hands, which belongs to infants, 'Daneus Isag. part. 4.

P. Martyr.
As of old circumcision was administered to infants, so ought it not to be denied
them now; for if they have the thing signified, why should they not have the
sign? Let no man doubt that circumcision and baptism are alike, and that
there is the same reason of the one as of the other. This does Paul plainly
teach to the Colossians, where he calls baptism the circumcision of Christ. And
they who allow that the Hebrews children ought to be circumcised, and yet deny
that ours should be baptized, do make God better to the Jews, then to
Christians. But some will say, forasmuch as we cannot tell whether infants have
the matter of the Sacrament, why do we give them the sign, and apply the
Seal to that which is uncertain? To whom we answer that this question is not
so much against us, as against the Word of God; for he has absolutely
commanded that children should be circumcised. We say of our Infants, that it is
enough for us, that their parents or any other, in whose power they are, do
present them to the Church; and if election and predestination concur with the
Sacramental action, then what we do is confirmed; but if not, then all is
void; for our salvation depends upon the election and mercy of God. Peter
Martyr, on Romans 4.

Bucer.
It appears plainly by St. Paul, that baptism succeeds circumcision, and that
baptism is the same now, that circumcision was of old; excepting that the
Spirit is given more powerfully now, and the knowledge of Jesus Christ is more
fully and plainly manifested. As therefore of old, the infants of Gods people
were admitted into the covenant by circumcision, even so ought ours, by
baptism; neither are our children less dear to God, then were the children
of the Jews. And whereas some deride us, saying, why then do we not baptize
males only, seeing only such were circumcised? We answer, that in Christ
there is neither male nor female, etc. Bucer on Matthew. 3.

The Judgment of our English Modern Divines touching Infants Baptism.
IN the very beginning of Regeneration, Dr. Ames.
whereof baptism is the Seal, a man is mereely passive; and hence it is, that
of a man that is to be either circumcised, or baptized, no external act is
required, (as in other Sacraments there is) but only a capacity passive to
receive: infants therefore are as capable of this Sacrament, in respect even of
the chief use thereof, as men of years themselves. Ames contra Anab.

Though faith and actual repentance be required in those that be of years,
before they receive the sign of the covenant, Dr. Davenant.
yet is it not necessary in the infants of believing parents; for to be within
the covenant is enough to make one capable of the sign of the covenant; now
infants are in the same covenant with their parents, Genesis 17.7. This we see in
Abraham, who first believed and then was circumcised; but Isaac was circumcised
before he could declare that he believed: This same thing is rightly done in
the children of believing parents, by the practice of the Apostles, who did not
baptize any of years till they had professed their faith; but when the parents
had embraced the faith, then their whole families were baptized, Act. 16.15.33.
1 Cor. 1.16. now no man doubts but that children are comprehended under the
notion of family. Davenant on Colos. 2.

In some the Sacraments do effectually work in process of time by the help
of Gods Word, read or preached, Mr Thoj Rogers.
which ingendreth faith; such is the estate principally of infants elected unto
life and salvation. Rogers Explication of the 39 Articles.

Infants receive the Divine virtue of the holy Ghost in baptism, Mr. Hooker.
which gives to the powers of the soul their first disposition toward future
newness of life. Hooker Eccles. politic.

Mr. Perkins.
The baptism of infants has warrant out of the Word of God, however some men
be of contrary opinion; for all the Israelites were baptized in the Sea, and
among them, no doubt, were many children. If it be said, that baptism was
extraordinary, and therefore is no ground for ours. Answ. True, it was
extraordinary for the manner; but yet herein, the matter, and substance, and
the thing signified is ordinary, and the end all one with ours. And therefore
the baptism of infants in the red Sea, is some warrant for the Baptism of
infants in the Church now adays. Perkins on Heb. 11.

Mr. Ainsworth.
They are but a faithless and crooked generation, that notwithstanding all that
God has spoken and done in this kind, do deny this grace of Christ to the
infants of his people, and the seal or confirmation of this grace by baptism
now, as it was by circumcision of old. Ainsworth, censure of a Dialogue of the
Anabaptists.

Dr. Willet.
Every man-child of eight days old shall be circumcised, etc. From hence the
baptism of infants, which comes in the place of circumcision, is most
pertinently proved, against the gross error of the Anabaptists. For as then
infants were circumcised to show the contagion of the nature, from the which
they were cleansed, by the circumcision of the Spirit: so even infants now,
being guilty of original corruption, have need of the Sacrament of
Regeneration. Willet on Genesis 17.

Mr. Hildersham.
There is great need that infants should be baptized, for this makes greatly
for the faith and comfort of their parents, for the present, and of their own
afterward; that as they are by nature so filthy and loathsome in the sight of
God, so the Lord has in the blood of Jesus Christ (whereof the water in
baptism is a sign and seal) provided a laver to wash and cleanse them in,
even the laver of regeneration, as the Apostle calls it, Tit. 3.5. yea a
fountain opened (as the Prophet calls it, Zach. 13.1.) for sin and
uncleanness, sufficient to cleanse them from all this filthiness, and
corruption of their nature. Hildersham on Psalm 51. Lect. 55.

Dr. Fulk.
We do no otherwise affirm Christian men's children to be holy from their
mothers womb, then St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. says; they are holy because they
are comprised in Gods covenant, and have right to be baptized. Fulk on Rhem.
Test. Romans 5.

Mr. Hieron.
Indeed the Anabaptists, who dispute against the baptizing of infants, do much
urge the practice of the Apostles, and of Philips baptizing the Eunuch; urging
that they baptized none but such as were able to give an account of their
faith. To this I answer: 1. That it is not simply improper to call the infant
of believing parents, a believer; because though he do not now actually
believe, yet partly because for his parents sake, he is within the compass of
the covenant; and partly because of that which may well be hoped for hereafter
it were hard to term him an infidel, so it were not harsh to call him a
believer; And why not a believer as well as a reasonable creature? though yet
there is in him no use of reason nor any certainty of ability hereafter to
enjoy it? 2. The argument is naught from the Apostles practice; for that course
which they took with one certain age of persons, cannot be stretched out to
all without exception; In Abraham's person, the knowledge of the nature of the
Sacrament, and a yielding himself to live under the Lords obedience, went
before the receiving of circumcision; yet in Isaac it was not so, he was
circumcised first, and instructed after. 3. As concerning the Apostles practice
it self, there is no certainty for it, that they baptized none but such as
were able to make acknowledgment of their faith; there is more probability on
the contrary, that they baptized even some infants, as (namely) when they
baptized whole families. 4. Be it that none of all these things will serve to
justify the baptism of infants, (yet unable to make confession of their
faith) yet their interest into the promise of God, is a sufficient plea: that
promise Acts 2.39. is made to them that believe, and to their children. If then
the promise belong to infants, why not also the seal of the promise? Hieron in
his Sermon of baptizing the Eunuch.

This covenant is contained in the Scripture; Dr. Whitaker.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. therefore the baptism
of infants is grounded upon the written Word of God: and certainly, if we had
not better authority for the baptizing of infants, then unwritten Traditions,
we were in an ill case to deal with Anabaptists in this matter. Whitaker
against Bellarmin de perfectione scripturae.

We say that baptism is a Sacrament of the remission of sins, Dr. Jewel.
and of that washing, which we have in the blood of Christ; and that no person,
which will profess Christ's name, ought to be restrained or kept back there
from; no not the very babes of Christians: forasmuch as they be borne in sin,
and do pertain unto the people of God. Jewels Apology, cap. 11. division 3.

D. Mayer.
That the children of believing parents ought to be baptized, it is plain.

1. From the use of circumcision, which was the forerunner hereof, which was
appointed to be done upon the eighth day after the birth. Now the Seal of Gods
covenant is to be applied unto the children of Christians, as soon as unto the
children of the Jews; but unto the Jews the seal was applied in their
infancy; therefore to the children of Christians likewise, as circumcision
their seal to them, so baptism our seal to us.

2. From the estate of infants, the promises belong to them, as well as unto
their parents, says Peter, Acts 2.39. and theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,
says Christ; and they are holy, says Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. now unto those that
are wholly partakers of the promises of God, and of the Kingdom of Heaven, the
sign and seal of God is not to be denied; but children of believing parents
are such even in their infancy, therefore the seal or sign of baptism may
not be denied.

3. From the practice of the Apostles and first teachers of the Gospel: St.
Paul baptized the household of Stephanus and Lydia and her household; and the
Jailer was baptized, with all that belonged unto him. And when little children
were brought unto Christ, some disliking it were reproved, and the bringers of
them encouraged: neither has there been any time since, wherein they have
been refused, but since the springing up of the many headed Hydra of
Anabaptisme. Mayers Catech. of childrens baptism.

Mr. Wynel
The covenant now, and formerly with the Jews, is the same, in relation to the
eternal welfare of the soul.

1. The foundation of the covenant is the same; as Gods free, eternal, and
unchangeable love to his elect.

2. The occasion of the covenant, the same; as man's misery by his fall in the
loins of Adam: of which this covenant of grace is a pregnant and merciful
remedy.

3. The Author is the same; as God, gracious, merciful, slow to anger,
pardoning iniquity, etc.

4. The thing promised is the same; as Christ the redeemer and Savior of
mankind.

5. The spiritual efficacy of the Ordinances the same; as the mortification of
the flesh, and the renewing of the creature to Gods Image in Jesus Christ.

6. The subjects the same; as a people in covenant with God, to yield obedience
to the faith.

7. The end, cujus, the same; as the glory of Gods mercy to his elect, and the
unexcuse of the reprobate.

8. Finally, the end, cui, the same; as good works here in this life, and the
immortality of the soul, and eternal blessedness in the life to come.

In another place concerning the baptizing of all without difference, he says:
That, though diverse borne within the Church are reprobates, yet as they come
one and one unto us, we cannot say that this or that child is a reprobate; he
may be an elect vessel, for ought we know. And the adequate end of baptism
administered, is not salvation of the baptized: The glory of God is the
principal end, namely the glory of Gods singular mercy, in the salvation of
his elect; and the glory of Gods justice in the unexcuse of the reprobate; As
all outward ministrations in the Church serve for the glory of Gods mercy and
justice. We put them all under the initiall seal of the gospel, that they may
be made subject to the gospel, and be judged by the gospel. Wynells covenants
plea for Infants.

Next to the arguments drawn from express testimony of Scripture for the
baptizing of children, Dr. Featley.
we have a most forcible argument drawn from the consent of the universal
Church, testified by their constant practice of admitting children to baptism,
even from the Apostles days unto this present. This argument, if it be well
weighed, is of very great moment, and may convince the conscience of any
ingenuous Christian. For no Christian doubts, but that the Apostles were
inspired by the holy Ghost, and Christ promised his Spirit to lead his Church
into all truth; which promise he has hitherto made good in such sort, that it
cannot be proved that ever the whole Church of Christ universally erred; it is
true, particular Churches have erred, and may err, and general Councels,
which the Schools term the representative Church, are subject to error, and
have sometimes decreed heresy and falsehood for truth; but the formal Church,
as they speak, that is, all the assemblies of Christians in the world cannot
be impeached with error at any time: whence I thus frame my argument.

That which the Apostles in their days began, and the whole Christian Church
scattered over the face of the whole earth has continued in all ages, and all
Countries where Christianity has been, and is professed, cannot be an
erroneous practice.

But the Catholic Christian Church, in all places and ages, even from the
Apostles times, has admitted the children of faithful parents to holy
baptism.

Ergo, the practice of christening children cannot be erroneous or
unwarrantable, as the Anabaptists teach. Featly, Disputation with Anab. page 19.

Confessions of Reformed Churches for Baptizing of Infants.
Helvetian.
WE condemn the Anabaptists, who deny young infants born of faithful parents,
to be admitted to baptism; for according to the doctrine of the Gospel,
theirs is the Kingdom of God, and they are within the covenant of God, why
therefore should not the sign of the covenant of God be given unto them? why
should they not be initiated by holy baptism, that are Gods peculiar and
within his Church? The Helvetian confession, cap. 20.

Belgic.
Certainly Christ shed his blood, that he might no less wash infants of
faithful parents, then those of years; and therefore it is requisite they
should also receive the sign, or Sacrament, of that thing which Christ for
their sakes accomplished. The Belgicke confession, Article 34.

French.
We acknowledge only two Sacraments, common to the whole Church; the former
whereof is Baptism, given unto us to witness our Adoption; because in it, we
are engrafted into the body of Christ, that being washed with his blood, we
might also be renewed by his Spirit unto holiness of life. Confession of
France, Articl 37.

Augustane
Infants being by Baptism commended to God are received into the favor of God,
and made his sons; as Christ testifies, Matthew. 18. saying, It is not the
will of your Father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones should
perish. Augustane confession, Article 9.

Saxon.
We retain the baptism of infants also, because it is most certain that the
promise of grace belongs even to infants; nor do we we judge this a mere idle
ceremony, but that then they are truly received by God and sanctified. The
Saxon confession, cap. 14.

I believe and confess that our children (forasmuch as they also are included
together with us in the covenant) when they are baptized into the Articles of
the ancient Catholic faith, Palatine.
are made partakers as well as we of the death of Christ, and of all other good
things, etc. Palatinate confession.

Baptism is a notable badge of the people of God, Harmony, etc.
for it serves us to show of what profession we be, and by our baptism we
declare in the Church what faith we profess; both we, our children, and our
families; namely, the Christian Religion. Ex actis concordia inter Lutherum,
Bucerum, and Helveticas Ecclesias.

A Letter of Mr. Philpot to a friend of his prisoner the same time in Newgate.
Wherein is debated and discussed the matter or question of infants to be
baptized.
The God of all light and understanding lighten your heart with all true
knowledge of his Word, and make you perfect to the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whereunto you are now called, through the mighty operation of his holy
Spirit. Amen.
I Received yesternight from you (dear brother S. and fellow prisoner for the
truth, for Christ's Gospel) a Letter, wherein you gently require my judgment
concerning the baptism of infants which is the effect thereof. And before I
do show you what I have learned out of Gods Word, and of his true and
infallible Church touching the same, I think it not out of the matter to
declare what vision I had the same night, whiles musing on your Letter I fell
asleep; knowing that God does not without cause reveal to his people who have
their minds fixed on him, special and spiritual revelations to their comfort,
as a taste of their joy and Kingdom to come which flesh and blood cannot
comprehend.

Being in the midst of my sweet rest, it seemed me to see a great beatifull
City, all of the color of Azure and White, four square, in a mavelous
beautiful composition, in the midst of the Sky; the sight whereof so
inwardly comforted me, that I am not able to express the consolation that I
had thereof; yea the remembrance thereof causes as yet my heart to leap for
joy, and as charity is no churl, but would others to be partakers of his
delight, so me thought I called to others (I cannot tell whom) and whiles they
came and we together beheld the same, by and by to my great grief it faded away.

This dream I think not to have come of the illusion of the senses, because
it brought with it so much spiritual joy, and I take it to be of the working
of Gods Spirit, for the contentation of your request, as he wrought in Peter to
satisfy Cornelius. Therefore I interpret this beautiful City to be the
glorious Church of Christ, and the appearance of it in the Sky signifies the
heavenly state thereof, whose conversation is in Heaven, and that according to
the Primitive Church, which is now in Heaven, men ought to measure and judge
the Church of Christ now in earth. For as the Prophet David says, The
foundations thereof be in the holy hills, and glorious things be spoken of the
City of God. And the mavelous quadrature of the same I take to signify, the
universal agreement in the same; and that all the Church here militant ought
to consent to the Primitive Church throughout the four parts of the world, as
the Prophet affirms, saying, God makes us to dwell after one manner in one
house. And that I conceived so wonderful joy at the contemplation thereof, I
understand the unspeakable joy which they have, that be at unity with Christ's
Primitive Church; for there is joy in the holy Ghost, and peace which passes
all understanding* as it is written in the Psalms, As of joyful persons is
the dwelling of all them that be in thee. And that I called others to the
fruition of this vision, and to behold this wonderful City, I construe it by
the will of God this vision to have come upon me musing on your Letter, to the
end that under this figure I might have occasion to move you with many others,
to behold the Primitive Church in all your opinions concerning faith, and to
conform your self in all points to the same, which is the pillar and
establishment of truth, and teaches the true use of the Sacraments; and having
with a greater fullness then we have now, the first fruits of the holy Ghost,
did declare the true interpretation of the Scriptures, according to all verity,
even as our Savior promised to send them another Comforter, which should teach
them all truth.

And since all truth was taught and revealed to the Primitive Church which is
our mother, let us all that be obedient children of God, submit our selves to
the judgment of the Church for the better understanding of the Articles of our
faith, and of the doubtful sentences of the Scripture; let us not go about to
show in us, by following any private man's interpretation of the Word, another
spirit then they of the Primitive Church had lest we deceive our selves; for
there is but one Faith, and one Spirit, which is not contrary to himself,
neither otherwise now teaches us then he did them: therefore let us believe as
they have taught us of the Scriptures, and be at peace with them; according as
the true Catholic Church is at this day, and the God of peace assuredly will
be with us and deliver us out of all our worldly troubles and miseries, and
make us partakers of their joy and bliss, through our obedience to faith with
them. Job 8.
Therefore God commands us in Job to ask of the elder generation, and to
search diligently the memory of the fathers. For we are but yesterdaies
children, and be ignorant, and our days are like a shadow; and they shall
teach thee (says the Lord) and speak to thee, and shall utter words from
their hearts; And by Solomon we are commanded not to reject the direction of
our mother. Prove. 6.
The Lord grant you to direct your steps in all things after her, and to abhor
contention with her. For as St. Paul writes, 1 Cor. 11.
If any man be contentious, neither we, neither the Church of God has any such
custom.

Hitherto I have showed you (good brother S.) my judgment generally, of that
you stand in doubt, and dissent from others; to the which I wish you as mine
heart to be conformable, and then doubtless you cannot err, but boldly may be
glad in your troubles, and triumph at the hour of your death, that you shall
die in Church of God a faithful martyr, and receive the Crown of eternal
glory. And thus much have I written upon occasion of a vision, before God
unfeigned. But that you may not think that I go about to satisfy you with
uncertain visions only, and not after Gods Word, I will take the ground of
your Letter, and especially answer to the same by the Scriptures, and by
unfallible reasons deduced out of the same, and prove the baptism of infants
to be lawful, commendable, and necessary, whereof you seem to stand in doubt.

Indeed if you look upon the Papisticall Synagogue only, which has corrupted
Gods Word by false interpretations, and has perverted the true use of Christ's
Sacraments, you might seem to have good handfast of your opinion, against the
Baptism of infants: but for as much as it is of more antiquity, and has its
beginning from Gods Word, and from the use of the Primitive Church, it must not
in respect of the abuse in the popish Church be neglected, or thought not
expedient to be used in Christ's Church. Auxentius one of the Arrians feet, with
his adherents, was one of the first that denied the Baptism of children; and
next after him Pelagius the heretic, and some others there were in St.
Bernards time, as it does appear by his writings; and in our days the
Anabaptists an inordinate kind of men, stirred up by the devil, to the
destruction of the gospel.

But the Catholic truth delivered unto us by the Scriptures, plainly
determines, that all such are to be baptized, as whom God acknowledges for
his people, and voucheth them worthy of sanctification or remission of their
sins. Therefore since that infants be in the number or scrole of Gods people
and be partakers of the promise by their purification in Christ it must needs
follow hereby that they ought to be baptized, as well as those that can
profess their faith; for we judge the people of God as well by the free and
liberal promise of God as by the confession of faith. For to whomsoever God
promises himself to be their God, and whom he acknowledges for his, those no
man without great impie^y may exclude from the number of the faithful. But God
promises that he will not only be the God of such as do profess him, but
also of infants, promising them his grace and remission of sins, as it
appears by the words of the covenant made unto Abraham, Genes. 17.
I will set my covenant between me and thee (says the Lord) and between thy
seed after thee in their generations, with an everlasting covenant, to be thy
God, and the God of thy seed after thee; to the which covenant circumcision was
added, to be a sign of sanctification, as well in children as in men; and no
man may think that this promise is abrogated with circumcision, and other
ceremonial laws; for Christ came to fulfill the promises, and not to dissolve
them: therefore in the Gospel he says of infants, Matthew. 5.
that is of such as yet believed not, Let the little ones come unto me, Matthew
10. Matthew. 19. Matthew. 18.
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, it is not
the will of your father which is in Heaven, that any of these little ones do
perish. Also, he that receives one such little child in my name, receives me.
Take heed therefore that ye despise not one of these babes, for I tell you
their Angels do continually see in Heaven my fathers face: and what may be
said more plain then this, It is not the will of the heavenly Father, that the
infants should perish? whereby we may gather, that he receives them freely
unto his grace, although as yet they confess not their faith. Since then that
the word of the promise, which is contained in baptism, pertains as well to
children as to men, why should the sign of the promise, which is baptism in
water, be withdrawn from children, when Christ himself commands them to be
received of us, and promises the reward of a Prophet to those that receive
such a little infant, as he for an example did put before his Disciples?

Now will I prove with manifest arguments that children ought to be baptized
and that the Apostles of Christ did baptize children. The Lord commanded his
Apostles to baptize all Nations: therefore also ought children to be baptized,
for they are comprehended under this word, All Nations.

Further, Acts 10.
whom God does account among the faithful they are faithful, for it was said
to Peter, That thing which God has purified, thou shall not say to be common
or unclean: But God does repute children among the faithful: Ergo, they be
faithful, except we had rather to resist God, and seem stronger and wiser then
he.

And without all doubt the Apostles baptized those whom Christ commanded: but
he commanded the faithful to be baptized, 1 Cor. 1.
among the which infants be reckoned; The Apostles then baptized infants.

The Gospel is more then baptism, for Paul said, 1 Cor. 1.
The Lord sent me to preach the Gospel, and not to baptize; not that he denied
absolutely that he was sent to baptize, but that he preferred doctrine before
baptism, for the Lord commanded both to the Apostles; but children be received
by the doctrine of the Gospel of God, and not refused; therefore what person
being of reason may deny them baptism, which is a thing lesser then the
Gospel, for in Sacraments be two things to be considered: the thing signified,
and the sign; and the thing signified is greater then the sign; and from the
thing signified in baptism children are not excluded; who therefore may deny
them the sign, which is baptism in water?

St. Peter could not deny them to be baptized in water, to whom he saw the holy
Ghost given, which is the certain sign of Gods people, Acts 10.
for he says in the Acts, May any body forbid them to be baptized in water,
who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Therefore St. Peter denied not
baptism to infants, for he knew certainly, both by the doctrine of Christ, and
by the covenant, which is everlasting, that the Kingdom of Heaven pertained to
infants.

None be received into the Kingdom of Heaven but such as God loves, Romans 8.
and which are endued with his Spirit, for whosoever has not the Spirit of God, he
is none of his: But infants be beloved of God, and therefore want not the
Spirit of God; wherefore if they have the Spirit of God as well as men, if they
be numbered among the people of God as well as we that be of age, who I pray you
may well withstand children to be baptized with water, in the name of the Lord?

The Apostles in times past being yet not sufficiently instructed, did murmr
against those that brought their children unto the Lord, but the Lord rebuked
them and said, Let the babes come unto me; Matthew. 10.
why then do not these rebellious Anabaptists obey the Commandment of the
Lord? for what do they nowadaies else that bring their children to baptism,
then that they did in times past which brought their children to the Lord; and
our Lord received them, and putting his hands on them, blessed them, and both
by words, and by gentle behavior toward them, declared manifestly that
children be the people of God, and entirely beloved of God. But some will say,
why then did not Christ baptize them? because it is written, Jesus himself
baptized not, but his Disciples.

John 4.
Moreover circumcision in the old Law was ministered unto infants, therefore
baptism ought to be ministered in the new law to children: for baptism is come
in stead of circumcision, as St. Paul witnesses, Colos. 2.
saying to the Colossians, By Christ ye are circumcised with a circumcision
which is without hands, when ye put off the body of sin of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ, being buried together with him through baptism. Behold
Paul calls baptism the circumcision of a Christian man, which is done
without hands; not that water may be ministered without hands, but that with
hands no man ought any longer to be circumcised, albeit the ministry of
circumcision does still remain in faithful people.

Josh. 5.
To this I add, that the servants of God were always ready to minister the
Sacraments to them for whom they instituted. As for example, we may behold
Joshua, who most diligently procured the people of Israel to be circumcised
before they entered into the Land of promise; but since the Apostles were the
preachers of the word, and the very faithful servants of Jesus, etc, who may
hereafter doubt that they baptized infants, since baptism is in place of
circumcision?

Item, the Apostles did attemperate all their doings to the shadows and
figures of the old Testamont; therefore it is certain that they did attemperate
baptism according to circumcision, and baptized children because they were
under the figure of baptism; for the people of Israel passed through the red
sea, and the bottom of the water of Jordan with their children. And although
the children be not always expressed, neither the women in the holy
Scriptures, yet they are comprehended and understood in the same.

Also the Scripture evidently tells us, that the Apostles baptized whole
families or households: but the children he comprehended in a family or
household, as the chiefest and dearest part thereof; Therefore we may conclude,
that the Apostles did baptize infants or children, and not only men of lawful
age; and that the house or household is taken for man, woman, and child, is
manifest in the 17 of Genesis, and also in that Joseph does call Jacob with all
his house to come out of the Land of Canaan into Egypt.

Finally, I can declare out of ancient writers, that the baptism of infants
has continued from the Apostles time unto ours; neither that it was instituted
by any Councels, neither of the Pope, nor of other men, but commended from the
Scripture by the Apostles themselves. Origin upon the Declaration of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, expounding the sixth chapter, says, That the Church of
Christ received the baptism of infants from the very Apostles. St. Hierom
makes mention of the baptism of infants in the third book against the
Pelagians, and in his Epistle to Leta. Saint Augustine recites for this
purpose a place out of John Bishop of Constantinople, in his first book
against Julian, chap. 2. And he again writing to St. Hierome, Epist. 28.
says, That St. Cyprian not making any new decree, but firmly observing the
faith of the Church, judged with his fellow Bishops, that as soon as one was
borne, he might be lawfully baptized. The place of Cyprian is to be seen in
his Epistle to Fidus.

Also St. Augustine writing against the Donatists in the 4. book chap. 23. and
24. says, That the baptism of infants was not derived from the authority of
man, neither of Councels, but from the Tradition or doctrine of the Apostles.

Cyril upon Leviticus chap. 8, approves the baptism of children, and
condemns the iteration of baptism.

These authorities of men I do allege, not to tie the baptism of children
unto the testimonies of men, but to show how men's testimonies do agree with
Gods Word, and that the verity of antiquity is on our side, and that the
Anabaptists have nothing but lies for them, and new imaginations, which seigne
the baptism of children to be the Popes commandment.

After this I will answer to the sum of your arguments to the contrary. The
first, which includes all the rest, is, It is written, Go ye into all the
World, and preach the glad tidings to all creatures, He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, etc.

To this I add, that nothing is added to Gods Word by baptism of children, as
ye pretend, but that is done which the same word does require, for that
children are accounted of Christ in the Gospel among the number of such as do
believe: as it appears by these words, Matthew. 18.
He that offends one of these little babes which believe in me, it were
better for him to have a millstone tied about his neck and to be cast into
the bottom of the sea. Where plainly Christ calls such as be not able to
confess their faith, believers; because of his mere grace he reputeth them
for believers. And this is no wonder so to be taken since God imputes faith
for righteousness unto men of riper age, for both in men and children,
righteousness, acceptance, and sanctification is of mere grace, and by
imputation, that the glory of Gods grace might be praised.

And that the children of faithful parents are sanctified, and among such as
do believe, 1 Cor. 7.
is apparent in the 1 Cor. 7. And whereas you do gather by the order of the
words in the said Commandment of Christ, that children ought to be taught
before they be baptized; and to this end you allege many places out of the
Acts, proving that such as confessed their faith first were baptized after. I
answer, that if the order of words might weigh any thing to this cause, we have
the Scripture that makes as well for us, for in Saint Mark we read, Mark 1.
that John did baptize in the desert, preaching the baptism of repentance. In
the which place we see baptism go before, and peaching to follow after.

And also I will declare this place of Matthew exactly considered, Matthew. 28.
to make for the use of baptism in children, for St. Matthew has it written
in this wise, All power is given me (says the Lord) in Heaven and in earth,
therefore going forth (...), that is, Disciple ye, (as I may express the
signification of the word) that is, make or gather to me Disciples of all
Nations: And following he declares the way how they should gather to him
Disciples out of all Nations, baptizing them and teaching; by baptizing and
teaching ye shall procure a Church to me; and both these aptly and briefly,
severally he sets forth, saying, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. Now then Baptism goes before Doctrine.

But hereby I do not gather, that the Gentiles which never heard any thing
before of God, and of the Son of God, and of the holy Ghost, ought to be
baptized, neither they would permit themselves to be baptized before they knew
to what end. But this I have declared, to show you upon how feeble foundation
the Anabaptists be grounded; and plainly it is not true which they imagine of
this Text, that the Lord did only command such to be baptized, whom the
Apostles had first of all taught. Neither here verily is signified who only be
to be baptized: but he speaks of such as he of perfect age, and of the first
foundations of faith, and of the Church to be planted among the Gentiles, which
were as yet rude and ignorant of Religion.

Such as be of age may hear, believe, and confess, that which is preached,
and taught, but so cannot infants; therefore we may justly collect, that he
speaks here nothing of infants or children; but for all this they be not to
be excluded from baptism.

It is a general rule, he that does not labor must not eat, but who is so
barbarous as might think hereby that children should be famished.

The Lord sent his Apostles at the beginning of the setting up his true
religion unto all Nations, unto such as were both ignorant of God, and were out
of the covenant of God, and truly such persons it behooveth not first to be
baptized, and afterward taught; but first to be taught, and afterward
baptized. If at this day we should go to the Turks to convert them to the
faith of Christ, verily first we ought to teach them, and afterward baptize
such as would yield to be the servants of Christ; Likewise the Lord himself in
times past did, when first he renewed the covenant with Abraham and ordained
circumcision to be a seal of the covenant, after that Abraham was circumcised.
But he when he perceived the infants also to pertain to the covenant, and that
circumcision was the sealing up of the covenant, did not only circumcise
Ismael his son that was 13 years of age, but all other infants that were born
in his house, among whom we reckon Isaac.

Even so, faithful people which were converted from Heathen idolatry by the
preaching of the Gospel, and confessing the faith were baptized; when they
understood their children to be counted among the people of God, and that
baptism was the token of the people of God, they procured also their children
to be baptized. Therefore, as it is written, Abraham circumcised all the male
children of his house. Semblably we read in the Acts and writings of the
Apostles, that after the master of the house was turned to the faith, all the
whole house was baptized. And as concerning those which of old time were
compelled to confess their faith before they received baptism, which were
called Catechumeni, they were such as with our forefathers, came from the
Gentiles to the Church, who being yet rude of faith, they did instruct in the
principles of their belief, and afterward they did baptize them; but the same
ancient fathers notwithstanding did baptize the children of faithful men, as I
have already partly declared.

And because you do require an hasty answer of your Letter, of one that is but
a dull writer, I am here enforced to cease, particularly to go through your
Letter in answering thereto, knowing that I have fully answered every part
thereof in that I have already written, although not in such order as it had
meet, and I had purposed. But forasmuch as I understand that you will be no
contentious man, neither in this matter, nor in any other, contrary to the
judgment of Christ's primitive Church, which is the body and fullness of
Christ, I desire you in the entire of him, or rather Christ desires you by me
(that your joy may be perfect whereto you are now called) to submit your
judgment to that Church, and to be at peace and unity with the same, that the
coat of Christ, which ought to be without seame, but now alas most miserably
is torn in pieces by many dangerous sects, and damnable opinions, may appear
by you in no part to have been rent; neither that any giddy head in these
dog-daies, might take an example by you to dissent from Christ's true Church. I
beseech thee dear brother in the Gospel, follow the steps of the faith of the
glorious martyrs in the primitive Church, and of such as at this day follow the
same, decline from them neither to the right hand nor to the left; then shall
death be it never so bitter, be more sweeter then this life; then shall Christ
with all the Heavenly Jerusalem triumphantly embrace your Spirit with
unspeakable gladness and exaltation, who in this earth was content to join
your spirit with their spirits, according as it is commanded by the word, that
the spirit of Prophets should be subject to the Prophets. One thing ask with
David ere you depart, and require the same, that you may dwell with a full
accord in his house, for there is glory and worship; And so with Simeon, 1 Cor.
14.
in the Temple embracing Christ, depart in peace. To the which peace Christ
bring both you and me, and all our loving brethren that love God in the unity
of faith, by such ways as shall please him, to his glory. Let the bitter
passion of Christ, which he suffered for your sake, and the horrible torments
which the godly martyrs of Christ have endured before us; and also the
inestimable reward of your life to come, which is hidden yet a little while
from you with Christ, strengthen, comfort, and encourage you, to the end of
that glorious race which you are in. Amen.

Your yoke fellow in captivity for the verity of Christ's Gospel, to live and
die with you in the unity of faith, JOHN PHILPOT.

I conclude,
1. THat the practice of Infants has sufficient, and undeniable warrant in the
holy Scripture.

2. That if it were not the mind of God, that Infants should be baptized,
surely Christ, or his Apostles would have given some plain direction to the
contrary; especially, seeing baptism comes in the room of circumcision, and
that Infants were circumcised.

3. That the universal Church of Christ, ever since the Apostles times, has
continued this practice of baptizing infants.

4. That not so much as one National Church, since our Saviors time, has
forborne or disallowed childrens baptism.

5. That the great and gross mistake of the Anabaptists arises from their not
distinguishing between persons borne in the covenant, and them that are borne
out of the covenant.

6. That only private, obscure and (for the most part) illiterate persons have
opposed this doctrine.

7. That the Anabaptists and their doctrine, have so lurked in dark corners
from time to time, that it is easy to see, they cannot abide the light.

8. That most Anabaptists in former times, were men branded with some notorious
infamy; and commonly poisoned with other dangerous and heretical opinions.

9. That the Anabaptists grounds and arguments, against infants baptism, are
all very poor, many of them very peevish.

10. That God has so blessed this Sacrament of baptism, even to infants, as
that millions of Saints in Heaven, most believers in this Kingdom, yea in the
whole world, being baptized in infancy, are and shall be saved, without
re-baptizing.

11. That it is an extreme injustice, yea sacrilege yea cruelty, to hinder
infants of that grace and privilege, which Jesus Christ has purchased for
them.

That it is an impudent arrogance, and highest presumption to question or
contradict the Word of Christ, who commands that little children should be
suffered to come unto him.

FINIS.

