The Mystery of the two WITNESSES UNVAILED.

Wherein we have a Description

of their persons time acts death
and office. manner of prophecy. sufferings. resurrection.


With the Consequences that follow.

TOGETHER With the seventh Trumpet, and the Kingdom of Christ explained.

by JOHN ROBOTHAM, Preacher of the Gospel in Dover.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for G. and H. Eversden, at the Greyhound in St Paul's
Churchyard.

1654.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, the Lord General CROMWELL etc.
MY LORD;
IT is not for any worth, performed on my part, that I have taken the (...) or
boldness here to prefix your name; but rather from the subject matter of this
ensuing Discourse, it being an Exposition of the mystery of the two Witnesses:
wherein we have a description of their persons and prophecy, their time and
actions, their death and resurrection, together with the consequences that
follow thereupon: all which I humbly conceive, may be very suitable for you, As
well for the greatness of your place and employment, as it is necessary to be
retained in your knowledge and judgment. Therefore in the first place, I
present this to your Excellency, as unto a choice and faithful witness of the
Lord; and after, to all those that give forth their testimony for the truth and
authority of Christ; against the falsehood and usurpation of Antichrist.

It Is most certain, as the Apostle does affirm, that Antichrist shall be
destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming: which is no other, then his
coming forth in the bright beams, and glorious rays of divine light, shining
forth in his people. The Saints of the most High, by the testimony they give
forth, are the rod of his mouth, and the breath of his lips; Whereby he will
bruise his enemies, and break them in pieces. Thus the true Spirit of Christ
in the Saints, shall darken and dry up that counterseit and corrupt Spirit of
Antichrist, that is abroad in the world. But not withstanding, the power and
authority of the Beast shall be dissipated and broken, (as it were) vi and
armis. And hence it is, that in these times, the Lord has appeared among us,
as a mighty man of war, clothed with his zeal, as with a garment: and has
endued his people, with such masculine virtue and strength, that their horns
have been as iron, and their hoofs as brass, whereby they have threshed the
Mountains, and the hills as Chafe. And this they have not done by power or
might, but by the Spirit of the Lord. It was the glorious appearance of GOD in
the midst of his people, that has subdued these three Nations. Now though
Dutch, Dane, and French should combine against us, yet shall the arm of the
LORD awake for his people, and shall as in former days, cut Rachah, and wound
the Dragon; he shall dry up the sea, and the waters of the great deep. It Is not
an arm of flesh can do this, but a divine presence with an Army, with whom
are the hearts, affections, prayers, and spirits of the Saints, with a sweet
compliance gathered up into, and going along with them. This causes the shout
of king to be in the midst of us: though the king in his person be taken away,
yet the everlasting King lives, and shall take to himself his great power, and
reign.

It Is a most undeniable truth, that the sword has been the original of all
kinds and forms of government in the world: it is the mother of all power,
protection, and preservation. When any disturbance does arise in a kingdom or
Commonwealth, whither do they run? but unto a military power for succor and
defense, as not being able to subsist, until they do, as it were, resolve into
their first principles, And though the sword in it is self be a dark and sad
dispensation, eating flesh, and drinking blood, it is proper work being to wast
and destroy; yet when it is accompanied with wisdom, righteousness, goodness, and
justice; it become good and desirable.

My Lord, I have but three words more to speak. The first is of you. The
second to you. The third for you.

That of you is, That the Lord has so far honored you, as to make you an
instrument of glorious achievements: and has made you head of your brethren,
and has given you a name with the great ones of the earth: but above all, he
has bestowed on you the spirit of his Son, which makes you most acceptable to
himself, and precious in the eyes of his people. It Is a true saying, Honor est
in potestate hono (...) heart, and make it suitable to your work, and that
your will may be drawn forth to the extent of the divine will, that your soul
may have a true sympathy with God, that your heart may be fortified against all
storms without, and fears within; and that you may cast down your wisdom,
valor, honor and succeste at the feet of Christ; so shall you take all up
again with unspeakeable advantage. What ever you expend sor Christ, in Christ
you shall find it again. Now that you may enjoy all in Christ, and spend all
for him, is the desire of him, who shall endeavor to be in all faithfulness,

Your Excellency's humble servant, JOHN ROBOTHAM.

To the Reader.
THe importunity of diverse Friends, caused me to suffer these notes, to pass
abroad into the world: they were taken by writing from my mouth; my time and
occasions would not permit, to cast them into such a form, as would have best
becomed the press: therefore thou shall meet with truth, coming forth in it is
own nakedness, without the clothing of humane Eloquence. As for the matter,
it is mysterious, and therefore if in any thing, wherein I may possibly be
mistaken, thy candor and ingenuity is desired, to pass it by. If thou art
Critical, and thy aim be only to epsy out the faults, either of the Writer,
Printer, or Preacher; I suppose thy time would be more advantagiously spent, to
search out the defects of thy own heart. If thou will accept of it, as it is
presented to thee, with the right hand, it is all that is desired by him, that
shall remain thine in any office of love.

JOHN ROBOTHAM.

The Contents of the following Treatise, concerning the principal things
therein contained.
SIx things from the Book of the Revelation observed. 1. The Author, who
indicted it. Page 2. 2. The Messenger, who brought it. idem. 3. The Penman,
which writ it. p. 3. 4. The form into which it is cast. id. 5. The matter
that is contains. p. 4. 6. The parties, unto whom it is directed. id.
The sum of the whole Chapter. p. 5. From verse 1. we have; 1. John's call to
measure. p. 6, 7. 2. His qualification. p. 8. 3. The things to be measured. 1.
The Temple. p. 9. 2. The Altar. p. 10. 3. The worshippers. p. 11.

Observations from the words; 1. Ob: That the Lord does suitably prepare his
people to receive such things, as himself does impart unto them. p. 12, 13,
14. 2. Ob: That the spirit of the Lord is the only Standard and rule of divine
things. p. 15, 16. Four false rules of knowledge discovered. 1. Fl^shly
wisdom. p. 17. 2. Mere speculation. p. 18. 3. External form. p. 19. 4.
Historical knowledge. p. 20, 21.
Four true principles of divine knowledge, whereby we come to know the truth.
1. By the Spirit. p. 22. 2. By divine impressions. p. 23. 3. In Jesus. p. 24.
4. By tr^^ Conformity. p 25.
3 Ob: That the Lord has always afforded his presence with his people, even
in the darkest and saddest times of Antichrist's reign. p. 26. 4. Ob: That the
Lord had always a people, that did truly worship him. p. 27. 5. Ob: That the
Lord does accept of none to worship him, but such as serve in his Temple, and
offer upon his Altar. p. 28. 6. Ob: That the true Saints of God, have always
been measuring of divine things. p. 29.
From verse 2. we have; 1. The outward Court explained, p. 31 2. The outward
Court rejected, p. 32 3. The outward Court given to the Gentiles as their
portion, p. 34 4. The holy City is trodden under-foot, by the Gentiles. p. 35
5. The time of forty-two mon^ths explained, and compared, p. 36, 37, 38
Observations from the word^ opened; 1. Ob: That all external forms and
professions of Christ, without life and power, are but shaddows, p. 39, 40, 41
2. Ob: That the true Temple, Altar, and worshippers of God, are not to be
measured by outward things, p. 42 3. Ob: That the outward form of divine
things is given for a time into the hands of Antichrist, p. 43, 44. 45 4. Ob:
The best use that Antichrist does make of the holy City, is to trample upon
it, p. 46, 47 5. Ob: Antichrist has his prefix^d and limited time, in which
he shall reign, p. 48 6. Ob: That the shapes and forms in which Antichrist
comes forth in, to act his part, are various and changeable, p. 49, 50
The spirit of Antichrist discovered in four particulars, 51, 52, 53, 54 The
form of Antichrist opened in several shapes, p. 55, 56 1. In the form of a
Dragon, p. 56, 57 2. In the shape of a Leopard, p. 58, 59 3. In the appearance
of a Beast with two horns, p. 60 4. In the shadow of an Image, which the
Beast causes to be set up, p. 61 Those that up the Image of the Beast,
discovered by six Characters, p. 62, 63, 64, 65* 66, 67, 68 Antichrist flies
out of one form into another, p. 69, 70 In verse 3. we have the mystery of
the wi^nesses in six things opened, p. 70 1. The witnesses are enabled to
pr^phesie. 1. From God originally, p. 73 2. From Christ immediately, p. 74
The means by which the witnesses are empowered to prophecy: 1. By the word,
p. 75 2. By the Spirit, p. 76
2. The title of witnesses here given, and why, p. 77 3. The number of the
witnesses, and why they are called two, p. 78 4. The office of the witnesses is
to prophecy, wherein we have two things: 1. What it is to prophecy, explained
in three things, p. 79, 80, 81 2. What testimony the witnesses give forth: 1.
Against the seed of the Serpent, p. 82 2. Against the power of the Beast, p 83

The Saints testify against the power of the beast, by holding forth; 1. The
prophecy of Christ, p. 83, 84 2. The Priesthood of Christ, p. 85 3. The
kingdom of Christ, p. 86, 87
5. The form and state of the witnesses in sackcloth, explained in three
things, p. 88, 89 6 The duration of the witnesses prophecy a thousand, two
hundred, and sixty days, opened, p. 90, 91 Observations from the words; 1.
Ob: That none can give forth a testimony of Christ, but such as are empowered
thereto by Christ, p. 92 2. Ob: That all those that hold forth the truth of
Christ, opposing Antichrist, are Christ's faithful witnesses, p 93 3. Ob: That
the witness of the Saints is a sufficient testimony, p. 94 4. Ob: That the
whole bent of the witnesses prophecy, has always been to uphold the truth of
Christ, against the falsehood of Antichrist, p. 95 5 Ob: Those that have been
most faithful unto Christ, and his truth, have been most rejected of the
world, p. 96 6. Ob: That Christ has always had a people to bear witness of
his truth, even in the saddest and darkest time of Antichrist's reign, p. 97
From verse 4. we have; 1. Various opinions concerning the two witnesses, p.
98, 99, 100 2. A full and positive description of the witnesses, p. 101.
The two olive trees, as representing Christ, explained in 4 particulars, from
p. 102. unto p. 109. The two Candlesticks, as representing the Saints
illustrated under 4 heads, p. 111, 112, 113 The ground why Christ was
represented by two olive trees. 1. From his twofold nature, p. 115, 116, 117
2. From his two fold dispensation, p. 118, 119, 120, 121
The reason why the Saints are called two Candlesticks. 1. They give forth an
earthly testimony, p. 123, 124 2. They give out a heavenly testimony, p. 125,
126, 127 Christ and his Saints are joined in one, and give forth one and the
same testimony, as is shown in four particulars, p. 128 129, 130, 131
Observation from the whole. That all the Saints, and faithful servants of
God, are his witnesses, p. 132, 133, 134, 135
In verse 5. we have a relation: First, the harmfull carriage of the enemy
toward the witnesses. p. 136 1. By restraining their persons. p. 137 2. By
rejecting their testimony, p. 138
Secondly, the witnesses defense, by the fire issuing out of their mo^ths. 1.
What is meant by fire, p. 139 2. How it destroys the Adversary, p. 140

Observations from hence. 1. Ob: That the Adversaries of Christ are always
ready to hurt his witnesses, p. 141 2. Ob: They that go about to hurt the
witnesses, or hinder them in the course of their prophecy, shall not go
unpunished, p. 142 3. Ob: That the witnesses shall prevail against their
enemies, by the word of their testimony, p. 143, 144 4. Ob: That the testimony
of witnesses is of great force, even while they prophecy in sackcloth, p. 145
In verse 6. we have a threefold power given to the witnesses, p. 146
First, to shut heaven that it rain not: where we have explained: 1. What is
meant by rain, p. 147 2. What it is to shut heaven, that it rain not, p. 148,
149
Secondly, to turn waters into blood; where we have opened: 1. What is meant
by waters, p. 150 2. What it is to turn waters into blood, p. 151
Thirdly, to smite the earth with all plagues, wherein we have; 1. The
agreement between the seals opening, and the Trumpets sounding, and the vialls
powering forth, p. 152, 153 2. The seven vialls opened, together with the seven
seals, and the seven Trumpets, from p. 155. unto p. 169.
Observations from the Text. 1. Ob: That the testimony of the witnesses,
against the ways and practices of Antichrist, does exclude them from the
heavenly influences and sweet showers of divine grace. p. 170 180 2. Ob: all
the sweet and refreshing streams of comfort and supply that Antichrist liv^s
upon, are turned into bitterness and contention, at prophecy of the
witnesses, p. 172 3. Ob: That the prophecy of the witnesses, though in a
mean, low, and sackcloth condition, i^ of mighty force and power unto their
adversaries, p. 173 In verse. 7. we have three particular things, p. 17^ First,
the time when the witnesses are to be slain, and when they have finished their
testimony, p. 176, 177 Secondly, by whom the witnesses shall be slain; wherein
we have opened: 1. What is meant by the Beast that slayes them, p. 79 2. What
is meant by the bottomless pit, from whence he comes, p. 180, 181, 182, 183 3.
The manner of his ascension, p. 184
Thirdly, the manner how, the witnesses are slain by the Beast. 1. He makes
war against them, p. 185 2. Does overcome them, p. 186, 187 3. Does kill them,
and how, p. 188, 189, 190
Observations from the verse. 1. Ob: That the Saints of Christ, in every age
and time, are enabled to finish their testimony, mauger all the opposition that
is made against them, p. 191 2. Ob: That the rage and cruelty of the adversary
is great against the faithful servants of Christ, p. 192 193 3. Ob: That the
workings and deceits of Antichrist are very deep and myst^rious, p. 194 4. Ob:
That there is a time when Antichrist christ does ascend high in greatness and
power, p. 195, 196 5. Ob: That the witnesses are continually overcome and
slaying, all the time of the powerful reign of the Beast, p. 197, 198 In
verse 8. we have an account of the bodies of the witnesses; where three
special things are noted, p. 199
First, what is meant by the bodies of the witnesses, p. 200, 201, 202, 203,
204, 205 Secondly, the place where their bodies lie: where we have explained:
1. What is meant by the great City. p. 206 2. What is meant by the stree^e of
that City, p. 207 Thirdly, a description of the City. 1. By it is resemblance.
1. To Sodom, p. 208, 209 2. To Egypt, p. 210


2. By it is carriage and action, p. 211
How Christ is said to be crucified in Egypt and Sodom, p. 212 Observations
drawn from the words opened. 1. Ob: That the external forms of worship that
Antichrist uses, are but as a dead body or carkas^. p. 213 2. Ob: That it is
not so much the outward form or figure of worship, that Antichrist seeks to
suppress, as it is the spirit and testimony of the witnesses, p. 214, 215 3.
Ob: That Antichrist is full of spiritual uncleanness, and cursed cruelty, p.
216 4. Ob: It Is the very life, spirit, and image of Christ that Antichrist does
chiefly oppose in slaying the witnesses, p. 217, 218
In verse 9. we have three things noted concerning the carriage of the enemies
toward the dead bodies of the witnesses. 1. Who are meant, by people,
kindreds, tongues, and nations, p. 220 2. Their exercise about the dead bodies.
1. What it is, to see the dead bodies of the witnesses, p. 221 2. What it is,
not to suffer them to be put in graves, p. 222
3. The time that these dead bodies shall lie unburied, and what is meant by
three days and a half, p. 223
Observations from the Text. 1. Ob: That the power and greatness, the wisdom
and abilities of men, are exercised about the dead bodies of the witnesses, p.
224 2. Ob: That the great care, that those of the nations and tongues, etc.
take about the dead bodies of the witnesses, is to keep them above ground, p.
225, 226 3. Ob: That the dead bodies of the witnesses are kept above ground,
all the time of Antichrists reign, p. 227, 228
In verse 10. we have a farther carriage of the Adversary toward the carkases
of the witnesses, p. 229 1 The persons acting: those that dwell upon the earth;
of whom it is meant, p. 230 2. Their actions: they rejoice, and make merry, etc.
and what it means p 231 3. The ground of their joy: because these two
Prophets tormented them; and how, p. 232, 233 Observations from the words: 1.
Ob: That the people that serve Antichrist are earthly and carnal, p. 234 2.
Ob: That the greatest joy of Antichrist is over the dead bodies of the
witnesses, p. 235 3. Ob: That the witnesses by their prophecy do most of all
torment the men of the earth, p 236, 237
In verse. 11. we have the witnesses resurrection, p. 238 1. The time of their
resurrection, After three days and a half, explained, p. 239 2. The cause,
viz. the spirit of life from God; and what it is, p. 240, 241 3. The
resurrection it self, and they stood upon their feet, explained in 3
particulars. p. 242, 243 4. The consequent that follows their resurrection; by
the great fear that falls upon their enemies, p. 244, 245 Observations from
hence. 1. Ob: That when the time of the witnesses suffering and sadness draws
to an end, there is an earnest expectation in them of their resurrection, p.
246, 247 2. Ob: That the witnesses are enabled to arise, by the mighty
powerful spirit of God, p. 248 3. Ob: As there is a time when the witnesses
lie slain and dead; so also there is a time, when they shall revive and live
again, 249, 250 4. Ob: That the rising of the witnesses, is a most dreadful
sight to the men of the earth, p. 251, 252
In verse 12. we have the witnesses ascension; from whence is noted; First, the
cause: they heard a voice from heaven, p. 254 From whence is noted:
1. The voice it self, p. 255 2. From whence it came, ibid 3. Unto whom it is
spoken, p. 256 4. What it speaks. p 257
Secondly, the ascension it self, p. 258 From whence is observed
1. Their action, p. 259 2. Their place, p. 260 3. The manner, and what is
meant by the cloud in which they ascend, p. 261
Thirdly, the Adjunct annexed to their ascension, and in what manner their
enemies should behold them, p. 262
Observations drawn from hence. 1. Ob: That the witnesses are enabled to
ascend by the powerful voice of the Spirit of God, p. 263, 264 2. Ob: That the
witnesses have their time of triumph and rejoicing, as well as they have a time
of sackcloth and mourning, p. 265 3. Ob: That the state that the witnesses
shall ascend unto, is most heavenly and glorious, p. 266
The external liberty and peace that the witnesses shall enjoy by their
ascension, consists, 1. In deliverance from oppression, p. 267 2. Their
enemies shall serve them, p 268 3. They shall enjoy peace and quietness, p.
269, 270 4. Deliverance from shame, p. 271
The internal glory and excellency that the Saints shall be advanced unto. 1.
They shall abound in knowledge p. 272 2. They shall exceed in joy and comfort,
p. 273 3. They shaall live and act more in the power of God, p. 274, 278 4.
They shall enjoy more immediate communion with God, p. 276, 277
4. Ob: That in the midst of the great confusion and darkness upon the face
of the earth shall the witnesses ascend, p. 278, 279, 280 5. Ob: That all the
power and policy of the enemies of the witnesses, shall not be able to hinder
their ascension, p. 281, 282 In verse 13. we have the great earthquake, that
follows the rising of the witnesses, p. 283 where we have opened: 1. The time
of the earthquake, p. 284 2. The nature of it, p. 285 3. The consequents, p.
286
Which are three: First, the tenth part of the City fell: where is shown what
is meant: 1. By the City, p. 287 2. By the tenth part, ibid 3. By the fall
thereof, p. 288, 289
Secondly, there were slain seven thousand men; where we have; 1. Their
persons, p. 291 2. Their manner of slaying, ibid. 3. Their number, p. 292
Thirdly, the Remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to God; where we
consider: 1. The persons, p. 294 2. Their passions, ibid. 3. Their actions, p.
295
Observations from the words:
1. Ob: That the rising and ascending of the witnesses, does cause a great
earthquake in the world, p. 296, 297, 298 2. Ob: That all the time of this
great earthquake, the witnesses are in ^ising and ascending, p. 299, 300 3.
Ob: That nation that shall first of all shake off and disclaim the power of
Antichrist, God will honor that nation first of all, in raising up his
witnesses in it, p. 301, 302, 303, 304, 305 4. Ob: That those principally and
chiefly shall be slain in the earthquake, that are the upholders and
maintainers of Antichrist's cause and quarrel, p. 306, 207, 308 5. Ob: That
when God does scatter the great and mighty ones of the earth, it does much
amaze and affrighten the poor and ignorant people, that have been seduced by
them, p. 309, 310 6. Ob: That it is the poor affrighted remnant, that will give
most glory to God, p. 311, 312, 313 In verse 14. we have the second woe, p. 313
Where we have opened: The first woe, p. 314 The second woe, p. 315 The third
woe, p. 316
Obser: That great and terrible woes befall the world in the three last ages of
Antichrist, p 317, 318 319 In verse 15. we have explained, what is meant: 1. By
the Trumpet sounding, p. 321 2. By the seventh Trumpet, p. 322 3. By the great
voices in heaven, p. 323
These are said to be: 1. Great voices, 324 2. Voices in heaven, p 325, 326 3.
Plurality of voices, p. 327 Observations from the words.
1. Ob: That the Lord has always had a people to declare his truth unto the
world, p. 328 2. Ob: That the Lord has manifested his truth by degrees, or in
agraduall way, p. 329 3. Ob: There shall be a most complete and glorious
discovery and declaration of truth made out by the Saints under the seventh
Trumpet, p. 330, 331 4. Ob: That the Saints fully risen and ascended up into
heavenly enjoyments, at the final destruction of Antichrist, shall
harmoniously sing forth the glory and praises of Christ's kingdom, p. 332 333
How the kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of Christ; wherein we
have opened: 1. What is meant by the kingdoms of this world. p. 334 2. How
these kingdoms have been detained from Christ, p. 335, 336 3. How Christ shall
recover these kingdoms again into his ownhand. p. 337, 338, 339* 340 4. By
what right or title Christ will lay claim to the kingdoms of the world, p
341, 342, 343 5. The manner of Christ's reign, wherein the spiritual reign
of Christ is illustrated in four particulars, p. 344, 345 346, 347 6. The
duration of Christ's reign and kingdom, p. 348, 349, 350
How the Saints shall reign with Christ, p. 351, 352 How the Jews shall be
converted, p. 353 Observations from the whole: That Christ will come and reign
gloriously in his people, subduing all his enemies, advancing his Saints unto
the glory and dignity of his own kingdom, p. 354, 355
In verse 16. we have showed: 1. What is meant by the title given to Saints,
being called Elders, p. 356 2. What Is employed by their number, being
twenty-foure, p. 357 3. Their posture and action, falling on their faces, p.
358
In verse 17. we have: 1. The praises of the Elders, p. 359 2. The subject of
their praises, ibid. 3. The ground of their praises, p. 360 In verse 18. we
have: 1. The Adver saries vexed, p. 361, 362 2. The Saints rewarded, p. 363 3.
The Antichristian party destroyed, p. 364
In verse 19. we have; 1. The Temple opened, p. 365, 366 2. The Arc
manifested, p. 367 3. The great irresistible judgments that befall Antichrist,
p. 368 Lastly, the close of the whole Chapter, p. 369, 370

Reader;
By reason of the Authors absence we have observed these faults, which we
desire thee to amend, and all others which thou do find.

ERRATA. IN page 59. line 16. for sanctify, read sanctity p. 62. l. 8. for
Rome r. home. p. 75. l. 5. for meat, r. meant. p. 221. l. 11. for Pry r.
Priest. p. 319. l. 17. for first Taumpet, r. sixth Trumpet. p. 244. l. 8. for
out read but. p. 341. l. 12. for with r. of. p. 166. l. 15. for, the great
multitude of Saints, add; who are as some hold.

THE MYSTERY OF THE TWO WITNESSES UNVAILED.
REVELATIONS 11. 1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the
Angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein.
THere is much talk and discourse of the two witnesses, and great enquiry is
made, to know, who they are, what is their testimony, whither they be slain,
when they shall rise, etc. All which I shall endeavor to disclose, according
to the measure of light, that I have received, in the knowledge and revelation
of this mystery.

Before I make entrance upon this Chapter, give me leave, from the whole book
of the Revelation, to take notice of six things.

First, of the Author, who was Jesus Christ, Chap. 1. 1. He is both the Author
and subject matter thereof, being the Alpha, and Omega, and all the letters
besides in this divine Revelation; in whom is the sum and substance of all holy
Writ, the whole mystery of spiritual truth, all visions of divine glory, lies
wrapped up, does meet and concenter in the person of the Lord Jesus. Hence he is
said, to have the seven spirits of God, Chap. 1. 4. because all perfection of
knowledge was treasured up in him, by which he is only able to be the
dispenser of such heavenly revelations and divine mysteries as these are.

Secondly, of the Messenger, that Christ does here employ, to convey this book
unto his Apostle, and that is an Angel: as is evident Chap. 1. 1. Now in that
Christ does signify his message unto John by an Angel; it denotes unto us, the
great authority and power that Christ came forth in: He does not appear low
and meanly, clothed in flesh, or humane form: but does, as it were, ride upon
the wings of an Angel; by the shining glory of an angelical administration
does he declare this glorious mystery.

Thirdly, into whose hands these truths are committed, that is, into John's, who
was the beloved Disciple of Christ, that leaned on his bosom, as having much
neernesse and intimacy with him. This John was called (...), the Divine; but
not so much from dignity of office, as from the superexcellency of his graces
and annointings. The Ancients did compare him to an Eagle, because he soared
aloft, in the knowledge and understanding the secrets of divine truth. This
Apostle is honored above others, in writing this prophetical book of the
Revelation.

Fourthly, take notice of the form of this book, it is cast into the form of
an Epistle, containing things present, past, and to come, Chap. 1. 19. The
things, that John had seen, were the glorious appearance of Christ in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Chap. 1. 12, 13. The things that were
in being, were those several messages both of praise and reprehension, that he
was to give forth to the seven Churches, as appears in Chap. 2. and 3. The
things to come, were the prophecies, that begin at Chapt. 4. and hold on to the
end of the book.

Fifthly, we have presented to us the subject matter of this book, and that is
called a Revelation: and that because it is not so much a doctrinall or
historical narration, as it is a symbolicall and prophetical prediction,
containing such glorious mysteries and divine Revelations, that did far
surpass the wisdom, art, or reason of any humane creature: none but Christ
himself, and that by the mouth of a mighty Angel could bring to light or
declare such unutterable visions of divine glory.

Sixthly, and lastly, observe unto whom this book was directed, and that was to
the seven Churches in Asia, Chapt. 1. 4. Seven is a perfect number, seven days
contain man's labor and rest, seven times seven is the great Jubilee of the
Lord, and rest of all things. So that these Churches being set forth by the
number of seven, they are a complete representation of all Churches and all
Saints. The perfect number of Churches and all believers are most lively
deliniated and set forth by seven Churches: Therefore whatsoever is here
directed unto, or spoken of the seven golden Candlestickes; is both directed
and spoken to all Churches and Saints in the world. Thus much to be noted of
the book in general: Now to begin with the Chapter.

I shall not stand upon any curious, artificial Analysis of the whole Chapter;
that which is principally contained therein, is the mystery of the two
Witnesses; holding forth a description of their persons, and prophecy, their
time and acts, their death and resurrection: in the opening whereof, we shall
give much light to the whole book, and much discover the secret mystery wrapped
up and contained therein. The two first verses of the Chapter do prepare us
for what does follow; and here I shall begin with the first.

And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood, saying,
Arise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein.
IN this verse take notice of three things.

First, John's call to measure the Temple; And the Angel stood, saying, arise,
and measure, etc.

Secondly, His qualification for that work; And there was given me (says he)
a reed like unto a rod. This was the instrument, that John was to measure by.

Thirdly, We have the things, that were to be measured, they are namely three.

First, the Temple. Secondly, the Altar. Thirdly, the worshippers therein.
I shall first open the words, and then give you some observations from them.

And the Angel stood, saying, arise. In John's call, observe three things.
First, the Messenger, an Angel; this denotes the eminent power and great
authority, that this Message was brought in unto John, as we hinted before.

Secondly, the posture of this Angel, he stood, which does show, his
willingness and dexterity, his preparedness and readiness to deliver his
Message, that is evidently employed by his posture of standing.

Thirdly, we have this Angels direction, saying, arise: thereby to prepare John
to receive his message. Now this command or direction of the Angel, saying,
arise, does not imply that John was sitting, and thereby to mean a change of
his posture, or mutation of his bodily station; but rather, that he should stir
up his mind and affections, and raise up his thoughts and apprehensions; to
attend unto that glorious vision or revelation, that the Angel was about to
impart unto him. As if the Angel had said, arise, lift up thy self far above
thy carnal mind, and earthly affections: raise up thy thoughts and
apprehension far higher then poor, low, earthly, and carnal things; to
contemplate on things of a more spiritual and glorious, of a more divine and
heavenly nature. So that it is not meant here a change of bodily motions, but a
translation of mind.

Secondly, Consider John's qualification for the work in hand; And there was
given me a reed (says he) like unto a red. It was the use of many Nations to
measure things with reeds or canes, because they were hollow and light, and so
fit for that use. This reed was like unto a rod, which was also used in
measuring: Hence it was, that the children of Israel were called the rod of
Gods inheritance, Psalm. 74. 2. So that by this reed like unto a rod, we have a
resemblance unto the instruments, that the Nations did use, or of their manner
of measuring: by which is signified the Spirit of the Lord, the only rule and
standard of divine things, that can give a true description and dimention of
the Temple of God.

Thirdly, We have the things to be measured: and they are, first, The Temple;
secondly, the Altar, Thirdly, the worshippers therein.

First, The Temple of God, does represent unto us the divine presence of the
Lord with his people, which makes them his Temple and Tabernacle, according to
that in 2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the Temple of the living God (says the
Apostle) for God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, etc. There
is a cohabitation and a coambulation between God and his people, they dwell
together, they walk together. The Lord by his divine presence and in-dwelling
of his spirit in their hearts, does make them his glorious Temple. Suitable
unto this, is that in Revel. 21. 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them, etc. Which phrase is an allusion to the Tabernacle
of old, mentioned in Psalm. 15. 1. The Tabernacle was a solemn pledge and sign
of Gods presence with his people; wherein was also the Ark of God kept; which
does intimate unto us, the Lords divine and spiritual presence, by the coming
down of the new Jerusalem out of heaven, which is nothing else but the light
of the Gospel, the glory of God, the Spirit of Christ, shining forth, and
dwelling in the hearts of Saints: making them his Temple and Tabernacle. Indeed
Christ was the true Temple of God, who was prefigured by the former Temple, of
the Jews; but the Saints being gathered up into Christ, united to him in
spirit, joined to him as members, making up the fullness of his body; they also
together with Christ become the Temple of the living God.

Secondly, the Altar, does represent unto us the true service and worship of
the Lord. The Altar was that whereon the Priest was to offer sacrifice, in the
Temple, or in the inner Court, that joined to the Temple, which was the Priests
Court, and accounted part of the Temple it self: both the Temple and inner
Court were holy, and appropriated unto the Priests only: but for the outward
Court, it was common for all people to come into it. Now I say, the Altar that
was in the Court of the Temple, does signify the true and real service of the
Lord: the worship that believers tender unto him, viz. all the prayers,
thankesgivings and praises they offer up, all their parts, gifts and graces
that they employ; all their pains, costs, and endeavors; all these, I say, are
the sacrifices that the Saints do continually offer up to God, by Jesus Christ,
the true Altar, upon which they offer. So that we have not only Gods presence
with his people, making of them his Temple; but here is also an Altar, or the
divine and spiritual worship of all believers in the Temple, who are made an
holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, I Pet. 2. 5.

Thirdly, They that worship therein. We are not only to take notice of the
worship, but also of the worshippers, not only of the Temple, but of those
that serve in the Temple; not only of the Altar, but also of those that offer
thereon. The true worshippers are those that worship God in spirit, that draw
nigh to him in faith and assurance, that know whom they worship, and worship
him whom they know; these know him that is true; and they truly serve him. Here
is a distinction made between the false worshippers and the true; between those
that only worship in the outward Court, mentioned in the next verse, that
only worship in the external form, or superficial part of things: and those
that are the true spiritual Priests of the Lord, who enter into the inner
Court, and into the Temple of God, and worship there: These are they, that the
Lord does take notice and accept of; that he will own for his true worshippers
and servants; namely, those that worship in his Temple, and offer upon his
Altar.

The words being thus opened, we come to take notice of some Observations, that
do necessarily arise from them.

The first observation is this: That I Observe:
the Lord does suitably prepare his people to receive such things, as himself
does impart unto them. This is taken from John's qualification, when the Angel
bids him arise, to raise up his mind and affections from low, mean, and
carnal apprehensions and objects; and to fix them on those things, that were
divine and heavenly, even to the understanding and knowledge of these heavenly
mysteries, that the Lord revealed unto him, by the mouth of a mighty and strong
Angel. Suitable unto this is that in Revel. 4. 1, 2. When the Angel sounded his
Trumpet, the voice said; Come up hither, and I will show thee things to come.
Now what did this voice signify, by saying; ascend, or come up, etc. it is not
meant of his bodily motion, or change of his st^tion; but a translation or
change of his mind: For says John, Immediately I was in the Spirit. That is,
he was in a heavenly rapture or heavenly ecstasy; he was spiritually carried up
into heaven. The like expression we have in 2 Cor. 12. 2. where the Apostle
says, he was caught up into the third heaven. Meaning thereby, that he was in
an exceeding high and heavenly rapture or spiritual transfiguration of mind
and spirit; that so he might hear those unutterable revelations of divine
mystery from the Lord. Thus Moses is taken up into the Mount with God, when he
receives the Law at his mouth, Exodus 24. 12. So were the Apostles taken up with
Christ upon the holy Mount, to behold his glorious transfiguration, as the
Apostle relates, 2 Pet. 1. 18. Now by the Mount is resembled, that high and
heavenly pitch of a mind enlightened, of affections raised, of a heart
spirituallized, whereby the Lord does suitably prepare his people to receive
such things, as he does discover unto them.

Now as the Lord does suitably prepare his Saints to entertain heavenly
things, by enlarging their capacities, strengthening their knowledge, and
raising their affections; so he does also make them to be of the same nature
and quality as his discovery is, that he makes known unto them. The creature
is, whatsoever the voice of the creator is unto him. If the Lord speak to any,
only by natural things, as by corn, wine, and oil, and the like: Such unto
whom the Lord comes in these, and no more, they are merely carnal and
natural, they hear God speaking in these, and they cannot ascend higher. And
so if the Lord speak in the heavenly visions of divine glory through his Son
unto any, then these unto whom he thus speaks become gracious and heavenly,
suitable unto the voice that speaks unto them. It is said, in Heb. 1. 2. God
has spoken in these last days by his Son: and how is it then? the Apostle
tells us in Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent the spirit of his
Son into your hearts. So that when God speaks to us by his Son, it makes us
to be sons also: and when we are sons, then the Lord speaks to us by the
spirit of his Son. Whatsoever the voice of Christ is unto us, such are our
hearts; such are our minds and affections; the whole frame and nature of our
spirits is such as his discovery is unto us. Therefore it is most unpossible
the Lord should reveal heavenly mysteries, and show forth his visions of
divine glory unto any; but he must also raise up the minds and affections of
such unto some proportionable and suitableness of spirit, to receive such
revelations from his mouth.

Secondly, Observe; That the spirit 2 Observe:
of the Lord is the only rule and standard of divine and heavenly things. This
is taken from John's qualification, enabling him to measure the Temple. And
there was given me a reed like unto a rod: Which reed or rod does represent
unto us the Spirit of the Lord, the true rule and measure of divine truth. The
word and spirit are all one: for says Christ in Joh. 6. 63. My words are
spirit and life. The outward word is but the clothing of the spirit, neither
has it life and power, but as the spirit does go forth in it. Then the spirit
is the true measure whereby we may take an equal scantlet, or true dimention
of heavenly things. This is that the Apostle does plainly tell us in 1 Cor. 2.
10. That the Spirit does reveal the deep things of God. So that the deep and
hidden things, the most secret mysteries of Gospel Truth are revealed unto us
by the Spirit.

Now what man is it that does not imagine he has the true measure and rule of
the things of God? Every man pretends it, and lays claim unto it. Therefore
before I pass this point, I shall show upon what grounds many men are
mistaken; and also make known what are the true foundations and principles of
the true knowledge and discernnance of the things of God. Concerning the false
rules, whereby men mistake, take notice of these which follow.

First, Fleshly wisdom and carnal reason are the principles that many men
think to find out truth by; and by these principles of nature they would
profess to attain unto the knowledge of divine things: but there is an utter
inability in man, by all his corrupted principles of nature, rightly to judge
or discern of spiritual things. Christ tells Nicodemus, That which is borne
of flesh is flesh, Jo^. 3. 6. Now what does he mean by flesh? he does not
mean material flesh and blood, but he means the corrupted principles of
man's nature, the wisdom, will, and affections of the n^turall man, which
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Again the Apostle tells us of (...), an
animate, sensual, or natural man; and of (...), a spiritual man; or one
enlightened by the spirit of God. Now the natural man is not able to judge of
things above the principles of nature; for every truth is discerned by
principles of light, suitable to it self. Hence it is, that the Apostle says
in 1 Cor. 2. 11. No man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man that
is in him. Now what are the things of man? but all created things, of whom man
is the epitome or compendium of them all, they being all comprehended within
him, as in a Mapp or short abridgement: so as for the secret and hidden things
of nature, or of the creature, there is none can fadome or comprehend them, but
the spirit of man, or the reason, wisdom, or understanding of man. So it falls
out in the things of God; for says the Apostle; Even so the things of God
knows no man, but the spirit of God. Heavenly things are only judged and
discerned by him that is spiritual, who judges all things by a true light.
Then it is in vain for man to grope in the darkness of his own wisdom and
reason after the knowledge of heavenly truth. Man's knowledge is a weak and
dim light, as the light of a Candle, to the light of the day, or like the
shine of the Moon unto the glory of the Sun: it is a low, fleshly, and most
unperfect light, and altogether insufficient to measure divine things by.

Secondly, Many there be, that ground their knowledge of divine things upon
some barren notion, or fruitless opinion, or mere speculation; and when they
have got some jejune and dry Maxims of Divinity, or some poor, lean, and
saplesse syllogisticall reasonings, that then think they have attained to a
most complete knowledge of the things of God, and that they are well seen in
the mystery of truth: when alas, all these things are not sufficient to present
unto the soul the least glimpse of true and saving light.

Thirdly, Others think that the whole mystery of truth is bound up, or
comprehened within some circle or form of Religion. Such as these are apt to
say, Lo here, and lo there, as Christ speaks in Luke 17. 21. that is, Lo here
is Christ in this way of worship, in this form of Religion, in this opinion and
doctrine: but says Christ, The kingdom of God is within you; That is, The
kingdom of God is not so much of form, but of power: of righteousness and
peace, of light and joy, of love and life; and all these are best manifested
within us; for Christ is best known where he lives. It has been the practice
of Antichrist, to cry up the Temple of the Lord; while they cry down the Lord
of the Temple: and to take up the form of Religion, as a means to persecute
the power thereof. Then it is not an empty and barren form of Religion that can
furnish us with the true light of the kingdom of Christ, or the knowledge of
his will.

Fourthly, and lastly, the most of men think, that if they have some
historical knowledge of Christ, and some literal knowledge of the Scriptures,
and are trained up as Parrets to speak over such things as they read in books
and Treatises; and are well versed in the Systems and body of Divinity; that
then they are sufficiently instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel; when alas
the truths of God are hidden from their eyes; and every word and letter they
read are written with an unknown character, which cannot be deciphered without
the Spirit of God. The most learned Scribe, the greatest Rabbie, that shall
understand the Original language, in which the Text of Scripture was first
written, as the Hebrew, and the Greek; but yet shall want the language of the
Spirit, cannot give a true interpretation of the hidden and secret truths
contained in the Scripture. There is not only a history, but also a mystery of
Christ: there is not only letter, but also Spirit in the Scriptures, which the
most learned in the world cannot find out, without the Spirit of Christ. The
Apostle gives in a full testimony unto this in citing of that place, which
says; I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent: where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the disputer of this world? has not God made foolishness the wisdom of this
world? 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. Then it is not carnal reason or fleshly wisdom: it is
not a barren notion, or mere speculation: it is not a round circle or empty
form: it is not a literal knowledge or historical relation of Christ and the
Scriptures, that are sound principles of saving light, or the true measures or
rules, by which we may discern spiritual things.

Thus having shown rules and principles whereby men are mistaken in their
judgment of divine things. Now it follows in the second place, that we make
a discovery of those principles of light and truth, whereby we may come to a
true sight and knowledge of the things of God.

First, Divine truths are known by the Spirit. The Apostle tells us in 1 John
5. 6. The spirit is truth. The spirit is the fullest, the highest, the most
absolute, and the most comprehensive truth: it is the original and ground; it is
perfection and end; it is the judge and standard of all truth. It is most true,
that God has made sense and reason the judge and standard of such truths, that
are within their own compass and circuit; and are able to perceive and
discern such objects, that are suitable to themselves; but they can ascend no
higher. Now for spiritual things, says, the Apostle, they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 12. They cannot be judged or rightly understood without a
spiritual apprehension and enlightened judgment: therefore he says in verse
9. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, etc. That is, both the sense of
seeing and hearing, and also the reason and understanding of the heart, are
poor, low, and dark principles, too superficial, too scant and narrow to
judge divine things by. Therefore the Apostle concludes in verse. 11. That none
knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God: which searches the deep things
of God; it is that alone opens the deep and hidden mysteries of truth. And
hence the Apostle affirms in verse 15. The spiritual man judges, or
discerns all things.

Secondly, Heavenly things are best discovered by a divine impression of them
on the heart. This is that the Apostle testifies of the Corinthians, saying,
Ye are our Epistle, written in our hearts, known and read of all men: for as
much as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by
us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables
of stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. As if the
Apostle had said; ye are the seal of our Apostleship, ye are our commendatory
letters; the truth is most of all manifested by that divine impresse it has
upon your hearts, it is written there with a more lively character, and more
easy to be deciphered, then if it were written with ink and paper, or on.
Tables of stone. The truths of God are not so well discovered by the word and
letter without us, as by the word and spirit within us. The mystery of the
Gospel is most of all seen, when it is engraven upon our hearts, by the
indeleble characters of the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, To know the truth aright, is to know it in Jesus; according to that
expression of the Apostle in Ephesians. 4. 21, 22. If so be, that ye have heard
him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: that ye put off
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful lusts: and be renewed in the spirit of your mind: and that ye
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. The Apostle shows plainly, that to know the truth in Jesus, is by
the putting off the old man, being corrupt: and by putting on the new man, etc.
wherein he does compare the natural and corrupt estate of man, to an old
worn-out garment, which is fit for nothing but to be cast off and laid aside:
and the new man (which is the impression of the image of Gods righteousness and
holiness on the soul) he does compare to a new garment, fit to put on, and be
adorned withal: and hereby our minds shall be renewed, changed and
regenerated from the natural depravation of the understanding, will and
affections; and wholly be filled and acted with spirit, light, and life of
Christ. And hereby are we able to discern the truths of Jesus, as they are
manifested to our new man; or as they are represented to our minds, as being
renewed according to the image and glory of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, and lastly, we come to know the truth, by our conformity unto it.
When there is a sweet compliance of our spirits with the will of God, then we
come to know most of the mystery of his will. And this Christ himself does
bear witness of, when he says; If any man will do his will, he shall know
of my doctrine, Joh. 7. 17. Now what is it to do the will of God? but to have
an harmonious consent, and sweet compliance of our wills, with the divine will
of God: whereby our wills are more enlarged in the knowledge and extent of his
will; our wills and his will, as it were meeting and concentring in one. Thus
the soul becomes best acquainted with the knowledge of the truth, and is
enabled to understand the unknown and hidden mysteries of heavenly things,
whereby it is able to judge aright, and give a true dimention or measure of
them. And thus much for the rules or principles by which we are to judge and
measure divine things.

Thirdly, Observe, from the Temples 3 Observe:
being measured; That the Lord has always afforded his divine presence with
his people; even in the darkest and saddest time of Antichrists reign. The
measuring of the Temple here, has an allusion unto Ezekiel. 40. where the Temple
was measured, that it might appear the whole frame and order thereof was from
the Lord. So here, the Lord does preserve a holy people to himself, and by his
divine presence with them, does measure them out for his Temple. So that he
does preserve a spiritual form of a Temple, by his divine presence with his
people, even all the times of the general Antichristian Apostacy and
defection, when there was no outward form of a Temple, when Antichrist sat in
the visible Temple, and exalted himself above all, grasping all power and
authority, all rule and dominion; then I say, at the very time of the powerful
reign of the Man of sin; God would have us take notice, that he did preserve a
people to himself, and by his divine presence, love, and protection did make
them his Temple.

Fourthly, Observe, from the measuring 4 Observe:
of the Altar; That the Lord had always a people, that did truly worship him.
Christ is the true Altar of God, and all the Saints are made spiritual
Priests, to offer up their sacrifices and services on him. The Saints draw nigh
to God in sincerity, they serve the Lord in spirit, they worship him in spirit.
They did always offer up upon the true Altar; sacrificing all that was dear
unto them, their friends, their goods, their preferments, their parts, their
lives, and all that was dear unto them. Such has been the love of the
faithful unto the service of Christ, that not withstanding all the rage and
sury of Antichrist, vexing and persecuting of them, by imprisoument and death,
and whatsoever could be inflicted on them, yet they could never be made weary
of the profession of Christ; but their faith and graces have always been so
impregnable and indefatigable, that they could never be worn out, or made to
give over the service of Christ.

Fifthly, Observe, in that the true 5 Observe:
worshippers must be measured; That the Lord does accept of none but his true
worshippers; such as worship in his Temple, and offer upon his Altar. Christ is
the true Temple in which we must worship, and the holy Altar, upon which we
must offer: and they only are owned and accepted that make use of him; they
are only to be measured and taken notice of. Now for all others, of what
profession or quality soever; be their external forms of worship and service
never so glorious or amiable in the sight of men; yet it is rejected, cast
forth and disowned; if they worship not in the true Temple, if they offer not
upon the everlasting Altar, that God has appointed for all his. Hence it is,
the Lord says, take measure of those that worship in the Temple, these are
they that I own; I take notice of none but these; I will accept of no more:
These are they that serve me in truth, and worship me in spirit; and I will
own them and acknowledge them for my own.

Sixthly, and lastly, for as much as 6 Observe:
Temple, Altar, and worshippers must be measured. Observe, That the Lord has
always had a people, that have been measuring of divine things. John here did
personate all Saints, who in all ages and periods of time, under the sury and
rage of Antichrist, have been ready to give in a testimony for Christ and his
truth: and have always born witness against the man of sin, the Son of
perdition; and against all his superstitious forms of worship; always casting
off, and rejecting his service and inventions. Every one according to his
measure, has been ready to stand up, and give in their Testimonies for the
truth of Christ, against the falsehood of AntiChrist. So much for the first
verse.

VERSE. 2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it
not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread
underfoot forty and two months.
IN the former verse, we had John^ call to measure the Temple of God, the
Altar, and the worshippers therein. Now here he does receive a prohibition, or
a negative command, not to measure the outward Court, which was without the
Temple, because it was given as a portion to the Gentiles.

In this verse we are to take notice.

First, what that is, which must not be measured; The Court which is without
the Temple.

Secondly, the prohibition it self: Leave it out, measure it not.

Thirdly, The reason of this prohibition; for it is given to the Gentiles.

Fourthly, The use that the Gentiles make of the outward Court, and the holy
City; They tread them underfoot.

Fifthly, How long? Forty and two months.

First, That which must not be measured, is the outward Court: so called, as
being distinct from the inward Court, which was appropriate to the Priests, in
which was the Altar, where they offered sacrifice, which was also adjoining to
the Temple. This outward Court is here spoken by an allusion to that mentioned
in Ezekiel. 40. 17. which was far larger and bigger then the inner Court.
Therefore called, The great Court, 2 Chronicles. 4. 9. being wide and large enough
to contain multitudes of people. This was not hallowed as the inner Court, and
Temple was; but was common for all people.

By the outward Court is meant all Antichrists worships and worshippers, even
the whole surface or superficial part of things, as all outward professions,
all external forms of worship, power, order, government, wisdom, art, or
whatsoever is without the Temple of God; all that the Gentiles or carnal
professors may take up and be exercised in, these be all the outward Court. The
outward face of the visible Church was given to Antichrist, to Gentiles, to
worldly Christians to use and enjoy: while the true servants of the Lord are
serving him in the wilderness, as in the inner Court of the Temple: They were
that inward and secret Temple, with whom the Lord was present.

Secondly, The prohibition it self; Leave it out, measure it not. The Greek
word (...) signifies to cast forth, as we use to cast things of no value out of
doors. As if he had said, cast it forth as common and of no use, account it not
of the Temple, nor of any part thereof; but rather esteem it as a portion for
the Gentiles, which they may enjoy, and be exercised in, therefore measure it
not. Now by measuring of the Temple, Altar, and worshippers, he was to take a
true dimention of the servants of God, who worshipped him in Christ, and served
him in spirit: who were the true, invisible, and secret Temple of God; serving
the Lord in the wilderness. Then by not measuring the outward Court is meant
thus much; That he should not measure or judge the true servants of the Lord by
external things; for the outward face of the visible Church was to be given to
the Gentiles; and that Antichrist was to sit in the Temple of God: and should
exercise in all external forms of worship, order, government, he should
exercise in all outward ordinances, and in the highest acts of Religion, as
prayer, preaching, and expounding of the Scriptures, and the like: and
therefore though these Gentiles or Antichristian professors should thus
exercise themselves in forms of worship: in Church Government, in highest
external acts of Religion: were called Christians; possessing and enjoying the
outward face of the visible Church; yet they were not to be accounted as the
Temple of God; to be of his structure or building, as measured by the true
reed, or weighed by the balance of the Sanctuary; they were not to be
accounted as Gods approved Church, or to be the true Temple of the Lord.

Thirdly, The reason of this prohibition; For it is given unto the Gentiles.
All worldly Christians and Antichristian professors are here called Gentiles,
by an allusion to those, that were enemies unto the Jews; they were called
Heathens and Gentiles, as appears in Psalm. 2. 1. And the Psalmist complains
in Psalm. 79. 1. saying; O God, the heathen (or the Gentiles) are come into
thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem
on heaps, etc. This was the complaint of the Church of the Jews unto the Lord,
against the most barbarous tyranny of the Babylonians, when they razed
Jerusalem, polluted the Temple, and murdered the people. So here the sons of
spiritual Babylon, who most barbarously and cruelly torment the Saints, and
tread the holy City under foot; these also are called Gentiles and heathen. Now
says he, the outward Court is not to be measured; because it is given to the
Gentiles: it is a Gentiles portion: a worldly Christian, a carnal professor
may take up, use, and be exercised in any of these external things: he may
take up the highest form of worship, he may make the greatest profession of
Godliness: he may be exercised in the most eminent acts of Religion; therefore
measure not my true servants and Temple by these, they are but the outward
Court, and the portion of Gentiles.

Fourthly, What use does the Gentiles make of these things? They tread them
under foot. And the holy City shall they tread, etc. By an allusion to
Jerusalem, the Saints are called the holy City, which was a figure of the
spiritual Church and Temple of God: in which respect they are called Jerusalem
from above, Gal. 4. 26. The new Jerusalem, the holy City, Revel. 3. 12. Mount
Sion, Heb. 12. 22. So that by the holy City is meant the Saints, called the
holy people, Dan. 8. 24. and 12. 7. Now the best use that these Gentiles make,
both of the outward Court, and of the holy City is but to profane and trample
upon them. As for all the external forms of service, government, ordinances,
and all acts of Religion, the best use they make of them, is like beasts and
swine to tread them under feet; not knowing how to make a better use of them.
And for the Saints, the holy City, these they abuse and persecute, they know
not how to make a better use of these, then swine do of pearls.

Fifthly, and lastly, How long? Forty and two months. The term of fortytwo
months, allowing thirty days to every month, allowing thirty days to every
month, make the same number of 1260 days, mentioned in the next verse. In the
next Chapter and sixth verse, The woman flies into the wilderness, there to be
nourished a thousand two hundred and sixty days: and in verse 14. it is
expressed by a Time, times, and half a time: by a time is meant a year, by
times two years, by half a time, half a year, which is three years, and a
half, being resolved into days, make 1260 days: if into months, they make
forty two months. To which agrees the term of three days and a half, in
verse. 9. of this Chapter. These days being put for years, they make just
three years and a half. So that the Gentiles treading down the holy City
forty two months: and the beast continuing forty two months, Chapt. 13. 5.
And the space of 1260 days, that the Witnesses shall prophecy; as also the
woman being nourished in the wilderness; and the time, times, and half a
time; with the three days and a half, that the Witnesses shall lie dead: I
say, all these various expressions of time, appear to be all one and the same
space. And so it appears, that the time of the prophecy of the Witnesses, and
the continuance of the reign of the beast to be one and the same. Some would
have this number 1260 days, turned into years, and so would measure the whole
term of the reign of the beast, and the prophecy of the Witnesses to
continue 1260 years. I shall not contradict this opinion; but shall thus far
close with it, as to conclude, that the term of time signified by forty two
months, and 1260 days, is the whole time of Antichrists reign, and of the
Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth. But I intend not to make it my business to
calculate the years of Antichrists powerful reign, or the time of the
Witnesses prophecy; but rather to search out something from the mystery of
truth, that is contained therein.

This term of forty two months, does not only h^ld forth the whole time and
age of Antichrist, in which he shall tread under the holy City, and scatter the
power of the holy people; but does also import the different and changeable
appearances and workings of his: so that various shapes and forms, the
several disguises and habits that Antichrist does cloth himself withal, and
come forth in, to act his part, and deceive the Nations: are held forth unto us
under the Term of forty two months. Therefore here we are to note, that the
time of the Witnesses prophecy is said to be 1260 days. Now a day is measured
out by the Sun, as a month is by the Moon: the course of the Sun is by days,
which is a time more constant and of more light then the night. But now the
time of the reign of Antichrist is expressed by forty and two months: now a
month is a season measured out by the Moon; and shows that in all things there
is but a Moon light, a weak and dim light, a light borrowed from the Sun.
Besides the Moon is variable and changeable, and is always up and down, never
at one stay, sometimes increasing, at other times decreasing; now in the wane,
then in the full, and the like: Suitable hereunto is the variable state and
changeable appearance of Antichrist, in his stations and forms. First, he
comes forth in the form of a Dragon: Secondly, in the shape of a Leopard:
Thirdly, in the likeness of a beast with two horns: And lastly, in the image
of the beast. Every one of these have their months and seasons measured out
unto them, in which they variously appear, and act their parts. But more of
this hereafter: having explained the words, let us proceed to the Observations
they offer unto us.

First, That all external forms and professions 1 Obser:
of Christ, without the life and spirit of Christ, are but the shadow and
outward part of heavenly things. All forms of worship, order, government, with
all the acts of Religion: all things that lie within the compass of man, are
but the outward Court, the superficial part of things, which a carnal man, a
Gentile professor may take up and use; and yet never know what it is to worship
in the Temple of God, or to offer upon his Altar, or to be a real and true
worshipper of the Lord in spirit: It was the Priest only, that might enter
into the inner Court, or into the Temple and holy place. So the Saints alone
are made Priests to God, Revel. 1. 6. And have access (or liberty of speech,
as the phrase is) to enter into the holy place, by a new and living way, Heb.
10. 19, 20. And by Christ to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God, 1 Pet. 2.
5. But now for all Gentiles, Christians, and worldly professors, they dwell
upon and live in the external part of things, in the form and shadow of
heavenly things: they never go farther then the outward Court or circle of the
things of God. Thus it was with the carnal Jews, as plainly appears in 1
Cor. 10. from verse. 1. to verse 7. Moreover brethren, I would not that ye
should be ignorant, (says the Apostle) how that all our fathers were under the
cloud, and all passed through the Sea: and were all Baptized unto Moses, in the
Cloud, and in the Sea: and did all eat the same spiritual meat: and did all
drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them; and that Rock was Christ) but with many of them God was not well
pleased, for they were overthrown in the Wilderness, etc. Now mark,
notwithstanding the Manna came down from heaven, and the water out of the
Rock; being as signs and symbol^^, yea as most lively representations and
images of Christ: in which respect it was called spiritual meat, and
spiritual drink: but it was not so to the carnal Jews; for they saw nothing
but the corporeal substance of those things; it was but fleshly and carnal to
those that could not apprehend it, but with a carnal eye. For what use did
these carnal Jews make of their spiritual meat and spiritual drink? The
Apostle tells us in verse 7. They were Idolaters: for they eat and drank, and
rose up to play. They did but Idolize those heavenly things, by sporting and
playing with them; for it is the nature of carnal professors either to abuse
their form of worship, or else to make their service their God, by idolizing
of it. It was the custom of the Gentiles to worship such things, as beasts and
birds for their God, as the Jews were to offer in sacrifice unto God. Thus do
all heathenish Christians, they sacrifice to their external forms of worship
and service: they never ascend higher then the outward part, they never pass
the outward Court; They know not what it is to worship God in his secret
Temple, nor to offer upon his holy Altar.

Secondly, Observe, from the prohibition 2 Observe:
it self; Measure it not. That the Temple, worship, and servants of God are
not to be measured by outward things. We may not take a survey, or make a
dimention either of the service or Saints of God, by the outward and external
part of things; for there is no outward form of worship, nor external act of
Religion, but Antichrist does take up and make use of. For mark it, John was
called to take a true scantlet of the true Temple, and spiritual worshippers
of God: now he was not to measure them by the external or superficial worship
and profession; for so he might be mistaken; for the Gentiles, and
Antichristian professors might and should possess the outward face of worship,
and perform the external acts of Religion. Then if we judge of the true
Temple and worshippers of God by this or that form, order, government, or
opinion; instead of measuring the Temple and worshippers of God, we measure but
the outward Court: we contest, wrangle and dispute about those things that wax
old and will perish.

Thirdly, Observe, That the outward 3 Observe:
form of divine things is given for a time into the hands of Antichrist. This
is given as a reason why the outward Court was not to be measured; because it
was given to the Gentiles. The external figures and forms of worship were to
be for a time, the portion of worldly Christians, they might take them, they
might enjoy them. Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2. 4. There he
reigns and domineereth, exalting himself as God in all supreme authority
and prerogative. So that Antichrist and carnal professors, may take upon them
all rule, power, and government: outward profession, external worship: these
they may enjoy, for it is their portion for a time, and they may possess them;
but more then these they meddle not withal: they have the outward Court, and
they possess no more. These have the outward Court, or external things of God
given into their hand for a time, no otherwise then the carnal Jews were made
partakers of outward privileges, being the fleshly seed of Abraham; as we may
take notice from Romans 9. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The Apostle lamenting for his kinsmen
in the flesh, says; Who were Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, and
the glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises: whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, etc. Here take notice of the greatness of the Jews privilege.
First, they are Israelites, of the adoption, accounted his Sons and Children,
above all Nations, Jer. 31. 9. Secondly, there appertained to them the glory,
the Arc of the Covenant, apledge of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 4. 21. Thirdly, And
the Covenants, temporal and spiritual. Fourthly, And the Law, Judicial and
moral. Fifthly, The service of God, the whole form and manner of divine
worship. Sixthly, The promises made to Abraham, and to his seed. But
notwithstanding they were partakers of all these external privileges, they
enjoyed but as it were the shadow of them: for take notice what he says in
verse 6, 7, 8. For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children: but in Isaac shall
thy seed be called. Hence it is evident, that they that were born of Abraham,
after the course of nature: such were not accounted as the children of God; for
says he, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: now Isaac was a child of promise:
so only the children of the promise, the spiritual seed, they were accounted
for children. So that the carnal Jew enjoyed no more then outward privilege,
then an external form of the things of God: and all such they might enjoy as
they were the fleshly seed of Abraham.

Thus a Gentile Christian, a carnal professor may enjoy the outward Court, the
external part of worship, the empty form of Religion: these things are given
into the hands of Antichrist for a time; these are their portion, and they may
possess them. But the external part is all they have, or can enjoy, that they
take up, they own, they are exercised in; not knowing the true, inward Temple
of the Lord, his Altar, or those that worship him in spirit.

Fourthly, Observe, That the best use 4 Observe:
that Antichrist and the world do make of the outward Court and the holy
City, it is but to profane, abuse, and trample upon them. As for the holy
City, they shall trample upon it; and as Daniel speaks, they shall scatter the
power of the holy people: they shall persecute them by imprisonment,
banishment, death; enflicting all manner of evil they can devise against them.
And as for all external forms of worship, order, government, Churches,
Scriptures, Ordinances, etc. All these they will profane and abuse; they know
not how to make a better use of these, then to pollute and trample upon them.
Suitable unto this was the practice of the Scribes and Pharisees, the leaders
of the people of the Jews, of whom the Prophet Ezekiel complains; saying;
They have eaten up the good pasture, but the residue they tread down with
their feet; and they drink of the deep waters; but foul the residue with
their feet: and as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your
feet, and drink that which ye have fouled with your feet, Ezekiel. 34. 18, 19. By
the good pasture and deep water is meant the pure word; or a complete
nourishment by these is given out of the flock: but the Scribes and Pharisees
would eat of these good pastures, and drink of these sweet waters, what of
them they liked, they would feed on that, which should up hold their dignity
and greatness, and serve their purposes and ends, and suit with their gain
and advantages: but for the other part or residue, or that which should feed my
people with knowledge and understanding (says the Lord) that you will tread
down with your feet, abuse and trample upon: that is, they would corrupt the
word of God and his truth, by their false glosses and interpretations, by
forcing their own expositions and inferences, which they make or draw from the
Scriptures: that so the people might feed on that, which they had trampled on
with their feet, that they had mixed, corrupted, and abused, as themselves
pleased. The same has been the constant practice of Antichrist, who by his
forced translations, and interpretations of Scripture, by his tyrannical
government, and invented ordinances, has subjected all people under him, into
Egyptian darkness, and Babylonish captivity. Thus has he corrupted the
external part of worship, and abused, suppressed, and trodden under foot the
holy City. But how long shall this be? Forty two months.

Fifthly, Observe, That Antichrist has 5 Observe:
his prefixed and limited time to reign and domineer in. It is most true that
the nature and spirit of Antichrist has always acted its part: it is that
very seed of the Serpent, that has opposed the very image of God from the
beginning: that has showed it self in all the Sons of Adam, beginning in
Caine, and passing to all the seed in all generations: but we must note, that
Antichrist in his power and form, has but a season and an appointed time: for
this does not note the time, in which the seed of the Serpent should make war
against the seed of the woman; but rather the time, when the subtilty and envy
of the Serpent was put forth and exercised in the cruelty of the Dragon, and
reign and power of the Beast. So that the evil spirit that Christ opposed in
the Scribes and Pharisees, was no other, then the spirit of Antichrist now: but
since the general defection, and falling away, this evil spirit has put on
the forms of diverse beasts, most fierce and cruel: so that this forty two
months is the time of the powerful reign of the man of sin. Now for the
time of the powerful reign of Antichrist, he has but his months, and his
seasons; and it will be, that time shall be no more: when the Lord shall come
in the b^ames and brightness of his glory, shining from the East unto the
West, and making a full discovery of the nakedness of the whore, she shall
utterly be destroyed, and shall reign no more.

Sixthly, Observe; That the shapes and 6 Observe
forms in which Antichrist comes forth in to act his part, are various and
changeable. Therefore it is, that his time is appointed by months, and not by
days: his time is not measured by the Sun, which is light and constant; but by
the Moon, which is dim in light, and most variable and unconstant in
appearance. So that the appearances of Antichrist are variable, unconstant, and
changeable as the Moon: now appearing in this shape: by and by in another:
Sometimes in this form, another time wholly disguised into something else, and
so never long at one stay. Thus the subtilty of Antichrist is to fly out of one
form into another, and when he is detected and discovered in one guise, he
will put on some habit of reformation and piety; but it shall be but the
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, in which he shall appear, to mislead
people by: therefore know, as his last time or month shall be his shortest, so
his last habit and dress, that he shall come forth in shall be the finest, and
most apt to deceive.

Therefore let all Saints watch and keep their garments, least they be made
walk naked, and their shame appear, Revel. 16. 15. Let every one arm
himself against the wiles and methods of Antichrist, that so we may be able to
trace him in all his ways, and find him out under all his disguises.

Now before I pass the thing in hand, it will be necessary that I make a
description of Antichrist: as to enquire what he is.

First, in spirit, and mystery. Secondly, in form, and appearance.
Concerning Antichrist in spirit, take a description by these four heads.

First, The spirit of Antichrist is that evil and corrupt spirit in man, that
opposes Jesus Christ, his image and glory, his truth and appearance. This is
that the Apostle calls, the carnal mind or spirit of enmity, that dwells in
the heart of man; which is the wisdom of the flesh, opposing the
righteousness of Christ. This spirit has had it is rule and reign in man ever
since man's defection, and fall from God. This is the old man, or man of sin,
the son of perdition, that does always endeavor to betray and crucify the
very life, light, image, and glory of Christ in our hearts.

Secondly, The original and life of this evil spirit, is the close of the
heart of man with Satan, the Prince and power of darkness; who does transform
himself into an Angel of light, advancing the reason, wisdom, and
righteousness of man, above the spirit or pure anointing of God. And so while
he draws man to worship God, in the wisdom, power, and parts of the creature;
it proves but the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, or acting in the power
of Satan, and of the flesh, and does contain no more then the signs and
shadows of heavenly things.

Thirdly, This spirit sits in the Temple of God, as God; That is, it does put
forth it self, and act its part; in every act and performance, in every duty
and ordinance, that man does perform, or exercise himself in. So that as
Christ does enable the soul to perform divine actions, by his wisdom, power,
and spirit; so does Antichrist, carry forth the soul to act by humane wisdom,
fleshly power, carnal parts and gifts; and so deceives the soul by this false
spirit, or false anointing, instead of the true anointing or pure spirit of
Christ.

Fourthly, and lastly, This spirit of wickedness always acts in a mystery of
iniquity. Now it is called a mystery of iniquity, because it is not in it is
proper place, where it may be better known or discerned: for says the
Apostle, The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, etc. Gal. 5. 19. These fleshly actings, being in
their proper place, are so evident, that they are easily discerned, there is no
man but knows these, and will say they are evil; but as for the works of
Antichrist, performed in the strength of carnal wisdom, fleshly power, humane
parts, and the like: these actings are cried up to be holy and righteous, when
they are but the more refined part of man, the righteousness of the first
Adam, or old man, and contain the very mystery of iniquity. To this purpose
will serve that place in Matthew. 12. 44, 45. When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none:
then he says, I will return into my house from whence I came out: and when he
is come, he finds it empty, swept, and garnished: Then goes he, and takes
with himself, seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter
in, and dwell there, etc. Something of the workings of iniquity, does appear
from this Text. The unclean spirit cast forth of man, is the spirit of open
and gross prophannesse, the natural conscience being in some measure
convinced, cannot any longer content it self in such palpable wickedness; but
by some outward profession or external reformation this Devil is cast forth,
as not to be born with any longer. But what comes of it? This same evil spirit
comes again, makes a reentry, dwells there: and in what appearance does he
show himself. He finds the heart empty, swept, and garnished, with some
external form of religion; and is now exercised in some excellent
performances of prayer, preaching, hearing, fasting, and the like: and here the
soul takes much satisfaction, in comparing it is present actings, with it is
former courses. Yet here is seven worse spirits, or the very perfection or
mystery of iniquity; for though these garnishings be never so beautiful and
glorious; though the outward profession be painted over, and much adorned: yet
the evil spirit dwells within, the perfection of wickedness, within, the
perfection of wickedness, the mystery of iniquity remains still in the heart:
and this is the highest deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, the very spirit of
Antichrist, and inward actings of the man of sin.

Then while we look abroad in the world, and strike here and there at the
external forms and images of Antichrist; let us behold the spirit of
Antichrist within us, having it is throne and seat in our hearts, continually
acting of it is parts, in all our duties and performances, in all our worships
and services: all the blindness, deceit, selflove, and hypocrisy, that lies
wrapped up in our hearts, proceeds from this corrupt principle. Therefore it will
not be enough, that we cut off the topboughes of outward profaneness, but
that we lay the Axe to the root of the Tree, and destroy that spiritual
wickedness that lies hid within our own breasts. Thus much for the spirit and
mystery of Antichrist.

Secondly, We have the form and appearance of Antichrist. Now though the
spirit of Antichrist, or that corrupt principle in man's heart be the very
sourse and root of all evil, yet it does not only lurk privily in man's heart,
but puts it self forth into the world, openly, and visible to the eye, and
that in many several forms and figures, in many shapes and appearances. Hence
it is said, There be many Antichrists, 1 John 2. 18. that is, there be many
shapes and appearances, in which Antichrist shall come forth to act his part.
Concerning these variable shapes of the man of sin, I shall now endeavor in
some measure to demonstrate.

These forty two months, notes the various and changeable images of the beast:
which term of time is the same in proportion with the three days and half,
mentioned in verse. 9. being the time the witnesses should he dead and slain. I
shall make use of that term of three days and half, in stead of the forty
two months; and shall show how in each day, and half day we have a changeable
form in which Antichrist does show himself.

The first term of time, or day of Antichrists visible reign, was in the
shape of a Dragon, mentioned in Revel. 12. 3. By which we have represented to
us the Roman Emperors, who usurped authority over the Church and Saints of
Christ, being very much corrupted, were exceeding great persecutors and
tormentors of all that professed the name of Christ. This great red Dragon, is
said to have seven heads, ten horns, and seven Crowns; which does import the
largeness of his Dominion, the greatness of his power and strength. And for
his carriage, it is Pharaoh-like, who sought to destroy the firstborn of
Israel, and as Herod sought to destroy Christ, as soon as he was borne: so
this beast was ready to devour the child, that the woman was to bring forth.
The spiritual Church is compared to a woman, as being espoused to Christ, and
likely to bring forth some excellent and worthy instrument, as Constantine, who
was sought to be destroyed by Galerius: but God taking this child into his own
bosom and prorection: and preserving the woman in the wilderness, from the
fury and rage of this Dragon: at last raising up Constantine (here called
Michael, which spiritually is meant of Christ) to fight against Maxentius,
Maximinus, and Licinius: and overcame them, that they ruled no more in the
Roman Empire. Thus those wicked and persecuting Emperors, that did so much vex
and oppress the Saints, are now cast out of heaven, as not retaining their
usurped authority of the Church. Now the subtilty of the Serpent put forth in
the cruelty of the Dragon, or corrupt Magistracy, acting in such gross and
abominable wickedness, is now detected, and cried down for bloody tyranny and
oppression; so that Antichrist could no longer continue in this form, this his
first day being ended; and he being cast to the earth, is forced to seek some
other habit or disguise to appear in, under some fair show or pretense of
Religion.

The second day of Antichrists powerful reign, or new form, that he comes
forth in, is in the likeness of a beast, like unto a Leopard, as appears
from Revel. 13. 1.

This beast does prefigure the universal Bishop of Rome, or Popish Empire. Now
this universal Bishop came in like an Angel of light, pretending religion and
reformation; but intended nothing but hypocrisy and abomination. This beast
arises out of the sea, or Nations round about: having had seven heads and ten
horns, as the former beast had: and ten Crowns: ten kingdoms being subjected
to the Popish Empire; his likeness was like unto a Leopard, fierco and cruel;
his feet like the feet of a Bear, devouring and ravenous; and his mouth as a
Lion, powerful and mighty. And received the seat and authority of the Dragon.
Now this beast being exalted in dignity and greatness; and all begin to submit
themselves to his service, and forms of worship; crying, Who is like unto the
beast? but now what does he? Notwithstanding at the first, he pretended to
sanctify and reformation; yet now by degrees he comes to blaspheme God, his
name, Tabernacle, and people; making war against them, by subduing and
slaying them.

And thus did this beast trample upon the Temple of God, and upon the holy
Cities in his months and seasons, while they were given into his hand. But the
Lord having raised up many eminent instruments, as Hush, Luther, Melancton,
Wickcliff, Calvine, and Bid, with many others, that have respectively
according to their light given forth their testimony against this beast, laying
open his hypocrisy and deceit, his filthiness and abomination, whereby he
has received such a deadly wound, that it never will be recovered; and
therefore is ever since upon the declining hand.

So that now Antichrist is forced to cloth himself in some other dress, and
come forth in some new habit or disguise to act his part in, and so flies out
of the appearance of this beast into another.

The third day of Antichrists powerful reign, is in the form of a beast with
two horns like a lamb, mentioned in Revel. 13. 11. This beast does relate to
Episcopacy, and such like forms of pretended reformation; so that this
appearance carries with it more fair pretenses, and greater shows of religion,
then the former; and therefore more closely hypocritical and deceitful then
the former. This beast is said to arise out of the earth, viz. from a Kingly or
earthly power: and had two horns, one was a political or civil, the other
called Ecclesiastical or spiritual: like a Lamb: professing much meekness
and gentleness: but speak like a Dragon, as being very feirce and cruel;
taking upon him to exercise the power of the first beast, to act by humane
force, and govern the Church by civil authority: and so did but heal up the
wound of the former beast. And this he does by lying miracles, as to cause fire
to come down from heaven in the sight of men; seeming to have the very spirit
of Elisha, counterfeiting the spirit of God in his workings, by which he
deceived the people of the earth. But these deceits and hypocrisies of this
beast being perceived by the Saints of God, he is forced to flee into some
other form, to hide himself under some other disguise, being closely beset,
and driven up into a narrow compass, must fly farther for succor and refuge:
and is compelled to make some other image or pretense, to shelter himself.
This being the third day.

Lastly, We have the half day, in which time we have the image, that the last
beast causes to be set up, Revel. 13. 14. The beast being changed into an
image, comes forth more refined, moreglorious in show, pretending the greatest
reformation of all, as being the last refuge that Antichrist has, the last
term of time he has to reign, the half day, and therefore now he puts on his
best dress, and cloths himself with his finest ornaments. This half day, and
last appearance comes near Rome to our own times; and therefore I shall not
describe those that set up the image of the beast, by any proper name; but
rather by these six particulars following; that we shall collect from that
place in Revel. 13. from verse the 14. to the end of the Chapter.

First, They that set up the image of the beast, ar^ those, that will make
Disciples unto Christ by a humane power; and by pressing some external
comformity upon men, they will convert the world into a Church, and make many
to be Christians against their wills: and hence it is, that there are so many
poor, dark, and carnal professors of Christ. Now this is diametrically
opposite to Christ's rule, who prevails upon the heart, by meekness, and
gentleness, and does gain upon the soul by truth and righteousness, and
win upon the affections with peace and love. Christ does not use any coactive
or constraining power to compel men to be subject unto him; but of an
unwilling people he makes them willing, by the swavity and sweetness of divine
grace, working upon their hearts. But contrarily, these advance their Church by
humane force and worldly power; causing all that will not worship the image of
the beast to be killed. Thus by force and cruelty they make Disciples, or
rather make many hypocrites, bring many under the force of Religion, that know
nothing of the power of godliness.

Secondly, Those that cause an image to be made, they prescribe rules of
worship and service, according to their own fancy and invention. Hence it is
said, verse. 15. They cause the image to speak; That is, by constituting and
appointing platformes of worship; advancing their own devices and directories,
above the laws and institutions of Christ. These only will define what is
truth and what not, as comprehending the whole mystery of truth within their
systems or models of divinity: as if they were the only Cisternes of living
water, and the very oil that must cause the lamp to shine: making themselves
to be the very treasury and storehouse of all wisdom and knowledge: and thus
they sit down in Christ's Throne and Temple, officiating his office and
authority, robbing him of his dignity and glory, by putting of his crown upon
their own heads.

Thirdly, These cause all to worship the image, which they set up, and by
humane force and secular power do compel all men to follow their edicts and
platformes; to observe their invented ordinances, and devised worship. It has
been the custom, that the Clergy (so called) must first study the faith, and
afterward the earthly powers would confirm it by some civil sanction: and so
enforce their own devices upon the consciences of people. Hence it was, that
the late Bishop that suffered here in England, did profess at his death, that
he dyed in that Religion, that was established by law. Now Christ does never
call up the powers of the earth to rule and bear sway in his kingdom. The
Laws by which Christ does rule by, are the law of the new creature, and of
love, the law of his word and spirit: by these he does enforce a sweet
compliance of the heart unto the will of God. The law of Christ is most
heavenly and divine, and it is of the most constraining force, and of the most
indispensible necessity of any law. This is called the law of liberty, because
it frees the soul from the vassallage and power of man's devises, and brings
the soul into a real compliance with the divine will. Thus Christ does change
the mind, renew the spirit, and alter the constitution of the souls of men,
and so make them subject unto his own kingdom: while Antichrist does enforce
many to his kingdom: to yield blind obedience unto him, by virtue of some
humane law, or secular power.

Fourthly, those that undertake to set up the image of the beast, they enforce
some mark or badge to every one, as a token of subjection unto their way, or
invented form of worship Revel. 13. 16. These require worship and homage of
all sorts, both small and great: and cause them to receive a mark in their
right band, by some external obligation; and in their forebeads, as some badge
to be known by: otherwise none may buy or sell, or have any communion with
them, or enjoy any power or privilege, that they themselves do enjoy. So that
these give forth some Character or mark, whereby all that come under them, may
both be known to be of them, and also engaged unto them.

Fifthly, Those that erect the Image of the beast, have not the power of the
beast, because all they set up is but a statue image, or shadow. We must
remember the time of the image is but the half day, therefore short: and hence
it is, that those that manage the work, of framing the image, are hardly warm
in their seats; they are no sooner advanced, but presently are thrown down
again from their station. These can but startle and affright men, these have
but the image of the beast, that could devour and destroy: These have more will
to inflict punishment, then they have power to effect: These have the nature
and spirit of the former beast, but not the authority and power. This half day
is called the dividing of a time: because the Saints are not absolutely in
bondage under Ecclesiastical laws and humane constitutions; this image being
but as a dead Lion, that cannot really hurt nor destroy; neithr are the Saints
wholly free from suffering; because they groan under the spirit of envy and
malice, of malignity and bitterness; and such like persecutions as these, they
endure under the form of the image.

Sixthly, and lastly, Those that manage the cause of the image, carry forth the
whole work in the wisdom, reason, power, and strength of the creature; they
act all by virtue of fleshly principles and carnal abilities: They perform
all by the name and number of the beast: This is plainly expressed in Revel.
13. 17, 18. these have his name, and the number of his name: and his number is
but the number of a man, which amounts to six hundred, threescore and six. His
number is not the number of God, which is seven, which is a number of
perfection and rest. Christ has the seven spirits of God, being filled with
all perfection of wisdom and knowledge, but his number is the number of m^n,
and contains no more then the wisdom, knowledge, and invention of man; it
only takes in those things, that are within the power and compass of man; it
is the number of weakness and imperfection, of the bondage and labor of the
creature, acting from the poor, low, and dark principles of carnal reason,
and of the first Adam. So that the Ecclesiastical form or Church state, that
Antichrist sets up, is wholly fleshly, consisting merely of a carnal Church,
humane ministry, natural gifts, invented ordinances, secular power, worldly
government, and the like. Thus all they act, all they enjoy, is but the number
of a man, weak, low, and carnal. Thus we have those described that make an
image unto the beast.

Now give me leave a little to recapitulate: we told you, that forty two
months did hold proportion with three days and a half, which does import the
several days, or ages, or periods of time, of the powerful reign of the man
of sin. And though there has been from the beginning, that evil spirit of
Antichrist, constantly opposing the Lord and his truth; yet the power and
reign of Antichrist has it is prefixed time, and comes forth under several
shapes and figures; as first under the appearance of a Dragon; secondly, of a
Leopard; thirdly, of a beast with two horns; and lastly, under the form of an
image: The three first of these have each of them, his whole day^ and the image
his half day. And thus Antichrist fl^es out of one form and likeness into
another, and does always appear under some fair vizard or glori^us pretense
of piety and religion, while he does act in a mystery of iniquity. The whorish
woman is said to be clothed with purple, and scarlet color, and decked with
gold, and precious stmes, and pearl, Revel. 17. 4. which are the very
excellencies of nature and a^t: the glory of all her servic^s and forms of
worship, these being her ornaments, she is adorned as the spouse of Christ,
though she be a coun^erf^it strumpet; for upon her head is mystery; that is,
all the head and glory of her excellencies is but a mystery of iniquity, to all
that are made drunk with the cup of her sornication, or spiritual idolatries
and superstitions, and discern them not. And thus Antichrist by his craft and
subtilty, is furnished with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. But yet
know, that when Antichrist is forced to set up an image unto the beast, that he
is put to his last shift and refuge, that he has but a short time, he has
almost played his last game; he has but half a time, a half day. Therefore
the time is nigh, it does already appear, that Christ will come forth in
b^ames and brightness to destory this man of sin, this son of perdition: and
all his Saints shall sing Halelujah, saying, the Lord God omnipotent shall
reign for ever.

Verse. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy
a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.
HAving showed, that by the Temple, Altar, and worshippers, are meant, Gods
divine presence with his people, the pure services, and true worshippers: these
the Lord would have measured, for such as he would own, during the whole
reign of Antichrist. But for the outward Court, all false worship, and all
external forms, that the Gentiles were exercised in: neither of these would
the Lord own, but that they should be cast forth, and not measured at all. Now
we are to proceed to open the mystery of the witnesses.

In this verse we are to take notice of these particulars.

First, From whom these witnesses receive power to testify against Antichrist;
that is from the Lord; I will give power, etc.

Secondly, The title given unto them; they are called Witnesses.

Thirdly, Their number; they are two.

Fourthly, Their office, in which they are to be employed; they shall prophecy.

Fifthly, The manner and state, in which they shall officiate; that is, in
sackcloth.

Sixthly, and lastly, The duration and continuance of their prophecy; and that
is a thousand two hundred and threescore days.

The first thing, that we are to enquire of, is who does empower these
witnesses to perform their office of prophecy; and that is the Lord himself;
I will give (says the Lord) God gives what the witnesses have. The Lord does
empower them, to give forth their testimony, and none besides himself can
enable them for that work.

Now I shall first show, who does enable the witnesses to prophecy: and then
secondly, by what means he does so enable them.

First, The Lord gives forth the spirit of propeesie, and that two ways.
First, originally from himself: secondly, mediately by Christ as Mediator.

First, The gift of prophecy comes originally from God himself; he being the
father of lights, from whom every good gift descends, Jam. 1. 17. Hence it
is, that those speeches are so frequently used in the old Testament: Hear the
word of the Lord: Thus says the Lord: and the word of the Lord came unto me,
and the like. All which does signify, that the Prophets received their
prophetical revelations from the Lord. To this purpose we may observe that
phrase in Ezekiel. 20. 46. Son of man, set thy face toward the South, and drop thy
word toward the South, and prophecy, etc. And the like speech is that of
Moses; My doctrine shall drop as the rain: my speech shall distill as the dew,
as the small rain upon the tender herb, as the showers upon the grass, Deuteronomy.
32. 2. Now from this phrase of dropping, we may argue, that both Moses and
Ezekiel, had their prophecy from the Lord. For look as the clouds, from
whence rain descends (to mollify the earth, and to cause grass and flowers
to spring) have not their water originally and natively in themselves, but from
the Sea, and moistened places of the earth, exhaled and drawn up by the heat of
the Sun: so have not the Prophets a spirit of prophecy, whereby they of
themselves are able to discover divine mystery and revelation: but it is drawn
out of a full sea of that excellent knowledge and wisdom, that is in God
himself. Then the Prophets must of necessity receive their message originally
from God himself. But

Secondly, They receive prophecy mediatly from Christ, unto whom the Lord has
committed the whole administration of all things, concerning his Church and
kingdom. And we have that passage, 1 Samuel 3. 21. The Lord revealed himself
unto Samuel in Shiloh, by the word of the Lord. By the word of the Lord is here
meant Christ, the eternal word, by whom the Lord does reveal himself, as in
Joh. 1. 18. So that Christ is brought in by way of mediation, as by whom the
Lord should reveal himself. Suitable unto this is that passage in Genes. 19.
24. The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire, from the Lord
out of heaven. The Lord raining brimstone by the Lord is meat, that the Lord
did administer judgment by Christ as Mediator. Christ is here brought forth
acting in the office of his mediatorship: though according to his divine
nature, he acts immediately from himself, without such dependence or
subordination: yet I say, as Mediator he receives from the father, and so
communicates what he receives unto his Saints. Thus you see from whom these
Prophets receive power to prophecy; and that is from the Lord himself. First,
from God originally: Secondly, from Christ as Mediator.

Secondly, by what means the Lord does thus empower these Prophets, and that
is, first, by his word. Secondly, by his Spirit.

First, It is by the word, that these Prophets are enabled to give forth their
testimony. Christ's Commission to his Disciples was to preach the word, Matthew.
28. 19, 20. And Christ is said to ride prosperously on the word of truth, Psalm.
45. 4. John bears record of the word of God, Revel. 1. 2. The Saints were
slain for the word of God, Revel. 12. 11. This word is the sword, that
proceeds out of Christ's mouth, Revel. 1. 16. The word being called the sword of
Christ; imports, that it is full of efficacy and power, of great force and
prevalency, discerning the thoughts, and subduing the imaginations of the
heart. This is that spiritual weapon, whereby the Saints are able to encounter
with their enemies, and to overcome the evil one, and to testify against
Antichrist.

Secondly, by the Spirit, which gives life and power unto the word. The Gospel
is called the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. because the Spirit
joins it self with the word, and makes it a quickening and powerful word. And
therefore it is, that Christ says; My words are spirit and life, Joh. 6. 63.
Christ's word does not go forth as a dead thing, but as a quickening power; not
as a killing letter, but as a powerful spirit. So that the word cannot be
separated from the Spirit, nor the Spirit from the word, they both jointly
concur and agree in one: The word is the habit or clothing of the spirit, and
the spirit is the life and power of the word: by these means, namely, the word
and spirit, are the witnesses empowered to prophecy.

Secondly, the title given unto those that testify against Antichrist, they
are called witnesses. This appellation is given to Christ, being called the
faithful witness, Revel 1. 5. And the true witness, Chap. 3. 14. Likewise he
was promised to be given as a witness to the people, Isa. 55. 4. Therefore he
tells Pilate, that he came into the world, to bear witness of the truth, Joh.
18. 37. In like manner are the Saints called Witnesses, as being called forth
to testify of the will and mind of God before the world. Thus it was said of
John Baptist, that he was sent as a witness of the light, Joh. 1. 7. And to
him (meaning to Christ) gave all the Prophets witness, Act. 10. 43. The Saints
that suffered for Christ, suffered for the witness of Jesus, Revel. 20. 4.
There is one place where by the Prophet, both Christ and the Saints are brought
in as joint witnesses; where the Lord speaking of his people says; Ye are my
witnesses: and signifying of Christ, farther says, And my servant, that I have
chosen, Esa. 43. 10. So that as Christ does receive a message from the Father,
he does truly and faithfully give forth his testimony, as appears in Joh. 3.
32. So also the Saints that receive his word, and declare their testimony of
his truth, do set to their seal, and witness of the truth, as it is in Jesus,
and do give forth testimony thereof before the world.

Thirdly, The number of these witnesses, and they are two. Some say, that there
are only two eminent persons here meant, not exceeding the number expressed.
Others, that thereby are meant the two Testaments, and so make the Scripture to
be the witness here spoken of: or else two in regard of their types, which are
presented to us by paires, as Zerubbabel, and Joshua, the two anointed ones:
and Moses and Elias, that caused fire to come down from heaven. Also Moses and
Aaron, by whom the water in Egypt was turned into blood, as we shall
understand more in the sequel. Or more especially, they are called two
witnesses, in proportion to the Law, that would not take an accusation, unless
asserted by two witnesses, Matthew. 18. 16. So here because there shall be a
sufficient testimony given forth against Antichrist, by the faithful witnesses
of Christ, they are called two, as most complete and answerable to the Law,
Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Thus you have their number, they are two Witnesses.

Fourthly, Their office and employment follows. They Prophecy. Now in that
they are styled Witnesses, and do Prophecy: we are to consider two things.

First, What we are to understand here by Prophecy. Secondly, What is the
testimony they give forth.
By Prophecy, we may understand three things.

First, to prophecy, it is to foretell things to come, to declare things that
shall come to pass: according to that saying in Esa 42. 9. Behold former
things are come to pass, and new things do I declare; before they spring
forth, I tell you of them. Now though this be chiefly meant of Christ, yet it
is foretold by the Prophet, as being first revealed to him. So that prophecy
is a dlvine prediction, or a foretelling of things to come, by a heavenly
revelation.

Secondly, to prophecy, sometimes is meant of understanding the mystery of
prophecy, or of such things, as are forespoken of: as to open and declare the
mystery of truth from divine prophesies. And in this respect the Saints under
the new Testament are called Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 29. These were not so called,
in relation to any divine predictions, that they could declare; but rather from
that dexterity and readiness they had to interpret and open the mystery of
those truths prophesied of before. From such gifts as these, were they called
Prophets.

Thirdly, to Prophecy, is when believers by their experience can give
testimony of the fulfilling of prophesies. And thus those primitive Saints were
said to prophecy; when the prophecy of Joel was fulfilled in them, and they
were able by experience to testify of the truth forespoken of: Act. 2. 16, 17.
where it is said; I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, etc. These by an allusion to the former manner
of discovery of God to the Prophets, are said to prophecy, because by a divine
revelation of truth, and glorious discovery of grace upon their hearts, they
could by experience say, this day is the Scripture fulfilled, and the grace of
the prophecy powered forth upon us. So beholding the vision of divine grace,
they are said to prophecy.

In each of these senses the Saints under the reign of Antichrist, may be said
to prophecy. First, from a spiritual inspiration and glorious discovery of
heavenly things: they are able to ^oretell, and prophecy, that Babylon shall
fall: This is their message: and this they testify continually. Secondly, They
by a spiritual judgment and apprehension of the things of God, are able to
understand enigmaticall and difficult things; and make glorious discoveries of
the mysteries of truth, and also of the mysteries of Antichrist. Thirdly, in
every age, according to their light and experience, they give forth a
testimony, of the fulfilling of those prophesies, both of the reign and ruin
of Antichrist. And thus the Witnesses are said to prophecy.

Secondly, for the testimony that they give forth, and that is, they hold forth
the truth and authority of Christ, against the falsehood and usurpation of
Antichrist. These witnesses give forth a double testimony.

First, against the seed of the Serpent. Secondly, against the power of the
beast.
First, they testify against the seed of the Serpent, by holding forth the
nature and grace of Christ; whereby he should break the head of the Serpent, as
it was foretold in Genesis 3. These acknowledge, that Christ took the seed of
Abraham, was clothed with our nature, was made flesh, and came forth in our
habit and form; became Emanuel, God with us, or in our flesh; but so filled
with heavenly anoyntings, and so clothed with the divine nature, that he was
able to subdue Satan, and to tread him under his feet, he was empowered to
break the head of this Leviathan, and to cast him forth into the earth. Thus
the Apostle testified to the Romans, that the God of peace should bruise Satan
under their feet, Romans 16. 20. By yertue of that Evangelicall promise, Christ
should overcome and crush the cursed seed of the Serpent. Of this the witnesses
do testisie, by holding forth Christ to be the seed of the woman: in whom
dwelt the anointing, by which all wickedness is subdued.

Secondly, They testify against the power of the beast: and that is, by
holding forth the office and dignity of Christ, against the power, government,
rule, and dominion of Antichrist; for though he acknowledge verbally, that
Christ has the sole power and government in his Church, yet vertually he does
deny it; by usurping those dignities and offices to himself. The testimony
that the Saints do especially give out against the rule and domination of
Antichrist, is of the prophecy, Priesthood, and kingdom of Christ.

First, Of the prophecy of Christ; they acknowledge Christ to be the great
Prophet of his Church, Act. 7. 37. To be the great Doctor and teacher of his
people; according to that exptession in Cant. 5. 13. His lips like L^^es,
dropping sweet smelling myrrb: By Christ's lips are meant his divine prophesies
and heavenly teachings, by which he does instruct teachings, his people: his
words are beautiful as the lilie, and odoriferous as myrrh. Now the Saints
holding forth the sufficiency and power of Christ's teachings, do overthrow the
fleshly wisdom, carnal knowledge, and humane teachings of Antichrist:
accordding as the Lord has said; I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1. 19. And the
Apostle tells us in verse. 27, 28. That God has chosen the poor, weak, and
despised things of the world, to bring to naught things that were high and
mighty. Hence it is, that we have that saying of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.
We speak wisdom to them that are perfect, (says he) yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the Princes of this world, that come to naught; but we
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, etc. By them that are perfect, the
Apostle means, those that are of full age, that are men in understanding of
divine mysteries: so that his preaching was wisdom to the wise: but it was not
humane wisdom, such as the world accounted of; nor politi^^ll wisdom of
Princes; but a hidden and secret wisdom; a divine mystery of heavenly wisdom,
such as the reason and understanding of carnal men cannot reach or comprehend.
And thus these witnesses testifying of the prophecy and wisdom of Christ, do
oppose the wisdom and understanding of Antichrist.

Secondly, They testify of the Priesthood of Christ: acknowledging him to be
the eternal Priest of God, set over the house of God, Heb. 10. 21. And that he
is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7. 11, 12. And not after the
manner of Aaron, therefore of necessity, there is a change of the Law. So that
hereby they give a testimony against all the Jewish rites and ceremonies, that
Antichrist does set up, and enforce an observation of. And thus the Apostle
does testify against Circumcision, when he says; If ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing: for (says he) I testify to every man, that is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to the whole law: and Christ is become of none
effect, etc. Gal. 5. 2, 3. That which is here said of Circumcision, is true of
all other Levicicall rites: if men will Judaize and stick now to Mosaicall
rudiments, Christ will be unprofitable unto them, for they are again
enthralled and bound to keep the whole law: and if they will be justified by
such legal observations, then Christ shall avail them nothing; they hold not
the head, when they cleave to such ordinances. They that will again set up the
Pedigogie of Moses, and bring men under Jud^icall rites and ceremonies; these
do in effect deny Christ come in the flesh, and therefore are of Antichrist;
according to that Text, 1 John 4. 2, 3. So that the Saints bearing witness of
the Priesthood of Christ, do oppose Antichrist in all his legal observances.

Thirdly, and lastly, they testify of the kingdom of Christ: and do
antribute all headship, power, rule and domination to Christ; they make him
alone to be coput ecclesiae, the supreme head of his Church; and ridiculous is
the Popes challenge to be the Ministerial head; whereas Christ has not
instituted any such image of his government. The witnesses do acknowledge the
whole dominion and government to be upon Christ's own shoulders, Esa. 9. 6. he
alone to have the sovereign power and authority in governing of his Church, he
only to have the supremacy of Regiment. Hereby the witnesses do testify
against the authority, power, and domination, that Antichrist does exercise,
and against those Cannon laws, and humane institutions, that he does set up.
Great has been then surpation of Antichrist in this kind, he undertakes to
rule over the souls and consciences of men; one of the chiefest of all
Babylons merchandises, are the souls of men, Revel. 18. 13. But this practice
was never tolerated by Christ. Antichrist does rule by an earthly and humane
power; accordingly we have it expressed in Revel. 17. 1, 2. That the kings of
the Earth committed fornication with the whore: that is, by joining their power
with her; they give up their power to uphold her interest, for this who rish
woman does ride on the beast, verse. 7. The woman is the Antichristian state,
riding upon the powers of the world, in the form of a beast, unto whom the
kings give their power. So that when Antichrist, and the kings of the earth
have mixed and knit cheir power together, that kingdom, or that Empire, that
does uphold the power of the whore, becomes as a beast, being inslaved to her,
yiedling unto her all their strength and dominion. Then the power of States and
Kingdoms, thus begotten and brought forth by spiritual fornication, is but a
false and whorish power, a corrupted and persecuting power; by which means the
idolatrous woman becomes drunken with the blood of the Saints, and of the
Martyrs of Jesus. Now the Saints giving testimony of the kingdom and dominion
of Christ, do oppose all the false and tyrannical powers of Antichrist. And
thus we have described, what is the prophecy of the witness; and the
testimony that they give forth.

Fistly, we are to consider the form and state in which these witnesses
prophecy, and that is in sackcloth. To prophecy in sackcloth, denotes that
sad and mournful condition of the witnesses under the power and reign of
Antichrist. Thus sackcloth and mourning is set forth as a badge or sign of
sadness and distress, in 2 King. 6. 30. and Amos 8. 10. This state of the
witnesses does hold forth unto us these three things.

First, that the witnesses give out their testimony in a poor, weak, low, and
despicable way; there being in some measure the absence of the bridegroom;
according to that speech of Christ, in Matthew. 9. 15. When the Bridegroom shall
be taken away, they shall mourn. So that the reason why the witnesses mourn,
and put on sackcloth, is, because in a great measure the Bridegroom is absent,
and at a great distance, and they in a very sad, weak and mean condition; and
they do but prophecy, or foretell things to come, beholding things a far off,
and not fully enjoying that glory, that they prophecy of.

Secondly, it imports, that their persons were under restraint and persecution.
The beast always making war with them, by fines, imprisonment, banishment,
and death; they were continually under persecution, trouble and vexation, all
the time of the reign and dominion of Antichrist.

Thirdly, it argues, that their testimony was always rejected, cast forth, and
trampled under foot. The world has always slighted and cast off the restimony
of the witnesses, as of old the Jews did neglect the testimony of Christ, of
whom it is said; No man received his testimony, Job. 3. 32. So that the (...)
cannot but mourn and lament, as it were in sackcloth, when their bridegroom
is in a great measure absent, when their persons are restrained, and their
testimony rejected. Thus much for their state, being clothed in sackcloth.

Sixthly, and lastly, the duration and continuance of their prophecy: and that
is a thousand two hundred and threescore days. In the former verse, when we
opened the term of forty two months (accounting th^^ty days for a month,
make just three years and a half) holds proportion with the term of 1260
days. The Gentiles shall ^read under foot the holy City forty two months.
The witnesses shall prophecy in sackcloth 1260 days. The woman nourished in
the wilderness, 1260 days. The term mentioned by Daniel, A time, times, and
half a time. The witnesses lie slain three days and a half: all these
terms of time hold one and the same proportion. So that the witnesses
prophesying 1260 days, is meant, they shall prophecy the whole time of the
visible reign of Antichrist, in sackcloth. But here we may note, that
Antichrists time is counted by months, which are reckoned by the course of the
Moon, unconstant and changeable: and it shows forth thus much, that all the
worships, forms, and actions of Antichrist are brought forth by a weak and dim
light, a light borrowed from the Sun, they are works of darkness and of the
night, wherein the Moon rules, Genesis 1. 16. It is not a light of the Sun, it
arises not from Christ, it shines not immediately from the Lord. But on the
contrary, the prophecy of the witnesses is accounted by days: a day is
measured by the Sun, as a month is by the Moon; and notes, that it is a day
time, more constant, more brightsome, and full of light, as appears in Act.
26. 18. The true servants of Christ are brought out of darkness into light;
and are children of the day, and of the light; and therefore it is, their
prophecy is measured out, not by months, but by days. But however the
witnesses time is accounted by days; it holds the same proportion of time with
forty two months; that so long as Antichrist shall reign and domineer, so
long shall the witnesses prophecy in sackcloth, continually powering forth
their testimony against the wickedness of the man of sin. So much for the time
of the witnesses prophesse.

Having opened the words, give me leave now to draw forth some observations
from them.

First, Observe, That none can give 1 Observe:
forth a testimony of Christ, but such as are empowered thereto by Christ. I
will give, etc. The Lord gives what the witnesses have. Christ himself, the
great and faithful witness, says, As the Father has said unto me, so I
speak, Joh. 12. 50. Thus we have the Apostle speaking in 1 John 1. 5. This is
the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you: The servants of
Christ can only declare, what they have received of him, and that upon the
surest evidence, and clearest demonstration. And hence it is, that the Apostle
says; What we have heard and seen, we declare unto you, ver. 3. So that only
those that receive from the Lord a gift, a revelation, or spiritual
understanding, such only are able to give forth a testimony of Christ and of
his truth. These witnesses can admonister the things of God, suitably to what
they have received of the gift or measure of Christ.

Secondly, Observe, That all those that 2 Observe:
bold forth the truth of Christ, opposing Antichrist, are his witnesses: This
is the title the Lord gives them here; these are my two witnesses; these
testify of me; these hold forth my truth, by declaration, and by profession;
as if the Lord had said; these are mine; they own me; they suffer for me; they
endure the word of my patience; and I will own them for my witnesses; they
bearing witness of my truth. Therefore every individual Saint, that does
according to his measure and ability, either by preaching, praying, writing, or
profession, hold forth the power and authority of Christ, against the
usurpation and tyranny of Antichrist, whosoever he be, of what quality or
degree soever, the same is a witness of Christ, to testify against the man of
sin, that wicked one, that son of perdition.

Thirdly, Observe, That the witness 3 Observe:
of the Saints is a sufficient testimony: They are called two witnesses, by
whom a thing is confirmed and ratified. Therefore God has not left himself
without witness; but has always sent forth such as would have healed
Babylon, but she refused to be healed, and repented not of her deeds, still
persisting in her abominations. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, God should
send them strong delusions, that they should (...)
believe a lie: that they might be damned (or judged) that believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. That is,
because of their obdurate malice and incredulity, shutting their eyes against
the truth, that was sufficiently held forth by these witnesses; therefore the
Lord would blind their eyes, by a restraint of his grace, and wholly give them
up to Satan, to captivate their minds, and seduce their understandings, that
they should believe lying and false doctrines, to take pleasure in
unrighteousness, so as by their prodigious lies, and forged superstitions,
they should mightily oppose the truth.

Fourthly, Observe, That the whole 4 Observe:
been of the witnesses prophecy has always been to uphold the truth of
Christ, against the falsehood of antichrist. The things they prophecy shall
come to pass, is, the kingdom of Christ, and the ruin of Antichrist. The
testimony they give forth, is, that the power of the anointing, in the
anointed, shall subdue the seed of the Serpent; and that Christ, as Prophet,
Priest, and King, shall overcome the wisdom, worship, and dominion of the
beast. Thus they prophecy, and continually power forth their testimony,
bearing witness unto the truth; this is their message they have to declare,
and they make it their continual study and practice, faithfully to discharge
this message and trust. Thus Christ tells Pilate; For this cause (says he)
came I into the world, to bear witness of the truth, Joh. 18. 37. This was
Christ's work and business; and this is the great arrand and embassage of all
his people, to bear witness of the truth, and to set to their scales that
Christ is true: and that Antichrist is a lier, a seducer, full of untruth and
unrighteousness.

Fifthly, Observe, Those that have been 5 Observe:
most faithful unto Christ and his truth, have been most rejected of the
world. These witnesses being persecuted in their persons, and flighted in their
testimony, they are made to mourn, and put on sackcloth. Thus it was with
Christ, while he was on earth, he did as it were prophecy in sackcloth; being
rejected Esa. 53. 3.
and despised of men, was a man of sorrows and grief; his testimony was
rejected; his words contradicted; his person set at naught; and all because he
did testify of the truth. The same measure is given forth to all his faithful
servants; the true ground of all their sufferings, is the testimony they give
forth, for bearing witness unto the truth. The souls under the Altar were
slain for the testimony that they held, Revel. 6. 9. Sackcloth and mourning
have been the portion of all such as witnessed the truth, in the time of the
powerful reign of Antichrist.

Sixthly, and lastly, Observe, That Christ 6 Observe:
has always had a people to bear witness of his truth, even in the saddest
and darkest time of Antichrists reign. The time of the witnesses prophecy in
sackcloth, is as long as the time, as the man of sin has to trample under the
holy City. Though the times werenever so dark, and persecutions never so
cruel, yet still there was always a remnant, that were neither so far
blinded, nor so much discouraged, as to give out, as that they should withhold
their witness unto the truth. When Elijah thought he had been left alone, the
Lord had preserved to himself seven thousand, that had not bowed the knee to
Baal, nor kissed him, I King. 19. 18. So all the time of the general apostacy
and defection, under the man of sin, the Lord has reserved to himself, such
as he has kept from the evil of the time, that would not yield to the
worship, nor conform to the idolatrous courses of Antichrist.

VERSE. 4. Those are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.
HAving already spoken of the authority, title, number, and office of these
witnesses, also of the manner and duration of them in their office: now we are
led to enquire who they are; of whom in this fourth verse, we have a sufficient
draught and full description.

Before I come to declare positively who these witnesses are, I shall first
show you what the various opinions of men are in this thing.

First, There are those that would have these two witnesses, to be meant of the
two Testaments, which they call Law and Gospel, namely, the Scriptures: but
this interpretation is too remote from the adequate sense and meaning of the
place; for these witnesses are brought in as men, and personated by men, that
are brought in as their types, and are described by such actions that they
should perform before the world: therefore, I shall consent, that the
Scriptures are the Testimony that these witnesses give forth, but not the
witnesses themselves.

Secondly, Others understand the two witnesses to be meant of Godly
Magistrates, and Godly Ministers: viz. two eminent ranks of men: of the same
quality as Zerubbabel and Joshua were of. Now though this interpretation does
bear some Analogy and proportion to the truth; the text cannot be so
restrained; for those two eminent types did rather prefigure Christ, who is
here brought in, as the great witness, meant by the two Olive trees, as will
appear by the sequel; therefore if Christ be chiefly personated by Zerubbabel
and Joshua, there is then no necessity to restrain the witnesses to persons of
the same quality and condition with them.

Thirdly, Some hold that these witnesses are meant of two eminent and peculiar
persons, that the Lord should raise up, for some great and special design of
his; to perform some magnificent and glorious work: and then to be bodily
slain by the Antichristian party: but neither will this interpretation be
congruous to the sense of the place; for the witnesses are not meant of any
eminent persons, that the Lord should raise up at any one time or age of
Antichrist, to give forth a testimony of the truth; but it holds forth all
those that should testify of Christ, in all the whole time of Antichrists
reign; as was plainly showed from the former verse.

Fourthly, and lastly, another sort does conclude, that the witnesses can be
meant of none, but of such as have suffered martyrdom, and spilt their blood
for the testimony unto the truth. I do neither condemn, nor contradict the
truth of this interpretation; for most certain it is, that those that laid
down their lives for the profession of the name of Christ, were great and
eminent witnesses of the truth; but we may not restrain these witnesses here,
to be meant only of such; because there be many that give forth large
testimonies of Jesus Christ; and yet never suffer natural death for so doing.
Besides the slaying of the witnesses, is not meant of a corporiall and bodily
slaying, but of a mystical; and of such a slaying that many shall suffer, that
never come to lay down their lives for Christ; as we shall come to see more
fully by the consequent of our discourse.

Now to declare positively and plainly, who are the two witnesses here meant,
and they are Christ, and his Saints; who make up but one spiritual body; and
though they may be distinguished as head and members; yet cannot be separated,
no more then the branch from the vine. Now that Christ and his Saints are here
meant will be manifest by the description, that the Text it self makes of them.

These are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing before the
God of the earth. It will be necessary for the opening of these words, to show;

First, Who is meant by the two Olive trees.

Secondly, Who is signified by the two Candlesticks.

Thirdly, Why they are called two. Fourthly, How Christ can be here meant.

If the question be asked; who are the two Olive trees? The answer may be made
from Zach. 4. from whence the description of these witnesses is fetched: These
are the two anointed ones, etc. That Christ is here meant by the two Olive
branches, will appear by their description in these particulars.

First, These two Olive trees are said to be placed on the right side, and on
the left side of the Candlestick, Zach. 4. 11. This represen^s us with Christ,
with both the arms of his two natures embracing, comforting, and blessing of
his people.

First, Christ, as taking our nature, fulfilling all righteousness, suffering
temptations, dying upon the Cross, herein discovers himself to be a suitable
Mediator, a compassionate high Priest, and a comfortable Savior to sinning
souls. And thus Christ is the Olive branch on the left side of the
Candlestick.

Secondly, Christ, as being filled with the fullness of God, clothed with
righteousness, complete in grace, anointed with the spirit; and as a head
giving down an influence into all the parts and members; and as the root
sending forth virtue and life into all the branches: always communicating of
his sulnesse and redundancy of divine grace into the hearts of his people;
whereby he does fill them with righteousness, love, and peace: hereby he is as
the Olive tree on the right side of the Candlestick. Suitable unto this is
that phrase in Cant. 2.6. His left hand is under my head; and his right hand
does embrace me. As if the Church had said; Christ, my beloved, does comfort,
establish, and refresh me with both the arms of his two natures.

Secondly, These two olive trees, are said to empty the golden oil out of
themselves, Zach. 4. 12. Now it is to much for men, of what rank or quality
soever; to empty oil out of themselves; for all men, the best of men, all as
mere men take oil into themselves. Its only Christ, the true branch, that
springs out of the everlasting root, that by a continual flowing and issuing
forth of spiritual life and grace, does abundantly supply all his people. When
the Angel asked Zachary, saying; What see thou? he answered, I beheld a
Candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and seven lamps
thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, etc. Zach. 4. 2. The Candlestick
was a chief utensill in the Temple, which does represent unto us the mystical
Candlestick of the Church; the bowl above it, is meant of Christ, who has
received all fulness of the spirit from their Father, signified by the oil,
which being pressed out of the true olive tree, as a most lively spring does
issue forth its streams unto all his Saints. The seven lamps, or powerful
operations of his Spirits, in life and spiritual motion, does give it self
forth by the seven pipes, or several dispensations to all his members. Thus
Christ is the fat Olive tree, that empties forth the oil of divine grace, into
the Candlestick, viz. his Church.

Thirdly, These are described to be, the two anointed ones of God: Zach. 4. 14.
These two anointed ones are called in the Hebrew, the sons of oil; because
it (...)
was the custom of the Jews to anoint three sorts of men, viz. Prophets,
Priests, and Kings; These here in the ext are meant of Zerubbabel, and Josbua,
who were but types of Christ, and of those that the Lord should make his
anointed ones.

First, Zerubbabel was a chief Governor and head in Israel: the first that was
carried away captive into Babylon; and one of the first that returned; and was
one of the chief rebuilders of the Temple; as appears Ezra 4. 2. His hands
laid the first stone, and the last stone in that edifice or building. Hereby is
represented unto us Christ the chief head and governor of his people: first
carried captive into spiritual Babylon, and first returning, working his own
deliverance, and the first repairer of his Church or new Jerusalem, whose hand
shall at length finish the Temple of God.

Secondly, Joshua the high Priest, was the other anointed one: upon whose head
was a fair Mitre, or Priestly ornament; unto whom was promised, that he should
judge the Lords house, and keep his Courts: that the Lords would put the whole
ministry and service of his house and Temple into his hand. All this does but
povnt out Christ; for says the Lord in Zach. 4. 8. Behold I will send forth my
servant the Branch: a frequent appellation given to the Messiah; who was to be
that eminent high Priest over the house of God, that the whole government and
ministration of all things should be in the hand of Christ, and that himself
should continually minister in the holy things of God. Then without question,
Zerubbabel, the chief governor, and Joshua the high Priest; these anointed
ones, were eminent types of Christ, who was the anointed King and Priest over
his Church; into whose hands, God has put the judgment and administration of
all things.

Fourthly, and lastly, These two olive trees are said to stand by the Lord of
the whole earth. Now there is none that stands by the Lord of the whole earth
but Christ himself; as appears by that place, Dan. 10. 21. The Lord speaking
by an Angel to Daniel, says; I will show thee, that which is noted in the
Scripture of truth: and there was none that boldeth with me (or strengthens
himself) in these things, but Michael your Prince. The Lord had threatened to
fight with the Prince of Persia; and therefore says to Daniel, I will show
thee, that which is noted in the Scripture of truth: this being a figurative
speech, does mean the determinate counsel and mind of God: and that none
strengthens himself, but Michael the Prince: as if he had said: There is no
humane force or power whereby I will sustain my self, but by Michael, the
Archangel, Jesus Christ, the Prince, Leader, and chief Conductor of his people.

To stand by the Lord of the whole earth, notes these four things.

First, Dignity and honor, that is peculiar only to Christ; according to that
of the Apostle, where he says; God has exalted him, and given him a name (...)
above every name, Phil. 2. 9. Christ in taking our nature made himself of no
reputation, or as the word signifies, he evacuated himself, he did as it were
exhaust and draw himself dry, denuding and stripping himself of all his
glory: but now in his exaltation, standing before the Lord, his excellency and
glory does shine forth.

Secondly, It notes power and strength; for to stand before the Lord, is all
one with sitting at Gods right hand, mentioned, Heb. 10. 11. Gods right hand in
Scripture is taken Metonymically for strength, whereby Christ is enabled to
uphold and protect his people; and to dissipate and scatter all his enemies; as
having all things subjected under his feet. Hence it is said, He stands
before the God of the earth. God is called the God of heaven, Dan. 2. 18. Here
he is called the God of the carth: noteing, that though Antichrist seems to
bear all the sway in the world, yet Christ has the rule and world, yet Christ
has rule and power of things in the earth, and he rules in the kingdoms of
men, and that he interposeth and meddles in all secular affairs, in order to
his own kingdom, and to the preservation of his own people.

Thirdly, It notes the actual administration of the kingdom of God, to be put
into the hands of Christ; for the Father has loved him, put all things into
his hand, Joh. 3. 35. And in respect of the dispensatory part of the kingdom
of God, the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son,
John. 5. 22. And has appointed him over his own house, Heb. 2. 8. So that
Christ by standing before the Lord, is empowered to subject the hearts of men
to himself, captivating the thoughts and imaginations of his people, to
counsel and direct, to govern and protect them: and also to tread upon the
neck and power of his adversries, confounding their plots, and destroying of
their persons.

Fourthly, To stand before the Lord of the whole earth, acceptance and
delight, to be as it were always in the eye and heart of God; and this
privilege is eminently attributed to Christ, in Prove. 8. 22, 23, 24, etc. The
Lord Possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old: the
phrase of beginning is put for eternity, a part ame, as we say, as if Christ
should have said, even from eternity, before the creation of the world, I was
my fathers darling: for when he made the heavens, girded the sea and gave the
unresistible decree; that it should keep it is bounds: I was as one brought up
with him, I was as a child with the father: I was daily his delight. The Hebrew
word is in the plural (...)
number, delights; intimating that Christ was the greatest delights of the
father; he was variety of delights unto him: in so much that while God was
making of the world, he took such delight in him, that he made all things by
him: that is, he made all things, as bearing some analogy or proportion of him:
So that every creature has some Character, some inscription or shadow of his
excellency upon it. Again, he adds; I was always rejoicing before him. In
the Hebrew it is, sporting greatly: the phrase being a metaphor, or simile,
taken from little children that sport and play before their parents: Thus
Christ is always standing before the Lord, being his continual delight, his
joy and rejoicing; as always in his eye and favor.

Thus we see plainly, who is meant by the two olive trees; namely, Christ, who
stands on the right side, and on the left side of the Candlestick, emptying
oil out of himself, being the anointed one of God, standing by the Lord of
the whole earth. Now it follows that we show who are meant by the two
Candlesticks.

The two Candlesticks do represent unto us the Saints and servants of Christ,
the whole number of Churches and believers; and this will appear if we
consider some particulars in relation to these Candlesticks.

First, These receive oil into themselves; as the olive trees do empty oil
out of themselves; so the Candlesticks receive in oil into themselves As it
was said of Aaron, that the ointment powered upon his head, ran down to the
skirts of his garment, Psalm. 133. 2. Alluding to that fragrant ointment made of
so many precious ingredients, mentioned Exodus 30. 23. So Christ being filled
with heavenly and divine anointings, that all his members receive of his
fullness, Joh. 1. 16. They receive an unction from the boly One, I Joh. 2. 20.
There is in Christ, plenitudo redundantie, a fullness of redundancy, and
everlasting spring of heavenly grace, continually flowing, forth upon all his
people, whereby they are filled with the fulness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. and are
replenished with a perfect supply of light and life. Thus the Saints are made
the anointed ones of God, by receiving the golden oil into themselves: though
it be true, they receive it, as it were, at second hand, as through a Mediator;
Christ having first received of his father, all fulness of divine grace, does
abundantly communicate to all that are his.

Secondly, These Candlesticks were said to be made of pure gold, Revel. 1. 12.
According to the description we find in Exodus 25. 31. which denotes the purity
and righteousness of the Saints. Christ himself is said to be a head of gold,
Cant. 5. 10. Suitable unto the head are all the members. The righteousness and
sanctity of believers, does much excel the excellency and righteousness: of
the first Adam: even as gold does excel other metals. Gold is the most solid,
pure, and durable metal of all other: by which is represented, the sound,
pure, and everlasting grace and holiness of the Saints: they are not made up
of dross or any earthly excellency of the first Adam: but of the pure and
undefiled, of the precious and permanent, of the divine and heavenly nature and
righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, These Candlesticks, are meant of the Churches and Saints of God; in
as much as Christ is said to walk and appear in the midst of them, Revel.
1. 13. Christ by his divine. presence with his Saints, does teach, guide, and
uphold them: and by his wisdom, providence and power, does mightily preserve
them, in the midst of fears and dangers. As the Candlestick of it self, is
not sufficient to give forth light; no more can the Saints shine forth in
heavenly brightness, but as they receive all their light and shine from
Christ, who is to them as oil to the lamp, and by his own spirit, life, and
light, does cause them to shine forth in spiritual happiness and glory.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Saints as Candlesticks hold forth the light and
glory of God, before the men of the world. Thus the Apostle does exhort the
Philippians, that by sincerity and holiness, they would shine forth as lights,
among the perverse sons of men; and therefore says; That ye may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation; among whom ye shine as light. John Baptist was
said to bear witness of the light, Joh. 1. 7. And therefore called a burning
and a shining light, Joh. 5. 35. His doctrine was as a fire burning; and his
conversation as a light shining among all those he was conversant with; always
giving forth an ample testimony of Christ, bearing witness, that he was the
true light, enlightening all, that by him should come into the world.

Thus we see who are meant by the two Candlesticks, the Saints of the most
high, who receive oil into themselves, and as gold, they appear in
righteousness, being by Christ's presence continually fed with the constant
supply of grace, whereby they shine forth as glorious lights, always being
ready to give forth a testimony of the grace and truth of Christ, before the
men of the world.

In the third place, having showed, that Christ the great and faithful
witness, is resembled by the two olive trees, emptying oil out of himself
into the Churches; signified by two Candlesticks, whereby they become the
anointed ones of God, standing before the Lord of the whole earth, and bear
witness unto the truth. Now it next follows, that we show, why they are
called two olive trees; and two Candlesticks. But first, why Christ is called
two olive trees. And that is in two respects.

First, From his two fold nature. Secondly, From his two fold dispensation.
First, Christ is called two olive trees, in respect of his twofold nature;
namely, his humane, and divine.

First, Christ according to his humanity, took on him the very rank nature
and quality of men; as the Apostle testifies, that he took the form of a
servant, and was sound, (...), in the similitude and shape of men: subject to
man's passions, and every way a right man, fin only excepted: and hence it was,
that he was called, holy, harmless, and separate from sinners, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
The Apostle relates to the Paschall Lamb, which was so conditioned; it was
behovefull, that Christ should be man, and also that he should be perfectly
holy and righteous, and so become a competent and fitting Savior for sinning
souls, and lost sinners. It was most requisite, that t here should be some
suitable analogy and proportion between him, that lost all, and him that
recovered all: that as Adam was of the earth; so Christ also should take upon
him the same form, that so ou^ nature might suffer in him, and he by his death
should offer up a sufficient sacrifice, to make a full expiation and
satisfaction for his people, in respect of sin past, present, and to come; from
the guilt and heinousness whereof, the Saints being wholly acquitted and
freed, their souls may be comforted and refreshed.

Secondly, Christ according to his divine nature is God, the only begotten,
the image of the Father, the altitude and summity of all blessedness and
glory. In this respect, he is the Summum benum, the chief and sovereign good,
the top of all felicity and happiness. Christ is that fountain, from whence
all goodness flows, and the ultimate and last end, unto which all things tend:
for by him, and for him, of him, and through him, and to him are all things,
Romans 11. 36. And God tells Moses, that his Name is in him, Exodus 23. 20. Gods
name is God himself; for God's name and attributes are his very essence: So
that Christ according to his divine nature, is full of all excellency and
perfection: he is the beginning and the ending, the Alpha and Omega; he is the
good and the end concentring in one: he is most complete in himself, and has
the fulness of all things. So that as the soul looks upon Christ in flesh,
as one most suitable for a Mediator: so here beholding his divine nature sees
an alsufficiency of fulness to make a glorious supply of all wants and
defects whatsoever. Christ in his debasements is a familiar object for our
faith, being Emmanuel, or God in our flesh; so in the brightness of his
fathers image and glory he becomes all blessedness and satisfaction to our
souls. The soul eyeing that most absolute, universal, and comprehensive
goodness, that is in Christ, can be contented to fit down and acquiesse in
his absolute perfection and fullness: and say with David, I shall be satisfied,
when I awake with his likeness or image, Psalm. 17. 15.

Having showed how Christ resembles the two olive trees, in his two natures.
The first as man, appearing in our form and fashion, as a familiar object to
our weakness. And secondly, as God, the fullness and perfection of all things,
and so yielding everlasting satisfaction. Now we come in the second place to
show also how Christ is represented hereby, in respect of his twofold
dispensation.

First, By what Christ has wrought for us in his person.

Secondly, By what Christ works in us by his Spirit.

First, we have that dispensation of Christ's, manifested, by what he has
wrought for us in his person. Christ was God manifest in the flesh, clothed in
our nature, became Emanuel, and dwelt among us. The Apostle says in Gal. 4. 4.
That when the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son, made of a woman,
under the law. The time designed and appointed of God, is called, the fullness
of time: God sent his Son, out of himself, out of his own essence and glory:
made of a woman, without the concurrence of a man, that the seed of the woman
might break the Serpents head, according to the promise made in Genesis 3. 15.
Also he was made under the Law: he observed the Law, and made himself wholly
subject thereunto. He was in all things obedient, that he might fulfill all
righteousness, by submitting to every ordinance of God. Christ always went
about doing of good, as preaching the kingdom of God, and working of miracles:
both miranda and miracul^ were wrought by him, to confirm his doctrine that he
delivered. Now in all these things he gave forth a testimony of the wisdom,
power, and goodness of his father, before the world. This was the time of
Christ's prophecy in sackcloth; being in much sorrow and sadness, often
tempted by Satan, always opposed by the Scribes and Pharisees; and having
finished his testimony, suffered the death of the cross. And as for the time
of Christ's bearing witness, was by computation (from the time of his
inauguration or instalment into his office, mentioned, Luke 3. 23. unto the
time of his death) the same term of time, that here the witnesses are said to
prophecy, namely, three years and a half. This is one testimony that Christ
gives forth, by those transactions passed on him, and by all those works
wrought by him, whereby he did work salvation for all his people, in his own
person. The whole compendium and perfect draught of our salvation, is
effectually drawn forth by Christ.

Secondly, Christ does not only give forth his testimony, by what himself
does in his person for us, but also by that frame, that by his Spirit he
works in us. Christ no sooner lays down his fleshly and visible appearance
to the world, but he appears in a more spiritual and invisible way unto his
Disciples; supplying his corporal absence, by his spiritual presence. So that
as his first dispensation was by his fleshly appearance; in like manner his
second dispensation is his spiritual presence; according to his promise, that
when he should depart, he would send the Comforter, Joh. 16. 7. The Spirit does
testify of the same things that Christ in his person did, but in a more
invisible and spiritual way; for says Christ, The spirit shall take of mine,
and show it unto you, Joh. 16. 15. Now that visible testimony that Christ gave
forth in his flesh, by his preaching and miracles, etc. was more external,
dark, and in figure, then his spiritual appearance and invisible operations
in the souls of his people; for by his casting forth Devils, opening the eyes
of the blind, and healing the sick, and the like: he did by such outward
external prefigurations show, what he would do by his Spirit, by cleansing,
enlightening, and healing of his people; by the inward working of his power,
spirit, and righteousness. The salvation that Christ has wrought outwardly,
the same he works in wardly, by the real operation of his Spirit in the hearts
of his people. Hence the Apostle says; Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. The
life and death, the works and image of Christ are set up and formed in the
hearts of believers. Thus we see, that Christ gives forth a testimony in
spirit, as well as in flesh, and in his spiritual presence, as well as in his
fleshly appearance.

Thus we have the ground why Christ is called two olive trees. First, in
respect of his two natures, divine and humane: Secondly, in relation to his
twofold dispensation, the one in flesh, the other in spirit. Now it follows,
that we show, why Saints are called two Candlesticks. The grounds are two.

First, Because they consisted both of Jews and Gentiles; whereas mention is
made but of one Candlefticke in Zach. 4. because it signified the Jews only,
by whom was represented the great Congregation of Saints. But here the Churches
of Christ being made up of Jew and Gentile, of the Circumcision and
uncircumcision, they are called two. And thus the whole complete number of
Saints and Churches were mentioned Chap. 1. But I do not conceive this to be
the maine reason, therefore consider:

Secondly, The Saints receive, and consequently give forth a double testimony:
the one as it were, fleshly, low, and earthly; the other more spiritual and
heavenly. Suitable to the state, condition, frame, and dispensation, that
Saints are under; accordingly they hold forth a testimony of Christ. In respect
of the Corinthians weakness, the Apostle tells them they were carnal, and as
babes in Christ: and of himself he says, in respect of his divine visions and
revelations, that he was in the third heaven or Paradise of God. Now concerning
this twofold witness or testimony, we have it fully expressed and set forth in
1 John 5. 7, 8. For there that bear record in hearen, the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit; and these three are one: And there are three that bear
witness in earth; the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood: and these three
agree in one. Now by beaven and earth, we are to understand of the state of the
Saints, in their several conditions and stations; either carnal and fleshly,
or spiritual and heavenly. We shall take notice thereof distinctly.

First, the witness or testimony in earth, presents us with the coming of
Christ in flesh, who came by water and blood. The water and blood that issued
out of Christ's side, Joh. 19. did answer to the legal washings and sacrifices
of the Jews, the one by water, the other by blood. Hereby is signified, first,
Sanctification, or the spiritual washing the silth and uncleanness of sin,
as with water: Secondly, Justification, whereby the heart of a Saint comes to
be freed from the guilt and charge of sin; and this is, as by blood. Now as
Saints eyeing Christ coming by water and blood, they apprehend him to be a
sufficient and comfortable Savior, justifying of their persons, sanctifying of
their natures: and so are satisfied in conscience in respect of Christ's full
expiation of, and satisfaction for sin. Now the Spirit comes in, and gives its
testimony unto these: for it is said, these agree in one. The Spirit does give
forth a testimony, through justification and sanctification, thus represented by
blood and water. Now this is called the testimony in earth, as being weak and
low in comparison, of that which is far more spiritual and heavenly. The
Saints under this dispensation and state, give forth a suitable testimony;
these are able to testify of the pardon of sin, of the appeasing of the
conscience, and of reconciliation; and also against the power of sin, the
accusation of Satan, and the condemnation of the Law, etc. This here is called
the testimony in earth, as being weak, and low, in respect of the other: this
is the first testimony, that the Saints receive, and consequently that they
give forth before the world.

Secondly, we have a testimony in heaven, or a more divine and heavenly
witness: and this is the immediate and single witness of the Spirit, that the
Apostle does intimate, saying, The spirit it self bears witness with our
spirits, etc. Romans 8. 16. The Spirit does seal adoption upon our hearts, by
witnessing to our spirits, or with our spirits, our spirits being renewed, and
witnessing to the truth of God: his spirit does concur and agree with our
spirits in the same testimony. Now the Father, Word, and Spirit, that bear
this heavenly record, are not said to agree in one; but they are one: they are
one in essence and nature, but distinct in operation and discovery. The father
is the original and fountain of blessedness, and therefore called the father
of lights, Jam. 1. 17. As being the root of all wisdom and knowledge, and
every other good thing. The Son is the very form and appearance of divine
excellency; and therefore called the image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15.
for in him we behold the glory of God, as in a glass or image, which in it
self is invisible and undiscernable. The Spirit is that, which does make an
irradiation or discovery of the Father and Son. The spirit of truth (says
Christ) shall testify of me, Joh. 15. 26. Now these three are one in essence
and being, they go forth together in one; they give a single and pure
testimony, immediately, and without any medium coming between. To this purpose
observe a passage spoken by Christ, when he says; If any man love me, he will
keep my words; and my father will love him; and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him, Joh. 14. 23. But how is it, that both the Father and
the Son will come to abide and lodge in the cottage of the believers heart,
that is only by the sending forth the spirit, that Christ had promised as a
Comsorter, which was to be the Chariot of the Son and of the Father in one:
Here is the Trinity in unity, viz. the Father and Son, both coming forth in the
Spirit, and dwelling in the hearts of his people. Now this testimony of the
Father and the Son, and Spirit in One, is that divine and heavenly record, that
gives a sure evidence or evident assurance unto the heart, of the riches and
glory of God, the love and goodness of Christ, the light and truth of the
Spirit, whereby the soul of a believer is made to sit down in heavenly places
with Christ, and rejoice in a pleorophery, or full assurance of faith, to
triumph in the evidence of divine love, to be satisfied in the true image of
righteousness and heavenly life, engraven in the heart. Now accordingly, as
the Saints receive in this testimony; so they demonstrate the same before the
world, as being always ready to give forth, what ever they receive from the
Lord. Such as have received this heavenly witness, are able to give out a far
more glorious testimony of the truth and glory of God, then those that have
received the former earthly testimony; even as the Disciples were more enlarged
by the testimony of the Spirit, then they wereby their being present with
Christ in the flesh.

Thus we perceive the ground, why the Saints are called two Candlesticks.
First, because they consisted of Jews and Gentiles. Secondly, because they
receive, and consequently give forth a twofold testimony; the first earthly;
the second heavenly. Now lastly, we are to enquire, how Christ intimated here,
by the two olive trees, should be joined with the two Candlesticks, and brought
in as a witness in sackcloth in the several ages and times of the reign of
Antichrist? and seeing that all this has been done since Christ left the
earth. Unto which I answer.

First, Christ and his Saints make but one complete body, are joined as head
and members, being knit together by one Spirit. This the Apostle does affirm
in 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the body is one, and has many members; and all the
members of that one body being many, are one body; so is Christ; for by one
spirit, we are baptized into one body. As it is in the natural body, so it is
in the spiritual, which consists of diverse members, and they of different
offices and operations: yet they make but one body. The Church is called the
fullness of his body, that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23. as Christ is the
fullness of all spiritual supply unto his Saints; so his Saints are the
fullness of his body: both would be defective, and as it were mai^^d, if they
were separated or disunited one from the other. Now in as much as Christ and
his S^i^ts make but one, and both make up but one body: Hence it is, that the
testimony of the Saints is attributed to Christ, he being joined with them in
prophecy, even in the days of Antichrists ^^igne.

Secondly, though Christ be abs^nt in body, yet is present in spirit, and by
his spirit does abide with his people continually, and ^^^ble them to
prophecy. Christ himself gave forth n^ other testimony, then that he received
from the Father: for (...)^ of my self do (...) as I (...) John. 5. 30. Even
so the S^i^ts, (...) cannot bear witness unto the truth, bat as they are
enabled thereunto by the spirit of truth. That which we have seen and heard
(says the Apostle) declare we unto you etc. And this is (...), which we have
heard of him, 1 John 1. 3. 5. So that the Saints receive their message and
testimony from the spirit of Christ, and accordingly they prophesse. And in
this respect Christ may also be said to prophecy in these latter times.

Thirdly, the testimony of Christ and his Saints is one and the same. The
Saints of old gave forth their testimony in their appointed times and seasons,
they did bear witness to the truth of God, against the same spirit of
wickedness, that was acted in their days, even as the witnesses in sackcloth
have done under the powerful reign of the beast. Thus did Mordicay and the
Jews testify against the pride and cruelty of Hammon. Thus did Christ
himself, when he was present upon earth, testify against the hypocrisy and
wickedness of the Scribes and Pharisees. And thus has the Saints in all the
days and ages of the man of sin, given forth a faithful testimony for the
truth of Christ, opposing the falsehood and deceit of all the ways of the man
of sin. Thus we see, that the very testimony of the Saints, is the testimony of
Christ, it is Christ's cause and quarrel they are engaged in: well therefore may
Christ be brought in and joined with the witnesses here.

Fourthly, and lastly, Christ does not perform this here spoken of him, in his
person, but in his members, it is not Christ immediately, and by himself; but
mediatly, and by his Saints: It Is Christ mystically, that is always opposing
of Antichrist. Suitable unto this is that passage in 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. speaking
of Christ, says; That he went by the spirit, and preached unto those spirits
now in prison; having been disobedient unto the word of God, and despised his
long-suffering in the days of Noah, while the Arc was preparing. Here that
which Noah a Preacher of righteousness did, is attributed unto Christ, because
Noah was but isntrumental in the business, it was Christ in the spirit, that
put himself forth in, and through Noah. In like manner it was said, that
whatsoever the prisoners did in the prison, Joseph was the doer of it, Genesis 39.
22. because they did it by warrant and leave from him, or by his dictation and
commandment. Just so Christ is said to prophecy all the days of Antichrist,
because his people receive their commission and power from him, as managing of
his cause and quarrel. It is said in verse. 8. that Christ was crucified in
Egypt and in Sodom: which cannot be meant of Christ's person; because he was
crucified at Jerusalem; but it is meant of Christ in his people: his Saints
being overcome and killed in spiritual Egypt and Sodom. So that we s^e
plainly, that the testimony, that these witnesses give forth, is Christ's
testimony: it is Christ in his Saints, it is the power of the most high one in
his people. In these respects Christ is brought in; as having a share in this
prophecy, under the powerful reign of the beast.

From this whole verse thus opened, take this one observation; That all and
Observe:
every one of the Saints are Gods witnesses. The witnesses here meant, cannot
be only appropriated to Magistrates and Ministers, or to any two eminent
persons, neither are they to be restrained to those only that suffered
martyrdom in their bodies, but of all Saints, of ev^ry individual Saint, of
what quality or degree soever, that gives forth a testimony of the truth of
Christ, all that do according to their measures and abilities continually
oppose the ways and devices of Antichrist. Christ the great and faithful
witness, as the olive tre^ does power out his oil of divine spirit, into the
C^ndlesticks of his people, whereby they are enabled to shine as lights, in the
midst o^ all the perverse generations of men, and among ali the gain sayers
of the truth. The Prophet testifies, that the Lord will sinite the earth with
the ^o^ of his mouth: and with the breath of his lips will destroy the wicked,
Esa. 11. 4. The Saints of the most high have the everlasting word of God,
abiding and dwelling in their hears: and as they hold forth the testimony
thereof, they are the very lips and breath of the Lord whereby ^e bruiseth his
enemies, and b^eaks ^h^n in pieces. The Apostle does affi^^e, that Antichrist
shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming, 2 Th^s. 2. 8. Now what
is the brightness of Christ^ coming? but his glo^^ion rays and bright b^^m^s,
of heavenly di^coveries of light and truth, that he shine: forth withal,
through his people. The word (...), signifies to consume by degrees, to wast a
thing by little and little, until it be consumed, and come to nothing. So
shall the dissolution of Antichrist be by degrees, by little and little, even
as the Lord shall be pleased to increase and double his Spirit upon his people,
whereby they are enabled to testify against the beast and his image: against
the false Prophet and the deceiver: and thus by degrees shall the man of sin be
destroyed. Now we perceive, that it is not only for the wise and learned:
neither for the great and mighty ones, to testify of Christ, or that they are
those by whom Antichrist should be destroyed: but its for Saints of all
degrees, for every member, how poor, how mean soever, that have received of
that holy oil from Christ, the true olive tree, that shines forth, with the
glorious testimony of Christ; I say, every such one is a Prophet, and witness
of the Lord. Then all those poor, low, and despised ones, that have according
to their measures and seize, given forth their testimony for Christ and
his truth: against Antichrist, and his falsehood, all the times of persecution,
as it were in the wilderness, and in sackcloth; these I say, are the witnesses
here spoken of; these are the two Candlesticks, who receive a full supply from
the two olive branches; these stand before the Lord of the whole earth, holding
forth the word of truth, and the testimony of Jesus, in opposition to the man
of sin, that wicked one, that son of perdition. Such honor have all his
Saints, though in the wilderness, and clothed with sackcloth, though under
much persecution and trouble; yet these are the Candlesticks of the Lord, set
by the true olive tree, Jesus Christ, receive of his oil into themselves, they
together with Christ stand before the Lord of the whole earth, and shine as
lights in the world. So much for the discovery of whom is meant by the two
witnesses. It follows.

VERSE. 5. And if any man hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.
HAving made a large description of the witnesses, declaring who they are, and
what their business. Now we come to show, how they are empowered to deal with
their adversaries; whereby we perceive the powerful effects of their
prophecy: If any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, etc.

In this verse consider, first the ha^mful carriage of the adversaries toward
the witnesses: If any man hurt them. Secondly, the means of defense or
opposition made by the witnesses toward their adversaries; fire proceeds out
of their mouths, etc.

First, the deportment of the adversary, and that is expressed hypothetically
or conditionally; If any man etc. whereby a certainty is affirmed. This
indefinite speech does not imply, that it should be a rare thing for men thus
to do, but rather a certainty of punishment should be inflicted upon all those
that should any way oppose these two faithful witnesses. If any man hurt them,
etc. It cannot be meant, as though few should hurt or injure them; but rather
that there should be no exception of persons amongst any that should hurt them;
none should go unpunished for any exterior adjuncts or qualities whatsoever,
let them be of any kind, rank, or degree, they should suffer for their
violence offered to them. The certainty of the enemies opposing the witnesses
is held forth by the doubling of the phrase. So Joseph tells Pharaoh, that by
the doubling of his dream, the thing was established, Genesis 41. 32. But how are
these witnesses hurt by their enemies?

First, by restraining of their persons, by persecution, imprisonment,
banishment, and the like. It has been the practice of the beast, continually
to make war with the Saints, with those that keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus, Revel. 11 17.

Secondly, by rejecting their testimony: the enemy does not only go about to
hinder the course of their testimony; but also to turn the truth they hold
forth into a lie: Hence it is said, that the beast opened his mouth in
blasphemy, against God, his name, Tabernacle, and people, Revel. 13. 6. Now to
blaspheme, is to speak evil, to revile and reproach the testimony of the
Saints; to bring some blot upon the truth they stand to maintain. Thus we see
how certain it is, that the enemies will oppose and hinder the witnesses in
the course of their prophecy. And as certain it is, that the enemies shall
suffer for this their attempt.

Secondly, the means by which the witnesses do oppose their adversaries: fire
proceeds out of their mouths to devour their enemies. As before we had a
description of the witnesses, by the two anointed ones, relating to Zerubbabel
and Joshua: so here we have their actions declared, by an allusion unto Moses
and Elias, both which were revenged for wrong done upon their enemies by fire
from heaven. Thus you may read in Numb. 16. 35. That when Korah, and the rest
of his company did rise up in rebellion against Moses, fire comes from heaven,
and destroys those two hundred and fifty chief men of the Congregation of
Israel. Also of Elias, you have it related 2 Kings 1. 10, 11. That when Ahaziah
sent two captains, with their fifties, to apprehend the Prophet; ^ire comes
down from the Lord, and destroys both the Captains and their fifties. So here
the witnesses are said to command fire to consume their enemies.

This cannot be meant of a material, but of a mystical fire, that the
witnesses do thus breath out of their mouths. It is the word of their testimony
that does consume and destroy their adversaries; it is this fire that does
constantly torment and devour them. Thus we have the word often called fire in
Scripture, Jere. 23. 29. Is not my word like fire, says the Lord? And we have
the Lord telling the Prophet, that he would make his word as fire, and the
people wood, and it should devour them, Jer. 5. 14. So here the witness^^,
thoug^ in sackcloth, testify against all the wickedness of Antichrist: their
persons are oppressed, their testimony contemned; but the word of their
testimony is as fire proceeding out of their mouths, to devour their opposers.

The Adversary shall in this manner be killed by the Fire that issues out of
the mouths of the Witnesses. Suitable hereunto is that passage in Isa. 9. 5.
where the Prophet speaking of Christ prevailing over his Enemies, says, For
every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood; but this shall be with burning, and fuel of ^ire. This should be of
another manner and kind, then the ordinary battle of the Warrior; this
should be Fire, or by the two-edged sword that proceeds out of the mouth of
Christ. The fire that goes forth out of the mouths of the witnesses is all one
with the brightness of Christ's coming, mentioned in 2 These. 2. 8. by which
Antichrist shall be destroyed. The light and glory of Christ's word that the
Witnesses give forth, as fire out of their mouths, ^^all destroy Antichrist.
This is the very form and manner of Antichrists destruction: though happily,
some that uphold his cause may fall by the Sword, in respect of their p^^s^n^,
as (...) of the Witnesses have suffered death for giving forth a testimony of
the truth: yet the cause and being of Antichrist shall be destroyed in this
manner, even by the word of truth, that proceeds out of the mouths of the
Witnesses.

The words being thus opened, take notice of these observations they afford
unto us.

First, That the Adversaries of Christ Obser. 1.
are always ready to hurt his witnesses.

It is most certain that the friends of Antichrist are always willing to
oppose the friends of Christ. These Prophets are cast out, rejected and
slight^d by the men of the world. The seed of the Serpent is continually making
War with the seed of the Woman. The Dragon waited to devour the Manchilde that
the woman was about to bring forth, Rev. 12. 4. And though he could not wholly
prevail, yet he cast forth a flood of persecution af^^^ her, and makes War
with the remnant of her seed, ver. 16. 7.

Secondly, They that go about to hurt Obser. 2.
the Witnesses, or hinder them in the course of their Prophecy, shall not go
unpunished.

There is none that offers violence to the Prophets of the Lord, but shall
receive their just deme^^^s: the Fire that proceeds out of the mouths of the
Witnesses shall devour them: in this manner they shall be killed, even by the
word of their testimony. There was never any person or people, that dealt
cruelly with the dear servants of the Lord, but the hand of God found them
out. The Psalmist speaking of the glorious conduct of the children of Israel
through the wilderness, by the powerful hand of God, says; He suffered no man
to do them wrong, he reproved KINGS for their sakes, saying; Touch not mine
anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. There might none
hurt or injure, they might not harm nor persecute the anointed ones of God; for
the Lord had sharply rebuked Kings for their sakes. All the woes and
calamities, all the judgments and confusions that ever came upon Kings,
Kingdoms, States, or powers, have been for the hurting and opposing of his
people. In like manner, all the plagues that are this day upon the world; all
the War, Famine, Death, and all plagu^^ are for the persecuting, reviling, and
misusing of the Witnesses. And this shall be the portion of all men, of what
rank, quality, or degree soever: be they never so wise or learned, be they
never so great or powerful that shall oppose and hinder these witnesses in the
course of their Prophecy, must in this manner be killed; Fire shall proceed
out of their mouths, and destroy them, they shall be tormented, burnt, and
consumed, by the word of their testimony.

Thirdly, observe, That the Witnesses Obser. 3.
shall prevail against their Enemies by the word of their testimony.

The testimony that the Witnesses give forth, is as fire in the bosom of al
their adversaries, and shall eat them out and consume them. Hence it is said,
the Lord will slay the wicked by the breath of his lips, Isa. 11. 4. By the
breath of Christ, uttered by the lips of his people; and by the brightness of
his coming in the light and knowledge of his Saints, he will destroy Antichrist.
God will judge the world, and burn up the earth by fire: This fire of the
Lord, conveyed into the world by the mouths of the Witnesses, shall destroy all
that is before it; all greatness and dominion, all power Ecclesiastical and
Civil, all the forms and superstitions of Antichrist are consumed and brought
to nothing by this fire, that proceeds out of the mouths of the Witnesses.
Our late experience has taught us, that whenever the Saints and faithful of
God, have given out the word of their testimony against, whatsoever
superstitious inventions, whatsoever tyrannical powers, that they have
prophesied against, and cried down, as Antichristian and wicked, these have
all been burnt up and consumed by the word of their testimony. We have seen,
that whatsoever power, greatness, rule and dominion: or whatsoever way or
doctrine, practice or invention have been set up in opposition against the
testimony of th^se Witnesses, that fire from the Lord has come and destroyed
them all. This fire out of the mouths of the Witnesses have fallen upon all the
powers, greatness, and dignities of men, upon all forms of worship, and
invented ordinances of Antichrist, and have burnt and consumed them.

Fourthly, observe, That the testimony Obser: 4.
of the Witnesses is of great force, even while they prophecy but in
sackcloth. Though these Saints and servants of the Lord prophecy in a poor,
weak, low, sad, and persecuted condition, their persons being slighted, their
testimony rejected; yet their testimony is of that virtue and power, of that
efficacy and force, that it prevails against the strongest powers and highest
dignities in the world. These poor despicable ones have such a testimony to
give forth, such a message to deliver, that shall encounter with all the grand
plots, counsels, and devices of their enemies; yea, and such is the strength
and virtue of their Prophecy, that the glory and excellency of man has faded
away and vanish^d before it. Then God has regard to the word and testimony of
his poor, weak, and despised servants. It follows,

VERSE. 6. These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their Prophecy: and have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will.
HERE we have a further description of the power of the witnesses to repay the
injuries done unto them by their adversaries. In the former Verse their power
in general is inserted: here we have the manner how they are enabled to deal
with their Enemies.

In which words you may observe a threefold power that these Witnesses are
invested withal.

1. A power to shut Heaven, that it rain not. 2. A power to turn waters into
blood. 3. A power to ssmite the Earth with all plagues.
First, they have power to shut heaven that it rain not. In which phrase we
have an allusion to Elias, of whom we have the Apostle testifying, that he
prayed, and it rained not for the space of three years, and six months, Jam.
5. 17. which holds a just proportion of time with these Witnesses Prophecy in
sackcloath: So that as Elias prevailed with God, that it rained not for three
years and a half, so here these Witnesses obtain the same power from God,
that it should not rain all the days of their Prophecy. Now further consider
two things. 1. What is meant by rain.

2. What it is to shut Heaven.

First, we are not to understand this of a natural rain, but of that which is
mystical and spiritual, and thereby is denoted the heavenly influences of
God, the sweet refreshing heavenly dewes that descend from him. These divine
droppings and heavenly distillings of gracious showers of grace, communicated
by the sp^^t, through the Gospel of Christ are here meant by this spiritual
rain. Suitable unto this is that phrase of Moses, when he says, My doctrine
shall drop as the rai^e, and my speech a^ the dew, Deutr. 32. 2. As if he had
said: My Doctrine shall drop upon your hearts, to mollify them, to refresh
them, to make them fruitful; even as the rain and dew of heaven does fall
upon the earth, to soften it, to refresh it, and to make it fruitful, to make
grass and flowers to sprowt and spring out of it. Then the Gospel and word of
Christ, with all the heavenly dews of divine graces, distilling and falling
from God, are here signified by rain.

Secondly, To shut heaven that it rain not, is to exclude all the ways and
practices, all the invented worships and services of Antichrist, from those
sweet distillings and divine droppings of that heavenly rain and dew that
comes from the Lord. The Witnesses by their Prophecy against all
superstitious forms, upon all invented ordinances and practices of Antichrist,
do hinder the heavenly dew of divine grace from falling upon it, as it were
shutting up heaven against them, by excluding of them from the ways and
Ordinances of Christ, or such as the Lord does make use of, to convey those
gracious influences of spirit and life unto his people. The Witnesses exclude
all the worships and forms of Antichrist from having any of the light, life, or
power of Christ in them, they cast them out, and reject them; they prophecy
against them, as false and empty things, as things of no value or worth, and so
consequently shut heaven against them, that is, rain not the showers of divine
grace and life, all the days of their Prophecy.

Thus the great power of the Witnesses is set forth by a resemblance to that of
Elias, who prevailed with God, that it rained not for the space of three years,
and six months: So these by their Prophecy against the ways and practice,
the worships and services of Antichrist, do hinder the sweet influence of
Heaven, and the refreshing showers of divine grace and comfort from flowing
down upon them, whereby they become as light and empty, as having no virtue or
life at all in them; they have no more Rain from heaven; they wither as plants
that God has not planted, as branches that have no life or sap in them.

In the second place, these have power to turn waters into blood. Here we
have another resemblance, and that is unto Moses and Aaron, who turned the
Egyptian waters into blood, Exodus 7. 20. the same thing you have done by the
hands of the Witnesses. This is suitable to the effects of the second and third
vials, where you have mention made of turning waters into blood also, Rev. 16.
3, 4. So that the prophecy of the Witnesses has the same effect, with the
pouring ^orth of the Vials, even to turn waters into blood. Now as we did
understand their destroying their enemies with fire; and their shutting heaven,
that it rain not. Mystically and spiritually before, so here must we
understand also of their turning waters into blood. Therefore consider, 1. What
is meant by waters. 2. What it is to turn them into blood.

First, by waters, we may understand all the sweet refreshing streams of
comfort, strength, supply and life that Antichrist did live upon, as all
worship and Religion, all order and govrnment, all peace and uniformity, all
doctrine and practice: all these are as so many streams of water, by which
Antichrist is comforted and refreshed, they being his very support and life.
The waters that the Egyptians were to drink, to live upon, and be refreshed
by, were turned into blood, so that they were like to dye with thirst, both
they and their Cattle: So this water is the very life, sweetness, and peace
that the world does enjoy, and exceedingly desire.

Secondly, To turn these waters into blood, is no other, then to imbitter all
that sweet peace and rest the world would enjoy all those pleasant streams of
union, peace, and delight, are turned into contention and bitterness, so that
the world cannot drink them down at pleasure, they are disturbed and
troubled; their sweet streams are turn^d into blood and contention; their
quiet waters are disturbed by the prophecy of the Witnesses.

Thus we see what is meant by waters, and how they are turned into blood. It
follows.

Thirdly, and lastly, They smite the earth with all plagues as often as they
will.

Here is one word to comprehend all evils that should befall Antichrist, by
the prophecy of the Witnesses: There needs no more particulars be named to
express those calamities that should befall the world. This does relate to the
pouring forth of the vials, mentioned in Revel. 16. where it is said, that the
seven Angels should power out the vials of of the wrath of God upon the earth,
verse. 1. So here, these shall smite the earth with all plagues; that is, these
by their Prophecy, and testimony of the truth, shall pour out the vials of Gods
wrath and indignation upon Antichrist and his adherents. Here then take notice
of the plagues that light upon the world, by the pouring forth of the Vials,
and of them consider;

First, that there is a full agreement between the seven Seals, seven Trumpets,
and seven Vials, each one dot^ correspond and answr to the other. The opening
of the first Seal, the sounding of the first Trumpet, the pouring forth of the
first Vial, are at one and the same time; and so of them all* they have near
affinity and relation each unto the other: the opening of the Seals, do
occasion the sounding of the Trumpets; and the sounding of the Trumpets do
cause the Vialls to be poured forth. The opening of the Seals by degrees, and
in a graduall way, are those several degrees of light and knowledge that the
Lord does discover to his Saints in their several ages, of the secret and
hidden mysteries of truth, which contains in it self a perfection of mystery,
as being sealed up with seven seals: now gradually in every age the Lord comes
forth, in the discoveries and revelations of these mysteries unto his Saints.
The sounding of the Trumpets follow hereupon, which is the outward declaration
and profession of truth by the witnesses; whereby they give forth a visible
testimony of the truths of GOD thus revealed to them, by preaching, praying,
professing, they do as it were, sound forth the Trumpet of divine truth. The
pouring forth of the Vials, are those judgments and evils that fall upon the
man of sin, by reason of the trumpets sounding. But know, that every Seal,
every Trumpet, and every Vial will agree together in their opening, sounding,
and pouring forth: every Seal has its Trumpet, and every Trumpet has its Vial
that does follow. So that we may not conceive that the opening of the Seals
presents us with one age, the sounding of the Trumpet with another, and the
pouring forth of the Vials with a third; but that the first Seal, first
Trumpet, and first Vial are opened, sounded, and poured forth in one age, and
the second Seal, second Trumpet, and second Vial in another, and so they agree
and go together until they are finished.

Secondly consider, that the plagues that are the effects that follow upon
these Seals opened, Trumpets sounded, and Vials poured forth, are not only, or
so much meant of outward or temporal plagues, but rather of mystical, of such
spiritual judgments that should be poured out upon the head of the man of sin,
to destroy him, not only in body: but in spirit and worship, whereby the very
interest and cause of Antichrist shall be overthrown. And now I say, that these
plagues, and evil effects that follow the first seal, are the same that does
follow the first Trumpet, and first Vial, so of the second, and in like manner
to the end. We shall only speak of those plagues that follow the pouring out
of the Vials; and so consequently, we include those also that follow the
Seals and the Trumpets.

The first Vial was poured upon the 1 Vial.
earth; that is, upon the Antichristian Church and State, which consists of
of earthly worship, and is made up of worldly Christians: and the effects of
this Vial poured out, was, that there fell a grievous sore upon the men that
had the mark of the Beast upon them, and worshipped his Image. This soar is
like to be incurable, agreeing with that which followed the sound of the first
Trumpet, Chap. 8. 7. And there followed hail mingled with hlood, and they were
cast upon the earth, and the third part of the trees were burnt up, and all
green grass was burnt up. This hail and fire agrees with the Thunder, which
happened at the opening of the first Seal, Chap. 6. 1. All which shows, that by
this Thunder, this Fire and Hail, together with this great sore, that the life
and peace, the worship and form of the third part of those that served the
Beast, were burnt up, and s^^rched: they that were like green trees in show of
holiness and zeal, became as dry and withered, without blossom, without any
fruit at all.

The second Vial was poured out upon 2 Vial.
the Sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul dyed
in the Sea, Chapter 16. 3. This is the same with the effect of the Witnesses
prophecy, when they turn waters into blood. Sutably at the opening of the
second Seal, Chapter 6. 3, 4. there appeared a red horse, signifying blood,
preparing for War and death. The same effect follows the second Trumper, Chap.
8, 9. A great mountain buring with fire was cast into the sea, and the third
part of the sea became blood, etc. This effect presents us with the death of
all the sweet comforts, sweet enjoyments, that the Antichristian Church did
feed on; all those forms of worship and service they took much delight in, and
were refreshed by, now they are turned into blood, yea like the blood of a dead
man, which was most deadly and corrupt in its own nature, that none may drink
of it, but the shall dye: every soul that was at rest and peace before, and
thought it self most safe and in a good condition, now it languisheth, gives
up the ghost, and dies.

The third Vial was poured upon the rivers 3 Vial.
and fountains of waters, and they became blood, etc. This differs from the
former, where the sea, or water of comfort was turned into blood, those
comforts they enjoyed were taken away; but this third Vial is poured out upon
the very spring and fountain of all their supplies: as they lost what they
enjoyed, so they cannot receive any more, their spring and fountain is stopped
up. The same judgment will be seen, if we look back to the third Seal, Chap.
6. 5, 6. And when he had opened the third seal, I beheld a black horse, and he
that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand: and a measure of wheat
for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, etc. The black Horse,
and he that ^ate thereon, with a p^re of balances, signify scarcity, ^amin^,
a great dearth and want, which is all one with the Vial poured out upon the
fountain of wa^^^. Agreeable hereunto is the effect of the third trumpet,
Chap. 8. 10, 11. At the sound of the third Trumpet, a great star fell from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the
rivers, and upon the fountains of waters: and the name of the star is called
wormwood, and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many dyed of
the waters, because they were made bitter. The starr falling from heaven,
burning like a Lamp, shows forth some glorious discovery made of the mystery
of truth, by the Angel that sounded this third Trumpet: and this becomes
wormwood, making all the fountains of water to be bitter: so that all the
fountains and springs of the water of consolation and comfort, all the streams
of light and life that the men of the earth (or of the Antichristian Church)
did draw forth, and were refreshed by, these were all become bitter as
worme-wood. So that as by the former vial poured out, the Sea and the waters
became blood: now by this third Vial being poured forth, the Rivers and
Fountains became as blood, and as wormwood, bitter and unsavory; for the the
Fountain is corrupted, the streams are defiled, they cannot drink or be
refreshed by them. The wisdom and policy of the Beast, all the invented
ordinances and worships, all the power and rule of Antichrist, these
fountains, these streams are all become unsavory, all that feed upon them,
feed on the curse, they feed on bitter waters and dye therewith.

The fourth Vial was powered out 4 Vial.
upon the Sun. And this scorched men with fire, they blaspheme God because of
their plagues, and repented not, etc. Revel. 16. 8, 9. Agreeable hereunto is
the effect of opening the fourth seal, Revel. 6. 8. When the fourth seal was
opened, (or a fourth discovery of truth revealed) there appeared a pale horse,
upon whom sat death, and hell followed him: and power was given him over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth. Under the former seal, we had famine: now
here we have death and hell following: this is meant of the spiritual death,
that the men of the earth, who worship Antichrist shall be slain withal, as
in their parts, professions and power. The same consequent follows the fourth
Trumpet, Chap. 8. 12. The fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun
was smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars,
so as the third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not for the third
part of it, and the night likewise. The whole state and kingdom, all the
ordinances and worships, with their offices and ministry, were all darkened,
confounded, and destroyed, by the sound of this Trumpet. So the Vial powered
out upon the Sun, darkens all the Churches and Ordinances, all the powers and
governments, all the doctrines and worships of Antichrists; their Sun loses
his light, and their Moon her shining, and their Stars their glory: and
darkness and confusion come in their room.

The fist vial was powered out upon the 5 Vial.
seat of the beast, and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they knawed
their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their
pains, etc. Revel. 16. 10. The seat of the beast is that earthly power, that
upholds Antichrist, as kingdoms, States, powers, dignities, rules and
dominions; these powers upholding the power of the beast shall be shaken and
torn in pieces. Suitable hereunto is the effect of the fifth seal, Chap. 6. 9,
10. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw the souls under the Altar of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held, and they cried how long Lord? etc. These cry out for vengeance and wrath
to be powered out upon the head of the powers of the earth, that persecuted and
tormented them. Compare with this, the fist Angel sounding in Chap. 9. 1.
whereat there was a Star that fell from heaven unto the earth, and to him was
given the key of the bottomless pit, etc. This Star does represent us with
such as before disowned the power and seat of the beast: but now fall to the
earth, or would set up some new form of worship, and ground it upon an earthly
power: and so fall from that seeming heaven they lived in to strengthen
themselves from the earth: and so cause a great smoke and confusion to arise,
that so truth can hardly be discerned from error, light from darkness: the
bottomless pit is now open: and the Temple is full of smoke: whereby the Sun
and air are both darkened, so that Church and State are brought into confusion.
So that when the Vial of Gods wrath is powered out upon the seat of the beast,
or power and strength of Kings and States, that the Gospel must only be
supported by the power of Christ alone, then the state and kingdom shall be
full of darkness and confusion: they shall gnaw their tongues, and blaspheme
God, because of those sores and breaches, that be made upon them.

The sixth vial was powered out upon the 6 Vial.
great river Euphrates, and the waters thereof were dried up, that the way of
the Kings of the East might be prepared, Chap. 16. 12. The drying up of the
river Euphrates seems to be spoken by an allusion to the taking of old
Babylon, Jer. 50. 38. And to the drying up of the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 21, 22.
and also of Jordan, Josh. 3. 16. By this is signified, that by the pouring out
of the sixth Vial, all the strength and power of the beast should be dried up:
then the Kings of the East, both Jew and Gentiles shall come to embrace the
Gospel, upon the glorious manifestation of the glory and power thereof. The
great effect of this Vialls powering out is, That three unclean spirits like
frogs comes forth of the mouth of the Dragon, the beast, and the false Prophet;
for they are the spirits of Devils working miracles which go forth to the
Kings of the earth, and to the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
the great day of God Almighty: and he gathers together into a place, called
in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon, Verse. 13, 14. 16. By the Dragon, the beast,
and false Prophet, are meant all the powers of Antichrist; Civil and
Ecclesiastical; these send forth unclean spirits like frogs; who send forth
their Legates and incendiaries, to draw together all their strengths and powers,
to uphold the power of the beast, which now is like to be broken and consumed:
These are the spirits of Devils, being full of uncleanness; working miracles,
by some counterfeit spiritual actings, or setting up some new invented forms
of worship: thus they gather the Kings of the earth to the great battle of God
Almighty; where God shall show the greatness of his power in destroying of
them; for they are brought to Armageddon, which signifies, devoted for
destruction, that they are seduced, and by ^uo^i^^ie brought together to be
destroyed. Baraks victory over Sisera, was by the waters of Megiddo, Judge. 4.
15. So all that give up their power to uphold the beast, shall come to the
great battle of God Almighty; even to Armageddon, where they shall assuredly
be ensnared and broken in pieces. Hitherto agrees the effect of the sixth seal,
Chap. 6. 12. etc. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and there was
a great earthquake: a great fear and terr^ur fell upon all men, great
concussions and commotions should be on the earth. And the Sun became black:
the glory of the state and Church of Antichrist turned into blackness and
mourning; into great confusion and astonishment: And the Moon became blood:
all the invented ordinances of the man of sin were darkened and obscured. And
the Stars fell from heaven, as a figtree casts her untimely figs: Such as
seemed to be Ministers and prof^ssors of Christ, now appear to be fleshly and
carnal; and fall from that appearance of heavenly light, unto the earth;
cleaving now to an earthly power; even like untimely figs, that never come to
maturity, or ripeness. Then their State and Church, which seemed to be as high
as heaven, departed as a scroll; and all their mountains of strength and
confidence were removed out of their places. And the Kings of the earth, and
the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captaiues, and mighty men, and
every bondman, and every free man, hid them selves in dens, and in the rocks
of the mountains, etc. All sorts, ranks and degrees of men, from the highest
to the lowest, they now fly to the rocks and mountains of their trust and
confidence, every one will fly unto his God, unto that he trusts in; the States
and powers of the world will fly to the Church, and hide themselves under
religious forms of worship; and the Church will fly to the earthly powers for
shelter and protection; and the people will run to those that seduced them, for
succor and relief; but shall not be able to secure themselves from the
wrathful countenance of the Lamb, ^e being exalted upon the throne of his
power, in the great ^ay of his venge n^e; when he shall reckon with the
Antichristian powers, that have shed the blood of the Martyrs, and rejected the
testimony of his witnesses: This at the rising of the witnesses; Add hereunto
the effect of the sixth Trumpet; And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice
from the four horns of the golden Altar, which is before God, Chap. 9. 13. The
voice and power of Christ, prefigured by the golden Altar, Exodus 30. 1. having
horns, verse. 10. signifying the power and strength of Christ, whereby the
four Angels that were heald in the river Euphrates were loosed: The great
multitude of Saints, that were bound up by the strength and power of
Antichrist, are now set at liberty; now they go forth with great authority,
and hold forth the truth, making glorious discoveries of the same; These slay
the third part of men: for fire, smoke, and brimstone comes forth of their
mouths; the light and truth they hold forth, as fire does devour, and as smoke
does darken all the light and glory of Antichrist. And in their tails or
conversation they hurt, by condemning the men of the world, and of those that
repented not of their deeds. And in Chap. 10. Christ comes forth as a mighty
Angel, clothed with a cloud of darkness and obscurity, that the world could
not see him: having a rainbow or Covenant of grace on his head; and the book
of the Gospel unsealed in his hand: he set his right foot upon the sea, of the
common people, and his left upon the earth, or worldly powers: And crying with
a loud voice, the seven thunders uttered: a perfection of fear and amasement,
of dread and terror falls upon the sea: and upon the earth; upon all the
people and powers of Antichrist.

The seventh Vial was powered into the 7 Vial.
air, and there came great voices out of the Temple of heaven; saying, it is
done, Chap. 16. 17. The very air that Antichrist lives and breaths in, is now
destroyed; there is no longer breath, spirit, or life in any thing that
Antichrist would live in, or receive comfort from; so that the whole work is
done; the beast is quite destroyed; and there were voices, and thunders, and
lightnings, and great earthquakes, such grievous concussions and earthquakes,
as if heaven and earth were conspired together, to destroy Babylon, the work is
done, or Bah lo^ undone; though once it had a being, now it has none; now it
is divided into three parts, as being torn to picces by the earthquake; and
every Mountain and Island fled away; as things that could yield no protection:
And there fell great hail out of heaven upon men, about the weight of a
talent, and men blasphemed God, because of the plagues of hail, for the plague
thereof was exceeding great. Here is an allusion to the great plague of hail,
that fell upon Egypt, Exodus 9. 22. This hail falls from heaven; from the
light and truth held forth by Saints, in the midst of heavenly enjoyments;
these rain down great and weighty haile-stones upon the state, order, and
worship of Antichrist. Compare hereunto the effect of the seventh seal. And
when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven, about the
space of half an hour. Upon the opening of this last seal, there is some
respite or intermission, and as it were for a time, some rest and cessation of
the Saints from persecu^ion and trouble. Now is the full revelation of truth,
now is the kingdom of God come; and now the Gospel goes forth, without let or
molestation; now the servants of God have peace without, and also a sweet
tranquillity and quietness in their own spirit^. Add hereunto the seventh
Trumper, Chapt. 11. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
voices in heaven, saying; The kingdoms of the world, are become the kingdoms
of the Lord, and of his Christ, etc. Now the kingdoms and nations cast down
their crowns at the feet of Christ, who will take his great power unto
himself, and reign.

Thus we see how the Saints smite the earth with all plagues, by pouring out
all the vialls of Gods wrath upon the State and Church of Antichrist: Aiso you
perceive, that there is an agreement between the seals, Trumpets, and vialls;
the opening of each sea'e, causes a Trumpet to sound, and each Trumpet,
causes a vial of wrath to fall upon the head of the beast. Christ opens the
seals, by discovering of light and truth to his Saints: The Saints sound the
Trumpets, by their holding forth and professing of the truth; and every Trumpet
sounded, brings a vial of indignation and destruction to be powered forth
upon the earth. And thus the witnesses, smite the earth with all plagues, as
often as they will.

Now give me leave to give you those observations, that the words afford us

First, Observe, That the testimony of 1 Observe:
the witnesses, against the ways and practices of Antichrist does exclude them
from the heavenly influences and sweet showers of divine grace There are not
any of the ways and practices, or of the forms of worship that Antichrist
does uphold and exercise; but at the prophecy of these witnesses, they wither
and are dried up, as a dead branch that is severed from the root. These have
effectual power to exclude all carnal and fleshly forms and worships of
Antichrist from all refreshing showers and dews divine grace: If these say,
this, or that way is not of God, it is not the appointment of Christ, it is of
man, it is his invention, it is fleshly and carnal: I say, presently upon the
witness and testimony of the faithful witnesses, the heavenly dews and sweet
distilling showers of divine grace have been shut up, and they have had no
rain, but they have been blasted, scattered, and broken. Suitable unto this is
that in Revel. 7. 1. And after these things, I saw four Angels standing in the
four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that it
should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. These winds
import the sweet gentle winds of the word and Spirit of God, as appears, Cant.
4. 16. The four Angels present us with the servants of Christ, who by their
witness and discovery of truth, do hinder and restrain those refreshing and
fructifying gales of wind, from blowing upon the earthly, carnal, and invented
forms of worship, that the earthly church does hold forth; by the power and
prevalency of truth, there is a stoppage made upon the errors and false ways
of Antichrist. Such was the judgment the Lord threatened to the house of Israel
for their unfruitfullnesse, saving, I will command the clouds that they rain
no rain upon it, Esa. 5. 6. The Lord would so shut up the clouds, that they
should not rain upon his Vineyard, that it might wither away with drought. So
in Jere. 3. 3. God did withhold the showers and the rain from the house of
Israel. This power is given to the witnesses, that they shut heaven, that it
rain not all the days of their prophecy.

Secondly, Observe, That all the sweet 2 Observe:
and refreshing streams of comfort and supply, that Antichrist lives upon, are
turned bitterness and contention, at the prophecy of the Witnesses. Hence it
is, they have always been accounted the troublers of the peace and quietness
of the world; were it not for the testimony of these witnesses, the world would
never be disturbed nor disquieted; they could be at rest and peace, and all
their streams would be sweet, their waters would never be disturbed, they
could d. Ink them down merrily; but that the witnesses prophecy against
them, saying these ordinances, these forms of worships, these gifts are
humane, carnal and fleshly; presently their waters are turned into blo^d and
contention, into strife and debate, into by ternesse and confusion. Suitable
unto this is the effect of the third Trumpet, Chap. 8. 11. The star called
wormwood fell into the third part of the waters, and they became wormwood,
and men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter. The star was called
wormwood, from the effect of it, because it made the waters bitter: the best
of Antichrists doctrines, ordinances, and forms of worship, which are as so
many fountains and streams of water, they are now become as wormwood, bitter
and unsavory. And thus all the ways of Antichrist are turned into blood and
contention, into wormwood and bitterness, bythe prophecy of these witnesses.

Thirdly, Observe, That the prophecy 3 Observe:
of the witness, though in a mean, low, and sackcloth condition, is of
mightly force and power unto their adversaries. All the evil that befalls
Antichrist, proceeds from the prophecy of the witnesses; they by their
declaration and profession of truth, sound sorth the Trumpets; and every
Trumpet sounding, does cause a vial of wrath to be powered out upon the head of
Antichrist. Then needs must the force and power of their prophecy be great:
These smite the earth with all plagues: and that as often as they will: as
often as they prophecy, as often as they give forth their testimony of the
truth of Christ, they smite all earthly things; all things that are carnal and
fleshly, are killed and slain. Then all the plagues, famines, wars, in the
world are occasioned by these witnesses; all spiritual sicknesses, weaknesses,
and consumptions, issue forth of the mouths of these Prophets, which torment
the world. In a word, these power out all the vialls of Gods indignation upon
the beast, that man of sin, by the word of their testimony. Here then take
notice of all plagues, with which these smite the earth, by pouring forth all
the vialls.

VERSE. 7. And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them.
HAving spoken of the active part of these witnesses, how they were empowered
to prophecy; and thereby enabled to resist their enemies; now here we are to
proceed to speak of their passive part, in that they should suffer from their
enemies.

As these witnesses did most grievously torment Antichrist, by smiting the
earth with all plagues; so in revenge, we have Antichrist about to repay these
witnesses, for all the wrongs he does receive.

The words hold forth the slaying and death of the witnesses, and that when
they have finished their testimony: in which thing we have a plain allusion
unto the story of Christ's death, resurrection, and ascension: as Christ
finished his testimony, and was slain; after which he rose again, and
ascended; so it falls out with these witnesses. Now from the words here,
concerning the death of the witnesses, by the war made against them; Consider
these particulars.

First, the time when they are slain; and that is, when they had finished
their testimony.

Secondly, by whom they should be slain; and that is by the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit.

Thirdly, the manner how they are slain; and that is expressed gradually, by a
threefold action of the beast, who is said.

First, to make war against them. Secondly, to overcome them. Thirdly, to kill
them.
First, of the time when these witnesses should be slain, and that is declared
to be, when they have finished their testimony. These witnesses have a time to
prophecy, and also a time when they shall finish their testimony, and then
they are slain. The maine thing we are to quire after, is to know when these
have finished their testimony; and then we shall easily know, when they are to
be slain. Now the most received opinion is, that these witnesses never come to
finish their testimony, until near the end and period of Antichrists reign,
that there should be some great and eminent slaughter at the latter end of
their prophecy, upon the declining of Antichrist's state and kingdom; but
this is far remote from the true scope and sense of ^he truth in this place;
for so the slaying of the witnesses should be restrained to some particular
persons, and to some particular time, and that near the end of Antichrists
reign: whereas the slaving of the witnesses, is a continued act, even all the
days of the powerful reign of the beast, who does always make war against
these, and does always overcome and kill the holy people, (all the time, that
the holy City is given into his hand) to trample upon them and abuse them.

Then the time when these witnesses have finished their testimony is meant no
more then this, that when any of the faithful servants of Christ, shall in any
age or time of Antichrist, faithfully and fully discharge their trust, deliver
their message, give forth their testimony of those truths of Christ, that they
are convinced of, against Antichrist, and the present evils of the times they
live under: then they are said to finish their testimony. (...) is variously
translated, the most accute render it, when they are about to finish their
testimony. This they do, before they are slain; and because they do this,
therefore they are slain; for they are slain because of the testimony they
give forth. Thus Christ was said to finish hu work, Joh. 17. 4. by that
faithful testimony he gave of the Father. And Paul tells us, he had finished
his course, 2 Timothy 4. 7. when he had faithfully discharged his trust, by
preaching the Gospel, according to his Commission. So the Saints in every age
and time, when they have faithfully given in their evidence and testimony of
that truth they know, then they have finished their testimony: and not that all
the witnesses should first give in their testimony, and at the last a few of
them should be slain; but that, I say, every Saint, every witness of the
Lord, in every age and time shall faithfully give in his testimony, and then is
slain: so that the slaying of the witnesses is not confined to one time, or
the last period of Antichrist; but their slaying continues as long, as their
prophecy in sackcloth, as we shall show more hereafter.

Secondly, by whom shall these witnesses be slain; and that is, by the beast
that ascends out of the bottomless pit. Now for the opening of this passage,
consider three things.

First, who is meant by this beast Secondly, from whence he comes. Thirdly,
the form or manner of his coming.
First, by this beast is meant Antichrist, who is so called from his beastly
nature, being most fierce and cruel, most barbarous and dangerous. So he is
called a beast in Chap. 13. 4, 5. because his mouth is full of blasphemy, and
his carriage full of inhumanity: for his rage, fury, and madness he is like
unto a beast; being of a devouring nature, and of a beastly disposition. The
whorish woman is said to ride upon the beast, Chap. 17. 7. The woman is that
whorish and Antichristian spirit, that does ride forth, and act by a beastly,
inhumane power, and as a beast does devour and destroy; and the Kings of the
earth give their power unto the beast, and so they become beastly, fierce and
untractable also The beast then is no other, then that wicked one, that son of
perdition, that spirit of wickedness, that mystery of iniquity, putting it
self forth in some corrupt and beastlike power and carriage, most fierce and
devouring; it is Antichrist in his power and greatness, oppressing and
destroying the Saints of the most high. So much for the description of the
beast.

Secondly, from whence this beast does arise, and that is from the bottomless
pit, or deep Abyss. The beast mentioned in Chapt. 13. 1. is said to arise out
of the sea, that is, out of many peoples and nations. And the beast in verse.
13. is said to arise out of the earth; from a kingly or earthly power. But this
beast that slays the witnesses shall arise out of the bottomless pit.

Three things are said to ascend out of the bottomeesse pit. First, the smoke
of the bottomless pit, Chap. 9. 2. which is meant of all Antichristian
darkness and confusion. Secondly, we read of the Angel of the bottomless pit,
Chap. 9. 11. which is Satan, called therefore Apollyon, that is to say, a
destroyer, whose work is to destroy others. Lastly, we have the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit; spoken of here; and also in Chap. 17. 8.

First, the smoke of the bottomless pit, is meant of that darkness and
confusion, of that ignorance and blindness, that does arise upon the soul as
a thick cloud, from the fleshly acting of the heart; whereby the mind and
understanding is wholly darkened and obscured; according to that of the Apostle,
speaking of the Gentiles, says, Having their understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. Blindness and darkness is
upon all the thoughts and inventions, upon all the carnal actings of the flesh.

Secondly, the Angel of the bottomless pit, is Satan, that Prince of
darkness, that evil spirit, that rules in the children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 2. 2. The Prince and power of darkness, by his instigations and
suggestions does rule and sway man's heart. By the close of man's heart with
Satan, he is captivated and ensnared, and so brought into subjection unto him,
as unto a mighty Prince or Ruler. Thus we see who is meant by the Angel of the
bottomless pit.

Thirdly, the beast of the bottomless pit, is Antichrist in the form of a
beast, or acting in his beastly, inhumane power, with much cruelty and
fierceness. Now what is this bottomless pit, or deep Abyss, that has no
bottom, it cannot be measured, none can take a dimention of it; now I say,
what is this, but that hellish working, those fleshly imaginations, those
black and beastly devices of man's heart; whereof there is no measure or end,
none can fadome them, none can search the bottom of them. We told you before,
that the frame and image of Antichrist, did arise from the spirit of
Antichrist; so here this beast, or power of darkness that slays the
witnesses, arises out of that hellish wickedness, that rage and cruelty, from
that darkness and confusion in the heart of man; this is the pit that has no
bottom; this beast or form of wickedness, this beastlike power, that slays
the witnesses, has no foundation, it is not brought forth by any institution
of Christ, it has no such bottom to fasten it self on, but does arise from
the evil imaginations of man's heart: this wickedness and rage has no limits
or bounds: the heart of man closing with Satan, does hatch and bring forth all
the most abominable and hideous, the most black and monstrous wickedness, that
is acted in the world: This wickedness arising into power and greatness,
breaks forth into cruelty and rage, into madness and beastliness:
Antichrist acting upon this principal, becomes as a beast, and is fierce and
cruel; he being in power does kill and slay the witnesses and faithful
servants of Christ. And this beast arises out of the bottomless pit, that is
without breadth or length, such as cannot be fathomed or measured, being full
of darkness and blackness of torment and confusion. Thus we see what is meant
by the bottomless pit; from whence this beast comes, that makes war with the
Saints. Hence it is; that the Apostle says; The coming of the man of sin, is
after the working of Satan, 2 These. 2. 9. It is Satan that does captivate the
minds and understandings of men, and powerfully seduce and deceive them: So
that Satan's working upon the hearts of men, does produce all those strange
inventions and deceits, all that darkness and confusion, all those horrid
designs and plots: that causes all that rage and cruelty, that man's heart
does hatch and bring forth, even all that killing and slaying enmity, that
Antichrist does exercise against the witnesses. So much for the description of
the bottomless pit, from whence the beast comes.

Thirdly, the manner of this beasts coming; he does ascend up, etc. that is
into greatness and power, he does arise up high in dignity and dominion. This
beast does ascend from the bottomless pit of the workings of Satan, from that
darkness, blackness, confution, rage, cruelty in man's heart, up unto
greatness, power, and dominion. This wickedness does not lie in the hellish
imaginations of man's heart, closed up in those unfathomed and endless thoughts
and inventions; but it ascends up into power and action, it arises into
height and dominion, and then breaks forth into cruelty and oppression. Thus
the beast is said to ascend out of the sea, Chap. 13. 1. that is, he as being
greedy of supremacy and greatness, did ascend by little and little, until he
was lifted up into the highest power and dominion. So this beast does ascend
out of the bottomless pit, to a state of strength and power: As it is said in
Chap. 13. 2. The Dragon gave unto the beast his power, and his seat, and great
authority, that so he might make war with the Saints and overcome them, and
kill them. Thus much for the manner of the beasts ascension.

The third thing to be considered, is the manner how the witnesses are to be
slain; and that is expressed by a threefold action of the beast, that
ascends out of the bottomless pit; he shall,

First, make war against them. Secondly, shall overcome them. Thirdly, he
shall kill them.
First, we have the war, that this beast makes against the witnesses. This is
the war in heaven, spoken of in Chap. 12. 7. between Michael and his Angels,
fighting with the Dragon and his Angels; That is, Christ and his people waging
a spiritual war, against the Devil and his agents. This represents us with
the spirit of enmity and malice of the Serpent, put forth in the power and
authority of the Dragon: here is the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the
woman, conflicting and fighting one against the other. When the woman is fled
into the wilderness, and Antichrist himself having taken the possession of the
outward Court, yet the Dragon makes war with the remnant of her seed, Chap. 12.
ult. This war is in heaven, being a spiritual Combat between Christ and
Antichrist. The envy, the malice, and the inveterate hatred of the seed of the
Serpent is always putting it self forth against Christ, his servants, his
image, and truth. Hence it was, that Christ told the Jews, That they were of
their father the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44.
They received the root and seed of malice and hatred from Satan, the accuser of
the servants of Christ, who does always raise calumny, war, and contention
against them. Thus the beast being filled with the cursed seed of the envy and
malice of the Serpent, does always make war with the Saints.

Secondly, this beast shall overcome the witnesses. This represents us with the
craft and subtilty of the Serpent, whereby he shall ensnare and entrap the
Saints for the time that they shall be given into his hand. Thus it is said of
the King of a fierce countenance, that through his policy he should cause craft
to prosper in his hand, Dan. 8. 25. And so in Dan. 11. 31. He shall corrupt
with flatteries. Such is the craft and subtilty of Antichrist, who by fair
pretenies, and subtle devices does betray the Saint. And thus he does, by
translating himself into an Angel of light, taking up the form of Christ, to
persecute the spirit and life of Christ. The beast comes forth with fair
pretenses, like a woman in some glorious dress, arrayed in purple, and scarlet
color, decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls, Revel. 17. 4. having
many excellencies of nature, and forms of worship, humane gifts, and a
counterfeit spirit; that so the whole world wander after the beast, saying, Who
is like unto the beast? But when he has by subtilty and deceit brought about
his own ends, then he opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme
his name, and abuse his people, by Ecclesiastical Cannons, Laws, and
Constitutions; so that, to the malice, here is added the subtilty of the beast
to overcome, and ensnare the Saints, and to bring them under his power and
jurisdiction, all the appointed time, while they are given into his hand. Thus
the beast by turning Religion into a Law, and by establishing his forms of
worship by civil sanction, and humane authority, taking into his assistance
the powers of the world, he does prevail against, and overcome the witnesses.

Thirdly, the beast is said to kill these witnesses. And this represents us
with the spirit of cruelty; herein he does beast-like, devour and destroy the
faithful servants of Christ. Now we must not understand this killing of the
witnesses, of a literal or outward slaying, but of a Mystical slaying; for
they are not here slain as men; but they are slain as witnesses: and so their
killing here imports two things.

First, a restraint laid upon their persons; sometimes by imprisonment and
banishment, sometimes by throwing them from place and office, from rule and
government, by silencing and suspending of them; some way or other hindering
them in the course of their prophecy. Thus the Jews cast out the poor man
out of the Synagogue, that Christ made to see, Job. 9. And all because he gave
a testimony of the power of Christ, who opened his eyes. Thus the high Priests
and Pharisees did beat, misuse, and imprison the Apostles, in Act. Chap. 4.
and Chap. 5. Thus the beast does put in execution all the politic Laws, and
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, to hinder, restrain, and wholly to disturb the
witnesses in the course of their prophecy. Thus first, they are civilly
slain, by restraint upon their persons.

Secondly, they are spiritually slain, by the casting forth and rejecting of
their testimony. It is the practice and endeavor of the beast to turn the
truth of their testimony into a lie, and into falsehood, by reproaching,
contemning, and scandalizing the word of their testimony, by the reproachful
names of error and scisme. There has been all the days of the reign of
Antichrist, some truth that the Saints have testified of, that has been under
much shame and reproach, that has been most rejected by the world. Hence it
is, that the Lord says unto the Church of Philadelphia, that she had kept the
word of his patience, Revel. 3. 10. Now what is the word of Gods patience; but
that word and testimony, that the world does reject, cast forth as dung, and
trample upon. That truth which is most under contempt and scorn of the world;
which the Saints suffer most by, and for which they are made the offscouring
of all things: That word of truth that is most opposed in each age of the
world, is the word of Christ's patience. Thus we see how the witnesses are
slain, first, civilly, by a restraint laid upon their persons. Secondly,
spiritually, by the world, casting forth, and rejecting of their testimony.
This of their testimony is that, which most principally, and most constantly
these witnesses are slain in; for all the enmity of the flesh, and the power
of the world has always been opposing the truth they assert, not at all
owning, but always condemning, slighting, and casting forth the testimony that
these give forth of Christ, or of his Spirit. As the Jews first killed the
person of Christ, and afterward sought against his Gospel and truth: so
Antichrist does not only by Ecclesiastiall Cannons and humane Institutions,
restrain the persons of the witnesses, exercising a civil death over their
persons; but also they suppress and slay the very truths and testimonies that
they bear witness unto. Thus we see how the beast does kill these witnesses;
and what manner of slaying they suffer.

The Text being thus far opened; we are now to come to give you some
observations from it.

First, Observe, That the Saints of Christ 1 Observe:
in every age and time, are enabled to finish their testimony, maugre all the
opposition that is made against them. Antichrist by all his fury and rage
cannot so far hinder these witnesses, as that they should not finish their
testimony. The Lord does give opportunity to every one of his faithful
servants, that they may finish their work, deliver their message, and
faithfully declare that committed to their trust, before they are taken off, or
wholly restrained by the power of the beast. This was manifested in Christ,
when the Jews had a mind to apprehend him in the Temple, but could not lay
hands on him, because his hour was not come, Joh. 8. 20. It was not in their
power to put Christ to death, until he had finished his testimony: and
therefore he says, When I was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretehed forth
no hands against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkness, Luke
22. 53. As if Christ had said, When I was daily with you in the Temple,
preaching the kingdom of God, and performing the work, that the Father gave
me to do, ye did not, ye could not lay hands on me, to take me: but this is
your hour, or time wherein God has permitted you to rage against me, and the
Priace of darkness has power, that by your hands I should be taken, and put
to death. In the same manner the Lord does first empower his faithful
witnesses, to deliver their message, to finish their testi-mony, by asserting
the truth of Christ, opposing the wickedness and falsehood of Antichrist,
before they are slain or taken off by the adversary.

Secondly, in that Antichrist is called 2 Observe:
a beast, Observe, That the rage and cruelty of the adversary is very great
against the faithful servants of Christ. Antichrist is of a cruel, fierce,
corrupt, beastly, and inhumane nature; and therefore compared to all the most
ravenous and devouring beasts, as to a Serpent for subtilty, to a Lion for
strength and rage, to a Bear for devouring, to a Leopard for his fierceness,
and the like. We have the Apostle testifying of this, when he says of
himself; I fought with beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Some interpret these
words literally, in that of old the Christians were often Damnati ad bestias,
being condemned to be devoured by wild beasts: whereupon it was a common speech
in the days of Tertullian, Christianos ad leones. But I rather conceive the
speech of the Apostle to be figurative and metaphorical; and by beast he
means beastly ^^nded men: Such as the Cretians were, whom he calls evil
beasts, Tit. 1. 12. They were intractable and dangerous to deal withal, being
of a raging and fierce nature. The same inhumane nature, and cruelty is found
in Antichrist, always endeavoring to devour the faithful witnesses of
Christ.

Thirdly, does the beast that kills the witnesses, ascend out of the
bottomless 3 Observe:
less pit, Then Observe, That the workings and deceits of Antichrist are very
deep and mysterious. This inquity is brought forth by the working of Satan,
upon the heart of man; exciting and stirring up so many fleshly workings, and
strange inventions, acting in so much subtilty and craft, exercised in such a
deep mystery of iniquity, that none can fathom the depth, or reach the bottom
of the wickedness thereof. It is not like a clear stream, that we may see
the bottom; but there is so much mud and filth, that none can see the depth of
all that subtilty and craft, of all that pride and self love, of all that
hypocritical deceit and wickedness, that is the very sourse and spring of all
the actings of Antichrist. This pit that has no bottom, is all that hellifh
darkness, all that beastly filthiness, all that outrageous cruelty, that does
arise in the hearts of men, fighting against and opposing the very light, life,
and image of Christ in his people. This pit is as deep as hell, and full of
hiddeous darkness; it is inexorable as the grave, and never satisfied in it is
pride and abominable wickedness. This is the deepest mystery of iniquity;
Satan transforming of himself into an Angel of light; suggesting the most
cursed wickedness into the heart of man, under the very form of zeal and
holiness, thereby seeking to dishonor God, and ruin his people. Hence it is,
that mystery is written upon the head of the whorish woman, Chap. 17. 15. when
in her ornaments of purple, and decking of silver, gold, and precious stones;
she is full of abominations, and filthiness of fornication; being but the
mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. Here is the fountain of all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness that the world sees not the depth of,
neither can it fathom the bottom of this wickedness, of this mystery; it
ascends from the pit as deep as hell it self.

Fourthly, does this beast ascend upward: Then Observe, There is a time 4
Observ^
when Antichrist does ascend high in greatness and power. All that wickedness
and abomination, all that blackness and darkness, all that deceivablenesse
and iniquity, suggested by Satan, into man's heart, that we spoke of before: it
is gathered up, and acted in greatness, power, and dominion: The spirit of
selfe-righteousnesse, pride, malice and envy; now comes forth in the form and
power of a beast. There is a time when this wickedness shall reign and bear
sway: this is the hour and the day of the powerful reign of the beast;
according to that saying in Revel 13. 5. Power was given unto the beast, to
continue forty and two msneths. And therefore it is permitted, that he should
for a time, act according to his will, because he is great, as it is spoken by
Daniel, of the king of a fierce countenance, Dan. 8. 4. Thus we have it in
Revel. 17. 13. The ten horns, do with one mind give their power and strength
unto the beast. They do with one consent use all their personal and royal
authority to uphold the power and dominion of the beast. By this means the
beast does ascend, becomes great, and mighty in power. But as there is a time
of the beasts ascension, so also there is a time of his descension and
declining; when the ten Kings shall withdraw their power again, and hate the
whore, and burn her flesh with fire, Revel. 17. 16. There will be times when
these shall no longer submit to the tyranny of the beast, but shall conspire
against him, and strip him of his ornaments, and prey upon his spoils and
ruins. Then shall the beast descend into the pit of perdition and destruction,
from whence he did ascend: and as Solomon says: The righteous shall be
delivered, and the wicked shall come in their steed. Thus Antichrist has his
time^ of rising into power and greatness, and shall also have his declinings,
and time of falling, when he shall grow weak and feeble, and shall not be able
to stand,

Fifthly, and lastly, does the beast make war against, overcome and kill these
witnesses: then observe, That the witnesses 5 Observ^
are continually overcome and slaying, all the time of the powerful reign of
the beast. The slaying of the witnesses cannot be confined to one age or time,
toward the latter end of their prophecy; and that only some particular
persons should be slain^ (and that by martyrdom only) but the beast does
always make war with the Saints, and by civil power, and ecclesiastical law,
does always overcome them, and by the execution of that law, does kill them,
by hindering them in the course of their prophecy, and rejecting their
testimony, turning the truth into a lie: thus I say, the witnesses are always
slaying, the whole time of Antichrists reign. Hence it is said, that the
little horn should weary out thg Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 25. by
continual vexing and tormenting of them. It is said of the Locusts that
ascended out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, That they had faces like men:
having a show of humanity; and their hair was as the hair of women: by reason
of their persuasive flatteries, and fair shows of gentleness and meekness:
but they had the teeth of Lions, rending and devouring the Saints by their
cruel exactions, and tyrannical governments, whereby they have always
suppressed the Saints. And thus have the faithful witnesses of Christ been
continually in slaying under the powerful reign of the beast.

VERSE. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.
IN the former verse we had the death and slaying of the witnesses. Now here we
are to enquire what becomes of their bodies: of which we have an account in
this, and the two following verses. First, their bodies lie in the great City:
Secondly, they are kept from burial, verse. 9. Thirdly, their enemies rejoice
over them, verse. 10. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street, etc. Here
take notice.

First, what is meant by their dead bodies.

Secondly, the place where they lie, and that is in the street of the great
City.

Thirdly, we have a description of this great City.

First, by it is resemblance; first, to Sodom: secondly, to Egypt.

Secondly, by it is action; Where our Lord was crucified.

First, to enquire what is meant by the dead bodies of the witnesses. We must
bear in mind how, and in what manner they were slain: and that was
mystically and metaphorically, and therefore their bodies must be so understood
also: Then if it were meant of the Witdesses being slain in their testimony:
then it must here be meant of the outward form and body of their testimony:
therefore by these bodies are meant all the external figures and forms of
worship in which the witnesses were exercised, and through which they did
sometimes give forth their testimony. When the Church was driven into the
Wilderness, to worship God in the secret Temple, the outward Court, the whole
body of their external forms of worship they left behind them, and the
Gentiles made use of them: so that this body or whole form of worship did
remain in the street of the great City. The outward and external part of
worship, when the spirit and life wa^ departed from it, and the witnesses had
left it, bec^me as a dead body or carkase, as having no breath or true life in
it: for as the body becomes as a carkase when the soul and life is departed;
so is the external form of worship when the spirit of the Lord is departed
from it.

Now that the external part of worship, in the forms and figures of it, when
it is spirit-lesse, and without life, is as a dead body or carkase. We have a
full place of Scripture to prove this interpretation; if we rightly observe
that Text in Matthew. 24. 28. where Christ says, Wheresoever the carkase is,
there will the Eagles be gathered together. The common interpretation of this
Text is, that here by the carkase should be meant of Christ, and that Saints
are compared to Eagles, as resorting to Christ. But consider how far remot^
this opinion is, from the adequate sense of the place. For first, it would be a
most i^ksome and na^seous comparison, to liken Christ to a dead stinking
carkase: The like comparison of Christ we find not in Scripture. Secondly, it
would also be as much unsavory and harsh a similitude, to assi^^late the
Saints to the Eagle, which is a bird of prey, mentioned, Job 39. 27, 28. etc.
But if we would enquire for the mind of Christ in this Text, we are to
consider the whole drift and scope of the Chapter, which is no other then a
full and ample declaration, or rather a prediction of the destruction of
Jerusalem, the Temple, the Nation, and Church of the Jews, as appears plainly
by the beginning of the Chapter. Now in the midst of those tribulations and
desolations that should befall the State, and Church of the Jews; Many should
say, lo here, or lo there is Christ, verse. 23. But Christ exhorts them not to
believe those false Prophets, that should say, he was in the desert, or in the
secret Chamber: and why? For as the lightening comes out of the East, and
shines even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Now
as it is the native property of lightning to make a full discovery of it self,
by it is lightsomenesse and brightness: so Christ shall be eminently
manifested, and declared to be the Messiah, by the destruction of Jerusalem, of
the Temple and worship of the Jews. So that Christ's coming to destroy
Jerusalem, was like lightning; for what could more evince and testify, that
Christ was the true Messiah, then the destruction of the Temple and worship of
the Jews, which they upheld after the coming of Christ; when it should all
have been abolished. Christ foretelling of this destruction, by which himself
should be manifested, coming as lightning, shining from the East to the West:
says; For wheresoever the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together. Now by the carkase he means Jerusalem, the Temple, and the worship
of the Jews, which they kept up in use, after the coming of Christ, when the
Jewish forms were to be abolished, when the spirit, life, and presence of God
was departed from these things; then the State, and Church, their Temple and
worship became as a dead carkase, without any life or spirit in it; they only
upheld the superficial part of their form and service, when there was no
breath of life, nothing of the Spirit of God left in it. And as for the Eagles,
being birds of prey, they are meant of those people and Nations that besieged,
and at last sacked Jerusalem, pulled down the Temple, scattered the people,
and destroyed their worship. Thus it was with the Temple and worship, with the
people and Cities of the Jews, being left of God, without his presence and
spirit, became as a dead carkase, and the enemies, like birds of prey, came and
devour's them. So here, when the Hab. 1. 8. The enemy is compared to an Eagle.
Church was driven into the Wilderness, to worship God in his secret Temple;
then the Gentiles possessed themselves of the outward Court, of the external
forms and figures of worship; but without the presence or spirit of Christ.
These are the bodies of the witnesses, that lie in the street of the City, and
that Antichrist will not suffer to be buried, or put in graves. For what is all
the form of worship, and service of the carnal Church, and of worldly
Christians, but as a dead carkase, lifelesse, and spirit-lesse. The Jews kept
up all their forms of worship after the Messiah was come, and had abolished
them all; and therefore it was, that when the Apostle was asked, why he would
revile Gods high Priest? he answers, he did not know him to be Gods high
Priest; for, says he, it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of a Ruler,
etc. Act. 23. 5. Now I verily believe that the Apostle knew well enough who it
was, that he was brought before, and that he was the titular High Priest: ^ut
when he says; I wist not that it was Gods high Priest; he spoke ironically, or
by way of deri^ion; because he sat as high Priest, when he was not, at that
time a lawful high Priest, the office of Priesthood being expired, by the
coming of the Messiah. Now the Jews were very willing to have kept up their
rites and forms, their worship and Priesthood, when they should have been laid
aside, the Lord being departed from them, they were but as dead carkases. In
like manner does Antichrist, by the outward Court, or external forms of
worship, that the witnesses have exercised in, these they uphold and preserve;
these are the bodies of the witnesses, they keep in the street of their City,
these they keep above ground, and will no^ suffer them to be buried: they only
slay the testimony and spirit of the witnesses, but they preserve their bodies
for their own use, and to serve their own ends.

Secondly, Consider, the place where these bodies lie, and that is in the
street of the great City. Here we have two things to enquire after, viz. what
is meant.

First, by this great City? Secondly, by the street thereof.
First, This great City is meant of great Babylon, mentioned in Chap. 17. 5.
called the mother of harlots and abominations: It is an allusion to old
Babylon, called great, Dan. 4. 30. which was eminent for tyranny and
oppression. Antichrist is called the mother of harlots, and the great whore,
because as a strumpet, she does not only commit spiritual whoredoms, but
does also teach and nourish her children in the same way, and so ^ill the earth
with her abominations. This whorish woman is described to be this great City
which reigns over the Kings of the earth, verse. 18. I confess, that Rome
has mystically ruled the Nations, and has been as the well-bead of the
filthiness and abomination of the world. But more especially this woman, here
called the great City, is the carnal, worldly, Antichristian Church; which
has as a whore departed from God, and has been led by a lying spirit, and
has followed after whorish inventions of her own brain, has gathered the
nations of the world into a Church, and called them by the name of Christians,
and all this has been by a mystery of iniquity, a very babell and confusion.
This woman called the great City, is no other then the whole Church of
Antichrist; that rides upon the beast or earthly power; and is clothed in gay
clothing of humane ordinances and formal professions, pretending to be the
Spouse of Christ, when she is a very harlot, going after other lovers; and
whiles she pretends Christianity, she is drunk with the blood of the Saints.
This whorish woman is the great City, where lies the dead bodies of the
witnesses.

Secondly, by the street of this great City is meant the whole Territory and
space, the confines and large extent of the Dominion and rule of the
Antichristian church and government. The word (...) being of the singular
number, is put for the plural, and signifies all the streets, territories and
places of Antichrist's rule and domination. It cannot properly be taken for one
street; for thero is no great City made of one street: but indeed the word, as
rendered by the Septuagint, signifies a whole Country, the whole confines or
bounds of a place: So that this street cannot be meant of one street, or
distinct place, but of the whole territory and largeness of Dominion, the
whole compass and extent of all the Nations, and Churches, that are under the
authority and command of Antichrist: the utmost limits and extreme bounds of
largeness and greatness is here intimated by the street.

In the third place, we come to a description of this City, and that is,

First, by resemblance; first, to Sodom; secondly, to Egypt.

Secondly, by some carriage or action of this City toward Christ: it is the
place where our Lord was crucified.

The City is described by a resemblance to Sodom and Egypt, in a
metaphorical way; for here we have the word (...), spiritually, which means
something that is spiritual and mystical: not that it is spiritual, as opposed
to carnal or earthly, but as opposed to Sodom and Egypt literally and
properly so called. Then it is meant of Metaphorical Sodom, and of Mystical
Egypt, by way of an allusion or resemblance.

First, Sodom was a place full of filthiness and uncleanness, as we have the
relation in Genesis 19. And the iniquity of Sodom was said to be pride, and
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness and lasciviousness, Ezekiel. 16. 49,
50. It was with this abominable wickedness that righteous Lot was so much vexed
and perplexed in spirit, at the sight and beholding thereof. Suitable unto
this, is the spiritual uncleanness and filthiness gf Antichrist, called the
mother of Harlots, full of abominations, corrupting the earth by her
uncleanness, and intoxicating the whole world with the wine of her
fornications. In a word, all the whoredom, fornication, and abomination of
Sodom, are spiritually hatched and acted by this whorish woman, this great
City Babylon the great, this Antichristian Church, this abominable Strumpet,
the great Harlot of the world.

Secondly, we have a resemblance to Egypt. First, in respect of Idolatry and
and Superstition, as appears, Exodus 12. 12. They were full of Idols and false
gods, they did worship their Kine, and other Cattle; for it was the custom of
the Heathen to worship their Kine, and other Cattle; for it was the custom of
the Heathen to worship that for Gods, that the Israelites were to offer in
sacrifice unto God: Hence it was, that Moses would not, that the children
should offer Sacrisice until they were come forth of Egypt, lest they should
follow the example of the Egyptians.

Secondly, Egypt was full of tyranny and oppression toward the children of
Israel: their Taskmasters laid on heavy burdens on their shoulders, and that
with much vigor and cruelty, as it is related in Exodus 1. 13. The taskemasters
of Egypt, and the oppression of Pharaoh, made it to be the very house of
bondage. The same things are found in mystical Egypt, as Idolatry and
superstition: all the whole bundle of Antichrists worship, is but of carnal
invention, and humane institution, yea it is spiritual whoredom and Idolatry.
So also may we find in her all the cruelty and oppression of Egypt: here are
those Taskmasters, that by their civil power, and Ecclesiastical Laws do
continually vex, and torment the Saints. As once Pharaoh destroyed the male
children of the Israelites, so the Dragon standing before the woman, ready to
devour her children: and when the woman flies into the wilderness for
shelter and relief, he casts a flood of persecution after her, and continually
makes war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandment of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12. 4. 16, 17. Thus you see
how the great City is resembled,

1. To Sodom, for pride and filthiness. 2. To Egypt, for idolatry and
oppression.
The second description of the City by its carriage and action; it is where our
Lord was crucified. This cannot be meant literally, or according to the letter^
for so Christ was crucisied at Jerusalem; but it is meant spiritually and
mystically, that Christ is crucified in his truth and members, in Sodom and
Egypt: it is the pride and filthiness of Sodom, and the cursed idolatry and
cruelty of Egypt that does always crucify Christ in his laws and servants,
but consider;

First, though Christ in his person was put to death at Jerusalem, yet he was
crucified by a Roman power, condemned by Pilate, a Roman Judge, and was
adjudged by a Roman kind of Ioh. 18. 31. Mat. 20. 19.
death, and was executed by the Roman Soldiers, and all was done under the
Roman jurisdiction, territory, government, and dominion, which here for
filthiness and abomination is called Sodom, and for idolatry and oppression is
called Egypt. So in this respect Christ himself may be said to be crucied in
Sodom and in Egypt. But

Secondly, Christ is crucified mystically, and that is in his truth and laws,
in his members and people. Acts 9. 5. Saul, why persecutest thou me? which
words do import, that Christ is crucified in his people. So that as Christ was
brought in, adjoined in testimony and witness with his Saints; in like manner
he comes in, as suffering with them also: So that here is some resemblance
between the suffering of Christ, and his witnesses; For as Christ was put to
death by a heathening Roman power: so by the reign and dominion of Antichrist,
the Witnesses are put to death also, and Christ is crucified in them. It was
the wickedness of the Scribe^ and Pharisees that accused Christ, of Judas that
betrayed him, of Pilate and the high Priest that condemned him, of the Gentile
soldiers that crucified him: all this wickedness heightened in Antichrist,
grows into the uncleanness and filthiness of Sodom, and into the e^^ity and
cruely of Egypt, does make War against he Witnesses, and kill them. So that
it is not so much meant of the place where Christ or his Saints are oppressed:
^^ to show, that the wickedness and impiety that put Christ to death, is the
very same wickedness that Antichrist does exeroise, in killing of the fai^h^ul
se^vants and Witnesses of Christ. The words being unfolded, we now come to give
some observations from them.

First, observe, That the external forms 1 Observe:
of worship that Antichrist uses, are but as a dead body, or carcass.

Such was the Temple, Priesthood, and worship of the Jews, when God had
departed from them: such also is all the worship and service of Antichrist;
it is not so much the superficies or external form that he does oppose, but the
spirit of life that breathed forth in them, by the Prophecy of the Witnesses.
As the body becoms a Karcase, when the spirit and life is departed, so is the
external and formal part of worship, when the spirit of God has departed from
it. The Apostle tells of a form of godliness, without the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. The word (...) is not put for the true form or essence of
godliness, but for an external profession and conformity thereunto by a mere
resemblance, vizard, or show of holiness: So all the formality of Antichrist
does consist in external gestures, behaviors, rites, and ceremonies, without
the pure efficacious, powerful, inward worship of God in spirit and truth: so
all their formal profession is but as a dead body, a Carkase without the life
or spirit of Christ.

Secondly, observe, That it is not so 2 Observe:
much the outward form or figures of worship, that Antichrist seeks to
suppress, as it is the spirit and testimonies of the Witnesses.

The world does patch up their whole Religion from the external forms or
bodies of the witnesses: these lie in every street of the great City, in all
the Territories and Dominions of the Antichristian Church: There is not one
street or part of the worldly church but has store of these Monuments and
Images of the worship and service of God, that they have taken up, from the
Witnesses laying of them down; when the Saints worship God in the inward
Temple, in the Wilderness, then these Gentiles possess themselves of the
outward Court, take it as their portion, and use it at their pleasures. As
Mahomet took part of the Jewish customs, and part of the Christians practice,
and so patched up his form of worship: So Antichrist has taken the external
forms, that the Witnesses had before exercised in; and adding his own
inventions, makes up a formal R ligion that he sets up in all the stree^s and
territories of the great City, viz. the whole Antichristian Church. So that
there is no Church, no State, part or Dominion where Antichrist has to do, but
there we may see the bodies of the Witnesses, the forms and images of the
worship, that they have been exercised in, and have laid aside.

Thirdly, from the resemblance, observe, 3 Obser.
That Antichrist is full of spiritual uncleanness, and cursed cruelty. All
the pride, gluttony, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness and
filthiness of Sodom: all the wick dnesse, idolatry, rage, envy, and malice
of Egypt, does but set forth the sinfulness of the man of sin, the son of
perdition; yea all that abominable wickedness heightened, spi itualized, and
grown more vile and mysterious, as it is acted by Antichrist. Here is the
silthiness of Sodom, the idolatry of Egypt, the oppression of Babylon in a
mystery, all under the pretense of piety and godliness. This City is called
the greatwhore, Rev. 17. 1. because of the multitudes of her spiritual
fornications: And the mother of harlots, verse. 5. being a teacher and nourisher
of others in her silthy whoredoms, bringing up children of whoredoms. Also she
has in her hands the cup full of abominations, a glorious cup to allure others
to drink the wine of her fornicatior, and to partake with her in cursed
idolatrous practices. Besides, the enmity, rage, and cruelty of the Beast is
always vexing and tormenting the Israel of God. Here is the filthiness of
Sodom, and the enmity of Egypt practiced by Antichrist, in the mystery of
iniquity, drawn up to the greatest pitch, height^ed to the utmost extremity,
deposing Christ and his truths, advancing flesh and sin into Christ's throne,
and so becomes beastly and most abominable.

Fourthly, and lastly, observe, It is 4 Obser,
the very life, spirit, and image of Christ, that Antichrist does chiefly
oppose, in slaying the Witnesses. It is not so much the persons or bodies of
these Witnesses they of the world do so much oppose; but the appearance and
life of Christ in them: it is the same wickedness that put Christ to death in
his person, and it is still the same wickedness that slays Christ in his
Saints and truth. The very name of Antichrist signifies one that opposes
Christ; if this were not his work and aim, he could not be Antichrist, who
indeed is one that fights against Christ, under the very form of Christ. And
as it is Christ he aims at, so it is Christ that is slain and crucified: it is
our Lord, his truth, his image that is slain in spiritual Sodom and Egypt: And
in as much as 'its Christ he crucifieth and kills; great shall be the
judgment of Babylon, as we may see in Chap. 17. when God shall recompense upon
the man of fin, the blood of the Prophets, and the blood of the Saints, and of
all that were slame upon the earth, verse. 24.

And last of all, the Lord will reckon with Antichrist for the blood of Christ,
for crucifying the Lord af glory. Christ tells the Jews, that upon that
generation should be brought all the blood of the Prophets, and righteous men
slain in former times, because they succeeded the former Persecutors, finished
their work, and so became guilty of all the blood shed before: so here
Antichrist does contract all the guilt of Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon, and of
those that crucified Christ; therefore upon him shall be recompensed the blood
of all that were slain upon the earth. So great shall be the fall and ruin of
Antichrist, that a mighty Angel (of great force and power) shall take a great
millstone, and cast i^ into the sea, and it shall be found no more, Rev. 18. 21.
A great millstone is very ponderous and weighty of it self, and falls with
great force, but much more if it be cast down with a strong hand, and being in
the bottom of the Sea, it cannot be found any more, neither will it rise again.
All which shows the exceeding violent and perpetual destruction of
Antichrist, being guilty of the blood of all Saints, yea, and of crucifying the
Lord himself.

VERSE. 9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall
see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.
IN the former verse, we heard of the place where the dead bodies lay: now here
we come to see what is the carriage of their Adversaries toward their dead
bodies; wherein we may consider these particulars.

First, the persons exercised about these dead bodies, and they are the people,
and Kindred, and Tongues, and Nations.

Secondly, their carriages or actions toward these dead bodies, and they are
two.

First, they shall see them. Secondly, they shall not suffer them to be put in
graves. Thirdly, the time how long they shall thus behold these dead bodies,
and hinder their burial, and that is, for three days and a half.
First, concerning the persons exercised about these dead bodies, and they are
People, Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations. We may read the words partively thus:
Some of all people and kindreds, etc. which implies some principal ones, viz.
those of power, strength, wisdom, authority, rule: These principal men of all
Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, the most learned and wise, the most eminent and
honorable of all Nations, the most choicest of men, of the greatest of gifts
and abilities, such as these shall be exercised about the dead bodies of the
Witnesses. There is not a man that has a language, gift, tongue, or dominion,
and rule, but he is taken up, and employed, about these dead bodies: These are
the persons thus exercised.

Secondly, how are they exercised about these dead bodies.

First, They shall see them. Secondly, They shall not suffer them to be buried.
First, they shall look upon the dead bodies of the Witnesses, not as the high
Pry and the Jews did upon Christ, with disdain and scorn, Lu. 23. 25. The
people with the Priests, beholding of him, derided him; but rather these look
upon them with delight and affectation, and as it is expressed in the next
verse, they rejoice over them: they make these dead bodies, or outward Carkase
of heavenly things, to be the very object of their joy and delight: they live
upon these Carcasses, they uphold them as their very life and comfort.

Secondly, they shall not suffer these dead bodies to be put in graves: this
commonly is done in dis-favour and scorn, it was spoken it was spoken to the
indignity of the Babylonian Monarchs, that they should be cast out of their
graves as on abominable branch, Issa. 14. 19. But I take the meaning here in
the contrary sense, that they kept these dead bodies above ground out of favor
and liking, that they might see them, and satisfy themselves with such a
pleasing object.

These are they that possess the outward Court, and will not suffer the dead
bodies to be buried; the outward fleshly form of the Witnesses they will not
let pass out of their sight, it is their life and Religion; the life and spirit
of these things that were wont to torment them, is departed, and therefore they
will not part with the external form that the Witnesses did once administer
in. These outward forms and figures of worship they will keep above ground, and
will not suffer them to be put in graves. Abraham desired, that when Sarah was
dead, she might be buried out of his sight, Genesis 23. 4. because the sight of
his Wife was a grief unto him: but it is not so here with those that manage
the cause of the Beast, they preserve the dead bodies of the Witnesses, that
they may from the Carcass or forms of the Saints, frame out, and set up a
Religion unto themselves: and therefore, though they slay the testimony of the
Witnesses that did vex and trouble them, yet they keep their bodies above
ground, that they might live, and be comforted by them.

Thirdly, how long these shall see their dead bodies, and hinder their burial,
that is, three days and a half, which is spoken indefinitely and
undeterminate: and as in Prophecy days are taken for years, so here it is
meant of three years and a half, and so hold^ proportion with the thousand
two hundred and sixty days, and 42. months, and a time, times, and half a
time. For it cannot be meant, that the Witnesses should prophecy three years
and a half, and at the end of their prophecy should be slain, and lie dead
three days and a half afterward: But this three days and half in which the
dead bodies of the Witnesses lie slain, and their dead bodies continue
unburied, is the same term of time with that of the Witnesses prophecy: even
all the space that Antichrist does possess the ou^ward Court, and trample under
foot the holy City.

The words being thus explained, we proceed to the Observations, which are
these.

First, That the power and greatness, the 1 Observe.
wisdom and abilities of men, are exercised about the dead bodies of the
Witnesses.

What is all the study and care that men take, what do they spend their time
and parts about, but concerning these dead bodies; yea, the most excellent of
men, Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues; these with all their dominion and
greatness, with all their learning and wisdom, they are all employed about the
Carcass, or external form of things: All the syllogisticall reasonings and
disputes, all the maxims and rules that worldly men are exercised in, what are
they, but the very form and figure, the superficial and external part of
those things, that the Saints have in their time administered in: now the
Gentiles come to possess the outward Court, and all their pains and endeavors
they use about it, to advance it, and make it glorious in the earth.

Secondly, observe, That the great care that those of the Nations and Tongues,
etc. take about the dead bodies of the Witnesses, is to keep them above ground.

The remembrance and sight of these are very dear and precious to the world:
these are their very life, peace, and joy, they cannot live or enjoy themselves
without them. The external forms of Religion, that the Witnesses have
sometimes given forth their testimony by, and having laid them aside, the
world does with much greediness take up to use them, and to make them their
very stay and comfort. I have observed, that the Saints did never cast aside
any external form of Religion, that sometimes they have been exercised in; but
worldly Christians did readily embrace them, they use them; they keep them
above ground, and will not suffer them to be put in graves, because they cannot
subsist without these, their very life and being is upheld by these dead
bodies, by these Carcasses, or outward things. Hence it is, that when the
Witnesses have cast aside some formal ways of worship; what is the question
of worldly professors? what Religion shall we be of now, say they? when shall
we be settled? Alas, their Religion and life is gone, if the external from be
taken away: They will not suffer these to be put in graves, if they can with
all their endeavonrs keep these bodies above ground: and why? the life and
spirit of these things is departed, with the Witnesses laying of them down, so
the world is willing to embrace them: So long as the Witnesses used them, and
there was some spirit and life in them, it tormented and vexed the worldly
people, they continually opposed the Witnesses in those very ways and forms
that now they take up themselves: they only persecuted the spirit and testimony
of the Saints, but their Carkases they keep above ground; for alas, take away
these, you take away their Religion, their life, and all they have: they have
but the outward Court to possess, and if you deprive them of that, they have
nothing left: No wonder then, if worldly Christians will not suffer the dead
bodies of the Witnesses to be put in graves. Now what is all the work and
labor of those that manage the cause of the beast? but this, that after they
have-slain the testimony of the Saints, to advance the fleshly part, and
outward Carcass of heavenly things, in relation to their own advantage.

It Is said in verse. 18. The nations were angry, for his wrath is come, and the
time of the dead, that they shouid be judged. All the Ordinances and Worships,
all the rules and authorities, all the orders and services of Antichrist, are
but dead things, and shall be judged as dead, having nothing of the light of
life of God in them. Well may the nations be angry, fret, and vex, and why? the
Lords wrath is come upon all Religion, and glorious forms of worship, they are
judged but as dead bodies, as empty Ca^k^ses, without any spirit or life at
all, and the glory of the worldly and carnal Church is now overturning, and
all is, because it is but a dead Carcass, and shall be consumed.

Thirdly, In that these bodies lie unburied three days and a half, observe,
That the dead bodies of the Witnesses are 3 Observe:
kept above ground, all the time of Antichrists reign. As before their dead
bodies ( viz. their outward forms of worship) did lie in all the streets and
dominions of Antichrist: so also are they kept above ground in every age and
period of time, in which the beast does reign. For these bodies have an
agreement with the outward Court, which is given to the Gentiles for forty two
months. This also is the time of the woman's being driven into the wilderness a
thousand, two hundred, and threesore days, Chap. 12. 6. where she was
nourished for a time, times, and half a time, Ver. 14. So that these three
days holds proportion with the forty two months: the same time that
Antichrist does posses the outward Court, so long does he make make use of the
bodies of the Witnesses. Then it is not in some particular time, or in some
short period, that the Beast shall rise up against the Witnesses, but namely
all time of his Reign he shall make war with the Saints, slay their
testimony, and make use of their dead bodies. And though he could not endure
the spirit and truth that the Saints held forth, yet he knows how to make use
of their external form and image, which he will not part withal, so long as
he is able to keep it above ground, until the wrath of the Lamb come, and
that the dead shall be judged.

VERSE. 10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.
HEre we have a farther carriage of the Adversaries toward the dead bodies of
the Witnesses: while they lie in the street of the great City, and are kept
from being interred, or put in graves, the men of the earth, they rejoice over
them, and make merry, and send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
are tormented, etc. In the opening of these words, observe,

1. The persons brought in here acting: And they are they that dwell upon the
earth. 2. Their actions: They rejoice, make merry, and send gifts one to
another. 3. The reason of this their acting; Because these two Prophets
tormented them, etc.
The first of these to be considered is, who are meant by the persons that are
here styled, the inhabitants of the earth: These are meant of worldly
Christans, such as serve Antichrist, they are only earthly and carnal, they
are without the Temple of God, they live in the synagogu^ of Satan. These are
said to dwell upon the earth, Rev. 12. 12. And Chap. 13. 8. The Antichristian
Church and faction are said to dwell upon the earth, because they are earthly
and carnal, in opposition to the Saints, who are said to dwell in heaven. The
Witnesses are styled such as dwell in heaven, Chap. 18. 20. And those that
worship the Beast, being their opposites, are styled, those that dwell upon the
earth. The Saints under heavenly enjoyments, heavenly discoveries of truth and
light, these dwell in Heaven, in the glorious Temple, in the holy tabernacle of
God.

But the Antichristian Church, and all the members thereof are cast out of
heaven unto the earth, there they inhabit and dwell; they favor of the earth,
having earthly enjoyments, carnal delights; their condition, state, worship,
and contentment consisting all of earthly things. The earth is their portion,
and they make their habitation in it.

Secondly, the carriage of these earthly men, toward the Witnesses dead
bodies: they rejoice over them, make merry, and send gifts one to another. This
is an allusion to the practice of the Jews, when they had procured deliverance
from the contrivances of Haman, they solemnly feasted, rejoiced, and made
merry, sending portions one to another, Hest. 18. 19. So when the Lord had
restored unto the Jews their land, their City, the Temple, and worship; The
people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make
great mirth, Neh. 8. 12. Suitable hereunto is that of the Prodigal, who when
he came home, the Father for joy kills the fatted Calfe, and they rejoice and
make merry together, Luke 15. 24. So here the inhabitauts of the earth do so
well resent their killing, and overcoming the Witnesses, as that they solemnly
rejoice and make merry, even as those that have obtained someeminent
deliverance, or that have received some excellent good thing, or as if they had
obtained some great and notable victory, they set up some Trophies or Ensigns
of Conquest. And this they express in a feastival manner, They eat, and
drink, and are merry, and send portions one to another.

The sum of all is this; that when the Adversaries shall think upon the dead
bodies of the Witnesses, that they maintain and keep them above ground without
the true life and spirit, they shall excceedingly triumph, and make feasts in
token of joy, as in the old time; and if they do not this literally, yet they
shall as much, and as really rejoice, as they that did such things; and not
only so, but do what they can to make others rejoice with them.

3. Consider the reason why they do thus rejoice, and that is, Because these
two Prophets tormented them that dwelt upon the earth. We may read tormented,
or had tormented; not that they rejoiced because they were tormented by these
Prophets, but because they had overcome, and killed these Witnesses of God,
that had always tormented them; now they thought they were rid of them, and
should not be troubled with them any more, therefore it is, that they of the
earth do so greatly rejoice. The Witnesses torment the earth by inflicting just
punishment and reward upon those that worship the Beast. Their very witness
and testimony is a great torment to the world. The wine of Gods wrath, and the
cup of his indignation shall torment the earth: and what is all this, but the
pouring forth of the Vials, occasioned by the prophecy of the Witnesses: As
they turned waters into blood, and plagued the Earth with all plagues, as we
heard before, so they torment the earth by their witness and prophecy: Good
reason has the world to rejoice, when they can hinder the course of their
testimomonie, and keep their bodies out of graves, to their own advantage and
use. From the words thus opened, take these few Observations.

First, observe, That the people that 1 Observe.
serve Antichrist are earthly and carnal. They are a generation that do arise
from the earth, and they are earthly, they neither know nor favor the things
of God. Their Church is carnal, their Ordinances are but inventions, their
Government is but a worldly power, all the whole form of service and worship
is but of an earthly and humane institution. Their wisdom and knowledge is but
of the flesh, the wisdom of this world, and of the first Adam, they are not
endued with wisdom from on high. All their parts and gifts are but acquired,
and made up by art and science, they are not the pure gifts of the spirit, but
of a false annoynting, of a common spirit. Indeed these may cause fire to come
down from heaven in the sight of men, as it is said, Chap. 13 13. pretending
they have the spirit of God, when they have but a false and seducing spirit, to
draw Proselites to themselves. So that all the things these enjoy, are but
carnal Churches, invented Ordinances, humane gifts, worldly governments, all
proceeding from the earth, are earthly, and shall be cast forth into the Earth
again.

Secondly, observe, That the greatest 2 Observe
joy that Antichrist has is over the dead bodies of the Witnesses. The
greatest expression of the joy and rejoicing of earthly people, is in slaying
of the Witnesses, when they can overcome and trample upon their Testimony,
when they can suppress the spirit of God in them, and stop them in the course
of their prophecy, then they will rejoice over their dead bodies, and make
their Carcasses their very life and glory. These of the Earth have no quiet or
peace in themselves, until by their power and wickedness they have crucified
the very apperance of God in these two Prophets; and when having slain their
testimony, and set up their Carcass as their form of Religion, then they
rejoice, they stir up one another to triumph, and exult, they comfort one
another in this great victory. Oh what great rejoicing has there been in all
ages, when the world and men of the earth could at any time suppress these
Witnesses, it has been their greatest aim and ambition; and when they have
accomplished it, it has been their greatest joy and rejoicing.

Thirdly, observe, That the Witnesses 3 Obser.
by their prophecy do most of all torment the men of the earth. The Earth,
and the Inhabitants thereof could rejoice in their earthly enjoyments, in all
their carnal actings, and humane inventions, were it not for the testimony of
the Witnesses, these continually vex and trouble earthly Christians, and
worldly Professors. The men of the Earth would take much comfort and
contentment in all their fleshly worship and formality, but that these
Witnesses are always giving in their testimony against their falsenesse and
emptiness of all their performances: But when these come and say, this is
Antichristian, to tell the world their Church is carnal, their Ordinances
invented, their gifts and abilities are but humane, and their government but
worldly; this does exceedingly enrage and torment the men of the earth. Thus
they turn their sweet waters into blood and contention, as we heard before,
and plague the earth with all plagues; they pour out whole vials of wrath upon
all the worships and ways of Antichrist. Thus we see, as the men of the earth
does overcome and slay the Witnesses: so these Witnesses make their part good
against their Adversaries. They reward Babylon as she has rewarded them, and
in the cup wherein she has filled, they fill to her double, Revel. 18. 6. And
as she has glorified her self, and triumphed over the Witnesses, so great
shall be her torment, her punishments shall be answerable to her pride and
tyranny. Therefore when the Witnesses shall by the word of their testimony,
cause vials of wrath to fall upon Antichrist, then shall the men of the earth
be scorched with great beat, and shall gnaw their tongues for pain, and
blaspheame Grd, because of their soars and their pains, Rev. 16. 9, 10, 11.
Their hearts shall be enraged with rancour and malice, as burning with fire they
shall speak evil of God, and gave their tongues for anguish, and vexation of
spirit. Thus do the witnesses by their prophecy vex and torment the
Inhabitants of the earth.

VERSE. 11. And after three days and a half, the spirit of life from God
entered into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them that saw them.
WE have spoken of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, of their death and
slaying, which was a time of mourning and sadness to them; but of joy and
triumph to their adversaries, who sport and rejoice over their dead bodies. Now
comes a season wherein these poor despised witnesses shall exult and be glad:
when their enemies shall be vexed and tormented; for when they had slain the
faithful witnesses of Christ, they thought never to hear of them more, but
that which will damp all their mirth and jollitie is this, these witnesses
shall stand upon their feet, and rise again. Now of their resurrection we are
to consider.

First, the time when they shall rise, and that is After three days and a half.

Secondly, the cause or means by which they shall rise, and that is, The
spirit of life from God entered into them.

Thirdly, we have their resurrection it self, expressed in these words; And
they stood upon their feet.

Fourthly, and lastly, we have the consequent or sequel thereof: And great
fear fell upon them that saw them.

Concerning the time or season of the rising of these witnesses, it is expressed
by three days and a half, which term of time has been opened already, and
as you heard, holds proportion with forty two months, And with 1260 days, and
with a time, times, and half a time. All the time of the powerful reign of
the beast, the witnesses prophecy in sackcloth, they are always killing and
slaying, they lie dead in the great City, and their bodies are kept above
ground for the space of three days and a half, which holds a just proportion
with the time of the woman's being in the wilderness, in Chap. 12. 14.
expressed by a time, times, and half a time. After which time of sorrow and
sadness, that shall befall these witnesses, they shall rejoice, for they shall
rise again.

Now in that it is said, After three days and a half, it does seem to imply,
an earnest expectation in the witnesses of their resurrection, when the time
shall draw near, when the last period of time shall come, of their sadness and
mourning, then suddenly they shall expect a time of rising and rejoicing.
Before the time they cannot expect deliverance: but when it draws near, then
they are exceedingly taken up in the expectation of it.

Secondly, the cause or means of their resurrection, The spirit of life from
God entered into them. After this, (...), spirit of life; or as the Hebrews call
it, the breath of life; as it is said, God breathed into man the breath of life,
Genesis 2. 7. when he made man a living soul. So when the Lord does raise up his
witnesses from their state of sadness and sackcloth, he breathes into them the
breath of life. The breath of God, is the spirit of God, and the breath of
life, is the power and operation of that spirit. Life is nothing but the souls
communion with God. The body is dead without the spirit, so is the soul
without Ghd. The conjunction of soul and body is life; so the union of the
soul with God is divine life. The Psalmist says, In thy presence there is
life. And mark it, he does not say, the spirit of prophecy, such whereby they
did only see things remotely, foretelling what should come to pass in after
times: but the spirit of life from God entered into them. The mighty and
powerful spirit of life, causes these witnesses to live: it is not that
spirit, whereby they should say, we shall live hereafter, or whereby they
should wish, O that we might live but the spirit of life, whereby they do
live, and they know they live; I say, this mighty, powerful and glorious
spirit of life, shining forth upon their hearts, living and operating in them,
this shall cause them to arise from shame and sorrow, even from that mean,
low, and poor condition they were in, prophesying in sackcloth. It is then,
the divine presence, the spirit and life of God, the glorious shining forth of
this face and love, that occasions the resurrection of the witnesses.

Thirdly, we come to the resurrection it self, and that is expressed in these
words; And they stood upon their feet. We cannot understand this of a
resurrection properly so called; but as the slaying and death of the witnesses
was mystical; such also must their resurrection be. Then it cannot be meant of
a bodily or fleshly resurrection; but of that which is mystical and
spiritual; namely, a resurrection from shame and misery, from bondage and
weakness, from their mean, low, weak, and fackcloth condition, unto a state
of more perfection and liberty, of more glory and light; their condition should
be much more glorious and excellent, then it was before. From this expression;
And they stood upon their feet; note two things.

First, it notes a rising from a poor, low, mean, captivated condition, as
plainly appears from that place, from whence these words are borrowed, Ezekiel
37. 10. when the Prophet was commanded to prophecy unto the four winds, to
breath upon the slain, and upon the dry bones, that they might live. The dry
bones, and the slain are the house of Israel under the Babylonish captivity,
they were as slain, and as a dead body: (even as the witnesses are under the
tyranny of Mystical Babylon) now it is by the breath of God, entering into
these dry bones, that they are made to live: the breath of life being in them,
they stand upon their feet. That notes their resurrection from the mean and
lost condition under the oppression of their enemies. Hence they are said, to
arise out of their graves, verse. 12. So the witnesses being but as dead bodies,
and as dry bones, under the tyranny and oppression of Antichrist; but when the
spirit of life enters into them, they stand upon their feet, and arise out of
bondage and shame, into a state of liberty and glory.

Secondly, to stand upon their feet, notes, that they should stand by
themselves, they should stand by that wisdom, that knowledge, light and power
they should enjoy in themselves; they should stand upon their own legs, and
not depend upon others; they should not live upon the wisdom, opinion, and
knowledge of other men, but upon their own light and experience in the things
of God. The time was, that the Arc was carried upon men's shoulders, from place
to place, until at last it was brought unto the Temple, and then it rested: So
the Saints, while prophesying in sackcloth, under weak and faint discoveries
of truth, did much depend upon the judgments and opinions of other men; but
now the spirit of God shall dwell so plentifully in them, that they shall live
upon their own experience of the light and life of God in themselves. The
spirit of life breathing in them, with much life, with much power and evidence,
that they shall no longer be carried away with the conceits of other men, but
shall stand upon their own feet. Thus we see, that the resurrection of these
witnesses is first, from bondage and misery, unto liberty and freedom.
Secondly, from darkness and meanness, unto light and glory.

The fourth and last thing here to be considered is the consequent or sequel
hereof; And great fear fell upon them that saw them. When the witnesses were
slain, and their dead bodies lying in the street of the great City; The men
of the earth could rejoice, make merry, and triumph; but now at the witnesses
rising, the case shall be otherwise with them, now they shall fear and
tremble, now amazement and astonishment shall take hold of them. When the
witnesses were slain, they thought never to hear of them more, they hoped
they should never arise; but behold now they rise again, and how greatly does
this affright the men of the world; here is terror and amazement to all that
dwell in the earth. Suitable unto this is that passage in Act. 5. 5. when that
judgment was manifested upon Anania^; the Text says; Great fear fell upon
all that heard those things. Those persecutours that did vex and trouble the
witnesses, they thought they had made sure work of them, that they had been
wholly destroyed, and that they should never more have been troubled with these
Prophets; but now to their great grief and amazement they rise again, and
stand upon their feet; this does more affright and trouble the men of the
earth, then ever their prophefie did.

Having thus unfolded the words, we pass on to the Observations they offer to
our Consideration.

First, Observe; That when the time of 1 Obser.
the witnesses suffering and sadness draws to an end, there is an earnest
expectation in them of their resurrection. The text does relate to the time of
their resurrection, when their suffering condition shall draw to an end. After
three days and a half, etc. There is a day, and after that two days, in
which the witnesses are in the midst of their sufferings and persecutions,
their evils are multiplied, and they cannot say when they shall be delivered,
and therefore resolve to wait with patience, and submit to the will of the
Lord. But when the half day shall come, which shall be but short, then these
witnesses are brought into a comfortable expectation of a seasonable and speedy
deliverance, when they shall plainly see, that the witnesses have been long
time in slaying, and have been dead, and now speedily shall revive and rise
again. These shall be able to say, the Lord will cut his work in
righteousness. It is said, that all Babylons plagues shall come in one day,
Chap. 18 8. that is all in some short time, suddenly, and beyond expectation.
So sudden shall be the rising of the witnesses, when they come to the half
day, or last period of time. Now I am most confident, that it is the time of
the sixth Trumpet, in which time the witnesses are not to be slain, but to
arise, and ascend to God, in the cloud; and therefore the great expectation in
the spirits of many Saints this day, of some notable change, and of some great
manifestation of the kingdom of God, does predict to me, the sudden rising of
the witnesses. The three whole days of the beasts reign are past, it is the
half day, the dividing of time, the time of the image of the beast; and
therefore the Saints shall shortly sing by experience that song; Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, Revel. 18. 2. The Saints may sing and rejoice, their time of
deliverance draws near; the spirit of life appears in some of them already,
and shall shortly shine forth in others by a discovery of that glory of the
Lord that is risen upon them, and these shall shine forth in the brightness
thereof. Many things in the consequent words of the Text will farther manifest,
that the witnesses are in rising.

Secondly, Observe, That the witnesses 2 Observe:
are enabled to arise by the mighty powerful spirit of life, from God. Nothing
but the mighty, strong, prevailing spirit of life, can cause the witnesses to
arise. There Is no motion, but it flows from life, and there is no true life, but
it flows from Christ, and his spirit. The first Adam was made a living soul,
the second was made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Christ is alive-making
spirit, it is the spirit that makes man to live a spiritual life. This is the
true life, the spirit of life; all spiritual actions flow from this life, it
is Christ living and acting in the soul. Now it is the abundant flowing forth
of this spirit of life, that must cause the witnesses to arise. It was the
great and powerful voice of Christ, that caused the dead to rise, Joh. 5. So
it must be the powerful quickening, inlivening, filling, reviving spirit of
life from Christ that brings forth a resurrection to these two witnesses. It is
not a small measure of the spirit, neither is it a spirit of prophecy, as to
foretell things to come, or to see things at a great distance, that will make
the witnesses revive and stand upon their feet; but the spirit of life, when
they shall know they live, when all they act and speak flows from that life,
their works and speeches are all living, when they are able to say, we live,
when they can declare the spirit of life from God lives in them, then I say, it
is that causes the witnesses to arise, when this spirit lives in them, whose
property is to quicken, and cause all things to live.

Thirdly, Observe, As there is a time 3 Observe:
when the witnesses lie slain and dead; so also there is a time, when they
shall revive and live again. They shall not always be trodden underfoot by the
men of the earth, and prophecy in sackcloth, and be slain by the beast that
arises out of the bottomless pit; and their bodies to lie in the streets of
the great City, that they should always be made a scorn to their
adversaries; but they shall have a rising time, when they shall cast off their
sack cloth and mourning, they shall stand upon their feet and rejoice; and then
their enemies that rejoiced over them shall weep and lament. If their enemies
did know this, they could not so much triumph over them. For as the Prophet
speaks; Though they fall, yet they shall rise again, Mich. 7. 8. These
Prophets of the Lord may be eclipsed for a season, and they may give forth
their testimony faintly and weakly, and in much weakness and darkness; but
afterward they break forth in greater luster and brightness then ever they
did before. Though they for a space lie dead, and their bones are dried (as the
Prophet speaks of Israel) yet the Lord will by the operation of his divine
power, and by the spirit of ^ife enter into them, he will cause* their dead
bodies to arise: So that* now they shall not act so much in the strength and
power of the creature, they shall not be upheld by the authority, reason,
judgment, and opinion of other men, but they shall stand upon their own feet;
they shall not live upon the streng^h of man's parts, wisdom or argument; but
upon their own knowledge, experience, and assurance of the spirit of life from
God dwelling in them. Now they shall not prophecy or foretell of good things
to come, or of deliverance at a great distance; but they shall act and speak
in the name of the Lord, from the anointing that dwells in them, they shall
only move, speak and act by that spirit of life, that has raised them from
the dead.

Fourthly, and lastly, observe, That 4 Observe:
the rising of the witnesses, is a most dreadful sight to the men of the
earth. The witnesses now arise from shame, oppression and tyranny, and how can
it be otherwise, but that their enemies that oppressed and tormented them,
should be much amazed and affrighted. When Herod heard of the works of Christ,
he was much afraid, saying, It is John whom I have beheaded, Mark. 6. 16. So
when the Lord shall raise up his servants from bondage and slavery, from
darkness and weakness, and shall lift them up into a higher condition; what
will the world say, are not these they that we have persecuted and slain,
risen up in the rule, dominion, and power of the kingdom of Christ. The sight
and beholding of this strikes the world dead, at one blow. This sight is
terrible to all earthly men. When the Soldiers came to apprehend Christ in the
garden, and did but hear Christ say, I am he; they fell down backward: So
when the men of the earth shall hear and see* the poor despised Saints to
stand upon their own feet, they shall fall backward; they shall as Saul fall
flat upon the earth, they shall become heartlesse and spiritlesse, fear and
trembling* shall take hold on them. The prophecy of the witnesses, though but
in sackcloth, was a great trouble to the men of the earth they were disquieted
and troubled at that; therefore they were much comforted and refreshed in
^laying of them, by hindering them in the* course of their prophecy. But now
when they shall see them arise higher then ever, O! this strikes the world* to
the very heart, this is an exceeding terror and amazement to them. There is
just cause for the earth to mourn at the rising of the witnesses, because the
liberty and glory of these, shall be their bondage and shame: as one of the
scales of the balance goes down, when the other goes up; so the honor,
prosperity, and dignity of these witnesses, and of carnal men, are
inconsistent one with the other. Then this amazement falls irrisistibly upon
worldly men; fearfullnesse and astonishment does surprise them all, palenesse
of face, and sadness of heart strikes the men of the earth, when they thought
they had slain these Saints so that they should never rise more, they thought
they had made an utter riddance, never to hear of them, never to see them
more, unless their dead bodies and carkases, to make merry withal: but now
that these should revive and live again, the sight of this, nay the very
thought hereof is like a millstone, that breaks them in pieces, and does make
their hearts to melt, and their spirits to fail within them.

VERSE. 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, come up
hither, and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld.
IN the former verse we heard of the witnesses resurrection: here in this
verse, we come to treat of their ascension; wherein we have an evident allusion
to the resurrection and ascension of Christ. And they heard a great voice from
heaven, saying, Come up hither, etc. In which words consider.

First, the cause of the witnesses ascension; They heard a voice from heaven,
etc.

Secondly, the ascension it self; And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud.

Thirdly, we have a special Adjunct of their ascension; And their enemies
beheld them.

We are no more to understand this ascension of theirs in the letter, then we
did of their resurrection: but as we understood before a mystical
resurrection; so now understand a mystical ascension also: Their killing was
mystical, as being slain in their testimony, so of necessity, we must
understand their resurrection and ascension to be mystical. This having been
formerly inculcated, and now also premised, that we are to enquire after a
mystical ascension. We proceed to speak of the first thing; viz. the cause or
means of their ascension. And they heard a voice from heaven, saying to them,
come up hither. In these words observe.

First, a voice. Secondly, from whence it comes. Thirdly, to whom it speaks.
Fourthly, what it speaks.
The first thing to be taken notice off is the voice: This voice is no other
then the very call of God, the appointment of the Lord. The great voice of his
spirit; It Is not like the still voice, in which God did impart his mind to
Eliah, or the voice speaking behind his people; but a great and mighty voice,
like the sound of a Trumpet, as it is expressed in Revel. 4. 1, 2. This is a
translating voice, changing the Saints into the voice it self, they are such
as the voice is, as John confesses; immediately, says he, I was in the spirit.
This voice is the breathing forth of the spirit of God, the spirit of the Lord
appointing, calling, enabling, directing the witnesses to ascend up to heaven,
and accordingly they do ascend.

Secondly, the place from whence this voice comes, that is from heaven, that
shows it is a most eminent, powerful, and certain voice. It Is the voice of
righteousness revealed from heaven, it is full of certainty, the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, it is full of excellency, coming from the excellent glory,
it is powerful and full of majesty, it comes from heaven, and brings the power
of heaven along with it, it prevails in the thing, unto which it was sent, it
commands all, it carries all before it. All the power of the earth is not able
to withstand this great voice.

Thirdly, take notice unto whom this voice is sent; it speaks unto them;
namely, the witnesses and faithful servants of the Lord. This voice speaks
only to the holy ones of God, none else can understand it is language. Those
that accompanied Paul in his way to Damascus in Act. 9. heard a voice, but saw
no man, neither did they understand the meaning of the voice, that was spoken
to Paul. So the men of the earth, may hear the outward sound of this voice,
but they understand it not, neither is it spoken to them; it is only spoken to
the witnesses, and they hear it, it is directed to them, and they only
understand it.

Fourthly, what direction does this voice give forth: it calls the witnesses to
ascend, saying, Come up hither. As if the Lord had said; Come my people, you
have been clothed in sackcloth and ashes, you have been made the reproach of
the world, and the Gentiles have trampled you under their feet, you have lived
upon the authority and opinion of men, you have lived much below in the earth,
you have lived too far and remote from my self, you have mourned, as in the
absence of the bridegroom; but now you shall live so no longer; Come up
hither; live in me, in my glory, in my spirit, in my strength, in my kingdom;
you shall have liberty, peace, and joy in me: come up to me, from under the
captivity of Babylon, from under the oppression of Egypt, from amidst the
filthiness of Sodom: come now, enjoy my self, my wisdom, my strength, my
kingdom: you shall now live upon my holy mountain, and there shall be no
destroying beast, you shall not be destroyed by your adversaries, neither shall
the beast, that ascends out of the bottomless pit be able to make war with you,
to overcome, and kill you any more. Here is the voice of the Lord, powerfully
calling, the bosom of the Lord opened in goodness and love, the face of God
shining forth in beauty and sweetness, the hand of the Lord effectually
reached out, here are the gates of the new Jerusalem, and of the kingdom of
Christ set wide open, and all comprehended in this most excellent and precious,
in this most transcendent and glorious voice of the Lord, expressed in these
words, come up hither.

Thus we see by what means the witnesses are made to ascend. The mighty voice
of the spirit of the Lord, enabling, calling, and directing them. It comes from
heaven; having the majesty, power, certainty of heaven with it. It speaks to
the witnesses only, because they only understand it, therefore directed to
them. And the glorious direction it gives forth, it calls up the poor despised
servants of the Lord, to live in the power and kingdom of Christ, saying, Come
up hither. We now go on to that which follows.

The second thing to be considered is the ascension it self; And they ascended
up to heaven in a cloud. In the consideration hereof, we may consider three
things.

First, their action, they ascend.

Secondly, the place whether, that is up to heaven.

Thirdly, the manner of their ascension, It Is in a cloud.

Their action is to ascend, which signifies some greater accession of honor,
dignity, greatness, and prosperity. When Nebuchadnezzar once said, I will
ascend up to heaven, I will exalt my self above the clouds, Isa. 14. 14. it is
meant that he would in his heart be greater in name, honor, strength and
dignity, then he had been formerly.

So the Witnesses shall ascend into a state and condition, much more excellent
then they had before enjoyed. This ascension is diametrically opposed to their
sack cloth condition, to that mean and low condition these Witnesses had
lived in, while they were under the power and reign of the beast. This
ascension is not a carnal or bodily transmutation, or a motion from place to
place, but of a mutation of state and condition; it is an ascension unto more
liberty, freedom, knowledge, strength and glory then they had lived in before.

Secondly, the place unto which they are to ascend, and that is to heaven; the
kingdom of Christ is mystically called Heaven. The Saints are said to dwell in
Heaven, as Antichrist is said to dwell in Earth; the meaning is, they shall
ascend into a more heavenly condition, of liberty, power, strength, wisdom,
knowledge, light, and life. They shall come to possess the Kingdom of Christ,
and enjoy all the immunities thereof. They shall live more in heavenly
discoveries of God and Christ, and his will: their external peace, and
internal glory shall be very heavenly and glorious. And in this respect the
Saints that shall sound forth the everlasting Gospel, are said to be in the
midst of heaven, Chap. 14. 6. The Saints are called Heaven it self, Chap. 18.
20. The multitude of Saints that shall sing Allelujah's and praises unto God,
upon the destruction of Babylon, are called a people that dwell in heaven,
Chap. 19. 1. because they live in heavenly enjoyments and praises. So here the
Witnesses are said to ascend up to heaven, in respect of that heavenly and
glorious condition and state that the Lord will advance his people unto, when
he shall wholly break the power of the beast, and advance his people to partake
of the glory and dignity of his own kingdom.

Thirdly, we have the manner how these Witnesses ascend, that is in a cloud.
This great thick Cloud that God draws over the Earth, and with which he does
over-shadow the face of all things; this is that darkness, that confusion,
division, contest, war, envy, this I say, is that dark cloud, that the Lord
has drawn over the face of the Earth. Has not God drawn this black cloud upon
the affairs, counsels, wisdom and actions of men; the order, government,
peace, prosperity of the world is all over-shadowed, men know not where they
are, nor what they do, when they go too fast, nor when too slow; the very
hearts and affections of men are divided, the world is full of contests and
wars, and confusions; and there is such a mist upon men's spirits, that they
scarce know which way to turn themselves. It Is in this cloud of confusion, in
which the Witnesses do ascended. We cannot but remember that the Lord brought
his people from Egypt, by dividing of the Sea, by separating of the great
waters: so will the Lord raise up his Saints by dividing of the men of the
earth, the great Sea, or peoples of the earth, by dividing of them, by
confounding of the wisdom and policy of the world, by dashing one part of the
earth against another; I say in this manner, and by this means, the Lord will
cause his faithful ones to ascend.

Lastly, we have that special Adjunct that is hereunto annexed: And their
enemies beheld them. By their enemies, we are to understand People, Nations,
Kindreds, and Tongues, with all the inhabitants of the Earth: All worldly,
carnal, Antichristian men, these shall behold them to their grief and
vexation. This is mentioned first, as to the torment and excessive grief that
the Adversaries shall take, when they shall see them that they have despised,
trampled upon, and contemned, to be lifted up, to ascend unto honor and
dignity, unto life and glory. And secondly, it is mentioned in the praise and
happiness of those that do ascend in the view of their Adversaries: As the
Prophet makes it an augmentation of bounty, that the Lord should spread his
table in the midst of his foes, Psalm. 23. So this is an addition to their
honor, they shall ascend in the midst of their Adversaries, in their view, and
before their eye. This is the saddest sight that earthly men can behold; they
shall see them ascend, and shall not be able to stop their passage: this shall
be as wormwood, as gall and bitterness to their spirits, this shall even make
them gnash their teeth, but they shall not be able to help themselves. The words
being thus far opened, we now come to raise some observations from them.

First, observe, That the Witnesses are 1 Observe:
enabled to ascend by the powerful voice of the spirit of God. They can never
rise nor ascend, until they are called up to the Lord by this great voice, this
loud heavenly voice, this voice of Majesty and glory. Antichrist was able to
suppress and keep under these two Prophets of the Lord, until the Lord comes
and raises them up by his own voice and command. If all the world should call
upon them to arise, they could not, until the Lord speak the word, and say,
Come up hither. When the Lod speaks with a heavenly voice, it is so full of
love and joy, of light and life, that every thing in the hearts of his, do
hear his voice; every faculty, every member, all parts hear and obey. The
soul is never willing to ascend, until the Lord calls by his eternal voice,
and that has such force and power, such excellency and and majesty, that it
removes every obstacle out* of the way, and sets aside every thing that would
hinder. And again, this voice is so great, so powerful, carries with it so
much authority, that the men of the Earth cannot hinder their rising* If the
Lord speak with a powerful* voice to the world, ^o Antichrist, to the men of
the Earth* Let my people ascend, let them come up hither, all the force, power,
policy of men shall not hinder them. This voice is dreadful to the men of the
earth, and does so much affright them, that they are forced at last (as once
Pharaoh was) to let the Israel of God go, and ascend out of Egypt to
Jerusalem, from bondage to liberty, from weakness to strength, from
persecution to dominion, from light to darkness, from Earth to Heaven. Now the
Saints are taken up to live in heavenly comforts and joys, in heavenly
discoveries of ^ight and life, in heavenly immunities and privileges. And all
this is done by the great, the mighty, and powerful voice of God.

Secondly, observe, from the ascension it self; That the Witnesses have their
2 Observe*
time of triumph and rejoicing, as well as they have a time of sack cloth and
mourning. When they ascend, they shall shake off their sackcloth and mourning,
they shall ascend far higher, unto an estate of more liberty, honor, peace,
and glory, then their former estate was. They shall not always be made the
scorn and reproach of the world, and be trodden under foot of the Gentiles,
and* be driven into the Wilderness, and their dead bodies to lie in Egypt and
Sodom, and their Adversaries to make merry, and rejoice over their Carcasses;
but they shall be advanced above all the pride and scorn of their adversaries:
well may their enemies vex and storm at them, but they are above their reach
and danger; these Witnesses shall be clothed with honor and dignity, for all
the wrongs and injuries their Adversaries have put upon them. Now they shall sit
upon Christ's throne, wear Christ's crown, enjoy Christ's kingdom: now they shall
quit the Earth, and ascend far above men and fears, above griefs and
troubles, above shame and contempt; to live more in God and Christ, to enjoy
more of his life and righteousness, to become more inheritors of his Kingdom
and glory.

Thirdly, In that the Witnesses shall 3 Observe.
ascend up to He^ven, observe, That the state and condition the Saints shall
ascend up into, is most heavenly and glorious. The Saints shall not dwell in the
earth, their faces shall not look downward, but their nature and privilege is
now to ascend to Heaven, unto heavenly privileges and immunities, unto
heavenly life and joy; great shall be their enjoyments, when they shall ascend
above the oppression of men, or the powers of flesh and hell; great shall be their
deliverance in respect of external liberty and peace, and also of internal
light and glory.

The external glory, liberty, and redemption that shall attend the Saints in
this heavenly condition that they are instated in by this ascension, we may
consider in these particulars following.

First, these Witnesses upon their ascension shall be delivered from the
oppression of their Adversaries. The oppression of Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon
shall all cease, and be broken in pieces My people went down to Egypt, and the
Assyrian oppressed them without cause: Now therefore what have I here, says
the Lord, that my people are taken away for naught; they that rule over them,
make them to howl, Isa. 52. 4, 5. Behold I will bring them again out of the
land of Egypt, and gather them from the coasts of Assyria; and the pride of
Assyria shall be broken, and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart away, Zach. 10.
10, 11. see also Isa. 10. 24, 25, 26, 27. And this proverb shall be taken up
against the King of Babylon, and it shall be said, How has the oppressor
ceased, and the golden City: the Lord has broken the staff of the wicked,
and the red of the rulers, Isa. 14. 4, 5*

Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon were the mightiest Oppressors of the people of
Israel, by which are typified those Antichristian powers that have overcome and
killed the faithful Witnesses of God. But now these oppressors shall cease,
and the golden City, that Ecclesiastical or Church Estate shall cease, and the
Saints that have been oppressed shall go free, the Lord will take off the yoke
of their burden, and break the staff of their shoulder, those that ruled over
them, and were their taskemasters, shall be trodden down as mire in the streets.

Secondly, God will make those that have persecuted and trodden under feet the
Witnesses, to serve and obey them. For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and
will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own Land, and the strangers shall
be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob: and the
people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel
shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants, and handmaids: and
they shall take them Captives, whose Captives they were, and they shall rule
over their oppressors, Isa. 14. 1, 2. For that nation that will not serve thee
shall perish; yea those nations shall utterly be wasted: The sons of them
that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised
thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and shall call thee
the City of the Lord, Isa. 60. 12. 14. The nations shall see, and be
confounded at all their might, they shall lay their hand upon their mouth,
their ears shall be deaf, they shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they
shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth, they shall be afraid of
the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee, Mica 7. 16, 17.

When Christ shall put his Scepter into the hands of his people, the men of the
earth shall bow down themselves, and submit to their authority; the very
spirits of men shall fall down and stoop before the Saints.

Thirdly, the Saints shall be abundantly blessed in peace and quietness, they
shall have rest from all their enemies. And it shall come to pass in that day,
the Lord shall give thee rest from sorrow, from fear, and from bondage, Isa.
14. 3. The wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid, and the Calfe, and the young Lion, and the Fa^ling together, and
a little child shall lead them: And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, and
their young ones shall lie down together; and the Lion shall eat straw like
the Ox: And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den: They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy mountain, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. And again, I will
extend peace to her, like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing
stream, Isa 66. 12. Isa. 33. 20


These Scriptures I know are mysterious, and there is a spiritual meaning of
them: but they are also true in the letter, and hold forth that external peace
and rest, when the Lord shall cause his people to ascend far above the power
and malice of all their adversaries: then he will so take away that wolvish
and ravenous disposition of worldly men, that his people shall live in peace
and quietness among them.

Fourthly, the Lord will raise up his people from reproach and shame, unto a
state of dignity and honor. For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, for
Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as the lamp that burns: And the
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy glory: And thou shall
be called by a new name which the mouth of the Lord shall name: And give the
Lord no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth, Isa. 62. 1, 2. 7. And ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen
(speaking of the Adversaries) for the Lord will sley thee, and call his
servants by another name, Isa. 65. 15.

By these Scriptures it appears, that the Lord will not always give up the
names of his people to reproach and infamy: they shall not always lie under
shame and disgrace; but when the Lord shall lift up the head of his poor
despised people, they shall have another name, which the Lord himself shall
name, a name of praise and glory; when the Lord shall adorn his Spouse with
the brightness of the sun and* make her terrible as an army with banners, then
the daughters that see her shall bless her, and the Queens and Concubines,
they shall praise her.

This shall be the state and condition of the Witnesses, when they shall ascend
up to heaven, to live in heavenly enjoyments, or liberty and freedom, in
respect of their outward and external glory: they shall be freed from the
oppression of their Adversaries. Their enemies shall serve them; they shall
abound in peace, and be blessed in praises.

Now it follows, that we speak something of their internal glory and
excellency that they shall be advanced unto: And that you may, take in these
particulars following.

First, the Saints shall abound in heavenly knowledge and understanding of the
mysteries of truth. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9. And he will destroy in this mountain the
face of covering cast over all people, and the Veil that is spread over all
nations, Isa. 25. 7. Moreover, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of
the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and
heals the stroke of their wound, Isa. 30. 26.

There has been a veil of covering spread over all Nations, and that by the
operation of the man of sin: but now the veil shall be taken away, and the
light of one day shall be as the light of seven, there shall be a perfect
discovery of light, a perfection of truth shall appear in the Saints.

Secondly, the Saints shall be taken up into higher enjoyments of spiritual
comfort and joy, by a clearer apprehension* of divine love, then when they sat
mourning under the sense of their own defects. And the ransomed of the Lord
shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joys upon their
heads* and they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
^^e away, Isa. 35. 10. and Chap. 51. 1^. And the days of mourning shall be
ended, Isa. 60. 20. And God shall take away all tears from all faces, and the
rebuke of his people shall be taken away from the earth, Isa. 30. 8. And GOD
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes* and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, Revel. 21. 4. And the inhabitant shall not say,
I am sick, the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity,
Isa. 33. 24.

All which places show, that when the Saints shall be delivered from the
spiritual captivity of Babylon, they shall have no more occasion of sorrow,
those evils that exposed them to reproach and persecutions, which lay so heavy
upon them; and those evils that caused them to shed so many tears shall be all
done away, they shall not now be grieved under oppression, and crying for
deliverance: For their Officers shall be peace, and their Exactors
righteousness, righteous ones shall have the dominion. Neither shall the
Saints live under any such apprehension of sin as now, which causes soul
sickness: for their iniquity shall be done away, and they shall enjoy spiritual
freedom and comfort.

Thirdly, the Saints shall act more in the power of God, and less from self
and creature. And he that is weak among them at that day, shall be as David,
and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before him,
Zech. 12. 8. For there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad
rivers, and streams, wherein shall go no Galley with oars, neither shall
gallant ships pass thereby: Their tacklings were loosed, they could not well
strengthen their mast, they could not spread their sail; Then is the prey of a
great spoil divided, and the lame take the prey, Isa. 23. 21. 23.

The weak and the feeble shall be filled with so much grace, majesty,
authority, strength, and truth, that as the very Angels of God, they shall be
carried forth in the most heroical and divine virtues, that the most weak and
impotent shall be able to take the spoil, and seize on the prey of divine
things; they shall not sail in any gallant Ship of outward enjoyments, there
shall be no rowing of the Galley with oars of creature-strength and ability:
but they shall got forth in the name of the Lord, and shall in his strength alone
perform all their undertakings.

Fourthly, and lastly, God shall more immediately communicate all knowledge,
comfort, strength, and all divine grace unto his people, then he has formerly
done. The Saints shall enjoy divine things, by a more near and intimate way
from Christ, then formerly they have done: They shall not so much rejoice in
the external part or outside of things, as in the indwellings of the spirit
and life of God within them. The Sunn shall be no more thy light by day,
neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord
shall be unto thee an everlastong light, and thy God thy glory: Thy Sun shall
go no more down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self: for the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended,
Isa. 60. 19, 20. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and
the Lamb are the Temple of it: And the City had no need of the Sun, neither
of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb
is the light thereof: And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the
light of i^, for there shall be no night there, Rev. 21. 22, 23.

When all external means and ways shall cease, God and Christ shall be all in
all to his Saints. The earthly Jerusalem had a Temple, and visible signs of
Gods presence in it: but now in the new and spiritual Jerusalem, that shall
come down from above, this heavenly frame and condition that the Saints shall
ascend into, after the Witnesses shall arise, it shall be more heavenly and
divine, more pure and spiritual, then ever they enjoyed before; yea, all their
ways and worships shall be more holy and spiritual; their light and communion
with God and Christ shall be such, as that they shall not need any outward or
external means. They shall not be over-shadowed by the night of ignorance, or
persecution, or darkness, but shall be filled with the in-dwelling of God, and
of the Lamb, and they shall walk in the glory of that divine light.

This and much more might be spoken of the glorious condition of the Saints,
when they shall ascend up to heaven, to live in heavenly enjoyments and
privileges, both of external liberty and peace, and also of internal light
and glory. This is part of the glory of the new Jerusalem, and of the Kingdom
of Christ, when Antichrist shall be thrown down from his throne and
authority; and when Christ shall be exalted, and the Saints possess his
Kingdom. We now proceed to the next observation.

Fourthly, do the Witnesses ascend 4 Obser.
in a Cloud? then observe; That in the midst of the great confusion and
darkness upon the face of the world, shall the Witnesses ascend.

There is a great thick cloud of darkness, distraction, division, and
confusion upon the minds and actions of the men of the earth this day: Now I
say, that in these thick mists and fogs of trouble and contention, the
Witnesses daily get ground, and arise higher and higher, and ascend gradually
every day, though the world neither sees it, nor knows it. Israel of old pass^d
through the Wilderness, until they came to Canaan by the conduct of a cloud:
So this cloud that has this day over-shadowed the world, shall not pass away,
until the Israel of God are ascended up to the land of Messiah, our new
Jerusalem. Suitable unto our purpose is that place, Isa. 51. 9, 10. Awake,
awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord. Awake as in the ancient days: Art
thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it that
has dried the Sea, the waters of the great deep? Thou have made the depth of
the Sea away for the ransomed to pass over.

God has seemed in former times, as it were, to be asleep, as if he had
altogether forgotten the sorrows and sufferings of his people. But now, when
the Lord shall arm himself with power, and cloth himself with strength as
with a garment: as in the generations of old, or ancient days, when thou
did cut Rahab, and wound the Dragon, that is meant of Egypt and Pharaoh. And
how was this done? by dividing of the waters, and drying up the Sea, he rescued
his people from the bondage of Pharaoh, and the oppression of Egypt. Thus God
delivered his people from the captivity of Babylon by the same power, as in the
ancient days. Now in the same manner, when the Lord shall redeem his people
from those burdens of spiritual captivity that his people have endured under
the tyrannical dominion of Antichristian Babylon, God will dry up the Sea, and
divide the waters; that is, he will wast and consume the state and strength of
man, and divide Peoples and Nations one against another, a thick Cloud of
darkness shall over-cover them all: what a gross thick Cloud hangs over all
men this day, upon all their Actings, Counsels, and Designs: Most men grope in
the dark, and know no^ what they do; what a dark cloud of fear, anger,
division, contention, disquietnesse and confusion of face, is this day upon the
men of the earth.

Now in the midst of these confusions and divisions aomngst the men of the
world in these Clouds of darkness, the faithful Witnesses of Christ, they
get ground, and ascend higher and higher, until at last they shall fully
ascend up unto the heavenly state and glory of Christ's kingdom. The Witnesses
ascending in a Cloud, the world sees it not, it is a mystery that few
understand. Then this thick cloud of darkness, fear, division and confusion
upon the world, does plainly demonstrate, that the Witnesses are now arising,
shaking off their sackcloath, and mourning, and are now ascending up to Heaven,
to live in, and enjoy the Kingdom of Christ, to enjoy that freedom and peace,
that light and glory that we last spoke of.

Fifthly, and lastly, do the enemies 5 Observe:
of the Witnesses behold their ascending up to Heaven? Then observe, That all
the power and policy of the Enemies of the Witnesses, shall not be able to
hinder their ascension. The Adversary does behold them, does see them* get
ground, arise, and ascend, and feign would hinder them, but cannot. This is the
greatest and most amazing fight that ever the world did see, the saddest
spectacle that ever it beheld; this fills the earth with astonishment and
trembling, to perceive the rising and ascending of these Witnesses formerly
slain and it cannot in the least retard or hinder them. This shall be the very
glory and triumph of the Saints, that they shall ascend in the view and ^ight
of all their Enemies, that hated, persecuted, and killed them. Now as it was
the sport and joy of these Enemies to kill and slay these witnesses, how much
more will it be their grief and torture, to see them arise from the dead, and
ascend into honor.

It could not be more grievous to Haman, to see Mordecai advanced, then it
amazeth the world to see these ascend, and that in their sight and presence.
This shall be the honor and joy of these Witnesses, that they shall ascend in
the view and sight of their Adversaries; who shall look on them, and be
exceedingly troubled and vexed, but yet shall not be able in the least to
hinder them, from ascending into the glorious liberty, peace, light, and
comfort of Christ's Kingdom.

VERSE. 13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part
of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and
the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heave.
HAving spoken of the resurrection and ascension of the Witnesses, we now come
to handle the great and notable effect that succeeds thereon, together with
several consequents thereunto annexed. The same hour there was a great
earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, etc. In the handling of
which we may consider,

First, the time of this Earthquake, in these words; And the same hour, etc.

Secondly, the Earthquake it self, mentioned in the Text, there was a great
Earthquake.

Thirdly, the consequents thereunto annexed, and they are three.

1. The tenth part of the City fell. 2. Seven thousand men are slain. 3. The
affrighted remnant give glory to God.
But first, of the time, The same hour there was a great Earth quake. This
term of time is not to be taken restrictvely, as if it should be meant of an
hour consisting of so many minutes. Some read the same day; neither may we
take it for a natural day of twenty four hours. It is an indefinite speech,
and holds no certainty for the space of time: but it imports, that the time of
this great Earthquake should answer the time of the Witnesses rising and
ascending up to heaven. Those words expressed in Chap. 17. 12. These receive
power one hour with the beast, import the same, meaning the whole term of
their reign with the beast.

Secondly, the earthquake it self follows: And there was a great Earthquake.

The natural cause of an Earthquake is, when the wind is pent up in the
bowels of the earth, and seeking vent from thence, breaks forth into violent
concussions and motions, so that the earth shakes and rends, contrary to its
natural firmness and stability. Of such an Earthquake we reed, Amos 1. 1.
And the like appeared when Christ arose from the dead, as it is recorded, Mat.
28 2.

But here we are to understand a mystical and spiritual Earthquake, a
shaking of Kings, Kingdoms, States, Powers, Forms, Goverments, and the very
dignities, orders, strengths, and comforts of men. The same Earthquake is
meant, Chap. 6. 12. And Chapter 16. 18. Thus the Lord says, He will shake the
Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry land, and all nations, Hag. 2.
6. This was partly fulfilled when Christ came in the flesh, the heaven of
Ceremonies and shadows, and of all the Jewish worship was shaken and abolished;
and also the earth was shaken, both Sea and dry land, all the whole earth was
full of great commotions and ruins. But this is again to be fulfilled; yet
once more will the Lord shake heaven and earth: The heaven of Antichrists
worship, Church, form, order and government: And the earth also, all those
worldly powers that have engaged to uphold and manage the cause of the Beast;
these powers, dominion, authorities and states shall be shaken also. Thus we
see what we are to understand by this Earthquake, the great commotions and
troubles that shall even rend and tear the earth in pieces: all its order,
power, government and dominion, both in Church and State shall be broken, all
shall be turned upside down by these violent breakings forth, that shall happen
upon the world at the rising and ascending of the Witnesses.

In the third place we have the consequents of this great Earthquake in these
words; The tenth part of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of
men seven thousand; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God
of Heaven.

This first consequent in order is this, The tenth part of the City fell.
Whereof we are to take notice of three things, viz. what is meant,

First, by the City. Secondly, by the tenth part. Thirdly, by the fall thereof.
First, this City is great Babylon, mentioned in Chap. 17. 5. which is meant of
the whole universal power, dominion and territories of the Antichristian
Church and State. The nations combined together, and gathered into a Church,
worshipping the Beast and his image, submitting to his rule and government;
this is the great City Babylon, of which we have spoken already, from verse. 8.
Though Rome it self has mystically ruled over the Nations, has been the rise
of abominations, and therefore in some sense, is meant by the City: yet it
cannot be taken so restrictively, but it takes in the whole State and Church of
Antichrist, that is called this City, the mother of Harlots, that has
corrupted the earth with her abominations.

Secondly, the tenth part of the City (the principal thing here to be
enquired after) is variously interpreted. Some would have the tenth part to be
meant of the Levites part, such a part as was offered to the Priests under the
Law, as a maintenance of the legal Priesthood. So that hereby the lot or
portion of the Priesthood, the chiefest and most devoted part should fall;
that the tribute of Tithes on tenths, whereby the Antichristian Ministry was
maintained, should fall, and utterly be withheld at the rising, and ascending
of the Witnesses. But by the tenth part of the City, we may understand of the
tenth part of the Nations and Peoples that were devoted to the service of
Antichrist. In Chap. 17. 13. Ten kingdoms give up their power and strength to
the beast, to serve and worship him. Now the tenth part of those Kingdoms,
Nations, or Peoples, that have wholly given up themselves to Antichrist, and
have resigned up their rule, and authority, their worship and service to the
Beast, these are here called the tenth part of the City.

Thirdly, this tenth part shall fall by withdrawing themselves from the yoke
and bondage of the service of Antichrist, as it is foretold of them in Chap. 17.
16. These shall hate the whore, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

Those ten kingdoms or nations that had formerly given up all their strength
and power to the Beast, and did formerly support Antichrist, now they shall
withdraw themselves again, now they shall with one consent prepare themselves
for her destruction. For God has put into their hearts, to fulfill his will,
and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God
should be fulfilled, Chap. 17. 17. The Lord in justice gave over the nations to
be servile to Antichrist, for an appointed time, until he had executed all his
cruelties, and enjoyed his dominion and tyranny over them; so at the end of his
determined time, God will put it into the hearts of the nations, to consent and
agree to rise up unto the destruction of all Antichristian dominion and power.
And though these nations shall not fully and wholly thus rise up to effect this
great work, to hate the whore, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, until
the last seal be opened, the last Trumpet sounded, and the last Vial powered
out, when there shall be a final and total destruction of Antichrist's power
and reign: yet there shall be a tenth part of the nations, that God will raise
up to begin this work, God will honor some nation or nations, first to
withdraw their power and authority from the service of the beast, and to oppose
his tyranny and oppression, and that at the opening of the sixth seal, the
founding of the sixth Trumpet, the pouring forth of the sixth Vial, at the time
in which the witnesses shall begin to rise and ascend. Now these nations that
the Lord shall first begin withal, to raise up, to oppose the power of the
beast: I say this nation, or nations, is meant here by the tenth part of the
City. For before that all Nations shall hate the whore, and cast her off, and
burn her flesh with fire, there shall be some particular nations, that God
will honor with the first of his work, and this is called the tenth part of
the City, that should fall, not only, by withdrawing their own power and
assistance; but also opposing and suppressing the dominion and power of
Antichrist.

The second consequent follows in these words; And in the earthquake were
slain of men seven thousand. In the opening hereof, it will be necessary, that
we consider of three things, concerning those here that are said to be slain.

First, the persons. Secondly, the manner. Thirdly, their number.
The persons here slain are expressed by an elegancy, (...), The names of men,
put for men of name; that is, of power, greatness, of office or dignity, of
some place or eminency. The Hebrews express men of honor or renown, by men
of name, Genesis 6. 4. So here, names of men, being put for men of name, are meant
men of note and quality, such as are of place and dignity, men of worth and
greatness. These men here slain by the earthquake, are not of the meaner and
lower sort and quality, but men of renown, for wisdom, learning, parts and
gifts, and men of place, of rule and authority. The names of men shall be
slain, their honor and greatness shall lie in the dust, their excellency
stained, and their power broken. These are the persons that shall be slain.

In the second place, the manner of their slaying presents it self. This
cannot be meant of a real and proper slaying; no more then that of the
witnesses: for if the slaying of the witnesses be a mystical slaying, the
earthquake a mystical earthquake, so the slaying of these men is mystical
also. The witnesses were always slain in their testimony and cause, sometimes
they gave testimony also by their blood. Sohere, these that are the abettors
and upholders of Antichrists cause, these I say are slain in their cause and
mannagement thereof; some of whom may also lose their lives in the quarrel.
Then this slaughter of these men of name, is in their honors and preferments,
in their titles and offices, in their pomp and riches, in their rule and
dominion, in their parts and nams, in all these they shall be slain and
suppressed, even as they themselves formerly dealt with the witnesses, in
keeping them under: this now shall be their own lot and portion.

Lastly, we have the number of those thus slain, and that is seven thousand:
which does imply a full and perfect number; and does not here signify just so
many in an equal proportion, but is put indefinitely, as it is often, a
certain number, for an uncertain: and may as well signify, many more, or
less, then the precise number that is expressed.

The number here mentioned seven thousand, does imply the whole and perfect
number, that does manage and uphold the cause of the beast: There were many of
the people of all Nations, that were seduced and misguided, and drawn to wonder
after the beast; but these men of name, are those that undertake to manage and
uphold the worship, form, and power of Antichrist; all these, the whole and
perfect* number of them shall be slain. Th^se be not the poor, vile, and base
sort of men, but those of a more noble degree and rank, men of fame, for
wisdom, learning, gifts, and offices; the full and complete number of these
shall be slain and fall in this earthquake.

The third and last consequent follows, which is thus expressed; And the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. In the unfolding
these words we may consider.

First, the persons here meant, called a remnant.

Secondly, their passions and actions.

1 They are affrighted. 2. They give glory to God.
The persons here specified are called a remnant. A remnant is so called in
respect of it is smallness or littleness, it is most commonly attributed to a
small piece or fag end of cloth, that is some fragment or very small piece left
of the whole, and it is always put for that which is, poor, few, and
contemptible. Then by the remnant we are to understand, the poor, ignorant,
seduced people, that by dependence upon, and compliance with those men of name,
that did manage the cause of Antichr^^^, have been drawn to worship the
beast, and to receive the mark of his image. These poor sottish people are
called a remnant.

Their passions and actions follow.

First, they are affrighted, and well they may, when they see all their props
and pillars gone, the men of name and power thrown down from their station.
When the Nobles and great ones of Israel were led captive into Babylon, the
poor and weak of the people were left behind: so the great undertakers of
Antichrists cause and quarrel are slain, and thrown down, now here is a
poor company of seduced persons that have wondered after the beast, they
behold their great men slain, and men of renown and power thrown down, and
overthrown, and now this poor remnant, they are very much affrighted and
amazed, they are cast down and terrified at the fight thereof: when they shall
see an utter ruin of those that seduced them, whom they owned and believed,
and had great dependence on, and therefore are stricken with exceeding great
fear, when they see these taken away.

Secondly, this poor affrightned remnant, gave glory to the God of heaven. God
was styled, God of the earth, verse. 4. And is called, The God of heaven and
earth, Genesis 24. 3. Here called the God of heaven. Also in Dan. 2. 18. This
notes the greatness of his power and sovereignty, who is mightier then all the
powers of the world. The remnant shall glorify the God of heaven, that can
subdue all the powers and dominions of the earth. But how shall the remnant
glorify God? That shall be, by acknowledging the just judgments of God, upon
all those men of name, that he had thrown down and slain. Suitably we have
the expression in Josh. 7. 19. My Son, confess (says Joshua) and give glory
to God, that is, by an acknowledgement of the truth and righteousness of Gods
just judgment. So here the poor affrighted remnant, shall freely acknowledge
the equity and justness of all those evils enflicted upon the men of name, of
greatness, office, and power, these shall say, that they suffered justly and
deservedly; and though they be affrighted and terrified to see these great men
of the earth, both in civil, and in ecclesiastical dignity and power, to fall
and be cast down, yet they shall glorify God, by acknowledging of the just
hand of God in his judgments upon them.

The words being thus far opened, we proceed now to touch upon some
observations clearly offered to us from them.

First, observe from the earthquake it self, That the rising and ascending of
the 1 Observe:
witnesses, does cause a great earthquake in the world. No sooner do the
witnesses begin to rise out of their sackcloth, and ascend up to heaven, but
the earth shaks, the world trembles, great concussions and commotions are among
the men of the earth, and upon all their affairs. States and Kingdoms, powers
and governments, men and interests, these all shake and tremble. The very
foundations of man's peace and joy are shattered and broken; the worships and
ways, the riches and preferments of the man of sin, they all expire and die.
The powers of the beast, whether civil or ecclesiastical, they are all
subdued, and cast to the earth. All the corruption of Magistracy, and all false
shows and forms of worship shall be dissipated and shaken in pieces. An
earthquake is one of the greatest evils and perplexities that can possibly
befall the world; the earth being man's center and stay: when the very
foundation of man's comfort and happiness is shaken, it must mightily affrighten
and astonish the men of the world. There is no shelter in an earth quake, for
Kings, Parliaments, Armies, Nations, Commonwealths, it shakes all, yea, rich
and poor, high and low, it throws down every thing that stands in it is way,
the very bottom and groundwork of the peoples joy, trust, comfort, hope, it
trembles and quakes: the root of all humane life, strength, wisdom, policy is
cut in sunder at once. The foundation of all power, ecclesiastical and civil,
is shaken, the very stability of Church, State, Religion, order, government,
shakes and falls down unto the earth. And needs must it be so; for the
witnesses are the very basis and pillars of the earth, they were the strength
and stability of the world: like unto the two pillars in Solomon's Temple, the
one called Jachin, the other Boaze, 1 King. 7. 21. that is as much as to say,
stability and strength, which indeed did prefigure the steadfastness and
strength of the Saints. These two Witnesses while they lived below in the
earth, they were the strength and succor of the world, but when they arise out
of the earth, and ascend to heaven, then the strength and stability of the
earth ascends with them. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are
dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it, says the Lord, Psalm. 75. 3. The Lord
holds up the earth by these pillars, namely, his witnesses, and when he calls
them to heaven, to his kingdom, to live in the liberty and glory thereof, then
the very pillars of the earth are removed, therefore the earth must needs quake
and tremble. This sore judgment is so terrible and amazing, that there is no
shelter or succor, nothing that man has, or does enjoy can be secure, it is
the most sweeping and affrighting evil, it pitties nor spares none, but
carries all before it. As Sampson carried away the gates of the City upon his
shoulders; so these two witnesses when they arise from the earth, and leave the
world, they carry away with them, the strength, the peace, the comfort, the
order, the power of the earth, and so leave the world and Antichrist in
confusion and distraction. The whole interest that the world has, in all it is
enjoyments, is but borrowed from the witnesses; and when these are taken away,
and raised up above their former station, the world falls into ruin and
confusion.

Secondly, from the time of this earthquake. The same hour, etc. observe, That
2 Observe:
all the time of this great earthquake, the witnesses are rising and ascending.
The same hour and time, yea and all the time of these great commotions and
stirs upon the world, the witnesses get ground, and ascend higher and higher;
though the world neither know it, nor perceive it. This great earthquake; that
this very day, does shake Kings, kingdoms, States, Churches, rules and
dominions, does plainly demonstrate, that the witnesses are now in rising, that
they begin to shake off their sackcloth and mourning, they stand upon their
own feet, and do not any longer depend upon other men's shoulders: they ascend
above the oppression and powers of their adversaries, into the glorious
privileges and liberty of Christ's kingdom. Know that through this thick and
dark cloud, that God has drawn over the earth, and in the midst of these
national storms and earthquakes, the Lord will shine forth more and more, and
the Sunshine of his favor and love shall display it is beams upon his Saints,
in working out their salvation and liberty. God by the plentiful showers of
divine grace, and by his distillings of his spirit upon his people, will burn
up that dross and fleshlinesse in them, which God does manifest in some
already. And by this great earthquake will so shake the powers of the world,
that they shall not be able to oppress the Saints any longer. O that we could
with faith and patience wait a while, and we shall behold within a few years,
yea, in a very short space, what desolations and devastations God will make in
the earth.; and what unexpected salvations and deliverances he will work for
his people, far above what his enemies fear, or his people hope for.
Therefore I say, wait but a while, stand still and see the salvation of the
Lord, the Lord will come and will not tarry; for in this very day, of the great
earthquake, in the very time now of these national storms and commotions, are
the witnesses rising above their adversaries, and ascending up into the
heavenly enjoyments and immunities of the kingdom of Christ.

Thirdly, from the first consequent of this great earthquake: and the tenth
part of the City fell: observe, That nation 3 Observe:
that shall first of all shake off and disclaim the power of Antichrist, God
will honor that nation first of all, in raising up his witnesses in it. There
is a tenth part of the nations, that have formerly given up their power and
authority to the beast, that shall fall off, and disown that man of sin, that
shall withdraw themselves from the yoke and bondage of Antichrists service, and
that in this earthquake, under the sixth Trumpet; and that before the ten horns
shall hate the whore, and burn her flesh with fire. Now I say, that nation, or
nations, that shall first shake off the yoke of the oppressor, and the burden
from off their shoulder, are the tenth part of the City, that here is said to
fall in the earthquake: The power and dominion of Antichrist, that this nation,
(or tenth part of the City) did once yield and submit unto: now that authority
and rule is wholly dissolved and abolished. Now I verily believe that England
is this tenth part of the City; or take England, Scotland, and Ireland, as
being united together into one, as being subjected under one dominion and
government to be the tenth part of the nations, that shall first withdraw from
under the reign of Antichrist; for the tenth part is not tied to one nation,
but to the tenth part of the nations, that were brought under the power of
Antichrist. And if the tenth part should be meant of one nation only, yet this
tenth part is but that nation, that the Lord does begin his work in; he will
carry his design from nation to nation, until the ten horns are all brought
to hate the whore, and to burn her flesh with fire. This indeed is the full
accomplishment, when the forty and two months shall be ended, and the word of
God fulfilled, the whole ten kingdoms shall join together, to make war with
the beast, and to give up their power to the service of Christ's kingdom. But
the Lord does first begin with a tenth part, that shall first withdraw it self
from under the dominion and power of the beast. And I believe, that this
Island, with the nations adjoining to it, will be the first fruits of the
world, that here shall appear the new Jerusalem, and the nations of them that
be saved, shall walk in the light thereof, for many nations shall be joined to
the Lord, upon the coming down of the new Jerusalem, and final downfall of
Antichrist. Now if it be demanded, why Germany or some of the reformed churches
abroad may not be meant the tenth part of the City: to which I answer thus;
That though those called the reformed churches, have in some respect, and in
some things cast off the service and dominion of the beast; yet they have not
cast off the image of the beast. For if we cast our eyes upon the reformed
Churches abroad, we shall see a national church, a carnal Ministry, worldly
Christians, invented ordinances of man's framing, civil and earthly laws and
institutions, humane and natural gifts and parts exercised: so that these
reformed churches so much talked of, are but some politic and humane frame,
that sets up an image to the beast, or Antichrist coming forth in another form
and shape, then that of downright Popery. And therefore we cannot judge any of
them to be the tenth part of the City, neither can we expect the rising of the
witnesses to be from thence. Now for as much as England is the first nation,
that is wholly, and thoroughly casting off, and disowning all Antichristian
powers; and for as much as the Lord has raised up his people in a great
measure from their sackcloth and mourning, and the Saints here begin to stand
upon their feet, and to ascend above the power of their adversaries, into the
liberty of Christ's kingdom; and in that God has begun this great earthquake
here, shaking all powers, both accle^^asticall and civil: this I say, does
plainly demonstrate, that England is that tenth part of the City, where the
witnesses shall first rise out of their sackcloth and bondage: Now this great
earthquake, that had it is first beginning here, shall continue, and by degrees
reach other nations, the Lord will from hence go on, to shake all nations, the
sea, and the dry land; And though Dutch, and Dane, and French shall combine
against us, and becompasse the Camp of the Saints, and the holy City, yet the
fire of the Lord shall come from heaven and consume them. The Lord shall be
unto this Island a wall of fire round about, Zech. 2. 5. And thus the Lord will
undoubtedly go on, until he has subdued the power of the nations, and broken
the strength of the ten horns, that they shall wholly withdraw their power and
authority from the service of Antichrist; and shall devote all their strength,
riches, authority, to advance the kingdom of Christ. Thus not only a tenth
part shall fall in the earthquake; but all the ten horns by degrees shall be
scattered and broken; and whereas they have given their power and service to
the beast: so now all their strength and power shall serve Christ and his ends.
The kingdoms of the world shall become Christ's, at the sound of the seventh
Trumpet: of which we shall speak in it is due place: now we proceed.

Fourthly, from the second effect, 4 Observe:
and there were slain of men seven thousand. Observe: Those principally and
chiefly shall be slain in the earthquake, that are the upholders and
maintainers of Antichrists cause and quarrel. Those here said to be slain,
are the names of men, or men of name, of fame, of note, of quality, of office,
of dignity; such as these are slain: these are slain in their offices, The
Lord pulls down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble and m^eke. ^
powers, riches, honors; these are cast out of ecclesiastical and civil
power and rule (and as it is said of the Dragon) they are cast out of heaven
down to the earth, they are degraded, and cast out, as an abominable branch.
This earthquake does not so much shake and scatter the poor, ignorant, seduced
people, as those that are great in power, in office, in parts and renown.
There is not one of these shall escape, the seven thousand, the full, perfect,
and complete number of those chief props and stays of Antichrist, such as
manage his cause, and maintain his quarrel, there is not one of those, that
shall escape, that shall not be thrown down. How has this earthquake shaken
men out of their honors and dignities, out of offices and places; as those
that were in ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Bishop^* Deans, Chapters,
C^ancellors, Commissaries, Ordinaries, Parsons, and Curates, with all the rest
of the Prelaticall crew: And then those in civil power and dominion, King,
Lords, Parliaments, and all others of place and power, that have set their
hands to uphold the power of the beast, the Antichristian or Clergy interest,
they have been broken and s^ared. All men of name, of civil or ecclesiastical
power and rule, that have set and engaged themselves, to uphold or maintain the
cause and interest of the beast, they have been all broken and slain, in this
great and ^errible earthquake. Therefore let all States and powers take heed,
how they mix their authority, with the usurped ecclesiastical power, for
whosoever does so, shall surely be destroyed. For the beast and the false
Prophet shall be both taken together, and be cast alive into the lake of fire,
burning with brimstone, Revel. 19. 20. The beast is corrupted Magistracy, or
form of power ecclesiastical and civil mix^ together, compounded and joined
into one: and so acts and comes forth in the form of a beast: The false
Prophet is meant of those Priests, that speak lies in the name of the Lord,
that seem to work miracles, and cause fire to come down from heaven in the
sight of men, counterfelting the spirit of God, when they speak but a
divination and falsehood of their own spirits. Now the beast and the false
Prophet fall together. The one speaking lies: and the other upholding him. The
Clergy first studying and inventing forme^ of worship, and the earthly power
main^aining them. O that the powers of the earth might see how much they are
damnified by Clergy interest, what a heavy burden it is, to carry the weight
of spiritual jurisdiction, which will prove as a talent of lead upon the
shoulders of all that stand under it. The woman is said to ride upon the beast,
Revel. 17. 7. The Antichristian church, carried upon the back of earthly
powers. Has not experience told us? that there has not been any sort of men,
of what title or quality soever, that have laid hold of Antichrists interest,
and sought to uphold and maintain his cause, but they have been ensuared and
broken in pieces. Why has there been all those turnings, and overturnings of
men of note and place, but because they have joined interest and power with the
beast, and have endeavored to uphold that usurped ecclesiastical power,
either Prelaticall, or Classical.

Fifthly, from the third consequent, And the remnant were affrighted, etc.
observe, That when God does scatter the great 5 Obser
and mighty ones of the earth, it does much amaze and affrighten the poor and
ignorant people, that have been seduced by them. When the pillars of Antichrist
are shaken, it must needs perplex and trouble those that depended upon them.
For when the poor, misled people, shall see the men of name, their great
rulers thrown down, and debased, this cannot but affright them; when that
power that ruled them shall be subdued, when that wisdom that led them, shall
be turned into folly, when all the ways and practices they have received shall
be discovered to be frivolous and empty, this cannot choose but amaze and
astonish the poor seduced remnant: now they know not what to do, nor on whom
to depend, neither unto whom to go for counsel, or upon whose judgment to
build. Hence it is, that these poor ignorant people ask such questions as
these; Of what religion shall we be of now? when shall we be settled? on whom
shall we trust? These cannot live without some form of religion prescribed by
man; therefore they think, religion, order, government to be gone, and that
all is turned into confusion, unless they may enjoy the Laws, platformes,
directories, and customs of men, they think all to be lost. Its no wonder
then if this poor remnant be affrighted and astonished.

Sixthly, and lastly, observe, That it is 6 Observ^
the poor affrighted remnant will give most glory to God. These will so far
glorify God, as to acknowledge him just in all his judgments upon those men
of name, that were slain in the earthquake. The experience of our times tells
us, that God has discovered so much wickedness and oppression in those he
has taken off and slain, that the remnant, and seduced multitude, (though
they loved them well, and were much affrighted at their fall) cannot but
glorify God, and say, these were justly thrown down for violence and
oppression, these have received their just demerit and deserved vengeance: Thus
will the common people glorify the God of heaven, by acknowledging his just
judgments upon them, that ruled over them. But as for these great and
powerful men themselves, they never will acknowledge the just hand of God:
they will say, of all these overturnings and shakings, they are but fatum
belli: and thus it happened out unto them: These indeed are filled with anger
and madness in their spirits, these have their hearts full of vexation and
grief; these open their mouths, and blaspheme God, and his Tabernacle; calling
light darkness, and truth error, and the like. Their hearts even die within
them with grief and discontent, they weep and lament, because their gain and
merchandise is taken away, their honor and profit is wholly abolished: These
gnaw their tongues for pain, and stand, crying, alas, alas; how is the
glorious City, with all her order, worship, gain, honor, in one hour made
desolate. Thus shall the great ones lament their losses, but never come to
repent of the works of their hands, that they had worshipped Devils, and idols
of gold, silver, brass, and stone, etc. These never come to acknowledge the
justness of God, hand upon them; but the poor affrighted remnant; these,
though much perplexed and troubled to see what is done, yet they acknowledge,
that all those men of name justly suffered, and so they glorify the God of
heaven in the justness of his proceedings. And as it is externally, so it is
inwardly and mysteriously in man: It Is not the wisdom and excellency of man,
its not the parts and gifts, the learning, the greatness of man, that will
glorify God: no, these excellent things in man, will speak glory to it self,
it will exalt the creature. But the low, wasted, crucified part of man, will
give glory to God, man brought low in his own conceit, and abased, and brought
even to a remnant, will glorify God, and suffer the Lord to make himself
glorious.

VERSE. 14. The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly.
HAving spoken of the great and notable effect, that follows the rising of
the Witnesses, namely, a great earthquake; with the several concommitants or
consequence thereof; we proceed to the close of this prophecy, ending at the
second woe, and sixth Trumpet. In Revel. 8. 13. we read of three woes, that were
to go forth with the three last Trumpets, which were as it were woe Trumpets,
each of them denouncing heavy judgments to befall the earth, such as were
wicked idolaters, and did worship the beast. These woes bring bitter and sore
calamities upon the Inhabitants of the world: and they are divided into three
parts, first, second, and third.

The first woe is that which accompanies the fifth Trumpet, Chapt. 9. and
imports thus much, that when the fifth Angel should sound his Trumpet, the
bottomless pit was open, that is, the pit of darkness, of confusion was open,
so that the beast, and corrupt flesh might act what they pleased. The Ministers
o^ Antichrist came forth like Locusts, and tormented men, by compulsion and
tyranny: and though they had faces like men, pretending humanity, and hair
like women, using persuasive flatteries: yet they had the ^eeth of Lyo^s, as
being fierce and tyrannical, and as Scorpions come forth with stings in their
tails, poisoning and tormenting all those that Iived under the form and power
of Antichrist, which had not the seal of God in their foreheade. Thus the
first woe is past.

The second woe, is the middle woe, and is a concomitant to the sixth Trumpet.
This woe is occasioned by the earthquake, that we spoke of in the former verse:
The shaking of States and powers, of governments, and dominions: The slaying of
seven thousand men of name and dignity: the fall of the tenth part of the
City: the affrighting of the remnant of men, this is the second woe. But look
back to the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, Chapt. 9. 13, 14, 15, etc. There was
loosed four Angels bound in the river Euphrates. The river Euphrates is the
spirit and power of Antichrist, that has as an overflowing stream, overspread
the earth, which has caused darkness and oppression to fill the world. The
four Angels are four evil Angels or powers of darkness; the Ministers of
Antichrist, arising from all the quarters of the earth to work wickedly. These
have an hour and a day appointed them to kill the third part of men. These
come forth like a company of horsemen, as ready prepared to kill and destroy:
and out of their mouths proceeds, fire, smoke, and brimstone, whereby they
kill the third part of men: that is, by power, oppression, and persecution,
they so overawed the spirits and minds of men, that out of torment and fear
they were forced to worship Antichrist: thus were the third part of men slain,
by these Angels of darkness, coming forth in the multitudes and strengths of
their Armies, of such that are acted by them. And it is said, that the power of
this Army is in their mouths and in their tails: noteing by their mouths, their
systems and platformes of doctrine and worship, which they enforce upon all.
And by their tails is signified their power and ability to oppress and
tyrannize over those, that by force they slay, by enslaving them to submit to
all their ways and ordinances. This grievous oppression of the four evil
Angels loosed, together with the great earthquake that follows, the rising of
the Witnesses is the second woe, that is here spoken of: this woe is past at the
rising of the Witnesses.

The Third and last woe, comes quickly, it speedily follows, and shuts up
the whole mystery. The death of the Beast is proclaimed under the sixth
Trumpet, and in the time of the second woe, Chap. 10. 6. Time should be no
more, in which Antichrist should live and reign. Then at the sound of the
seventh Angel, the mystery of God should be finished, verse. 7. The mystery of
Antichrist fully laid open, and the mystery and glory of Christ's kingdom fully
revealed. This last woe is meant of those calamities, mentioned in the last
verse of this eleventh Chapter. And there was lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hail. All which does imply Gods
heavy, terrible, astonishing, and irresistible judgments upon the world, he
will plague the earth, as once he did Egypt with hail, Exodus 9. 25. This is
the third and last woe that accompanies the seventh Trumpet.

Observe, That great and terrible woes Observe
befall the world in the three last ages of Antichrist. Here is three woes, but
the second that falls at the rising of the Witnesses is the greatest. This
second woe is a bitter one indeed; it will fall like a millstone, and grind in
pieces the inhabitants of the earth. Great are the torments and vexations this
woe brings upon the world: all Famines, Sicknesses, Fears, Wars, and all
sorts of evils, weakness, a^^rightments, strange amazements this woe brings
with it. The present calamities upon the world, that are occasioned by the
Earthquake, throwing down States, Nations, Governments, Powers, and shaking
men of quality, state, wisdom and parts, bringing wars, fears, famines,
deaths, etc. These, and the like woes upon the world this day, speak forth the
rising of the witnesses. And as the rising of the Witnesses is a work of time,
and is of a graduall product: so also shall this second woe be a lasting woe,
and lasting woes are the worst of all. The third woe follows the second, it
comes quickly; this brings it is sting along with it, but it is of a shorter
dispatch then the former. This last woe, that immediately succeedes the second,
comes with the seventh Trumper, and therefore is the last woe that befalls
Antichrist.

This last woe is the reason of all those plagues, as death, mourning, famine,
fire, that God will destroy Babylon withal, which shall cause the Kings of the
Earth to lament her, and the Merchants to mourn over her; for she is stripped of
her gold and silver, of her precious stones and pearls, of her purple and
scarlet, of all her sine linen and clothing, and in one hour shall be made
utterly desolate. Thus we are come to an end of the Prophecy of the Witnesses
resurrection and ascension, with the great effects that follows, namely the
great Earthquake, and the second woe, which is the work of the first Trumpet.

Next follows that of the seventh Trumpet, and the state of Christ's Kingdom
after the full and perfect ascension of the Witnesses, and the final downfall
of Antichrist.

VERSE. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.
HAving spoken of the Prophecy, Death, Resurrection and ascension of the
Witnesses, with the effects of their rising, namely the great earthquake that
shakes the world, which does accomplish the second woe. This being the first
resurrection of the Saints from shame and sackcloth, from misery and
affliction, upon which the tenth part of the City falls, and the little horn,
that thought to change times and laws, is subdued, Dan. 7. But after comes a
second Resurrection, of truth and light, of life and liberty to the Saints in
all nations, when there shall be a universal ruin of Antichrist. Then all
Saints, throughout all Nations, shall come in to the enjoyment of internal and
external glory: when all former persecution and shame shall be past away, and
they shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years, and shall fully enjoy
the immunities and liberties of the kingdom of Christ, which shall be
fulfilled at the sound of the seventh Trumpet. And the seventh Angel sounded,
and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, etc. That which we shall
enquire from hence, is to know what is meant:

First, by the Trumpet sounding. Secondly, by the seventh Trumpet. Thirdly, by
the voices in heaven. Fourthly, the subject matter, that those voices do
proclaim, and that is, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our Lord, etc.
First, a Trumpet is that with which men sound to give an alarm, or a
preparation unto the battle, 1 Cor. 14. 8. Also to publish or proclaim a
thing, Joel 2. 1. The counterfeit Pharisees when they gave their alms, are
said to sound a Trumpet, Mat. 6. 2. Alluding to the custom of the Jews, who
when they would gather an assembly, or proclaim a matter, did use to sound a
Trumpet. So here by the Trumpet sounding is meant the Saints proclaiming and
sounding forth the word of truth, declaring the testimony of Jesus, and
extolling his praises. This they do either by preaching forth or declaring of
the truth, or by making profession thereof. These Trumpets do respectively
follow the seals opening: as the vials follow the Trumpets sounding. The first
seal, first Trumpet, first vial go together, and every one of these
respectively in order follow each other. The beginning is with the opening of
the seals, which is Christ opening and disclosing of heavenly and divine truth
unto his Saints: and accordingly, as the seals be thus opened to them; they by
declaring and professing of the truth so discovered to them, are said to sound
forth the Trumpets; each Trumpet in his season, according as the seals are
opened, and heavenly light and knowledge is discovered unto them.

Secondly, what is meant by the seventh Trumpet. In Chap. 8. we read of the
sounding of the four first Trumpets* And in Chap. 9. of the fifth and sixth*
Trumpets sounding: and here we have the seventh and last Trumpet. So that there
is a graduall and orderly sounding of the Trumpets; answerable to the opening
of the seals: when the last seal shall be opened, then the seventh Angel comes
to sound the last Trumpet; which is the highest and last declaration of the
truth and excellency of God: Seven is the number of perfection, of rest and
blessedness: the seventh Trumpet is the proclamation or declaration of the
kingdom of Christ, caused by the Saints sounding forth, the highest and the
last glory of Christ's reign and dominion.

Thirdly, we have the effect of the seventh Trumpet, and there were great
voices in heaven. The most perfect and exact, the most distinct and sweet note
of music is the tongue of man; there is no sound so perfect and complete as
these voices in heaven; these are the voices of A^llel^jahs and praises to God.
And of these voices here mentioned we may note three things.

First, they are great voices; they are mighty and powerful voices. God once
spoke to Elijah in a low still voice; so he has done unto his people, while
they prophesied in sackcloth: but now upon the great and various discoveries of
God, the Saints are made to sound forth mighty declarations of his truth and
glory. It is said in Psalm. 29. 3, 4, etc. The voice of the Lord thundereth upon
many waters, it is powerful, and full of Majesty, breaking down the Cedars of
Lebanon, dividing the flames of fire, and making the wilderness to shake, etc.
So these voices of the witnesses risen, are so great and powerful, that they
shake the wisdom, glory, strength, riches, power, and excellency of the
world. The appearances of God in former time have been faint and low in his
people, they have seen things at a great distance, and have as it were,
whispered in a low private voice of the things of the kingdom of Christ; but
now they shall publish them on the housetop: and as John Baptist could say,
Behold the Lamb of God: so shall these cry aloud, with boldness and
confidence, with assurance and liberty, and say, the kingdoms of this world,
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. There is no ear, but
shall hear, and no heart but shall tremble at this voice: Hell and Devils,
all the glory of flesh, and power of the world, shall be affrighted and
consumed before this great and mighty voice.

Secondly, These voices are said to be in heaven: The witnesses are risen and
ascended up into heaven, to live in heavenly discoveries and enjoyments, to
walk in the light, and to act in the glory of God. These voices come from the
excellent glory, like the voice that came unto Christ at his trans^iguration.
The Saints that lived in a poor earthly condition before, under the oppressing
power of the earth, are now raised up into heaven, and there do rejoice over
that vengeance, that the Lord executes upon the earth: Therefore in respect of
Babylons destruction the Saints are thus called upon: Rejoice over her thou
heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged her, Revel. 18.
19. Nothing but songs of praise and glorious voices of deliverance are heard of
those that live in heaven, who live in the spirit of God, and in the glorious
discoveries, and divine manifestations of the Lord. There can be no voice from
heaven, but it must be full of excellency and glory, the voice of joy and
gladness, the voice of praise and triumph. These voices are heard round about
the throne of God; and they sound forth nothing but the power, throne,
dominion, and glory of God. Here is heaven opened, the glory of God manifested,
and Saints under those heavenly dispensations singing Allelujahs, saying, The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of Christ. Now they can say,
the Lord lives, the Lord raigns. When the Lord shall reign before his Ancients
gloriously, Esa. 24. 23. The Saints of God, called the twenty-foure Elders
verse. 16. are meant by the Ancients, before whom the Lord will reign, upon
whom the glory of God shall shine. Now the Ancients, or Elders, being raised up
by the Ancient of days, to sit with him in heavenly places, will abundantly
Trumpet forth the glory of God, and sing from heaven his wonderful praises.

Thirdly, These were voices in heaven, not one single voice, but voices: a
plurality of voices; and those not a few but many, here are a multitude of
voices: now at the rising of the witnesses, the Saints are multiplied, they are
not now as a poor few scattered people, but they increase to thousands of
thousands, here are multitudes of hearts enlarged, and multitudes of voices
sounding in heaven* They shall not be a poor despised remnant, who are
accounted the offscouring of all things: but now abundance of the Sea shall be
converted: and a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
Nation, Esa. 60. 5. 22. There shall be a miraculous increase and multiplication
of Saints, that shall utter their voices together, and yet they shall all sing
with one voice, with one tune: all these voices sound one and the same thing,
they all concentre in one, they all sound forth the praise and glory of
Christ's reign and kingdom.

Now before I proceed to speak of the subject matter, that these voices do
proclaim, viz. the glory of Christ's reign and kingdom, I shall give you
some observations of what has been already spoken from this verse.

First, From the succession of Trumpets, or the Saints declaring the glory and
truth of God, observe, That the 1 Observe:
Lord has always had a people to declare his truth unto the world. There was
always some that did proclaim and profess the truth of Christ, though in
weakness; yea, the first Trumpet has it is time of sounding, as well as the
seventh. In every age according as the Lord made a discovery of his truth,
there were some ready to give forth a testimony thereof before the world. When
the Prophet Elijah thought in his own judgment, there was none left in
Israel, besides himself, there was seven thousand left, that the Lord reserved
to himself, that had not bowed the knee to Baal. So in the saddest and darkest
times of Antichrists reign, there have been those that have, according to
their measure given forth their testimony of the truth. Every Trumpet sounding
did in some measure hold forth the glory of the Lord, and every such
declaration of truth has caused a vial of wrath to fall upon the man of sin.

Secondly, observe, That the Lord has 2 Observe:
manifested his truth by degrees; or in a graduall way has caused his Saints
to declare it. The seventh Trumpet, does imply six other Trumpets that went
before: and so every one is brought forth in it is time and order, until that
of the seventh comes to sound. The Lord opened one seal after another,
letting light break forth, Minutatim; by little, and little, and as it were by
piecemeals, drop by drop, until at last he comes to open the seventh seal, by
making a perfect and complete discovery of his truth. The Saints in sackcloth,
in the midst of Antichrists reign, were under much dimnesse and darkness: but
the Lord in every age respectively, has made several advances of truth, and
has by degrees brought up his people from the state of bondage and darkness,
by making a more full manifestation of his truth unto them. So the Saints hold
forth the truth of God by degrees, and proceed gradually, from the sounding of
the first Trumpet, until they come to the seventh. It is with the Saints in
this case, as it is said of the waters of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47. That these
waters did increase, and arise first to the ancles, then to the knees,
afterward as high as a man's loins; at last the waters arose to that height,
that they became a mighty river, wherein a man might swim, and without which he
could not pass over them. So that the Saints under the first, second, and
third Trumpets, did all hold forth a profession of the truth, and according to
their measures did give a testimony thereunto, though but in some small, weak,
and faint discoveries of it, and more in the letter, then in the spirit. These
were glorious lights also, in respect of the darkness of those ages and
generations they lived in: but yet in respect of that light discovered, and
that declaration of the truth made out by the Saints under the sixth and seventh
Trumpet, they were under much darkness and weakness, not being come up to
that degree of light, that the Lord has of late discovered, and will make
known unto his people.

Thirdly, observe, There shall be a most 3 Observe:
complete and glorious discovery and declaration of truth, made out by the
Saints under the seventh Trumpet. The seven Trumpets are all comprehended in
one: the last Trumpet includes all the former. Seven, as you heard, is the
number of perfection and rest: So all the Trumpets are involved, and wrapped up
in this last. The seventh seal is the highest revelation of truth, and the
seventh Trumpet is the highest and most perfect declaration, by which the
Saints do proclaim, and make it forth. Suitable unto this is that Prophecy,
Esa. 30. 26. Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun,
and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days. So
that here is seven days brought into one day, and one day shall have the light
of seven. So that the last and highest discovery of truth, shall comprehend all
the former. The seventh and last Trumpet signifies the highest declaration of
the glory of God, the truth and kingdom of Jesus, that ever the Saints publish
or sing forth: it is the breaking forth of the highest praises, and greatest
glory of God. In this great and last dispensation, the Saints obtain a fuller
measure of the spirit then ever, they are now sevenfold more enabled to
proclaim the glory, power and kingdom of Christ, then ever they could do in
former time.

Fourthly, from the great voices heard in heaven, observe, That the Saints 4
Observe:
fully risen, and ascended up into heavenly enjoyments, at the final
destruction of Antichrist, shall with one harmonious and sweet consent, sound
forth the praises and glory of Christ'^ kingdom. Indeed the Saints could
always sing, while they prophesied in sackcloth, but it was like David, when
he sung of his deep waters, so it was of their afflictions and sufferings; as
Paul and Silas sung in prison, they had weak and faint joy, in the midst of
their sufferings. But now the Saints in heaven, they cry out, they sing aloud,
and shout for joy. These voices be full of power and authority, the world, and
it is strength and foundation trembles to hear them, the riches, the strengths,
the powers, the governments of men, are shaken by them. So great and powerful
are these voices, that as it was said of Israel of old, The voice of a King is
among them; they sing forth the grace, the excellency, the authority, and glory
of Christ's kingdom, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become our Lords,
etc. The Saints are said in Revel. 15. 3. To sing the song of Moses, and the
song of the Lamb. As Moses sung forth the praises of God, for delivering his
people Israel, and destroying their enemies the Egyptians, Exodus 15. so his
people shall sing forth the praises of his power and greatness, for delivering
them from Antichrist's yoke and tyranny. And the song of the Lamb, who works
great and mavelous things, to the destruction of Antichrist, whose cruelty
and oppression he had long suffered. They shall extol him, as being King of
Saints, and shall acknowledge him just, in his judgments punishing Antichrist,
and in his ways true, in performing all his promises made unto his people.

Having given you the observations from the former part of the verse, namely,
from the seventh Trumpet, and the voices heard in heaven: I now proceed to
speak of the subject matter of these voices.

The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. These words contain a glorious
proclamation or declaration of the kingdom and reign of Christ, wherein we
may take notice of these six particulars, to be enquired into.

First, What is meant by the kingdoms of this world.

Secondly, How these kingdoms have been detained from Christ.

Thirdly, How Christ will recover these kingdoms to himself.

Fourthly, By what right Christ shall possess them.

Fifthly, The manner or nature of Christ's reign.

Sixthly, The time and duration of his reign.

Concerning the first thing, namely, what is meant by the kingdoms of this
world? we may easily perceive what they are, by opposing them to the kingdom
of Christ: for these kingdoms of the world are diametrically opposite, and
contradistinct to the kingdom of Christ. The kingdom of Christ is of a
heavenly and spiritual nature, Romans 14. 17. It Is King, Laws, government, and
subjects are all spiritual: it is set up and advanced by no humane force or
power, but by that which is merely divine, Dan. 2. 45. Now the kingdoms of
this world, are called the kingdoms of men, consisting of external glory,
riches, strength, government, policy, that men by humane power have set up, and
does act by. In a word, all the wisdom and policy, all rule and government,
all power and strength, all Constitutions and Laws, all the riches and glory
of men, of these are made up and formed the kingdoms of this world, called the
kingdoms of men, Dan. 4. 25. consisting of worldly greatness, external
glory, humane policy, outward strength, advanced into the form of rule and
government, acted and brought forth by man, this is the state, glory, and
kingdom of the world.

Secondly, How these kingdoms have been detained from Christ; and that is thus:
whereas Christ has given forth his power by earthly men, as by Kings and
Princes of the earth: according to that place in Pro. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice: by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all
the Judges of the earth. These have been the substitutes and deputies of
Christ, having received all their wisdom, their strength, their authority, and
dominion from him, the Lord has by these administered unto the world, even by
carnal, fleshly, wicked men, by the Kings of the earth: the Lord has not
administered by his people, but by those that have reigned as Kings and Princes
of the world. Now this being so, these Kings of the earth, have committed
fornication with the whore, Rev. 17. 2. having mixed and joined their power
with hers, and have with one consent and mind given up their power and
strength unto the beast; as is declared verse. 13. to serve his ends and
designs. And though it be true, that all this while Christ has intermedled
with all the affairs of the Nations, their policies and governments, that all
occurrances therein has tended, at least by degrees, to advance his own
kingdom, and to bring about his own ends: yet these kingdoms and policies,
and governments have served Antichrist, and it has been their work and
business to oppose the kingdom of Christ, and suppress and persecute his
people and truth: so that these kingdoms of the world have not served Christ,
though Christ has served himself by them; but they have been devoted unto
Antichrist, and served him.

Thirdly, How does Christ recover these again into his own hand. And that is
by breaking and scattering the powers of the world; he will shake all Nations,
Hag. 2. 6. when the Lord shall cast aside these oppressing tyrants of the
earth, he will come forth in the ministry of his own people, and by them,
administer righteousness and peace unto the world. The Lord will dash in
pieces all* the powers of the earth, that have oppressed his people, and will
so come forth in his own people to administer to the world, that the earth
shall be at rest and quiet, when violence shall be no more heard in the Land,
but our officers shall be righteousness, and our exactors peace. And how shall
this be? See what the Lord says by the Prophet, Esa. 24. 21, 22, 23. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the
high ones, that are on high; and the Kings of the earth upon the earth: and
they shall be gathered, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut
up in the prison and after many days they shall be visited, or found wanting,
as the margent reads it. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun
ashamed, when the Lord of host shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem,
and before his ancients gloriously: or as the Margin renders it, There shall
be glory before his ancients. The meaning of these words take thus: The great
and mighty Kings of the earth, who have opposed the kingdom of Christ, and
have undertaken all power ecclesiastical and civil, to rule in Church and
State, to determine all spiritual causes by temporal power and civil
sanction: God will so advance his Saints, by his spiritual appearance in them,
that they shall oppose and punish these Kings of the earth, not only by the
sword of the spirit, but also with a temporal sword, the Kings of the earth
upon the earth, they shall be able to overcome those that did enslave and rule
over them. He that kills by the sword shall be killed by the sword: here is the
patience of the Saints: Revel. 13. 10. This is the fruit of all their patience,
in all their former sufferings. And after many days they shall be found
wanting: men shall after a time be willing to bear the loss of Kings, and
great ones, without trouble or vexing: when the Moon shall be confounded, and
the Sun ashamed: viz. all civil and ecclesiastical powers, governments,
orders, and rulers shall be broken. Then the Lord shall reign in Mount Zion,
to wit, in his Saints and people, as before his ancients, in whom he shall
gloriously appear, to administer righteousness and peace unto the world. By
these ancients are meant no more, then the twenty four Elders, mentioned
Revel. 4. 4. who sit in white clothing, having Crowns upon their heads: as
reigning in royal state, glory, and tr^umph. So that the Lord will no longer
come forth in, and by the men of the earth, to reign by Kings and Potentates,
but he will come forth in his glorious appearance in his Saints, and through
them will administer righteousness to the world. Suitable hereunto is that
Scripture, Dan. 7. 22. where it is said, that the little horn should make war
with the Saints, and prevail against them, until the Ancient of days should
come, and then, judgment was given to the Saints of the most high, and the
time came that the Saints possessed the kingdom. Christ himself shall inherit
all Nations, and he will put his people in possession of all power, riches,
rule, and dominion. When the Lord shall take away power and dominion from the
men of the earth: Then the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most high, whose kingdom is an ever lasting kingdom, and all dominions
shall serve and obey him, verse. 27. All that is good and excellent, that is rich
and beautiful, that is noble and honorable, shall be given to the Saints. The
forces of the Gentiles, and their Kings shall be brought to them, Esa. 60. 11.
And they shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and boast themselves in their
glory, Esa. 61. 6. All Dominions and States shall serve them* strangers shall
stand and feed their flock and the sons of the alient shall be their plow-men
and vinedressers, dressers, verse. 5. So then when the Lord shall take the
power, riches, dominion, and authority, from the great ones of the earth, and
invest his Saints with the same, when all power and rule shall be brought under
the feet of Christ, who will come forth in the appearances of his people; then
Christ does take to himself his great power and reign. Thus the Lord does
recover the kingdoms and nations into his own hand; stripping the men of the
earth with their strength, riches, glory, rule, and conferring of the same
upon his people; and so will administer no longer by Kings and Nobles, but by
Saints and faithful ones: He will reign among his Ancients gloriously.

Fourthly, By what right or title Christ will lay claim to the kingdoms of
the world; and that is, by his own native and proper right: These kingdoms
shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. The original right
and propriety of all the kingdoms of the world are the Lords: they are his
right, and he will maintain his own privilege and prerogative: he will take
to himself and possess all: they of right belong unto him, and he from the
beginning did possess all: It is true the Lord did entrust Kings and great
ones of the earth to be his Substitutes and Stewards; he committed the care of
these to them as his Servants or Deputies: but when the Lord will cast these
Stewards out of their places, and dispossess the Kings and Nobles of the
earth, then presently, the kingdoms of the world return to him, whose they
were from the beginning. But these kingdoms of the world are so the Lords, as
they are Christ's also: Christ the anointed one of the Lord he shall reign; he
is son over his own house, Heb. 3. 5. He has right and propriety with the
Father, by virtue of Sonship and anointing: The actual administration is put
into his hand: he being endued with all power in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.
18. Christ has not only propriety in the holy City, but the ends of the
earth are his possession. Now all the Saints are the anointed of the Lord,
gathered up into that one anointed, and therefore shall reign with Christ: as
it is said, He has made us Kings and Priests to our God, and we shall reign on
the earth, Revel. 5. 10. The Lord shall reign, and his Chirst must reign: and
all the Saints, the anointed ones of the Lord; these being all comprehended in
the one anointed Christ, these shall reign with the Lord. As the Lord comes
forth in Christ, and Christ in his Saints: so the Saints shall ascend into
Christ, and Christ into the Father, and so all in one, they reign in the glory
of God, whereupon the speech of Christ shall be eminently fullfilled in Joh.
14. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I
in you. The power of God falls upon Christ, and Christ becomes a quickening
spirit in all his Saints, that he might by his power put forth in them, rule
over the Nations. So that we see the right of all Nations belongs to the Lord
originally, and to Christ his anointed; and to all Saints, as being the
anointed ones of the Lord, they all making up the fullness of the anointed one
of God. These have right to all the glory, power, riches, excellencies of the
earth, it is theirs, they shall possess the power and strength, the riches and
glory of the earth; these shall reign, and the earth shall be filled with the
glory of God. Then there are none have right unto the kingdoms of the world,
but the Lord and his anointed: all other are but pictures and images of
government and rule; their power and authority was lent them from the Lord, and
now he will take it again to himself, whose own it is; now he will cast
forth the men of the earth, and shake them from the seat of greatness and
dominion: and now the kingdoms of the world shall be given to the holy ones of
God, to the anointed of the Lord, and they only shall reign.

First, the Manner of Christ's reign is that to be spoken off in the next
place: that Christ shall reign in, and by his Saints: for they having overcome
shall sit down upon Christ's throne, as Christ has overcome, and is set down
upon his Fathers throne, Revel. 3. 21. The Saints shall judge the world, and
Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2. That is, they shall not only judge poor, low, earthly
things, but things of an Angelical and most excellent nature. It Is the Lord
through his Saints that shall judge the Nations with righteousness, and
govern the people with truth, Psalm. 67. 4. 7. This glorious dispensation of
Christ shall be administered by his Saints: the Saints, or the Lord in them
shall judge the world: that is they shall fust of all destroy and throw down
all confusion and disorder; and afterward save and govern the world, they
shall give settlement in the Nations, by a right ordering of all things, civil
and spiritual. Now as for the personal and fleshly reign of Christ, that is
asserted by many Godly men, (whom I love and honor) I shall not at all
undertake, either to affirm or deny that opinion: but I shall say with them,
the kingdom of Christ is at hand, I dare not say, it is a far off, though I
cannot describe the manner of it: but of the spiritual reign of Christ (which
none deny) I shall speak off, from these four reasons.

First, The spiritual reign seems (to me) to be the most glorious appearance
and manifestation of Christ unto his people: and hence the Apostle did not
desire to know Christ any more after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 6. And therefore I
believe, that Christ by the spiritual manifesting of himself, in and through
his Saints, will first break down the powers of the world, and then administer
righteousness unto the earth.

Secondly, the spiritual reign of Christ, does most of all besuite the glory
and spirituality of his kingdom. Christ tells Pilate, that his kingdom was
not of this world, that is, it was not fleshly or carnal, but of a spiritual
nature and quality. Christ coming in the spirit to his Disciples, did more
enlighten, comfort, and spirituallize them, then his fleshly presence did, In
Esa. 11. 2, 3. It Is said of Christ, that he should not judge after the sight of
his eyes, or the hearing of his ears, etc. That is, he shall not judge
according to outward appearances, but according to righteous judgment. The
glory of the Saints in the latter days shall be spiritual, their knowledge
spiritual, their comfor^s and joys shall be spiritual, yea Christ shall
reign by his divine presence in his people, of whom shall be made up his
spiritual kingdom.

Thirdly, It is by the spiritual appearance of the Lords brightness and
glory, that he will destroy Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8. What is the word of
Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his coming? but the word of the witnesses
testimony, and the bright shinings forth of spirit, life, knowledge, and
righteousness in his people, whereby the iniquity of the man of Sin is
detected and laid open, whereby Antichrist is destroyed, as by fire, wasting
and consuming him to nothing. Now by the same appearance, as in his people,
will the Lord administer righteousness, and goodness to the world, as that
whereby he does destroy Antichrist.

Fourthly, and lastly, all the glory that is spoken of Christ, and his
kingdom, that shall be in the latter age, does amount but to thus much; that
the Lord will eminently manifest his gracious and special presence with his
people. As in that 37 Ezekiel. latter end; The Lord speaking of the glory he will
bring upon his people, says, I will Tabernacle with them, and I will set my
Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore, etc. The Lords presence and glory
shall most of all appear in the midst of his people; he shall so manifest
himself, as to be admired in his Saints. So what does all the glory of the
coming down of the new Jerusalem, mentioned in Revel. 21. imply, but only thus
much, Behold (says God) I will Tabernacle with men, and I will dwell with
them. Intimating thereby, that as the Lord made the Tabernacle a sign and
pledge of his presence with his people: so now in his last, and most glorious
discovery of himself, it should be by the manifestation of his divine presence
in his Saints, by erecting the Tabernacle of his own spirit, life, and glory
in the midst of them. And so much for the manner of Christ's reign. It
follows.

Sixthly, and lastly, we are to consider the time and duration of Christ's
reign, and that is expressed for ever and ever. The reign of Christ is an
everlasting reign, he receives a kingdom, that cannot be shaken: there shall
be no end of it: his Throne endures for ever, and it shall never expire: let
the enemies thereof use what craft or policy they will, they shall never
destroy it. The God of heaven (says the Prophet) shall set up a kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed: neither shall it be left to other people, but
it shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. If that of the Apostle be objected, where
he says, that Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, 1
Cor. 15. 24. I answer, that this does nothing at all impeach the
everlastingnesse of Christ's kingdom: for the meaning of it is this, that when
Christ shall have finished his work, destroyed all his enemies, and have
completed his work upon his Saints, then he shall cease to reign any longer
as Mediator, he shall cease to administer according to his present dispensation
and office, then God shall be all in all: God shall be all to his Saints, by
the immediate and glorious communication of his light and glory; and Saints
shall enjoy the all of God, his wisdom, his goodness, his love, and the like.
So that however the Mediatorship of Christ shall cease, when he has finished
his work and office, and the dispensatory part of his kingdom shall cease,
yet in respect of the nature and being, it shall be for ever and ever: The
reign of God shall be to eternity, and Ch^^st shall reign in the Father, and
Saints in Christ, so that God, and Christ, and his Saints, shall reign for
ever and ever. The Apostle does style Christ, to be a King eternal, and
immortal, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Christ's kingdom is immortal, because it is not
subject to succession; it is not liable to be devolved and rould down to
after-comers; which Daniel expresses thus; His kingdom shall not be left unto
other people; that is, it shall not be translated from man to man, and at last
quite dissolved. And the Apostle does not only call Christ an immortal King,
but also an eternal King, his kingdom shall hold on constantly throughout all
Centuries and ages of the world; there is no period of time, that shall cause
it to expire and give up the ghost, but it shall attain to it is full beauty
and perfection, it shall never decline or decay, but shall last beyond all ages
and times, it shall endure for ever and ever.

But now concerning the glorious reign of Christ, upon the downfall of
Antichrist, the time expressed to be a thousand years, Revel. 20. And it is
prophesied of Christ in Esa. 60. 15. that he should be the joy of many
generations; both this expression of many generations, and of a thousand
years, are an indefinit number, to express the very large and spacious time,
wherein Christ shall rule in, and by his Saints, when he shall appear before
his Ancients gloriously; and all the Elders before his Throne shall worship
him. If it be objected, from Revel. 20. 4. That those that had been beheaded
for the testimony of Jesus, and the word of God, etc. These lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years, this being the first resurrection, and the rest
of the dead lived not again. I answer, that it cannot be meant that the
persons of those that were beheaded for Jesus, and refused to worship the beast
or his image, should bodily reign with Christ: but that God will raise up a
people of the same spirit with those, that suffered for the testimony of Jesus.
Thus Elias was said to come again, in John the Baptist. And thus the Lord
tells Daniel, that he should stand in the lot at the end of the days, when his
prophecy should be fulfilled. All Saints gathered up into one spirit, they
make but one. And thus we have the Prophet speaking; And the Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee, Zech. 14. 5. When the glory of God shall
appear more glorious in the Saints, in the time of his spiritual reign, the
glory of all the former Saints shall be gathered up in them, and appear most
gloriously. The resurrecteon here spoken off, is meant of a resurrection from
shame and reproach, the witnesses rising from their sadness and sackcloth, and
ascending into the glory of Christ's kingdom. And when the seventh Trumpet
shall sound, and the glory of the Lord be fully discovered and laid open, then
all that hear the glorious sound of the everlasting Gospel, shall live; but
the rest of the dead (that hear not the voice of the seventh Trumpet, or that
great proclamation of the truth and glory of Christ) they shall not live until
the thousand years be past.

Again, if it be objected from Ezekiel. 37. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. That the Lord
has promised, to call the Jews, and gather them into their own Land, and
make them one Nation, and David their King shall reign over them. I answer,
this prophecy is of a spiritual and mystical interpretation; for the land of
Messiah are the Saints; of whom the land of Canaan was a type: for if we take
it literally, that the Jews should rebuild Jerusalem, and dwell peculiarly in
the land of Canaan, then also it must be meant, that David, and not Christ,
should be King over them. But we know that the promise does only borrow
expressions, from the state of the Jewish Church, but it shall be fulfilled in
spirit: for he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, Romans 2. 28. The Jews shall be
called when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come, Romans 11. 25. which is not
meant, as if God would first finish his work among the Gentiles, and then call
the Jews as a peculiar people: but that the Jews should be brought in, with
the fullness of the Gentiles, when Antichrist shall be ruined, and that which
lets be taken out of the way, and the everlasting Gospel go forth with
freedom, in the fullness and abundance of the Gentiles, shall the Jews find
acceptance also.

Now from all that has been said, of the kingdom and reign of Christ,
observe, That Christ will come and reign Obser:
gloriously in his people, subduing all his enemies, advancing his Saints unto
the glory and dignity of his own kingdom. Christ will take to himself all
power, rule, strength, riches, glory, peace, joy, and whatsoever is good, and
will bestow it upon his own. Satan and wicked men have reigned long; but now
they shall cease to reign any longer. The whole earth shall be filled with the
righteousness, goodness, and glory of God, and the anointed ones of the Lord
shall reign; and the Saints shall reign with him for ever; as it is said,
Revel. 5. He has made us Kings and Priests to our God; and we shall reign on
the earth. The strength, glory, riches of the Gentiles shall be given unto us;
we shall no longer be subject to Satan and wicked men; but we shall be brought
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and shall live in the new heaven
and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; our habitation shall be the new
Jerusalem, the holy City. Now all the services of formal professors, and
carnal Christians shall be disowned of God, Esa 43. 20, 21. And humane
ministry shall be abhorred, verse. 27, 28. And Jerusalem shall be a burdensome
stone; breaking in pieces Kings and Kingdoms, States and powers, that shall
take upon them to judge of spiritual things, that shall intermeddle with
Church-work, or shall any ways go about to interpose between God, and the
spirits of men. Because none can, none shall reign over the Saints, but the
Lord himself; Man has had his time of power, and dominion, but now he is to
give account of his Stewardship, and reign no longer. The riches, the glory,
the strength, the dominion of the world are Christ's; he has let out these to
man to be employed; but the men of the world have abused them, these have been
used in opposition to Christ; therefore Christ will recover these to himself
again, he will come and redeem these from Antichrist, from Babylon, from the
power of darkness, and all these kingdoms of this world shall immediately
become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ: The Lord shall take all, own
all, possess all, and his Saints shall possess all i^ him: he must reign,
and they shall reign with him. The whole earth is the Lords, and he will put
his people into possession of all that is good, excellent, and glorious. All the
kingdoms of the world shall become our Lords and his anointed ones.

I shall now proceed to show the effects that follow, in which I shall give you
a brief Paraphrasticall sense of the following verses, and so conclude.
Because the Lord reigns, and we shall reign with him, what is the issue.

VERSE. 16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats,
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God.
IN this Verse observe three things. First, the title given to the servants of
the Lord, his anointed ones, they are called Elders, because the Lord does
appear with them, and in them, with much gravity and majesty, by his glorious
indwellings of his everlasting Spirit. These be his Ancients, as the Prophet
calls them, Esa. 24. 23. before whom the Lord does appear. Saints taken up
into the Ancient of days, living in the eternal spirit, these are called the
Ancients, the Elders of the Lord.

Secondly, Their number, twentyfoure: The number of the Apostles were twelve,
but here is the number of twenty-foure: answerable both to the twelve Tribes,
and also to the twelve Apostles. Suitable hereunto is that place, Revel. 21.
12. 14. In the description of the new Jerusalem, it is said, That upon the
twelve gates thereof, were the names of the twelve Tribes, and upon the twelve
foundations, the names of the twelve Apostles, which does demonstrate, that the
Spirit of God shall appear in a double measure, twice as much as in the
Apostles, these shall have a fuller measure of the Spirit: The names, the
virtues, the gifts, the graces, both of the twelve Tribes, and twelve Apostles,
shall be engraven upon these anointed ones. These shall enjoy a double measure
of the Spirit, they shall not appear as twelve, but as twenty-foure Elders
before the Lord. These are they which sat before God: as having rule and
dominion with him.

Thirdly, We have their posture and action; they fell upon their faces and
worshipped God.

1. They fell on their faces; that shows their humility, and self-denial,
as disclaiming all fleshly glory and excellency, they do as it were put their
faces in the dust, as abhorring their own beauty and excellency.

2. They wership God: the time was, they did worship men, and means, they
adored self and creature: but now they cast off their idols of Gold, and their
idols of silver, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the
moles, and to the bats, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 2. 20. And now they exalt
the Lord alone, they worship him, and him only. The voice of praise follows.

VERSE. 17. -- We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty: which art, and wast,
and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have
reigned.
HEre likewise three things are considerable.

First, The praises of the Saints: we give thee thanks, etc. They sing the
song of deliverance and joy; of triumph and victory, saying, we thank thee O
Lord: not to us, not to man, not to creature be the praise, but to thee O Lord,
thou only deservest all praise, O Lord, God, Almighty, and therefore we will
praise thee only. The Saints exalted into the liberty and glory of Christ's
kingdom, they sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Revel. 15. 2. They give
thanks for deliverance and salvation-Their hearts, and their mouths are full
of divine praises, they sound forth Halelujahs, and sing aloud the glory of the
Lord.

Secondly, They praise him, who is the everlasting and eternal being: which
art, and wast, and art to come. Here we have the very circle of eternity, that
is most comprehensive, and does comprehend, both the beginning and end of all
things. The Lord was before all creatures, and shall abide always, though all
creatures should perish: from him all creatures had their being, and to him
they are referred, as their utmost end. Therefore the Lord is worthy of all
praise, being before all things: by whom all things are, and to whom all things
tend; the Lord is the beginning, being, and end of all things, meeting and
concentering together.

Thirdly, The ground of their praise, Because thou have taken to thee thy great
power, and have reigned. As if they had said; Lord thou have given thy power to
others, thou have let Satan, Antichrist, and wicked men reign on the earth:
but now thou have taken thy power to thy self again, and have wrested it out
of the hands of earthly men, that have abused it, and thou will use it thy
self. The men of the earth have reigned by wisdom, policy, by plots, carrying
on their own designs: but the Lord will reign in truth and righteousness. It
must needs be matter of great joy unto the earth, that the Lord will reign:
for while man reigned, there was nothing but oppression on the earth, but the
Lord rules and reigns with deliverance and salvation. It follows.

VERSE. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of
the dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto
thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name,
small and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth.
FRom these words take notice. First, how the adversaries vex and fret, and do
even rage in fury and madness: and good reason they have so to do: for the
time of their dead was come, that they should be judged: all dead power, rule,
and authority, all dead ordinances and services, all the dead ways and
practices of Antichrist, these must all be judged, condemned, and destroyed:
all things that have not the spirit and life of God in them, all these must be
judged: well may the world then vex and rage, and gnaw their ^ongues for pain.
This is the reason of all that bitterness, malice, sury, and madness, that is
in the hearts of men at this day, what makes them vexing and fretting, but that
all things they set up, maintain, enjoy, and take pleasure in, are judged and
condemned for dead power, dead ordinances, dead gifts, all things of man are
judged to be dead. When the Lord comes to judge the earth, confusion and a
consuming fire goes before his face, Psalm. 97. 2. which must needs make that
judgment very dreadful and terrible to all formal powers, and fleshly
actings: especially because the Saints shall judge the world, yea, and Angels
also, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. They shall judge men, and things of highest principles
and places, those things that carry a civil or spiritual excellency upon
them, shall be judged by the Saints. What follows?

Secondly, The Saints are rewarded and advanced, And that thou should give
reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear
thy Name small and great. As the portion of the world is, vexing, fretting,
cursing, and wrath: so the portion of Saints is love, goodness, blessings,
thankesgivings. The dreadful day of doom and darkness, of judgment and
confusion unto the world, is a day of light and joy, of comfort and reward unto
the Saints. The worlds trouble and ruin, is the Saints peace and salvation.
Though the Lord come in fire and wrath to destroy Antichrist, yet he comes in
love and mercy to save Sion; and therefore, when he comes forth, and a
devouring fire, burning up his enemies round about, Psalm. 97. 3. Yet Sion heard
and was glad, and the daughter of Judah rejoiced, because of his judgments,
verse. 8. The Saints have been a long time under oppression, shame, and
persecution: now the Lord will reward them, and give them light for darkness,
strength for weakness, glory for shame: they shall now receive reward and
praise, for all their former sorrow and sufferings. The Saints shall rejoice in
heaven for the vengeance powered out upon Antichrist: Therefore rejoice over
her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you
on her, Revel. 18. 20. When the Kings of the earth, and Merchants, mighty and
rich men shall weep and wayl, and cry alas, alas, then shall the Saints (here
called the holy Apostles and Prophets) rejoice and sing: because the ruin and
fall of these, shall be their joy and reward.

Thirdly, The Lord will not only judge the dead principles, practices,
ordinances, and powers of Antichrist, and give reward unto his servants; but
also will destroy the Antichristian party. And should destroy them which
destroy the earth. The word translated destroy, signifies corrupt: that is,
Those that have managed the cause of Antichrist, have corrupted the earth;
according as it is said in Revel. 19. 2. The great whore did corrupt the earth
with her fornication; That is, by her sosseries and fornications, she has
corrupted the minds of the men of the earth, drawing them aside from the Lord,
by the intoxicating wine of her fornication, she has blinded the minds,
adulterated the affections, and polluted the hearts of the men of the world,
and have made them to serve Satan the God of this world. These that have
managed the cause of the beast, and have thus corrupted the earth, shall be
destroyed. This destruction is not so much meant of a bodily destruction, as of
place and power: these that have by their power and rule, by their deceit and
falsehood corrupted the earth, these in their dignity, office, rule and
authority shall all be slain. It follows.

VERSE. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in
the Temple the Arc of his Testament, and there was lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.
COnsider three things from these words.

First, The Temple of God opened. The time was it was shut up, as once the
Temple of Jerusalem was under Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 24. So this spiritual Temple
was shut up, when it was measured in verse. 1. When the outward Court, or
visible face of things were in the hands of the Gentiles, verse. 2. The Church
was driven into the Wilderness, for many years into desert places, there to
be nourished for a time, from the face of the Serpent, that sought to devour
her. But now the Temple is set open, as of old it was by Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.
3. Thus it is said of the new Jerusalem, that the gates should not be shut,
Revel. 21. 25. And the reason is, because there shall be no night, nor danger,
the gates shall stand open continually. This notes the free access for
multitudes of Saints to enter in to the new Jerusalem, without impediment or
stop. Not as in times of persecution, when they sought to worship the Lord in
corners; but they shall come and enter freely and boldly, and that without let
or molestation. So that the woman shall no more be driven into the Wilderness,
and shut up there, but the Temple of God shall be set open, and there shall be
a free and great access unto it.

Secondly, That which appeared in the Temple was the Arc of his Testament. As
the Temple was opened, so the Arc was made visible, which was shut from the
eyes of men, under the old Testament, 1 King. 6. 19. It was very seldom seen,
and that by the High Priest only: the Arc was a pledge of Gods presence with
his people, and denotes unto us, the mysteries of truth, which formerly lay
hid, but now are made manifest. The great High Priest has opened the Temple,
and made visible the Arc, by making known the mysteries of truth. In former
time the Church was in the Wilderness, the Gentiles possessed the outward
Court, lets of truth were discovered, only something was hinted out by a few
choice instruments: but now the Saints have a Temple opened, a full and free
access: and now they have an Arc made visible, or the hidden mysteries of God
revealed; not only to a few called Clergy men, but generally to all Saints
the knowledge of the truth is revealed.

Thirdly, The close of all, And there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail. Earthquake, hail, and
lightning, set forth Gods judgments most terrible and irresistible, Esa. 30.
30. Of an earthquake we have spoken before from verse. 13 of this Chapter:
Hailstones was one of the plagues of Egypt, that destroyed their trees, Exodus
9. 25. And by which the Amorites were destroyed in Canaan, Josh. 10. 11. By
these judgments we have the final destruction of Antichrist. This is the
third woe, that shall accompany the seventh Trumpet, and is agreeable to the
plagues of the seventh Vial, by which Antichrist shall be wholly destroyed;
and should blaspheme God, because of the plague of the hail, that was exceeding
great. By this last and great judgment, the mystery of iniquity is
discovered, and the power of Antichrist wholly broken, at which his party
shall vex and fret, gnaw their tongues, and blaspheme God for all their pains
and sores, whereby they shall be utterly ruined and consumed.

Thus we have the Effects of Christ's kingdom and reign laid open: we see for
what it is, that the Elders do so exceedingly praise the Lord, for that he
takes to himself his great power, and does reign, by which he does offend the
Nations, and reward his servants. The Temple is no more shut up under
restraint, but free access is given; the Arc is no more hidden, but the
mysteries of salvation made evident. And the Lord by his sweeping judgments
will wholly consume Antichrist, both in his policy and power. Hence it is, that
the Saints shall thus triumph and rejoice; How can the daughter of Sion, but
rejoice when he^ King comes? the redeemed of the Lord must needs triumph: And
besides the whole world shall rejoice, when the oppressor shall cease, when
violence shall be no more heard in the Land, when our Exactors shall be
righteousness: then I say, the world will sing and rejoice, because the who^^
^^^th shall be at peace, and be quiet, Esa. 14. 4. 7. When Christ shall come to
reign in his appearance in his Saints, b^ shall judge the Nations with
righteousness, and govern the people with truth. Psalm. 67. 4. 7. Therefore
when the Lord shall come to reign, to set all things in order, to govern and
give settlement to the Nations: well may Antichrist vex and fret, and all
oppressing powers be angry; but the Saints shall rejoice and sing; and all the
world besides shall be glad, because of his righteous judgments. So much to be
spoken of the Effects of Christ's reign, and so I end this whole Discourse.

FINIS.

