Stafford-Shires MISERY, SET FORTH IN A true Relation of the Barbarous Cruelty
of the FORCES Raised against the PARLIAMENT.

SENT In a Letter from STAFFORD, by Captain William Robinson, to a Gentleman
in LONDON, and to be presented to Mr. SPEAKER.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, July 20. Printed by G. Dexter, 1643.

STAFFORD-SHIRES Misery: Set forth in a true RELATION FROM STAFFORD
THE convenience of this Messenger invites me to alter my resolution, which was
to have silenced my pen, until it could have reported some News, which you
and my other Friends could have took content in: But fearing least you should
be too much dejected by our Enemies vaupouring of a great Victory obtained
against our Stafford shi^^ forces forever always represent their good
successes in a multiplying glass, and their bad ones in the wrong end of the
perspective.) I will faithfully, though according to the Posts haste, give you
a Relation of the Afflictions God was pleased to lay upon us at Burton. The
Queens Army coming to Ashby, presently made it their Care to free the
Inhabitants of Burton (who are generally wall affected to the Parliament from
the oppression of the Protestants their friends: and therefore sent 27 Colors
of Foot, and about as Colors of Horse, to do Execution (according to the
known Laws of the Land) upon the Parliament Forces residing there: They faced
it upon Thursday last, first with their Horse by break of day in the Morning
who were forced to Retreat, afterward about 5. and 6* of the Clock they
returned with the Foore presently the Service began to grow very hot, the Town
having b^^ne twice Summoned by a Trumpet to yield, but bravely resolved to
fight it out, which they did still it was near ^in a Clock^ at Night, with the
loss only of a d^^^^ Men, and slew as I am credibly informed by thoe who
werein the fight diverse hundreds of the Enemy: Our Soldiers Muskets grew so
hot, that very many of them flew in pieces; very many more had their hands
blistred, merly with the heat of Pieces.

The Enemy was resolved to have the Town, though it cost them never so dear,
and therefore exposed their men (according to their value) like Beasts to the
slaughter, which our Soldiers soon perceiving, used their advantage freely;
till at last being wearyed with killing, tired with the whole days service,
and oppressed by an overdaring Multitude of the Enemy, they were driven from
their Guards, and then soon left the Town.

Brave Colonel Houghton, his Lieutenant Colonel ^ders, Captain Wat^, and
diverse other Commanders, whom I am not acquainted with, all men never enough to
be honored, after Quarter demanded and granted, after all very grievously
wounded, and we cannot yet learn who are dead, and who living of them.

Our Foot Soldiers after Quarter promised, they put up in the Tower of the
Church, where the Bells hanged, and then blew up the Tower with Gunpowder: but
through Gods infinite mercy to the admiration of all men, they were all
preserved from death, except 10 or 12. though many wounded; the uiolence of the
blow opened the Church doors, and none durst come near: most of them escaped.

The Townsmen escaped not much better; for they wounded many, killed many and
spoiled all: and when they had left the Town not worth (...) pence, they set it
on fire* Thus the Scripture is fullfilled, The mercies of the wicked are
cruelty. See what the whole Kindome is to expect from the Moors, Walloons,
French, Spanish and Irish, who are called into the Land to be Assertours of the
protestant Religion, the known Laws of the Land, the just Privileges of
Parliament and the Liberty of the Subject.

We had about 100. Soldiers* one iron Piece one Case of (...) and one small
Drake in Burton. Many of the Foot Souldies escaped, but (...) of the Commandes;
and most of the Townsmen of any quality were carried ^way prisoners.

We expect that Army every hour at Stafford, and prepare for their
entertainment. Ever since my departure from London, I have been perpetually
upon service, for these (...)* or 7 days hunting the Cavaliers of this County,
and those of the Lord Capells Army, which lies upon this county now from place
to place. We hear that the Lord Capells Forces, Collonell Sands, and Collonell
Chudleys, are all to meet the Queens this day, or to morrow, and when they have
played their Rex in these parts, are all to march up to the King to Oxford. If
the Armies in the West move by the same Compass, the business at Oxford will
prove difficult except the Question be stated before their commi^* As often as
God shall please to grant opportunities you shall hear how things stand where
I am.

If you are known to Mr. Speaker, present my humble service to (...), and
relate this unto him, which I would have done my self, could the Messengers
time have given me leave.

Finis.

