Mean, Tekel, Perez, OR, A little Appearance of the HANDWRITING (In a Glance
of Light) Against the Powers and Apostates of the TIMES. By a Letter written
to, and lamenting over Oliver Lord Cromwell.

BY JOHN ROGERS.

In this woeful Hour of his Temptation, and of Sions sore pangs, and Solemn
Appeals; and of the precious Saints imprisonments and persecution for this most
Glorious, betrayed denied, and crucified Cause of Christ Jesus

KING OF SAINTS AND NATIONS.

There sin is written with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond ( ungue
adamantino (...)) whiles there Children remember their Altars and Groves, again.

Jer. 17.15. Why do ye persecute me, as God? and are not satisfied with my
flesh? oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a Book!
that they were graven with an iron pen in the Rock for ever! For I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand in the latter end upon the EARTH, etc.

Job 19.22, 23, 24, 25. etc. Heu pietas! ubi pri^^a? pros^n^ o tempora! Mundi
Fax: Vesper! prope Nox! o Mora! Christ Veni! Sinite Virgam Corripientem ne
sentiatis Mailcum Conterent^^. B^rn.

A word by the way to the Reader,
SInce the time that I was lately so illegally and arbitrarily plundered
(without any Cause shown or known) by this Unrighteous (self-created) powers
that is got uppermost. I have with the words of Jeremy, Chapter 20.8, 9. cried out
violence and spoil! violence and spoil! because the word of the Lord is made a
Reproach, and Derision daily. Then I said, I will not make mention nor speak
any more in his name; But his word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in
my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. But
constrained in spirit wrote this Letter, yet seeing by several Messengers I
have assaied, and that several days together to get it delivered, and finding
it so difficult, that it is doubtful whither it be safely conveyed to him or
no; you find it printed, as the most probable means of having it presented to
his eye, for that many Flatterers are ready to run with the news to their
Master, as v. 10. REPORT, say they, and we will REPORT it, all my Familiars
watched for my balting, saying peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall
PREVAIL against him, and take our REVENGE on him. Well, if they do so, welcome
CROSS of Christ! for my next Petition to thy Kingdom come! is thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven! yet who knows but this weak word may awaken him a
little! For, Aegros, quos potus fortis non curavit, ad salutem pristinam Aqua
tepens revocavit, warm water has sometimes recovered men to their former
health; but whither this do or not, my Conscience is (now) so well satisfied,
my heart be refreshed, and my spirit so warmed in the strength of our dear
(despised) Christ, that I hope to go on with Jerem. 20.11. For the Lord is with
me, who is the terrible one; therefore my PERSECVTORS stall stumble, they shall
not prevail, but they shall be greatly ashamed, for they SHALL not prosper (long)
and their everlasting Confusion shall never be FORGOTTEN! this is the
victorious, overturning, already, triumphing Faith of 100ds (Blessed be JEHOVAH
besides.)

JOHN. ROGERS.

MY LORD,
While the souls of many of the Lords dear Servants (who sit weeping over you)
are in Travel, and struggle for you in this hour of Temptation. I most humbly
beg (as upon my knees) for your own Soul, and Family, and for the poor
afflicted Saints sake, that you will but weigh these few Lines of our present
Lamentation, in the balance of your heart and Conscience (one part of an hour
which you may best spare and be most serious in (...) which (if the Lord, whom
I serve) require it, I think I could as freely write with my Blood, as with
Irke, in tears and gall of grief) O our bowels! our bowels! our hearts ache, and
are pained within us, to hear the doleful groans and cries! tears! prayers!
and solemn Appeals of godly people in the Nation round about to the Righteous
Judge of the whole Earth! which (doubtless) will be Answered with a dreadful
Dispensation, and severe Decree upon those that be found the Enemies to the
Lord Jesus, and his Exaltation: The Apprehension whereof has so ceased upon my
Spirit, that I should sin (if some way or other) I gave you no notice
thereof, for that your own person is (yet) so dear in our very souls, that
Bowels of Affection are frequently seen to you in mourning, praying, and
wrestling for you (if possible) to recover you out of those bottomless Snar^s
wherein you are so deeply ensnared by the evil Counsel of Parasites, subtle
and self seeking Flatterers, Dawbers, and Deceivers, who have not that lively
Sense to the Lord Jesus, his poor Saints, and Interest, nor yet to your Soul
(so despately engaged we humbly conceive) as we who are counted enemies for the
Truths sake (as the Lord will witness) have: Of whom as 3 Phil. 18, 19 I have
told you often, and now tell you again even weeping, that they are enemies to
the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and
whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things, Jeremiah 9: verse. 1.2. Oh
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might weep
day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my people, that I might leave
my people, and go from them; for they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of
treacherous men. I cannot speak with you in person, therefore I beseech you
read these words, which our tears and prayers are the Ambassadors, and
Forerunners of Mittamus pre^es and lachrymas cordis l^gatos (Cyprian) for that
we havenot the least grain of ill will, hatred or malice (as some suggest and
say) against any person, but only against the sins and evil of this change of
government, which God will (and if Righteous we are sure must) Judge and then,
as once you said in your Letter to the Ki^ke of Scotland, God who knows us,
will in his due time (...) manifest whether we do multiple these things as
men, or do we them for the Lord Christ and his poor peoples sake. Wherefore

1 Be pleased (we beseech you with weeping tears) to compare a little present
transactions with former Engagements, and with the Armies Declarations, etc. as
that of June 14. 1647. in page 6. declaring that you took up Arms in
Judgment and Conscience for the peoples Just Right and Liberties, Your own
Declarations,
and Resolved to assert and vindicate them against all Arbitrary power,
violence, and opposition; and against all particular parties, and interests
whatsoever. So page 7. that it is no resisting of Magistrary, to side with
those just Principles being these upon which you assi^^ed the Parliament: And
that the glory of God was not wanting in such cases to set a price upon such
proceedings, it being one witness of God in the world to carry on a Testimony
against the injustice and unrighteousness of men: And against the miscarriage
of Governments, when corrupted and declining from the primitive and original
glory. So page 9. We are so far from designing and complying to have an
absolute o^ arbitrary power sig^ed or settled for continuance in any PERSONS
WHATSOEVER; at that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have
it so in the PERSONS of any, Against absolute Government. in one Person.
whom we (our selves) could most confide in, or who should appear most of our
PRINCIPLES and Opinions, or whom we might have most personal assurance of, or
interest in: but that the Authority of this Kingdom in PARLIAMENTS may ever
stand and have its course as the supreme power and trust, with many other
things in that Declaration. So in the case of the Army stated and proposed by
the Agents from Gilford, October. 9. 1647. page 4. We took up Arms in Judgment
and conscience for the peoples Just Rights and Liberties, and not as mercenary
soldiers hired to serve an arbitrary power, So page 13.14. The people shall
see we minded not our own interest, For successive Parliaments.
but the Good, Freedom, and Welfare of the whole Nation, which in the same
page is declared particularly to be in new Successive Elections of Supreme
Assemblies of Parliaments at Periods of times, and that it ought not to be
denied them, this being so Essential to their Freedom, that without it they
are no better then SLAVES, that therefore it be insisted on so positively and
resolvedly, as not to RECEDE from it, So page 15. That PARLIAMENTS rightly
constituted are the Foundation of our hopes of Right and Freedom to the
people; that therefore the constant SVCCESSION of PARLIAMENTS be so resolvedly
insisted on that a law PARAMOVNT be made for it. And whereas all power is
originally and essentially in the people; and whereas their free choice or
consent by the Representors is the only original and foundation of all Just
GOVERNMENT, that it be insisted upon positively, that the supreme POWER of the
peoples REPRESENTORS in PARLIAMENT be forth with declared for, as their power
to make LAWS, or repeal Laws, and to call to account all Officers in this
Nation whatsoever. So page 16. This supreme and sole Power in Parliament being
the thing against which the King contended, and which the people have defended
with their lives, and therefore ought now to be demanded as the PRICE of their
BLOOD. So page 17. The many oppressions of the people, and the danger of
absolute tyranny were the occasion of the expense of so much blood, so that
the people have bought these their Rights and Freedoms by the price of blood,
etc. Since that the Remonstrance of St. Albans, Right and freedom where it
lies.
1648. page 14.15. The sum of the public Interest of a Nation to COMMON
RIGHT and FREEDOM (which has been the chief subject of our contest) and in
opposition to TYRANNY and INJVSTICE of KINGS or others we take to lie in these
things following.

1. That all Matters of supreme trust or concernment to the safety and welfare
of the whole, be in a common and supreme Council or Parliament,

2. That the power of making Laws, Constitutions, ANY (as of right) but by
that supreme Council or Representative, nor without their advice and consent,
may any thing be imposed on or taken from the people, or if it be otherwise
attempted by ANY, that the people be not bound thereby but free. So page 16
That it may not be left in the will of the KING, or any particular person
whatsoever (standing in their own Interest) to oppose, make void, or render
ineffectuall such determinations or proceedings. So page 21.22. Where any
person is trusted with a limited power, according to Laws to preserve the
Rights and Liberties of the people, and abuses of power to their hurt, or by
the advantage of that power shall rise to assume hurtful powers, which they
never committed to him, and indeed to take away all those Foundations of Right
and Liberty, of Redress and Remedy, and to swallow up all in his own absolute
will and power, to impose, take away, and destroy at pleasure, They fought
against personal Interest.
etc. Such person does (ipso facto) forfeit all that trust and power he had,
etc. Further in p. 65.66. That satisfaction and assurance be given that what
they have contended for against the King (which is our humble suit now) for
which we have been put to so much trouble, cost and loss of blood, has been
only for the Liberties and common Interest, and not for your personal Interest
and Power; that there may be a sound settlement of the peace, and future
government of the Kingdom upon grounds of common Right and Freedom, as
follows.

For Parliaments Annual or bionnual.
1 That there be a certain succession of future Parliaments (Annual or
Biennuall) with secure provision, that none who have engaged or shall engage in
war against the right of Parliaments or Interest of the people therein, or
have adhered to the enemies thereof may be capable of electing or being elected
(at least during a competent number of years) nor any other who shall oppose or
not join in agreement to this settlement; and that it be declared that such
Representatives have and shall have the supreme Power and Trust. Besides [much
more in these other Declarations] that upon the Armies march into Scotland,
1650. page 36. We found our hearts extraordinarily stirred up by the Lord to
assist the Parliament against the KING being abundantly satisfied in our
Judgments and Consciences, that we were called forth by the Lord to be
isntrumental, to bring about that which was our continual prayer to God: viz
the destruction of ANTICRIST, and the deliverance of his CHVRCH and people. And
upon this simple account we engaged, not knowing the deep Policies of worldly
Statesmen, and have ever since hazarded our lives in the high places of the
field against all the opposers of this work of Jesus Christ. And having those
things singly in our eye, namely the DESTRVCTION of ANTICHRIST, and the
advancement of the KINGDOM of JESUS CHRIST. Against King, and against
Antichrist, and for the kingdom of Christ.
So page 38.39. A second war more dangerous then the former was contrived
against us by them that hated us of this Army of England under the name of SECT
ARIES, and a second testimony was given from Heaven to justify the Proceedings
of his poor Servants, against the bloody Antichristian BROOD, though with the
loss of many precious Saints; we were then powerfully convinced, that their
purpose was to deal with the LATE KING as a man of blood, and being persuaded
in our consciences that he and his MON ARCHY was one of the TEN HORNS of the
BEAST spoken of in Revel. 17.12, 13, 14, 15. we being witnesses to so much
innocent blood of the SAINTS that he had shed in supporting the BEAST, and
considering the loud cries of the SOVLES of the SAINTS under the ALTAR, we were
extraordinarily carried forth to desire JUSTICE upon the KING. But if there be
any that have taken Council against the Lord and his Anointed, whom the Lord
has decreed to set up in the holy Hill of Sion, we are persuaded the Lord has
brought us as INSTRVMENTS, through which he will speak to them in his wrath,
and vex them with his sore displeasure; we desire it may be known, we are not
Soldiers of Fortune, and are not merely the SERVANTS of men, And for the
Monarchy of King Jesus alone.
we have not only proclaimed JESUS CHRIST the King of Saints, to be our King by
profession, but desire to submit to him upon his own terms, to admit him to
the exercise of his ROYAL AVTHORITY, and with much more to that purpose: yea,
to name but one more (the Declaration of April 22. 1653. page 6. After much
debate it was judged necessary and agreed upon, that the supreme Authority
should be by Parliament devolved upon known persons, men searing God, and of
approved Integrity, and the Government committed to them for a time, as the
most hopeful I way to encourage, and countenance all Gods people reform the
Law, and administer Justice impartially, hoping thereby the people might forget
MONARCHY, Against this Monarchy again, and for Parliaments.
and understanding their true Interest in the Election of successesive
PARLIAMENTS, may have the Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard
to this Glorious CAUSE, or necessitating to keep up Arms for the defense of the
same. Though much more of the same import out of sundry other Letters and
Declarations: We might produce, yet for fear of being too tedious) our souls
would rejoice, and be abundantly satisfied to see an Harmony between these
Declarations, and the present Actions of this present Government, seeing (as
Solomon says) Ecclesiastes 4.5. When thou vowest (or art devoted or engaged)
to God defer not to pay it: Better it is that thou should not vow, then
that thou should vow and not pay, suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin, neither say thou before the Angel that it was an error, wherefore
should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands: Oh! my
Lord! let the blood, lives, and tears, be thought upon that have sealed to
these Declarations, and engaged for Christ his cause: and the Liberties of the
people by Parliaments, etc. O be not offended with us whose souls mourn for
these sins and transgressions, and are weaned (as then you would have us) from
Monarchy, or any such like GOVERNMENT! seeing in some of them (as in the
Declaration, April. 2. 1653 and Iuue 14. 1647. page ult.) you press it upon us
to stand for these things, and you say you expect it of us, and of all that are
well affected to the Public, but now we are declared offenders for so doing!
Oh dear! honored Sir, what shall we say but your own words in page 52. of the
Remonstrance of St. Albons. Your bare retracting or changing your cause
(without better or any reasons giving) cannot put out the light which your
former Declarations with reasons have let in, and which God has so eminently
owned and given his seal and increase unto. O my Lord! that these things might
be cleared to the poor! unsatisfied people of Go^! whose hearts are bleeding
under the sense of them day and night! Zedekiahs case and calamity for his
breach of Covenant, and his imbondaging again the people after Liberty
proclaimed and declared, Ier. 34 verse. 15 16. And ye were now turned and had
done right in my sight, in proclaiming Liberty every man to his Neighbor, and
ye had made a Covenant before me in the House which is called by my name. But
ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every
man his handmaid, whom he had set at Liberty at their pleasure, to return; and
brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants, and for handmaids
being often in our remembrance.

revise or reason, with the rise of this change upon the breaking up the late
Parliament, taking its being there, (but for this end) to keep up the carnal
intrests the Parliament had voted down, viz of Clergy, carnal Church State,
Tithes, Presentations etc. which was according to the several Declarations of
the Army, as in the Case of the Army stated October 9. 1647. page 2.8.10. and
Declaration of August 1. 1647. from Colebrook page 13. the 5 Proposition is the
present ^nequall, troublesome, and contentious way of Ministers maintenance by
Tithes be considered of, and remedy applied; so the 6th: is that the Rules and
Course of Law, and the Officers of it be reduced and reformed, and concerning
the Clergy with then carnal Church State the Remonst. of St. Albans page 10th.
Declares it the Parliaments part to take away these corrupted forms of outside
religion and Church government, (...) he Rise of this G. upon the ruin of the
last Parl. how? and why?
whether imposed without law, or rootea in the law in times of Popish ignerance
or idolatry or of the Gospels dimmer light, by we ans whereof snares and chains
were laid upon conscientions and zealous men, and the generality of the people
held in darkness, superstition, and blind reverence of persons and outward
things fit for Popery and Slavery; and also to take away and losen that
dependence of the Clergy and their Ecclesiastical affairs upon the King, or
that interest of the Clergy in the civil laws and affairs which the craft of
both in length of time had wrought for each other; and that it was the Kings
part to uphold and maintain this dependence of the CLERGY their MAINTENANCE and
CHVRCH MATTERS; and were it not too tedious, I should name many more of your
Declarations, against these very things: Now for the Parliament to do that
which the Army and good people round the Nation have declared to be their duty,
viz. to take off the civil dependence of the national Clergy, with their
national Church St. and to vote a new model of the Law, viz less intricate,
uncertain, Tyrannical, and unjust, and more consonant with Gods word, Statutes,
and judgments, and right reason; and more plain, and easy, and clear. And to
take away corrupt and simonious presentations, whereby souls and people are
bought, and sold to great men's lust, etc. For this (formerly judged, their duty
to be dissolved and broken, yea at that time too (when this longed for mercy
after many years was brought to the birth, by some faithful servants of the
Lord (precious round the Nation) after many pangs, much opposition, yea and
after the long sitting Parliament, was broken too for their neglect of these
very things (with others;) seems strange to us, Rev. 18.13. being Merchandise
of Babylon.
and the more dissatisfies us, for that we see this Power succeed for the
support and upholding of those things which that Parliament had voted down; and
which the Army and good people had so often declared, prop^ of Antichrist; this
makes the Rise o^ it more grievous to the souls of some of the Saints, then in
that the peoples choice was not in it, though somes Declarations required that
also, 6. Micah 16. The Statutes of Ou ri are kept, and all the works of the
house of Alab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a
desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an bissing: therefore ye shall bear the
reproach of my people.

O my Lord, that the opening and bleeding of our Bowels for these things might
be a little regarded and pitied!

3. May you be (most humbly as upon our bended knees) entreated to take a
little account of the already fruits and effect^ of this alteration, which (the
Lord knows) we bitterly bewail before the great God, 3. The already effects and
fruits of this change, most grievous to the faithful and Godly
as more heavy to us, then the precedent changes in shutting up the doors of
our public meeting place, hindering us in Gods Worship; imprisoning our dear
Brethren, and friends, plundering reproaching and grieving them (and them
only) that have been, all those wars and yet are (and we hope ever will be)
faithful to the Cause, and Kingdom of Christ, threatening to take away their
lives, and endeavoring to stone and stab them, aspe^sing them with most
palpable loathsome, and notorious falsities, to possess good people in the
Countries with prejudice against them, as if they were against all Magistracy,
Ministry, and Property, which with a wondrous and wicked confidence some write
and spread about (the Lord lay it seriously to their hearts and humble them for
it!) but we cannot be suffered to Print the Truth, or to answer their cruel
and unjust Calumnies or Accusations, whilst we desire no other weapons, (the
Lord knows) for our warfare, but the Word of Truth, (which shall be our
defense!) yet we are not suffered to print, but plundered of our notes and
writings, whiles all manner of lies, slanders, and ^njurious reports, are
printed and divulged of us. This was counted Tyranny in the Papists, and after
in the Prelates, and declared against page 10. of the Case of the A^my stated
October 9th, 1647. viz [to lock up the Printing Presses, against whom they
please was in the Bishops time complained of, as one of the great oppressions,
etc.] and yet (to hinder truth) it is now made Treason to print or preach it;
so that we are forced to conceal truth from the world, and the witnesses lie a^
it were dead in the streets, by such Political combinations (as these are) who
do all they can to keep out the breaking forth of that light and truth, which
suits not with their present purpose; wherefore our only remedy left us is
faith and prayer, and solemn Appeals to him that judges righteously: yet the
Lord show mercy to our unkind brethren in the day of his appearing! And in the
mean time declare whether they do well or no to cry out (so cruelly and raise;ly
against us in this our new captivity) and to stir up the people against ^s (as
evil doers) by the advantage which they have in w^iting what they will against
us, whilst our hands are tied behind us, and truth is bound! Besides oh! oh!
are not men of corrupt principles and carnal interest up again, with the
highest confidence! malignants countenanced? and such encouraged as were (not
long since) declaimed against? whilst only the little remnant of the Lords
faithful ones are frowned upon! brow beaten! threatened! grieved! and wounded
to the very souls of them for these things! but our great comfort and
confidence is, that in this Day which will burn as an Oven (when all the proud,
and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble) the son of righteousness shall
arise with healings upon us.

4 Lastly (my Lord) may you be pleased but to see a little in the midst of our
Agony and trouble, how l^ke this present Government looks to that which the
Lord (by the faith and prayers of his despised people 11. Heb. 33.) has so
eminently engaged against, laid in the dust, and stamped upon with disdain
(fullfilling his word therein) and whilst you were with the Lord (therein) he
was with you but oh! is there no danger to fit in the same seat? be under the
Predicament? walk in the same Ways? keep up the same interests? with them that
were (for example sutely) so visibly destroyed and cut off. The former K. (cut
off) had his Courts, Councels, State, Pride, Idleness and vanity in persons
about him, rich beds, hangings, Coackes and Attendants, evil Counselors,
Politicians, and wise men put him upon imprisoning, oppressing, and persecuting
the poor despised Saints, under the name of Deceivers, Hypocrites, and Fanatic
spirits, etc. that were not of the same principles with him, and his Court,
ruling for his own interest, more then for the peoples Liberties, etc. and (O
my Lord) but a little consider, is it not so in all or most of the same points,
pleaded against him so long together, by the sword, by the word and faith of
Gods people, How alike this G. is to it which God has thrown down before our
eyes.
thousands of whom lost their lives and dearest blood, and friends to free us
from all these things; O my Lord, make us not your enemies, by telling you the
truth, with tears, and bleeding Bowels! (the Lord knows) for you and yours;
whom the Lord has so highly owned and honored in his design against this very
kind of G --. be pleased to use your own words, page 12.31: 38, 39. of the
Declaration of the Army going into Scotland, 1650. wherein you declare against
any government by one man or K. unless it be Christ Jesus, and you tell the
Brethren of Scotland, if they proceed in any such design, to bring in such a
Government as King upon us, they will blot out not only their former merits
but undo the noble achievements of the English Patriots and Parliaments in
this and former Generations: For we know (say you) how easy a thing it is to
raise a Monarchical spirit, but how hard it is to keep it within the circle, we
know the common and old Plea is necessity; which, with sound Christians, cannot
now satisfy as a competent Apology; for that Machivil has ever made that a
Cloak for his exorbitant actions; Necessity no good Plea.
yea the Jews to crucify Christ pretended thus, O (...) but (as one said)
there is no NECESSITY to sin, but against it, and the Saints necessity in a
civil reference (as well as spiritual) is to exalt Christ and his Kingdom.
But for this we only fly to your own words again. [ Remonst. St. Albans page
5th. He that ingageth (upon pretenses for public ends) and that upon public
necessity or extremity (all which say you must concur to their full
satisfaction therein) he will first try all honest ways possible with due
regard to, and concurrence with the preservation of the Magistracy, and
Government under which God has set him, before he will fly to any ways of
extremity, neither will he (when engaged therein) proceed further or longer in
that way against or without the Magistracy, then that first necessity, or some
other (emergent (upon the proceeding) does justly lead, not driving the
pretense of Necessity, further to serve or advantage himself, or perpetuate
those ways of extremity) but when the necessity or danger is over, will return
again to Magistracy and Order ( i.e. now by Parliam. as before) we desire no
more then your own words. But seeing some of your Court do cast in Reason of
State (as well as necessity) for this Alteration, Reason of State dangerous.
we wish (in the travel of our souls for them) that their eyes were opened, to
seethat this has been, and will bethe ruin of al States and Governors now in
the world, viz. their Reason of State! carnal or worldly Policy and Wisdom,
this brought the blood of Iezreel on the house of Jebu (though he executed
Justice on the King and his house according to Gods command) yet he walked in
the same ways, gat up upon the same Throne, and into the same Kingdom, and
kept up the same Interest! and Idol worship his Predecessors (cut off by the
hand of Justice) did, and did the work but by halfes; and all by reason of
State. This Reason rejected Saul, and made him disobedient; this was that
Reason that led Pharaoh and his Host into the bottom of the Sea, in his bitter
heat against the work of God in that day; and this was that principle that
made Sihon, King of the Amerites, and Og King of Bashan, Number. 21. oppose
Israel, and the work of God in that Generation to their lamentable ruin. Yet
this was the Wisdom principle and light that lead the grave Council, John 11.
into that cursed Vote of crucifying Christ! And is not this warning enough for
us? Then see in all Ages how the results of the purest reason of state have
proved dangerons, yea destructive to Governors and Governments, ever oppugning
the present work and desigue of God in these ages. Therefore O my Lord, let
not this principle deceive you, lest it destroy you! May I speak Luthers words
to you (in Epist. ad Melanst.) Sed scribe he frustra, si tu secundum
Philosophiam vestram, has res ratione regere, hoc est cum rations insanires,
perges and occides to ipsum, etc. I write these things in vain if you will
resolve to Rule by Carnal reason, and according to the corrupt Dictates and
the Philosophy of Sophisters, about you, which if you do will fall inevitably,
sad to you one day, and too too probably, will prove, your Ruin, which we
beseech our God in mercy and time forbid. Ergo certe are prote and dol^^ te
meas preces si^ irritas facere. Oh! make not our daily prayers for you of no
effect to you; and because many Good men, as well as Great, were prestr'd by
the pernicions Counsels and Suggestions of some Ambitionists and selsish
Teachers, and Scholars in Luthers days, he was wont to pray, [ a doctore
gloriese and a pastere contentiese libera nos dominus, the Lord deliver us from
such glorions Rabbis, and selfe-seeking contentions Teachers? And must we not
pray that you may be freed from such as have subtly insuared you, Our Weapons
of war far and our adversaries what they are
and do Prelate like possess you, and others against us? that we are
Fanatique, mad men, Fools and heady enemies to Magistracy, Ministry, and all,
etc. for which our hearts are pained within us whiles we ponder these things,
and our spirits greived, that men, of so much former Merit and Eminency, should
so sinfully, and unchristianlike condemn and accuse us of thing our hearts
abhor, and loath within us: And call for severity, under the name of Justice,
and (...) Persecution against us in the matters of our Faith and Consciences,
merely and alone for the exalting of Jesus Christ, in the things which they
themselves have formerly preached and professed to others; yea, which the whole
Army have frequently declared for many years together, till it came into
Fashion to hold an Epheram religionem, a Court Religion which will turn with
the times! but the Lord humble and break us for it: But wisdows (says Solomon)
is better then weapons of war, Ecclesiastes 9. and as we have so we desire no
other weapons but Gods owns word and spirit, having our Loins girt about with
Truth and having on (blessed be our God for it) the Breast plate of
Righteousness in this business, wherein our Brethren are against us.

But my Lord, may the presented Truth (or poor crucified Jesus) beg this favor
to give it as much liberty, as his adversaries have for their gross lies and
falsities, in printing or otherwise; therefore will you be pleased, (though but
for a little time, a month or two) to release those laws that hinder the
liberty of publishing the Truth, Let our Brethren or any that will oppose, us
convince, or corquer al they can with the good word of God, and we shall be
satisfied to try it out with them so; but not with the weapons of the world, as
they have them (now) all on their side, to imprison persecute, or put to death,
etc. for that is Antichrists (not Christ) way of warfare. In this sense (says
Luther in Epist. ad Erph.) consider with what sword I have conquered sin, and
overcome errors, and subdued policy, I have never touched you with a finger,
but with the spirit of Christ's mouth, viz. the Word of his Gospel, so
Z^inglius resp, as Sirothin to^. 2. fol. 302, declares the Word of God the mely
instrument to overcome with, onica ^a que viasola est, etc. The word is the
only way to subdue errors; therefore, says he we suffer all the writings of
the Papists to be spread and read, for the sword of the spirit shall destroy
them all; what cause then, says he, is more suspicious then ours, who would
have even the Adversaries Doctrines publishea, that we may overthrow them with
the word? or your who reproach us as heretical and will not suffer ours to be
published? this is our case now. Therefore as Luther wrote to the Dukes of
Saxony, Epist. Tom 7. fol. 209, so do we humbly to you my Lord, I would not,
says he, but all have free Liberty, yet if any transgress Gospel bounds, and
would raise up seditions or wars against you, then you may suppress them. So,
my Lord, if we stir up people ^o ^sings, tumults, or carnal warfare, as men
falsely charge us, then punish us a^ you please, for it is contrary to our
principles so to do) but to the spiritual works and warfare, wherein we are now
engaged, viz faith and prayer. Furthermore O (...) that you would not believe
every report of the Rontis^ous or Fire-blowers of these our new troubles,
against us. For as it was once said, the way to get preferment and places is to
write or rail against Luther, as Eccius Coccius, etc. found it, Pauper Lutherus
multes ficit divites, so do many Money Merchants, and Mercenarians, see it at
this day, the way to get prefermeus is to be forward against us and the poor
despised Remnant. Now, my Lord, let not your ear be open to all their lies, and
not once open to the Testimony of Truth on our side. will you be pleased to
peruse a little those writings taken out of my S^udy, and satisfy your self
concerning the truth of them, oculo irretorto, and not believe those bits and
parts, which some Sycophants; probably, will acquaint you with, on purpose to
irritate and inrage you against the truth, and Asserters of it. Too too many
such Flatterers are about you my Lord! which makes our hearts to bleed for you!
that justific the wicked for reward, and take away the righteensnesse of the
righteous from him, Isayah 5th But if we have no hopes left to prevail with
you, yet our hears are filled with hopes, and sure we are to prevail with God;
our Appeal is in heaven, and the faith and prayer; which are up, (as high as
ever since the world stood) either will bring forth your conversion; for Luther
says the Church converts, totunmundum sanguins and oratione, or your
confusion. For the death and destruction of the Persecutors, was as it was said
of the death of Arrius, precationis opus non morbi. But if it be asked, what we
would have you do, our present or Answer is; first advise with the Lord by
faith and prayer, about Declarations, and the good peoples expectations in your
Closet a little) for it is said of Carelus Magnus (oh that the like might be
said of you!) Plus cum Deo quam cum hominibus lequitur, God then with men, or
any of his Court. 2. And then Proclaim Fast or solemae day of humiliation for
the errors and sins past, as 1 Kings 21.27.29. it came to pass when Ahab heard
those words he rent his clothes and fasted, and lay in sack cloth, etc. and the
Lord said, see thou how Ahab humbles himself, because he humbles himself
before me I will not bring the evil in his days. And in 1 Samuel 12.19. The
people said, Samuel pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God that we dye
not, for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask a King, and why
was this so great a sin? see Sam. 8.5. they said make us a King, like as all
the Nations about us have) And the Lord said, verse. 7. They have not rejected
thee but they have rejected me, that I should not Reign over them; this was
their great sin, seeing the Lord himself would have ruled them, and redeceived
the alone Absolute Government over them, upon which account Gideon (good man)
refused it) Judges 8.23. saying. I will not rule ever you, but the Lord shall
rule ever you, 3. Furthermore, let a solemn day and duty be set apart to seek
the Lord, for advice and Council what to do; which good Princes and people
always did upon straits and emurgencies of old, as Judge. 7.23.27. shall we go
forward or cease (say they) so 2 Chronicles. 20 3. Iehosaphat feared, and set
himself to seek^ the Lord, did proclaimed a Fast throughout Judah: so Ezra
8.23. the want of this makes so much complaint by the Lord, as in Amos 6.13.
Ye rejoice in a thing of naught saying, have we not taken to us horus by our
own strength? And Hosea 8 4 They have set up Kings but not by me, and Princes
and I know it not, that it without so much as asking it at my hands, or
consulting with my word, or my Seers (as they should do) but of their own
heads they have done this. Therefore let the Lord be sought to about these
things, What to be done in order to return
seeing other things were justly expected from them that professed Christ; but
the Summer is ended, yea the Harvest is past and we are not refreshed! O my
Lord! trust not to such Flatterers as always speak smooth Things to you, and
prophecy deceitfully; O hear a little the Lords own Seers! via. the Ministers
of the Unction from an High^. And therefore let out the Lords Prisoners (whom
the Churches are robbed of) viz. Mr. Feak and Mr. Simpson and that they may
open to you the present vision of God given them in these things! according to
the dispensation of the spirit! O hear them! once (at last) preach to you in
the power of Jesus; ^or whom (alone) they suffer, infirmities excepted, and by
the word of the Lord try the spirit whither of God or no? for we are persuaded
as long as they be in Prison you will be in blindness to the Truth, (Tanquam ad
doctrinam peregrinam) Therefore let them have though but for a month or two,
and though but half so much Liberty, to open the word of the Lord to you, as
your Chaplains have, if they preach not the very Truth, and prove it to be so
before all men imprison them again, Let out the Lords prisoners M. Feak M.
Simson, Han. Trapnal now in Bridewel for Christ.
and us too with them in this cause; though hitherto we may say, as Luther
said, Fideliter praedicare nihil alind est quam furorem mundi in se derivare,
our Faithful preaching has raised up fury against us. O my Lord! think of
these things; these are the swords that pierce through our very souls, we sue
not for our own lives, but for yours herein; did not Pharaoh send for Joseph
out of prison, to interpret his dream? Genesis 41. and Belshassar send for Dan.
chap 5. to open his vision, yea and preferred him too, though Daniel declared his
ruin, according to vision; Surely, surely, you will find it then, the wisdom of
God is more excellent then the arts and sciences of the wise men about you. But
if you will yet go on, adexitium potius quam ad exercitium, after all our
bleeding entreaties, and be hardened up by the dangerous counsel of your own
Reason or them about you, then my Lord, our souls shall mourn in secret for you,
as for one desperately lost indeed, and we shall proceed to bear our testimony
against the sins of the times; for our appeals hangs in heaven, and we cannot
recall it, yea as Luther once said, Quo magis illi furunt eo amplius precede,
the more men rage, the more resolute we hope to be in our Appeals says and
prayer to our JEHOVAH, continuing up the Altar ED for a witness, between us and
our Adversaries; yea and come if need be as the Christians did by whole Troops
to Arrius Antonious proclaiming themselves Christians, Our Resolution
and offering themselves up to the death for the Truth: Being assured in our
very souls, though we now mourn we shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and ^ull
of glory, Luctus in laetitiam convertetur, lachrymae in risum, sa^cus in
sericum cineres in corellas and unguentum, jejunium in epulum, et ^anuum
retortio in applausum, In the meantime I beseech you my Lord pardon
infirmities, for God has pardoned them, and own what God owns, that is truth:
For potius in ardentem regum in siluere, quam ullum peccatum in deum commisero,
as one said, I had rather, the Lord knows I think, leap into a bonfire, then
wilfully commit wickedness or sin against God, yea mallem obedire quam
miracula facere, as Luther said, I had rather be obedient to my God then work
miracles, and surely my Lord, will you be a little serious, you will say that
it is Conscience to our duty which does altogether prompt us to this present
contest, for the truth, Cause, and interest of our dear Lord Jesus the King of
Saints, and Nations, wherein I am heartily desirous, to be ready to live or
die, which my Master, whom I serve will have me herein, without the least
tit^le or compound of Fraud, or Flattery. So far as I may,

Your True Sincere Servant, JOHN ROGERS.


