A GREAT FIGHT AT Walmer Castle In the County of KENT, BETWEEN The Parliaments
Forces who had besieged the said Castle, and the forces sent over by His
Highness the Prince of Wales. With the manner of the Fight, the success
thereof, and the number that were slain on both sides.

Likewise, the Princes relieving of the two Castles of Deal and Sandown. And
the Declaration of the new raised Forces at Hounsley-Heath, for the King, and
their resolution touching the Parliament and Army.

Printed for general satisfaction of all loyal subjects, MDCXLVIII.

STRANGE NEVVES FROM KINGSTON Concerning The gathering together of a great
party of Horse for the King, and their Resolution to settle Him in His Royal
Throne.
Honored Sir,
THe Royalists in these parts begin to grow to a great head, and the
disaffected party seems somewhat numerous; they give out, that they are
jointly resolved, to have the King immediately inthroned, and that they have a
great party in London who are resolved to join with them for the accomplishing
the same; and indeed it does manifestly appear to be truth, instanced by their
present commotions about the to vnsadjacent, for upon Tuesday night last, a
party of Horse marched over the Bridge into this town, and quartered here all
night, but kept a Horse Guard at the Bridge Foot, and another at the further
end of the town, and in the morning about 9. of the clock they all marched
over the Bridge, and drew up into a Body, and declared their resolution, to
stand and fall, and live and dye together, in their present Engagement for
there inthroning of the King, and settling of the peace of the Kingdom; but
their immediate actions soon changed the fair gloss of their subtle
pretenses, for diverse of them rode out into the country, and disturbed the
peace of the country, using many insolent out rages, and plundering diverse
well-affected and godly persons.

Their numbers increase daily, and unless speedily prevented, will grow to a
great head.

It is reported, that diverse great ones are amongst them, as several Earls
and Lords, viz. the young Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Holland, and several
other Lords of eminency.

Some report, that if they be not suppressed within 2 or 3 days, their number
will increase to many thousands.

Others again report, that so soon as they have gained a considerable party,
they are resolved to raise the siege at Colchester.

They seize upon all the Horse that possible they can light of, and many
country Royalists come in unto them, they are gallantly mounted, and exceeding
well armed, and gives out many reproachful speeches against the Parliament.
Sir, by the next, you shall receive a more fuller account, from

Your most humble and devoted servant, Daniel Rogers.
Kingston 6. July, 1648. Postscript.
SIR,
Upon the close of this Letter, a further discovery was made of the designs and
intentions of the new listed Army, viz. Upon their meeting and randevouring
together, they declared for the King, and protested to live and dye in the said
engagement. Their number consists of about 8. or 900, Many of them came from
London, both Gentlemen, and Apprentices, and many of them of the counties of
Surrey and Sussex. Here is also the Duke of Buckingham, who is thought will be
designed General, as also the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Holland the Earl
of Peterborough, and diverse other Lords and Gentlemen. And it is said there is
expected 7. or 800. more very speedily.

Yesterday morning they had a general meeting at Hounsley-Heath, whither
diverse come from the city of London, and out of the Country, some with Arms,
and some without, and they give out, that they doubt not but within three days
to be three thousand strong, and further says, that they shall then new
modilize the Parliament.

They have seized on diverse horses of Sir John Dinglies, and others, out of
their Grounds and Stables, for the service of the King.

They intend to randezvouz near Hare Warren, a great Moor near Hampton Court,
and there to receive Orders (if not prevented,) touching their present Design,

For which purpose, there are come diverse of the Kings old Officers, under whom
it is conceived they will be settled. And that there are 3. or 400. foot that are
designed to seize upon Lambeth house, and there to plant Ordnance against the
two Houses of Parliament, and we likewise hear, that a great party of horse
are appointed to guard them.

The expect within 2 or 3 days to be in a Body of 2000. Horse and Foot, and
when they are thus joined, then they are (as it is said) to go to raise the
siege at Colchester.

There is some speeches as if they had a design to attempt the surprising of
the Comittee at Derby-house, before they go to relieve Colchester. They pretend
to rise to fetch the King home to the Parliament, etc. and use many fair
pretenses to draw in others amongst them.

But we hear, that there is a party of horse coming from the Lord General to
suppress them, which is all at present from

Your devoted servant, D. R.



A great Fight at Walmer Castle in Kent, betwixt a party belonging to his
Highness the Prince of Wales, and the Parliaments Forces.
SIR,
Upon Wednesday last, there happened a desperate engagement betwixt the
Parliaments Forces, and a party belonging to his Highness the Prince of Wales,
at Walmer Castle, the manner thus.

The Prince having sent a party from France, under the command of Col.
Fitz-Beal, with Arms and Ammunition for the relief of the two Castles of Deal
and Sandown, and having effected the same, the said Colonel resolved for Walmer
Castle, and thereupon hoysted sail and steered toward Walmer, where they
arrived toward the evening, accompanied with three other ships very well
manned, and when they were within half musket shot of the shore, they let fly a
broad side at the Parliaments forces, who were entrenched upon the Breach near
the Castle; insomuch, that there began a very dangerous and hot dispute, the
fight continuing for the space of an hour and a half; the Cavalry played very
fast with their great and small shot all the time, the Parliamenteers answered
them with the like Volleyes, and at the last beat them off from the shore, and
for^ed them to Sea, with the loss of six men, and nine wounded.

The Enemy fought resolutely, but (it is sup posed) with a great deal of loss
made their retreat, for it is said that diverse were seen to fall upon the Decks
of the ships.

This is a great dishearming to the besieged, to have relief attempted without
success, though as yet they slight any overture of surrender or treaty. Diverse
Grenades have been shot into the castle, yet are they within not brought
thereby to the least compliance of disposition to yield.

Canterbury July 6. 1648. four in the morning.
FINIS.

