Englands Threnodie.
OR A brief and homely Discovery of some jealousies and grievances, under
which the kingdom at present groaneth; Affectionately tendered by Lady Anglia,
to all her dear children, the lovers of their Country, and Well-willers to
Truth and Peace: Especially to her worthy Sons, the Members of both Houses of
Parliament.
march 10th 1647
MY dear Inhabitants shut not your eyes;
But look upon the dangers manifold
Which do occasion these my woeful cries.
I having born as long as well I could,
Am forced to vent the causes of my grief,
To all that may afford the least relief.
Expect no curious order, lofty style,
Or feigned fancies to adorn my words.
Disastrous sorrows (striving all the while
Which shall cut deepest) cause such harsh discords
Amid my music; that I greatly fear,
Few will have patience my complaint to hear.
In homely dress my lines shall be attired,
It Is for thy sake (O Countryman) I write:
I would be understood, and not admired
For Latine-English Phrases; at whose sight
Thou may astonished be, but profit small
Can be by thee attained, if ought at all.
The naked truth without poetic skill
Of Adventitious colors I shall paint;
The Pagan Muses shall not guide my quill,
No Heliconian sister I Will acquaint
With my design: but leave them to such men
As to delight their Readers fables pen.
I Will not be tedious; give me leave to be plain,
I England, once the glory of all Lands;
(Even since the time that Charles began his Reign
For learning, godliness, and warlike hands;
(To which may added be such wealth and stor
That scarcely could I wish or look for more:)
Do on a sudden feel such alteration,
As if my sinews shrunk, and vein-blood dried;
Nothing almost retains his wonted fashion,
All goodness in a manner's laid aside.
Such wickedness and looseness does abound,
As in my neighbour-lands can scarce be found.
So well a tempered, happy government
Of King, with Peers and Commons, I enjoyed
(Until sinister practices had rent
These joint asunder) that none me annoyed,
But some effectual course was quickly ta'n
To disappoint all such as sought my bane.
Although the Papists, weary of their yoke
Did often assay the means to throw it by:
Yet all their strength and cunning never broke
This threefold cord wherewith I did them tie.
The Navy, called Invincible, from Spain,
With shame and loss I thither sent again,
The Powder Plot (unparalleled I think
Throughout the world for wicked treachery)
Which brought my Parliament unto the brink
Of death: and all near to adversity;
My God in the nick of time, discovered,
And brought the mischief on the workers head.
All insurrections of rebellious men
The wisdom of my Governors brought down:
When Anarchy was likely now and then
To get possession, and abase the Crown:
Jack Cade, John Wall, Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw
With Wyat knew what it is to pose my Law.
But now (alas) if any such arise,
(Which may fall out ere long for ought I see)
What means is left to quash such enemies,
Since mine amongst themselves so disagree?
I quake as often as I the dangers view
In which I stand, and know not how t'eschew,
A vip'rous brood called Cavaliers I bred,
Which sucked my breasts; yet so unthankful are,
That me they have not only tortured
With Wars and Taxes, never making spare,
But would expose me unto any ill,
If they thereby may but obtain their will.
Come French, Italian, Spaniard, Irish, Dane,
(Yea almost devil) if he roundheads hate,
To them he is welcome, he can have no stain
So horrid, but they will have him for their mate.
Were now the Spanish Navy on the Sea,
How glad would these men be to make it way!
How many Miscreants wish Ireland lost,
That so those Rebels might my bowels tear!
How many desperate Caitiffs have been crossed
When they of Jone's success so much did hear!
Yet such (alas) are harbor'd in my breast,
As, all that in them lies oppose my rest.
Besides all these, some are in Foreign Lands,
Improving (questionless) their pains and art,
To bring in Princes with their armed bands,
Against my children dear to take their part.
Now judge, if cause I have not thus to cry,
Seeing such blows, and cannot put them by.
But some may say; Malignants now are quel'd:
What need you then so strangely still to rave?
They Are outed of the places which they held:
Many are laid already in their grave.
Some are at home disarmed, some over Sea gone;
And scattered so, that danger can be none.

God owned them, and their enemies brought down.
But much I fear lest some have since forsook
The Lord, which gave them once such high renown.
I cannot now such forwardness espy,
As when they first engaged mutually.
Amongst the rest, this was one thing they swore;
[To bring Delinquents to deserved doom:]
But many that have made it heretofore
Their trade to slay Gods people, are at home,
Possessing much, if not their whole estate;
And do against my children boldly prate.
Who would believe, except he saw the same,
What rabble routs of them do meet together,
(And not without some arms) to drink and game,
And cast (as may be thought) for change of weather?
Some speak outright, and tell my children plain,
They hope ere long to rule the roast again.
The Lords of mis-rule in their Coaches sit,
And whirle it through my streets like gallant blades,
(For whom the Tyburn-hurdle were more fit)
Their wives attended with their grooms and maids
In pompous sort, as if deserved praise
attended on my spoylers now adays.
I daily see the lamentable cheer
Of well affected Tenants, which have spent
Much of their means, and lost their children dear
In service of the King and Parliament:
And have been plundered to the very quick,
Because they to their Covenant did stick.
It was their hope that wicked enemies,
When God had brought them down, should rule no more:
Who would have thought they should so quickly rise
Before the Tragedy was wholly over:
And those whom heretofore they sought to kill
Left unsecured to these Landlords will?
Shall these Malignant rake-hels make their peace,
And (uncontrouled) honest men oppress?
Make poor men wait a leisure for a lease,
And pay what they demand, be it more or less?
Shall they turn widows out, and children small,
Whose mates and fathers in my cause did fall?
Consider (worthy Parliament) your word
Is passed already, that you will protect,
And save such harmeless as shall draw the sword
In your just quarrel. O, then have respect
To poor men's livelihoods. Let not these Bears
Be turned loose, to cause more woe and fears.
You sit at Westminster, how should you hear
The plaints that are in every corner made?
You Landlords are your selves, and need not fear
The things that make the meaner sort afraid.
O, let it never be said; When you are secure,
Ye care not what your faithful friends endure.
This is one grievance; but it is not all:
My valiant Soldiers say they lack their pay,
(Though God before them made their foes to fall,
Which was to maintenance a ready way,)
Though Proposition-money with Excise
Besides free quarter, on my shoulders lies.
I speak not only of mine Army now:
But also such as since the wars begun,
And since have active been. There be I know
Full many which these wars have quite undone;
Yet could not get their dearly-earned pay,
Till want constrained them down their arms to la
Some using means to get debenturs out,
Have spent much time and moneys thereupon:
And after this ado they seem to doubt,
Whether it were not full as good to have none.
Some wish they had not been at so much cost,
Supposing this as well as the others lost.
Since the Author writ this fair for the Press, he hears of some likelihood
that this grievance will be temoved, which if it go on, he is content that
these three staves be looked on as null.
Others complain, that after much expense,
They have been called to such strict account
Of weeks and days, that under that pretense
They have been put by all. This does amount
To more then every body will suppose:
For thus these men their discontents disclose:
"Is It possible that each illit'rate man
"(Which yet may be a Soldier true and stout)
"Is It like (say they) that such a person can
"For three or four years space, without all doubt,
"Know when he served, and when not, to a day?
"Must he that herein fails lose his pay?
"Had we been weekly on yet monthly paid,
"There had not needed now so much ado:
"But now it having been so long delayed,
"They lay on us the blame and damage too.
"Sure they which should, and did not pay us ought,
"To keep true reckoning, though they gave us naught.
It Is strange to many, that Malignants come,
When they have done all th'mischief that they could,
And buy their peace for little, live at home
Of persons whom they plundered uncontrol'd;
Yet public debts for want unsatisfi'd;
The common people think there is something wide.
I fear my sister Ireland wants aid,
Which I could well afford her, were it not
That my divisions make my sons afraid,
And question what shall be my future lot.
Alas! this is my grief if down I go,
It is my self, my self that overthrow.
How is it (noble Army) that your strength
Which was my guard, and terror of my foes,
Is judged (how truly I Will not say, at length,
Time will the truth of hidden things disclose)
To lay these heavy burdens on my back,
While bleeding Ireland does your succor lack?
Great talk is moved, (as you well may judge)
By the seizing on, and flitting of the King,
And other your deportment. Cause no grudg
By undertaking rashly any thing.
I hope you will not: yet to abandon fear,
Let all men know you are the men you were.
When things were calm and peaceable within,
I little cared what dangers were without:
Could I persuade my children to punish sin,
And live in Unity, I would not doubt.
I durst bid all mine enemies do their worst;
Though Turk invaded me, and Pope me cursed.
But here is my grief; my sons legitimate,
Not only from the bastard brood divide:
But also amongst themselves do separate,
And into many parts and factions side.
One stands for this; another pleads for that:
A third's as zealous for he knows not what.
The Saints under the Bishops tyranny,
I or prayer and conference did often meet:
(Though persecuted for it) this harmony
Was evermore accounted to be sweet.
Yea in the hottest seasons of the War,
There was more love and unity by far.
Amongst professors there is such strangeness grown,
As almost is incredible to hear;
One Christian now will scarce another own,
(Except it be to back-bite and to tear;)
If there be any matter of dissent
Betwixt them, in the point of Government.
One praises much the Presbyteriall way,
Another likes the Congregationall:
But both of them persuaded (as they say)
That their's must stand, and the other needs must fall:
And scarcely will they hear each other speak,
Which were the way to rectify the mistake.
Does any of you bear such high conceits,
That all you hold and, nothing else, is sound?
The crafty Serpent many hundreds cheats,
When as they think they build on stable ground.
If that your hearts would suffer you, ye might
Lend to, and borrow from each other light.
O meet and pray together now again;
And study how to inform and edify:
Be not ashamed to throw by what is vain,
Seeking the truth, and not the mastery.
In things indifferent bear with one another,
Offend not any (though the weakest) brother.
Consider well the dangerous designs
That wicked men are driving all this while;
He that to any wretched Sect inclines,
Hopes to have freedom for it in your Isle:
What manner of opinion is so base;
That in my bosom hopes not for a place?
Some say the Scriptures are no more Gods Word,
Then that which any holy man does speak;
Some look for Revelations from the Lord,
And all the written word do quite forsake.
Some dare to write against the Holy Ghost;
And now he is famous that blasphemeth most.
Others despise the holy Trinity:
And dare to call it a three-headed Cat;
Some say the soul does with the body dye,
The Seekers are not yet resolved, what
To pitch upon: all their Religion now
Is that God must be served, but none knows how.
These vile opinions, and a great deal more,
Which are too surely known to grow in me,
Might have been plucked up (as once ye swore
In general all Heresies should be:)
Had you together stuck as brethren true,
Since God subdued your enemies under you,
But now they crake, and talk of toleration;
Yet hope I (children) you will not be so base,
To suffer such in quiet in your Nation,
As do revile your God unto your face.
Let none escape unpunished, (for shame)
That raileth on the Lords most holy name.
The rabble of ungodly and profane
Rejoice to see your jars, and fallings out:
For thus it comes to pass, no course is taken,
To bring them to their knees that are so stout.
Yea those whom you might by due censure win,
Through your default may harden in their sin.
Take heed of laying stumbling blocks in the way
Of silly Papists, whom ye may offend;
When they shall see you one from other stray,
And all your fellowship in pieces rend.
Surely it is pitiful, if whilst ye strive,
You any further from the truth shall drive.
In brief: If you regard Jehovah's praise,
Your own true joy, or tottering Kingdoms peace;
If ye the Heresies of these sad days,
And open wickedness would have to cease;
If you of others sins would not partake;
An end of your divisions seek to make.
There be some other things might be declared:
But these are principal, and most oppressed
My weary heart. And if that due regard
Be had to these, I shall unfold the rest:
Till when, and ever, I beseech you pray,
That God may take all grounds of fear away.
A. R.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1648.


