Sions Rock Exalted Over all the Earth to Reign: And the Worlds Foundation
discovered, which he will overthrow, with all its Builders and Buildings.

Therefore thus says the Lord God; Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a
Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure foundation, he that
beleiveth shall not make haste: And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder:

Isai. 28.16. Mat. 21.44. Moved of the Lord, and given forth (by a sufferer for
the Righteous Seed sake, in the common Goal of Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk, who is
scornfully called a Quaker) for the manifesting the true foundation of our
Religion, and the laying open deceit, and deceivers, to all that desire to know
the Truth, and to be delivered out of deceit, and the snare of the wicked one,
in which the deceivers and deceived are held captive.

And to all you Priests, that you may see your deceit, and co^^ from it, and
deceive the people no longer.

And all people cease from deceivers, and let no man deceive you with feigned
words: For God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and if you come to
know the Truth, the Truth shall make you free,

1 John 1.5. John 8.32, London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1656.

Sions Rock exalted over all the Earth to Reign: And the worlds foundation
discovered, which he will overthrow with all its Builders and Buildings.
CHRIST JESUS the same that ever was the beginning and end of all things, Rev.
22.13
the first and the last, he I am, and there is none else besides me; this is
the Rock of ages, Christ Jesus the word of God, who changes not, the same
yesterday, to day, Heb. 13.1.
and for ever; Rev. 13.8.
the same was slain from the foundation of the world; the Lamb of God, who
takes away the sins of the world; John 1 29.
the same upon whom all the holy men of God in all ages were builded, Psa.
48.14. and ^^.24. L ^^.79.
he that ever took away the sins of all that followed him, he was before the
foundations of the earth was laid; he was a guide to all the holy men of God in
all ages, and upon him they were builded; and he was their foundation, and rock
of defense, 2 Samuel 22.2. Rev. 14.3.
to guide and strengthen them in all Righteousness; he was their Redeemer and
redeemed them from the earth, he dwelt in the Saints, and commanded them and
the Prophets in allages, to do according to his will, and as he moved them, so
they spoak, or went and declared his messages in his power; and he was their
defense in all Righteousness; and he is the same and changes not; John 1.
the same word of God that ever was, the same that moved the holy men of God to
give forth the Scriptures; Rev. 19.13. 2 Pet. 1.21.
and he is the Life of the Scriptures; and they are a declaration of him;
Christ Jesus the word of God; who is the Saints foundation, Luke 1. 1 Pet.
2.6.7. Ephesians. 2.20 21.
the rock of ages, the head of the Church, and chief Corner stone of the
building, builded by God with stones elect and precious fitly framed for the
Masters use; and this Word of God in due time was made flesh, and dwelt among
the Disciples; and they beheld the glory of him, Joh. 1.12, 14.
as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth; and they
received him, and received power to become the Sons of God, the same Christ
Jesus that ever was, is the same and changes not; he is the Light of the
world, John 1.4. 7, 9. and 8.12. and 12.46.
and lights every man that comes into the world, that all men through him
might believe and be saved: And this is the foundation of our Religion, the
same that ever the holy men of God were builded upon, Mat. 7 25. and 16.18.
Christ Jesus the Rock of ages (he who has bought us with a price, and
ransomed us by his blood) in whom we believe, and by whose Light we have
received power to become the Sons of God; and all that believe in this light,
and walk in this light, Christ Jesus, they receive the Light of life; this is
he that knows the Father, and none knows the Father but him, Mat. 11.27
and them to whom he reveals him; and by the Revelation of this Son of God, do
we know the Fathers voice, and obey his Commands, and by his power are led
according to his will in all Righteousness; and this is the Rock on which we
are builded, and the foundation of our Religion, before whom no worker of
iniquity is able to stand, but he that works iniquity is by him condemned, 1
John 3, 5, 8.
and this is he Who is now made manifest, and condemns sin in the flesh, and
redeems all them that believe in the light of himself, into himself, and in him
there is no sin; and this holy One is our Redeemer, and redeems us into
himself; and this is the head of us all, who walk in the light; and we are
Members of this holy Body, where there is neither male nor female, but all one
in Christ, and him all in all: and here the world is destroyed, and the will
and lust of the flesh denied, and here flesh and blood cannot enter; but the
flesh, the vail is to be done away, and all that live in the lust of the flesh,
they crucify him the Lamb of God; and all that live in the delight of sin,
Joh. 3.19.
they love darkness better than light, and such the light condemns; and all
that will sollow him, must take up the cross and deny themselves, and he that
loves any thing better than him, is not worthy of him: and he that hates not
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and all that he has, Mat. 10 37
etc. Luke 14.27, 28.
and his own Life also, does not follow him, and cannot be his disciple: and
they whose love stands in earthly things, and therein have a life, their part
is not in him; and here they that will save their lives shall loose them, and
they that lay down their lives for Christ's sake shall save them: and this is
their assurance, who follow the Lamb through great tribulation, and love not
their lives unto the death; Rev. 7.14. and 13 4.
these are they which suffer with Christ, and have part in his death, and bear
about the dying of the Lord Jesus Christ, until the enmity be fully slain upon
the cross, and these suffer with Christ, and shall reign with Christ, these
have part in the Resurrection, and are redeemed from under the power of the
Lake, which is the second death, Rev. 20.14. Mat. 7.23. and 25.41.
in which all workers of iniquity are to have their part: and here all you that
live in wickedness may see, that you are not come to the death and resurrection
of Christ, nor have any part herein, but live in the world, from which
foundation the Lamb was slain, and do yet in you lie slain, and the Covenant of
God, the light in your Consciences, is hated, Isal. 42.6.
and the blood of the Covenant trampled upon, by the powers of darkness, with
which you join, whereby the Lamb is slain: and here you may see that you are
guilty of the blood of the Son of God; and how can you escape the death, who
are in such blood guiltiness? seeing that if man sheds man's blood he is to die;
and how much more will God be avenged for the blood of his only begotten Son,
Rev. 11.8.
who is crucified in you, and by you spiritually? and you are spiritually in
Sodom and Egypt, and are builded upon another foundation than the Lamb; and
your foundation is upon him, who slew the Lamb at first, and led man into the
transgression: Man was created upright, Eccles. 10.29.
but he found out many inventions, and run into them, and followed not the
Lamb, and for this cause came the Curse upon man, and in the curse do the world
live in wicked inventions, and follow the imaginations of their evil hearts,
which are subjected to the Devils will; and here is the foundation of the
world, the Serpent the subtle beast, Rev. 13.
who causes all the world to wonder after him, and worship him, and leads them
captive at hiis will, and the world seeks out many inventions, and are in many
ways, and sects, and forms, and opinions, all in the fall; and invent and
imagine many ways to find out the way of God, and conceive many things from
the Scriptures, which is a book sealed from them, and in the world is the many
meanings, and many judgments, and opinions of the words, which were never
spoken by such as they are, who according to the imaginations and conceivings
of their own hearts pretend to worship the living God, who is not known by such
as are in the wicked inventions, and there live after the deceitfulness of
their own hearts; and thus all the world lives in pretenses of worshipping the
true God, some in one way, and some in another way, and strive particularly to
maintain each his way, which are all in unrighteousness, Mat. 11.25 26, 27.
and none of them are come to know the Father by the revelation of the Son, nor
to know the Son, Genesis 10.
who reveals the Father, but are all as the builders of Babell, in great
confusion, though but one foundation they build upon, the Serpent, he who slew
the Lamb, and now has all the world to worship him, who are builders and build
by his power, and all along reject the Lamb, who in the Church is now become
the head of the Corner, Mat. 21.42. Rev, 19.18, 20, and 20.8.10,
who will overthrow Gog and Magog, and beat down the world and its foundation,
and overcome the Beast, and cast the false Prophets, and Priests, and worlds
Teachers, (who all live in wickedness) into the Lake together, and dash down
their foundation of unrighteousness, the Serpent, who lodges in the Schools
where the false Prophets learn their divination, and to divine for money, for
gifts and rewards, the wages of unrighteousness. And you Priests may see the
foundation of your Priesthood, and buildings, to be the Serpent who leads you
day by day to study Divination, and to follow after the inventions of your own
hearts: In the beginning man was made upright, but he found out many
inventions: and here you may see your buildings to be upon the Serpent, the
inventer of all evil, with whom you are at agreement, and are fully swallowed
up in your foundation of unrighteousness, the Serpent, who has led you long to
deceive the people, and to make a prey upon them, and some you have begotten by
your ministry to be one with you, and your strength, the Prince of darkness,
who over-shadoweth you, and many of your ignorant people that follow you, he
leads you all in wickedness, and ignorance, and unbelief, so that you are
resolved to go on in wickedness, so long as you live upon the earth, and in
your unbelief, judge, that none can live without sining, Rev. 12.17
and so blasphemes against the seed of the woman which keeps the Commands of
God, and against the Saints who are born of God and cannot sin, because the
Seed of God remains in them; and he that says he knows God, 1 John 3.9.
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, 1 John 2.4. and 2.6.
and the truth is not in him; and he that says he abides in Christ, ought he
himself to walk, even as he walked; and he that transgresses and abides not
in the doctrine of Christ, has not God; and Christ said to his, be ye perfect,
2 John 9. Mat. 5.48.
as your Father in heaven is perfect: and here you Priests may see in the
Scripture, that you are far from having God, who are resolved to go on in
wickedness, and would have people to believe, that none can be freed from sin
in this life, and so strive to keep people all their time in wickedness, and
you your selves know not that birth, wherein sin is not committed, and how can
you lead any into the new birth, Joh. 3.3.
without which none can enter into the Kingdom of God: and when Paul was in the
travel to the birth of the righteous Seed, that the war was great in him, he
cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death; and with this you blind the people, and tell them, that Paul cried out
of the body of sin so long as he lived, and so feeds the people with the
inventions of your own hearts; for Paul witnessed a deliverance from the body
of sin in this life, Gal. 2.19, 20.
and said in his Epistle to the Galatians, that he was dead to the Law, and
that it was no more he that lived, but Christ that lived in him; and where none
but Christ lives, there cannot be evil committed, neither did he then complain
of the body of sin, but was come to the birth of the just: and he wrote to
Timothy, that he had fought the good fight, and kept the faith; 2 Timothy 4.7
and then he did not complain of the body of sin, but was complete in Christ,
in whom there is no sin, and he spoak wisdom among them that was perfect, and
said, 1 Cor. 2.6. Phil. 3.15. 2 Cor. 13.11.
Let us therefore as many of us as be perfect be thus minded, and bad the
Corinthians be perfect; and yet with Paul's words you blind guides blind the
people, and make his complaints, while he was in the war, a cover for your
errors and heresies, wherein you lead the people in blindness, and you blind
guides will lead the blind, till you fall into the ditch of perdition. And
further to cover your deceit, you tell the people, that John says, if we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; this is no
ground nor warrant for you to tell people, that none can be freed from sin in
this life, ^ Joh. 1.7.
for he said, if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin; here John witnessed, that the blood of Christ cleanses from all
sin, and did not write, that they should all their life time live in sin,
though then some of them had sin, and were not cleansed, but he exhorted them
to the light, and that therein was their fellowship one with another, and that
the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin: and yet you priests dare tell the
people, that none can be freed from sin in this life, and so manifests your
selves to be ignorant of the blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin; but
by his power, who is the Author of sin, do you in your sins rail against them,
who witness forth the light and life of Christ, which leads into the birth,
wherein there is no sin; and by the light do they know the blood of Christ,
which cleanses them from sin, 1 John 3.6.9.
and see him manifest in them, in whom there is no sin. And these you call
deceivers and deluders, and call it an error to hold forth the truth of
perfection in this life, or that they witness the birth wherein sin is not
committed; and you make your ignorant people believe, that such are deceivers,
because they hold forth the life of the truth, wherein they live and differ
from you, who have got a form of godliness to trade with, 2 Timothy 3.5.
without the life and power, who are to be turned away from; and with the
Scriptures you blind the people, and tell them, that in the last times
deceivers and salfe Prophets shall come, and tell them, that we are the false
Prophets, though in life and doctrine we utterly deny the practices of them,
who were foretold to be the false Prophets; the true Prophets cried against
such as sought for their gain from their quarters, Isai. 56.11. Ezekiel. 34. Mic.
3.11. Mat. 23. and 5.6. Luke 11.43 Phil. 3.19.
and sought for the fleece, or preached for hire, and divined for money; and
Christ witnessed against such as was called of men masters, as stood praying in
the Synagogues, had the chiefest places in the Assemblies, and the greetings in
the Markets; and the Apostle Paul cried against such, whose God is their belly,
whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, and such who by good
words and fair speeches deceives the hearts of the simple, and witnessed, Romans
16.18. 2 Timothy 3.
that such should come in the last days, as should be lovers of them selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers; and here you may see your selves to be
the false Prophets, and that you are them that preach for hire, and divine for
money, and such as Christ cried against; and none are more covetous than you,
nor more proud than you, your Wives and Children; and here you may see, that
the Apostle prophesied of your coming; and the Apostle Peter cried against such
as through covetousness with feigned words make merchandise of the people,
having eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2.
and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have
exercised with covetous practices, cursed children, which have forsaken the
right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosar,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness; and Jude cried against such as went in
the ways of Cain and Balaam, Jude 11.16
and had men's persons in admiration because of advantage: and here all that
reads this, and knows the Scriptures, the light in their Consciences will let
them see, that you are the false Prophets, who are found in such practices as
the Scripture speaks against; and all that own the life of the Scriptures
cannot own you, who are manifested by the Scriptures to be deceivers, you live
in covetousness, and you use feigned words, and make merchandise of the people;
you feign your selves to be Preachers of Righteousness, and yet tell people,
that none can live here and not sin; and here you manifest your deceit, and
that you are strengtheners of evildoers, that they should not forsake the evil
of their doings; and thus you go on in your wickedness, and are exalted upon
your foundation, the Serpent, with whom you are joined, and upon him you are
builded, and therein preach to continue in sin all your life time, and many
have builded with you, and many you have dawbed with untempered mortar, and
tell them of a perfection in another life, which they that live in sin all
their life time will never be able to find, for their reward will be according
to their works, Rev. 22.12
and all workers of iniquity are to have their part in the Lake, and all that
build with that which they conceive and imagine to be of God, great will be
their fall when Christ Jesus the Rock of Righteousness appears in his Majesty
to reward every one according to their deeds done in the body. 2 Cor. 5.10


Given forth the sixth day of the fifth month in the common Goal of
Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk. Him that can receive this let him.


By George Rofe.

FINIS.

