THE INTENTIONS OF THE ARMY Plainly discovered, IN A Dispute between Major
General Brown, and Major Scot, an Independent, concerning the King.

Wherein is manifested how much they regard the honor and safety of his
Majesty's Person.

AS ALSO The occasion and manner of the late difference betwixt the said Major
General Brown, and Colonel WHALEY.

Certified in a Letter from Woobourne, Dated July 31. 1247.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Intentions of the Army plainly discovered.
SIR,
I Made you promise, faithfully to give you the account of what my observation
in the Court and Camp might hold worth your intelligence; you may justly
expect the performance: The King, whom always the greatness of his Spirit and
Resolution holds undaunted, bears it firm above the injury of Threatening,
and remains unterrified: however, Major Scot, an Independent Member (yet
deserves something to hang on) lately, and in the presence of the King, being
asked by Major G. Brown, what good end they would make in the House, made a
desperate sudden resolution, They could never make a good end, till they took
off the Kings heads that stood there to whom Major Genesis Brown replied; I had
thought, Sir, you had come to have kissed the Kings hand: Sir, said Major Scot,
I had rather follow him to the Gallows; and I think he spoke the sense and
intention of the Army* and what is ordinarily belcht out in their Drink, when
men in overcharged stomachs vomit out truth in the nakedness of their hearts.
The Ma. General immediately addresseth himself to his Majesty, made him
knowing of that desperate language, takes Scot by the shoulder, saying, Sir,
this is the man: the King, whom ever highest Providence and his own innocence
with miracle protects, slights the madness and malice of so poisonous a tongue.

Sir, I shall add one thing more, since I have so good occasion to name a man
of so much integrity and Honor. You may have heard imperfectly the quarrel
between Major Genesis and Col. Whaley; I shall give you a perfect relation, and
which Whaley himself dares not deny: The Commissioners and Col. Whaley being
set at Dinner, Whaley took an occasion to tell the Major General, he knew well
he was an enemy to their proceedings: indeed he replied he was, and must
openly declare to the world, he hated the baseness of their intentions. Sir,
said Whaley, had Sir Tho. Fairfax been ruled by me, our Army should have
marched up to the City, and have shaken their Gold Chains: then, Sir, said
the Major General, you intend by this to plunder the City, as you have droven
away the Members; but if they were all of my mind, and at unity within
themselves, we would not care for five times your Army (and as we are, we regard
you not) we would draw out, and fight with you in the field: What, said the
Colonel, with a company of Cobblers, Tinkers, Tapsters, and Tankard-bearers; I
know not, said the Ma. Genesis but you may have such in your Army, and there is
none but has: to whom Whaley answered, but Runners for their Officers; Essex
and Mass^y's reformers: Sir, said Ma. Genesis Brown, let me tell you, there are
as gallant brave gentlemen among them as any in your Army, and have fought as
bravely and gallantly: you will expect some, said Whaley; to whom the Ma. Genesis
replied, None: yes, one or two, said Whaley; not your General, quoth Ma.
Brown: I tell you, said Whaley, they are Runners. Ma. Genesis at the repetition
not a little moved, replied, By God, Sir, you lie, and I will make it good with
my sword; and know you, that nothing but your sword shall give me satisfaction:
and whereas you think your Command will countenance you to affront men (for he
had just told him he would remove him from his place) I will fight with you in
the face of your three Regiments. Sir, I am a Citizen and a Reformist, and hold
my self concerned in your language, and will maintain those Gent. as gallant
as any in your Army, and will my self fight with your General; let him draw
up his whole Army and engage that not a man do me violence but himself. The
contention was high, Col. Whaley not over-forward to draw, yet his hand on his
hilt, was easily withheld by the company, and certainly Ma. Genesis was not
behind-hand: the King had notice of it, and took up the difference betwixt
them. You shall do well, to let those Genesis know, how much they are engaged to
the courage of that gallant and honest man, seriously as he carries on every
thing with high regards to his honor; in this he did not out do himself. His
gallantry and Resolution is eminently known, and though his courage fly high,
yet never to lessening, so undaunted and well tempered a mind he bears. Sir,
I hold you too long, I beg your pardon, give me leave to tell you, I expect no
good from this Army but by accident, intentionally destruction to the K. and P.
the liberty they take of language, the unreasonablenes of their demands, and
all for themselves, give small encouragement to hope a good end by them, yet I
wonder they should so openly speak their thoughts of destroying the King, as if
Monarchy were ended in him, whose numerous Royal Issue gives enough to
understand, we can be happy in no other Government.

VVoobourne, July 31. Your humble Servant, G. R.


