THE SOLDIERS CATECHISM: Composed for The Parliaments Army: Consisting of two
Parts: wherein are chiefly taught: 1 The Justification of our Soldiers. 2 The
Qualification of our Soldiers.


Written for the Encouragement and Instruction of all that have taken up Arms
in this Cause of God and his People; especially the common Soldiers.

2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good.

Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

Imprimatur.

JA. CRANFORD.



Printed for J. Wright in the Old Bailey. 1644

THE SOLDIERS CATECHISM: Composed for the Parliaments Army.
Question. WHat Profession are you of?

Answer. I am a Christian and a soldier.

Q. Is it lawful for Christians to be soldiers?

A. Yea doubtless: we have Arguments enough to warrant it.

1. God calls himself a man of war, and Lord of Hosts.

2. Abraham had a Regiment of 318. Trained men.

3. David was employed in fighting the Lords battles.

4. The Holy Ghost makes honorable mention of David's Worthies.

5. God himself taught David to fight.

6. The noble gift of valor is given for this purpose.

7. The New Testament mentions two famous Centurions.

8. The Baptist does not require the soldiers to leave their profession, Luke
3.14.

9. Many comparisons are taken from this Calling in the New Testament.

10. There have been many famous Martyrs of this profession.

Q. What does our Savior mean then by those words? Mat. 5.39.

A. 1. Christ there only forbids private revenge and resistance.

2. Scripture is the best interpreter of Scripture: we know that other places
of Scripture do warrant taking up of Arms in some cases.

Q. What side are you of, and for whom do^ you fight?

A. I am for King and Parliament: or, in plainer terms;

1. I fight to recover the King out of the hands of a Popish Malignant Company,
that have seduced His Majesty with their wicked Counsels, and have withdrawn
him from his Parliament.

2. I fight for the Laws and Liberties of my Country, which are now in danger
to be overthrown by them that have long labored to bring into this Kingdom
an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Government.

3. I fight for the preservation of our Parliament, in the being whereof (under
God) consists the glory and welfare of this Kingdom; if this Foundation be
overthrown, we shall soon be the most slavish Nation in the Christian World.

4. I fight in the defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion,
which is now violently opposed, and will be utterly suppressed in this Kingdom;
and the Popish Religion again advanced, if the Armies raised against the
Parliament prevail.

Q. But is it not against the King that you fight in this Cause?

A. No surely: yet many do abuse the world with this base and absurd objection:
our only aim is,

1. To rescue the King out of the hands of his and the Kingdoms enemies; and
to maintain his Honor and just Prerogatives.

2. We endeavor to defend that which the King is bound to defend, both by his
Oath and Office.

3. We take up Arms against the enemies of Jesus Christ, who in His Majesty's
name make war against the Church and People of God.

4. If the King will join himself with them that seek the ruin of his people,
and the overthrow of Religion, surely both we and all good Subjects, may
lawfully stand in the defense of both; as the people did against King Saul in
the case of Jonathan, 1 King. 14.45.

5. We do no more then what our Brethren of Scotland did, when they came into
this Kingdom with an Army some three or four years since; whose Action the
King and both Houses have cleared from all Rebellion, and they remain
justified in what they then did, to all posterity, by an Act of Parliament.

Q. Has not the King published many Protestations that he will maintain our
Laws, Liberties and Religion? why then do we fear the subversion of them?

A. 1. Many things have been published in his Majesty's name, which in all
probability he never saw or knew of.

2. Though the King himself may intend really and well, yet the Sons of
Zervia are too strong for him.

3. It is not to be imagined that a Popish Army will defend the Protestant
Religion, or lawless Libertines, the Laws of the Land.

4. We find by woeful experience that he has many ways failed in diverse of
those large Promises and Protestations, notwithstanding that God has been so
often called to witness.

5. They say it is a Maxim now at Court, that Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics, and such, do some there, account all true Protestants.

Q. How can you that are Soldiers for the Parliament answer that place of
Paul, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. etc.

A. 1. That place requires not obedience to any unlawful Commands, neither
does any other place of Scripture, we are no further to obey man, then may
stand with the will of God.

2. They are grossly mistaken which say the King is the highest power; Indeed he
is the highest person in his Dominions, but the Laws and Courts of the Kingdom
are above him in power, and the King himself is limited and subject to the
meanest Court in the Land: Therefore surely the high Court of Parliament must
needs be the higher Power, which not to obey, is to resist the Ordinance of
God.

3. Suppose the King were the Higher Power, yet if he shall intend or permit
the ruin of his Subjects, both nature and grace allows people to preserve
themselves.

4. If the King be the higher power by constitution, yet is his power now in
other hands by usurpation. The Queen, Iermin, Bristol, Digby, Cottington,
Windebanke, Porter, and many others have for a long time, and do still manage
the greatest affairs of the Kingdom; so that it were a miserable thing to be
subjected in conscience (as that Text imports, if some men's exposition might
pass for orthodox Divinity) to such enemies and incendiaries both of Church
and Commonwealth.

Q. What is it that moves you to take up Arms, and to engage your self in this
Civil War?

A. 1. The love I bear to my Country.

2. The preservation of our Parliament, Laws and Liberties.

3. The defense of our Religion against Popery.

4. The care of our Posterity.

5. The general forwardness of all good people.

6. The consent, and provocation of all Gods Ministers.

7. The command of the Parliament, which is the Higher Power.

8. The necessity that now lies upon all that fear God in the Land.

Q. What do you think then of those Protestants which sit still, and do not put
forth themselves in these times?

A. 1. Either they are not convinced of the necessity.

2. Or they are but lukewarm Professors.

3. Or they are of base and private spirits.

4. Or they are faint-hearted cowards.

5. Or they are secret enemies to God and his Cause.

Q. What danger are such Newters in?

A. 1. God takes special notice of their disposition and carriage, and will
deal with them accordingly.

2. In Gods account all such are enemies; they that are not with him are
against him.

3. They deserve neither respect nor protection from Church or Commonwealth.

4. They are in danger to be spued out of Christ's mouth, Rev. 3.16.

5. They are directly under that dreadful curse which the Angel of the Lord
denounced against Merosh, Judge. 5.23.

Q. What say you then of those Protestants, which fight on the other side, and
join with the Enemies of our Religion, Parliament, and Country?

A. 1. I say, that they are unworthy the name of Protestants.

2. I say, that they maintain the cause of Antichrist.

3. That they are the shame and blemishes of Religion.

4. That none of their weapons shall prosper, Isa. 54.17.

5. That God will utterly undo them, Zeph. 3.19.

6 That their swords shall enter into their own hearts, Psalm. 37.15.

7. That all the blood that has been shed lies upon their score.

8. That they are in the highway to perdition, without repentance.

Q. What is the reason think you, that so many Protestants, of all degrees,
join with our Popish enemies?

A. 1. Many are only Protestants in name, but indeed are Papists, or Atheists
in heart.

2. Many are drawn in to join with that Party out of a base fear of suffering
in their estates, supposing the Kings side would be the safest.

3. Many to avoid the Justice of Parliament, have hazarded the ruin of their
Country, to save themselves from their deserved punishment.

4. Many have engaged themselves with the Kings Party, in hope to make up their
broken fortunes.

5. Many for fear of Reformation, which they are not able to endure, and
therefore join with them that oppose it.

6. Many out of a desperate spirit of Malignancy, and an implacable enmity
against the people of God, and all goodness.

Q. What is it that you chiefly aim at in this war?

A. 1. At the pulling down of Babylon, and rewarding her as she has served us,
Psalm. 137.8

2. At the suppression of an Antichristian Prelacy, consisting of Archbishops,
Bishops, etc

3. At the Reformation of a most corrupt, lazy, infamous, superstitious,
soule-murdering Clergy.

4. At the advancement of Christ's Kingdom and the purity of his Ordinances.

5. At the bringing to Justice the enemies of our Church and State.

6. At the regulating of our Courts of Justice, which have been made the seats
of iniquity and unrighteousness.

7. At the upholding of our Parliaments, which are the Subjects best
Inheritance, and the Crown of our Nation.

8. At the preservation, and continuing of the Gospel to our posterity, and
the generations to come.

Q. What hopes have you of prevailing in this Cause?

A. We have encouragements enough to assure us of good success: there be many
arguments to confirm our hope.

1. From the justness and goodness of the Cause.

2. From the course that has been taken.

3. From the condition of those that are engaged in the business.

4. From the quality of our enemies.

5. From the cheerfullnesse of most men's spirits in this Action.

6. From the many defeats and victories already given and obtained.

7. From the assistance of our Brethren of Scotland.

8. From the Covenant which all the well-affected of the Kingdom have entered
into.

Q. Explain these more particularly and in order, and first show me what hopes
you conceive from the goodness of the Cause?

A. 1. A good Cause puts life and courage into men's hearts.

2. A good Cause has GOD ever siding with it.

3. A good Cause daunts and dismays the adverse party.

4. A good Cause will undoubtedly prevail at last.

Q. What is your encouragement from the course that has been taken?

A. 1. In that all fair and Christian ways have been attempted before we
took up Arms.

2. In that the Lord was solemnly and generally sought unto before this
business was undertaken.

3. In that it was undertaken with good advice, and is guided by a multitude of
Counselors.

4. In that it is still followed with the Prayers and humiliations of all the
faithful in the Land.

Q. What hope have you from them that are engaged in this War?

A. 1. Because all the faithful and godly Ministers of the Kingdom, do side
with us in this Cause.

2. Because the most of our Commanders are men of dis-ingaged and Public
Spirits.

3. Because our men generally are so full of courage and resolution.

4. Because we have so many godly and religious Soldiers in our Armies.

Q. What from the quality of your enemies?

A. We may conclude that God will not prosper them.

1. Because they are for the most part Papists and Atheists, with whom we have
to deal.

2. Because they are generally the most horrible Cursers and Plasphemers in the
World.

3. Because they are, for the most part, inhumane, barbarous and cruel.

4. Because they are enemies to God, and the power of goodness, and therefore
the Lord will scatter them.

Q. What do you gather from the cheerfulness of their spirits, that are of
your party?

A. 1. It Is an Argument that God has raised his servants to do some great
work, Psalm. 149.5.9.

2. It Is an Argument that God will prosper those whom he has made so willing,
Judge. 5.2.

3. It Is an Argument that such as are so willing and cheerful in this
business, will go on courageously.

4. It Is an Argument that they are so well assured of the goodness of their
Cause, that they will live and die in it.

Q. What do you conclude from the good success that your side has already
had?

A. 1. That Almighty God declares himself a friend to our Party.

2. That he has already much abated the courage of our enemies.

3. That we have all the reason in the World to trust God for the future, who
has done so much for us.

4. That the Lord will glorify himself more and more in his Churches behalf.

Q. What hopes have you from your Brethren of Scotland?

A. 1. We have cause to acknowledge Gods great mercy in bringing them to our
assistance at this time.

2. Their numbers and preparations are great, and they a courageous and warlike
Nation.

3. They have given sufficient testimony of late of their love and
faithfulness toward our Nation.

4. They are as much concerned in this Quarrel as we, and are resolved to
join with us in it.

Q. But what grounds have you to comfort your selves from the National
Covenant, which you say so many have entered into?

A. 1. Because it is a testimony of our general humiliation, and a good
beginning of Reformation.

2. Because it is the joy and desire of all good Christians throughout the Land.

3. Because Popery never received so deadly a blow in this Kingdom, as by this
Covenant.

4. Because all the Parliaments affairs have prospered well since the Covenant
was taken, witness our many victories and successes: As 1. Gloucester, 2.
Newbury, 3. Winchby, neete Horne-Castle, 4. Hull, the same day, 5. Lincoln, 6.
Gainsborough, 7. Arundell Castle, 8. Nantwich, 9. Alsford near Winchester,
besides many other defeats given the enemy, and diverse other places of lesser
note recovered, without any considerable loss on our side.

Q. But is it not a lamentable thing that Christians of the same Nation, should
thus imbrue their hands in one another blood?

A. I confess it is: But as the case now stands, there is an inevitable and
absolute necessity of fighting laid upon the good people of the Land.

1. Is it not high time to stand upon our guard, when our enemies have drawn
their Swords upon us, to invade our persons, and whatsoever is dear to us.

2. God now calls upon us to avenge the blood of his Saints that has been shed
in the Land, and those many outrages which have been committed against his
servants.

3. The whole Church of God calls upon us to come in to the help of the Lord
and his people against the mighty.

4. Our children and posterity call upon us to maintain those Liberties, and
that Gospel, which, we received from our forefathers.

5. We are not now to look at our enemies as Countrymen, or Kinsmen, or
fellow-Protestants, but as the enemies of God and our Religion, and siders with
Antichrist; and so our eye is not to pity them, nor our sword to spare them,
Ier. 48.10.

Q. There are a great many on the Kings Party that have been held honest men,
etc. will your sword make no difference between them and others?

A. 1. If they join themselves with the malignant Party, we cannot know them
from Malignants.

2. It is to be feared, that such were never of us, because they are so cruel
against us: hypocrites commonly when they are unmaskt, prove the most dangerous
enemies.

Q. Who do you think were the Authors, and occasioners of this unnatural
War?

A. 1. The Jesuits, those firebrarnds of mischief, with all the Popish party.

2. The Bishops, and the rotten Clergy, with all the Prelaticall party.

3. The Delinquents, that were not able to abide the trial of Justice, with
all the Malignant party.

4. The formal Gospellers of the Kingdom, that hate a Reformation, with all
the Atheistiall party.

Q. Do not many of them that you count your enemies, stand for Religion as well
as you?

A. 1. Surely they are mad, that think the Papists will fight in defense of
the Protestant Religion.

2. They are very simple, that expect any care of the true Religion from the
Prelates and their party, who have been the grand persecuters of it.

3. Neither is it to be imagined, that men so loose, lewd, and wicked, as most
of your Cavaliers are, should really intend the preservation of Religion, or
any thing else that is good.

4. We know the Earl of Newcastle pretends that he fight for Religion, yet his
Army is for the most part Popish, and he said not long since, That men might
talk of Religion, and so forth, but Religion of it self was but an ayerie
thing.

5. Their rage and madness against those that they know to have been most
zealous and forward in the maintenance and profession of the Protestant
Religion, does sufficiently show how cordially they stand for Religion.

6. Indeed they do stand for Religion, but just as the Ephesians stood for
Diana, Acts 17.

1. They stand for a Popish Prelacie. 2. They stand for an Ignominious Clergy.
3. They stand for the soule-starving Service-Booke. 4. They stand for a
company of stinking Ceremonies. 5. They stand for abominable Monuments of
Idolatry. 6. They stand for unchristian liberty.
Q. Do you think that there will be a Reformation of these things before we
shall enjoy any peace?

A. Yea doubtless: and I gather it from these Reasons.

1. Because Gods anger is let loose upon this Nation for these things.

2. Because about this time hundred years Popery was suppressed in this
Kingdom; and it is noted, that every Centurie, or hundred years, has produced
great alterations in the Church.

3. Because it is Reformation that our Enemies do most fear.

4. Because the Devil and his Instruments do so bestirre themselves at this
time.

5. Because all the reformed Churches in Christendom pray for and expect our
Reformation.

6. Because the measure of our enemies iniquity is now full.

7. Because a solemn Oath and Covenant is taken to that purpose.

The Second Part of the Soldiers Catechism.
Q. WHat are the principal things required in a Soldier?

A. 1. That he be religious and godly.

2. That he be courageous and valiant.

3. That he be skillful in the Military Profession.

Q. How do you prove that our soldiers should be religious?

A. 1. By Scripture: Deuteronomy. 23.9. Luke 3.14.

2. Besides, there be many Reasons to confirm it.

1. Because they lie so open to death.

2. They stand in continual need of Gods assistance.

3. They fight for Religion and Reformation.

4. God has raised them up to execute justice.

5. Men may be as religious in this Profession as in any other.

6. We read of brave soldiers that have been very religious.

7. A well ordered Camp is a School of Virtue, wherein is taught, 1.
Preparation to death, 2. Continency, 3. Vigilancie, 4. Obedience, 5.
Hardness, 6. Temperance, 7. Humility, 8. Devotion, etc.

Q. Who do chiefly offend against this Rule?

A. 1. Such soldiers as give themselves to whoring and uncleanness.

2. Such as use to swear, and blaspheme the name of God.

3. Such as follow that swinish sin of drunkenness.

4. Such as plunder and steal whatsoever they come near.

Q. Are not these things tolerable in soldiers?

A. No more in them then other men: the Scripture says generally to and of all
men whatsoever: 1. That whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.5.
2. That the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. 3.
That drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 4. That
he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong he has done, and there is no
respect of persons, Col. 3. ult.


Q. What is the reason then that there be so many lewd and wicked men in the
Parliaments Army?

A. 1. Because Commanders in Chief are not more careful in choosing godly
Officers.

2. Because honest religious men are not more forward to put forth themselves
in this service of God and his Church.

3. Because Order and Discipline is not more strictly executed by Superiors.

4. Because Officers in Towns and Countrie^ aimto press the scumme and refuse
of men, and so by easing themselves, pesture our Armies with base conditioned
people.

Q. How can we expect a blessing upon our preparations, when so many godless
wretches are employed in our Armies?

A. 1. Truly it is a very sad thing, and much to be lamented, and requires the
care of the State to remedy.

2. Yet (blessed be God) we have multitudes of godly and eminent Christians
that are engaged in the Parliaments Service.

3. And besides, we know that God can make use of wicked men to serve his
providence, as he does of wicked Angels.

4. We have many instances of bad men that have done good service to God and
his Church as Saul, Ioab, etc.

Q. Is it well done of some of your Soldiers (which seem to be religious) to
break down Crosses and Images where they meet with any?

A. 1. I confess that nothing ought to be done in a tumultuous manner.

2. But seeing God has put the Sword of Reformation into the Soldiers hand, I
think it is not amiss that they should cancel and demolish those Monuments
of Superstition and Idolatry, especially seeing the Magistrate and the Minister
that should have done it formerly, neglected it.

Q. But what say you to their tearing and burning the Books of Common Prayer,
in every place where they come?

A. Much may be said in their justification, who show themselves so zealous
against that Book.

1. It has been the fomenter of a most lazy lewd, and ignorant Ministry.

2. It has been the Nurse of that lamentable blindness and ignorance, which
has overspread many parts of this Kingdom.

3. It is a great cause of our present calamities, for who are they that side
with our Popish Enemies, but Common Prayer men?

4. It is become the most abominable Idol in the Land, people generally do
dote upon it, as much as the Ephesians upon Diana; and prefer it before
Preaching in many places, being strangely enraged for the want of it.

5. It is high time therefore to remove this Brazen Serpent, and grind it to
powder, seeing it is the occasion of so much evil.

6. It is very likely therefore that God has stirred up the spirits of some
honest soldiers to be his Instruments for the destruction of that Idol.

7. It belongs to the Parliament Soldiers, upon the matter, to remove all
scandalous things they meet with, having covenanted, and engaged themselves in
the work of Reformation.

Q. What do you say concerning valor and courage?

A. 1. I say, it is a most noble and heroical virtue, that makes some men
differ from others, as much as all men differ from beasts.

2. I say, it is impossible for any to be a good soldier without it. An Army
of Hearts led by a Lion, is better then an Army of Lions led by a Heart.

3. I say, that one valiant man in an Army, is better then a thousand cowards.

4. I say, that a coward degenerates from man, being of a base and ignoble
nature.

1. God took special care, that all faint-hearted cowards should be cashiered
out of his Armies, Deuteronomy. 20.8. 2. Cowards ever do more hurt then good, being
like an X before an L. 3. And for the most part cowards miscarrie sooner then
those that are courageous.
Q. What are the chief Arguments and considerations to make a soldier
courageous in the Parliaments Service?

A. 1. The goodness of the Cause, which undoubtedly is Gods, and his Churches.

2. The promise of God, to help his Church and People against his and his
Churches Enemies.

3. The manifold experiences that the people of God have had in former ages of
his assistance.

4. The manifold experiences of Gods special goodness to his servants in
these times.

5. The assurance, that not a hair can fall from our heads without the
providence and permission of God.

6. The danger of faint-heartednesse; he that would save his life in such times
as these, shall lose it.

7. The promise, that whosoever shall lose his life, or any thing else, in the
Cause of Christ and his Gospel, shall be a great gainer by the hand.

8. The consideration that this War is surrounded with the prayers and
blessings of all the good people of the Land.

9. The multitude of eminent Christians, of all sorts, that are engaged in this
business.

10. The great reward of honor here, and glory hereafter, that shall be given
to every one that is valiant for the Lord.

Q. What are the principal enemies to courage and valor?

A. 1. Want of experience: fresh water soldiers are commonly faint-hearted
soldiers; whereas they that have been used to the Wars are usually of
undaunted spirits.

2. Want of metal: some men's spirits are naturally so low and base, that they
will never prove good soldiers: as it is with cocks, so is it amongst men:
there is a breed and generation of cravens.

3. Want of Faith: when a man has little or no confidence in God, his heart
must needs fail him in undertakings of danger; whereas Faith fears not in the
valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.

4. Want of innocence, and a good conscience, Prove. 28.1. It was the speech of
the valorous Earl of Essex, our renowned Generals Father, (cited by D. Barlow
in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 1.1600) That sometimes in the field
encountering the enemy, the weight of his sins lying heavy upon his
conscience, being not reconciled to God, quelled his spirits, and made him the
most timorous man that might be.

5. Want of wisdom and consideration: for surely if men would seriously
consider the evils of cowardice, and the excellency of valor, it would make
them abhor the one, and be ambitious of the other.

Q. Is there any great need of skill and cunning in this Profession?

A. Yea doubtless: for David does thankfully acknowledge the Lords goodness, in
teaching his hands to war, and his fingers to fight, Psalm. 144.1.

1. Great wisdom, policy, and experience is required in Commanders.

2. And no less skill and dexterity in common soldiers; they must know how to
handle their Arms, how to keep Ranks, etc.

3. Certainly a few well-trained Soldiers are better then a multitude of raw,
unexperienced men.

Q. What; should be done to make soldiers skillful in their art?

A. 1. Officers should be very diligent in teaching and exercising their men.

2. Common soldiers should make it their business to learn and yet what
cunning they can.

3. Every soldier should seek to God by prayer, that he would instruct and
teach them: for it is the blessing of God that makes men to profit in any
profession.

4. Both Commanders, Officers, and common Soldiers may advantage themselves by
reading and observing what has been written by eminent Soldiers, of this Act.

Q. How ought Commanders and Officers to carry themselves toward their
Soldiers?

A. 1. Religiously, showing them no evil example, but being a pattern to them
of virtue and godliness.

2. Lovingly, not in a stern rugged manner, considering that their Command is
not over Bears, But men.

3. Discreetly, encouraging them most that deserve best, and avoiding so much
familiarity as may breed contempt.

4. Justly, not defrauding them of their due, nor doing or suffering any injury
to be done to the meanest.

Q. How should inferior Soldiers demean themselves toward their Commanders
and Officers?

A. 1. They must acknowledge and honor them as Superiors, and account them as
men set over them by the providence of God and wisdom of the State.

2. They must be exactly obedient to their command even for conscience sake.
Romans 13.5. of all men Soldiers are most strictly tied to obedience, the want
whereof may prove of very dangerous consequence.

Q. What say you of such Soldiers as are given to mutining?

A. 1. They are as dangerous Cattle as can belong to an Army.

2. They deserve severe punishment, and to be utterly cashiered.

3. They will hardly ever prove good Souldidiers that are taynted with this
humor.

Q. What is your opinion of those Soldiers that run away from their Colors?

A. 1. Such are, by Martial Law, to suffer death, and surely, they well
deserve it.

2. It Is a most ignoble and base part to do so, and they deserve to be branded
with infamy for ever, that are guilty of it.

3. Nay it is a foul wickedness, being offensive both to God and man, Psalm.
78.9.

1. For such (if the Cause be just) do abandon the Cause of God. 2. They
deceive that trust which was reposed in them by the State. 3. As much as in
them lies, they betray the Cause they have undertaken. 4. They give dangerous
example, and may occasion the overthrow of an Army.
Q. How ought soldiers to be encouraged and rewarded?

A. 1. They ought to be highly honored, especially such as have been
courageous and faithful in their Countries Service.

2. They ought to be well maintained, with sufficient allowance, while they are
abroad in employment; for no man goes on warfare at his own charges.

3. They that have received any hurt or loss by the wars, ought to be
liberally provided for, and comfortably maintained all their days, by them
that sent them forth.

Q. What Arguments have you to prove, that such honor and respect should be
done to our soldiers?

A. 1. They that fight against the Churches Enemies, are Gods helpers against
the mighty, Judge. 5.23.

2. They are the Instruments of Justice, and the Executioners of Gods
Judgments, Psalm 149.7, 9.

3. They show themselves men of public spirits, and true lovers of their
Country.

4. They show themselves valiant and courageous, which are very high deserving
qualities.

5. No men undergo such hardship and hazard as the soldier does.

6. None deserve better then they, either of Church, Commonwealth, or Posterity.

FINIS.

