The Poores Pension: A SERMON PREACHED IN GREGORY'S Church in Sudbury in the
County of Suffolk, May 12. 1643.

Upon occasion of the charitable relief that yearly then, and there is given,
toward the covering or clothing of a hundred poor people, according to the
will of the Donour M Martine Cole, late of the Town aforesaid deceased.

By Samuel Rogers, Master in Arts, and Minister of Much-Tey in ESSEX.

PSALM. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver
him in time of trouble.

MARK 14.7. Ye have the poor with you always, and whenever you will, you
may do them good.

Hoc est occidere hominem, vitae suae ei subsidia denegare, eave, ne inter
loculos tuos includas salutem inopum, tanquam in tumulis sepelias vitam
pauperum.

Amb. in Psalm. 118. Si Deorum cultores simulacra insensibilia excolunt, and
quicquid pretiosi habent in ea conferunt, quanto justius est and verius
viventia Dei simulacra excolere?

Lact. Inst. lib. 6. cap. 13. Imprimatur JA. CRANFORD, Aug. 12. 1644.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Edward Brewster at the Sign of the Bible on
Fleet-bridge. 1644.

To the right worshipful the Major and Aldermen, to the reverend the
Ministers, and to the discreet Bailiffe and Burgesses, with the rest of the
well-affected people of the Town of Sudbury in the County of Suffolk,
The Author devotes himself, and his service, and dedicates this little
parcel of his pains.
Worthy Sirs, and my much respected Friends,
THis Sermon first preached amongst you, and now dedicated to you, has had
occasionally it is first birth from him, from whom the Author naturally has had
his being, whose pains in this kind, and upon this occasion, had it been
afforded, as of right expected, this worthless work of mine might have been
well spared, but it was his pleasure to put me upon the work, and therefore my
-- mihi jussa capessere fas ^est.
duty to obey him, to whom I owe my self; this and the same that was at first
directed to your ears is now made visible to your eyes; after it had been
preached, for above half a years space it came not once into my thoughts it
should be printed, I accounted it no other then as an untimely birth that never
should see the sun; and the reason why now I brought it forth to light, was
not because of any high conceit, that either I have, or expect you should have
of its worth, (I am conscious to my self of my own imbecility which even
herein may be seen to others) but in this printing age (wherein are vented all
things both new and old, both good and had) for any one that is a Penman, it is
expected that he should not only set his tongue a work to speak but also his
Pen to write; to be altogetho silent in this kind, and in these days may seem
a solaecisme; but that was not it which drew this from me. I could well enough
have still shrouded my self under the shadow of obscurity, and would
willingly have kept any thing of mine in this kind from public view, but more
forceable arguments did overpower me, viz.

First drawn from the pressing miseries of multitudes of people in many
places; the objects of pity which should set a work charity we every where to
be seen, how many shiftlesse and helpless creatures (whose loud cries may he
heard even afar off) do importune us to put to our helping hands, to do for
them, that are able to do little or nothing for themselves, this then may
serve, as their Echo, to give you (as it were) the rebounding of their voices.

Secondly, I considered the hard-heartednesse of most in most places, these are
the times wherein (I think) never greater necessity, and yet (I fear) never
less charity, and no wonder that in this iron age men have such hard hearts,
for it was foretold by our Savior that in these last days Matt. 24.1^.
iniquity should abound, and the love of many should wax cold, 1 John 2.18.
whereby we know it is the last time, for never more vanity, and never less
charity, Jam. 5.4.
the cries of the distressed and oppressed that do pierce the ears of God
even in the highest Heaven, cannot enter into the ears, or at least the hearts
of men on earth. Who is not more or less wanting in making a supply to the
wants of others? in whose hearts do the kindled coals of love appear so
violent at to break forth into a vehement flame? are not most men herein
stark cold, and do not the best seem to be but lukewarm? needs there not
then something to quicken us, a spur to provoke us? make use then of this for
that purpose, at least let it be as a remembrancer to mind us of our duty,
which sometimes we shall be ready peradventure willingly to forget.

Thirdly, concerning this particular occasion which first put these words into
my mouth, the same was the cause why I let them fall from my pen, for I
understood that notwithstanding you have had many Sermons, two yearly upon
this occasion, yet not one appears extant, they were (it seems, no longer
lived then the breath wherein they were delivered; whereupon I thought with my
self that something in this kind were better then nothing to be kept upon
record in honor and for memorial of that great good work of charity, which
the Apostle says is a never failing grace, 1 Cor. 13.8. of that kind (it
seems) was this, for the last will of the deceased is as a lasting deed, to
insure your poor of their yearly relief for ever: that this therefore was a
good work, none that is good can deny, for it is of good use tending to the
good of many, and that it was also a great good work, I think it may well be so
said to be, in that I fear me it will not be greatly followed, when and by
whom amongst you will it be seconded? Now good works especially of this nature
are so rare, that they may well be welcomed when they do appear, and
certainly the perpetuity of that work (were there no other cause) deserves the
continuance of this, your poore's yearly Pension may well be honored with an
annual celebration; see then how one good work is seconded with another, a
bodily alms for the poor is recompensed with a spiritual benefit for all;
you have (it seems) usually on this day, upon this occasion a double Sermon,
and why may not each be of double use? viz.

First, for Commemoration of what is done for the time past; for the Lord will
so grace good works, that they shall be (as it were) a surviving issue; Saint
John tells us what he heard God from heaven say, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, both in that they rest from their labors, as also
in that their works do follow them, nay let me add, they are blessed in that
their works do still survive them to, for they follow after them to Heaven to
be rewarded, and yet they remain still behind them on earth to be renowned.
Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed.

Secondly, for Exhortation to what should be done for time to come: For so (as
it seems) was it the mind of this Donour that each Minister of your two
Parishes should be requested yearly on this day to make an Exhortation to the
people, and if they do it not themselves, to cause it to be done by some
others, and has allowed them a recompense: Now whereto serves an Exhortation
but to move us unto, or put us upon the practice or performance of a good work
or duty? and then is it of so much the greater force, when as it is grounded
upon the Examples of others set before us, who though they are dead, yet speak
unto us, and though not vocally, yet really call upon us, to do the same good
works, that so we may be repaid with the same rich recompense of reward? For
the Examples of good works are as patterns set before us to teach us that the
same or such like should proceed from us; this work of alms to the poor, you
are not so much to consider as done by another, but so to reflect upon your
selves, as hence to learn what herein should be done by you; hence are you
exhorted from this example of our brother deceased to be of the same mind and
practice; considering it is a high point of wisdom, whilst we have the things
of this life to make the best and the most of them, which is not when we
engrosse them to our selves, but when in conscience and obedience to God we
distribute them to others; the Apostle minds us of what our Savior says (oh
let it appear that we believe it to be a truth) That it is more blessed to
give then to receive, Act. 20.35.

If any thing spoken this way be here to be found that may stir up compassion
and acuate affection, that may so work upon our hearts as to set a work our
hands so to extend charity Dan. 4.27.
that we our selves may find mercy, it is enough I have my desired and: Two
things more only by way of Preface I desire you would be pleased to take notice
of, viz.

First, concerning the matter which you shall here find; Expect no news, of
which every dales plenty and variety does always fill us, if not sometimes
times surfeit us, and were our news as true and good, as rise and common, there
would seem to be no want; news is now grown so stale, that for any thing not
new to come forth may seem to be news indeed, Nihil dictum quod non dictum
prius.
no other news have you here, for the wise man says, Ecc. 1.9, 10.
there is no new thing under the sun, is there any thing whereof it may be
said, See this is new? it has been already of old time which was before us: I
should be loath to be censured by you deservedly, as the Apostle was by the
Athenians most unjustly to be a (...) Act. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
babbler for bringing new and strange doctrine to your ears; or that you should
be accounted (as they were, and did appear so to be) so addicted to novelty,
that the truths of God should seem strange to you; Here you shall find common
things, which are therefore never the Omnia bona communicativa, quo communiora
eo meliora.
worse, or of never the less use, common they are indeed, because they
concern all; such things that you have formerly (and it may be often heard)
and yet are now again hereby put in mind of, that so you let them not Heb. 2.1.
stip; It is not amiss 2 Pet. 1.12.
to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, that
you may be established in the truth: Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis
discitur, Sen. epist. 27.
that is never enough spoken, that is never too well learned, nor can be too
much practiced.

Secondly, concerning the manner of delivery both at first and now, it is
without excellency of speech; affected eloquence in preaching is not
Venerabiles and vere Deo digni Apostoli. Christ^ cum essent in omnibus puritate
vita, and animi virtu^ibus clarij non magni pendebont sermonis ornatum. Eusebius.
lib. 3. cap. 24.
Apostolic, for the Apostle Paul the 1 Cor. 14.18.
most learned (as may be thought) of all the rest tells us expressly that when he
was sent of Christ to preach, his commission ran thus in these words, 1 Cor.
1.17.
(...)etc. and I confess, my opinion is that plain speaking is as commendable
in preaching, as plain dealing is necessary in trading, as Ministers therefore
press this upon people, so are they to practice that themselves, choosing
rather to profit people with wholesome doctrine, then to please them with
delightsome Phrases; this that you have here at first, showed it self in a
plain dress, and since, had I neither list nor leisure to put it into another
habit, had I skill to do it, who can now in these sad times apply himself to
the study of witty inventions; or delight others with the curiosity of nice
expressions? Cicero says thus of Rhetoric, Pacis est comes, ottique socia,
and jam been constitutae reipublicae velut alumna quaedam eloquentia; which if
so, how unseasonable is it at this time for us, and what little use have we now
to make thereof: except to work the more upon our affections, the more
pathetically to express our bitter lamentations? our wits may well be dulled,
when as our hearts cannot but be Lam. 1.20.
bemudded with our trouble.

Again, had I had will, yet could I not have time to do herein as I would, for
these impolished meditations I let pass out of my hands with as much haste as
they came into my mind; all I could do was but to review them, I could not
refine them; for all the time I had to make them legible and fit for the
Press, was surreptitiously taken away from my other employments, now and then
a little, which little being soon missed, I could not then spare much, or
more; I must needs therefore implore your kind acceptance of this my weak
conception, which wanting its due perfection through the want of the midwifery
of time has come to an immature and untimely birth; such as it was, it is, and
such as it is, it is freely yours, if you please but to take it as your own;
if any thing herein be amiss, I cannot but take it to my self; Humanum est
errare, it is incident to man's nature to err, and whatsoever is good I dare
not but ascribe it to God, Omne benum superne, Every thing that good is, is
from above: Now the God of all glory enrich our hearts so with his grace, that
we may be fruitful in repentance and obedience to him, and abounding in love
and mercy toward others, and endue us with a greater measure of wisdom, not
of this world, which is Jam. 3.15, 27.
earthly, sensual, and divellish, but of that from above, which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality and without hypocrisy, that we may enjoy the fruit of
righteousness which is peace, to all them that work righteousness, and that
make peace, which is the Prayer of him who is

An unworthy Minister of the Gospel, and your servant in the work of the
Lord, SAMUEL ROGERS.

The Poores Pension.
JOB. 31.19. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering.


THese words are spoken by that holy man Job in his own defense, who being
falsely accused by his friends is enforced to justify himself, he pleads
innocence whiles they reproach him with iniquity, and takes God to witness his
integrity, notwithstanding they condemn him with hypocrisy; and in this
Chapter does he accurse himself with many a heavy execration, if he were
guilty of such heinous offenses that he does there mention: e. g. if I have
walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to deceit; Let me be weighed in
an even balance, etc. verses 5, 6. if my step has turned out of the way, and
mine heart has walked after mine eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to my
hands, then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted
out, etc. ver. 7, 8. and so still goes on in the following verses clearing of
himself, and amongst other things (as being none of the least sins) he
acquits himself of oppression of the poor, which may be done not only in
doing them wrong, but no less in not doing them right, therefore says he,
ver. 16. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the
eyes of the widow to fail: Or have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof: If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
poor without covering: If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not
warmed with the fleece of my sheep: If I have lift up my hand against the
fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: Then let mine arine fall from my
shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

The words of the Text may be taken two ways: viz.

Either Absolutely, considered in themselves as an entire Proposition without
any connection or dependence, then may they be thus read, If I have seen any
perish, etc. i.e. I have not seen any to perish, this is an ordinary phrase and
common speech in Scripture to express a manifest negation by way of
supposition.

i. e. as having relation to, or dependence upon the following words, and as
they are so considered, we have here

i.e. the thing supposed as false and wicked; If I have seen etc. i.e. were it
so that I should suffer any to perish for want, etc.

i.e. what does he then desire should happen, a heavy curse to lighten; Then
let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the
bone. verse. 22. as if he should say, were I herein guilty, then do I wish that
this judgment should befall me.

This one Supposition may afford us these three several Propositions: viz.

Whilst we are here in this world we may sometimes happen to be in great want.
This is employed in the words, that there are and may be such as are ready to
perish for want of clothing, and those so poor, that they may be even without
covering.

We are to see to, that is, provide for those that are in want, and that stand
in great need of help. This is also employed in the words, in that he does
accurse himself, if he had been wanting this way, if he had suffered any to
perish for want of clothing, or the poor to be without covering.

We are not to suffer any to perish in extreme need for want of necessary
relief: For herein does Job justify himself, that he had not been so
hard-hearted as to suffer any to perish for want of clothing; and had he so
done, he does adjudge himself worthy of exemplary punishment. These are the
chief points considerable in the words, of each in their order.

Whilst we are here in this world we may fall into want; Doct. 1.
and come to be in great need.

This cannot greatly be doubted of, but will easily be condescended to, for
were it not out of question, multitudes of witnesses might be produced, and by
daily experience it might be proved. How many are there upon our own knowledge
that experimentally find this to be a truth? nay, who is there that can assure
or secure himself, that he for his part shall be none of those that shall make
it good? Solomon peradventure the richest, I am sure the wisest of mere men,
although he was in least danger of want, yet by his wisdom he foresaw that
his riches could not keep him from want, therefore says he, Eccles. 9.11. I
returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to
them all. There is none whoever that can promise himself the attainment or
enjoyment of any outward comfort or contentment, no not so much as of food and
raiment, it is not man's wit or wisdom that can get it, but only a divine
providence that does give it: the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.17. does give in charge
concerning rich men, that are most free from want, that they be not highminded,
for they may fall into want, though therefore they bear up their heads aloft,
they may come down as low as others, they may not then trust in uncertain
riches, and why? because uncertain, and that both in respect none is sure to
partake of them, as also none is certain of the continuance of them, for even
when we have them, we are not sure of them, Prove. 23.5. Riches certainly make
themselves wings, and sly away, so that while we are looking on them, they are
passing from us; and Chap. 27 ver. 24. Riches (says the wise man) are not for
ever, neither does the crown endure to all generations; the world it self is
subject to mutation, and therefore the things of the world cannot be limited to
succession; so that for all these things, there is none but may be bred in
want, or brought to want. -- Pauper ubique jacet, store of poor in every
place. But what do I speak of men? when as Christ the Son of God, and the
heir of the world, Heb. 1.2.
had no better entertainment whilst he lived in the world, then to suffer the
want both of food (for we read of him that he was both hungry and thirsty) and
of lodging, Matthew. 21.18. Joh. 19.28.
he had not where to lay his head, Luke 9.58. The Apostles also after Christ
met with the same measure that did Christ their Lord and Master, so says the
Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 6.4. he was in necessities and distresses, ver. 10. he was
poor, although he made many rich; he had nothing, although he possessed him,
who is in stead of all things; so he complains, Chap. 11. ver. 27. In
weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness, and 1 Cor. 4.11. Even unto this present
hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have no
certain dwelling place; in so much that he was feign to work for his living,
ver. 12. And labor, working with our hands, and 2 These. 3.8. he says that he
wrought with labor and travail night and day; but let me not run too far
in a beaten path, I might even loose my self in a multitude of Examples of
this kind, to return therefore homeward to our text, Job that speaking these
words gives us occasion to note this truth, may serve as an example in stead of
all, Job 1.3.
he that did affluere opibus, abound in all things, came to be vix in pelle
quidem, scarce had he any thing about him, 2.7.
no not a whole skin left him, he that before suffered not any to perish for
want of clothing, was now himself so poor, that he was without covering; so
that from him comes the Proverb at this day in use, His Codrus subito qui modo
Cr^^sus crat.
As poor as Job. And this was not his case alone thus to come to want, but
has been the condition of most of the best of Gods people, even of those of
whom the world was not worthy, for it is said of them, Heb. 11.37, 38. that
they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, in deserts, and in
mountains, in dens, and in caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented: so that if not from our own experience, yet from the examples of
others we must needs be driven to confess, that whilst we live in this world
we may come to be in great want; nay, let me further add, there is none in the
world but is in want; I should adjudges it to be proudly and presumptuously
spoken of any amongst us that should say they were so rich and increased with
goods, Revel. 3.17.
that they had need of nothing, for as long as we live in this world we are and
shall be one way or other in want, How we may be said to be in want.
and of something or other we shall stand in need; we may be in want any of
these three ways, viz.

viz. the comforts and necessaries of life, without which none can at least
long subsist, this is ajudgement threatened to the rebellious and disobedient,
Deuteronomy. 28.48. yea, not seldom it falls out to be the portion of Gods own
people, Romans 12.13. the Apostle lays it down as a duty; that we should
distribute to the necessity of Saints, so that even Saints may be in so great
necessity as to stand in need of relief, Matt. 25.41-48. our Savior there
tells us that the wicked at the last day shall be indicted and arraigned, cast,
and condemned, for not relieving Christ in his members, so that it does there
appear, that even those who are so dear to Christ that their case he accounts
as his own, may nevertheless in this world be in a needy condition, viz.
hungry, thirsty, strangers, naked, sick and in prison, Romans 8.35. Famine and
nakedness are in the catalogue of those many evils which befall not only the
worst of men, but the best that live; and by so much are these in the greater
want, by how much they are destitute of those things that can least be spared,
this is the disconsolate condition of thousands of poor people in the
Christian world, nay, to come neater to our own bone and flesh, how many
English Protestants in Ireland have suffered the extremity of this want, how
many sad reports from thence have for this long time filled our ears, I would
I might have said also, our hearts? have we not lately heard how that
multitudes of them are exposed to starving and cold, the unavoidable
executioners of death? yea are there not many in most places of this land, whom
the devouring sword (that does make havoc and spoil) has brought to as bad a
stay? Oh that we had a fellow-feeling of the miseries of our fellow-brethren.

Prove. 13.7. There is that makes himself rich, and yet has nothing, would be
accounted better men then they are, these are vainglorious boasters, and there
is (says he) that makes himself poor, and yet has great riches, though
very rich, yet still complain that they are but poor, because they are not
contented with what they have, and these are covetous persons, who even choke
themselves with greediness, whose hearts desires seem as large as * hell it
self, Prove. 27.20.
their eyes are never satisfied with seeing, much less their hearts with
desiring; like as a man in a dropsy, does still desire drink, and the more he
poures down, the more thirsty he is, the nature of the disease being such as
causes him to drink much more then would do him good; or like a ravening
Mastiffe that stands staring at the tables end greedily gaping for a morsel,
which he has no sooner swallowed down and devoured, but he as eagerly looks
for as much more, as if he had had nothing at all; or like other hungry hounds,
who being at a loss, go about bawling after their prey, so it is with these,
they go about all the day long with this Quaere in their mouths, Psalm. 4.6.
who will show us any good? i.e. a good Farm, a good penni-worth, a good
bargain, good ready money, etc. the goods of this world they can never have
enough of, whenas a little or nothing of spiritual good contents them; and
wonder not that I compare these men (though men) to dogs, for the Scripture
does the same, Psalm. 59.14, 15. And at Evening Prophetando non optando dicit,
ut apparet ver. 6.
let them return, i.e. they will so do according to their wonted manner, and
make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city, and wander up and
down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied. Prove. 30.15. Has filias
exponit lunius esse ^^nudiuts by ulcam linguam sargun em indisi enter sugentem
and attia^^ntem; Annot. in loc.
The horse-leach has two daughters, crying, Give, give; and the world has two
sons to match with those two daughters, the rich miser, and the miserable
poor, both crying Give, give; the one cries give, because he has nothing, and
therefore in want; and the other as greedily cries give, because he is not
content with any thing, and so still in want; and therefore may he well be
reckoned there among those things which are never satisfied, and which say not,
It is enough: ^res^it amor nammi, quantu^ ip a pecunia ^^^scu
for the more he has, the more still does he desire to have, Enough is a
language which he can by no means learn, neither will he rest content till
his mouth is stopped up with dirt, and then D^ Hall contempl. 8. part.
less then two else of earth shall serve him, whom for small part of the curse
inflicted upon worldlings as a just judgment of God, Eccles. 5.10. He that
loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves
abundance, with increase.

We are in want, when we want what we ought to have.

If a man has never so much, yet if he has not that he should have, for all
he has, he is still nevertheless in want. e.g. if a man have masses of
wealth, even Psalm 73.7.
more then heart could wish, yet if he has not heart and grace to make good
use of what he has, he is in greatest want, better have nothing, then to be
never the better for any thing, and indeed he that has not wherewithal to
make good use of what he has, has as good as nothing; What shall it profit a
man (says our Savior) if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his ownt
soul, Mark 8.36. so that were it possible that a man might have the command of
the whole world, yet for all that might he be in want of that that should save
his soul, and so never the nearer, or the better; how many are there thus in
want, and yet are not sensible of their wants? like as Martha who was much
troubled about these outward things, that nothing might be wanting, yet our
Savior does discover that there was want, and tells her that there was in her
wanting of the chief thing, the only thing needful which she took not good
notice of, Luke 10 42. and thus are we not all in want of those things that we
ought to have, and abound in, viz. in thankfulness, contentedness, holy
obedience and heavenly wisdom to make the best of these earthly blessings?
There is an evil (says Solomon, Eccles. 6.1, 2.) Which I have seen under the
Sun, and it is common among men. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth
and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires,
yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, etc. though he might seem to
want nothing, yet he wants the chief thing, even a sanctified heart, which is
the gift of God that should make good all things.

And who now is there living in this world that in one (if not more) of these
three respects may not be said to be in want; is it not a plain case who
doubts of it, but that whilst we live here we may happen to be in great want?
and why does the Lord in his wisdom see good to suffer us or any, at any time
to be in want, seeing he is able to give to every one a fullness? For these
reasons, viz.

Mark 9.5, 6.
Peter on Mount Tabor when he wist not what he said,) we would be ready to say,
It is good for us-to be here: let us therefore never look any further, but
here pitch our tabernacles, this appears in that notwithstanding whiles we do
live in this world we live in a world of misery, and cannot wholly free or
secure our selves from want, yet how prone are we to seek for true felicity
in earthly prosperity; and when it comes to, how loath are we and the world to
part, but how much more unwilling should we then be, if we might have even what
we would? but therefore shall we, yea, the best that are, sometimes be in want,
that so we may mind homeward more, like the Prodigal son, Luke 15.13.19.
who so long as he had his fill, minds not his home, but no sooner began he to
be in want, but then he longs after his fathers house.

Moses tells the people that the Lord to humble them suffered them to hunger,
Deuteronomy. 8.3. for if so be we should be free from all wants, we should not know
our selves, nor yet our God, therefore Agur wisely desires the mean, as being
the only safe condition, Prove. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed
me with food convenient for me: and why? because in either extremes there is
danger, ver. 9. Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say Who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain; so that a
fullness in this world makes us in danger to swell against God; the Lord
therefore oft-times will make us fare hard, and keep us upon short commons,
lest we should grow fat, and wax wanton: and so cast off and forsake God, as
the Lord complains that the people for whom he had done so much, served him
after all. Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: Thou art waxen fat,
thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God
which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. and ver. 18.
Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God that
formed thee.

Which of you (says our Savior) by taking thought can add one cubit to his
stature. Mat. 6.27. It is God that made the world (says the Apostle) and all
things therein, that is the Lord of Heaven and earth, that needs not any
thing, who gives to all life and breath, and all things, Act. 17.24, 25. and
Deuteronomy 8.3. He humbled and suffered thee to hunger, etc. that he might make thee
know, that man does not live by bread only but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord does man live: it is not the outward means that
we do live upon, but Gods blessing upon the mea^es that we live by; and verses
17, 18. Lest thou say in thy heart, My power, and the might of mine hand has
gotten me this wealth. But thou shall remember the Lord thy God: for it is he
that gives thee power to get this wealth, etc. so the wise man tells us, that
riches and wealth with power to partake thereof, and comfort in the use
thereof, is the gift of God, Eccl. 5.19. this, God would have us to know, and
therefore does he give and take away at his pleasure, thus dealt he with Job,
which made him to acknowledge the same, Chap. 1.21. The Lord gave (says he)
and the Lord has taken away, etc. The Lord sometimes will let us want, that
thereby we may see what shiftlesse creatures we are, and what an all-sufficient
God he is.

Sam. 12.21. and great reason why we should be most desirous of, and most
careful to provide for the happiness of the world to come, look never to be
well till we get thither, but ever, either to be in want of something, or at
least subject to the want of all things; but if after this time of our
pilgrimage we get once safe home to Heaven, then fear no want of any thing
that may make the creature happy, for there is a fullness in perfection, In
thy presence, O God, is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore, Psalm 16.11. the vast desires of thy heart which cannot now be
satisfied, shall then be filled brim full and running over. How excellent is
thy loving kindness, O God (says David) therefore the children of men put
their trust under the shadow of thy wings, they shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of thy House, (by house here may be understood not only the
place of grace, i.e. where the Lord does afford the means of grace, where he
does dispense his holy Ordinances, spiritual dainties and delicacies which the
Lord himself has provided for the nourishing and cherishing of the souls of
his people in this life, Isai. 25.6. but also the palace of glory, i.e. the
happiness of Heaven, provided for the Saints of God after this life, which is
also called the House of God, Job. 14.2. where there is an everlasting
wellspring of joy that can never be exhausted or drawn dry) and thou shall
make them drink of the river of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain
of life, and in thy light shall we see light: the very thoughts whereof even
now cannot but ravish thy heart, have thou any comfortable hopes hereof? thou
can not then but break forth into admiration and say with the Psalmist, Oh
how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
Psalm. 31.19. who would be willing to lie still in a dungeon almost half
starved, or at the best where he has but enough to keep life and soul
together, and not desire rather enlargement to go to his own home, where he
may have even what he will? this consideration, to wit, of the misery of this
life, and the happiness of that to come made the Saints of God in all ages so
willing to die, and so loath to live as the Patriarchs, Ieb. 11.23, 16.
all which died in faith not having received the promises: i. e. as touching
the land of Canaan (which although it was the land of Promise, yet was it to
them as a strange country, Heb. 11.9.) but having seen them afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them, i.e. through faith did they see and
believe that in many generations to come, these Promises made to them should be
made good to their posterity, but for their own parts they confessed that they
were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, and why? because they desired a
better country, that is an heavenly, where they might to the full enjoy their
God, who has prepared for them that City.

Psalm. 127.2.
It is in vain for thee to rise up early, to sit up late, and to eat the
bread of sorrows, it is Gods blessing only that can do thee good, for if thou
should swelt thy heart, thou can not keep thy self from want, yea, though
thou make thy self never so great a drudge whilst thou live here, thou
shall be in want in one kind or other; see then and consider how thou do
play the fool, Eccl. 4.8. There is one alone, and there is not a second (a
covetous man is a singular fool, he has scarce his fellow, and wherein does
his folly appear? in that though) he has neither child nor brother: (none
that he can assure himself shall be his heir) yet is there no end of all his
labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, For whom
do I labor and bereave my soul of good? this is also vanity, yea it is a
sore travel. The Text is so plain and to purpose, that I shall not need to
comment upon it.

Job, who was stripped of all, and yet such an one of whom God gives this
testimony, viz. that there was none like him in the earth; a perfect and an
upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, Chap. 1.8. and it was not
his case alone, for, for the most part they are the Jam. 2.5.
poor of this world that are the chosen of God, a great comfort therefore it
may be to the godly poor in time of the greatest want, that for all this the
Lord loves them nevertheless; and that want is not evil, but good for them,
otherwise it should not be their portion, for the Lord does not withold good
things from them, because he could not beteame them on them: but because he
sees they are not good for them, but that the want of them is better; yea, best
for them, and this are they to be assured of, and to rest satisfied with, for
these outward things the Lord often gives them to the wicked in wrath, and
withholds them from his in love.

But has not the Lord promised that there shall be no want to them that fear
him, Object.
Psalm. 34.9. and that no good thing will he withold from them that walk
uprightly? Psalm. 84.11.

i.e. of any good thing, Psalm. 34.10. so that thou being such an one to whom
the Promise is made, if any thing be wanting to thee, thou may be sure it is
not good for thee, and then better that thou do want it, then if thou did
enjoy it: what wise man will complain of that want which if he had would prove
more hurtful then gainful to him?

No good thing will God withold, etc. and therefore not wants, which to them
are also good things, Wants good to the Godly, and how.
as does appear in these respects, viz.

Hab. 2.6.
laden with thick clay, and so shackled with fetters of silver, and chains of
gold, that they come on heavily and staggeringly, and oft-times fall short;
Matthew. 13.22.
the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches are heavy clogs at
men's heels, which make many that they cannot once stir, nor take one right
step in the way to Heaven, hence comes it to pass that it is so Matt. 19.23.
hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: For they that will be
rich, (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.9.) fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition.

This advantage have the poor over the rich, that their pathway to Heaven
lies more plain, and smooth, and is not beset with so many thorns and briers,
they may therefore pass on with a more swift pace. A ship of great burden,
and heavy laden comes with great labor and difficulty, and with much ado is
brought in; but a light pinnace comes a long swiftly, and is brought in with
much ease.

for the needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall
not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. My God shall supply all your need (says the
Apostle, Phil. 4.19.) according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus: if
there be in God and in Christ enough (thou think) to satisfy the desires of
thy heart, fear not but thou shall have enough.

See then how good it is for Gods people (at least sometimes) to be in want,
and yet how afraid are the very best of falling into outward wants, as if they
thought themselves wiser then God that knows what is best and fittest for
them: sense indeed cannot credit it, but faith must believe it.

4 Tim. 6.17.
that gives us all good things richly to enjoy: When thou have eaten, and art
full (says Moses) then thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good land
which he has given thee. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not
keeping his Commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes which I command
thee this day: Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11. Genesis 32.10.
unworthy of the least of all his mercies, deserve not the crummes that fall
from his table, that the Lord then should deal better with us then with others
our betters; that he should let them want, and yet let us abound, that he
should cut them short, and yet give us our fill; we can give no other reason
but Gods mere mercy to us above others, seeing he might have dealt with us in
this kind as with others, yea, worse then with any, seeing that there is none,
no not the richest and greatest in the world, but might have been as little and
low as the poorest and meanest on earth, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who has made thee to differ? have thou not cause to say with David, Who am I,
O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel
7.18.

Again consider, Where much is given, there will be much required: Luke 12.48.
this is held but equitable amongst men, and therefore as just with God; whenas
God does more for us then for others, he in justice expects more of us then of
others, the more cost the more fruit, others that have not so much as we, have
not so much to answer for as we; and the more God has bestowed upon thee, the
greater is thy debt of thankfulness, and the greater thy duty of obedience.

Do we see others in want? Heb. 13.3. Remember them that are in bonds as bound
with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the
body; as if he should say, it stands you in hand to relieve those in want, in
regard it may be said to be in some respect a Respecta possibilitatis, licet
non certitudini^
common case, yea, it might be thy case, put thy self therefore into their
condition, that is by laying it to heart, as if it were thine own, and then be
hard-hearted and strait-handed if thou can: but of this now but by the way,
and more at large in the next points.

Would we not fall into want? viz. Means to keep from want:


Make God thy portion: as did David, Psalm. 119.57. and then thou have enough,
as he says, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want: do thou
think God ( Psalm. 50.12.
whose is the world, and the fullness thereof) is able to supply thy wants, if
then thou do enjoy this God, how can thou fear any want? the Lord made
himself known to Abraham the Pilgrim, even Acts 7.5.
when he had not a foot of land of his own to be (...) Genesis 17.1. not only the
Almighty, but also the All-sufficient God, noting God is every way able to do
for his servants; he has wherewithal to give to all their fill, the word is
very (...) De^^ sortis.
emphaticall, and full of comfort, and Abraham made good use thereof, as it
does appear afterward, for when he was in a great strait he casts himself
upon Gods All-sufficiencie, (...) composit i^ ex (...) relativo, and (...)
sufficientia, and sic idem significat quod Gr. (...), sibi vel per ^e
sufficient. Vel (ut alii volum) (...) deriva u^ a (...) mamma, quia nutrit Deuteronomy
fi lios suo^ cum omnia^^ bono^um affluentia^, sicut nu^rix in^anteme^ papiliis
(...) so^genie^.
God (says he) will provide, Genesis 22.8. and Jehovah-jireh (God will see to,
and provide for his) ver. 14. may well be the motto of all true believers, the
children of faithful Abraham, Solus habet omn^a ju^ habet ha^enie^ omnia
if thou have God, thou have more then all things else, for one God will do
thee more good, and stand thee more in stead, then the whole world beside,
David saw cause why he should rejoice more in the light of Gods countenance,
then the men of the world in the increase of their corn and wine, Psalm. 4.6,
7. Get thy heart therefore replenished with him that made the heart, otherwise
thou will always be in want, not the world, but the God of the world can keep
thee from want, E^^^ avariatiae totus non sufficit orbis.
the whole world is not enough to satisfy the greedy desire of a covetous
Cormorant: We read of Alexander the Great (who never left coveting and
conquering till be had made himself Monarch of the then known world, or at
least so much thereof as was known to or heard of by him) that he wept,
because there were no more worlds for him to conquer, and no wonder that the
world is not enough, nay, were there many worlds they would prove all too
little to satisfy an unsanctified heart, for a circle can never fit or fill a
triangle, now we know the for me of the world is circular, and of man's heart
triangular, impossible then is it for this to be filled with that, it is God
only then that in the Trinity of persons can suite well with, and fill to the
full this triangle, man's heart.

Cant. 2.16.
that thou art his, and he is thine; then all that he has (who is heir of the
world) is also thine, so far forth as it is for thy good; 1 Cor. 3.21, 22,
23. All things are yours: Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, And ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. All the good that God has that is competible to
creatures is derived through Christ to us, he therefore that has Christ, has
such a treasure to enrich him, and such a Magazine of all good things, and that
of all sorts to furnish him, that it is impossible for such an one to come to
want; For he that spared not his own Son (as says the Apostle, Romans 8.32.)
but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? if he give us the greater, will he deny us the less? if he
bestows Christ upon us, who is more worth then all things, then surely will he
not withhold from us any thing which in comparison of him is as nothing, whenas
therefore he gives Christ, he gives not a naked Christ's, but Christ with all
his benefits, and all his appertenances, i.e. all manner of good things, which
God gives in over and above the bargain to all true believers: so that the
having of Christ does Omne maju^ includit in ^e minus.
imply all other things and more, forasmuch as he is far better to thee then
any thing else can be, like as Elkanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Am not I
better to thee then ten sons? to be sure, Christ is better then ten thousand
worlds; for not only for his sake do thou partake of good things, but also in
and through him have thou the sanctified use of all those things; it was not
then without cause that that holy Martyr Lambert still cried out to the last,
None but Christ, none but Christ; and that the Apostle Paul accounted all
things but as dung that so he might win Christ, Phil. 3.8.

Give, (says our Savior) and it shall be given unto you, good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your
bosom: Luke 6.38. and Prove. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor, shall not
lack: Alms to the poor is like the pouring of a paile of water into a dry
pump, that fetches up a great deal more; contrariwise, any way to wrong the
poor, whereby to enrich our selves, is the ready way to come to want, Prove.
22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and he that gives
to the rich, shall surely come to want. Yea, it is said, that he that
withholds more then is meet shall surely come to want.

Isai. 1.19. Exodus 23.25, 26. Psalm. 84.11. and largely Levit. 26.3, 4, 5, 6.
Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13, 14, 15. and particularly Deuteronomy. 28.1-14. be not we then wanting
in duty to God, and God will not be wanting in any good thing to us, and how
can we look that God should make good his Promises if we look not at all to
our performances? we make them void whenas we keep not the condition: if thou
be a true servant of God, do not think him to be so hard a master, as to
suffer any of his household to want, it is more then ever was heard of or
known. Psalm. 37.25.
Walk before God then, and be upright, and trust God to provide for thee,
follow God in his way, and then art thou in a fair way to have a supply of all
things, Seek first ( i.e. in the first place as the chiefest thing) the
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Matthew. 6.33. I end this with what the Apostle says 1 Thessalonians.
4.12. Walk honestly, etc. that ye may have lack of nothing.

Itiner. Ser. pa. 465.
as Hephestion to Alexander, As I had nothing, so I wanted nothing; whenas
enough without contentment will be too little, this appears in 1 K^. 21.4.
Ahab, who though he was King of Israel, yet (as if a Kingdom had been too
little) he was not contented, except he might have to himself poor Naboth's
vineyard, and the same Plut. Apoph. Regum.
Alexander, who hearing of the great riches of India, divided all his Kingdom
of Macedonia forthwith among his Captains and soldiers (so little content
took he in a Kingdom) saying he preferred the riches of India (hoped for)
before all his father Philip left him in Macedonia; Dr Hall contempl. 7. part.
so that riches and poverty are more in the heart then in the hand, he is
wealthy that is contented with a little, and he is poor that is in want with
abundance: Every body wants many things, but there is one thing we all want,
which if we had more of, we should want nothing, and that is true
contentedness; which only with Godliness is great gain, that rests well
enough satisfied only with the mere necessaries of life: if therefore we
would have enough of the world, let us labor for more of this grace, and to
attain to so great a measure thereof as to say with the Apostle Phil. 4.11,
12. Not that I speak in respect of want, for I have learned in whatsoever
state I am therewith to be content: I know both how to be abased, and I know
how to abound, every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full,
and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need, etc. If in thy wants thou
can learn to be content, thou have that then which is better then that thou
want; and the more to move hereto consider of these things: Consider.


alas should God deal with us according to our deserts, we should not be worth
the least mite, when therefore thou art ready to complain of want, compare but
thy receipts with thy deserts, and then thou will think thou have enough and
speed'st wondrous well, for even the worst condition out of Hell deserves
contentedness.



viz.

It is our duty to see to, that is, provide for those that are in want: Doct.
2.
We are to afford help and relief to those that are in misery and distress.
Had not Job thought this to be his duty, wherefore did he wish, if he were
wanting herein, so great a curse to light upon him as ver. 22.

This is commanded by Precept: Relief of the po^re, 1 Commanded.
these few places of Scripture in stead of many more do sufficiently prove it,
see what is given in charge (and so what we are bound to duty) Lev. 25.35.
Deuteronomy. 15.7-11. Isai. 58.7. Matthew. 5.42. Romans 12.13. 2 Cor. 8.7. by grace, there
the Apostle means almes-giving, as does plainly appear in the foregoing
verses, and this he calls the grace of God, as ver. 1. because Phil. 2.13.
it is God that works in us as in other things, so in this thing both to will
and to do of his good pleasure: and it is not enough (you see there) to have
something of this grace, but it is expected and required that we abound therein.

It is also highly commended in practice, 2 Commended.
the Saints of God in all ages have been much honored for this their freeness
and forwardness in relieving of their poor brethren: the contribution made by
the Macedonians for the poor Saints at Jerusalem is upon record, Romans 15.26.
and again are the same Christians highly commended for the same thing, 2 Cor.
8.1. etc. the Apostle there does bear them witness how that when they
themselves were in an afflicted condition and at a poorestay, so that they
seemed rather themselves to want relief, then to be able to give relief, yet
even then they abounded in their liberality, and that they had gathered so
much that the Apostle was loath to receive it of them, he seeing it was beyond
their power, in so much that they prayed him with much entreaty to accept
thereof, and to distribute it among the Saints that were in want. The
Philippians also above all other Churches next to those of Macedonia had the
praise for communicating more then once to the necessities of the Apostle, for
he speaks it to their commendation, that since he departed from Macedonia, no
other Church beside theirs had sent him a supply, which he was glad of, not so
much for his own benefit, as for their gain, which should be great in the day
of account, Phil. 4.14.18. the care also that the Christians had of the poor
in the time of the Apostles is spoken of Act. 11.29, 30. they sold their lands
and goods rather then they would suffer their poor brethren to want, Chap.
2.45. and there were godly and discreet officers (that should not be ciphers)
elected by the Church, and appointed by the Apostles purposely to oversee and
look after those that were in want and stood in need of relief, Chap. 6.3, 5.
I shall not need speak of particular persons who are greatly renowned in
Scripture for their hosptality and almsdeeds, as Abraham, Lot, David,
cornelius (of whose alms there was in the presence of God a memorandum made
Acts 10.31.) Dorcas, (whose good works and almsdeeds were to be seen and
showed, when she her self was not, the poor could not tell how with patience
to take her death, she had done so much for them all the time of her life, Act.
9.36, 39.) and many more of no small note whom I must pass over in silence;
yea, it is worth the observing how that our Savior himself, though he was
relieved by others, yet even out of that would he ordinarily give a portion to
the Joh. 13.29.
poor, giving us thereby to understand that even the poor themselves should
pay collection, that is, part with somewhat (though the less) to those that
are in greater need then themselves are. And we are to afford relief to those
that are in need for these reasons: because it is bonum, justum, and honestum;
it is a thing good, right, and honest so to do, as will thus appear:

Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity let us do good to all men (says the
Apostle) especially to them that are of the household of faith: and verse 6. it
appears what good he means, even the communicating of good things, in which
welldoing we must abound, and not wax weary, ver. 9. and Heb. 13.16. To do
good, and to communicate, forget not (says that Author) we must be free and
forward to distribute good things, for this is to do good, and therefore is it
our duty, for Romans 12.9.
we must cleave to and follow that that is good; and this is good, and that in
sundry respects, good both for giver and receivers, good both for our selves,
ours, and others.

Good for others: 1. In that hereby they receive good, To give Alms good in
diverse respects: viz.
for their bowels are refreshed; as the Apostle says the Saints were by
Philemon, ver. 7. 2. In that hereby they do good, (if they have any goodness
at all in them,) viz. bless us,


Good for our selves: 1. For the present: for Prove. 28.27. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack, and Psalm. 41.1, 2. Him that considers the poor,
the Lord will preserve and keep alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth.
etc. 2. For the furture: provide well for eternity; so the Apostle gives in
charge concerning rich men, that they do good, yea, that they be rich in good
works, viz. to distribute and communicate, laying up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. so that.
not so much to lay up, as to lay out is the best way to provide for
afterward, therefore does our Savior give us that good counsel, Luke 16.9.
from the example of the unjust steward, who was so wise for himself whilst he
was in office, as that by the liberal giving away of his masters goods, he
might be well provided for afterward, when he had nothing left him; And I say
unto you, (says our Savior) Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye sail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. For if ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches? ver. 11. q.d. If ye be untrusty in
disposing (according to the will of God) these temporal goods, how can ye
expect that he should bestow upon you everlasting happiness^? and Chap. 12.33.
Sell that ye have, and give alms, q.d. at no hand let the poor want what
shift soever ye make, rather sell, then want to give; Provide your selves bags,
which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief
approaches, neither moth corrupts: so that to disburse to the poor on earth
(in conscience and obedience to God) is before hand to provide a rich treasure
in heaven, and who that believes this would not think himself happy in such
an exchange? is not this the best alchimy to turn earth into Heaven? is not
this a good bargain to part with * vain and uncertain things, to partake of
real and durable riches? believe it, this is the best improvement, and the
most that can be made of these things: whereupon a worthy Father thus exhorts,
* Si vis esse mercator optimus, foenerator egregius, da, quod, non potes
retinere, ut recipias quod non poteris amittere, da modicum, ut recipias
centuplum, da temporalem possessionem, ut consequaris haereditatem aeternam:
Would thou be a good merchant, a great usurer, give, that thou can not
keep, that thou may receive that thou shall not loose; give (though but)
little that thou may receive a hundred fold; give thy earthly goods, that
thou may obtain eternal life: contrary wise, if thou show no mercy here,
expect not to find mercy hereafter; For he shall have judgment Eccl. 1.2.
^ Tim. 6.17.
Aug. in Ep.
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. and who so stops his
ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be
heard. Prove. 21.13.

Good for ours; this a means to make our posterity blessed; Psalm. 37.26. it is
the property of a righteous man to be ever merciful and lending, and it is
said of such an one that his seed is blessed (and that is no small blessing)
though then thou have given much, and as yet have received but little, do not
give over, and think all is lost, for if thou should never live to enjoy the
crop in this life, there is the more behind for thy children after thee, and
how can we possibly provide better for them, then to lay up in store Gods
blessing for them: and that by our means they should come to be heirs
thereof; the good provision therefore that we should make for our children
consists not so much in laying up, as in laying out; Quo plures domi sunt tibi
liberi, eo plu^ tibi non recondendum, sed erogandum est. Cyprian. de eleemos.
the more children thou have at home, the more must thou not hoard up for them,
but the more must thou give to the poor; a strange paradox to the men of the
world, they will never believe it, but the faith of a Christian will persuade
him to greater matters then this.

That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live, and
inherit the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Deu. 16.20. and that it is
so, may appear, Prove. 3.27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due,
when it is in the power of thine hand to do it: observe, it is their due from
us, therefore our debt to them, and we must not defer payment of this debt.
Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and come again, and to morrow I will give,
when thou have it by thee. ver. 28. the poor have some Ius Charitatis, licet
non proprietatis.
right to rich men's goods in point of equity, and according to the rule of
charity; though therefore they may be cast or nonsuited at the Common law of
man, yet may the sue us in the Court of Conscience, and have judgment against
us at Gods tribunal seat of justice, Beware (says the Lord) that there be not
a thought in thy wicked heart, etc. and thine eye be evil against thy poor
brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and
it be sin unto thee. Deuteronomy. 15 9.

The Hebrew Rabbines, and the Jews at this day call alms (...)
Righteousness, not only because they ought to be of goods rightly got, but
also because it is but just and right that they should be given, and not
because they make Righteous (as the To whom we may say according to their own
Translation, Matt. 6.1. Attend^te, ne justitiam vestram faciatis; sake heed you
make ^^^m not your Justifi^^tion. Light ^ot Miscell.
Papists would make us believe, who make this to be a chief one of their many
meritorious works) and the wealth of this world is by our Savior called
unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.11. and so indeed it is, when unjustly withheld as
well as when not rightly got; so that contrary to right and reason, to hold
fast that we ought to part with, turns even wellgotten goods into the Mammon
of unrighteousness; and why is it a matter of justice to give alms? because
we are not the absolute owners, but only the Luke 16.2.
stewards of Gods gifts, now it is 1 Cor. 4.1. Reas. 3.
required of a steward that he be found faithful as well in his disbursements
as in his receipts, not to engrosse all to himself, but to take only his
allowance, and to lay out to every one according to the mind and will of his
Lord and Master.

We are to relieve the distresses of our poor brethren, because it is a part
of honesty, and therefore our duty, Provide things honest (says the Apostle)
in the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. and Phil. 4.8, 9. whatsoever things are
true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, if there be in them any
virtue or praise we should think on such things, and what no more? Those
things (says he) which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen
in me, do: we cannot approve our selves honest men in the sight of God; if we
be altogether wanting in this duty toward man, for works of mercy are works
of piety, so far forth considered as commanded of God, and done in conscience
and obedience to God; if man only called for relief at our hands, we might be
hold excused before God, but whenas God requires it, it must be done for Gods
sake, conscience stands bound in this case, this is one half of the royal
law, Mark 12.31.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: and how do we love him, if we be
hard-hearted toward him? who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother
has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him; Qui panperi e
cemosy^am dat, Deo suavi^ati^ odorem sacrificat. Cypri.
how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. To give alms is a religious
work, for it is an evangelicall sacrifice. Heb. 13.16. To do good, and to
communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased: if
therefore thou would please God, thou must see that amongst the rest of thy
sacrifices, this be not wanting.

viz.

That do not account it their duty; they think it to be a thing arbitrary, 1
Sort.
and not necessary, they may do well in giving relief, and they may let it
alone, and not do amiss; who shall compel them to give away what is their
own? even he requires it of thee, to whom thou owe thy self and all thou
have; they think they ought to get and lay up all they can, but do not
account it their duty as well to lay out, and do therewithal all the good
they can; hence comes it to pass that men in this thing are at the best so
indifferent, for they think they are free, and not bound hereto by duty, and
hence it is that the superfluity of men's goods, which is the portion of the
poor, is lavisht out and wasted in profuse and vain expenses, yea, in the
maintenance of base and sinful lusts, for by that time pride, gluttony,
drunkenness, voluptuousness, and all manner of excess and riot have had
their share, there is scarce a farthing left for the poor, nay (it may be) a
great deal is set on the score, and much more then is their own spent in
these things; oh that such would but consider what an account will they be able
to give in, that are in so great arreares with God, when the judgment is set,
and the books opened, Dan. 7.10.
wherein all the particular passages of their whole life shall be reviewed, and
there will it be found, and brought forth against them: Memorandum, At such a
time by such an one were so many pounds laid out (cost needless^) in bravery of
apparel, rich attire, and fantastical fashions, and so much more at another
time, and so from time to time the like: whenas so many poor creatures at the
same time had not a good ragge to cover them. Item, such vast sums of money
lavisht out without any measure in feasts and banquettings, whenas the poor
that were ready to perish for hunger would have been glad of the scraps and
fragments, that were given to their hounds and hawks, Luke 16.21.
yea, feign would they have been refreshed with the very crummes that fell from
their tables. Item, such a treasure wasted in needless and unnecessary
buildings, so many Walks and Galleries, Turrets and Pyramides, such setting
up, pulling down, transposing, transplacing to make gay houses (which were
very mock-beggers) and so much yearly cast away in costly furniture, with
which their houses were well-stuft and filled, whenas multitudes of poor
people were driven to wander about, and had no certain dwelling place, had no
other house then the wide world, no other bed then the hard ground, and no
other canopie then the open Heaven. Item, so many hundreds spent in lawsuits
for the satisfying of a self-will, and as much more in sports and pastimes for
the pleasing of a carnal mind, whenas never a poor creature was one penny
the better for all this: what answer can such make to these things, will they
not then be either speechless or selfe-condemned? if men did but believe this
that for the want of this duty they should be called to so strict an account,
one would think they would not be so wanting therein, but the cause is they
account it not a duty.

That do not practice it as their duty: 2 Sort.
they will peradventure in words acknowledge what they ought to do in this
kind, but little or nothing is done, like as many (especially in these days
taking the advantage of the times by reason of the present obstruction of
justice, and meaning to show more knavery then honesty) being demanded of
those to whom they are endebted such sums of money that have been for a long
time due, still confess the debt and acknowledge, it has been a great while
due, and more then time it were paid, but put off still with good words from
time to time, and indeed means not to pay at all, if they can possibly shift
it, and except they be enforced; thus deal many people with the poor to whom
they owe much, but will part with nothing but fair Vox and praeterea nihil.
words at the most, Genesis 49.21.
like Naphtali, they give good words, as if the poor as Hos. 12.1.
Ephraim could be fed with wind; alas poor creatures their case is to be
pitied, it is fit they should be relieved, the Lord help them, God comfort
them, it is a work of charity for good people to do: for them, and many such
like speeches, which are the expressions only of a complementall charity, Luke
16.21.
such like Dives his dogs, all they can do is but to lick a poor man with
their tongues, Matt. 17.27.
or like Peter's fish that had money in the mouth but not a hand to give it;
bare words what are they but wind; and such verbal charity what is it but as
clouds and wind without rain? it is but of an airy substance, and has not the
solidity scarce of a penny weight, for if all the good words and well-wishings
of such were worth but a two pence or three pence, they would by no means part
with them, these are those exploded by the Apostle, Jam. 2.15, 16. If a brother
or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food; And one of you say unto them,
Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled: in n withstanding ye give them not
those things which are needful to the body: what does it profit?

the performance of this our duty? The more to move hereto consider,

God looks for it to be done, Motive 1.
we have a word of command to oblige us to the duty (as was showed in the
proof of the point) and how can we approve our selves upright in the sight of
God, unless we have Psalm. 119.6.
respect to all his Commandments; he has made us his Almners, and therefore
expects we should

viz. to the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.11.

viz. according to that we have, 2 Cor. 8.12.

viz. when there is need, Gal. 6.10.

viz. for conscience sake, in obedience to God, and out of love to our poor
brethren.

God looks upon what is done; God knows our charity, Motive 2.
and takes especial notice of our giving to the poor for his sake, Rev. 2.19.
I know thy works (says Christ to his Church in Thyatira) and charity and
service, and faith, and patience, etc. these chief things remarkable in her,
he is said to know, that is in a special manner, with the knowledge of
approbation, so to know as richly to reward, this he makes known that the
least thing that is given (though but Matt. 10.41.
a cup of cold water) for his sake, shall not be forgotten, and it is
observable that in that place charity (that is of the right kind that does
appear in deed, and is seen in service) is And the same in 1 These. 3.6.
joined with faith; for without this there is no faith, and so Heb. 11.6.
no pleasing of God, forasmuch as faith is dead, and no faith without works,
now to releeve the poor is a principal work of faith, excellent fruit that
does spring from a lively faith, without which it cannot profit, all which the
Apostle does make to appear at large, Jam. 2.14. etc.

Now forasmuch as a man may 1 Cor. 13.1.
bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and yet want charity, and so it may
profit him nothing, that we may the better discharge our duty herein, let us
consider how, or in what manner it is to be done, for that purpose th se
directions will not be amiss, viz.

Give justly: i. e. of goods rightly got, otherwise thou give not that is
thine own to give, In what manner to give Alms: viz. 1.
and can thou think to do or to get any good by stolen goods? if thou
scrapest together earthly goods by wicked and indirect means, and afterward
do give out of these to the poor, if the curse does leave them, yet will it
still haunt thee: Eccl. 11.1.
Cast thy bread (says Solomon) upon the waters; let it be thine own, and not
other men's, for that will be no advantage, but every way Lucrum ex injus^itta
damaum.
loss to thee.

Psalm. 41 1. vet. Tra^sl.
wisely of the poor, now wisdom herein must be seen both in respect of the
giver, it must be according to his ability, as Act. 11.29. and of the
receivers, it must be according to their necessity, as Act. 4.35.

He that gives (says the Apostle, Romans 12.8.) let him do it with
simplicity: i.e. with singleness of heart, looking for no reward at the hands
of man, for Luke 6.32, 33, 34, 35. Sunt qui pauper^^us parum ^ribuunt, ut
amp^^u^ accipiant, quae magis venatio est quam eleemosyna. Hiet. in Ep. Lact.
Inst. lib. 6. cap. 12.
If ye love them which love you (says our Savior) what thank have ye? for
sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do good to them which do
good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners do even the same. And if ye lend
to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend
to sinners, to receive as much again. But love ye your enemies, and do good,
and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your reward shall be great. Tenendum
est omnimodo ut ab officio misericordiae spes recipiendi absit omnino. This
must be held for certain, that in the works of mercy there must not be so much
as any hope of requital, that is, from those to whom we show mercy: we must
not then be double minded, but sincere hearted in that work.

Cor. 9.5. it is as seed that must be scattered abroad with a free and full
hand, ver. 6.9. who so bad a husband as to sow his ground to halves, because he
will spare his seed? what wise man will keep in his goods, and let his chiefest
commedities lie dead by him in his warehouse whenas trading is quick, and not
rather bring forth still as long as there is any, that so by traffic he may
at length have a rich return?

Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give (says the
Apostle) not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loves a cheerful giver. 2
Cor. 9.7. He gives well that gives willingly, what therefore is wanting in thy
hand supply with thy heart, though a bargain is valued by the worth of the
thing bought, yet a gift is by the mind of the giver: hence comes it that
Alms is not only called beneficence, that signifies well-doing, but also a
benevolence that signifies well-willing, for that cannot be done well, that
proceeds not from good will.

Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them: Non est
ingrat^ Deo quae visa fuerit ob hominibus eleemosyna, sed quae ideo facta est,
ut visa sit.
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore when
thou do thine alms do not sound a trumpet before thee, etc. Matt. 6.1, 2.
see more of this in the following verses: Whereupon Chrysostom in his Comment
upon that place says thus, That alms is not rejected of God, that is seen of
men, but that which is done for that end that it might be seen.

Now that we have understood that it is our duty to relieve those that are in
want, and in what manner this is to be done. In the last place (that we may
have no excuse to shift it off) we are to consider the persons to be relieved,
who those are that we are to see to and provide for, and this brings in the
third point, which is this,

We are not to suffer any to perish in extreme need for want of necessary
relief: So that this grace of charity seems to be universal, it is to be
not only in all, but also to be extended toward all, it has an object of a
large extent, it will not be straightened in too narrow a compass, for it knows
almost no bounds, it is not a scanty grace, no nor partial, but free-hearted
to any, open-handed to all.

What all? some are rather to be punished then relieved, Object.
so altogether undeserving, that it is no charity at all to do any thing for
them, Qui largiuntur indignis bona, malos roborant materia vitioru^
suppeditata. Answ.
and we might be thought rather to offend if we should give any relief to such
as are vile and profane wretches, for what do we in so doing but maintain
them in their vicious course of life?

We are bound to afford help or relief to all or any, only thus far, viz in
these two respects:

If I have seen (says Job) any perish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering; none so wicked or wretched, that we may suffer to perish for
want of necessary relief; Qui perituro succurrere potest, si non succurrerit,
eum occidit. Lact. Inst. li. 6. ca. 11.
He that sees one in extreme need, and may but will not relieve him, is guilty
of his death.

So far forth as it is a work of mercy: for some there are in great need, and
yet no deed of charity to relieve them, forasmuch as they are not impotent but
impudent poor, their poverty is voluntary and not necessary, viz. That if any
man will not work, neither should he eat. For we hear (sait he) that there
are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are
busybodies. Now them that are such, we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own bread. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10,
11, 12.

So that (these things considered) it does appear that in case of inevitable
necessity, we are (as a work of mere mercy) to afford relief to any; and that
this is our duty may be proved Matthew. 5.42. Give to him that asks thee: and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away: it is indefinitely
spoken, him, whosoever he be, without exception or exemption, for in such cases
before given, there must be no partiality, or respect of persons, and therefore
this him St Luke expressly shows to be every man, Chap. 6. ver. 30. and in the
same sense speaks the Apostle, Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity, let us do
good unto all men: that is, so far forth as there is occasion given, and
their need requiring: Especially unto them who are of the household of faith; we
are indeed to do most for them that are best, but yet so far forth as there
is necessity, we must do good to all, or any; and this our Savior does make
plain to us in his Parable Luke 10.30.37. where the distressed Jew was
relieved by the good Samaritane, who casually, or occasionally lighted upon him
by the way, and though he was a stranger, yet in this case he accounted him to
be his neighbor, whom he was bound to, to do for; hereby are we given to
understand, that every one in such a case is a man's neighbor, not only his
kindred and * Disting^endu^ est de pauper^^te sell. vel ex coacta necessitate,
vel ex propria voluntate. Tho. Aquin.
acquaintance, but whomsoever he has to do withal, or that any way stands in
need of help, in case of extremity the very Samaritane must help the Jew; Every
object of misery must we readily embrace that we meet with to show mercy to,
whether it be friend or foe, Jew or Gentile, Christian or Pagan: And to the
performance of this duty we are bound in diverse respects:

He has made of one blond all rations of men, Act. 17.26. we are all by
creation the children of one and the same father, Mal. 2.10. and therefore are
fellow brethren, and should we not do then one for another? we should
degenerate from men, yea even from the bruit beasts, if we should not show
pity to those of our own kind; the irrational creatures howsoever many times
are fierce and furious one kind against another, yet, in time of misery by the
dictate of common sense will be helpful and serviceable to those of their own
kind; in case of extreme necessity we are required to relieve the bruit beasts,
Deuteronomy. 22.4. and how much more is one man better then all they? this argument
much moved Job to stoop to the meanest of those that did belong to him. He did
not despise the cause of his man or maidservant, ver. 13. for says he, Did
not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the
womb? ver: 15.

Matthew. 7.12. this comes close home to the conscience, and is to all men so
clear and convincing, that none can gainsay or find fault with it; and in
this particular we must consider the distressed condition of other men, as if
it were our own, Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them
which suffer adversity, at being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13.3. in
our serious sad thoughts put our selves into their case, and our own
consciences cannot but then convince us, that if we were in such extremity or
necessity, we would not that others should deny us relief, by reason of pay
exceptions that might be taken against our persons, but we would have it how
ever, and not be said nay, because in extreme need; and if so, then by the
aforesaid rule is it our duty to do for others, as we would be done by our
selves.

In regard of Gods Example; (which is altogether without exception) he is
herein impartial and no respecter of persons, Matthew. 5.45-48.

Pessimus hominum habet umbras quasdam ceu vestigia quaedam creatoris.
even in the worst of men, though much ruinated and defaced, yet is it not
wholly extinguished or extirpated, every man as a man sets forth the handiwork
of God, and therefore in this regard favor is to be afforded to every one, if
not for the man's sake, yet for Gods sake whose creature he is, and whose image
he bears; the picture of a King (though but rudely set forth) is to be
respected in regard of the person whom it represents, and the base usage of it
(especially if through contempt) reflects upon the person, and tends to the
dishonor of him whose picture it is; so 1 John 4.20.
If any man say I love God, and hates his brother, he is alyar: for he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? q.d. as we deal with men in this kind, the Lord accounts as done to him,
forasmuch as man as made of God is the visible image of the invisible God.

tells us of Autigonus whom he not without cause does brand with infamy for his
cavelling with a Cynike, Seneca de Beneficiis lib. 2. cap. 17.
who asked of the King a talent, his answer was, that it was too much for a
Cynike to receive; then he begged a penny, that (says he) is too little for me
a King to give Turpissima est ejusmodi cavillatio, invenit quo modo neutrum
daret, in denario regem, in denarioregem, in talento Cynicum respexit: cum
possit and denarium tanquam Cynico dare, and talentum tanquam rex. Ib.
thus he found an excuse for both, and so by that means gave him nothing at
all; such like shifts do men make, and strain their wits to find out many more
to keep back in their own hands that, that might benefit the poor; well,
though men may be thus put off, yet God will not be so dallied with, Gal. 6.7.
know and consider well that God requires of thee to give relief in extreme
need to any, look to it then as thou will answer the contrary at thy peril, it
lies upon thee as a duty, how can thou then be discharged?

Let us learn well that which we of our selves are not so willing as we should
be to practice, viz. without any evasion or protraction freely embrace every
object and occasion for the doing of good, quaries, where? or who? when? or
what? how? or why? for wheresoever he be, or whosoever he is, that whenever
stands in need of whatsoever help we can afford, we must howsoever see that he
does not miscarry through our default or neglect, and why? because it is our
duty, which (all excuses set apart) we must look to, viz. not to suffer any to
perish for want of clothing, or any poor to be without covering, we may not
then in this thing so much respect any man's person as his Sive ille sacerdos,
sive cognatus sit, and affinis, nihil in illo aliud consideres nisi
paupertatem: sine discretione omnibus indigentibus simpliciter tribuamus non
quaerentes cui, sed quare demus. Hier. in Ep.
condition, for charity is to look directly into the case and collaterally into
the cause; not solely the worth, but chiefly the want of the person is to be
regarded.

But such are strangers to me, I know not whence they come, nor whither they
go, I never saw their faces before, and I know not therefore what they be, nor
whether I should relieve them or no?

Such an one speaks like Nahal, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. who proved himself a fool,
ver. 25. but hear what God says, Answ.
And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner, that he may
live with thee, Levit. 25.35.



The Ingratitude of the poor indeed does oft-times much cool the charity of
the rich, but let not that discourage thee, Answ.
forasmuch as thou have a better play master, who will see that thou shall not
be the looser; and Ingratus est. non mibi fecit injuriam, sed sibi, nec ideo
pigriut dabo, sed diligentius, Sen. de ben. lib. 7. cap. 32.
this is their fault and not thine, let not therefore their sin of ingratitude
cause thee to sin in the not discharging of thy dutie^ Cast thy bread upon the
waters (says Solomon, Eccles. 11.1.) for thou shall find it after many days:
q.d. though that thou give to the poor may seem to be cost cast away,
especially if it fall into the hands of ungrateful persons, so that thou
think never to have any thing again, not so much as thanks, no not one good
word for all that thou do, yet spare not ever the more; for it is as a
venture at sea that shall certainly come home at last with a rich prize, when
as thou do little expect it, but had quite given it over as lost.



As thou art a Christian, Answ.
let not such cursed speeches proceed out of thy mouth; Jam. 3.9, 10.
know that thou must not be wanting in this duty, no nor in any office of love,
no not toward thy enemies, as they are thy enemies and have wronged thee; I
confess they are otherwise to be considered as they are Gods enemies, and have
dishonored him, so may thou indeed Psalm. 139.21, 22.
hate them, (but it must be then as God does, viz. pity them in respect of
their persons, though abhor them in regard of their sins) but considering
them as enemies to us, we may not fail nor fall short in duty toward them;
proved,

Matthew. 5.43, 44. the Pharisees by their false gloss had corrupted Gods law,
as in many other things so in this, their rule was this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy (this was pleasing enough to corrupt nature,)
they understood by neighbor in the law to be meant only their friends and
acquaintance; But I say unto you (says our Savior) q.d. I must learn you
another lesson, viz. Love your enemies, bless them that cause you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you; see, here is love, and offices of love required of us toward our very
enemies, both concerning their spiritual as also their outward good. Romans
12.14.20. Recompense to no man evil for evil, but if thine, enemy hunger, Per
cibum and potum, omnia bumanitatis efficia intelligenda.
feed him; if he thirst, give him Carbones ignis coacervabis in caput ejus]
i.e. animus frangetur in utra^que partem, etc. aut ex ardore chatitatis
beneficili emollietur, aut uretur testimonio conscientia. Cal^.
drink, for ^^so doing, * thou shall he ape coals of fire on his head; be not
overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good. q.d. do not as thou art
dealt with, but as thou would be done by, do not withold thy hand from
doing: what thou can, for (and not against) thy enemies, Poenas ejus in diem
judicii cumulabis, Orig.
for thereby thou shall so inflame them with thy love, that it shall kindle in
them burning charity toward thee, or if they continue still in their malice,
they shall be set on fire with the coals of their own conscience, and of the
divine justice, if therefore thou do repay thy enemy evil for evil, thou
do bring a greater evil upon thy self; for that was the evil of
punishment, but thine is the evil of sin; but if with thy well-doing thou do
over-match the evil that thy enemy has done thee, Is laud d^gnus qui malis
provocatus restituit bona. Id.
how great a victory do thou obtain? it is a noble thing to overcome, but
more noble to overcome evil, but most of all to overcome evil with good.

Romans 5.10. and bestowed on us his son, ver. 8. who is more then if he had
given us all things beside; what could he possibly have done more for us?
Herein is love indeed, not that we loved God (for we being his utter enemies,
hated him, and were hated of him,) but that he loved us, and sent his son to be
the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another (for there is an infinite distance betwixt God and us, and
therefore is the enmity far greater between God and us, then is, or possibly
can be, between one and another.) 1 John 4.10, 11.

Another example of this kind we have, 2 Kin. 6.21, 22, 23. the Syrians
(enemies to Gods people) came in an hostile manner, and with a malicious mind
against the Prophet Elisha, but were strangely not only disappointed of their
purpose, but also captivated themselves, the King of Israel seeing his enemies
to stand at his mercy would have showed them no mercy, but calls out to slay
them; the Prophet is of another mind, and requires them not to be destroyed,
but to be relieved and then dismissed, which being done, their hearts were so
melted herewith, that they were thereby subdued and overcome for a long while
after: many more examples I might produce (were it as needful as easy) even
of heathen men and infidels void of true saving grace (whose excellency has
consisted in mere morality) yet by the power of restraining grace Emollit
mores, nes sinit esse seros.
(which does mollify in great part man's cursed cruel nature) have been
eminent and men of renown for their courtesy and bounty toward their greatest
and most malicious enemies; oh how inexcusable shall we be, if such as these
shall rise up in judgment, and for this thing amongst other things condemn
many of those that profess themselves Christians? I confess, that to relieve
our very enemies, and that (in case of necessity) as if they were our very
friends is a hard saying (that is, to those in whom is nothing better then
corrupt nature) and who can hear it? but is there any to be found that
practice it? oh it is so harsh a thing that flesh and blood cannot bear nor
brook it, and no wonder, for (the Apostle says) Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 15.50. a natural man, yea, the best of men
(as touching the part unregenerate) cannot possibly submit to this, it must be
pure grace that must yield hereunto, for the carnal mind is enmity against
God, and is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be. Romans 8.7.



Herein must wisdom be seen, Answ.
we must so give even to the worst of men, that they perish not for want of
relief, and yet withal make it to appear, that we do not countenance nor
will maintain them in their sin; we must support humane nature even in a
wicked man; Arist otelet reprehen sus a quodam, quod eleem^synam dedisset
improbo, Non homini (inquit) dedi, sed humanae for. ti. Laert. lib. 5. cap. 1.
so the Philosopher excused himself saying, he considered not the man, but
mankind.

Again, we must not look altogether to the deserts of the party, for consider,
if God should deal with us according to our deserts, what could we expect at
his hands? I am not worthy (says that holy Patriarch) of the least of all the
mercies, and all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant. Genesis
32.10. God indeed feeds us to the full with the finest of the wheat, with honey
out of the rock, and with the pure blood of the grape, Deu. 3^.13, 14. Psalm.
81.16.
but we are such altogether undeserving creatures, as unworthy we are of the
very refuse, or crummes that fall from us.

I have given already to many, and cannot to every one, it will not hold out,

Give a portion to seven, Answ.
and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth:
Eccles. 11.2. Quod aliqua^do de necessitate amittendum est, sponte pro divina
remuneratione distribuendum est. Cyp. ser. de tleemos.
q. d. thou know not how God may deal with thee, or what thou have,
therefore whilst thou art, and whilst thou have, be still doing good therewith,
and that not to a few, but let many, yea any have a part and share therein,
observing the cautions before given, having respect both to thy ability, and
their necessity: See page 25, 26.

These are, though not all, yet most of the chief of those many excuses that
men make, to shift off their duty in this particular; which (we see)
nevertheless will not hold them excused before God; other objections of less
note are not worth the answering.

What now remains? but that knowing these things, Joh. 13.17. (...).
we should accordingly do them, for the knowledge of duty without practice
availes nothing, be always therefore doing good in this kind to one or other,
and for encouragement in this well-doing, set before you the rich recompense of
reward; consider what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10. God is able to make
all grace abound toward you, that ye always having sufficiency in all things
may abgund to every good work (as it is written, He has dispersed abroad, he
has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever.) Now he that
ministers seed to the sower. both minister bread for your food, and multiply
your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness.

Ireland? Oh let us consider their distress, and let us take notice of our
duty, though our eyes have not seen, yet our ears have heard, and that at
large; time after time how ill it fares with them; nay have not we our selves
been eyewitnesses in great part of their misery? how many of them in all this
time have come to our doors, and presented themselves before us as visible
objects of our pity? let us not turn away our faces, close out eyes, stop
our ears, and harden our hearts against them; Front capillata post est
occasio calva.
As we have opportunity (says the Apostle) let us do good, etc. Gal. 6.10.
advantages of times, and opportunities of doing good we must catch hold of, and
not let slip; and now have we an opportunity put into our hands, there is
nothing wanting but a heart, their distresses are powerful suitors, which do
cry day and night, and not give us rest, how then can we possibly give them the
denial? The high Court of Parliament in their late This was preached upon the
occasion of the second Ordinance of Parliament for the relief of Ireland, then
ne^^ly come out, and required by Ministers in all places to be commended to the
people.
Declaration and Ordinance do lively present their gasping condition unto us,
(whose spirit is not moved, whose heart not wounded, whose soul not afflicted?)
and in their behalf do second their suit, and call upon us for a charitable
supply of the very necessaries of life for them: if then we now sit still, and
do nothing, how inexcusable shall we be? tremble to think that any of us should
suffer any of them to perish for want of clothing, or to remain so poor that
they should be without covering.

They are none of our kindred and acquaintance, far from us, unknown to us,

Are they not men, Answ.
and are they not in need? then are we bound more to them then to others that
are in less need, though nearer to us; nay, but further, are they not of near
a kin to us? are they (not English Protestants, and so of the same flesh and
blood with us? yea, as we profess our selves Christians, so are not they the
same (such as have been brought to his miserable condition for the true
Religions sake) and therefore are we brethren, Mat. 23.8. and should not such
do one for another? 1. Pet. 3.8. as also fellow members, 1 Cor. 12.27. and so
ought to have a sympathizing disposition, ver. 25, 26. remember what the
Apostle says, Gal. 6.10. Let us do good to all men, but especially to them
who are of the household of faith; which is the multitude of all true believers,
dispersed throughout the whole earth, known by the name of the Church Militant,
which is called Gods Family or household, Ephesians. 2.19. now, especial and more
then ordinary care must be had of such as these that are in want, whenever we
hear thereof, and any opportunity seem ^s for that purpose we must afford
relief.



All future events of things are uncertain and unknown to us, Answ.
we must discharge our duty, Omnla etentura jacent in incerto.
and leave the success to God, we must use the means, and then refer all to
the good blessing of God; how know we, but that hereby the Lord tries us;
whether we will trust him or no?



And what shall we be altogether and only for our selves? Answ.
never was it merry world, since so much self-love showed it self in the
world; the Apostle gives us another lesson which we must learn, viz. Let no
man-seek his own ( i.e. not only his own) but every man another wealth ( i.e.
as well as his own) 1 Cor. 10.24. (clean contrary to the Maxim of worldlings,
which is, Every one shift for himself) and another of this kind we have Phil.
2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others.



In the morning sow thy seed, Answ.
and in the evening withhold not thy hands for thou know not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good, Eccles.
11.6. it may be, thou art yet to receive the blessing for what thou have
formerly done, or peradventure, now thou may expect a greater blessing then
before; or what if now to reap the fruit of all? do not therefore slack thy
hand, For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. Let us not then be
Weary in Well-doinge for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. Gal.
6.7, 9.



There is a time for all things, a time to lay up, and time to lay out, Answ.
these are not gathering but spending times, this is not a time to hoard up,
but we must now bring forth out of our storehouse all things both old and new:
consider what the Lord says to Baruch by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 45.4, 5.
The Lord says thus, Behold, that which I have built, I will break down, and
that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole land. And seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not.



Take we heed we do not disable our selves; true, Answ.
neither God nor man require of us impossibilities, to do in this kind above
that we are able (yet let me tell you upon extraordinary occasions we are to
constrain our selves though something above our ordinary ability, as did those
Christians whom the Apostle applauds 2 Cor. 8.3.) but God and our own
conscience knows best, whether this be a real truth or only a fained excuse;
it is to be feared, most want nothing but a willing mind; For if there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has and not according
to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12. the widows two mites (where there is nothing,
or but little) willingly parted with, is more acceptable to God, then all that
worldly rich men give out of their abundance, Mark 12.42, 43, 44. what can more
be said even by those that desire to cavil, or what can more be spoken to stop
the mouths of such? I end with a motive or two, which may move our hearts to
put to our helping hands to relieve the wants of distressed Ireland. viz.

How know we but it may be a means to move the Lord to be mercivull to this
land? see what he has promised, Motive 1.
Isai. 58.10, 11, 12. contrariwise, if we cast off all pity toward them, we
may not look that the Lord should have any compassion on us (for nothing is
more just with God then to pay sinners home in their c. g. Dives would not give
Lazarus a crumme of bread, therefore was himself denied a drop of water.
own kind) Psalm. 109 9.12.16. Amos 6.6, 7, 8. see there how the Lord threatens
those that have not a fellow-feeling of the miseries of their fellow-brethren.

back our hand, and follow not close the work to help forward their
deliverance as well as our own, but that the Lord should (through out default)
be pleased to take some other course, and bring it about another way, it will
not be for our honor, but to our shame; as Mord^^^ tells Ester, when the people
of God were in straits, and she at first seemed loath to put forth her self, If
thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement
and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, b(...)ou and thy fathers
house shall be destroyed: And who knows, whether thou art come to the
kingdom for such a time as this? Chap. 4.14. so, If we altogether hold our
hands at this time, there shall at length come deliverance to Gods people some
other way, whenas we and ours may perish, and who knows, but that we may be
the kingdom that the Lord will hereby try at this time, and in this thing? Set
before you the rich recompense of reward: consider two things, He that has
pity on the poor Faeneratur Domino. etc. al verbii adum Orig.
lends (on usury) to the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him
again, Pro. 19.17. and who may we better trust then God, and what better
security can we desire then his word? it is the absolute best course that
usurers can possibly take, to make the most and best improvement of their
money, thus to put it out to Gods use (oh that they had but faith to believe
it) for he is so rich a play master, that the very interest shall be far greater
then the principal, and so sure a play master, that he will see thou shall be
sure not to want, He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack, Prove. 28.27.

Luke 6.38. this (me thinks) should whet on those that are greedy of gain. Alms
is fitly compared to seed, 2 Cor. 9.6. and why? because it yields a great
increase; now there is no man when he sowes his ground thinks that it is lost
and cast away, so buried in the earth that he shall never see it more, no, he
looks that that should bring him a great deal more, and pay him with over
plus for all his cost, and this hope makes him prodigal of his seed, he freely
scatters it abroad with a full and open hand, he will see that his land shall
not want seed, it shall have as much (by his good will) as the ground can bear
or bring forth, and what shall we be such Atheists as to trust the ground and
not God? Fear not, but if we throw out good store of this seed, it will yield
us a rich crop (a hundred fold) at harvest,

(...).
FINIS.

