The late conflagration consumed my own, together with the Stock of Books (as
it were) of the Company of Stationers, London: since that lamentable disaster,
next my own loss; this does trouble me, that when any of those few Ingenious
Persons who desire books inquire after them, they are often answered by such as
have them not, That they are all burnt, which discourageth any further enquiry,
not only to the learned, but even of Country Chapmen, wherefore to let all men
know notwithstanding the late dreadful Calamity, that there are Books yet to be
had, And for the convenience of the Ingenious Buyers, I publish this ensuing
Catalogue.

For the Litteral faults of the Printer to Book-Buyers, I need not make any
Apology, but for my self, that I did only name the Books, and not more largely
deliver their several Titles and Subjects, that would have swelled the
Catalogue: To supply which if any that desire to be acquainted with the
particulers, upon repairing or sending to me, may have full satisfaction from
the Books themselves, if they send before they are sold.

From my Shop in Gresham-Colledge, next the Stairs, or Warehouse in
Moore-Fields against the Cardinals-Cap.

BOOKS in Large Folio.
ASsemblies Annot. 2 Vol. Notes on the New Testament.
Ainsworths annotations. Andrews Sermons. Biblia Polyglotta, with the Lex. 7
vol. Beza in Testament. Novum Babbington's Works. Bakers Chronicle. Beamont,
and Fletchers Plays Bochattes de animal. in 2 vol. Bodinus in Ephesios.
Broughtons Works. Book of Martyrs, 3 vol. Bleau's Art of Navigation.
Church-Bible. Cotgraves French Dictionary. Counsel of Trent. Coopers
Dictionary. Camdens Britannia. Complete Ambass. Carews History of Ireland.
Calvin on Job Englisht. Crookes Anatomy. Chaucers Works. Coopers Works. Digby
of Bodies. Downhams Christian Warfare Dons Sermon. Complete 2 volumes. Davila's
Hist. of France Complete. Dugdals History of Warwickshire. Of St. Paul's,
Description of the Indies Latin. Davila's History of France, 2 vol. Dee of
Spirits. Erasmi Adagia, Estates and Empires by Grimston. French History, Fulke
on the Remish Testament. Flories Italian Dictionary, Fullers Church History,
Feratius Lexicon, Fullers Church History with Appeal Pisgah sight, Froisarts
Chronicle. Grimstons History of France, Gouges Works, Gesner of Beasts,
Gerards Herbal, Hammond on the New Testament, Holy Court, by Causinus.
Hexams Millitary Discipline Complete, Heylin's Cosmography. History of the
Netherlands, Of Serpents,
Hall's Works 3 volume, Howels Dictonary, Hookers Policy, Isaacksons
Chronology, King James' Works, Luthers Table Talk, Lusiads of Portugal, Eng.
by Fanshaw. Lex Marcatoria Morrisons Travailes, Merchants Mirror, Matthew Paris
Hist. Meed's Works 2 vol. Minshaw, Dictionary 9 Languages Monasticon
Anglicanum, 2 vol. Newmans Concordance Ogilby's Bible. Virgil with Cuts, Homers
Hiads with Cuts, Odisses with Cuts Aesop with Cuts,
Plutarcks Morals, Englisht. Plutarcks Lives Englisht Parkinsons Herbal.
Plinies Natural History, Perkins Works, 3 vol. Parkinsons Garden, Peter on
Mark, 2 vol. Poultons Statutes, 1660 Continuation to 1667. Purchase Pilgrimage,
in 4 volumes Purchases Pilgrims. Polibius in English, Perron against King
James. Rawleigh Hist. World, Rosses Cont. of Rawleigh, Romant of Romants,
Rushworths Collect Reynolds Works, Rastals Statutes at large. Stapleton's
Juvenal, with Cuts, Speed 's Chronicle, Maps of the Chronicle,
Spelmani Concilia. Seneca 's Works Englisht, Sands Ovid with Cuts, Spencer's
Similies, Stillingfleet Vindica. of Laud Spotswood Hist. of the Church of
Scotland. Spanish History. Simsons Chronicle, Stowes Chronicle, Survey of
London,
Scapulae Lexicon, Silvesters Works, Leigh of Breda and Buss, Spelmans
Glossarie. Shakspears plays, Seldeni Eadmeri Hist. Noverum. De Successionibus.
Theater of Honor, Turkish History, Titus Livius English, Tailors Cases of
Conscience, Toriano's Italian Dictionary, Ushers Annalls. Uenetian History,
Ward on Matthew Willets Sinopsis, On Genesis and Exodus Wilsons Dictionary.
Withers Emblems,
Books in Small Folio.
ANdrews on the Commandments, Antiens Authors, Alexa^ders sentences Aelians
Tackticks, Attersol on Philemon, Amadis de Gaul, Austins Meditations, Amianus
Marcellinus, Adam in Eden, herbal by Dr. Cole an Herbal by Doctor Cole,
Arcadia, Romance Alisons parts in 4 pieces. Aristotle's Politics, Astrea
Complete, Romance Andrews Lectures, Affairs of Germany, Ashe's Tables of the
Law, 2 vol. Enterleaved with pap. 4 vol.
Allen doct. of Gosp. Benlows Reports, Book of assize, and pleas of the Crown,
Of Offices, Bonaventures life of Christ, Bibles with Service and Psalms. Barnes
4 Books of Offices, enabling private-persons, to serve in state affairs.
Brownrigs Sermons Complete, Brevia Judicialia, 2 vol. Brownes vulgar Errors,
Bulstrods Reports, Burtons Melancholy, Boyses Postlis. St. Bennets rule of
Life. Baptista Porta, Bolton, dead Saint speaking, Bacons Refussitation, roll.
Natural History, Henry the seventh.
Barrets Discipline, Bullemi Annot. Banisters Annot. Brownes Britt. Pastoral
Burton on Antonius, Ben Johnsons Works, 2 vol. marb, Three volumes.
Burgesses of Refining, Complete, Original Sin. On Corinthians.
Balls power of Godliness, Bain on Ephesians, Brooks Heraldry, Beccons Works
in 2 vol. Second volume. Bilsons Christian Suffering. Bunny 's Corner stone,
Lord Brook 's Works, Bifeild on Peter, On Colossians. Boultons Works. De
Blanches Travails. Broughtons Church History. Bodins Commonwealth, Babingtons
Fire works, Bassa. Romance Bannished Virgin, Ditto Barrets Dictionary. Binghams
Art Millitary, Bucks Rich 3d. Bentivoglio Hist. Fland. Complete, Wars,
Relation,
Beards Theater of Gods Judgments Barnards Concordance, Britain 's Pastorals,
Benlow 's Poems, Cook on Littleton. Civil Wars of Spain, Crook on the
Hippocrite, Caesar's Coment, with Edmonds Notes. Civil Considerations, Cosens
Tables, Cotton on John, Clark's Examples. Case of Conscience, Martyrologie
Complete. Marrow of Divinity.
Cranmer against Gardener. Chirurgions Mate. Civil wars of Lancast. and York
complete. Collect. of Protectors Ordinances. Cowels Interpreter. Crooks Reports
3. voll. Complete Surveyer. Calvin's Institutions. On Job. On Deuteronomy.
Cartwrights Rhem. Testament. Crackinthorps Vigil Dormetant. Cyrus le grand,
complete. 2 vol. in several parts. Cowleys Poems. Clelia complete in one voll.
in two voll. in several parts.
Cleopatra compl. in 2. voll. In several parts. Cura Politia. Coralbo, Romance.
Chillingworth against the Papists. Cabala complete. Collection of the Parl.
Ordinances from 40 to 46. Common Prayers Edinburgh 1637. with singing Psalms.
Cotgraves Distionary Common prayers and Psalms London, Cassandra Romance.
Daniels Hist. of England compl. Dubartas Works H. Summary. Dyal of Princes.
Downham on Justification. Don Quixot. Diodorus Siculus. Davis Welsh Dictionary.
Draytons Poems. Polyalbion.
Drummonds History of Scotland. Day on Ita^ah. Dutch Physic. Dixon on the
Epistles. Diodates Notes. Dicksons Cases of Conscience. Dodonens Herbal. Dalton
Justice of Peace. Sheriffs.
Davis Reports, Diers Reports. Euclids Elements English. English Gentleman, and
Gentlew, Law. Erasmus on the Epistles English. on the Gospel and Acts.
Eusebius History. Elton on the Colossians. On the Romans. On Romans Chap. 9.
Extravagant Shepherd. Elise, Romance. French Grammar. Frosts Sermons, French
Virtuosi compleat^ 2d. voll. Fabians Chronicle. Fullers Holy War and State.
Fisher on Baptism. Felthams resolves. Four Sons of Amon. Florio Italian Dict.
Fartingdons Sermon. first voll. second voll.
Fenners Works. Fearlys Sermons. Foster Miscelanius. Fulke on Rhem. Testament.
Fotherbys Atheomastix. Fanshaw's Luciad. Floods Philosophy. Foulis History of
Sectaries. Field on the Church. The Forest of Ratities. Fishers Justification
of the Anabaptists. French Academy. The Flower of the Commandments. Fonseca
42. Sermon. on the Quadragesimal Gospel, Englisht by I. M. Gatakers Sermons.
Guill on the Creed. Gauden on the Church. Greenhams Works. Godfrey of ^ulloign.
Gouge on the Hebrews in 2. voll, complete, Gadburys Doctr. of Nativities.
Collect. of Gent.
Grand Scipio Romance. Guillims Heraldry. Gowers Poems. Godolphins holy Arbor.
Gusman. Holy Court. Herberts Travels. Hall on Timothy. History of Sweedland and
Poland. Of the Banished Virgin. Of Specturs.
Habbingtons Edward the fourth. History of Italy. Wonders of Nature
Presbyterian Plots. Mary Queen of Scots. Douglas and Angus.
Charribby Islands Iron Age. Hungary. Ariana Wars of Italy. Of Venice by
Paruta.
Hist. Of Cheshire. Hicks on the Revelations, Hall on Government. Howell of
Venice. Presidency of Kings. Of London. Of Naples. German Diet. Lewis the
thirteenth.
Hutchinson on John. On the Prophets. Howels Institutions of History, being the
History of the World. Hobarts Reports. Hollingsheds Chronicle in 2. voll. Halls
Chronicle. Heirons Works complete. 2. voll. Heywood of Angels. Hulots
Dictionary. Homers Works in English. Frogs and Mice.
Hawkens Observat. Heylin on the Creed. Historical Meditations. Herberts Henry
the eighth. House of Mourning. Heldersham on John. Harringtons Commonwealth of
Oceana. History of Africa. Helvicus Chronology. History of Justinian. Francion
Of Scanderbeg.
Doctor Heskings Parliament of Christ. Hearns President of Pleadings. Hetley's
Reports Knights Concordance, Kellit on the Sacrament. Miscelanies.
Killigrews Plays. Kings Declarat. about the Scots. Kendal against Goodwin.
Kings Description of Cheshire. Lucians Dialogues English. Lightfoots Harmony.
Lucans Phatsalia English. Lestrange on the Liturgies. Lasander and Calista
English. History of the Barbados. Jones on the Hebrews. Jewel against Harding.
His Apology.
Jermin on the Proverbs. On Ecclesiastes.
Jacksons Works complete. first, second, and third voll. Inigo Jones Stoneheng
restored. Jenkings Poems. Leighs Body of Divinity. On Job and Psalms. On
Learning. Critica Sacra.
Lushington on the Hebrews. On Galatians.
Ludgates History. Latches Reports. Leonards Reports. Life of Don John of
Castro. Lanes Reports. Ley's Reports. Life of the Grand Cyrus. Mountagues Act
of the Church. Morlands History of Piedmont. Marbecks Concordance. Morton on
the Mass. Mercators Atlas. Morleys Introduct. Markhams Decad, of Watr. Honor,
Of Watr. Epistles with assent of Cyrus,
Ministers of State. Marrow of the French Tongue. Moon's Expedition. Moors
Collections. Mystery of Godliness Of Iniquity.
Mossoms Sermons. Morris on the Sacrament. Mornay on the Sacrament. Mutability
of France. Malvezzi on Tacitus Morelius Dictionary. Martyr on the Romans, On
Judges. Mayor 's Works in 4. vol. Musculus Common places. Martyns Chronicle.
Mountgomerys Urania. Maunsels Catalogue of Books. Moors Reports. Meads Works
2. voll. Machivels Discourses of Government. Doctor Mortons Catholic Appeal
for Protestants. Map of Commerce. Minshaw 's Spanish Dictionary. Notes on Don
Quixot. Northampton Prophecies. Nordens English Traveller. Nicholson on the
Psalms. Newtons Trigonometria Nowel of Pleasure. Duchess of Newcastles
Philosophy Poems Tales. Life of her Lord.
Newton on John, Nordens Gunnery. Orlando Furioso Owens Reports. Oceana. Otes
on Jude Owen of perseveration. Olaus magnus. Olivers Acts. Ovids Metamorph. by
Sands. Phillips Dictionary. Prinn's Canterbury 's Doom. Life of Bishop Laud.
Parliament Register. Peirson on the Creed. Portas Natural Magic. Part 's
Works. Phatamond English, a Romance. Protestants Evidence. Poor Man's Liberty.
Pateus on Revelations. Practice of Physic. Pembles Works. Philpot of Kent.
Peels Debtor and Creditor. Pettavius History of the World. Parutus Politic
Discourses. Procopius in English. Pembrokes Arcadia. Pinto's Travels. Purchase
his Pilgrimage. Pultons Abridgment of the Statut. Plowdens Comment. of the Law.
Mris. Philips Poems and Plays. Long Parliaments Ordinances, and Declarations. A
Romance in Manuscript. Rogers Exposition of the Creed. Roberts on the Covenant.
Key of the Bible.
Romant of Romants. Rogers seven Treatises. On Naaman On Judges.
Rous Works. Renodeus Dispensatory. Reynolds on Murder. Reverius Practice. Body
of Physic.
Richardsons Annotations. Rastal 's Abridgment. Revolutions in Holland.
Riolanus Anatomy English. Ramsey 's Astrology. Richlieu 's Government of
France. Review of Trent Reves Sermons of Ninivee. Sandival 's Civil wars of
Spain Eng. Slatyrs Pale Albion Lat. and English. Salust's Works Eng. by
Heywood. Sanderson 's Physiogmony and Chiromancy. Scots discovery of
Witchcraft. State of Europe. Simpson 's Lexicon or Goncordance. Scotch Laws.
Stock on Malechi. Seldom on the Seas. Sands Travels Smith of Virginia. Sprigs
History. Ships of Fooks. Sanderson 's Sermons complete. Summary of Dubartus.
Shephard 's Parable of the Virgin. Sands Ovid. Sanderson of Painting. Senertus
Works English. Stonehenge by Jones, Sibb 's Saints Cordial, On Corinth.
Stetline 's Poems. Sovereign Prerogative, or Sheppard 's Epitomy of the Law. Of
Deeds. Rolls.
Strada. Shute 's Sarah and Hagar. Sanderson 's King James, King Charles. Queen
Mary.
Stanley's Philosophy compl. 1 vol. In three voll. Several parts. Shepherds
Callender. Trap on the Bible in 5 voll. His several Vollu^e. Tailor the Water
Poet Works. Twist. against Hoord. Theophania a Romance. Jer. Tailor 's Sermons.
Treverius Herball. Tully de Senecture Eng. Triumphs of Nassau. Theater of Gods
Judgments. Thesautus Brevium. Thorndikes Epilogue. Tailor 's Works complete. 1
vollume. On the Psalms.
Tables of Chiturgery, Ushers Body of Divinity. Variety of memorable things.
Ursinus Catechismes. Veres Commentary. Wilson 's History of King James. View of
the Scripture. Vertuosie of France 2 vol. Vigoes Surgery. Wilson of the
Romans. White 's Works. Weavers Monuments. Wingate 's Maxims. Wheatleys
Prototypes. Williams of Antichrist. Best Religion. Seven Treatises.
Wi^hers Psalter. Welsh Dictionary. White on Genesis. Willet on Leviticus.
World of Wonders. Waggoner in Dutch. Wottons State of Christendom. Woodals
Surgery. Wings Harmony Celestial. Winch 's Reports. Yorkes Heraldry.
Yelverton 's Reports. Year Books of the Law compleat^
Books in large Quarto.
APocripha English. Antiquities of Canterbury. Ainsworth on the Psalms. on
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Deuteronomy. Brightman on the Revelations.
Bullinger 's Sermons. Ball against Cann. Brownlow's Reports. Bridges Defense.
Critica Sacra. Concordance of the Bible. Christian Policy. Calvin on Timothy
and Titus. On Tymothy.
Complete Clark. Consent of Time. Callis Readings. Declarations in the Kings
Bench. Doway 's Bible in 2 vol. King Edward the sixth Testament. Gitbiers
Academy. Giffard on Cantieles. On Revelations.
Gouldman 's Dictionary. Grand Abridgment of the Law, In all, three volumes.
Greek Testament. Gadbury 's Ecclesiastical Ambassad. Hoptons Topograph. Glass.
Glass and Geomet. Staff.
Hackwell against Carrier. Hughes Abridgment of the Acts. Hughes Survey of the
Tongues. Holy History by Causin, Herodian English. Howels Letters. 1. With
Dodona's Grove.
Jackson's annotations complete. Fourth volume. On the Pentiteuch.
Mossom 's Sions Prospect. Moyle 's Book of Entries. Mountagues Essays the
first part. Essays the second part.
Nash 's Way to Happiness. Quaternio.
Natura Brevium French. Peacham 's Emblems. Potter on the Number 1666. Perkins
Golden Chain. On Galatians.
Protestants Evidence. Prinn 's Power of Parliaments. Policies revived. Pastor
Fido. Queen Elizabeth's Annals in 2 vol. Rogers 7 Treatises. Riders Dictionary.
Sherman of Infallibility. Smith 's select Discourses. Saltmarsh 's small Works.
Senalt 's Christian Man. Swinbourn of Wills. Testament Greek. Shepherds
Touchstone of Assuran. Thomas Dictionary. Travels of the Patriarchs. Thomatius
Dictionary. Vanes Meditations. Watsons Quodlibets. Way of Reconciliation to the
Sacrament. Whitney 's Emblems. Weemes Synagogue. Wilsons Ayers in 3 parts.
Willetts Synopsis. Welden of Dominion.
Books in Small Quarto.
ANtiquities of Westminster and Paul's. Abbot on the Psalms. Against Hill. On
the Sabbath. On Job.
Ames on Peter. Art of Poetry. Annatomy of Wit by Euphues. Arrowsmith 's Chain.
On John. Austin of Fruit trees. Anthony 's Gospel Physician. Agrippa 's
Philosophy 3 part. Fourth part. Vanity of Sciences. Abridgment of the Martyrs.
Appian of Alexandria. Arraignment of the Creature. Attersols 3 Treatises.
Almanacks of Mirth 45 sheets. Aschams School of Shooting. Ascues Hist. of
Scotland. Brotherly Reconcilement. Art of Painting. Analisis on Timothy.
Artificial Changling. Amendment of Life. Apology for Actors. Allens Chronology.
Arrow against Brownists. Abstract of Queen Elizabeth. Adams 9 Sermons. Aliens
Histories. Answers to Downam. Admonition to England in Defense of Bishops.
Assertion of Church Policy. Araignment of Venice. Albions Eng. Answer to the
Treat. of the Cross. Answer to Milton. Adventures in Love. Ainsworth on the
Cant. Orthodox Foundation, Astrea Alector. Arcadia. Absolute Monarch. Aurelia.
Amadis de Gaul. De Gaul the fifth part. His Letters.
Admirable Events. Argalus and Parthenia with Cuts. Without.
Arnalt and Lucenda. Ambross looking to Jesus 1st part. Appian his Roman
History. Aurelia the Paragon of pleasure. Saint Ambrose's Christian Offices. M.
Aurelius Antoninus Meditat. Apocripha English. Baxter of Church government. Of
Baptism. Of Justification. Of the Sacrament. Of Mortification. Divine Life.
Conversion. Confession of Faith. Apologic. or against 5 Men.
Balzack 's Letters. Bilson's Sermons. Church Government.
Barnards Faithful Shepherd. against Ainsworth. On the Sabbath. On the
Revelations. On Ruth.
Buroughs Evil of Sin. Saints Treasury. On Beatitudes and Gospel Revelation.
Gospel Worship. Irenicum. On Matthew. Jewel of Contentment. Moses Choice.
Bacons advancement of Learning. Bail 's Direction for health. Biggs Vanity of
Physic. Brooks Riches of Christ. Parclays Summum bonum. Benefield 's 20
Sermons. On Amos Chap. 1. On Chap. 3.
Buck on the Beatitudes. Brightmans Works. Becons Postils. Buchanans Body of
Divinity. Birth of Mankind. Bruels Praxis. Buckler of Faith. Bullinger on the
Revelations. Banisters Surgery. Baines on the Collossians. Bridges
Supremacy. Burgis Vind. Legis with Justifi. 1st. Justification complete. Bolton
's Works 4 vol. Instructions. Directions. Arraignment of Error. Walking with
God.
Blake on the Covenant. Bastwick of Church government. against Independency.
Bacon 's Norman Hist. complete. Remains.
Boyse 's Postils. Remains.
Bocalini 's new found Polliticks. Boyles Experiments Philosophy. Air.
Usefulness of Philosophy.
Ball 's Pulpit Patronage. Of Faith Bastingus Catechism. Book of Duels.
Benthams Conflict. Society of Saints.
Barker on the Commandments. Babingtons Works. Babington on Genesis Exodus Levit.
Behmens Aurora. Remains. Epistles. Signa retum.
Blundevils Exercise. Logic.
Bedwels Geometry. Bulkley on the Covenant. Bruce on the Sacrament. Barlows
Conference. Defense of Protestants.
Beards of Antichrist. Motive. Theater of Gods Judgments.
Browning 's Sermons. Bancrofts dangerous Positions. Of public Prayers.
Brerwoods Enquiries. Baker on the 51 Psalm. Baker on the consolatory Psalms. On
the Lords Prayer. Book of Nobillity. Of the Monarchy. Of Fortune. Of Battles.
Italian and English. Of St. Alban. Of Speeches of the Long Parl.
Bell 's Popes Funeral. Bunny of Divorce. Truth and Falsehood. Bourne of
Inventions. Beza on the Canticles. Basilicon Doron. Balzacles Letters. Burden
of England. Borrace Fiameta. Belgic Common wealth. Breviary of Health. Burton
's Questions. Sermons.
Bonners Homilies. Religion.
Bound on the Sabbath. Broughton on Daniel. Parker's Portraicture of the Kings
of England. Bradshaw on Thessalonians. Book of Histories 13 sorts. Brocard on
Revelations. Brooks Reading of the Law. Bilson of Christian Subjection.
Blagraves Mathematical Jewel. Book of good Manners. Browning of public Prayer.
Blithe 's Husbandry. Brinsley 's true Watch. Brathwaight on the Evangelist.
Bryskets Discourse of Civil Life. Boothes Surgery. Bacons Essays. Rules and
Max. Com. Law. Botero of the Greatness of Cities. Bancrofts dangerous
Politics. Baldestard 's Courtier, French, Ital. and Eng. Bishop Barlow 's
answer Engl. to Engl. Catholics. Bifeild on Peter. Barrow 's Method of
Physic. Braithwaight 's Survey of History. Calvin on the Ephesians. On the
Acts. On the Galatians. Commentary on the Galat. Corinthians. On Genesis. On
Psalms. Harmony. Sermons. Jacob and Esau. On Jonah. On Hebrews. On Daniel. On
Philippians. Jeremiah. Lamentations. Romans. 199 Psalm. His 4 Sermons. On the
Com. Institution.
Chilestor of Institution of Christian Princes. Campanella's Spanish Monarchy.
Collings Sector and Quadrant. Plain Scale. Dyaling.
Culverwell 's light of Nature. Cupids Camells. Cruso's Castram. Cart wright
against Whitgift. Second Reply. On Colossians.
Christian Religion. Christ's Sermons on Emaus. Cartwright against Enthusiasts.
On the Collossians. Caril on Job the 6 parts in 12 vol. Complete several vol. 5
part. 6 part. 11 part. 12 part.
Culverwell 's Light of Nature. Complete Gardener. Crandan against Baxter.
Carpenter 's Geography. Collection of the Spanish practice. Of Letters. 12
sorts.
Colson 's Arithmetic. Charlton 's Jurisdiction. Catter on the Covenant.
Cooper on Hester. On the Gospels. On the Revelations. Anatomy of a Christian.
Chambers Astrology. Clowes Surgery. Courtiers Academy. Chewny against
Socinianisme. Catalogue of Chancellors. Crowly against Warson. Castle of
Health. Christian Prayers. Coverdale on the Passions. Christ's Star. Chitteus
Postells. Champneyes vocat. of Bishops. Carrions Chronicle. Cromptons Justice
of Peace. Calvert on Isaiah. Countrymans Recreat. Collins Ephata. Cottons Way
of Life. Cottons Sermons. Collins Cordial, 1st, and 2d part. Third part.
Complete Gentlem. by Peacham. Clerks Worthyes. Childbirth. Cradocks
Gospell-Holiness. Liberty. Works.
Coals Assurance. Preservatives against Sin.
Cleaver on the Proverbs. Crashawes Works. Cawdry 's Similies. Camdens Remains.
Conquest of the West Indies. Of Peru. Calamy 's Sermons bound together
Ceremonies of the Pallatinate. Certamen Religiosum. Cambines Turks Affairs.
Courtier in 3. Languages. Court of Request. Continuation of Commines. Cade of
the Church. Caesar's Comment. Custom of Nations. Churchyards choice. Challenge.
Cokes Copy holder. Covel against Burges. Polymenteis, Defense of Hooker.
Croyes S. Conformities. Cranmer against Transubstantiat. Censures of the
Church. Civel Rights of Titles. Councellor of Estate. Princes.
Chirurgions Questions. Castrews defense of 3 Ceremonies. Council of Princes.
Of State. Chirurgions Closet. Dr. Charlton thankful remembran. Charron of
Wisdom. Crakenthorps defense of Constant. Common Prayer and Psalms, 1625. 1627.
Charlton 's Paradoxes. Charlton 's Natural History of the Soul. Coal from the
Altar. Charlton of Atheism. Cabala 's Mysteries of State. Curtis Theater of
Navigation. Corles Hist. of the West Indies. Cowels Interpreter. Concordance to
the Bible. Collection of Statutes Cottas Trial of Witchcraft. Cokes special
Charge. Colling 's Sector and Quadrant. Dyalling. Plain Scale.
Bish. Cant. Doct. Sacrament. Collections of Ordinances of Parl. Charity
maintained by Catholics. Commentary on Lamentations. Dikes Works. Denison on
the Sacrament. Second of Peter.
Dyal of Princes. Dod 's Works. On Sacrament.
Destruction of Troy. Defense of Constantine. Day 's Sermons. Daniell 's Poems
complete. Dyke on Philemon. Evangelical Histories. On the Heart. On Repentance.
Works.
Dariot on the Stars. Deacon and Walter on Spirit^. Davis Mic to cosmus. Works.
Davis art of war. Downham on Hosea. Christian Divinity. 4 Treatises. Plea for
the Poor.
Downham on the Covenant. Defense of Bishops. Of Prayer. 4 Treatises. On the
15th Psalm.
Downing 's State Ecclesiastical. Discourse of Allegiance with Barcklays
Temporal Power of the Pope. Discourse against new Discipline. Divine Vetities.
Dialogue of the Creature. Directions for Health, by Bayley. Derings Speeches.
Description of Jerusalem. Of New France.
Dering against Harding. On the Hebrews.
Deliverance of Israel. Diggs Warlike Treatise. Unlawfulness of Subjects taking
Arms. Stratiotives.
Dodechedion of Fortune. Down of Faith. D^ayton 's Elysium. Day 's 12 Sermons.
Discovery of Peru. Doctrine of Divinity. Demosthenes Orat. Drakes Travels. Dove
of Church Covernment. Dayrels Church Government. Dells Sermons. Del Espines
tranquillity of mind Englished by Smith. Dod on the ten Commandments. Duck of
Free Grace. Descatts Compendium. Donn's six Sermons. Of Self homicide Dawsons
18 Sermons. Dodona's Grove with Parable. Defend. of Faith. Directions for
prevention and cure of the Plague. Dodridge's complete Parson. Daniel's
Chronicle. Donn's Letters. Poems.
Daniel 's Works Poetry. Decl. of the Popes Impostures. Davies Nosce Teipsum.
Description of the World. Dalingson 's Method of travel. Descript. 3 Voyages to
the West Indies. Edwards Gangren complete. First and second part. against
Tolleration. Works.
Essex 's Dove. Estye on the Scripture. Enchiridion Medicum. English Gentleman.
Gentlewoman. Elton on the Commandments. English Improver, by Blithe. English
Lawyer. Eliots French Fruit. End to Controversies. English Secretary. Epitomy
of Froisard. Euclid 's Elements in 6 Books. Edward the sixth Homilies. Estwick
against Bidle. Edwards Surgery, with Fevers. English Helicon. Euphues and
his England. Englishmans Treasury. Epitomy of the whole course of Physic.
Essays of an Apprentice in Poetry. Evans Childrens Dictionary. Erasmus praise
of Poetry. Earl of Essex Treason. Featleys Sacrilege. Cases for Spectacles.
Dippers dipped. Vertumnus Romanus.
Fullwood of the Church. French Distillation. Fisher on the Liturgies. Fulbecks
Parallels. Pandecks. Complete.
Fountain of Fictions. Forbes of Justification. On Revelation.
Fenners Works. Alarm.
Farrarius Commonwealth. Faulkland of Infalibility. Forresters Postels. Fenton
of Usury. Fenn 's Fruits. Fox 's North west passage. Fentons Tragical
Discourses. Favor of the Church. Felthams Resolves. Erancis Poems. Faius
Grounds of Religion. Fragosta and his 3 Sons. Fitzherberts Policy. Fletcher on
the first Psalm. Fosbrooks Sermons. Forbishers Voyage. French Academy. Fernes
Heraldry. Fidels young Lawyers guide. Fletchers Poems. Way to Blessedness.
Gnevaras Works. Lives. Golden Epistles.
Garden of Health. Of Charity. Of Eloquence.
Gaiscons Poems. Dooms Day.
Gores Sermons. Greek Antiquities. Goads Drops and Vials. Gateker of
Transubstantiation. Grand Debate. Gunners Glass. Gorton on 110th. Psalm. Golden
Chain. Godfry of Bullogne. Glass of the Times. Gardiners Labyrinth. Gilberts
Works. Dr. Goads Disputation. Gouge 's 3 Arrows. Armor. On the Lords Prayer.
Saints Sacrifice.
Gregory's Works. Gibbons on Genesis. Gilberts Walk to Heaven. Gaul against
Astrology. Greenhil on Ezekiel. compl. 4 vol. Garry 's Diary. Griffith 's Bethell.
Garthwaits Harmony. Guy of Warwick. Gross of Happiness. Gallen 's Method. Grand
Seigniors Seraglio, Golden Ass. Guido 's Surgery. Granger on Ecclesiastes.
Guild on Samuel. Gale 's Surgery. Gurnals Armor, complete Goodmans Fall of
Man. Goodwin of Justification. Saints dipping. Antipologia. Against
Anabaptists. On the Romans. Treatises.
Gunters Works. Gee 's Works. Grammar School. Gifford's Sermons. Glanvils van.
of Dogmatizing. Green 's Never too late with works. Gardener of the Coal Trade.
Godard's Miscellanie. Grimston 's Hist. of the Grand Seign. Goodwin 's Child of
Light. Guevoera 's Mist. of Mount Calvery. Glauber 's Philosophical Furnace.
Granada 's Sinners Guide. Guazzo of Civil Conversation. Godwin 's Roman
Antiquities. Jewish.
Hen. 8. Obedience of Christ. Man. On the 7 Sacraments.
Heywood 's Henry the fourth. Haven of Health. Hoyles Rejoinder. Hardy on John.
1st, and 2d part. History of the Waldenses. Of Persilles. Holdsworth 's
Sermons. Hadon 's Osorius. Hall on Peter. Hammond 's Dispatcher dispatched. Ten
Sermons. Ignatius Epistles. Reply to White. 1st. and 2d Defense of Schism,
Heylins Defense of Episcopacy. On the Sabbath. History of St. George. Quin.
Articulis. Against Lincoln. Geography. Against Calvin. Survey of France.
Stumbling Block.
Health Improvement. Hills Arethmetick. Hudson on the Church. Halls Surgery.
Hyde on the Church. Honnycombe of Justification. Heyward 's Sanctuary. David's
Tears. Works.
Hooper on the Psalms. Henry the fourth of France. Howard against Prophesies.
Holyband 's Dictionary. Treasury French Tongue.
Harmony of Confessions. Holland on the Revelations. Experiments. History of a
Magician. Of Parismus. Of King Arthur.
Hills Art of Gardening. History of Indepency. Hall of Episcopacy. Hull on the
Lamentations. On St. Peter's Prophesies.
Harbout 's Faithful Subject. Hooker 's Policy. Hooker 's 2 Lessons.
Humiliation. Harrington 's Popular Governm. Hall on Hosea. Apology. Huit on
Daniel. Hist. of New England. Holidays Sermons. Hemmings Postels. Heliodorus
Ethiopian Hist. Engl. Heywoods Works. Haven of Pleasure. Homes against Tombs.
Herodatus Engl. History of China. Of Britain. Of Episcopacy.
Hospital of Fools. History of the Secrets of Nature. Hakewell against
Carryer. Heylins Sermon on the Tares. Housed 's to Sermons. Hunts New born
Christian. Hartlib 's Legacy. Hartlib of Bees. History of the Grand Seignior,
by Grimston. Higgon's Mystical Babylon. Harvey's Philosophy. Hamonds Practical
Catechism. Hackwell 's Liberty of the Subject. Hey wood 's nine worthy Women.
Hakluyts Discoveries of the World. Heyward 's Edward the sixth. Herodian 's
Imperial History. History of Sejanus. Huraults Political Discourses. Herberts
conception of the Times. Patriarchs Estate of the Church, Discourse of the
Times from the Apostles to the present, the times of the Emperors, Popes,
Turks, Kings of France, England, Scotland, Spain, Portugal, Denmack, with
Memorable Accidents in their time. Hoby 's Counter Snarl. Italian Passenger.
Ironside on the Sabbath. Jeanes Divinity 1st and 2d part. Johnson 's Travels.
Juds Divinum complete. Jackson 's Justifying Faith. Knowledge of Christ.
History of Christ. On Thessalonians.
Jesuits Cat. Jackson of Consecration. Janua Linguarum. Jenison's Conpunctions.
Interest of the Princes. James Corrupt. of the Fath. Instruct. for Christian
Women. Introduction to the French tongue. Jorden of Bathes. Ibis ad Cesarum.
Job 's Conflicts. Justification justified. Iphigenis, a Romance. Journal of the
Proceedings in Parl. Jones Art of preserving Body and Soul. Knox 's History.
Kings James Remonstrance. Kelwayes Nativities. Knight of the Sea. Of the Sun.
Of the Cross.
Keltridg on Luke. Kinaston's Poem. Kings Dyalling. Key of the Covenant.
Langquets Chronicle. Lockiers Works. Low 's Chiturgery. Loves Works compl. 2
vol. Of Election. Combat. Dejected Souls cure.
Lake on the Commandment. Luther on the Galatians. On the Psalms. On Psalms and
Galat.
Leigh 's Divinity. Lipsius of Constancy. Politics. Larkham on the Atributes
Lucians Dialogues English. Leycester 's Commonwealth. L'Estrange 's Apology.
Love and Valor. Laiton 's spec. bell. Sacram. Lesbie on the Church. Lives of
the Popes. Lightfoot on the Acts. Laurentius on the Eyes. Looking-glass for
Papists. Lewkner of Cities. Lapidary by Nichols. Lithgows Travels. Lathams
Falconty. Lives of 9 Women worthy. Lakes 10 Sermons. Lawfrank 's Surgery.
Leoline and Sydanis a Romantic Poem. Lemnius his Touchstone of Complexion.
Looking-glass of the holy War. Ley on the Sabbath. Lawrence of Faith. Loyd 's
Pilgrimage of Kings and Princes. Leigh 's Art of Surveying. Accidence of
Armory. Lambert 's Preambulation of Kent. Lord Marquess Idleness Lyfords
Errors. Manton on James. On Jude. Mayers Treasury. Markhams Masterpiece.
Husbandry English Husbandman. Works.
Mittour for Magistrates. Martyts Letters. Murcots Work. Morice on the
Sacrament. Mosten 's Imposter. Ceremonies.
Mountague 's Appeal. Essays complete. Gagg. Invocation of Saints: Works.
Marrow of Physic. Matiners Mate. Meed on Revelat. Apostasy. Moulin on the
Sacrament. Against Arminian. Machivel 's Art of War. Mythonisses. More of
Tribula. Marbury on Habakkuk. On obadia. Moral Philosophy. Mandivel 's Travels.
Montelion. Mirror of States. Of Policy. Mount Calvary. Moulin against Phil.
Anglicus. Method of Physic. Mask of the League. More 's Utopia. Monard of the
West Indies. Maiden Knight. More 's Demonstration of God. Morgan 's
Horsemanship. Marrow of the Law the 2d part. Mervin. Masterson 's Arithmetic.
Mascall of Cattle. Mulcasters Positions. Mela 's Geography. Mercy and Truth.
Manzinus Discourses. Mathematical Jewel. Manwood Forest Laws. Manton 's Christ
on Earth. Maxwell 's Lex Rex, Law and the King. M. Aurelius Antoninus
Meditations. Moulin 's Defense of the Catholic Faith. Marmiones Cupid and
Psiche, a Poem. Queen Mary's French Grammar. Morgan 's Art of Dialling. Muffet
of Health. Moxon 's Tutor to Astronomy. Newton 's Astronomia Britannica.
Mathematical Elements. Help to Calculat.
Nicholai orient. Perigrinat. No ton 's Orthod. Evang. Nichols old Religion.
Napire on the Revelations. Nennio of Nobility. New Age of old Names. Nettle
against Seldom. Norden 's Mit^ou^ of Honor. Names of the Towns. News from
Heaven. Norden 's Labytinth of Man's Life. Nichols on Church ^atechism. Owen
against Bidle. Of Redemption. Osorius of Nobility. Ostela. Orator by Sylvayn.
Origines Sacrae. Owen 's Communion with God and Saints. Patrick 's Pilgrim.
Prinn 's Answer to the Papists about Free Will. Histrio Mastix. Loyalty.
Perpetuity. Lordly Bishop complete. More with Prelates tyranny. Vindication of
the Laws. Saints Devotions to their K. Mount Orguell. Plea for the House of
Lords. Anti-Armin.
Prelates Tyranny. Unbishoping of Timothy and Titus.
Phirovans 's Secrets. Parker 's Phil. with Preexist. Parthenissa 1st part, 5th
part. Penal Statutes. Picture of Papist and Puritan. Preston on the New
Covenant. On Atributes. Faith and Love. Remains. 5 Sermons.
Physic for the Soul. Phillip 's Sermons. Perkin 's on Christ's Sermon on the
Mount. On the Creed. On Hebrews. Cases of Conscience. On Revelations. On Jude.
Purple Island. Power 's Experimental Philosophy. Palace of Pleasure, 1st and
2d part. Papillion 's Art of Fortification. Peirson 's Varieties. Page on the
Lords Prayer. Of Church Government.
Prediaux 's Introduction. Paget 's Hereseographia. Against the Brownist.
Parable of the Virgin. Pemble on Ecclesiastes. On John. Persecuted Ministers.
Proceedings against Gun powder Traitors. Physician and Surgeon. Primrose 's
Works. Cardinal Poole of Justification. Philosophical Furnaces. Passions of the
Mind. Perfect Conveyancer. Page of Bowing. On the 51 Psalm.
Pierce against Barlee. Against Hickman and Baxter.
Peirson on the Ephesians. Palmerin of England. De Oliva. Pilgrim of Castle.
Palingenius. Pastime of Pleasures Palmendos. Pilgrimage of Princes. Philo^omus.
Persillers. Parisinus. Panoplie of Epistles. Pitiscus in English. Politic
Touchstone: Discourses. Physic against Fortune. Poole against Preachers
sentences. Price 's Defense of Truth. Practice of preaching. Poores Vicars
Plea. Palefyman on the Romans. Pasquin in a Trance. Pilkinson on Nehemiah.
Parsons Varieties. Voll. several Plays. Pathway to Health. Palestine. Potters
Consecrat. Sermon. Plea for Altars. Phillips Counceller. Pearl of practice.
Pinchin of Justification. Palace of pleasure. Peter's Repentance. Parker 's Rose
and Lilly. Pasquil 's Madcap Platt 's substance and treasure. Hidden Treasure.
Palladio 's Architecture. Physic and Surgery. Purchase of Bees. Pemales
Natural Simples. Phillips of Tenures. Powell 's direction for search of
Records. Parker 's Portaicture of the Kings of England. Primrose on the
Sabbath. Plat 's Jewels of Art and Nature. Pinnels Doct. and Domin. of the
Cross. Percivall 's Spanish Grammar and Dictionary. Palymanteia or the mean to
judge a Commonw. Pamphlets of the late times, 4 vol. Qu. Eliz. Canons and
Injunctions. Quarles of Pope Paul. Quintius Curtius. Questions of Love.
Quintessence of Wit. Quarles 's Fancies. Quircitanus practice of Physic.
Rollock on the Thessalonians. Effectual Calling. Reads Works.
Reynolds 3 Treatises. On Hosea. Passions. 110 Psalm. On the Sacrament.
Reynolds on Obadiah. On Haggai. Rogers Protestant Church. Rutherford of
Presbytery. Survey against Hooker. Of Church government. Against liberty of
conscience. Life of Grace.
Roman Antiquities. Rogers of Marriage. Practical Catechism. On the Sacrament.
On Sacram. and Catechism.
Reading Guide. Against Anabaptists. Rogets Parable of the rich Fool. Figs.
Fig Tree. Fast Friend. 39 Articles. Two Parables. Prodigal.
Randal on the Sacrament. On the Church. On Romans. Works.
Rogers Tabernacle. Refuter refuted. Robotham on the Canticles. Rich Storchouse
Rarities of the Woild. Ridly 's Givil and Ecclesiast. Law. Rich Closet. Rudes
Geometry. Robinson 's Defense of Separation. Rollenson 's Sermons. Robinson 's
Essays. Roberts sacred Sepren. Remonstrance about Chapter Discipl. Relation of
Congo. Rocks of Christ's Shipwreck. Romsden 's Gleaning. Regiment of the Sea.
Reynard the Fox. Riches Farewell. Ross against Digby. Reply to Lawd. Rouse 's
Attique Antiquiries. Rome ruined. Reeve's Christian Divinity, Riders
Dictionaty. Rudolph 's Discipline, Receipt to stay the Plague. Regiment of
Health. Right of Tithes, by E. C. Richome on the Euchatist. Rose's new Planet
no Planet. Riply 's Compound of Alchimy. Ramus and Bedwell 's Geometry. Review
of the Parl. Transactions. Ratcliff 's Politic Discourses. Slater on the
Psalms. On the 4th of the Romans. On the 31 Chapt. On Malachie. Deaths Summons.
Tithes.
Sibbs Feast. On Corinthians. On the Cantieles. Light from Heaven. Evangelical
Sacrifice. On Hosea.
Simpson on Unbelief. Sherly 's Plays in 2 vol. 24 sorts. Martialled Soldier.
Swineck 's Christian man's Call. Gods are Men. Styrup 's Dialling. Quadrant.
Complete.
Satticen 's History. Special Law Cases. Symonds Pisgah Evangel. Simonds
Sermons. Sidenham's 5 Sermons. 8 Sermons. 16 Sermons.
Sandys Sermons. Strife of Love in a Dream. Stanford 's Pleas of the Crown.
Shelford 's Discourses Survey of History. Sibthorp of Suptemacy. Survey of
London. Swan 's Read Debitum. Calamus Mensurans. Sedgwick 's Fountain.
Speidells Geometry. Spelman of Tithes. Searles Dyalling. Swedish Discipline.
Somer of Gavel kind. Stratagems of Jerusalem. Smith on Hosea. Soldiers
exercise. Sins Self-murder. Scottish Academy. Smith 's Art Military. Gunnery.
Spanish Mandivell. More with Pilgrim. Sempill of Titles. Sandys Europae
speculum. Styward 's Art Military. Stalham against Quakers. Sutton on the
Romans. Squires Lectures. Smith 's Sermons. Sinners Guide. Surveyors Dialogue.
Stonham on the first Psalm. Statans Stratagems. Safeguard for Jaylers. Sejanus
Life. Shepherd on the Sabbath. Swadline against Bellarmine. Sufferage of the
Divines of Britt. Supreme Power. Seven Problems of Antichrist. Sherlock against
the Quakers. Secretary in fashion. Skine de Verb signific. Spanish Inquisition.
Speculum Egrotorum. Seamans Callender. Companion. Seneca of Benefits, English.
Tragedies, English.
Storke on the Attributes Stephen on Original Sin. Number of the beast.
Stoughton 's Dignity. Sympson 's Penitent. Stoughton 's 13 Sermons. 7 Sermons.
4 Sermons.
Souls Progress. Stillingfleet 's Origina sacra. Irenicum. Swadlius Venetian
Quarrel. Silkworms and their Fleece. Sutcliff 's Chall. to the Rom Chur.
Survey of Popery. Scot 's Discovery of Witchcraft. Sleidan 's four Empires.
Speeches in Parliament a vol. Strodes Anatomy of Mortality. Silvayn 's Orator.
Sermons before the Lords and Commons, 4 vol. Spelman 's Villare Anglicanum.
Theater of Gods Judgment. Treatise of the Loadstone. Terry 's Logic. Tichbourn
's Grapes. Topsell on Joel. Theater of the Earth. Tindall of Obedience.
Triumphs of Rome. Turkish History. Treatises of Baths, 8 sorts. Of Custom and
Use. Tailor on the Provetbs. 1st part. 2d parts. Trap on the Pentateuch. Tailor
of the Sower. On the Revelations. Types. Sermons.
Treatise of Specter. Tertullians Apology, English. Tailor of Gavel kind.
Twist on the Sabbath. Treats Scripture Map. Town 's Reassertion. Touchstone of
Complexion. Troubles of Franckfort. Trial of Basterdy. Torshell 's Humiliation.
Terence in English. Tailor 's disswasive from Popery. Treatise of Magistrates.
Touchstone of the Catholic Faith. Thompson Antichrist arraigned. Torquat 's
Tassos Aminta. Treatise of Reprobation. Tailor of Episcopacy. Thougard 's
Notable things. Tomes against Infants Baptism. Torshell of Hippocracy. Treatise
of the state of Israel in Solomon's time. Towns and Shires Names in Engl.
Tillesby against Seldom of Tyths. Usher of Obedience. 18 Sermons. Answer to the
Jesuits.
Virett of the Lords Prayer. Virtue of the Parables. Virgil in English. Venner
's Via tecta. Viana and Paris. Vaughan 's Waterworks. Valentine and Orson.
Venetian Commonwealth. Variety of Histories, 46 sorts. Viluayne 's Treatises.
Vicars Chronicle. Urquarts Trissoretras. Vindication of Presbyterian
Government. Unfortunate Queen. Vives Instruction of a Christian Woman. Virgil
Aeneids by Phaer. Virels Christi Disputatio. Woman's Lawyer. Walker on the
Sabbath. Gods Works. Whetston 's Rock of regard. Mirror. Willet on the
Sacrament. Webb 's Pueriles. Wilson 's Saints Calling. Rhetoric. Wheatly 's
New Birth. Gods Husbandty. Bride bush. Redemption of Times.
Wotton on John. Whittel 's Celestial Paradise. Watson 's Works, 1st part.
Complete. Westfield 's Sermons. Whistler against Anabaptists. Woodbridge of
Grace. Williams Sermons. Wits, Fits, and Fancies. William 's Grand Rebellion.
Warning to the Dragon. Wotton of Architecture. Wilkinson 's Fame of Love.
Williams Account of the Low Countries. Wise old man. Wyrleys Use of Arms.
Wandering Knight. Whitings Sermons. Walsingham of Religion. Wilcox on the
Psalms. Whittaker against Champ. Wing 's Ephemeris, 52, 58. Wharton 's
Refinement of Sion. Wright of the Passions of the Mind. Williams against
Cotton. Wiseman 's Christian Knight. Wentworth 's Misselanys. Willoby 's Avisa,
with other Poems Woodall 's Chirurgions Mate. Wurtz Surgery. White on the
Sabbath. White 's Way to the true Church. Whetston 's Engl. Mirror. Wadsworth
Letters between Spain and England. Wass 's Dictionary. Yates of the Gentiles.
Divinity. Of Hippocracy.
York against Camden.
GCTAVE LARGE
ACcomplished Contrice Aylots Poems Ames Christian Divinity Apology for
learning Alphabet of Proverbs Allens Henry the 7. Art of War Abstracts of
humane Nature Art of making Glass Abbots Christian Family dutys Milk for Babes
Auxiliary Beauty Art of Oratory Austine on the Trinity Arnaldo a Romance
Andrews on the Canticles Anotomy of the Mass Ainsworths marrow Angel of
thoughts Astrea A pastoral Accedences Oxon. Ascham of government Amanda a Poem
by N. Hooks St. Augustines life Alleyns History Henry the 7. Aylets divine
Speculation Aelians history Bosworths Field Buroughs St. Inheritance Brinselys
Treatises Bibliander a Romance Belgic pismire Bridet ornament Birchenshas
Music Bacons new Atlant Basilicon Doron Birth of a day Britains pastoral
Brooks assurance Barrolus learned Man Bosleys Sermons Bushuels Narrative Black
tribunal Butlers Scale Bucklers God All Bramhall against Chascedon Liberty
Baxters Common Wealth reformed Pastor Boil of Colds Cullers paradox Style of
Scriptures Saraphick love
Beamount Poems Barons poems Balzack letters 4th. Vollume Beza on Job Brown of
V^nes Broomes ^ plays 5. new plays Brewens life Brathwait Satyrs Book of
psalms Bitsons St^. Subjection Burning of Paul's formerly Bergerats Characters
and Letters Bathursts Shephards Calender Butlers Scale of Interest Battles of
Cresey and Poutiers Brinsleys Trne watch comple at Bramhall against Hobbs
Birbecks 4. last things Bramhalls reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon Barons
Cyprian Accademy Boethius Philosophical Comfort Bushels Youths error Barons
Mirra a Tragedy Boots History of Ireland Brinsleys Christian duty Bulwers
Chyrologia Bridges Arethmetick Brerewoods Logic Clitophon and Leucippe Cobbet
on prayer Family Duties Colliers works Christian watch Concordance for the
Bible Cowleys ages Calverts Jew Candish Eslayes Childrens Dictionary Carpenters
experience Cloria and Narcissus Complent Chamberlains Poems Cooks Logic
Crookes three Sermons guide to blessedness Culpepers Dispensatory Physician
Aurum potabili Judgment of Diseases
Chamberlarns Midwifry Complete Midwise Cartwright on the Creed Capell on
Toutations complete Remains Works
Crag against Anabaptist Sermons Cobbs works Carters Armory Catalogue of
Compounders Cottoui posthuma war and peace Catalogue of English writers Cotton
on the Canticles Ecclesiastes Cure of the Stone of misprission prejudice
Calvin's Melchisadeck Christ's love to ^^^usalem Cranes New years gift Cowleys
Mistrys Cyprian Accademy Crollius and Paracelsus philos. Chamber on the
passions Challoners Sermons Cartwrights poems single Carylls plays complete
Deserving favorite Passionate Lovers complete 4. Plays Choice Novells
Caffandra a Romance Cleopatra by Ash Cleopatra ^. Vol. Catalogue of Kts. of K.
James of the Nobility Nobility with Knights Old and New
Cotgraves Eng. Treasury of wit and Language Cure for the sin of Swearing
Chaloners 6. Sermens Caundish Image of grace Drunkards Caracter Dickson on
Psalms Hebrews
Downhams liberty Christian Freedom Drakes life Dickes Righteous man's Tower
Sacrament Sermons Conscience
Days Sermons Dutch Dispensatory Devotions of the Ancient Churches Dugress
Dialogues Doctrine of the Bible Difference between France and Spain Davisons
Poems Duke of Roans memorialls Drs. Dispensatory Draytons Agin Court Diggs
unthankfulness taking Arms against K. Ducats meditation Deerings Sermons Duty
of Constables Defense of Queen Marys Succession Danes light to Lilly David's
troubles Diets Sermons Determination of Tholus Discourse of Empresses
Depopulation arraigned Dingleys Treatises Don Fenisse a Romance Diance a
Romance Discourse of Beasts Dickinsons Casus conscienti^ Discourse of Auxiliary
Beauty Dancers Poems Difference between France Spain and the Empire Dyke of
Scandolls Davies poems Davies Heaven and Earth Shaken Durant of Salvation
Dearing on the Hebrews Days English Secretary Diverse Poems to the King and
Queen Dominion of the English Seas Esops Engl. willan in prose in Verse
Edward the (...) by Hall Eng. grammar by Robinson parnassus Lexicon Secretary
Edward; by May Electra Eng a Romance Excellencies of England English
Phlebotomy Helicon Enchir don of Fortification Exact Surveys Earl of Surreys
Poems Enucks Conversion Evans Ephemeris Erastus Church censures Estate of the
Empire Essays politic and moral Evelins Lucretius English Rogue Eeds of
Salvation Fax nova Fulk against Bristow against Stapilton Fiat Lux Fabrique of
Church livings Fulter on Ruth Baptism Reconciler
Fenners Divinity. Conscience Directory
French Accademy History Fides Apolostolica French garden Fords panegytick
Farnabys Rhetoric English Females Duel Free Trade Goffs 8 plays Gee of
Magistracy Gardners 16. Sermons Guild on the Revelation on the Canticles
Grotius war and Peace Joseph Authority Annals English
Gerardo a Romance Granados Meditations Gregorios Italian and English Graftons
Tables Gunters Triangle God callor Med. for the Plague Grants observation on
Bills of mortality Greaves pyramids Rom Foot.
Godwine Fam. Religion Goodwine of Dreams Goodwines Christian growth Gadburys
Seamans guide Gassendus of Astrology G^yes Sermons Grand prerogative of humane
Nature Gombaulds History of Endymion Eng. Gaudens Sermons Grand Imposture of
Rome History of Clito and Lucippe King Henry the 8. Erudition Homer of the
English Clergy Hutchinson on 6 small prophets I. H. his poraphrase on the
penitent Psalms Harveys right Rebel Hawks ground of the Law Heydons Temple
Harveys Generat Eng. Howes Abridgement Horace English Hanniball and Scipio
Hughs Abridgement He^ps to Heaven Harveys Astrologicall discourses Anatomical
Exercise History of ^ustin English Heraclitus Tears Hester of Metals Harisons
spiritual Logic Hannays Poems Hoddesons Poems Howards Poems Hopper on the
Commandments Higgons Venetian Triumph Harringtons Virgil Hernes conveyancer
Human Actions Howell of Empire Revolutions of the 3 Kingdoms 12. History
Humphery against Drake Hamonds Poems Heticks Poems Hamonds Review Halls quo
Vadis Characters Passion Sermon Inauguration Sermons complete 7. Volumes
Epistles 2. Solomon's divine Arts Old Religion Decades Remedies ag. proph.
Funeral Sermons
Henry the 7 th. 7th. Henry 2 Edw. 3
Heyline Letters Cambate against Baxter and Fuller. Holy Living and Dying
Heywoods History of Women, Hoard Souls Mystery Gods Love. Herbal for the
Bible. Howell Letters Complete. Dodonis Grove 2. pt
Harington (...) olindor and Flostella Hiands life of Christ Hewis Survey of
the English Tongue History of the Cardinals of Rome Hoptons Concordance Dr.
Hewets Sermons Jones Church Catechism Jewel on the Thessalonians Sermons before
the Queen
Judicial Astrology condemned Angelo of the Scrip. Irelands natural History
Institutions Mathemat. Ieroms (...) helps Iohnsons new Inn Illustrious
Shepherdess Ianua Linguarism by Dugard referata Iuvenall Eng. by Stapleton
Ienkings poems Introduction to the Latin Tongue Iunius his cure of Misprision
Idea of humane Nature of a perfect Princess Josephus a Tragedy by Gouldsmith
Kinastons poems Key of the Bible King David's Vow Kellisons Hierarchy Kitchings
Courts in French Kings works Meditations Knox of predestination King James
Psalms Keckermans Mathemas. Language of the hand Lockyers balm Olive
Sincerity Works Christ's Communion
Lambarts Justice Survey of Kent
Lovell of Animalle Luthers Sermons Life of Mon, de Renry of Nerius VVallace
Becket Archbishop of Canterbury Prince Henry
Lawson against Hobbe Lestrange against ^aylie Visions Lybourns Arith. Laymans
A. B. C. Lawrance of Baptism Loves Natural man's case Lucretius English Letters
against Lecesters Common wealth Legend of Cardinal Lorain Life of Sir Thomas
Moor Loyds History of King Charles the ^. Leigh on the promises England
described Littletons tenures Larkins Hist of the Fathers Lancashire lovers
Letches Triumph of truth Long against Owen Life of Father Paul Inquisition
Compseat Nim and Bung Peireiskins life
Lyeosthenes Apopht hegmes Life of Religion Life of Mon. de Renty Leighs
Caesar's Lushingtons Logic Men before Adam Moor of Enthusiasm poems Meeds
yearnings Maugers grammar Mystagogus poeticus Method of Chemical Physic
Mathews Letters Malthus fire works Moors ground of Religion Martials Epigrams
English Magazine of Hon. Mellis Deb. and Cred. Monlin Cole from the Altar
Melhellicomicum Muffet on proverbs Masterson Arith. M^rrour of new Reformation
Mantons Christ's personal Reign Monarchy Asserted Mayes Sermons Manuell Arts
Mortons 3. Fold State Miserere paraphrased Merchants Exch. at Roan Montagues
Shepherds paradise Mirror that Flatters Not Mundays Chronicle Memorial of
Britain Milborns Sermons Monasticon Brittanicon Mosely on the soul
Contemplations Mizza a play Midletons a plays No wit like a woman's
Mystery of Iesuitisme Mayes Edward the third Monument of Mortality Marrow of
Divinity Mathematical Recreations Nigh of Gunne^y Natura Brevium French Naps on
Parnassus Nordens sinful man's solace Mirror Naltons Sermons Nortons Christ's
sufferings Nosce teipsum Newcomes sinners hope A thousand Notable things Nisbet
on Peter Nissena a Romance Oughtreds Circle of proportion Octo linguarum
Orontius true Church Oliver Cromwells life and death life by Dawbenys Ostella a
poem Philips succession of Queen Mary Spanish Monarchy Philpots poems Pursers
Annuities Pallas armata Parker against the Assemblies Prideaux sacred Eloquence
Pembertous Sermon at St. Paul's Cross at assizes Polemicall discourses by J. D.
Powels Summons for Swearers Plutarchs ^ifes Epitomized Parsons Law Pasquiles
night Cape Paracelsus of Metals by Turner Plantagenet Perkins Cases Family
government Witchcraft
Playfords Int od, to Music Prelate and Prince Palemons Vote poems Pilgrims
Journey Pagets Heresiography Polanus of predestination Potter against charity
Mistaken Papinius Statius' Prince of Love Pareys David restored Prestons
Abridgement Pestells Sermons Playfairs Sermons Polewheel of self-deny^^
Purnells Cabinett Purchase of grace Purchases Microcosmus Pilgrim Popular
Errors Practical Register Pells Improvement Philloxippes and Pollicritte
Potters God Incarnate Incarnate and Trinity Trinity Works complete
Pastor Fido Primrose his popular Errors Rawlings on the passions Rateliffs
life Ross against Brown Mystagogus Poeticus Poetical honey View of Religion
Rablais English Richlieus Defense Rous Cath. Charity Resbury against Goodwine
Rastalls Computation Tables Roberts on the Sacrament Evidence Reflection on
Newcastles Records Arithmetic Robinsons Birth of a day Rumps Songs Reeves
straight gate Robinsons all in all Trinmph of truth Christian pattern Robertson
against Baxter Reyners precepts Rawlins Arithmetic Reynolds Treatise of the
Coure Rebels no Saint^: Speeches of the Kings Judges Rowlands Judicial
Astrology Condemned Sedgwick Sophocles his Electra by C. VV. Solomon's song in
Eng. M^^tre Scuders triumph of the feminine sex Secret messenger or the Art of
Characters Sage Senator Seldens Christian Nativity Synopsis of Counsels
Soliloquies Theological Scepter of Judah Standish Confutation Savadge devout
protest. Straight gate Singularity and Plurality of Bonefices Seneca's
consolation to Helvia Stock of repentance Sermons Scots works poems
philosophers Stone Satyrs philomathie
Sibbs St. safety Souls conflict. Salkeld of Angels Shalkerleys Tables Serranus
on Ecclesiastes Serres mitrour of Death Sandersons Cases 5. Cases
Smiths Rhetoric Senertus of Fevers Stocker on the Mass Surreys poems Sparks
high way to heaven Scotch discipline Sedgwicks Council Millitary Sermons
Sixfold Politician Story of Storys Satyticall Letters Sands Psalms Serious
thoughts Sanctuary of Salvation Spiritual treasure Strong helper Sparks
devotions Scrivelius Lexicon Sclater on the Com. Cat. Self Murder Scroder of
Animalls Summons for Swearers Sheffield of conscience Sherborns poems Shepherds
holiday Sure guide to the French Tongue Shephard on the Sabbath Saints
subjection Symonds Case and Cure sight of Faith 3. treatises Works
Sucklings poems with remains Stanleys poems complete aurora with Cupid Erue.
Europa
Scarlet gowns Shirleys poems 6. plays 8. plays Gent. of Venice and Polit
Secretary in Fashion Scots Philomathy Tailor of repentance Offices of
Confirmation Real presence on the Sacrament
Tuvills Essays Taylers circumspect walking Thorndicks Assemblies Tailors
poems of Kings Motto
Tears of the Indians Table to the Bible It Is not Lawful to wed a Bro. wife
Table to Cook Treatise of the Catholic Faith Tapps Arithmetic Torrianos
Grammar Trial of Faith Touchstone of Truth Topsell on Ruth Triumphant Arch
Thomas 2. Assize Sermons Tossanus compendium of the fathers Tolls Female Duel
Tymms silver watch bell Tillenghasts Sermons Velitations polemicall View of
France and Austria Victory of patience Vicats poems psalms
Virells grounds of religion View of Jewish religion Vshers judgment complete
Extent of Christian Death Life
Vanity of the passions Vinditiae pietat. complete Voitures Letters Eng. Virgil
Traversty 2 part Verstegans Antiquities Unheard of Curiosities Vulgar Errors
Universal Character Vissions by Lestrange Withers Vox pacifica Campo Musae
Abuses whipped and Stripped
Woods life of King Charles Whybeards tactometria Wintons Anatomy Wilkins of
preaching Mathemat Magic Warner of Faith Wales redemption Wings Urania
practica. Wilkinson of Sheriffs Wilfords Arithmetic Scale of Commerce Secret
of nature Meteors
Willowby^ Aviza Waterhouses Meditations of Arms Wards life of Faith Apology
for learning Wingates Logarithmes Arithmetic Wills of perilous times Wits
Interpreter Wars of the Jews Wits or Sport upon Sports Wallers poems Wings
Surveying White on Matthew Whartons palmistry Watchmans Lantern Wildmans
Measures Whittaker against Reynolds Wards Sermons Whartons English Grammar Wren
of Monarchy Way to true Happiness Williams Oceult Philosophy Wilkins
Concordance
Octavo Small.
Agreement of Scripture Attestation of Church government Answer to a Jesuit
Aristotle's problems Alarm to England to Church Sleepers to Judgment
Artemidorus of Dreams Augustine of predestination Meditations Apollinus of
Church government Amandus and Sophronia Aulicus Coquinarie Astreas Tears Assent
to bliss Ars notoria Animadversions on Lillies Grammar Aliots poems
Antiquodlibet to beware the priest Ancient physic Antiquity of parliaments
Answer to defense of the Surplice Arbor of Amity Ashes flowers of the Law
Ajax Metamorphosis Antichrists Reign and Growth Apollo Shroving Abridgment of
the Latin Dict. Albertus Magnus Abraham's suit for Sodom Alphabet of proverbs
Allens Sentences Assertion of Grace Ancient Book on the Sacrament Advertisement
to the new Friars Apology for Paris Ainsworths communion of Saints Adams
Tragedy Apothegms and Historys Apology of the Lincoln Ministers Arithmetic by
Lilier Art of ringing the Bells Advise to Balams Ass Alcoran Friars Arithmetic
Alphabet of hard words Anatomy of Sin Ainsworth against Idolatry Communion of
Saints Accedence for Seamen Apology for young Divines Attorney of the Common
pleass Arnet of Religion Arminius defense Aurelius Meditations Athertons Life
America Described Anatomy of Mass Andrews of prayer Assertion of the Church
policy Abridgment of Scots Chronicle of the book of Assize Henry the 7.
Statutes in French
Anatomy of the mind Arcadia continued Annual world Apollogy for Ecclesiast.
Hierarchy Arcadian princes Apology for private Mass Adams Life Anatomy of
Melancholy Accademy of Complements Art of Archery Ashwell on the Creed
Allingtons grand Conspiracy Artificial Changeling Astrologicall Optics
Arcandum by ward Book of physiognomy Bertram on the Sacrament Buroughs Sermons
Becons demands Jewel of joy Bezas Letters with 4 other tracts on the Sacrament
Bradford on the Mass Bulleign on the plague Bagnalls Ridles Beaumonts poems
Missives of love Braborns 7. days Sabbath Bernards picture Death of a penitent
Bartons Grammas Rhetoric Bretius on Jonah Bucer on the Church of England.
Blind man's Staff Bruccioli on the Canticles Baptized Turk Bulstrod Miscellanies
Bohtmes peace of the Church Meditations Barras small works Book of Epitaphs
Devizes Wine and Treackle Emblems with souls solace of Jewels of Grace of
Cookery
Burden of Conscience Bells Sermons Bunny on the Commandments Admonition
Bedoms poems Bolton on the Sacrament Magical physic bounds
Bogans threats Christian Mirth Britains triumph Bales act of English Votaries
Image of both Churches Baxters Sermon of salvation Grotian religion directions
and persuasions against Johnson of confirmation
Balls large Catechism Bone-setter Complete Book of knowledge Bramhall against
Militiere Boil of Forms Barbados rebellion Barnetts 2 Sermons Brisco of
thoughts Free Grace Bohemian perfecution Brinsleys cordelius Sententiae
Sententiae and Cato Pueriles Confabulatiunculs Esope VVatch
Blood of the Grape Bayfiel on the Trinity Brownsword Romes Convict. Bakers
Arithmetic Bright of Melanchloyl Book of Palmistry Bastards Epigrams Book of
Oaths Bankrupts Britton Butlers Bibleman Brooks Cases French Read on stat. of
Limitation Bournes Light Bacons Catechism Box of Spiknard Book of presidents
Eng. and Lat. Birds Grammar Buxtorfs. Epit. English Bound of Unbelief Brez his
English Quaker Bailys life of B. P. Fisher Bentlys Harmony of Holy Scriptures
Brent on Eternity Butler, Nathaniels his life and death Brooks Nature of Truth
Belleys loving Enemy by weight Bellamys Caveat to Presbyterians Boytuvills Rule
of the world Basilius Valentinus Bakers vindication of the Theater Dr. Brown of
man's Good Bates observations Bernards Isle of man Clerks Vade Mecum presidents
Carews description of new Jerusalem Cornwells Gospel Repent. Customs of
London Colliers Epistles Chyrurgeons Directory Cambers Chiromancy Cambells
Legacy Capells hinge of Faith Considerations on the Exchequet On oceana Cowleys
Blossoms Country Farrier Culverwells white Stone Cotswoods poems Campians art
of poetry Clay of leases Cuff of Ages Copy-Lonlder Crompton of prayer Croo^^
life Crompto^^ poems Craiges Catechism against Anabaptists Chancery Orders
Chancellours Office Christ's Mystery Communion of Saints Charter of Rumny Marsh
Christian moderator Castle of Memory Cawdry against H^mmond Clavis
Apocalip^^ca Castlemains Letters Christian Solace Collers Experience Exaltation
of Christ Charlton against Heyden Carters Tomb stone Church Common wealth
Cudmores poems Calamys Arc Cure of Errors Cabinet of Invention Cottons Gospel
Conversion on the Covenant waters of life
Combachius Sal. lumen Engl. Casaubon on the Lords prayer Collins on Faith 5.
Lessons Clerks phraseologia Adages Comes facundus in via C^sps 1 Vol. 2 and 3
Vol. Cornwallis Essays Clerks Guide complete Cook on Littleton Abridged
Reportsabridged
Cockains poems Clevo and Lozira Carpeners Rule Cleavelands poems Wat. Tyler
Court K. Guide Commentary of the Law Chymicall Collection Addresses Chancery
practice Choice observations on the 12 Caesar's Carpenter against the
Anabaptists perfect Law Comenius pattern Orbis pictus Complete Angler Cluverius
Geography English Catholic History Catalogue of English Divinity Cap. Jones
Legend. Corbets poems Collops poems Catholic Meditations complete
Carews poems Chewney of hell Clarks Tutor (...) s^tter Court and Kitchen of
Ioane Cromwell Cawdry of Independency Cathedral Service Cooks Guide
Contemplatio Mortis Childrens Dictionary Conference between the K. and Bishop
of Wo^^. Casmannus Vade Mecum Engl. Calvin's Sermons of Melchizedeck Conquest of
China Clays Tables of Interest Crofts Nuptial love Terrestrial paradise
Clarks Mirror Christ's passion a Tragedy The Compass of a Christian Coopers
Triumph of a Christian Continuation of Sidneys Arcadia Davenants poems Daphnis
and Cloe Dents works John the Baptist Dugards Rudiments Doctor and Student
Epitomy Discourse of prodigies for guiding of reason Declaration of Cupiff
Divine poems Disputat. at Winchcombe Daniels poems Dove against Atheism
Descartes Method Engl. Dido and Aeneas by Stapleton Despaignes works Errors on
the Creed populat Errors
Deaths Advantage Dia poemata Davenants Declamat. Mrs Drakes life Dingley of
Angels David's blessed man Repentance Durants Christ's love with Sipps Sipps
Denison on the Sacrament Dales Analysis Davisons poems Duty of Constables by
Layer by Shepherd Dionysius Longinus of Eloquence Eng. Donns History of the
Septuagint Digby of adheering Observations of Relig. Medic. Donns poems old
Deacons guide to glory Dyers Reports Abridged Dents pastime for parents pathway
on the Revelation works
Digbys Letters a Romance Dido and Aeneas a Romance Dyers Christ's voice famous
titles Description of the India's by N. N. Dancys Chronicle of portugal
Dugress his Dialogues Eng. Lat. and Fren. Dialogue of polygamy Excellencies of
Free state Essays Theology. Egypts Favorite Enemy to Idleness Everard of
Tobacco Enchirid. Med. by Sadler Elegies and Satyrs Evans voice from heaven
Echo Eurialus and Lucretia Esop Eng and Lat. Edward 2. in verse. English
Dictionary Expositor Easts Summons on lames Expert Physician Exact Clark
^aw-giver Euphrates Elementa Logica Entertainment at Rutland-house Eliots
Castle of Health Governor
Euleston of Excommunication Englands old Religion by H. B. Elizaes Babes
French Verbs Gardner Grammar Alphabet Tutor Schoolmaster
Fulkes Mereors Fosters Quadrant Fimers tables Fulwood of Errors Fishers life
Fountain of the Law Fullers contemplations of Conscience Andronicus
Fullers poems French Kings lives Finch against Vane Manual Milk for Babes
Fishers Odes English Fathers advise Four Liars Family of love Flaming Bush
False Favorite Flecknoes poems Travailes Fleet woods Justice Index Temporum
Fort Royal Fergussons on Galathians and Ephesians. on Philippians and Colessians
Fields Caveat for parson Howlet Flecknoes Characters Falklands spiritual
Returns Farlams Characters of man's life Prophefies Gostelow emblems Garden of
spiritual flowers Garland of Loyalty Goodwil Greenwoods works Goulden Mean
Greenwood of love Goulden grove Key of man's Salvation Guide to Scripture
Guicciardinus low Countries Gesta Romanorum Greenvils life Galeacius life
Goulden Cabinet Gamges Epigrams Gellibrands just: and Logarithms Institutions
Godly man's journey to heaven Gunters Triangle Garden of Eden Compl. Goodwins
Description of love on the Sabbath Saints happiness Child of light
Glass of humors Cospell worship Grimestones Miscellanies Gibsons Geometry
Gomercels poems Gomers mystery Goldmine to the French Tongue Grotius Descrip.
of Holland Goves St. Hony-combe Salve Giffords Sermons on the Canticles Game at
Chess Gleanings Griffith God and King Sermons Grammar Supplim. Geneva described
Gamersalls poems Gardners Mystery Glass for Papist and Pnritants Grand Case
revived Gaul on the Romans Gertards Meditations Gods judgment against Drinking
Grove of fancies a poem Greenhams 2 Treatises Germans Prophesies Geneva
Common Prayer with other tracts Herberts Confessions Child bear Woman
Quadripart Divot. Careful Father Confession and Devotion
Henry the 8. articles Letters for Luther
Howels in spection Hurst Sermons Hawtons growth of Antichrist Humphery on the
Sacrament Hermeticall Banquet Helmont Disguised Vindication Hill on the
Scripture Hickman against Heylin Howes marks History of Metals Hookers
Humiliation Doubting Christian Habbingtons obseru: of History Homes plain
dealing Demonology Hammond of Urine Hope of Israel Hierocles on Pythagoras gold
Verses Heaths paradox Assertor Horace odes Eng. Halls Satyrs History of Susanna
Halls Vindication beauty of Molynes Bp. Hall Cases Conseence Harris Grammar
Heydons Astrology Halls poems Heroic Education of youth Hills physiognomy
Hills pathway to prayer Holy life History of the wars of China Honest Ghost H.
N. Prophesies Harveys poems Humes poems Hudibras complete Harfields Essays
Hipolito and Isabella Hippoclitus Engl. Harringtons law-giving Epigrams Hell
Reformed Hobsons Treatises Hollands looking-glass Hammonds life Harvys
Circulation of the blood Eng. History of Iustine in Eng. of the Jews Heroical
lovers Height of Eloquence Heywoods poems Hooles Ground of Grammar Examinar. of
the Grammar Grammar
Hodges Catechism. Harwood on the Lords prayer History of the Cardinal of Rome
Hattons psalter History of Naples Homer Allamode Hearts Orthography burning Bush
Holybands Italian Schoolmastes declining of the French Verbs Horatius Flavius
by Ben. Johnson Hills ordering of Bees Johnsons Psalms Epigrams Introduction to
the latin tongue Innocent lord Jeanes on the sacrament Johnston on nature
Justice of peace Jacobs wrestling Joseph and his mistress Jacksons pedigree of
Israel Institutions of the law Jones church catech. Jus fratrum Judgment of
the eclipse 1652 Jesuitism displaid Jessey of conscience of grace Jacobs ladder
Johnsons lexicon chemicum Journal, a poem in burlesque Jewel found in
Worcester-streets Insurrection of Wat Tyler Isaiah on the Messiah Joscelines
sermons Kitchen in french Knights of the band Knuttons sermons Kendals epigrams
Kellison on the 51 psalm Kings poems Kent, Essex, and Colchester-expedit. Kings
meditations life Kynsaiders poems King on the Lords prayer Kitchins authority
of justice of peace Lucius Florus engl. Life of the virgin Mary Ladies
dispensatory Lives of Gods prophets Latkhams parable Leeches grammar-questions
Loves kingdom Leys court of wards Law and testimony Littleton in french Lingua
Laws of drinking Landaff on the sacrament Laws of the rosy crucian Lands
mourning for swearing Lives of the roman emperors Lovelace poems Lyfords
principles Leylands antiquities Love-melancholy Ladies legacy Lluellins poems
Lazarillo Lucans continuat. pharsalia Lady Janes epistles Letting of humors
Lady new castles fancies Lingua linguarum Lady Ramsies pelican Lambards
archeion Lumen de lumine Light to grammar Lightfoots miscellanies Leycesters
commonwealth. Life of the three reformers Old castle Parker, bishop of
canterbury Socinus Richlieu
Life of Calvin Thauler Kath. de medicis 1 with 4 tracts
Legend of St. cutbert Littletons solomon's gate Lives of prince Henry and
princess Mary Life of Adam Lupsers works Leshly's epithrene Bishop Laud on the
sacrament Murrels cookery Mills poems Magna charta Muses sacrifice garden
interpreter
Messalina Merchants royal exchange Marks of Gods child Musarum deliciae Mumie
sympathetical Markhams sermons Maidens blush Mastersons spirit. house sermons
Magdalens tears Mercurius rusticus Margarita chirurgica Manual of controversies
Martyrs prayers Mirror of health of martyrs Moors second lash Marrow of
Alchimy Markhams method more with four books of farriery Munster and Abingdon
Modern divines Marrow of divinity compl. second part Moral philosophy Moulins
right of churches Maupas french grammar Moulins accomplishment of prophecies
traditions purgatory on the mass
Manual of parliaments Montross his history Marstons plays Mayes breviaty
Mirror of justice by Horn Mystery of Christ in us Masons little star Magical
gold Mantuan in English, Manwaring of consumptions on the scurvy Mortons art of
gageing Markhams art of fowling Man in paradise Means to make a trade flourish
Militier's victory of truth, and Bramhals answer Massanello a tragedy Markhams
horsemanship Maplets dial of destiny Marks of the children of God Malines
english view Manly's Saints affliction Maserus laws of the Rosy cross Norwoods
epigrams Newlanders cure Natural conclusions Newtons directions for health
medicine Night-search, first part second complete
Owens authorit. of the scripture of mortification epigrams english english by
Vicars
Ovid against Ibis Metamorphosis thirteenth elegies de tristibus de ponto
banquet of sense art of love with four poet. pieces works festivals
Olivers rise and fall Orthodox sermons Office of an executor Overburies
observations Observations on anthroposophia on King Charles history Observator
observed O^ganon salutis Osorius against Haddon Optic glass of humors
Ove^buries characters Observation of history by W. H. Office of a justice of
peace Pious thoughts of death Phrases Italian and English Pimells prophesies
Polidor Virgil Priers looking glass Poets-willow Practice of physic Peyton
Philosophers game Panegyric to queen of Sweden St. Paul's progress
Philosophical essays Pemel de morbis capite help for the poor Perrots epigrams
characters and epigrams Ponts almanac Poor man's jewel treasure Panela medica
Pathway to tongues Parable of the unclean spirit Poems, ep taphs and epigrams
Parnassus biceps Paget of the creatures Perkins cases golden chain reformed
catholic
Preston on the sacrament Perkins of the law Purnels no power way to heaven
Powel on the covenant Poem on tobacco, latin English English and latin
Paracelsus his archidoxes Paynel's regiment of health Phadro's physical works
Practical catechism S. Peter's compl. and Mary Magd. suneral tears Perecius his
astrologer anatomized Poetry by R.C. Quintus curtius English Quarlespoems
Hierogl. emblems elegies
Quarles fons lacrimarum dreams Queens wells Royal buckler Religio medici Right
of dominion Right devil Re^ractoria disput. Ramus dialects arithmetic Rigbyes
poems Rogers epitomy Richards poems Racovian catechism Royal charter Buckler
Revelations revealed Rates of the customs Record of urine Rivets last hours
Rawleighscabinet Robothams two witnesses pretiousness of Christ Religio juris
consultus Ross against brown Rawleighs essays Reflections on des Carts
Royalpsalms Reads anatomy Robinsons essays Robroughs balm from Gilead Rosses
muses interpreter Reynolds salve for wounded spirits celestial amities
Ronsevius prese^vation of health Shepherds guide for a justice Shepherds duty
of constables Salimarsh dawnings on free grace Stockwoods figures Shiptons
poems Sheltons shorthand with tutor Sions muse Souls exercise Swift on
lamentations Sedgwicks sermons seven sages Sultan orchan Stock of repentance
Silvesters poems Springes for woodcocks Spencers logic Spiritual grammar
Speeds husbandry Sclate^s sermons Soldier pleading his cause Spencers poems
Scope of scripture School of salern Shelford of youth Solicitor Souls solace
Streams of sweetness Sacred law Spicers sale of salt Seldom of barons
Succession of the church Stradlings set mon plague Sheltons poems Sectaries
downfall Spirit of alchimy Shakespears poems Saunders balm on sacrament Sydneys
life Spains council divulged Sydenham on baptism Sculdiers practice instruction
Speech of flowers Speeds genealogies Stella contempt of the world Scourge of
villainy of folly Stillingfleets divine presence Smiths convert preparation for
marriage Ethiops conversion three treatises
Symson of justification Silver watch-bell Strappado for the devil Spurstow on
the promises Seneca's tragedies in english Stuarts divinity Stanwix sermons
Spanish grammar Schism disarmed Spriggs testimony Surveyors dialogue school
Sarah wight letters Seven wise masters more with fortunatus Shepherds country
court duty of constables justice proposals of sincerity and hypocrisy epigrams
School of potentates Sickmans salve Stevens essays Sandis on the passion
Spelman nec. non temer. eccles. Sherlocks catechism against the quakers Siege
of Antwerp Sanderson of oaths Suttons living and dying Spira's life Stema sacra
Sands Ovids metamorphosis Staffords life of the vi^gin Mary Starkeys pyrotechny
Spracklins ignorantiae Sanliens french grammar Seneca's hippolytus by prestwich
Scholars companion Sermons by E. H. Safety and sweets in affliction Sadlers art
of physic Secretary's study Sandfords garden of pleasure Secure choice by H.
G. Solomon's gate by Littleton Topics in the Law Tailor against popery
confirmation grapes from Canaan Grammar divine epistles
Treatise of barons Townsend of prayer Turners spirit of the world anatomy
Tozer of wisdom Triumphant lady Traps true treasury Truth its manifesto
Troughtons scripture redemption Ta^hams poems Tusculan in english Tamarlain
first and second Tukes souls turnkey treasure of true love Treatise of the
globe of the day of judgment Tullies offices in english epistles english
Tables of interest Tymothy's lesson Triumphs and shows Taudi against Hobs
Towgoods sermons Tillage of light Trummons memor. Tillam on the sabbath Towers
against atheism Tentzelius his sympathetical mumie Terms of the Law, english
french and english
Treatise of gaming Towers four sermons Turnball on Jude Table of the bible
Trelcatius divotian. Tailor of elect. Thorndick of the church Tuckneys sermon
at hills funeral Thomas seven sermons Towers of atheism Triggs secrets Tragedy
of Lodowick Ssorza Vaughans directions of death Vennings works milk and honey
Mysteries
Vaughans silex scint. with the poems silex scintillans
Ulysses on Ajax Virgils eglogus, english Unpatalleld monarch Vilvains essays
Vincentius catholic religion against heretics Ushers method Udells hebrew
grammar Venus cabinet unlockt Vaughans poems Udalls sermons Virels grounds
Vocabularie english and dutch Vision concerning Cromwell Unfortunate politician
Udalls flowers out of Terence Widows treasure Willis search for causes alchimy
with spirit of alchimy Willis tutor to stenography Wakes observation Whites
apology for Rushworth Woman's doctor counselor Wit and drollery restored
recreation interpreter
Watson of contentment Water house discourse Woods sermons Warm drink Walker
against socinian Gods providence Watsons collections cordial Woods physic
Wilkinsons sheriffs Wrights sermons passion of the mind Walls characters none
but Christ Whitmore of diseases Wottons logic War of the Jews Watham of free
grace Whittaker against Reynolds tree of life Whites sacred law Wodenots
aphorisms Wilson of usury Ward sins indictment Wise virgin Wrens monarchy
Winstanleys mystery and saints paradise saints paradise Wyats rebellion
Websters arithmetic tables of interest Wits arithmetic Wingares arithmetic
second part rule of proportion body of the law
Whitlocks observations Webs pract. of quietness Woods history king Charles
Winells tables Wolsal of mortification VValls commentary of the times Wells on
freedom Williams physical rarities World in the moon VVatsons histor.
collect. of Scotland Wits commonwealth VVoodals physical secrets Wars of
Engand Youths behavior complete Yarrows souls preparation Youngs cure of
ignorance
Twelves crown.
Andrews devotion catechist. doctrine Austins presumpt. man Anatomy of
conscience Abba father Ainsworths pieces Abbots geography Allingtons conspir.
complete continuation St. Austins confessions, english sermons by paynell Adam
in innocence Advice to a daughter Artificial changling Albino and Bellamia
Abbots four sermons Academy of complements Abbots description of the world
Ashes handful of flowers A viaticum or journey to paradise Alsords church
triumphant Alphabetical table of english words Assemblies confession of faith
Ashrea or the grove of beatitude Burges chain of graces zeal Tithes
Burtons legacy Lord Brooks of truth Brathwaits essays Bennet on 51 psalm
Bloys on 42 psalm Bernard of good works Baker on the creed Barlows Lutheran
fact. Balzac's princip. Browns natures cabinet Bacons miracles of nature
catechism essays wisdom of the ancients
Brugis vade mecum Blunts voyage characters Bunny's resolutions first Baines
helps directions for a godly life Boultons carnal professor on the sacrament
humiliat.
Book of fish Book of oaths But of grace Boats life Bedford on the sacrament
Bifield of faith marrow directions
Broughts feasts Bakers psalms motives for prayer Barlows spirit stedfastness
Burden of conscience Benefeild on 51. psalm Bradshaw on the sacrament sin
against the holy Ghost Bulwer on the muscles deaf and dumb complete
Burles grammar Bacons life and death Burghleys precepts Buchanus derection of
Mary Q of Scots Boroughs soverainty of the british seas Bovillia's quiet of the
soul Brooks nature of truth Buonies problems Bramhal against Militier
Barksdales memorials Barclay's mirror of minds Borero of the greatness of
cities Blount's courtiers art Banquet of jests by Arch. Bassets curiosities of
nature Bakers David's sling Complete citizen Curiosities of nature Cleaver on
the sabbath Corpus Christi Common notions Cromptons catechism Crooks guide
Carriers letters Coals christian man's walk Christian A. B. C. Cowlies visions
Contemplat. mortis Claphams brief Character of a christian Christian sacrifice
exercise by R. P. Chaloner on the creed Case Eliah's abatement Civil wars of
France Cato Major Cokes reports abridg'd Christian combat Capel of tentations
third part Coals art of simpling Camus directory of eternity Cressies motives
Culverwel of faith Communion of saints Costara Crofts way to happiness Cid
first part first and second
Country captain with variety variety
Card of courtship Chamberlains royal penitent Closet for ladies Cozens
devotions Chrisostoms paraneses golden book Causines trearise of the church
militant diocese angel of peace
Coopers daily sacrifice Covent's enchir^dion of faith Cusanius idiot in
english Christian soldier Carpenders achitophel Cowpers two treatises
Cruelties of the spanish inqu^sition Charms of love by R. H. Daily practice of
piety Dons polydoron. sermon. at Lady Ramsey's fun. meditations of atheism
Dod's pieces Delherus contemplat. D^kes right receiving Discourse of eternity
Dux grammat. David's tears Diseases of the times Denisons resolut. Daniels poems
Downham on the covenant Dialogue of polygamie Drexelius angel guardian David's
diamond Dictionary lat. and engl. Donnes essays in divinity paradoxes Ignatius
conclave complete
Davenants poems discourse upon Gondibert Dodona's grove Doctrine of the Bible
Dionysius Longinus of eloquence Detections of the devils sophistry Digby's
discourse of powders of plants Drerelings court-meditat. Declarat. of christian
doctrine Divine meditations of several men Dawsons right intention Duncons
returns Davies muses sacrifice Aesops fables engl. Englands Elizabeth English
school Equal way of God Emblems of rarities Englands summons reprover Edward
the 6 his history Evens prayers and meditations Enchanted lovers, a play Eicon
basilicon Featly's devotions trans^bstant. Fiery pillar Faithful shepher.
Forbidden fruit Fenners manna grace Fern of the reformat. French gardener
Fettiplace exercise Fruit Trees Fullers threefold romanz^ Gildas epistles
Gilpins life Goodmans treasure Gerrards day-book Garden of spiritual flowers
Groans of the spirit Grandisons S. Chrysostom Grammar-war Guntons Gods house
Goodwins (John) sermons Saints interest christians engagement return of mercies
Tho. of justificat. aggravation Christ in heaven Saints happiness
Greenwoods works Granado's meditat. Gauls works theory distractions against
Tailor Funeral-serm.
Golden mean Gardiners devotions Gouldwels reason metamorphosed Henrietra Maria
Hermes theologus Hunting the fox Heavenly knowledge Harringtons catal. of
bishops Hackwels passing of bills Hodders arithm. Haec homo Hudsons life of
faith Harrington of the Messiah Howels visions Holy flames Hammond of schism
reasonableness of christian relig. Hinkley's sermons Helps to says Hilder sham
of fas^ing Hides christian legacy History of S. Eliz. Help to discourse
History of thieves Henry the 3 and 4 by Cotton and Heywood Heavenly progress
Holy incense Hooker of perfection three sermons Lords prayer souls possession
souls preparation
Halls cases of conscience soliloquies holy raptures holy order occasional
meditations peacemaker mourners in Sion
Herberts poems Hattons psalms Hobbes of dominion of government Haywards
sanctuary of a troubled soul Harsnet of repentance Hools grounds of grammar
Hall of contentment Howels Dodona's grove instruction to travellets complete
Heaths poems Hills pathway to piety comments on scripture Horace art of
poetry. Orations by Johnson History of Mary queen of Scots Habingtons poems
Heywoods english Elizabeth David's tears Holy sinner, by W.H. Help to discourse
Hides christian legacy Horat. lat. and engl. by Hawkins Help to engl. history
History of king Charles the second Interest of princes Isle of man Joseph and
his mistress Johnsons arithmetic Joys of tribulation Jacksons key of knowledge
History Jenisons two treatises Invitation to prayer Idiot Image of both
churches Jeanes of abstinence Justice restored Jacobs ladder Instruction to
pray, by H. I. Johnstons history of Scotland Instructions for foreign
travelers King James apology for the oath of Allegiance psalms Key to history
Looking of ^chism Loves heroic champion Loarts life Lots little one Ladies
secretary Life of mistress Roats more Loes mystery Lascivious queen Londons
distuler Lovels Herbal Leighs faints ^ncouragement Lauds seven sermons Lyfords
legacy Life of Alfred Lilies comedies Liptius of constancy Lusus serius Lives
of seven famous women Laws physic for the poor Lants daily exercise Sir
William Lowres three new plays The laymans mite Lynds by way Lucius slorus,
english Mazarines entrance Moulins antibarb. against armini Majestas intemerata
Mirror of minds Masters plea Moots relation Mirror of complements Moors
utopia, english Edward the fifth, and Richard the third Meads almost a
Christian Matchiavils prince Mirror that flatters not Mirror of devotion
Minority of king James Marriage of the Lemb Manual Ma^gariton Misere^e me dom.
Mi^^our of martyrs Manual of d^^otion Maions three treatises ^h ee^^d state
cure of c^^es of ^ying of contentment hearing and do
Method for sciences Musers Hero and Leander Marrow of complements Murfords
poems Malvezzi spanish events christian favorite Roman and Tarquin Alcibiades
David persecuted spanish event dav. per. favorite
Mayes agrippina Agrippa and Cleopatra contemplat. mortis
Matthews glorious star Napiers logarithmes Nosegay of flowers Nordens guide
Neal of travel Nolins hermetical physic chimists key Narrative of the troubles
in England Osborns works in four vol. advice complete political reflections
second part miscellanies
Office of the blessed virgin Oil of scorpions Ovids epistles, english De art
amandi Proceedings of the H.C. of Ju. against K. Charles Piersons cure of cares
Primerose on the sacrament Peacocks desertion Paracelsus aurora Parliaments
practice Prideaux of conscience Psalms in four languages Phillips of hell
Partridge Rhabdologie Peter's enlargement Prisoners and Claracilla Peachams
variety P^ckquets anatomy Practice of quietness Pathway to patience Pelham on
Job Practice of christianity Philosophers banquet Prestons abridgement on the
sacrament Saints infirmities
Penitent pilgrim Perfect cook Poem of hunting Parrs grounds Prodigals tears
Pathway to heaven Pattern of patience Popes deadly wound Parry's pious
reflections Pemble on the sacrament Parry's drops Pearls of eloquence Queen of
Scots Quarles divine fancies Queens closet Quarles boanerges and barnabas Ross
his epitomy of Rawleigh Arcania microcosm. Reads anatomy Ravis hebrew grammar
Robinsons essays Rogers of love good news Ross on Rawleigh on Hobbs and
Rawleigh Resolver of curiosities Rous art of happiness psalms mystical marriage
only remedy
Rivets meditat. Raymonds travels Rationale on common prayer Richelleus moral
discourses Sadlers sick woman's glass Shirleys manuductio Stevensons poems
Spiritual thirst Siege of buss Skippon on the promises Sprint on the sabbath
Saints advantage Sedgwicks wonders of God doubting christian Sinners sanctuary
salvation Struthers observat. Straight gate Stoughtons two treatises Sparks
saints joy Stuarts sermon. compl. four sermons second ternary
Saltmarsh beams Southwels works Samways devotion Survey of the turkish empire
Spira's life State of France under Lewis 13. Spouse royal Strodes holy love Son
of a rogue Sincere convert welsh Smiths Moses prayer pattern of prayer Sanders
palmestry Suttons live and dye live
Scudders daily walk Sejanus life Smiths commonwealth Sands Europae speculum.
Sands Ovid Sibbs excellency of the Gospel Christ exalted bruised reed
conference
Sibbs sountain sealed glance christian portion
Skilful physician Senalt on Job Sinners tears Staffords life of the virgin
Mary Sandy's works Skeffington's Hero of Lorenzo Salustius, englisht by Cross
Sleidans sour monarchies Spry's council of state-policie Treatise of
indulgencies Taffins marks Tables of interest Tailors circumspect walking of
content Attributes principles of christian practice regula vit^
Table of humane passions Teats ter tria Temples master piece True catholic
Terrestrial paradise Tilenus against Baxter Tombs of scandal Tulli fam.
epistles in english True watch first and second, fourth part Tuckny's balm more
with none but Christ none but Christ five sermons
T^kes high way to heaven antiquity of the catholic faith Tailors golden grove
letters to Rochester repentance time well spent
Twisden of usury Treatise of pacification of liberty and servitude Five
treatises of several authors Theophilus mystical divinity Vicars against
Christ's picture Vanity of the creature Via tuta Virels grounds Vaughans two
discourses life of paulinus world controv. with Paul's life world contemned
Wotton of separation Wells anchor of Hope Ward of the loadstone Walfols
meditations Willis mount tabor Walker on the covenant Westfields white robe
Whitfields helps Wisdom of the ancients Wits theater commonwealth Wortons
remains letters Withers juvenilia remembrancer character of man
Wishart on the Lords prayer Wolfal of mortification Whites state of souls
Wastels epit. of Bible Christians daily delight Wasberns poems Wakes meditat
Wasses poem of hunting Y^ungmans warning piece Yarrows comfort St. Austins
confessions in english enchi^idion Glass of vain glory Apology so lovers Act
for wardmoote-inquest Abridgement of doctor and student Adams city of peace
Anchor of says Art of thriving Atheism anatomized Apology for young divines
Art of cookery Amboyna's relation Andrews on the ceremonies Arraignment of the
tongue Avener of atheism Algebra Augustus Alfords works of the soul Church
triumphant
Abstract of humane wisdom Art of brachigraphy Antipathy betwixt French and
Spaniard Argalus and Parthenia Balm for the bruised Bay-bush Bunworths Drs.
signature Beza's houshold-prayers Bedford on the Sacrament. Becon on the mass
Breviary of religion Bundle of myrrh Bacons essays apology for Essex
Babingtons farewell Bartons psalms Botero of cities Bottle of tears B^nister of
the eyes Bain on the Lords prayer Brightmans self-denial Burges on the
sacrament Balzac's roman. Aristippus Bakers apology soliloquies Bacons
catechism Baxter on the hypocrite assize-sermons on judgment now or never call
Bakers three sermons Burgis of original sin Brooks of health Boltons helps
Burleighs precepts Bunny's resolutions compl. Brathwaits spicery Bradford on
the Lords prayer Bifields doctrine of Christ on the promises signs more with
three other tracts directions
Barnabies journil Bithner on the soul Borroughs on the sea Cousins devotions
Closet for Ladies Complete tradesman Contents of scripture Collection of
capital heretics Christ's journeys on earth Courtiers art Cannons cabinet
Christian state of matrimony Comforter Church incense Christian directory Cases
morning exercise Carletons directions Canterburies devotions Collection of
prayers Converts catechism Character of cruelty Chapels art of preaching
Clergy in their colors Celestial soliloquies Lamp Crabtree-lecture Curtain
lecture Comfort for conscience Conceits of noble persons Companion for a
Christian Christian combat Claphams brief Crashaw's dialogues Cornwallis on
Seneca Carpenters Achitophel Causins entert. for Lent diary Cooper on the
affections dialogue Character of Spain Character of the times Cordial for a
heart-qualm Cawdrey's fam. reform. Christian instruction Dialogue of good works
Daniels Delia Divine emblems, by Mall Dwarss newyears gift Divine echo
Denisons resolutions Drexelius Zodiac eternity right intention fore runner to
eternity patience hive
Defense of women Divine cosmographer Devout man's purpose Discourse against
flattery on Gondibert Despain on the eclipse 1652 Drerlincourt on the sacrament
Directions for our duty to God Divine meditations Discourse of temples Ephesian
matron Erasmus golden work English pharisee English academ. of complements
Englands Elizabeth Enchiridion physice Enemy to atheism Elenchus in english
Entertainment for the soul Enemy to security Eatons dead says Essays
philosophical Exercise of spirit, devot. Enchanted lovers Englands command at
sea Fathers blessing Featley's tears Ferns divisions Felicity of queen
Elizabeth Fenton of symony Four birds of Noahs-ark Form of friendship
French-cook Flemings prayers French littleron Fields prayers Fragmenta regalia
Fullers meditations good thoughts in bad times Gerrards weeks work conquest of
temptations Granado's meditat. devotions flowers heavenly exercise paradise of
prayer on the Lords prayer
Garniers confession Government of thoughts Guide to honor Gaul of witchcraft
Gots essays Grounds of monarchy Gretius of providence politic maxims Game of
jamesanna Godly letters Gerblers lady's vindicat. Gray's perfection of prayer
Guilds penitent sinner Gurney's vindication pacification Government of virtue
Greenham of conscience Garfields dialogue of polygan Grammar School Grimstones
prayers and meditations Hookers souls preparation doubting christian History of
portugal Heavenly treasure Holy limbick Hall of obedience devour souls
paradoxes resolutions
Hesters physic Hunts mathemat. recreations christian combat Halls holy
observation meditat. and vows on the creed
Hothams character Heavens glory Happy mind Honest man by Grimstone Heavenly
academy Henshaws daily thought miscellanies Hap^iness of the english in union
Hooper of Christ Heavenly thoughts and comforts thoughts H^dges of the soul of
prayer Hitchcocks sanctuary H^aven of the mind Heirons devotions Holy sinner
Heavenly refreshment History of Alexto Valentine Hobbs humane nature Hilliards
fruits of afflict. History of the Bible Hippocrates aphorisms Hermetical
physic Hermes trismegistus engl. Holybands french Littleton Hackwells vanity
of the eye instruct. to prayer by H. J. Hobson on the creed Help to devotion by
R. B. Hunis penitent. psalms Herles policy and prudence Jewels apology in
english Jones works cry of blood Judges judged returna brevium
Jenkins works lex terrae Index temporum Edw. 5. Johnsons essays Jackson on
conscience Juniper lecture crabtree, with woman's revenge Jesuits policy
Instructions for gentlemen Jones on resurrection Jonahs message to Nineve
Ignoramus Jackson of conscience Journies of our blessed Savior on earth King
James aphorisms on Matthew psalms
King Charles prayers meditations Key for Chimists Kemp is imitation of Christ
Lyford of names Lewis on the promises Luthers prayers Lloyds Christ's valedict.
Line of life Leonards problems Lockyers little stone Littletons tenures, french
Linakers comforts Ladies cabinet companion Lucans continuat. engl. Pharsalia
Loving husband Liberty and servitude Life of Lueas and Lisle Londons gate Loves
catechism Luptons daily employment for the soul Lynds safe way Letters between
the bishop of Sarum and doctor Cole Looking-glass for sinners Mothers blessing
second part Mornayes self-knowledge life death with anatomy homilies
Melancthons prayers Mirror of mercy Modern policy Matryrs flowers
Multiplicity of words Moral discourses philosophy of the stoics Malvezzi's
letters politic favorite Map of microcosmus Moulin on the sacrament Manual of
spirit. exercises Manual of prayers Musculus temporizer Method to understand
the bible Moustrap bayted Meditat. on Lords prayer on the 51 psalm Murrels
cookery Mountgomery's Eusebia Me^^try of Europe Munition against man's misery
Mayers cookery Moulin of the love of God Heraclitus letters Manna digested
orations
Manual for catholics Man's imperfection Manzinies loving husband and careful
wife Maxwels treasure of tranquillity Meditations by J. H. Mystery of redemption
Malvezzi's paradoxes Metamorphosis anglorum Middletons heavenly progress
Nocturnal lucubrat. Newcastles call Nomenclator Bodleyan library Newtons
mathemat. instit. compl. first part second part
New-engl. psalms Nosegay of flowers Nature and grace Newyears-gift Nordens
load-star souls delight Owens spanish tongue epigrams in eng. Ornament of woman
Picture of a careful man Picturae loquentes Prisoners prayers Parrots prayers
Paget of death Fam. duties meditations
Practice of charity Princes prayers Picture for Susanna Pattern for women of
catechistical doctrine Pattern of imperfections of christianity Peachams truth
Popish cat confuted Pathway to paradise Physic for the poor Presions saints
submission Pearl of the gospel Pincks trial Pool against blaspheming Palmers
practice christian freedom Purchasers pattern Pathway to heaven Poesy of
prayers Petreus caneus, eng. Pilats jests Pilgrims practice Practice of the
saithful piety Pry or on the sacrament Poesy of flowered prayers Pastors plea
Peacemaker Powel of lending and borrowing Precepts for christian practice
Paradise for the soul Purchasers paradise Parasynagogue Pensive man's practice
compl. second part Perkins seven treatises two treatises abridgement of
predestination of damnation right way to dye well
Protestants practice Schism Politic maxims Parr's help to devotion Pagets
Hist. of the bible Packets true catholic Percy of prayer Questions on the
gospel Quarles Boanerges and Barnabas Enchiridion Read on the muscles Rous on
the great Oracle mystical marriage Rule of good life of perfection Richardsons
saints desires divine consolations Rous Meditat. Reward of the faithful
Reynolds oration divine pourtrait. on the sacrament spiritual intervals.
history of Susanna
Rogers faithful friend meditations Rushworths dialogues Rich treasury Rols
confession Relation of a persecuted gentlewoman Ros coeli Rusha described
Rawleighs remains sceptick maxims of state prerogat. of parliaments observation
gospel
Ross meditat. and conscience meditat. conscience Randalls visions of God Royal
chain of golden sentences Sparks of the spirit Spare hours ministers Spiritual
insaruat. Sheppards cases Spiritual increase exercise Swedish devotion Satyr
serie Seven sobs Spira's life Seven penitent. and consolat. psalms Sutton of
dreams Souls porter exercise Summary of the Bible Smith of mortality
Syrophoenicia Supplicat. of saints Sorrowful soul-solace Staffords Niobe and
meditat. Niobe Heavenly dog meditat. Spanish schoolmaster Scot of schism
Spanish braggadocio Saints legacy Souls alarm bell Samsons jaw bone Sacrifice
of a Christian of the soul Souls comfort Seamans safety Soldiers solace
Serious satyrs Solomon's foundat. of Christian religion Shepherds souls solace
Sellers paradoxes Sheerings Saints happiness Styles contemplations Swadlings
devotions Skippons salve for every sore Thynne of ambassadors Trial of a man's
self Touchstone of a Christian Teacher of an engl. school Treatise of death of
warm drink Triumph of patience Treasure of the soul Theater of complements
Treatise of temples Tuvels essays Treatise of the pike Tozers directions Tutor
to astrol^gie Tailors meditations Tempests meditations Topsels soliloquies
Tailor of friendship Tousiains Lamentations of Jeremiah Use of the promises, by
Jews Velleius Paterculus Vanes dove and serpent Ushers catechism Vennings new
com. Vision of hell Vade mecum Vade mecum for Justice of peace Vanity of the
eye Vision of God Verity of believing Violets discovery of the commons cheated
Winding sheet, with 3 treat, more Whimsies Walkers engl. pharisee Resolves
Whites psalms Whitaker of the grape of waters Whites contemplations Wingates
logarithms Weak believer Whitgift examined Wines sentences Websters hard heart
Wills schoolmaster Webbs works arraignment of an unruly tongue Wisdom of the
ancients Weeks works Warmstry's fighs of the church Woman's worth sharp revenge
glory
Walwins plea for ministry Withers remembrancer Psalms Hymns
Wodenots descants upon old records Warwicks meditations Webbs practice of
quietness Wilsons help to faith
Large 24, and 16.
Alphabet of prayers Andrews private devotions manual for the sick complete
Book of prayers Bills accounts Bacons meditat. Bay bush Bacons prayers Brights
shorthand Beza's septenar. Bulls prayers Christ's pattern Chronicles epitomy
Collets devotions Cato in engl. Consolat. for the fick Crumbs of comfort 1 and 2
part Capels meditat. Derings prayers Erasmus on pater noster Fortune-book
Finsbury archers Fountain of felicity Good thoughts Godly rule Gerrards
meditations Garland of godly flowers Godly garden Gees steps Handkerchif for
parents eyes Hiltons scale of perfection Imanuel Kings works speeches and
letters Kents receipts Key of paradise Lessius of health Life of Lopez Manna
Moulin of fasting prayer Mayes epigrams Virgils georgicks Martyn on the soul
Nature of charity Ovid metamorph engl. Perkins of the law Palmers practice Rule
of perfection Riley of conscience Rous psalms Society of twelve, a treatise
Souls exercise Staffords day of salvation Sum of the bible Samsons Prayer Tulli
of friendship Treasure of gladness Vyneard of devot. Virgils Eneis fourth,
engl. VVigmores poems VVithers hymns Public devotions Valentines devot. welsh
Farewell prayers Groans of the spirit
About 200 Manuscripts, english and latin

The Publisher to the Reader.
IT is to be understood that this Catalogue is not so complete, as to contain
all the books I have, since many have come to my hand since it was printing,
and more do daily, as I can hear of them: ((...) being my request likewise,
that all such as have any parcels they are willing to part with, would let me
know their minds, and I shall be ready to deal for them.) As for school-books
and privilege, together with stitcht books; I held it needless to insert them,
judging that any ingenious person will conceive me furnished with such, suitable
to the rest of my stock.

Moreover, I desire all persons concerned to take notice, that I make and sell
the best Ink for Records, etc. which has for many years been so approved. But
since my removal by the late fire, several persons have mistaken my Shop, and
gone to some neigbour pretender; to their great disappointment, and my damage.

FINIS

