KEIPOMANTIA: OR, THE ART OF DIVINING BY The LINES and SIGNATURES Engraven in
the HAND of MAN, By the HAND of NATVRE, Theorically, Practically.

Wherein you have the Secret Concordance, and Harmony betwixt It, and
Astrology, made evident in 19. GENITURES.

Together with A Learned Philosophical Discourse of the Soul of the World,
and the Universal Spirit thereof.

A Matchless Piece.

Written originally in Latin by Io: Rothmanne, D. in Phisique, and now
Faithfully Englished, By GEO: WHARTON Esquire.

Manus membrum Hominis loquacissimum. LONDON, Printed by J. G. For NATHANIEL
BROOK, at the Angel in Corne-Hill, 1652.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND Universally LEARNED (My much Honored Friend) ELIAL
ASHMOLE Esquire.
WORTHY SIR,
WEre it not that in Common Civility. I am Bound upon this Occasion, as to
acknowledge my Infinite Obligations to you (that being the best Quality of a
Bad Debtor, and even All a Chrstian Creditor should expect, where the Means of
a juster Requital is wanting,) so to give you an Account of the present Work,
unto which you First incited Me:

Yet ( Sir) the Rarity of the Subject, and the Gypsylike Esteem it has
amongst the vulgar: would have necessarily enforced Me, to shelter in under the
Wings of none but an Absolute Mercurialist.

That you are no less, The Ingenious Works you have already Published; The
Succinct and Learned Annotations you have made upon some Part of those, (to
omit what I know you have in Design;) your Exquisite knowledge in
Arithmetique, Geometry, Astrology, Natural Magique, and Physic: and in those
other Inferior Objects of your Delight, viz. Limming, Engraving, Painting, and
Music, may and do abundantly manifest: I shall not, I need not Expatiate:
(To instance the particular knowledge you have in Chiromancy, were but Actum
agere, in that Astrology (before Mentioned) comprehends the same, as here it is
Applied: and your self Them both.)

Nor could I glory at All in the Name of a Greater Personage, to Patronize this
Piece: it is not the Blustering Noise of an Empty Title, or the Frail Support
of a Signal Birth, Only, that can be a Fit Champion, for this or the like
Mysterious Sciences: Learning is best Fortress'd of those, by whom she is most
understood: I confess her Admirers may wish her Happiness; yet they commonly
fail her in Extremity.

And herein I follow the Example of mine Author, who made choice of the best
Deserving in his Country, unto whom he D^dicated this Work in the Original:
that is, unto such as were sober and skillful: Not to Men that were Mighty and
Ignorant, or Learned and Malicious.

Nor yet have these any just cause to complain, unless for the want of
Ingenuity: whereby they are Doomed to an Absolute Depravation of that, whereby
Wise Men daily Ascend, even to the Presence of God and his Angels; I mean the
Knowledge of his Works: For it is not sufficient we hear a story of God in the
Scriptures, unless also we read or see him in the large Volume of his
Creatures: neither do we Read Him by a Bare Gazing upon the outward Form
thereof, but by a narrow Enquiry and search made into their hidden Nature, and
Disposition: For, In the Beginning (says my Author) God adorned All things
Created, with Signatures, that so the Mind of an Ingenious Man might delight
it self by a Diligent searching into the Nature and Disposition thereof, and
thence boldly acknowledging the wonderful Works of God, and converting them
to a Right use, be cheerfully constrained to the Love of God himself, and to
worship him with all his heart, for his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness.

Let us therefore Behold the Heaven, the Stars, and Celestial Signs, the
Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, Metalls, etc. in and upon the Earth; and
consider how wonderfully their various Signatures every where present
themselves unto us, and by a Tacit Language proffer us their Nature and
Disposition! How exceedingly the Seven wandering-Starres (vulgarly called
Planets) do Differ, not only in Magnitude and Motion, but also in the
Brightness, and Beauty of their Light! How variable an Influence is in each;
what a Lively, Lasting Spirit, diversely disposing, Moving, Animating,
Producing, Signing, and Sustaining these Inferiors, according to their
different Position in the Heavens, and the sundry Complications and Mixtures of
Beams accurring from other Stars!

The Philosophers of old have acknowledged, (and we shall willingly the same)
Et inf^mis Suprema, and in Supremis infima: There are in Heaven Earthly things,
in respect of the Causes, and by a Celestial manner, and Celestial things in
Earthly, but by a Terrestiall manner: whence indeed it is, That the Sun, the
Moon and other Stars are considered in the Earth, but that in regard of a
Terrene Quality; so also Plants, Stones, Metalls, etc. in the Heavens, but this
in respect of a Heavenly Nature, endued with Life-Intellectuall. And this was
the Reason why Heaven it self was Depainted with sundry Images by the Ancient
and Holy Fathers: and that he who had through his Ingenuity* attained these
Holy Mysteries of the World, was by the Hebrews truly named Rabbi, by the
Latins, Magister; and by almost all other Nations, Magus: Nevertheless this
Name is now so much suspected and hated, that some had rather for-goe the
Gospel it self, then receive it again into Favor: so wilfully Obstinate,
Blind, and Stupid are the Masters this Age has produced.

But let us Instance a few Examples, and First of the Celestial Bodies: you
know that the Image of the Serpent, has the Nature of a Serpent; that is, it
causes Death by Poison, so often as the Lord of the Geniture, or the Moon is
therewith unhappily Posited at the Birth: The like of the Scorpion; For even
the same Images drive away and kill Serpents and Scorpions, Spiders and Flies,
they expel Poison and the Plague, being deduced from Heaven upon the
Terrestrial Chaos, at an observed time: Leo makes Men Bold; Virgo, Docile;
Taurus, Robust; Aquila procures Honors; Lyra instills the love of Music, and
the study of Poesy: Sagittary addicteth to Hunting; and much more of that
Nature, marked with their proper Signatures.

Next, let us contemplate the Animalls of the Earth, how every one Bears its
own Nature: and how we know the same in most of them by their Effigies, [viz.
by their Countenance] Voice, Gesture, Habit. often by their Color. The Horse
by his Gesture bewrayes his Pride: The Ass his Slownesse: The Lion (by the
Face and Gesture) his Courage: The Bear his Fircenesse; The Cock his
Cheerfulness: The like are every where obvious in other Creatures, unto any
but such as regard the knowledge of nothing. Now by observing the outward
Forms of Beasts, arises Phisiognomy in Man: For look what Beasts a Man
resembles most, either in Face, or Proportion, he is truly said to possess
the Disposition and Nature thereof.

If now we descend to Plants, and Roots, we shall there enter a Theater of
Signatures worthy our Contemplation: For Example: Solatrum vesicatorium
(barbarously termed Alkakenge) shutts up its Husks so soon as the vessels
thereof are Filled with Juice, and replenished with little Stony-Graines, as if
Intimating unto us by a Tacit Language, That therein resides a virtue of
Purging the Bladder, and of Diminishing the Gravel and Stone therein.

Chelidonia, not only Blushes with a certain Bloody Moisture, and therewith
Stains the Hands of him that Touches it, but in the Root it also shows a
Cavity much like the Ventricles in the Heart of Man: whereby is intimated that
its virtue is to Purge the Blood to quicken the vital Spirit, and to free the
Heart from the injuries of Poison.

Cynosbatus, as also Mespylus, fill the Belly with Little Stones, that break
in Pieces the Stone in the Bladder.

Carduus offends the Fingers of those that touch it by Prickles, yet such is
the secret virtue thereof, that it consumes and Expells all Pricklings and
Stingings in the Body of Man.

The Numulariae resembles in the Leaves thereof the Epiglossis, and heales the
Inflammation of the Throat.

Nux Juglans and Moscata represent in the Faces thereof, the Composure of the
Brain and Head, and are therefore comfortable to both.

Orchis in the Root thereof, resembles the Testicles, and therefore is Venus
excited by it.

The Hypericon, and Persicaria are notoriously known to operate according to
their proper Signatures.

Many Hundreds more might be Instanced of Flowers, Seeds, Leaves, and Roots.
The Signatures are most apparent in such Herbs as are least endued with Odor:
Those that are Sweeter, Evidence their Virtues unto us (notwithstanding we were
Blind) by their Smell. So also in the Leaves of Trees, in Rinds and Barks, in
Wood and Roots, we find such Signatures, as do manifest the hidden virtues
thereof, and thereby learn to apply them to Humane use, or the Healing of
Diseases. The like we see in Stones and Metalls.

If this then be so clear in the Stars and Signs of Heaven, if so in
Animalls, Plants, Roots, Stones, and Metalls: who but a Madman, or Fool dare
say, That the like Signs in the Hand of Man* are Idle and Vain? Man is he for
whom all things were made, and wherein all things of the Greater world are
comprehended, although with a Face more Occult. Man only Rejoices in this
Honor [that he has a Resemblance, Operation and Conservation with all things
in the World:] He symbolizeth (as I may say) with the Matter in the Proper
Subject, with the Elements in their Fourfold Composure of Body: with the
Plants in the Vegetative virtue: with the other Animalls in the sensitive: with
the Heavens in the Sydereall Spirit, that is, in the Motion and Influence of
the Superior Bodies upon these Inferior: with the Angels in the Intellect,
Wisdom, and Speech: with God himself in the Containing Power of all things.
And therefore we cannot imagine the Signs so variously Portrayed in the Hand
of Man are in Vain: but that they are there placed by Nature, with intent to
make known unto us the Inscrutable Works of GOD, if Job (Chapter 37.) may be
Credited.

That the Explanation of these Signs is named Chiromancy, I need not acquaint
you: Nor what Canons the Ancient and Modern Philosophers have written
concerning the same: Only this I shall tell you, My Author has not only (in
this small Tract) Reduced All to a Concise and Methodicall Discourse, and Added
diverse others of his own Observations: But also Illustrated the Practique Part
thereof with sundry Notable Examples, whereby he has Manifested an
Astrologicall Consent and Harmony betwixt the Hands and Genitures of all Men. A
work not attempted by any before him. And whereas the Masters in this Science
have not Assigned (...) Tubercula, or Mounts of the Hand to the Planets,
without some Successive Discrepancy: Nor although all of them deliver it for a
General Rule [That by how much every one has a Planet more Dignifyed at the
Hour of his Birth, by so much more Evident the Characters and Signs will
appear upon the Region appropriated to the same Planet,] yet has not this
been approved until by this Author, who has hereby abolished all former
Doubts, and clearly demonstrated the Truth of that Doctrine.

Nor has He thereby (in my Judgment) restored the Art of Chiromancy to more
certainty, then he has confirmed the Grounds and Credit of Astrology, and
Das^'d in Pieces the Bug-beare Arguments of all the Enemies of either: For what
more Convincing to the Juditious, then if (by Inspection made into the Hand of
any Man) I truly pronounce this or that Planet Essentially Dignified or Angular
in his Geniture, or in such or such a Position with other Planets or Stars:
another Unfortunate Afflicted, or Dejected? Or if (on the Contrary) by looking
first into the Geniture, and considering therein the several Positures of the
Planets, and their Configurations one to another, and with other Stars; I
tell him (and that Distinctly and Truly) the Lines and Signatures Engraven in
his Hand: what (I say) is or can be more satisfaction then this to Rational
Men, as touching the Power and Influence of the Planets and Stars upon these
Inferiors, and consequently of the Lawful use, and verity of the Sciences of
Astrology, and Chyromancy, betwixt whom there is such a secret Coherence and
Harmony? And this I dare undertake to perform for the Honor of these
Sciences, to the shame of all Malicious and Pestilent Detractors.

Indeed (I confess) we cannot by Chyromancy so exactly determine the time of
any Accident, as by Astrologic, where the Arch of Direction may be Resolved
into the most Scrupulous Parts of Days: I suppose Chiromancy was not so much
Ordained by Providence for the use of such whose Purer sights can penetrate the
Celestial Spheres, and there Exactly read their own, or others Fate, in
those Golden Letters of the Stars: But rather for the Benefit of such that be
of a Grosser Genius, and whose Dimmer Eyes cannot Discern the Decrees of
Nature at so Great a Distance. Yet are not these Signatures wanting in any Man
(more, or less) lest he should prove wanting to himself in the Accomplishing
of a Higher Scrutiny.

As touching the Version it self, I have done it with all Integrity: and if in
some places I may seem to Differ from the Original, it is but where I find
the Author abounding more with Elegance, then Variety of Matter, and even
forsaking the Terms of Art, rather then he will Miss of an Eloquent
Expression: for perhaps I have herein sometimes Contracted him, yet still
retained His Genuine Sense. In other Places I have only Corrected the Errors
of the Press, the which indeed were many more, then the Author's Errata
specified, and very Gross ones besides: and therein have done no more, then I
desire others may do for Me. For any thing else I know not that I have
Exceeded the Laws of Translation, unless it be in retaining the Terms of
Art, and that I did purposely, lest in Abolishing them, I should therewith
abolish the Art also: Nevertheless in the First Seven Pages I have given the
English thereof, and that (I hope) is sufficient.

The End proposed, is, That hereby all Persons, who are not acquainted with the
Latin, might in Plain English Read and understand their own Destiny: and
(if Possible) Avert (at least wise Mitigate) the Mischiefs Threatened them: Or
with comfort attend, and (by Humane Prudence) Cherish and Augment the Good
portended: whereby they may Greatly be Enabled to Give God thanks for his
Infinite Mercy, and Goodness: At least wise Glorify him in the Midst of their
greatest Afflictions.

And this is the first Tract (of this Nature) that ever appeared in the English
Tongue: and I may confidently say in any Language whatsoever, (the Latin
excepted;) wherein the Author writ no less Learnedly, then Elegantly: And I
heartily wish (and desire, Sir, you will join with me in it) That some one or
other of our ablest Astrologers, (who have better Encouragements then my
self,) would pursue this Design of the Authors, it being (in my Opinion) the
best and only way of bringing this Science the nearest to Perfection.

Sir, I have now but a little to say, and that is, First, to give you Thanks
for all the variety of Favors you have conferred upon Me ever since the First
Hour of our (to Me) Happy Acquaintance: Next to assure you (in a short time)
Ptolomy himself, in the English Tongue, which so long has been expected from
Me, yet still Retarded by Reason of the many Discouragements and Crosse-Grain'd
Events I have Labored under for some years past, begging your kind Acceptance
of this in the Interim: Then to crave your Pardon for this Prolixity: And
Finally, the Continuance of your wonted Affection, and Opinion of Him, who
unfeignedly am

Feb. 18. 1651/2. Sir, Yours in the utmost of all True Love, and Friendship,
GEO: WHARTON.

M Manilius in his Preface to Aug. Caesar.
When every Species of the glittering Sphere
(The Stars returning) Ranked did appear
In their own Seats: and by the Fates Decree,
Each had restored it is Formall-Potency;
Experience framed Art, by various use,
Example guiding where it was Abstruse:
And (though at a vast Distance) plainly saw
The Stars All-ruling, by a Tacit Law:
The whole World Moved by Reason-Alternate,
And how, by SIGNS, to Judge the Turns of Fate.
Iobi 37. 7.

Qui in manu omnium hominum signa ^osuit, vt cognoscerent opera ejus singuli.


A Short and Plain Rule of CHIROMANCY.
CHIROMANCY is a Rule whereby to know the Signs in the Hand of Man, and a
Science of Judging Rightly concerning them. There are Two Primary Parts of
Chiromancy, 1. Theoricall, and 2. Practical.


1. The Theoricall is that which considers the Parts of the Hand, as the
(...) [i.e. the Argument, matter, or Subject] of the Art.

The Parts of the Hand [that is, of the Hand and Palm thereof Extended and
opened,] are.

1. The Vola, or Inner-Part of the Hand, wherein the Lines, the Turbercula or
Riseing parts, the Feriens or Smiting-part, the Cavea or hollow, and the Mensa
or Table thereof, are, (by a clear and certain Method) known and considered.

2. The Five Fingers; viz. The Pollex, or Thumb, the Index or Forefinger, the
Medius or Midle-finger, the Annularis or Ring-finger, and the Auricularis or
Litle-finger.

1. LINES.
THE Incisures, or Lines, are engraven by God and Nature, within the Spaces and
Distinctions of the Inner-part of the Hand: And of these, some are Principal,
others Lesse-Principall.

The Principal Lines.
1. (...) Cardiaca [that is, the Line of, or belonging to the Heart] which
includes and imbraceth the Mount of the Thumb. It is also called, The Line of
Life.

2. Epatica, The Liver-Line, or the Naturall-Meane, which runs through the
Middle of the Hand, arising from the same place with the Cardiaca at the Root
of the Forefinger.

3. Cephalica, or the Line of the Head and Brain, which arises below from the
Cardiaca, and (being drawn thence to the Epatica) makes a Triangular Figure.

4. Thoralis, the Table-Line, or the Line of Fortune, which takes its original
under the Mount, or Root of the Litle-Finger, and extends it self toward the
Forefinger.

5. Restricta, or the Dragon's Tail, which seperates and distinguishes the
Hand from the Arm, either by a Simple or Double Transcursion. This Line
determines the (...), or Subject of the Art. It is likewise called the
Discriminall Line.

The less Principal Lines,
Are not in every ones Hand, or when they be, not very clearly to be seen.
And of these there are Five in Number.

1. Via Solis, or the Sunn's way, which is a Right Line running downwards from
the Tuberculum (or Rising Part) of the Ring-Finger, into the Cavitie of the
Hand.

2. Via Lactea, or the Milkie-way, running upward, from the Restricta, through
the Feriens.

3. Saturnia, or the Line of Saturn thence ascending through the Middle of the
Vola, to the Tuberculum of the Midle-Finger: which Line, if it be cut and
parted, is called Via Combusta, or the Burnt way.

4. Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus, which is the Figure of a
Hemicycle, drawn from the space betwixt the Forefinger and Middle-finger to
the space betwixt the Ring-finger and Litle-finger.

5. Linea Martis, the Line of Mars, or the Vital Sister, which is Parallel to
the Line of Life, in the Turberculum of the Thumb.

2. TUBERCULA.
THe Tubercula, are, the more Eminent Muscles under the Fingers. 1. of Venus.
In the root of the Thumb. 2. Jupiter. Forefinger. 3. Saturn. Midle-finger.
4. Sun. Ring-finger. 5. Mercury. Litle-finger.

3. FERIENS.
THE Feriens (or Smiteing part) taking its name a Feriendo, or Percutiendo, is,
that part of the Hand which we turn about in giveing or receiveing of things:
And this is the Mount comprehended betwixt the Menfall and Discriminall Lines,
under the Tuberculum of the Litle-finger, the which is attributed to the Moon.

4. CAVEA.
THE Cavea, is, the Hollow place in the Middle of the Palm, wherein the Three
Principle-Lines, Cardiaca, Epatica, and Cephalica make the Triangle. And this
is given to Mars.

5. MENSA.
THE Mensa, is, the Intervall, or Space, betwixt the Thorall and Epatica, the
which is given to Fortune: whence the Thorall is called The Line of Fortune.

VERSUS.
Est Pollex Veneris; sed Jupiter Indice gaudet:
Saturnus Medium; Sol Medicumque tenet.
Hinc Stilbo^ Minimu^: Feriente candida Luna
Possidet: In Cavea Mars sua Castra locat.
Venus the Thumb and Jove the Index guides;
Saturn the Middle, Sol the wanton Brides:
Stilbon the Least, Luna the Ferient,
And Mars in Cavea does Pitch his Tent.
Here we must note, That there is some difference amongst Authors concerning
the Places of Mars, Venus and Mercury: For some give the Tuberculum of the
Thumb to Mars, The Cavea to Mercury, The Region of the Litle-Finger to Venus:
Now to satisfy my self, I first of all observed such Men as were Venereall,
[that is, such as were given to Ieasting, Fair, Merry, Agile, Lovers of
Music, etc. And these I found had the Region of the Thumb plainly Marked
with decent Signs, comely Notes and Characters: And that, not without their
Nativities portending the Luxury of Venus, she being either collocated under
her Proper Prerogatives in a competent place of the Figure, or in a good Aspect
of some Planet. The like regard I had concerning Mercury. Wherefore the Cavea
belongs to Mars.

THE Practical part of Chiromancy.

The Practique of Chiromancy is that which gathers Probable Predictions from
Lines, the Places of the Planets in the Hand, and from the Notes and Characters
every where posited in the Hand and Fingers.

Wherefore let this Series be observed for Method-sake.
1. Cardiaca, or the Line of Life. 2. Epatica, or the Liver Line. 3. Cephalica,
or the Line of the Head and Brain. 4. Thoralis, or the Table-Line. 5.
Restricta, or the Dragons Tail. 6. Via Solis, or the Suns way. 7. Via Lactea,
or the Milky way. 8. Via Saturnia, or Saturnes way. 9. Cingulum Veneris, or the
Girdle of Venus. 10. Via Martis, or the way of Mars. 11. Mons Veneris, or the
Mount of Venus. 12. Cave a Martis, or the Cave of Mars. 13. Mons Jovis, or
Jupiters Mount. 14. Mons Saturni, or Saturn's Mount. 15. Mons Solis, or the
Sun's Mount. 16. Locus Lunae, or the Moons Place. 17. Mons Mercurii, or
Mercury's Mount. 18. Mensa, or the Table. 19. Pollex, or the Thumb. 20. Index,
or the Forefinger. 21. Medius, or the Midle-finger. 22. Annularis, or the
Ring-finger. 23. Auricularis, or the Litle-Finger.
QUESTION. Whether we must judge by the Right Hand, or the Left?
IT is certain, that in one Hand the Lines, and other Signatures, are very
often more manifest, and by their Featnesse more perspicuous, then in the
other, as well in Men as Women: wherefore a Question hence arises, whether in
both Sexes the Right or Left Hand is to be taken: or whether the Right Hand in
a Man, (as some teach) and the Left in a Woman only?

ANSWER.
THat Hand (in both Sexes) which shows and exhibites the Lines thereof most
clearly, and abounds with a Series of Characters and Signs: yet so, as that
the other whose Lines are more obscure may pay its contribution. If in both
Hands they consent and appear to be fair and comely, they declare a Constancy
of Fortune and Health. The cause of which diversity is this: He who is Borne in
the day time, and has a Masculine Planet [the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter or Mars]
Lord of his Geniture, bears the more Remarkable Signs in his Right Hand,
especially when the Sign Ascending is also Masculine. The contrary befalls
those that are borne by Night, so often as a Feminine Planet predominates, and
the Sign Ascending is Feminine. If both Hands agree, it must needs be, that in
a Day-Nativity the Feminine Planets Rule: or that there falls out a Mixture of
Masculine and Feminine. So in the Night, by the contrary Reason: which
Diversity must necessarily be observed.

I. Of the Line of Life.
This is also called Cardiaca, or the Heart-Line.
1. WHich being Broad, of a Lively-colour, and decently drawn in its Bounds,
without Intersections and Points, shows the Party Long-Lived, and subject but
to few Diseases.

2. If slender, short, and Dissected, with obverse little Lines, and deformed,
either by a Pale or Black color: It presageth weakness of the Body, sickness
and shortness of life.

3. If orderly joined to the Natural Mean, and beautifyed in the Angle with
Parallels, or a little cross, it argues a good wit, or an evennesse of Nature.

4. If the fame have Branches in the upper part thereof extending themselves
toward the Natural mean, it signifies Riches and Honors.

5. If those Branches be extended toward the Restricta, it threatens Poverty,
Deceipts, and Unfaithfulness of servants.

6. If in this Line there be found some confused little Lines, like hayres, be
assured of Diseases: and they to happen in the First Age, when they appear
below; if toward the Cavea, in the Middle; if toward the Epatica, in the
Declining Age.

7. If this Line be any where broken, it threatens extreme danger of Life, in
that age which the place of the Breach shows: For you may find out (almost
ad unguem) the Dangerous or Diseased years of your age, if (this Line being
divided into 70 parts) you begin your number and account from the lower part
thereof, near the Restricta, for the number falling where the Breach is,
determines the year.

8. If the Character of the Sun (as commonly it is made by Astrologers) be
found in this Line, it presages the loss of an Eye: But if two such
Characters, the loss of both Eyes.

9. A Line ascending from the vital beneath the congresse of it and the
Epatica, to the Tuberculum of Saturn, designeth hominem (...) [That is, An
Envious Man, who rejoices at another Calamity;] the site of others
concurring. This also frequently shows a most perilous Saturnine Disease, as
is the Plague, etc. in that part wherein it touches the vital: And so much the
worse if it cut the same.

10. But such a Line passing from the vital to the Annular or Ring-finger,
promises Honors to ensue, from or by means of some famous Woman, or Queen,
or the gainefull favor of some Lady of Honor.

11. The vital Line thicker then ordinary at the end under the Forefinger,
denotes a laborious Old Age.

12. A Line passing through the vital, to the Cavea of Mars, foretells of
wounds and Fevers, and of Misfortunes in Iournies.

II. Of the Epatica, or Naturall-mean.
1. THis Line being straight, continued, and not dissected by obverse little
Lines, denotes a healthful Body.

2. If it be short (or Broken) and reach not beyond the concave of the Hand, it
bodes Diseases, and shortness of Life.

3. By how much more the same is produced, by so much longer the Life may be
warranted.

4. If cut at the end thereof, by a small intervening Line, it threatens
Poverty in Old Age.

5. If in the upper part, it be distant from the vital by a great space, it
bodes distemperatures of the Heart, as Palpitation, Syncope, etc.

6. This also shows Prodigality, especially if the Table be broad.

7. If Tortuous, [that is, if it wind and turn several ways,] unequal, of a
different color, and dissected, it argues an evil constitution of the Liver,
and thence Diseases proceeding from the weakness thereof: covetousness also,
and a Pravity both of nature and wit; especially, if from under the Region of
the Middle finger, it approach toward the Cardiaca, thereby making a short or
narrow Triangle.

8. If Decently drawn and well colored, it is a sign of a cheerful and
ingenious Disposition.

9. If it have a Sister, it promises Inheritances.

10. If continued with foam little hard knots, it demonstrates Manslaughters,
either perpetraed, or to be perpetrated, according to the number of those knots.

11. If therein a cross be found under the Region of the midle-finger, it
denounces death at hand.

12. If it terminate with a Forke toward the Ferient, it is a sign of a
Depraved wit, of Hypocrisy, and evil manners.

13. When it tends to the Mensall, it is a token of a slanderous and
reproachful tongue, and of Envy.

14. When it projects a remarkable cleft through the vital, to the Mons
veneris, and the sister of Mars, especially if the same be of a Ruddy color,
it bids beware of Thieves! and intimates also Fraud and Deceipts of Enemies.

15. This cleft likewise insinuates a most vehement Heat of the Liver,
proceeding from the Rays of Mars, whereby the Life is disquiered, for that the
Line of life is dissected.

16. This Line having some Breach, yet such a one as that nevertheless it
seems to be almost continued, shows, that the manner of life will be, or is
already changed. And this in a Declining Age, if the Breach be under the
Ring-Finger: But if under the Middle-Finger, in the strength of years.

III. Of the Cephalica.
1. THis is called the Line of the Head and Brain: which if (arising from its
place in a due Proportion,) it connect the Lines of the Liver and Heart, in a
Triangular form, have a lively color, and no Intersection falling out
between, declares a Man of admirable Prudence, and one of no vulgar wit and
Fortune.

2. By how much more Decent the Triangle is, by so much happier shall the
Temperature, wit, and courage be: But if it be obtuse, it argues an evil
disposed nature, and a Man that is Rude if no Triangle, far worse: [A Fool,
a Prodigal, a Liar, and commonly a short life.]

3. The Superior being a Right-Angle, or not very Acute, foretells the best
Temperature of the Heart: but when it is too much Acute, especially, if it
touch the Line of Life upon the Region of the Midle-Finger, it argues
Covetousness.

4. The Left-Angle, if it be made upon the Natural Mean, in the Ferient, and
be a Right Angle, confirms the goodness of the Intellect.

5. But when the Cephalica projects unequal, and incomposed clefts to the Mons
Lunae, thereby making unusual Characters, in Men, it denounces Weakness of
the Brain, and Dangerous Sea-voyages: but in Women, frequent sorrows of Mind,
and Difficulties in Childbearing.

6. Equal Lines (thus projected) presage the contrary in both sexes: viz. In
Men, a good composure of the Brain, and Fortunate voyages by Sea: In Women,
cheerfullnesse and Felicity in Child bearing.

7. This one thing is Peculiar to the Cephalica: [if it project a cleft, or a
manifest Star, upwards, to the cavea Martis; it signifies Boldness and
courage: But if it let fall the same, downwards; Thefts and Deceiptfullnesse.]

8. The Cephalica joined to the Dragons Tail, by a remarkable concurse,
promises a Prudent and joyful old age.

9. The same drawn upwards in the shape of a Forke, toward the Place of
Fortune, signifies subtilty in managing of affairs, and craftiness, either to
do good or bad.

10. If in this Forke a Mark appears, resembling the part of Fortune, as it
is noted by Astrologers, that gives an assurance of Riches and Honors to
succeed, by means of Ingenuity and Arts.

IV. Of the Thorall Line.
1. THis is also called the Line of Fortune; It is termed likewise the
Mensall, because it makes up the Table of the Hand: which Line, when it is long
enough, and without Incisures, argues a due strength in the Principal Members
of Man, and withal, constancy: The contrary, if it be short or crooked, cut,
or Parted.

2. If it terminate under the Mount of Saturn, it shows a vain and lying
fellow.

3. If projecting small Branches to the Mount of Jupiter, it promises Honors.

4. If there it be naked and simple, it is a sign of Poverty and Want.

5. If cutting the Mount of Jupiter, cruelty of mind, and excessive wrath.

6. If it project a Branch betwixt the Forefinger, and the middle, in a Man it
threatens a wound in his Head, in a Woman, danger in childbearing.

7. Three Lines ascending directly upwards from this line, viz. One to the
space betwixt the middle and Forefinger, A second to the space betwixt the
middle, and the Ring-finger; and a th^^d to the space betwixt the Ring and the
Little-finger, argues a contentious Person in many Respects.

8. A little line only thus drawn to the Intervall, or space betwixt the
middle-finger, and the Ring-finger, sorrow and labor.

9. If annexed to the Natural Mean, so, as that it makes an Acute Angle, it
brings sorsow and labor.

10. If the Natural mean be wanting, and the Thorall annexed to the Vital,
it threatens Decollation, or a Deadly wound.

11. If no Mensall at all, it shows a Man malevolent, contentions, faithless,
inconstant, and of base conditions.

12. Confused little Lines in the mensall, denote sicknesses: if under Mercury,
in the First Age: under the Sun, in the Flower thereof, under the Midle-finger,
in old Age.

13. When in this Line there are certain Points observed, they argue strength
of the Genitall^, and Burning lust.

V. Of the Cauda Draconis, or the Restricta, and the Lines arising thence.
1. IF this be double, or treble, and drawn by a right and continued tract, it
promises a good composure of the Body.

2. That line which is nearest the Hand, continued, and of a good color,
assures of Riches.

3. But if the same line be cut in the middle, crooked, and very pale, it
denounces debility of Body, and a want of all things.

4. A Cross, or Star upon the Restricta, foreshewes tranquillity of Life, in
old Age.

5. If there be a Star, simple or double, or any Lines near the Tuberculum
of the Thumb, in Women, they denote Misfortune and Infamy.

6. A Line running from the Restricta through the Mons Veneris, presageth
adversities, either by the means of some kindred, or a wife.

7. A Line extended from the Restricta to the Mons Lunae, denotes adversities,
and private enmity. If it be crooked, it doubles the evil, and betokens
perpetual servitude.

8. Such a Line also being clear, and straight, and reaching so far as the
Region of the Moon, foretells many journeys, both by Sea and Land.

9. If it extend to the Tuberculum of the Forefinger, it tells the Man he
shall live in a foreign Country, in great Estimation.

10. If to the Epatica, it argues an honest behavior, and prolongeth Life.

11. If to the Mons solis (be it simply, or doubly) it shows inseparable good,
and enableth to govern, or rule in great affairs.

12. By the same reason, if it pass to the Mons Mercurii, it betokens a Man,
that is fit for many things. But if it reach not the Mons Mercurii, but be
broken about the middle, and end beneath the Mons Mercurii, this marks out a
Prating Fellow, a Liar, and a Murmurer.

13. If directly ascending to the Mons Saturni, it signifies a good position of
Saturn, in the Geniture, whose decrees shall shortly follow: But if crookedly
both toward the Restricta, and the Epatica, especially; it bodes a Man that is
Covetous, Laborious, and hard.

VI. Of the Via Solis, or the Sunn's Way.
THis being whole, equally drawn, and well colored, promises the favor of
great Men, and joyful Honors: But if dissected, and inaequall, the contrary:
and exposes to diverse impediments, and envy in attaining the same.

VII. Of the Via Lactea, or the Milkie-way.
THis well proportioned, and continued, presages journeys that be fortunate,
both by Sea and Land, and moreover, a good Brain; the favor of Women ( Venus
assenting,) a composedness, and gracefulness of speech: If it be cut, or
distorted, it argues Infelicity, and Lies; but whole, and ascending to the
Little Finger, is a sign of great Happiness.

VIII. Of the Saturnia, or Line of Saturn.
1. THis being fully and wholly protracted to the Middle Finger, is an Argument
both of profound cogitations, and likewise of fortunate events, in counsels
and actions.

2. Combust or Deficient, an evil sign, portending many misfortunes, unless
other positions favor it.

3. Bending backward, in the Cavea of the Hand, toward the Ferient, in the
form of a Semicircle, threatens imprisonment.

4. A Line drawn from the Vital through the Epatica to the Tuberculum of
Saturn (if there it touch the Saturnia) the same.

IX. Of the Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus.
IF this Line have a Sister, it argues intemperance and lust, in both sexes,
and baseness in venereall congression; a filthy Man especially, who abhorres
not the carnal knowledge of Beasts. And if dissected, and troubled, losses, and
infamy by reason of Lusts.

X. Of the Via Martis, the way, or Line of Mars, or the Vitall-sister.
THis Line (so often as it appears) augments and strengthens the things
signified by the Cardiaca. But (particularly) it promises good success in
War, provided it be clear, and decently Red.

Two Observations concerning Lines.
1. THe Quantity of all Lines must be wisely observed, [that is, their Length,
and Depth:] so likewise their Quality [that is their complexion, and shape,
whether they be crooked, or straight.] Next, their Action, which is, to touch
or cut other lines: their Passion, to be touched or cut of others. And lastly
their Place and Position.

2. We must know, that the Lines are sometimes prolonged until certain years
of our Age, otherwhiles shortened: now they wax pale, anon they become notable,
and as it were Luxuriate with a kind of Redness, and this as well in the
Principal, as Less Principal lines.

Again, (as touching the Less principal, and such as are found in the
Tubercula of the Planets,) it is most certain, that some do one while quite
vanish, and that another while, others rise of a different shape, and
complexion.

The cause of which, I suppose to be no other, then the various Progressions of
the Apheticall Places in the Genitures, that is to say, Fortunate, and
Unfortunate, to the influence whereof Man himself is wonderfully subject. The
Signs of his Hand are presented at different times with differing Faces: Such
a virtue, Such a love resideth in the Imagination of the Greater World, toward
this Lesser.

And therefore the most studious in Chiromancy cannot attain the knowledge of
Particulars, by one inspection, only made to a certain year of the persons
Age. Things that worthily merit our observation, yet known or approved of but
by a few.

Of the Planets.
The Planets also administer not a little in judgment, from their respective
places: For, if they be Happy and Benevolent, good things are portended, but
being Unhappy, and Froward, the contrary.

Here we must also note; that those Planets are termed Benevolent, in whose
Tubercula, and places, the accustomed Lines are found to be Equal, their
Characters fair and proportionable, as a cross, Stars, three, or four
parallel Lines, Ladders, little Branches, a Quadrangle, the character of
Jupiter. But the Froward and Unfortunate are those Planets, whose Tubercula and
places are deformed with Trouled lines, and Uncoth Figures, as a lame and
interrupted Semicircle, Grid-irons, the character of Saturn. And this is to
be observed in all the Lines of the Hand. Now as touching the Planets, let us
proceed according to the Method proposed.

XI. VENUS.
VEnus shining well and happily, (that is, when in her Tuberculum she presents
a clear Star, or Furrows that be red and transversly Parallel; and so often
as her Tuberculum is much elevated, makes such men to be merry, cheerful,
luxurious, yet amorous, grateful, comely, and libidinous, very honest also,
and just, with whom an entire and incorrupted tie of friendship (once made,) is
permanent.

She renders the body somewhat tall, and clear, the Eyes pleasant, and
sparkling with the splendor of beauty, full of allurement and temptation: The
hair crisped, and very thick, yet gently curling: she Instills a spotless,
and a noble mind. Yet oftentimes gives men full of boasting, and incontinency.
She enclines the mind to Music, Painting, and all other Arts that have
Beauty, etc. Sometimes (according to the strength of the Geniture) she
produces Priests, and Pedagogues, Apothecaries, Gardners, etc.

But being Unfortunate, she causes lasciviousness, incontinency and
boasting: And if you find a Cross also, near the first joint of the Thumb;
it commonly designs an Adulterer, or such a one, on whom a mishap has fallen
in some uxorious matter, or thing.

If the place of Venus be untilled, and void of Incisures, it points out an
effeminate, rude, and sorrowful person, foolishly and ridiculously addicted to
be merry and jeasting.

XII. MARS.
MArs is Fortunate, so often as his Sister appears red, clear, and decently
drawn, and when either Stars, or a Cross are found in his Cavea.

Thus therefore he denotes such as are bold, and full of courage, stout,
warlike, contentious and not easily mutable, strong, and lusty trencher-men,
imperious: The hair for the most patt yellow, the Eyes from black waxing red
and terrible. If Jupiter participate, he possesses the Gall, the Reins, the
Back, the Liver; If with Venus, the privy Members, etc.

But if he be Froward and Unfortunate, that is, when his Signs, and Place are
afflicted, etc. He describes Men that be Litigious, Violent, Deceitful, Angry,
Intolerable: Also (the rest dissenting) Thieves, Bloody-minded, and such whose
Arts or Occupations are conversant with Fire, and Iron. He has significations
of a Wife, Sons, and dissembled Friendships: thus also he ingendereth
Fevers, and Blisters or Wheels, filthy Eyes, and skin, the Apoplexy, Holy
fire, wounds, and troubled thoughts.

If you find a Saturnine Particle in the Cavea of Mars, it threatens a
Precipice, or fall, from some high Place.

If there ascend a crooked Line from the same Cavea, to the Tuberculum of
Saturn, it threatens imprisonment.

If a Line run from the Cavea of Mars toward the Restricta, and terminate in
that part thereof which is under the place of the Moon, it is an infallible
sign of many Peregrinations and Journeys.

XIII. JVPITER.
JUpiter is Happy, or Fortunate, when in his Region he exhibites signs that be
auspicious, that is, if there be a Star, or a Doubled Cross, Parallel lines,
or a Line decently drawn from the vital to his Tuberculum, etc. For, thus he
signifies Men that are Noble, Glorious, Honest, Benevolent, Affable,
Honorable, Merry, Renowned, Neat, Just and Equitable, Beautiful, Formidable,
and Happy, such as have comely Eyes, thick hairs, and a Grave Gesture;
likewise such as be shamefast, and keepers of their Promises.

These Men are preferred to great Dignities, and solicited by the Conversations
of Great Men, etc. and do highly favor and esteem of their Wives, Sons,
honest and good Men, etc. In a Man Jupiter has the Liver, Blood, and Ribs,
the Lungs and Gristles.

But if he be unhappy, he oft-times throws a man headlong from a great estate,
to calamities: If there be half a Grid-iron in his Tuberculum, it betokens
losses, especially by means of the more potent sort of Women: otherwise (thus
constituted) he occasioneth Griefs of the Heart, the Crampe, Inflammation of
the Lungs, and other Diseases proceeding from wind. If a Line transversely cut
his Tuberculum, and afterward tend to the place of Saturn, making there
little hayrs, it threatens the Apoplexy.

But if you find a Cross especially, or a clear, and red Star in his
Tuberculum, he premonstrates splendid Honors, conferres Riches, and Public
Rewards from Princes, or other great Personages.

XIIII. SATVRNE.
Saturn is happily Placed, when we find his Line wholly running to his
Region: But less happy, when he presents some inauspicious Characters:
unhappily, if he show confused, and unfortunate Signs. He governes the
Spleen, Bones, and Bladders. When he is Fortunate he makes Men silent,
Provident, of good, and profound Counsels: such as Muse much, and are somewhat
sorrowful; Men that are puffed up with a silent spirit, and whose aim is at
Honors. And these are slender of Body, somewhat tall, pale and feeble, their
hair blackish, Eyes hollow: they are fortunate in tilling of ground, and in
mettalls of all sorts, yet more careless of their Wives, and less addicted to
Venery; foolishly laughing, and jeasting: tenacious also, and more worldly then
is fitting or just, etc.

But if Saturn be Unfortunate and Froward, he makes Men Sorrowful,
Laborious, Sordid, Humble, Covetous, Unfaithful, Liars, Luck-lesse, Malicious,
incumbered and oppressed with perpetual Griefs and Anxieties: Thus also he
afflicts with dangerous Diseases, Catharres, Coughs, Melancholy, and
Hypocondriacall infirmities; The Dropsy, Gowte, Falling Sickness, Hectique and
Quartane Fevers: He likewise occasioneth Imprisonment, Falls from Houses, and
endangering of life by Waters. A gross line running from the Intervall of the
Middle and Forefinger, to the Mensall, and breaking or interrupting it,
denotes Diseases or wounds in the lower part of the Belly.

XV. SOL.
IF the Sun do Fortunately Rule; he makes Men faithful, ingenious, Honored,
Highminded, Wise, Humane, Religious, Just, Moderate, Aged, and such as always
manage their affairs honestly.

He gives a Body well composed, and adornes it with yellow hair. He governes
the Heart, the Midriffe, and Nerves.

But if Infortunately, Men that are proud, and highly elated, manifesting their
access to dignities by unjust means, boasters, and immodest. He brings
Fluxes of Rhume upon the Eyes, and thereby hurt both to them and the Mouth,
trembling of the Heart, Syncope, etc.

The Via Solis, being cheerful of color, signifyes honors in political
affairs, the favor and grace of Princes: But if (on the contrary) it be
Confused, and Unfortunate, it obstructeth Honors, and intimates the wrath, and
hatred of Princes.

XVI. LVNA.
THe Moon, happy, makes Men famous, honest, honorable, and of a great body;
yet well proportioned, pleasant also, and willingly journeying by Sea, and
walking by the Sides of Rivers. But if any ways dissenting in the rest,
unconstant both in Life and Actions, yet tending (for the most part) to the
best.

She Rules the Brain, the Stomach, and Belly.

But if Unfortunate, she portends a various, and inconstant kind of life,
weakness, and an increase of Griefs and Anxieties: she (thus) occasions the
Paralysis, a commotion of the Members, oftentimes an Epilepsy and Canker, Spots
of the body, cruel Colliques, and whatever else proceeds from abundance of
Cold, and Moisture: and this the rather when the Lines found in the Tuberculum
of the Moon do appear very pale. If there be Fair and Comely Signatures
near the Ferient, they premonstrate Happiness to the Man in his journeys, and
Messages; and in Foreign Countries: to the Woman felicity, and fertility in
bearing of Children. Ominous signs do show the contrary.

XVII. MERCVRY.
MErcury, Happy, and Fortunate, makes Men ingenious, desireous of Sciences, and
seeking diligently after secrets, such as be apt for any thing; Orators, Poets,
Eloquent, Crafty, Variable, and ready to learn any thing, Mathematicians,
Arithmeticians, and Men addicted to Merchandise, etc.

He governes the Tongue and Memory, etc.

If he be Unhappy, he denotes Men full of Levity, Liars, Pratlers, Thieves,
Cheats, unconstant, Faithless, Traitors, etc. He suscitates dry Diseases,
Madness, Fury, and acute Fevers, according as the rest shall assist him.

But forasmuch as he very seldom yields the Rule to one Planet only, (the
Familiarity of Two, Three, or Four often concurring) we ought to proceed
very warily in finding out their Decrees: For, to collect and dispose the
Mixtures of the Planets rightly, is, a thing very hard to be done, especially
of those who are but slenderly excited: because such Mixtures are almost
inscrutable, in respect of the general influence of the Heavens.

Nevertheless, the Work is sooner effected, where the Lines and Signatures
are Fair and clear: but if they be obscure, the judgment is more intricate.

XVIII. The Mensa, or Place of Fortune.
1. THis space being Great, and Broad, and the Figure Decent, declares a
liberal Man, magnanimous and long-lived.

2. But if small, and narrow, it argues a slender fortune, Niggardize, and
Fearfulness.

3. A Cross or star within it, clear, and well proportioned, especially
under the Region of the Ring finger, betokens Honors, and Dignities, to
ensue; from, or by means of great and noble Personages: If the character of
Jupiter, it promises notable Dignities Ecclesiastical.

4. The same Cross, or Star Tripled, excellently increases the Portents of
good fortune: but if it be cut by confused little Lines, the good fortune is
thereby diverted, and Anxieties and Labors threatened, in defending his Honors,
especially if they be under the Region of the Ring finger.

A Cross, or star in the uttermost part of the Mensa, is a sign of
Fortunate Journeys.

6. The Mensa sharpened by the concurse of the Thorall and Cardiaque Lines,
point out Deceipts, and danger of Life.

7. If no Mensa be found in the Hand, it shows obscurity both of Life and
Fortune.

8. Good and equal Lines in this Space, do speak the Fortune good: but if
evil and incomposed, they quite overthrow it.

9. A little Circle, shows Perfection of wit, and Sciences, the rest Assenting.

XIX. The Pollex, or Thumb.
OVerthwart Lines, that be Clear and Long, underneath the Nail and Joint of
the Thumb, confer Riches, and Honors.

A Line passing from the upper Joint of the Thumb, to the Cardiaca, threatens
a violent Death, or Danger by the Means of some Married Woman.

Lines every where dispersed in the Lower-joint of the Thumb, describe Men
that be contentious, and such as rejoice in Brawling and Scolding.

A Line surrounding the Thumb, in the Middle-joynt, portends the Man shall be
hanged: Equal Furrows drawn under the Lower-joynt thereof, argue Riches and
Possessions. If the first and second joint want Incisures, it is a token of
Drowsinesse and Idleness.

XX. The Index or Forefinger.
MAny Lines in the uppermost Joint, and they proceeding overthwartly denote
Inheritances, but running so in the Midle-joynt, an Envious and evil Disposed
Person.

Right Lines running betwixt those Joints, declare (in Women) a Numerous Issue;
In Men Bitterness of the Tongue. If they be in the First joint, near unto
Jupiters Mount, they manifest a Joviall Disposition; that is, they point out
the Man, whom Jupiter favored well in his Geniture.

That Woman who has a Star in the same Place, may safely be Pronounced
unchaste, and Lascivious.

XXI. Medius, or the Midle-Finger.
THis Finger, presenting little Grid-irons in the Joints thereof, plainly
declares, an unhappy, and Melancholy wit: but if Equal Lines, it manifests
Fortune in the veins of Mettalls.

A Star there, presages a violent Death, by drowning or Witchcraft, etc. If a
Gross Line be extended from the Root thereof upwards through the whole
Finger, unto the end of the last joint, it argues Folly and Madness.

XXII. Annularis, or the Ring-finger.
A Line rising from the Mons Solis, and ascending by a Right Tract through the
joints thereof, is an Argument of Noble Fame.

Equal Lines in the First Joint, premonstrate Honors and Riches:
overthwart-Lynes, the Enmity of Princes; Howbeit, if these Lines shall seem to
be Intersected, it is the better, because they argue impediments.

XXIII. Auricularis, or the Litle-finger.
FRom the Joints hereof, as from the Mount it self, are Judgments and Decrees
passed concerning Merchandise, and Favors.

A Star in the First Joint near the Tuberculum, argues Ingenuity and
Eloquence.

Other Obtuse Signs, the Contrary: But when there appear Unfortunate Signs
in the First and Second Joint, they Mark out a Thief, and a very deceitful
person: If Adverse Lines in the last Joint, perpetual Inconstancy.

Some there are, who predict the Number of Wives from the little Lines in the
Mons Mercurii, at the outmost part of the Hand: and I have often observed them
hit the Truth; but yet I will not boldly confirm any thing, in this respect,
because it properly appertains to Venus, and her Disposition.

If the End of this Finger, reach not so far as to touch the last Joint of
the Ring Finger, it signifyes a Wife most Imperious in all things: The Truth
thereof may be approved, almost, in any Body.

Two Observations, touching the Mounts and Fingers.
1. AS the Mounts adorned with good Figures, and Characters do carry a good and
happy Omen: so likewise being vitiated with confused and unhandsome Lines, they
evermore bode the contrary, and this as well on the Fingers as Mounts, unless
they be restrained by the Confederacy of other Lines that be good.

2. Chiromancers do Teach and Affirm, That the First Joint near the Mount of
the Finger, must be attributed to the First Age: The Second to the Flourishing
Estate of Age; And the last unto Old Age. The Marks found according to the
Nature of the Planets, we have already ^^^^ined; concerning which
(notwithstanding we have formerly admonished it) it is our Opinion, that the
Directions, or Progressions of the Principal places in every Geniture, do in
due times, manifest their respective Marks and Characters, whether Fortunate
or Unfortunate.

The Special Practice of Chiromancy, and its Genethliacall Concordancy, in 19.
Examples.
I Have Read in Authors, That the Characters of Places, and the Faces of Lines,
are represented according to the Position and Habitude of the Predominating
Planets, in every Geniture: And I found it so: Nor shall I (anon) deny it
verifyed in my own: But met with none that had ever brought Examples, or
Collected any thing of this Nature. Whereupon, I, more Ardently endeavored to
make Trial thereof my self, That so the Truth, and Excellency of this
Science, might (both with me and other^ remain fully approved of and
certain, (...) having observed one, and another Example, manifesting their
Concordancy, by a more Covetous, and diligent search, I quickly found the like
Harmony in diverse others, Nineteen whereof ( Ingenious Reader) I now expose to
thy view: Read, Understand, and Judge. As for the Ignorant, let him either
Learn, or be Silent: And for the Envious, God send him his Health, and let him
upbraide where he pleases.

Example I.
One borne at Uratislavia, in the Year of Christ, 1567. August 17. Hor. 12.
10. in the Afternoon.
HE is promised Long-Life, and seldom to be Troubled with Diseases: His
Complexion (for the most part) Phlegmatique.

Mercury Angular, and in his own House, denotes his Ingenuity.

The Mid-heaven, Irradiated, by the Trine of Jupiter, an Affluence of Joyful,
and easily-Attained Honors, without Impediments.

Mars in the 12 and in the House of Mercury, whom he Afflicts by a Quartile,
obstructs his Muse, by Martial Men, especially: and such as are given to
Merchandise, etc.

Venus is excellently well and fortunatly Placed, for Marriage, and Plenty of
Children.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

We find an increase of Riches, by Marriage, so likewise from his own
Services, and Offices, honestly undertaken, on the behalf of others: No
Testimony of Imprisonment, or a violent Death: yet some Misfortune to be taken
heed of, proceeding, either by the means of Thieves, or by some of the Greater
sort of Beasts: Frequent Journeyings in his First, and Middle-Age, and those
Famous, Honorable, and Gainefull.

Now, if we Trace these things, by the Lineaments of the Hand, we shall find an
agreement.

1. For, in the first place, the Men's Veneris notably Furrowed, shows, that
Venus had the best Positure, in the Geniture. Hence we must gather the
significations of Venus, to complete the Judgment.

2. There are Three clear Lines, in the First Joint of the Little-finger,
which tell us the Dominion of Mercury: The like, the Triangle so aptly
described. Whence we conjecture a most Excellent Wit, and Commendable
Behavior.

3. The Sunn's Place has its little Lines not foolishly posited, which
contribute Honors: And the like does the Partile Sextile of Jupiter, and the
Sun who is Angular in the Geniture.

4. Saturn (by the Incisures of his Mount) shows Adversities, some Diseases:
yet those but Light and Easy.

5. The Breadth of the Mensa confirms the Liberality of Nature.

6. The Saturnia extending to the Epatica, shows an Honest Behavior, Good
Judgment, a Long Life.

7. The Mons I^vis decently adorned with Incisures, the Height of Honors.

8. The Cross near the Ferient, promises Happy, and Honorable Journeys:
otherwise the Region of the Moon, were here untilled.

9. The Cross in the Menta under the Annular, contributes Honors, and good
Fortune: But insomuch as it is Cut by the same, (being let down through the
Epatica) it threatens loss of House-hold-goods, in his Old Age.

To be short, the Principal Lines being endowed with the best conformity,
demonstrate strength in the Principal Members of the Body, as also appears by
the Geniture: For, it is not our purpose to draw, or examine all the Incisures
in General, especially the least of all, running through the Fingers or the
Restricta: we hold it sufficient, that we have Rightly applied the
significations of the Principal Lines and Characters, to the Planets and
Stars in the Geniture, and their Significations: so, that the rest may be
very well referred to the Readers own Ingenuity.

Example II.
Another borne ( Spurce puta) in the Country of Uratislavia, of Ignoble
Parents, in the Year 1590. Feb. 2. New style, Hor. 1. 30. Afternoon.
AS soon as I saw this Child (in my Travailes) I desired to know the time of
his Birth: For, he was hardly Four years old, and looked with an exceeding
Free and comely Face: And perceiving him Illegitimate, I did the more diligently
observe and describe the Lineaments of his Hand; And how exactly they Agree
with the Stars in his Geniture, shall be the next presented to our Enquiry.

We find Four or Five of the Planets excellently well dignifyed; in which
respect, it might fittly be called, A Regal Geniture. Venus her self is in
her Exaltation, and more then so, in mutual Reception with Jupiter, from
Houses. The like Reception there is betwixt Saturn and Mercury. Mars is in his
Triplicity, and very strong in that part of Heaven. Sol, Saturn, and Jupiter
make a Triangle, in Aerie Signs, and so does the Part of Fortune.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. They all premonstrate not only length of Life, and constancy of Health,
but also an absolute Wit, and a Mind that is Noble.

In his Hand you find an excellent Concinnity of Lines, and the places thereof
admirably well adorned [viz.] The Tubercula of Venus and Jupiter, then the
Tuberculum of Mercury, and lastly the Moon's: ye behold a conspicuous Sister
of Mars: whereby we may pronounce him a most Fortunate and Formidable Warrier.

2. Mercury enclines Him to all Manner of Sciences, and gives a Profound Wit.

3. The Region of Jupiter is Graced with his proper Character. So you see, in
the Geniture, the Great Dominion of Jupiter with the Virgins Spike, not without
the Reception of Venus.

4. In like manner the Tuberculum of Venus, beautifyed with convenient
Incisures. And therefore in describing the Genius of the Native, we must make
a Mixture of the significations of Mars, Venus, Jupiter, and Mercury.

5. Saturn letting down Three Little Lines from his Tuberculum, and therewith
cutting the Thorall, denounce Sickness in his Old Age, Poverty also and
Needinesse.

6. The Capaciousnesse of the Mensa, shows the Goodness of his Nature.

7. The Via Solis designs him to Honors, but (being touched by Diminutive
Lines) not without some slender Impediments.

8. The Line of Saturn Ascending (by a straight Path) even to the Middle
Finger, confirms the Excellency of the former Judgments.

9. The Ferient tells of Iourneys: And the like are signified in the Geniture,
by the Positure of the Moon in the West-Angle: so also by the Trine of Mercury
to Saturn, Lord of the Ninth House.

10. The Epatica (having a Breach in the End thereof) denotes a Change of the
Manner of his Life, in Old Age, etc. The Excellent Reception of the Planets
disposing of the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12th Houses, what further
concerns the State and Condition of the Native.

Example III.
The same Day and Year (abating but 12 hours and 30. Min.) A Female was Borne
in Turingia, where the Pole is elevated 51. Degr. 30. min.
IT will merit the Pains, if (in some sort) we compare the Discourse of the
former Hand, with this that follows.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. The Principal Lines, [viz. the Vital, Epatitica, and Thorall,] do almost
agree in their Site and Conformity: In the Less Principal you see a
Difference.

2. The Vital is thrice Cut. First, near the Restricta, which shows a
Disease about the 7th year of her Age: And although in Directions there
appear nothing suspicious, about that time: yet, in regard there are for the
most part some Dangers of Sickness, or Crazinesse in all Clymactericall
years, even when there happens no unlucky Progression of the Apheticall
places: you may conjecture a small Fever, some short and slender
distemperatures, the small Pox, or the like.

Another Section (conspicuous in the Middle of the same Line) Agrees with the
Direction of the Horoscope, to the Opposition of Saturn, which falls out about
the 32. Year of her Age; and brings with it a Disease very Dangerous.

The third Section must be referred to the 52. or 54 Year of her Age, the
Horoscope then coming to the Quartile of Mars: And this premonstrates Wounds,
or a Burning Disease in the Lower Parts of her Belly; Because it interrupteth
other Lines, through the Cavea of Mars. But dye she does not of this Disease,
in regard Venus Assists in the Geniture.

3. The Sister of Mars is wanting: But the Venereall Furrows are sufficiently
Eminent. Wherefore they portend Lasciviousness. The same is signified by the
Conjunction of Mars and Venus in Pisces, Mars being Lord of the Horoscope.

4. The Cephalica, here, excells; and therefore indues her with the more
Ingenuity. In the Geniture you see Mercury in the Third House (a Competent
place) in Reception and Aspect of Saturn himself: notwithstanding the
Tuberculum of Mercury scarce shows so much as one Incisure.

5. A Cross in the Moons Place, foretells of Fertility and Happiness in
Bearing of Children. And to this, Venus is fitted in the Geniture,
notwithstanding she has Mars in Conjunction with Her. Yet, seeing he
disposes of the 6th. House, it is to be feared, lest at some time he occasion
Danger in the Birth of a Boy.

6. The Place of Jupiter is also otherwise understood, then in the Preceding
Example. The Region of the Sun likewise favors in some measure. An Honorable
Life is seldom obtained by the more Generous sort of Women, unless by
Marriage.

7. The Line Arising in the very Middle of the Hand, and thence Ascending to the
Root of the Thorall beneath the Region of Mercury, by Discecting the Epatica;
points out an unfaithful Friend, which (in her Declining Age) should occasion
Loss, and Detriment, in her House-hould Goods, and Things.

8. The Epatica (Cut in the End thereof) bodes a deficiency of Wit in her Old
Age: The Cross there, is the Forerunner of some Good: The Reception of
Mercury and Saturn from Houses, in the Geniture, and they Dispositors of the
3, 4, and 8. Houses, a sign of Inheritance.

9. The Breadth of the Mensa is very Feate, and the Site of the Thorall comely,
and decent, which argue her Goodness of Nature, Readiness of Wit.

10. The Line of Saturn running in an Oblique Tract, from the Restricta, to
the Tuberculum of Saturn, does usually mark out such as be Laborious,
something Covetous and Hard.

But that the Lines of the Hands are not completely perfect, at the Hour of
the Nativity, this Example abundantly manifests. Moreover, seeing by this, it
is certain, That the Positure of the Planets in the Figure are of great
Authority; It necessarily follows, that the Lines especially the Less
Principal, do truly receive their clearer Conformity from the First Moment of
the Birth, in which the Infant begins to move its hands, and make, as it were,
to lay hold of, or Catch at things.

As touching the Principal Lines, there is no doubt but that they are Clearly
enough Engraven, at the very Instant of the Nativity: But that (in process of
time) there is an Access of some Incisures and Characters, Reason it self will
teach him, that shall make more Diligent Inspection into the hands of little
Infants. For, at first we find an obscure and subtle Draught of the Lines:
Afterward, (the thin, and tender skin being worn away, by the continual
Motion, and Bathing thereof) all the Lines grow Fairer and Brighter, every day
more then other: For then the virtue of the Stars, and the Sydereall Spirit,
(wherewith every one is Inspired) begin to perfect the Lines more Completely
(the Element of Water intervening.) Whatsoever is Generated in this World, is
Generated of Water, and the Spirit. And whosoever is not Regenerate of the
Water and Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdom of GOD, (as our Savior
speaks:) Water has a respect unto the Heart of Man, But the Spirit has
regard of the Divine Efficacy. Moreover, the Stars do first of all convey
their Influence through the Air, which is nearest the Nature of Fire, like as
is the Nature of the Stars themselves: whereby the Water it self, (that is
next to the Air in Situation) receives the Caelestiall virtue, and
Communicates it to the Earth, from which Communication, the Fecundity thereof
proceeds.

And this is evident in the Springtime, whilst things are Sprouting from the
Bosom of the Earth: For, if Showers be then wanting, they grow but slowly: and
the Increment they have is either by the vaprous Cold of Night, (the Image of
Humidity) or else the Nightly Dew, or both together, (the Heat of the Sun
assisting in the day time:) which being continued for some days, afterward
(when a Shower comes) you shall quickly perceive them Increased in a Moment:
because that now the Sydereall spirit enlivening them, renders it self more
Excellent then they, by its plentiful besprinkling of Moisture. The like is to
be understood of the Slender Skin upon the Hands.

You see also in the Plants themselves, how Rude their Leaves be, when First
they peep out of the Earth, in respect of the Lineaments, and Pictures of
their Branches, (they are otherwise called Signatures:) which by little and
little show themselves more plain and openly to our view. The like we must
judge of the Lines, or Incisures of the Hands, which hold the like Analogy and
Proportion in the Manifestation of their Signatures. Whereby it appears, How
Great the Works of GOD are: He has put these signs in the Hand of all Men,
that every one also might hereby acknowledge his Works past finding out, as
Job says, Chap. 37. v. 7.

Nevertheless, there are some, (both Divines and Philosophers) who account it
a Heinous thing of us, that we wrest this saying of Jobs to Chiromancy: But
that we may Briefly satisfy such, we will examine the meaning thereof more
fully.

The Text there, runs thus:
V. 5. God will Thunder Marvellously with his Voice, who does Great and
Inscrutable things. V. 6. Who commands the Snow to fall upon the Earth, so
likewise the Winter showers, and the Rain of his Strength. V. 7. Who has
placed Signs in the Hand of every Man, that all Men may know His Work. V. 8.
The Beast enters into his Covert, and remains in his Den.


IN the Beginning of the Chapter, you have, as it were, certain Praeludiums to
a following Proposition, laid down in the 5. Verse: For thus he says, Jehovah
Thundreth, or speaks Loud in his Works, That they may be Great and
Inscrutable. The Examples of the Proposition follow in the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

He makes (says He) the Snow to Descend like Wool, as the Psalmist adds.
The Reasons of the Generation of Snow, are indeed speciously delivered amongst
the Peripatetiques: yet if you Reduce them to a Level, they will by no means
stand, but terminate in Dotage.

Another Example of the Proposition, you have in the 7th Verse, GOD Signeth all
men ^n their hands, That every one might know his work, that is, Those Lines
were not made there by Chance.

The Hebrew Version verbatim: He shall Sign all Men in the Hand, that every
man may know his Work.

The 70. Interpreters. He marketh all men in the Hand, that every Man may know
his Infirmity.

S. Hierome. He has placed Signs in the Hand of all Men, that every one may
know his works.

The Chaldee Translation. He makes Signs in the Hand of all the Sons of
Men, that all the Sons of Men might know their Work.

These we wholly apply to the Lines of the Hands, because that every Man
beholds them daily, but seldom knows what they signify unto him. You have in
each an Universal Particle, and therefore no Man is Excluded: which very thing
Refutes the Translation of some, who Read [That every one might know his
Worke-men:] But there are many Thousands of Men Living, that have no Workmen,
at all, who Earne their Bread with the Labors of their own Hands.

Besides, To know their Worke-men, is, not a Great and Inscrutable Work, but
altogether such a One, as every common Rustique daily is capable of.

And therefore that version wholly dissents from the Proposition.

Object. But now ye may Object, That if the Disposition, and Draught of the
Lines of the Hands be an Inscrutable Work, then nothing of Certainty can be
pronounced as touching their Decrees and Significations: and therefore the
Science of Chiromancy will be Imperfect and Lame, or (if you please,) no
Science.

Solu. I Answer: All Sciences in this Life are Imperfect, and Lame, if ye
look upon the Force of Humane Wit: as the Apostle himself testifies. And
surely they were so made lest we should wax Proud, and Boast of our Wit, and of
those Sciences, but rather seek for the Absolute Perfection of all things in
GOD, who has reserved that Perfection for the World to come: yet therefore are
not those Sciences to be Despised, and utterly Rejected: But that the Mind of
an Ingenious Man might delight it self in them, because Sciences are the only
Food of the Mind.

We maintain also, that Chiromancy contains things that be Inscrutable, by
a Threefold Reason.

1. Because that in this Science, we cannot attain the Knowledge of all the
Particular and scrupulous Lineaments, so, as that we can explicate the Decrees
of every Incisure. And although many Particulars may be pronounced, yet are
they such Particulars as may not recede from the Number of Universalls: yet
when ye can or would pick out the Decrees of all the most Scrupulous
Incisures, there may be oft-times above An hundred Portents to be considered,
which is Impossible to be done. Therefore our knowledge hardly reaches to the
one half of this Science: In which respect the Sgnifications of all Particular
signs, are not Injuriously deemed Inscrutable.

2. Another Reason, is, for that the Position of these Lines, very much differs
in all Men's Hands: For, although you should observe A thousand, yet could you
not find any Two exactly agree in every Particular positure of their Lines.
And this Diversity proceeds from no other thing, Then The Soul of the World:
She it is that by her Spirit, from hour to hour, variously Disposes, Moves,
Animateth, Produces, Signeth, Sustaineth all things of this Inferior World:
This is it that Communicates to every Man, a certain Sydereall Spirit from the
seven Planets, and Twelve signs, by whose Rule and Instinct every thing (that
is it self,) exceedingly Profits; the Liberty of Will remaining. The Ancient
Philosophers called it, The Good Spirit, or Proper Genius of every one:
wherefore, if the finding out of these Signatures were not to all Men almost
Inscrutable, every one might easily find and know his own Genius, and what were
needful for him to do. But touching the Soul of the World, and the Spirit
thereof, I shall annex some things at the end of this Work.

3. Lastly, the Structure of the Hand it self, is admirable, in regard of the
Proportion it bears to the Face, and certain Parts thereof:

Which is this:

1. The whole Hand, is of Equal length with the Face.

2. The Greater Joint of the Forefinger (which adjoynes upon the Tuberculum of
Jupiter,) Equals the Height of the Forehead.

3. The other Two (to the Extremity of the Nail) are the just Length of the
Nose: [viz. from the Intercilia, or place betwixt the Eyebrowes, to the Tip of
the Nostrills.]

4. The First and Greater Joint of the Midle-Finger is so long as it is betwixt
the bottom of the Chin and the Top of the Under Lip.

5. But the Third Joint of the same Finger, is of equal length with the
distance that is betwixt the Mouth and the lower parts of the Nostrills.

6. The Greater Joint of the Thumb, gives the Wideness of the Mouth.

7. The Distance betwixt the Bottom of the Chin, and the Top of the Lower-lip,
the same.

8. The Lesser Joint of the Thumb, is equal to the Distance betwixt the Top
of the under-Lip, and the Lower part of the Nostrills. The Nails obtain the
just half of their respective uppermost Joints, which they call Onychios.

Now I suppose it well enough understood, what consideration is requisite to
the knowledge of the Hand, the Parts and Signatures thereof, which yet is
supposed but a small Particle of the Humane Body: But the cause of the
aforesaid Proportion, who can tell? verily therefore, Man is the work of GOD,
as the Hebrew translation has it, ( Ad verbum,) in the aforesaid Place of Job.

The third Example, proposed by Job, is, concerning Beasts that seek their
Denns, and leave them at their pleasure, not otherwise, then as if somebody
had taught them it. Whence it is manifest, Beasts do live indeed by sense, yet
not wholly destitute of some Reason: which very thing is proved also by other
Documents. But we may more Rightly attribute unto them, an Image or Proportion
of Humane Reason. Now the rest, I leave. Nor yet have I here said thus much, as
if without it this our Chiromancy could not stand. Let those to whom it is
acceptable, approve thereof; otherwise, let him it pleases not abound in his
own sense.

Example IV.
One Borne upon the River Rhene. A. C. 1546. January 6. Hor. 1. Min. 20. in the
Afternoon, the Pole Elevated almost 52. Degrees.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

The things considerable in this Example, are:

1. A Token of the Gowt, under the Finger of Saturn, whereof he was sick (by
Turns) for some years: notwithstanding, that Disease could not be foretold (
In specie) from any Characters. Mars Posited at the Geniture in Sagittary, and
in the 6. House, brings infallibly the Gowt* of which Positure, we have also
known other Examples.

The Girdle of Venus whole, yet Twice Intersected, is a palpable sign of
Intemperance, and of Beastly Behavior in venereall Actions, not without some
stain both in Name, and Repute, which he found by the Event. Consider, I
beseech you, Saturn in the 7th House, joined to Venus in a Quartile of the
Moon.

2. For, such a Conjunction produces Minds that be Impure, unless Jupiter
interposeth. He likewise denies Issue, and oft-times takes away the Children
given, or makes such as are to be borne Unfortunate.

3. The Triangle perfect; the Cephalica extended, by a Continued tract, to the
place of Mercury; and the Saturnia rightly touching the Natural Means; the
Place of Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus; And lastly, the via Lactea, not foolishly
formed, argue, A fortunate Man.

In the Geniture you may behold Saturn and Jupiter disposing of the 7th, 8th,
9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th, not without Reception of Houses: In which places,
you find all the Planets (Mars only excepted:) this Native therefore was most
Fortunate in such things as are subject to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter.

4. The two Parallel Lines conveniently drawn (in the form of a Ladder) from
the Region of Saturn and the Sun, to the Moons place, denote a prosperous and
constant fortune, in foreign Countries.

5. The Mons Lunae well and fairly depicted with convenient Incisures,
premonstrates Iourneys.

6. The Mensal Cutting the Mount of Jupiter, denotes Men that are full of
wrath: And so they are wont to be, for the most part in whose Nativities Mars
resideth in the 6.

7. The same Dissected, under the Finger of Saturn, by a short and thick Line,
threatens a Grievous Disease in the lower part of the Belly, and that in his
Old Age.

8. The vital broken, toward the end thereof, by a double Incisure, bodes
Diseases about the 52. or 54. year of his Age. At that time the Horoscope
comes (by Direction) to the 6. degree of Leo (the Terms of Saturn) very
Ominous, etc.

9. The Via Lactea adhering to the Dragons Tail, (another Cross accurring,)
speaks his Old Age to be full of Tranquillity.

10. The Cross in the Mensa, under the Solar Finger, designeth Honors, and
the Favor of Great Men.

It is not requisite to describe all that is signified by the Geniture, because
in the Disposition of the Planets, showed you before; all things are
comprehended: which Sydereall Face and Position, very seldom happens.

Example V.
One Borne in the year 1586. December. 9. New Style. Ho. 8. Min. 40. Before
noone, in the upper Lusatia.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

AS you see but a simple Concurse of Lines in the Hand: so the Places of the
Planets in the Geniture, are sufficiently dejected.

1. It Is true, Jupiter is accounted Angular, and in his Exaltation: yet is he
Retrograde; and by Calculation, not ( partily) found to be in the West
Horizon: He has not (as yet) adorned his Mount with any Lines; yet there, (in
the Geniture) he favors Marriage, and when he does so, the Lines that
shall arise in their due time, upon the Tuberculum of Jupiter, will manifest;
not without some other Prosperity.

2. Venus also, is hereunto fitted, as being in the Second House, yet adornes
her Tuberculum but slowly, because she is Peregrine.

3. This Child was sometimes afflicted with an Epilepsy: nor was he ever Cured
thereof: which Accident, whether it should be attributed to those little
Branches, arising from the Thorall, under the Region of Saturn; Or, to the
Conjunction of the Thorall with the Epatica, by that little clear Incisure, I
cannot determine. It Is hardly possible, to find the signs of all Accidents, in
the Hands: And I confess, I have not, here, so Accurately distributed the
Lines of the Fingers: for that in Children we can very seldom perceive their
Delineations plainly.

Indeed, in the Geniture, the Conjunction of the Luminaries, is Unfortunate;
because the Brain is thereby much weakened, and greatly bereft of the Animal
Spirit.

By how much nearer their Conjunction is, by so much more evidently do we
find the Evils thence descending. I know that such are of a weak and simple
Ingenuity; almost continually Sick; but especially Afflicted with
Hypocondriacall Melancholy. Moreover, Saturn being here in Aries, augments
the Infirmities of the Head.

4. The Epatica, inclined toward the Restricta; (thereby making a
Narrow-Triangle,) Contracts his Wit, diminishes his Prudence: But withal it
renders him somewhat Covetous.

The Cephalicall decently drawn, helps the wit, in some measure.

In the Geniture, you find but slender Testimonies of Ingenuity; for Mercury
in Sagitary, nigh to the Sun, is altogether weak: The Moon is hardly a Days
Journey from the Sun: The Horoscope also not Irradiated by either Jupiter, and
Saturn Annular, are the only Assistants.

The Line passing by the Vital, to that Concave of Mars, and there Erecting a
Cross, with he dimidiate Line of Saturn; betokens wounds, and dangers of
Life, by the means of Thieves, etc.

The same is rightly manifested by Mars in the Geniture, he being then in the
Cuspe of the 9. House, because of his North Latitude; and in Quartile to the
Sun and Mercury.

The Conjunction of the Thorall and Epatica, by the small Intervening Line,
confirms this Judgment.

The aforesaid Cross in the Concave of Mars, threatens Fevers, and other
Diseases of his Nature, etc.

Now it sufficiently appears, that the Abject Concurse of the Stars in the
Nativity, do agree with the Rude Draught of the Lines in the Hands: which very
thing I have elsewhere also observed.

Another Borne in Thuringia, in the year of Christ, 1585. June 26. half an
hour before noone.
IN which Geniture, Saturn falls in the 7th House, in Aries; Jupiter in the
9th in the beginning of Gemini; The Sun in the 10th in Cancer, and in
Conjunction with Mercury, who is Retrograde and in Square of Saturn: Mars in
Virgo possesses the 12th House, the Moon in Scorpio, the Second, Venus being
Retrograde in Leo.

This Positure, as it is the most dejected, so found I the Lineaments of his
hand accordingly Unfortunate.

For first, the Vital is Dissected by a part of the Cephalica, not touching
the Cavity of the Hand. And I beheld (as it were) some Ruder Lines not only
here and there projected from the Cephalica through the Ferient, but they also
broken one by another, near to the Place of the Moon. Moreover, in the
Concave it self, or rather under the Tuberculum of Saturn, then the Sunns; a
certain Star adheres to the Epatica, casting a Cleft through the Mensa upon
the Thorall Line, under the Region of Saturn, etc. These Signatures bring not
only Infelicity, but shorten the Life. The same you may collect from the
Geniture it self. The Horoscope comes by Direction to the Opposition of
Saturn, about the 15. year of his Age, designing a Deadly Disease.

Example VI.
The Brother of the former Borne in the year 1588. December 17. ( New Style,)
at 5. in the Morning.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. MArs (Lord of the Horoscope) received of Venus from Houses, (yet they
dejected) ingenders Lust, and Incontinency. You see the Region of Venus how
evidently it is adorned with Furrows, a Cross being posited in the upper part
thereof: which oftentimes produces Adulteries.

2. Jupiter is partly collocated in the Mid-heaven, making a sufficiently
decent Triangle with Saturn and Mercury, in Earthly Signs. And therefore
Jupiter adorneth his Seat by the little Line, and the Cross annexed
thereunto: whence you may conjecture, that this Planet has greatest Dominion
over the Native. His Significations may be collected from what has been said
before, yet more Remisly, because he is in his Detriment.

3. Saturn (in Conjunction with the Moon;) is Lord of the Geniture, and this
by a double Proportion in respect of Jupiter. And therefore you see the
Saturnia whole and Entire, and which is more, a Sister annexed thereunto, the
same extending beyond the Thorall by a decent Tract.

4. Although that from Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, there be something (of Wit)
demonstrated: yet you may see the Cephalica drawn to the Taberculum of
Mercury; and the Auricular bearing a small Line, which is clear enough, and
running through the Joint it self.

Mercury in the Geniture, in Capricorn, promotes the Wit exceedingly, (and so
he does when he is in Aquarius and Libra, in which Signs Saturn
predominates.) The like is declared by the Trine of Jupiter, and also the
Sextile of Mars and Mercury: But the Quartile of Mars afflicts Mercury,
obstructing the At^ainement of Honors.

5. The Moon is excellently well-Posited in Taurus, and in Trine to the Sun;
but yet in the Cuspe of the sixth, and therefore Two little Clear Lines adorn
the Ferient, assuring an Increase of Honorable Journeyes.

6. The Via Solis whole, and equally drawn, promises the Favor of Noble Men,
and Joyful Honors. The Dignities foreseen by the Geniture will come by the
Excellent knowledge of Learning, and from such things as are dedicated to
Mercury: The Position of the Sun in Capricorn, brings something peculiar to
all manner of Affairs.

7. The Mensa it self of a large Capacity, confirms the former
significations. A Cross there troubling the Saturnia, shows some Misfortune to
descend from the Malice of Saturn. The Opposition of Venus and Saturn, is not
only adverse to Matrimony, but also usually wont to deny Issue.

8. The Thorall emitting little Branches toward the Ferient, does sometimes
presage Poverty. Thus (we hope) both the Lines of this Hand, and the
significations of the Geniture, have been sufficiently examined.

Example VII.
The Brother of the former Borne in the year of Christ 1590. December 30. (
New Style) Ho. 4. min. 30. in the Morning.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. THe Genius of this Native depends upon Mercury, Venus, Saturn and Jupiter,
because you see their places handsomely adorned, and the Lines wholly produced.
And although Mercury exhibites no Character on his Taberculum, save only a
little Line: yet the Cephalica, drawn by a direct Path, even to his Tuberculum,
universally gives his Decrees. Hence do appear the Endowments of a Ready wit,
a Happiness to Eloquence, and other Ingenious Arts: whereof before in its
proper Place.

2. Although the Sun be (here) in Capricorn, (as in the precedent Geniture)
yet appears there no Via Solis in the Hand: In which respect the Favor of
Princes shall not so easily be gained by this as the former Native, who has
Jupiter himself partly constituted in the Mid-heaven. Nevertheless, the
Cephalica shows, that this Native shall happily Manage great Affairs.

3. The same is promised by the Conspicuous Star in the Mount of Jupiter. The
Line running (as you see) from the Vital to the Mount of Jupiter, has very
often manifested to me the Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter in the Genitures,
especially when it passes through the Vital, and the Temple of Venus, as you
see it does, in the two following Examples, and in the 17th, therefore Jupiter
is excellently well placed, he being Direct in Motion, and nigh to the
Southern Lance of Libra, beholding the Mid-heaven by a Sextile,
notwithstanding he be in a Dejected House of the Heavens.

4. The Moon affords but slender signification, because she is not as yet come
to a Sextile of the Sun. The Ferient presents but one Line, and that is
attributed to short journeyes.

5. The Mensall projects little Branches toward the Ferient, as in the former
Example.

6. Concerning the Portents of Saturn, which are yet more Obscure, we say
nothing. For, seeing he is Retrograde in the 8. House, (although in his
Triplicity) his Condition is but Indifferent: he afflicts Venus more by his
Opposition, then he does Mercury, in that he is Extremely Adverse the Nature of
Venus. As to their Opposition, we have but newly spoke.

7. The Mensa it self has a due and simple proportion, whereby the goodness
of Wit, Temperament and Behavior is confirmed.

8. The little Line posited in the Intervall of the Index and Medius, is
Unfortunate, and points out a Wound in the lower part of the Belly.

9. The Vital vitiated near the Beginning thereof by an Incisure, bodes a
Disease in his Infancy. And he was accordingly seized on, by an absolute
Phrenzy, at the middle of the Spring, in the year 1593. Yet happily escaped it
without the Application of any Remedies, Corruption flowing abundantly from one
of his Ears.

Hereupon we thought him Reserved for greater matters. The same vital
discected by the Intervening of a Line descending from the Region of Saturn,
theatens a most dangerous Disease, of the Nature of Saturn: and this about the
40th year of his Age: you see also the Horoscope it self comes (at that time)
by Direction, to the Opposition of Saturn. This thing (as also elsewhere) we
can scarce sufficiently admire. Mercury Lord of the 8th (the House of Death) is
found in his Detriment, hostility Afflicted of Saturn himself: which denotes
a Fall from some High-Place, Drowning, Poison, Plague, etc. Venus interposing
her self mitigates, and Abates of the Evil, in some sort, but takes it not
wholly away.

Example VIII.
A certain Man Borne on the Confines of Bohemia, in the year of Christ 1588.
the 8th day of November (New style) at 8 a Clock, 45. Min. 40. Sec. in the
afternoon: the Latitude of the Place 50. Degr. 30. Min.
THis Gentiture is Fortunate, as are also the Lineaments of the Hand.

1. The Moon Partilly Posited in the Horoscope, in Trine of Mercury,
demonstrates an Excellent Wit: so also the Reception of Mercury and Mars, from
Houses. The like Venus being Angular, and in her own House: And Lastly the
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the House of Mercury, they imbraceing the
Moon by a Sextile. The like is signified by the Cephalica, extending it self
to the Tuberculum of Mercury: so likewise by the Finger and Tuberculum of
Mercury, they exhibiting not undecent little Lines. Herewith agrees the Mensa it
self, and those very fair Characters in the Places of Jupiter, Venus, and the
Sun.

2. Venus is conspicuous in her Furrows as being Angular (at the Birth) in her
own House.

3. The Trine of the Sun and Mercury, (in Watery-signes) to the Cuspe of the
South-Angle, and Horoscope it self (where we meet with the Moon, and also
the Part of Fortune) Salutes him with Honors, and wished for success of all
things. Such a Trine is seldom met with. It promotes a Prosperous Fortune.
Unto these let be added Venus Angular in Libra, etc. The Regions of the Sun,
Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon, are excellently Beautified in the Hand: And a
double Triangle therein wonderfully accurring: one of which is formed of the
Vital, Epatique, and Cephalique Lines: The other, by the Cephalique, Mensall,
and Vital, if you add the Little Line of the Vital, which runs thence to the
Tuberculum of Jupiter.

The Two Parallel Rules assist notably in Point of Marriage, Honors, Ingenuity
and Affairs: One of which is made by the Line that passes from the Intervall
of the Index and Medius, to the Mensall, touching the same, below the Intervall
of the Medius and Annular; and thence Protracted to the Intervall of the
Auricular and Annular; (some by such a Line Prophesy Incest,) the other from
the Line falling from the Pollex, upon the Middle of the Vital, and running
thence by a Right Angle through the Cavity of the Hand, to the Natural Mean.
All these things do plainly presage a most Excellent Man in all manner of
Sciences, especially the Mathematics. And this very same judgment, manifestly
arises from the Geniture, by the situation of Mercury in Scorpio, the Positure
of the Moon in the Horoscope, in her own house, and the Trine of Mercury:
Lastly, by the Reception of Houses betwixt Mars, and Mercury Besides, the
Sextile of Mars and Mercury etc. argues Celerity: the which are so manifest to
the Intelligent, they cannot be looked upon and conferred without Admiration.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

5. The Region of the Moon, presenting a very Clear Line, betokens
Journeys: the Moon Angular, in a moveable sign, the same: so also Mercury
Received of Mars, Lord of the Third.

6. The Vital, and that Line which Runs from the Tuberculum of Saturn through
the Hand, unto the Region of the Moon, do seem to resemble a Skale, or
Ladder, of an Excellent Bigness, and that by a Notable tract: In which Skale
are every where found Transverse Lines, requisite to the Shape thereof. This
presages a wonderful and formidable tract of Dignities, but not without Great
Envy.

7. As touching Riches, what need we say more? There are no Dignities, no
Kingly and magnificent Affairs, wherein an Affluence of all things is wanting.
Venus Centrally in the 4. House, contributes Honorable Possessions in his Old
Age, and no little Fame after his Death: you see how her Taberculum even
Luxuriates with accustomed Incisures.

8. The Vital diversely Cut, concerns no small or Light Infirmities. In the
5th year of his Age, he was sick of the small Pox. The rest you may judge to
fall out in the 11, 21, 25, and 43 Years of his Age, or thereabout.

9. Moreover, Saturn projecting (in his Region) an Incisure, through the
Mensall, bodes a Disease in the lower part of the Belly: (I suppose the Stone
in the Bladder, etc.) As therefore this Geniture of it self, is happy; so are
likewise the Lineaments of his Hand, and the Convenience in the Lines
themselves, which was to be Proved.

Example IX.
One Borne in the Year of Christ, 1551. The 8th day of March, at 9. a Clock
and 30 Min. before Noone, where the Elevation of the Pole is 51. degr. in
Silesia.
WE observe the Right Hand of this Person, because that therein we perceived
the Lines most Clear, according to our former Annotation: we have also made
Proof thereof in other Examples, yet oft-times found a certain Diversity (as
before we have said) we must not every where repeat this same thing, which
makes so little to the purpose. First, let us see the Practice, and thoroughly
enquire its wonderful Agreement with the Genitures themselves.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. The Line of Life conspicuous with Incisures, as it were some little Hairs,
portends no small Diseases: the like Saturn cutting the Thorall with Four
Incisures: whereby he also foreshewes Four more Grievous Infirmities
proceeding from his Nature. The First of which befalls the Native about the 21.
year of his Age, by a sudden Catharre upon his Breast and Lungs, not without
some strangling, and Difficulty of Breathing: the second in the 35 year of his
Age, by the means of a Poisoned Drink. But in regard he shall not wholly
Drink off the Cup, at one draught* (because of some Nauseous thing appearing
the Deadly dregs is left in the Bottom: yet hurts it him something. But by the
Help of a Physician the strength of the Poison is easily Compressed. If you
take the Pains to Calculate, you will find that the Progression of the Sun
comes exactly then to the Quartile of Saturn. The Third we conjecture will be
in the 45. Year of his Age, or thereabout, the Horoscope then passing out of
Cancer into Leo. This Progression also is wont to bring a Change of Outward
Goods. The Fourth, we judge to fall out in the 54, or 55th year of his Age,
the Horoscope coming then by Direction to the 6th degr. of Leo: which degree
how greatly it threatens in Directions, we will more clearly explain to you,
elsewhere. But although this ensuing Disease may prove very Grievous; yet is it
not to be thought altogether deadly, because of Jupiters divolving himself to
the very degree of the Horoscope. Let him then take heed of a Quartan Fever,
the Plague or Pestilence.

Upon the Direction of the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, in the 13. or 14.
year; the Native fell into Hot-scalding-water, with the hurt of his Arm and
Breast. Now this accident we seek for in the Vital (yet not in Specie) where
we behold little Hairs. The Place of Mars according to the Calculation of
Copernicus has of North Latitude 2. degr. 10. min. wherefore his Oblique
Ascension is 62. degr. 50. min.

2. Jupiter conspicuous in his Tuberculum, with no unusual Incisures, shows
Dignities that be sufficiently Great (respect being had to the Place of his
Birth.) The like in that he is Collocated in the Cuspe of the Ascendent. We
have also elsewhere observed (from the Line of Mars drawn through the Vital,
to the Region of Jupiter) the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the Geniture.
Nor does the precedent Example very much dissent from the same.

3. The Sun is not ill placed near to Venus in Pisces: you see therefore in
his Mount a little Line that is clear enough.

4. The Region of Venus adorned with convenient Furrows, not only manifests
her good habit in the Geniture, but also presages some goodness to accrue by
the means of a Wife. The Sun therefore coming by Direction to the Sextiles of
Venus, greatly Enriched him by the Inheritance of a Wife, and this about the
41. year of his Age; in which we observed his Hand thus Delineated.

5. Jupiter and Mars arising together in the East, denotes Ingenuity: So
Mercury in Aries (thus remote from the Sun) a Ready Wit. Observe his Region,
and therein you shall find Three Parallel Incisures. The same you may
pronounce from other places, according to the former Precepts.

6. The Cephalica, and Via Lactea do hereunto both contribute, notwithstanding
they be of a shorter Extent.

7. The Region of the Moon is Incult, and quite destitute of Incisures, and
therefore wholly Silent; like as also she is in the Geniture, being scarcely
departed from the Sun above a days Journey.

8. The Restricta continued, and of a good Color, argues Riches, and a good
Crasis of the Body.

9. The Mensa very Broad, his goodness of Nature: And the like you shall find
by Jupiter in the Nativity.

10. The Natural Mean dissected by the Intervening of an Incisure, Heat, and
Grief of the Liver: the like from Mars, (next to Jupiter in the East) in an
Aerie Sign.

11. Saturn in the Cuspe of the 10th is (in some sort) averse to Dignities,
occasioning Envy, especially. He also exhibites (and that not vainly) an
Incisure under his Finger, arising from the Intervall of the Medius and Annular.

Thus also have we briefly demonstrated from this Geniture, the wonderful
Consent and Harmony of the present matter.

Example X.
Another Borne in the year 1588. the 8th day of February, at 4. hours and 30.
min. in the Evening, at Witeberge.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

WHat Familiarity there is in this Illustrious Example, shall be shown you in
brief.

1. The Dominion of the Geniture, rests chiefly in Jupiter and Mercury: Next in
Venus and Mars; yet not excluding Saturn, and the Moon. The Rule for finding
and constituting the Lord of the Geniture shall be explained in our
Astrologicall Commentaries: and that we will always follow, and do certainly
know we deviate not from the Truth. Now seeing that Jupiter, Mercury, the
Moon, and Saturn are all of them Angular; it must be of necessity, that these
are very conspicuous in their Mounts. Venus also, and Mars Luxuriate in no
Evil Conjunction.

2. This Geniture (therefore) is very fortunate, (except in those things that
concern Health:) For, Saturn is so adverse to Jupiter and the Moon, that
(almost perpetually) he suscitates Distillations upon the Breast and Liver.
Herewith agree the Intersected Lines in the Tuberculum of Saturn: Then the
Vital also and Epatica are on every side Assaulted by the Touch of other small
Lines. Whence I conclude that the more notable Assault of Diseases will happen
in the 30, 32, 36, 44, and 50th years of his Age, or thereabout.

3. The Position of all shows, a Great Wit, Eloquence in abundance, and a
Propensity to all Arts whatsoever: So many Parallel Lines, Crosses, and
Convenient Characters, there are every where found: But especially the
Cephalica Invading the Region of Mercury by a continued Martch: The Place of
Mercury, and the Auricular it self adorned with Lines and a double Cross:
Lastly, Jupiter, Venus, the Mensa, the perfect Triangle.

In the Geniture such things as appertain to the Ingenuity, are gathered from
the Positure of Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, etc.

4. The Cephalica doubled up to the Natural Mean, argues Craftiness and
Subtilty in Managing of Affairs.

5. The Star of Venus in its proper place, and thereon most clear Furrows,
denotes Lust. The three Incisures upon the Eminent part of her Tuberculum
premonstrate Good things to be obtained by Marriage. The same you have from the
Conjunction of Venus and Mars in Pisces, [to wit, a Venereall, and Ioviall
Signe] in a Sextile of Saturn, and Trine of the Moon: Venus in the second
house, and Jupiter in the 7. descending to the Head of the Twinns, do import
an Affluence of Riches by Marriage: Jupiter there, does also assure him victory
over all his Enemies.

6. Although the Sun be not excellently well Posited in the Geniture: yet
adornes he this Region in some Measure, by certain Little Lines: But they are
Cut, and do therefore Insinuate troubled Honors. Jupiter and Mercury promise
those that be more Joyful, and so does the Mensa, here and there offering a
Multiplied Cross.

7. The Saturnia drawn to the Natural Mean, in a clear Tract, and afterward
(by an Obscurer) to the place of Saturn, concerns the happy Issue of things: (
Saturn is here more adverse to His Health then Outward Fortune:) and this (in
the Geniture may be collected from Saturn, Angular; from the principal Rule
that Jupiter and Mercury challenge therein, and also from Venus and Mars, who
are joined in Pisces: which Congresse raises not easily to Fortune.

8. The Line rnnning from the Cavea of Mars, through the Saturnia, until it
attain the utmost part of the Hand (below the Region of the Moon) denounces
Long Iourneyes: So likewise the place of the Moon, which is signed with three
Parallel Incisures: The same Judgment arises from Mercury in the East Angle
of the Geniture: The Moon Angular, Saturn Lord of the Horoscope, (in the
Moons Exaltation,) and in the House of Venus (Lady of the 9th.) And Lastly,
from the Conjunction of Mars and Venus, Dispositors of the 9. and 3. Houses.

9. The Part of Fortune in the 8. insinuates Goods by Inheritance, as also such
as flow plentifully from his own Ingenuity and Arts. But yet Mars and Venus in
Opposition thereunto, pronounce a Profuseness through Pleasures and Luxury. I
conjecture the same Accession of Inheritance, from the Cross, and small Lines
in the uppermost Joint of the Thumb, below the Nail, etc.

10. Capricorn in the Ascendent, and Saturn in a Sign of the same Quality,
is an Argument of Long Life. The Epatica more then usually produced, the same.

11. This Figure does almost insinuate a Violent Death, either by Drowning or
otherwise being Ruined: Venus also promotes the Provocations of Immoderate
Lust: But because of Jupiter (who potently restraines Saturn) I shall Judge
the Primary cause of his Death, to be an Apoplexy, or Dropsy: Let him beware
of a Philtre in his youth. Saturn also so very much adverse the Moon, and
that from an Angle, threatens dangers of Imprisonment: Here the deceipts of
Venus are suspected. Indeed there is a Braunching Character in the Mount of
Saturn, but it is Intersected by the Intervening of two small Lines.

12. The somewhat Bigger Cross in the utmost part of the Mensa, near the
Ferient, as also that Cross annexed to the end of the Epatica, toward the
Restricta, denote a plentiful Life in his Old Age, and Journies that be
prosperous.

13. That Line which from the Mensa is Recurved through the Epatica, and
Cephalica, until below the Ferient, and toward the Restricta, it become a
Semicircle, denotes Captivity, and secret Enemies: The like (as was said
before) appears by Saturn in the Geniture, who is therein Diametrically
Opposite to the Moon, and partily afflicting Jupiter (Lord of the 12. house)
by a square. You may therefore pronounce those Enmities to ensue in respect of
his Wit, the store of Sciences, and the Excellency of Dignities wherewith he
is endowed.

And now (we trust) we have sufficiently Explained and demonstrated what was
proposed.

Example XI.
Another borne at Angusta (a City of the Vandalls) in the year 1581. the 11.
day of May, at one of the Clock in the Morning.
1. ALthough Jupiter be in his Fall* and in a Dejected place of the Figure, yet
in that he assumes the Lordship of the Geniture, and is the first that receives
the Moon into his Imbracement, he leave not his Tuberculum untilled. Whosoever
thou be that art Addicted to Astrology, and would know the Principal Lord
of the Geniture: observe (above all others) that Planet which first Receives
the Moon (as before we have said) into Conjunction with him, and so powers
upon her his Celestial Moisture: which thing you shall understand more plainly
elsewhere.

2. Mercury participates in the Rule of the Geniture, (for that he Receives
the Moon) is collocated in his own House, and in a Good Place of the Figure:
the which he also signifies in his Mount, notwithstanding he is Retrograde.
Saturn in the Horoscope, in his own House, and Triplicity, augmenteth and
amplyfieth the Depth of his Wit.

3. Saturn partily Afflicting the Luminaries, by Malign Aspects, and from a
violent Sign, the Sun also not far distant from Palalitium, or the Bulls
Eye, (a malevolent Fixed Star) denounces a violent Death, or great danger
thereof: whereof the troubled Character upon the Region of Saturn is an
Argument: for thereon shall such Characters appear, either in some other
form, or else more Clearly, when the Evil approaches.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

4. We do judge the Integrity of Behavior from the Saturnia, terminating at
the Natural Mean. Venus in her own House, Irradiating the Moon by a Trine,
begets a Natural shamefastness, the which is seconded by Jupiter, who (as we
told you) has the Dominion in this Geniture: Mercury (if not Superior to
him,) is certainly his equal in Government.

5. The Tuberculum of the Sun presenting almost the Character of Saturn, is
not accounted very Fortunate, for that it betokens many Enemies, without
Cause, Envy accompaning. The Luminaries (so greatly infested of Saturn)
presage the same. As often as the Sun's Place bears the Greek Letter,, (so,
that the Line cutting that which is errected on his Tuberculum, descends from
the Intervall of the Auricular and Annular, the like whereof the Cingulum
Veneris usually describes;) you may most certainly adjudge Difficulty of
Businesses, through the Envy of Men.

6. Venus forming three little Clear Lines on her Mount, augments his Revenue
in some Measure, by the Means of a Wife, as is Clearly evinced by her Pos^ture
in the Second, with the Part of Fortune.

7. The Vital vitiated in three Places, by the Transite of three little Lines,
threatens three sufficiently Grievous Diseases, about the 32th. 40th and 45th
years of his Age. If you bring the Horoscope to the Quartile of Mars, and in
like manner the Moon to the Quartile of Mars and Saturn, you shall surely
produce the years before nominated.

Example XII.
The Brother of the former Borne A. C. 1583. 27. June; Ho. 11. Min. 30.
Afternoon.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

.1 THe Line of Life troubled by the Intervening of another, threatens a Disease
about the 20th year of his Age. And doubtless at that time the Direction of
the Horoscope comes to the Quartile of Mars: so likewise the Progression of the
Moon to Saturn himself: Howbeit this Direction (in regard of the presence of
Jupiter) is not much to be feared.

2. The Rule of the Geniture belongs to Saturn and Jupiter. Wherefore the
Tuberculum of Jupiter affords us overthwart little Lines: but the Tuberculum of
Saturn, a Star, until the Saturnia also Ascends.

3. You have likewise the Signatures of Mercury and Venus, in their own Places,
which are now Conjoined in Leo, the Conjunction being not to be despised,
although it be Platique.

4. The three little Lines collocated on the Ferient, insinuate Iournies; and
so does Mars Lord of the Horoscope (in the House of Mercury) and the Sun in
Cancer.

5. The Cross in the Cavea of Mars, increases his Martial Disposition, and
the Heat of the Liver.

6. The Suns Place presenting a Cleft, increases his Honors but slowly. In the
Geniture, the Decrees of Dignities are obscure: yet the Sun is Angular with the
Heads of the Twins.

7. The Saturnia being whole, promises a Happy success of Events and Actions,
and so does the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Dispositors of the 8, 9,
10, 11, and 12. Houses.

Example XIII.
A Brother of both the two last Borne A. C. 1577. Nov. 7. Ho. 3. Min. 12.
Afternoon.
This Third Example I lately got at Ritispone.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. THe Saturnia whole, although obliquely drawn to its proper Seat, shows,
that Saturn is Lord of the Geniture. He descernes not absolutely an Adverse
Fortune, etc. (Hither transfer the rest of Saturnes Significations, from
their proper Place, when he is not Infortunatly posited.) Yet Saturn in the
Cuspe of the 10 perturbes the good Fortune of Venus and Jupiter, who share in
the Rule of this Geniture: Mars also in the West Angle, and there in a strange
Sign, denounces the same: which Mischiefs shall be Multiplied in his Old Age.

2. Venus (by reason of her North Latitude) Resides on the Cuspe of the 7th,
having the Moon joined with her, in regard of Her South Latitude. And
therefore their Place tells us of Lines, and Marks that be trim and handsome:
notwithstanding the Moon's more Remissely, in Regard that she (hasting to the
Sun,) is not Illustrated with Light sufficient.

3. Jupiter Direct, and in Conjunction with Venus near unto Spica Virginis,
adornes his Region with a Little Line that is Decent enough: But yet he is
oppressed of Saturn. We have often observed, that his Conjunction with Venus
has bestowed very Great Riches, by Marriage: wherewith here agree the
Condition of Venus and the Part of Fortune.

4. The Via solis shows it self in some sort a Friend unto Honors. That
Planet Angular, in Scorpio, and with the Scorpions Heart, must not be rejected.

5. Mercury Retrograde, in his Detriment, and in the Eight House, is accounted
very weak: (He is somewhat strengthened of Venus and Jupiter:) wherefore you
see (at this time) no signature to be found in his Region.

6. The Due Breadth of the Mensa, differs not much from this Habit of the
Stars.

7. The Cross above the Restricta, promises Tranquillity in his Old Age: But
the Saturnia denies it: But seeing that Cross is made of the Little Line,
which descends from the Vital, and the Region of Venus, look if it bring
not Misfortune and strifes by the Means of Wives, etc. The rest are left to
every Man's Discretion: Nevertheless, we must needs acknowledge, that All
Incisures are neither here, nor elsewhere scrupulously Delineated.

Example XIV.
One Borne at Thuringia A. C. 1586. December. 3. Ho. 7. Min. 30. Before Noone,
Lat. 51. Degrees.
WE have, before, in the 5th Example, almost the same Position: the Distance of
their Births is only 5. days. The Principal Lines do Agree in Situation and
Conformity: In the rest there is some (yet no very notable) difference.

1. The Vital is often Dissected about the End and Middle thereof:

Wherefore it denotes a Sickly Disposition, in his Old Age. The two little Lines
vitiating the same by their Transite, and Descending upon the Cavea of Mars,
manifest Martial Infirmities of the Body, about the 50. and 52. year of his
Age. Wounds also in the Head or Feet are then to be feared.

2. In like sort, Saturn letting fall a Line, Obliquely, from his Place, shall
at the same time besprinckle his Poison: wherefore that time shall be full of
Misfortunes. A Disease also must be expected about the 11th year of his Age,
because the Vital is there Marked by a touch of the Cephalica* the Horoscope
comes at that time to the Quartile of Mars.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

3. The track of the Cephalica, extended to the Mensall, argues a Ready Wit. In
the Geniture, Mercury is not unhappily posited in the Horoscope, in a Trine of
Saturn: But yet he possesses a strange sign, being likewise oppressed by the
Quartile of Mars: whence you see the Region of Mercury but slenderly Marked.

4. A Cross in the Cavea of Mars, betokens the Quality of Mars, and a Heat
of the Liver, Danger and Wounds in his Journeys. In the Figure, Mars afflicts
the Sun by a Quartile from the 9th House: the Moon is also in Square with
Saturn.

5. That Line which is almost Parallel to the vital, occasioneth many
unprofitable Journeys; because it is Decurt, and Tortuous. The two small Lines
also so conspicuous upon the Tuberculum of the Moon, concern Journeys. Mars
in the 9th in the House of Mercury: He in the First, and the Moon in a Moveable
Sign, in the Geniture, the same.

6. Venus and Jupiter do in some sort manifest their Bounty in their
respective Places: But in the 5th Example, the Mons Iovis is Incult. Yet
because he here shows his Assistance, from the New-moone, preceding the
Nativity, in Sagittary, it will doubtless Flow abundantly so soon as he gets
the Principal Dominion. Such a strength Jupiter had not before in the 5th
Example.

7. Furthermore, the Virgins Spike with the Dragons Head in the Cuspe of the
10th. And likewise Aquila it self now Rising in the East, do all of them
largely contribute Honors: the like does the Positure of the Sun, he being in
his Triplicity, and Angular: which gives the two little Lines on his Mount.

Example XV.
The Brother of the former Borne A. C. 1589. Apr. 24. at 4. in the Morning.
HEre we give you the different Faces of either Hand.

1. In his Right Hand the Epatica is visible, but passes not the Concave
thereof. And therefore it shows his shortness of Life: especially, because a
certain Line is transversly let fall from the Vital, to the end of the
Epatica, as it were interrupting the Progress thereof.

The vital of the Left Hand, receives a Line arising from the Tuberculum of
Saturn. The Place of the Vital, thereby touched and almost Broken,
appertains to the 25. year of his Age, or thereabout, wherein without Doubt
the Horoscope comes by Direction to the Body of Saturn. Indeed Venus is
present, but in a strange sign: whence the Native shall then very hardly
escape. The Oblique Ascension (...) Saturn is 54. degr. 36. Min. that is, the
5. (...) of Gemini.

2. In the Left Hand the Epatica is wanting, (...) Lines (almost Parallel) are
let fall (...) to the Mensall: which argue (...) and an evil composure
thereof: likewise a Pravity both of Wit and Behavior.

3. But although Venus (in the very Cuspe of the Horoscope) by reason of her
South Latitude, 1. degr. 12. min. does produce no slow Ingenuity: yet being in
the House of Mars, or a Foreign Sign, she will incline the Native to all
manner of wickedness, [Petulancy, Lasciviousness, Inconstancy, etc.] Mars
Lord of the Geniture (Venus participating) Afflicting Mercury (in Taurus and
Retrograde) by an Angular Opposition, the same. Therefore he denotes, or
rather makes him Contentious, Disobedient, violent, unfaithful, etc. All
which are manifestly seen by the Evil Disposition of the Lines in his Hand.

4. The Cephalica of the Left Hand, increases the strength of his Wit,
wherewith the Tuberculum of Mercury agrees, though slenderly, because it is
Marked with two Incisures, at the least, in the utmost part of his Hand. Venus
presents three sufficiently clear Incisures in her Region: the rest I found
Incult.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

5. Mars has a Sister appearing in the Right Hand; but none in the Left. This
begets wrath, and incites the Native to Warlike Arts, as to be an Engineer,
or a Gun-smith, making Warlike Arms and Instruments of all kinds: Only this,
when Mars is not Angular, and in his own House, you shall find no Effects of
him in the Hand: yet being Retrograde he possesses Men with unhappy Malice,
and threatens some Adversities, especially in Old Age. And therefore when he
neither shows a Proper Line in both Hands, nor exhibites in one a Line that is
decently drawn, you may safely adjudge his Decrees Imperfect, and less
Prosperous.

6. In the Left Hand, the vital is variously touched: wherefore number ye so
many Future Diseases, about the 7, 14, 25, 32, etc. year of his Age.

7. A treble Cross about the vital, by the Place of Mars, confirms the
Assistance of Mars: But in Uxorious matters, it argues Cross Fortune, and a
bad Belief. In the Nativity, Venus is shrewdly suspected for her Positure,
especially for that her Dispositor is resident in the West Angle.

8. The Saturnia descending by an unacustomed Path, plainly shows a Corrupt
Nature.

9. The same Line passing above the Restricta, to the Region of the Moon, is
also a Sign of Adversities, and secret Enemies. And verily there is almost
nothing observed in this Geniture, that disposes to a Prosperous Fortune.

10. The two Lines in the Tuberculum of the Moon, premonstrate Journeys: as
do also the Moon in the 9. and Mercury in the first House.

11. Jupiter is most dejectedly Collocated: yet has he adorned his seat with
a little Line. He makes a Triangle in Earthly Signs, the Moon shining by a
Sinister Aspect unto him the Sun and Mercury by a Dexter. Wherefore, he
asswageth and strangely declineth all Misfortune, especially such as appertain
to the Impediments of the Mind.

12. The Sun is Angular, and Rises exactly with the Pleiades, in a Trine to
Jupiter.

And therefore you see a small Cross under his Mount, notifying, that this Man
shall not altogether live obscure. This Diversity of Lines in the Hands,
flows from a troubled Imagination of the Macrocosme, as we shall show in its
due Place.

Example XVI.
One Born in Thuringia A. C. 1592. March 24. Ho. 3. Min. 11. Afternoon, the
Pole elevated 51. Degrees.
I Have here also put both the Hands; because in the Left Hand, the Thorall, or
Mensall, and some other Lesse-Principall Lines, appear with another Face, then
they do in the Right.

depiction of palm of hand with markings.

We will now consider of the Question formerly put at the beginning of this
Tract, [whether the Left or Right Hand is most commodiously to be assumed, that
thence we might frame a constant judgment; Or whether both Hands are to be
considered?] For, I find that both exhibit Lines that be clear enough:
Wherefore seeing that this Man was Borne by Night, whilst a Masculine Sign
Ascended, and when Jupiter (especially) and Venus had Dominion in the Geniture,
we cannot determine whether Hand should be Chosen: Because those testimonies
equally Contend. [A Masculine Sign Ascends: A Masculine Planet predominates:
The time of the Birth is Nocturnall, resembling the Female Sex: And Venus A
Planet of the same Sex participates in Dominion.] Wherefore (things standing
thus) we are forced to retain both, comparing them together. The former
Example requires the same Practice in Election of the Hand.

1. Venus is Rightly Placed in both Hands, because that each presents a Star
on her Region: which portends a most Libidinous Man, and such a one as may be
Impetuously hurried unto all manner of voluptuousness. So the same Planet does
also Luxuriate in the like Inclination, being excellently posited both in her
Exaltation, and in the Horoscope. Her Longitude is Calculated from the
Alphonsine Tables, as being the surest and best for finding of her Place.

2. In like manner, the Place of Jupiter appears in both Hands well-disposed:
even as he possesses his own House in the Geniture, and a good Place of the
Figure: For, the 11 house is called the joy of Jupiter: Both these Planets
administering the Geniture so Favorably, Import a Glorious and Lasting
Fortune; the Place of Saturn excepted:

3. For, he brings Captivity; yet not so heavily, because he is in Cancer, and
Disposing of the 12th. In the Right Hand he lets fall a Line beyond the Place
of Mars, the which grows Crooked toward the Ferient; but is more straight in
the Left Hand. The Progress of the Mid-heaven to the Opposition of Saturn,
Points out the 36 or 37 Year: At what time other Characters also, will appear
on his Tuberculum, which shall bode some Misfortune at Hand.

4. The Peregrination Line proceeding from the Cavea of Mars, toward the
Restricta; appears in the Left Hand: But in the Right it is Cut, and
conveighs it self to the Cephalica. Hence we gather a various Fortune in
Journeys. Venus Lady of the 9. House, and in the Horoscope, makes the Journeys
Prosperous: Mars in the third impugnes that Prosperity; but yet Venus
prevails: Mars so posited premonstrates great Strifes with Brethren and
Kindred.

5. The three Parallel Lines drawn from the Tuberculum of the Sun and Mercury,
to the Vital, promise him Fortune in his own Country, and this by the means
of Courtiers, Learned Men, and the Nobler sort of Women: which significations
are confirmed by the small Lines that are found in the Mensa of the Right Hand.
All which depend upon Jupiter, Venus and the Sun.

6. The Place of Mercury is not altogether Barren, and therefore he not
destitute of Ingenuity: Besides the Cephalica and Lords of the Geniture, are,
Assisting unto him.

7. The Mensall of the Right Hand, is extended by a continued Tract, to the
utmost part thereof: But in the Left it passes not the Tuberculum of Mercury:
wherefore, That, declares a strength of the Principal Members, or Genitalls;
This, some hurt or loss therein, especially in the Genitalls: But what that
hurt, or loss will be, is not so boldly to be determined.

8. The Epatica of the Right Hand passes not the Extremity of the Ferient, as
it does in the Left: This, shows a Decrepid Old Age; That, otherwise,
notwithstanding it is decently enough produced.

9. The Vital agrees in both Hands, as well in the Draught as tacture of other
Lines. Wherefore the little Hairs in the beginning thereof, presage a Diseased
Infancy.

Other Diseases are premonstrated about the 14, 21, 25, 32, etc. year of his
Age: we will also observe the 56. year, wherein if the Native shall escape an
Apoplexy, without danger, then will we allot him a Longer Life. Without doubt
those years will answer to their respective Directions.

Example XVII.
Another Borne in Thuringia, under the Latitude of 51. degrees, A. C. 1588.
September 21. at 7. in the Morning.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. THose Planets which have Predominancy in the Geniture, are also very
Clearly to be seen in the Hand; [Venus, Mercury, Jupiter and Mars.] The Via
Solis, and Via Saturni, are both Dissected: The Region of the Moon presents an
obscure draught.

2. Therefore Venus giving a Star in her Region, shows a mind that is
Lascivious; Ingenious, Merry, etc. as before we have Described, Page 23.
concerning her Ingenuity. Wherefore the Positure of Venus most exactly agrees
in the Hand and Geniture; for here she Glittereth in her own House, and in the
very Cuspe of the Horoscope. Her oblique Ascension is 202. degr. 15. min. That
is, 15. degr. 15. min. of Libra.

3. Mercury (by the like Reason) shows his Fortunate Assistance, exhibiting on
his Region both a Star and a Cross, with convenient Incisures. So in the
Geniture he is most excellently well seated, being in a competent Place of the
Heavens, in his own Mansion: whereby he conferrs the things that be of his
Nature with abundance of Favor: See before, (viz. page 31.) where we have
Treated of the Rule of Mercury.

4. The Cingulum Veneris not obscure, confirms the incontinent
Lasciviousness, and Luxury of Venus: The same Dissected under the Finger of
Saturn and the Sun, declares Losses by the means of Lusts: This Decree is
confirmed by Venus in the Horoscope, Retrograde in Libra.

5. You see also the Dominion of Jupiter, noted by Incisures and a double
Cross. This conferrs Honors, and renders the Native a Goodly Person, jocund,
etc. He there peculiarly administers Aid Inseparable. He is direct in the
Geniture: and although in his Detriment, yet he rejoices in that Place of the
Figure, as being near to the Tail of the Lion, and the Dragons Head, and his
Dispositer strong and Fortunate. But because he is within 10. degrees of Mars,
and Afflicted by the Square of Saturn, he abates somewhat of his Favor.

6. There is indeed a Sister of Mars, (notwithstanding it be but obscurely
drawn) letting fall a Cleft upon the Tuberculum of Jupiter. I told you before
that I had very often found out the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the
Geniture from such an appearance of the Sister of Mars. Therefore Mars thus
found nigh to Basiliscus, or Regulus, increases his Courage, and Anger: Yet
bodes it a desired end of Contentions, Mars in Partile opposition to the Moon,
does sometimes occasion Adversities in Honors, Marriage, Sons, and Moneys.
Moreover, this Position of his takes away the Favor of the People.

7. The Epatica, Cephalica, the Triangle, and Mensa, are all exceeding well
Formed. Besides, the Mensa is decently adorned with Lines that are drawn
thither from the Region of Venus. By all which we generally Conjecture, not
only a more Prosperous and Healthful habit of the body, then ordinary; but
also Ingenuity, the best Indowments of the Mind, and Dignities that be
excellent; especially within his own Country; and by the means of such
Persons and things as are Dedicated to Venus.

8. The Line that passes from the Vital (by a Crooked path) through the
Concave and Epatica, to the Ferient in the Mensa, (whereunto other Incisures
likewise tend, beneath the Region of the Sun) do intimate Strifes in Old Age,
for Defense of his Honor and Estimation

9. The Via Lactea, being of it self fairly Furrowed, denotes the Goodness
of his Brain, Favor of Women, sweetness of Expression, and Fortunate
Journeys. The like Mercury in the Geniture, as being Lord of the Ninth House,
in his own Mansion, in a good Place of the Figure, and free from the Rays of
the Malevolent Planets.

10. The other Intricate Lines in the Triangle, presage a confusednesse in
those Affairs, which belong unto Mars, the Moon and Mercury.

11. The Via Solis is interrupted by the Cingulum Veneris, which will bring a
Stain upon his Honor, by the means of something relating to his Wife.

12. The Tuberculum of Saturn has upon it the same Mark that we found before
in the fourth Example: which threatens the Gowt; and some other grievous
Diseases, of the Nature of Saturn: And the same is discerned by the Residence
of Saturn in the House of Death afflicting the Moon and Mars by a Platique
Quartile.

13. The Vital somewhere touched and cut by other Lines, presageth Diseases
about the 14, 20, 24, 30, 48, etc. year of his Age: The Horoscope proceeds
from Libra into Scorpio about the 20. year of his Age, and there remains in
the Terms of Mars for the space of 9. years.

Saturn Unfortunate in Nativities, is wont to Vomit his Poison most vehemently
after the first Revolution, that is, after the 29. and 30. years (in which
time he moves round the Zodiaque.) What the Cross above the Restricta
means, we have often told you. The other Incisures, (especially those that
seem to shadow the Saturnia) are but slender, and obscure as yet.

Example XVIII.
One Borne at Erphordia, in the year 1589. the 8. of May, at 1. h. 45. min.
Afternoon.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

1. VEnus, Mercury, and Jupiter rule the Geniture: and therefore you see their
Regions in the Hand, decently enough adorned.

2. Hence therefore we Prognosticate a happy wit, and other things that flow
from Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury.

3. The Triangle drawn with the best Conformity helps the Ingenuity and all
the Indowments both of Body and Mind.

4. The Region also of the Moon shows her Dominion, the same being Marked with
no despicable Incisures: It occasioneth prosperous Journeys, adds Splendor
both to the Body, and Manners of the Native, and gains the Favor of Women;
which very thing the Moon (in Cancer, and in the 10 House of the Heavens) most
plainly demonstrates.

5. The Lines of Jupiter are somewhat troubled, and therefore his Condition is
but indifferent: yet gives he Honors not contemptible, although with some
Difficulties, some Impediments.

6. The Conjunction of Venus and Mercury in the House of Venus, and in a
Partile Trine of Jupiter, is accounted very Fortunate. For thereby his Mind is
excellently inclined unto all such Arts as are dedicated to Venus and Mercury.
I see he will prove a most Eloquent Man. The two Parallel Lines (which are
drawn in the Form of a Scale, or Ladder, from the Region of Mercury, to that
of Venus;) do clearly manifest this Conjunction, and the very same judgment.
We have almost the same Scale or Ladder in the 15. Example, which gave that
Native the Benefit of a voluble Tongue, and a quick Pronunciation.

7. Saturn has Ominous Signatures upon his Tuberculum, intimating wounds and
other grievous Accidents: And the Line which runs underneath the same from
the Thorall, to the Concave of the Hand, threatens a fall from an High Place,
or Drowning. The same is Denounced by the Sun in the Geniture, who is Afflicted
of Saturn by his Conjunction with him, near to the Hyades: Mars (Lord of the
Eight House) being in his Detriment.

8. The Vital is thrice touched: First, by a Line running from the Cephalica:
but because it breaks not the Vital, we suppose the Disease (thereby
signified) will not be so grievous, as otherwise: the Moon comes by Direction
to the Quartile of Mars, about the 18 year of his Age. Besides, the Progress
of the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, about the 47 year will agree to the
other Incisures. And lastly, the Progression of the Moon to the Square of
Saturn, about the 54. year; in all which years, the Native must take heed of a
violent Death.

9. The Mensa excellently Rased, confirms the goodness of Wit, and
temperament, and the continuance of a plentiful Fortune, etc.

But here it is to be Noted, by every one Desirous of this knowledge: that in
the precedent Examples, the Incisures and small Lines, are not all of them
Delineated, partly for that they were excedingly slender, and partly because
they could not be described so accuratly as requisite. Besides, we must
observe, that even of those Lines which we have posited, some ought to be more
obscure, and slender: others more clear and Conspicuous; and therefore good
Caution must be had, when we would apply them to other Examples. The skill of
the Engraver can never follow the Form of the Lines so precisely, as they
present themselves in the Hand. Moreover, we have often omitted some
Accommodations in the Geniture; lest their significations (as considered in
themselves) might Nauseat the Readers.

Example XIX.
Now that I may perform the present Task by a more Commendable Example, I
shall annex the whole judgment of the Geniture, to the Practique of
Chiromancy, as I delivered the same almost Two years ago, to a certain Saxon,
a Friend of mine; He was Borne in the year of Christ 1561. January 17. Ho. 13.
Min. 35. Sec. 40. Afternoon; in the Latitude 54. degr. 45. Min.
depiction of palm of hand with markings.

HEre are Five Planets excellently well Placed in their own Prerogatives:
[Saturn and Mercury Received from Houses, and Locally in their own Triplicity:
So Jupiter and Mars, assume a just Power by their Reception of Houses: Venus
also is in her Exaltation, and in the Angle of the Earth.] Lastly, the Moon is
in her Triplicity: But she having not as yet obtained her due Light from the
Sun, is here very Silent. Mercury and Saturn are notably united by a Trine.
The Part of Fortune Rises with the Scorpions Heart. Venus and Jupiter are the
Prime Rulers of the Geniture; Saturn and Mercury Participating, etc.

1. A Long-Life, is conjectured from the Horoscope, and the Luminaries being
not impedite: although the Moon be opposite by the Quartile of Mars: yet the
Progress of the Horoscope is first to the Opposition of Saturn: whereof anon.

2. His temperature excells by an Equal Mixture of Humors, because he
receives his Ferment chiefly from the Perfusion of Jupiter and Venus; Saturn
and Mercury besprinkling a Melancholy juice.

3. Hence the Force of Discerning and Representing (vulgarly called the
Phantasy) breaths nothing but what is Moderate and Agreeable to Reason: For
Jupiter makes such as are borne under him, Honest, Just, Wise, and addicted to
Quiet and Peaceable Counsels, doing always that which is Right and Honest
both in judging and Adviseing: such also as are very Desirous of Praise and
Renown: yet (in gaining the same) recede not from their Natural Modesty and
Temper, neither from good Arts, whereby Honor and true Glory are wont to be
obtained.

But because Saturn and Mercury are both excellently well placed (in respect
of their Reception, and Partile Trine) they also do largely bestow their
virtues: they make the Native exceeding diligent in his Arts, and Affairs: so
that in administering them, he uses singular Sedulity and Care, they cause him
to search after secret things, and make it his study for to Penetrate Hidden
Mysteries, to find out the Causes of Natural things; to understand the Civil
Laws: and to unfold Men's secrets: Generally, such Men as are addicted to all
manner of Sciences. Venus the chief that participates in the Rule of the
Geniture, occasions such Commotions of the Native as be Delightful, Merry,
Pleasant: yet so, as that he studyeth Good Works, and Friendships, whereof he
is most observant, and hereby becomes grateful to all Men: He abhors all
Filthy, but is taken with cleanly things, comely Gestures, decent Attires,
Ornaments, and Elegance.

4. Venus (therefore) and Jupiter do Promise great Felicity, in Affairs both
Civil and Ecclesiastical.

5. There are most evident testimonies, of an Excellent Ingenuity. (1) Mercury
in Aquarius does of him self suscitate the strength thereof. (2.) Besides
there is a Reception (from Houses) and a Partile Trine betwixt Him and Saturn.
(3.) Venus Angular does the like. (4.) Especially for that the Moon and the
Dragons Head are together in the same Angle; (5.) Mercury and the Moon are
Asyntheti [Pure and not vitiated:] yet both behold the Horoscope; [she by a
Platique Trine; He by a Partile Quadrature.

6. Jupiter Lord of the Second, Direct in Motion, and Received of Mars, plainly
Assures an abundance of Wealth. The Part of Fortune most excellently augments
this signification, the same being posited in the second, where he is Disposed
of, and Aspected by Jupiter. These Riches take their Increase from services
faithfully performed, from most Eminent Honors and Dignities, and they more
abundantly in the third, or last Age.

7. Mercury Lord of the 10 and having convenient society with Saturn, presages
Dignities not obscure. We have spoken before concerning the Dominion of Jupiter
and Venus; wherefore seeing they equally share the Rule of the Geniture, How
can it be that they should not reward the Native with some or other most
eminent Dignities?

8. Your Neighbors or Kindred shall sometimes occasion your Damage, in
household Goods or Affairs: and you shall expend very much in Building.

9. Mars Lord of the 6. ingendereth Hot Infirmities, yet they not so vehement
because of Jupiter's Interposition. Moreover, Mars in Sagitary causes most
commonly a gravel in the Joints of the Feet: If he be found in that Sign,
and in the Sixth, he inevitably brings the Gout, the pains whereof are not to
be taken away, but by the Influence of Sagittary, Pisces, etc. deduced from
Heaven it self, etc. Some other Remedies also may do much, yet not any that
are got by Common Artifice.

10. Your Death will be Natural by the means of some Chronicall Infirmity,
proceeding chiefly from Saturn, such as are Distillations upon the Jaws, the
Breast, the Lungs, Spleen, etc. Howbeit, Old Age is a Disease, and an Easy
Passage unto Death it self.

11. The Sun and Moon disposing of the 9. House, do discern Honorable
journeys: Mercury well posited in the Third occasioneth Journeys undertaken for
the Cause of Honors and Dignities, and to Persons most Honorable for Learning
and Dignities Civil and Ecclesiastical.

12. Venus Lady of the 11 concerns a Multitude of the best Friends: yet Mars
beholding Venus by a Quartile shall stir up the envy of some Persons, sowing
oftentimes Dissension, and inverting all goodness.

13. Venus shall give you victory over your Enemies; whereof indeed there are
but a few denounced; because she is Lady of the 7. Angular, and in her
Exaltation.

14. Your Marriage shall be Fortunate, as to an Affluence of Riches: yet herein
beware of the Faithless Brawling, and Luxurious Quadrature of Mars. But this
very much depends upon Man's Free Will: and young Men oft-times find themselves
at a loss, through their Ignorance and Rashness.

We will now consider the Signs of the Four Angles.
15. Scorpio Ascending, gives the Natives an Elegant Acuteness of Wit, Plenty
of Discourse. It also often Instilleth Great vices, [Infidelity, Envy,
Covetousness, Ingratitude,] which Learning and Right Reason Exterminate.

16. Virgo Culminating is wont to Raise the Native to Magistracy: It conferrs a
tolleration of Great Authority: It transferres many Benefits to others, from
whom it returns not the like Favor.

17. Taurus in the West-Angle presents you with such Adversaries, as at length
he will see oppressed by sundry kinds of Misfortunes: He there incites you to
Love, Luxury, Delights, and Jeasting.

18. Pisces posited in the Fourth, indue the Minds of the Natives with much
Faith, Integrity, and Dexterity of Wit, whereby they gain great Authority in
their Administrations: they delight to Walk and Dwell near Rivers: But almost
abhor uxorious Matters.

The Planets in the Houses of Heaven.
19. The Sun in the Third presages Journeys in the Causes of Honors and
Dignities: He brings a Mutation of Places, and Honor in Foreign parts.

20. Mercury there, well posited, renders a Man most Learned in every Science:
whereof I could produce innumerable Examples: those shall invent many things by
their own Ingenuity: they are Fortunate in Church Matters, Writing, and
Merchandise.

21. Venus most excellently well collocated in the Fourth, will give you Large
Possessions, and Habitations, chiefly in your Last Age: she declares the Period
of your Life Honorable and Praiseworthy.

22. Mars in the First, and there not Unfortunate makes a Man Courageous, Rash,
and somewhat Angry: sometimes he presageth Wounds in the Head and Face.

23. Jupiter in the 5. does sometimes confer the Great Rewards of Great Men:
He makes a Man Fortunate in Embassies.

24. Saturn thus excellently seated in the 8. gives many inheritances: He
threatens death by Catharres, A Cough, etc. and oftentimes by the Plague.

The Planets in the Signs.
25. The Sun in the House of Saturn makes the vital virtue more Robust, and
as it were more Compact, whence he gives a Longer Life then ordinary.

26. The Moon in the House of Jupiter promotes all things that are good: yet
being here Afflicted by the Quartile of Mars, exciteth some strifes in
Possessions: often reiterateth small Fevers.

27. Saturn in the House of Mercury, gives a Profound Wit, Occult Sciences.

28. Jupiter in the House of Mars indifferently well Affected, makes one
victorious.

29. The same is signified by Mars in the Mansion of Jupiter: Thus they both of
them render the Native very gracious with Princes, and Noblemen, and under them
to have Authority.

30. Venus in the House of Jupiter, bestows many Benefits, either by the
means of Women, or of some Ecclesiastical preferments. She makes you
Discreet, Honest, Healthful: sometimes she occasioneth strife, and falling out
with your Neighbors, and some of your Friends, for that Venus is exposed to
the Quadrature of Mars.

31. Mercury in the House of Saturn, gives always a profound Wit, and a Man
that is greedy of all Sciences.

The Lords of the Houses.
32. The Lord of the Horoscope received of Jupiter from Houses, plainly
declares a Generous Mind.

33. The Lord of the Second in the Fifth, increases your Wealth through
Rewards bestowed by Great Men.

34. The Lord of the Third in the Eight occasioneth Journeys, either on the
behalf of some that are Dead, or by reason of the Plague: He often destroys
Elder Brothers.

35. The Lord of the 4. in the 5. makes you Fortunate in Tillage, or
Navigations.

36. The Lord of the 5. in the 4. brings Gladness and Delight to you from
things that be Immovable, as the Building of goodly Houses, and the tillage of
sweet and pleasant Gardens. And here Venus undoubtedly confirms that Portent,
because such things are contained under her Dominion.

37. Mars Lord of the 6. in the First excites many hot Infirmities, but this is
qualified by the Reception of Jupiter.

38. The Lord of the 7. in the 4. presageth strifes about the Father or Wives
Inheritance, and this the rather for that he is most cruelly Afflicted of Mars.

39. The Lord of the 8. in the 3. shows that the Native shall survive all his
Brothers. He often designeth Death in a Foreign Country.

40. The Lord of the 9. in the 3. occasions Journeys for the Cause of Dignities.

41. The Lord of the 10. in the 3. and there excellently well Placed, makes the
Native more Honorable then the rest of his Brethren.

42. The Lord of the 11. in the 4. denotes a Second Fortune in Goods that be
Immovable, especially in Old Age.

43. The Lord of the 12. in the 4. Displeasures and strifes for Possessions,
and Church-Goods. These may be sufficient in General Judgments.

Now if we will Consider the Principal Lines of the Hand, we shall every where
find the same things signified, notwithstanding that we have curtailed the
Decrees of the Significators. We told you ( Experience her self bearing
witness) that the less Principal Lines are changed at a certain time,
according to the Progressions of the Celestial Places and Stars, who are
Significators: whereby it comes to pass, that we may best judge of any thing
from them, either when they appear de novo, or begin to wax clearer then they
were before.

1. The vital indeed is continued, but yet Marked with some Incisures,
although but slender ones. Whence judge you some Diseases about the 14, 30, 40,
etc. year of your Age.

2. Venus is Fortunate in the Geniture: and therefore she has thus Rased her
Region, with the accustomed Furrows.

3. The Epatica decently drawn, and without Sections, argues a Good temperance
of the Liver, health of Body, and a Life that is long enough.

4. The Mensa full of Branches, shows an Increase of Riches.

5. The Mensa formed by a sufficiently decant space, perspicuously bearing the
Character of Jupiter, under the Region of the Annular (or Ring-finger) is an
excellent Argument of Honors, chiefly Ecclesiastical.

6. The place of Jupiter beautified with a most clear little Line, the same.
So likewise the Tuberculum of the Sun, not undecently Furrowed.

7. The Moons Region presenting a clear Incisure, premonstrates Journeys.

8. The Dominion of Mercury is also most obvious, in that he excellently
adorneth his Region, as also the First Joint of the Auricular, or Litle-Finger.

9. The Cephalica contributes to the Wit, in that it decently composeth the
Triangle. Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, do the like.

10. Saturn also has some Portents, especially a Disease, in that he Bears a
Character under his Finger.

11. The Parallel Lines which Run through the Midst of the Hand, toward the
Ferient, confirm the Arguments of Felicity.

12. The Saturnia produced even to the Epatica, declares uprightness of
Judgment and Manners. The same Line having a Cross about the Restricta,
argues a Peaceable, and most Honored Old Age.

General Elections.
In the use of all Purgative Medicines, you must observe the Decurse of the
Moon, in Scorpio, Aquarius, and the third Decade of Pisces: although she be
not joined to Jupiter, or Venus. For, the Conjunction of these Planets with the
Moon, inhibites the virtue of the Purgative Medicine, in regard they affect
the Body, and Incline the Medicine to the nature of Nourishment. In other
Actions, [as in Buying of Houses, in Journeys, and the Commencement of
Administrations, etc.] Let the Moon be in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Libra,
or Aquarius, and Aspected by one or both of the Fortunate Planets. And as for
the Day, let it be upon a Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.

And now lest this Geniture should have seemed Defective, I present it wholly
as I composed the same, unto the studious in Astrology: indeed chiefly for that
it is not in the Number of the vulgar sort, but diligently enough composed.

A Special Judgment of this Geniture, giving you the Directions of the
Principal Places, and their Significations.
1. THe HOROSCOPE to the Body of Mars. The Place of Mars in Sagittary, 03. Degrees.
10. Min. His Latitude 00. Degrees. 06. Min. N. Declination 20. Degrees. 56. Min. S.
Right Ascension 241. Degrees. 06. Min. Circle of Position 54. Degrees. 45. Min.
Ascentionall Difference 32. Degrees. 47. Min. Oblique Ascension 273. Degrees. 53. Min.
Direction sought for 29. Degrees. 40. Min. The Oblique Ascension also of the
Horoscape, is 144. degrees. 13. min.
2. The Horoscope to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Sagittary
08. Degrees. 00. Min. Oblique Ascension 280. Degrees. 32 Min. Direction sought for 36.
Degrees. 19. Min.
3. The Horoscope to the Scorpions Heart. Scorpions Heart in Sagittary 03. Degrees.
45. Min. Latitude 04. Degrees. 00. Min. S Declination 24. Degrees. 53. Min. Right
Ascension 240. Degrees. 53 Min. Assentionall difference 40. Degrees. 52. Min. Oblique
Ascension 281. Degrees. 45. Min. Direction required 37. Degrees. 32. Min.
4. The Horoscope to the Opposition of Saturn. Opposition of Saturn in Sag.
13. Degrees. 40. Min. Latitude 2. Degrees. 20. Min. N. Declination 20. Degrees. 10. Min. S.
Right Ascension 252. Degrees. 34. Min. Ascentionall Difference 30. Degrees. 36. Min.
Oblique Ascension 283. Degrees. 10. Min. Direction required. 38. Degrees. 57. Min.
5. The Horoscope to the Trine Dexter of Jupiter. Trine of Jupiter in Sagit.
19. Degrees. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Degrees. 43. Min. N. Declination 22. Degrees. 23. Min.
S. Right Ascension 258. Degrees. 36. Min. Ascentionall Difference 35. Degrees. 41. Min.
Oblique Ascenton 293. Degrees. 17. Min. Direction sought for. 47. Degrees. 04. Min.
6. The Horoscope to the 26. degr. of Sagit. (the Term of Saturn) he has in
the year. 59. Degrees. 20. Min. 7. To the end of Sagittary in 63. Degrees. 47. Min. 8.
The Horoscope to the Sextile Dexter of Venus Sextile of Venus in Capricorn 04.
Degrees. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Degrees. 27. Min. S. Declination 23. Degrees. 50. Min. S.
Right Ascension 274. Degrees. 55. Min. Ascentionall Difference 38. Degrees. 36. Min.
Oblique Ascension 313. Degrees. 31. Min. Direction required. 69. Degrees. 17. Min.
The Directions of the Sun.
Sun's Place in Aquary 08. Degrees. 00. Min. Declination 18. Degrees. 19. Min. S.
Distance from the Fourth. H. 23. Degrees. 47. Min. Circle of Position 21. Degrees. 40.
Min. Oblique Ascension 318. Degrees. 00. Min.
9. The Sun to the Square Sinister of Mars. Quartile of Mars in Pisc. 3. Degrees.
10 Min. Oblique Ascension 339. Degrees. 09 Min. Direction required. 21. Degrees. 09.
Min.
10. The Sun to the Body of Venus. Venus in Pisc. 04. Degrees. 30. Min. Latitude
00. Degrees. 55. Min. S. Declination 10. Degrees. 44. Min. Right Ascension 336. Degrees.
43. Min. Ascentionall Difference 4. Degrees. 28. Min. Oblique Ascension 340. Degrees.
11. Min. Direction required. 23. Degrees. 11. Min.
11. The Sun to the Square Dexter of Saturn. Quartile of Saturn Pisc. 13.
Degrees. 40. Min. Oblique Ascension 347. Degrees. 32. Min. Direction sought for 29.
Degrees. 32. Min.
12. The Sun to the Trine Sinister of Mars. Trine of Mars in Aries 3. Degrees. 10.
Min. Oblique Ascension 52. Degrees. 24. Min. Direction required. 44. Degrees. 24. Min.
13. The Sun to a Proper Sextile. Suns Sextile in Aries 08. Degrees. 00. Min.
Oblique Ascension 06. Degrees. 07. Min. Direction sought for 48. Degrees. 07. Min.
14. The Sun to the Sextile Dexter of Saturn. Sextile of Saturn in Ar. 13.
Degrees. 40. Min. Latitude 1. Degrees. 10. Min. S. Declination 4. Degrees. 21. Min. N.
Right Ascension 13. Degrees. 00. Min. Ascentionall Difference 1. Degrees. 40. Min.
Oblique Ascension 11. Degrees. 20. Min. Direction required 53. Degrees. 20. Min.
15. The Sun to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries 19. Degrees. 30. Min.
Latitude 1. Degrees. 26. Min. S. Right Ascension 18. Degrees. 32. Min. Ascentionall
Difference 2. Degrees. 31. Min. Oblique Ascension 16. Degrees. 01. Min. Direction
required. 58. Degrees. 01. Min.
16. The Sun to the Sextile Sinister of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Taur. 04.
Degrees. 30. Min. Latitude 00. Degrees. 26. Min. S. Declination 12. Degrees. 40. Min. N.
Right Ascension 32. Degrees. 22. Min. Ascentionall Difference 5. Degrees. 7. Min.
Oblique Ascension 27. Degrees. 15. Min. Direction required 69. Degrees. 15. Min.
17. The Sun comes to the Trine of the Midd-Heaven in 66. Degrees. 50. Min. years.
The Directions of Venus.
18. Venus to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Ar. 08. Degrees. 00
Min. Right Ascension 7. Degrees. 20. Min. Right Ascension of Venus 336. Degrees. 21.
Min. Direction sought for 30. Degrees. 59. Min.
19. Venus to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries 19. Degrees. 30 Min. Latitude
1. Degrees. 26. Min. Right Ascension 18. Degrees. 32. Min. Direction required 42. Degrees.
11. Min.
20. Venus to a Proper Sextile. Sextile of Venus in Taur. 4. Degrees. 30. Min.
Right Ascension 32. Degrees. 24. Min. Direction required 56. Degrees. 13. Min.

The Directions of the Midd-Heaven, whose Right Ascension is 154. Degrees. 13. Min.
21. The Midd-Heaven to a Sextile of Mars. Sextile of Mars in Libra 30. Degrees. 10
Min. Right Ascension 182. Degrees. 54 Min. Direction required 28. Degrees. 31. Min.
22. The M. Heaven to the Trine Dex. of the Sun. Trine of the Sun in Libra 00.
Degrees. 00. Min. Right Ascension 187. Degrees. 20 Min. Direction required 33. Degrees. 07.
Min.
23. The Midd-Heaven to the Trine of Saturn and Mercury. Trine of Saturn in
Libra 13. Degrees. 40. Min. Latitude 1. Degrees. 10. Min. N. Right Ascension 193. Degrees.
00. Min. Direction required 38. Degrees. 48. Min.
24. Midd Heaven to the Virgins spike. Virgins spike in Libr. 17. Degrees. 40. Min.
Latitude 2. Degrees. 00. Min. S. Right Ascension 195. Degrees. 32. Min. Direction
required 41. Degrees. 19. Min.
25. M. Heaven to the Opposition of Jupiter. Opposition of Jupiter in Lib. 19.
Degrees. 30. Min. Latitude 1. Degrees. 26. Min. N. Right Ascension 198. Degrees. 32. Min.
Direction required 44. Degrees. 19. Min.
26. M. Heaven to the Trine Dext. of Venus. Trine of Venus in Scorp. 4. Degrees.
30. Min. Latitude 0. Degrees. 26. Min. N. Right Ascension 212. Degrees. 13. Min.
Direction required 58. Degrees. 10. Min.
27. M. Heaven to the Southern Lance of Libra. Lance of Libra in Scorp. 09.
Degrees. 00 Min. Latitude 00. Degrees. 40. Min. N. Right Ascension 216. Degrees. 50. Min.
Direction required 62. Degrees. 37. Min.

The Directions of the Part of Fortune.
28. The Part of Fortune to the Sextile of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Capri.
04. Degrees. 30 Min. Latitude 00. Degrees. 28. Min. S. Declination 23. Degrees. 51. Min. S.
Right Ascension 274. Degrees. 55. Min. Distance from the Fourth H. 59. Degrees. 18.
Min. Circle of Position 40. Degrees. 20 Min. Ascentionall Difference 22. Degrees. 02.
Min. Oblique Ascension 296. 57, Direction required 28. Degrees. 06 Min.
29. The Part of Fortune to the Antiscia of Mars. Antiscia of Mars in Capr. 26.
Degrees. 50 Min. Declination 20. Degrees. 47. Min. S. Right Ascension 298. Degrees. 55 Min.
Distance from the Fourth H. 35. Degrees. 18 Min. Circle of Position 29. Degrees. 00
Min. Oblique Ascension 310. Degrees. 26 Min. Direction required 48. Degrees. 45 Min.
30. The Part of Fortune to the Body of the Sun, gives years 60. Degrees. 30. Min.
31. To the Trine of Saturn, Trine of Saturn 13. Degrees. 40. Min. S. Latitude 1.
Degrees. 10. Min. N Declination 15. Degrees. 36. Min. S Right Ascension 315. Degrees. 48
Min. Distance from the Fourth H. 18. Degrees. 25 Min. Circle of Position 18. Degrees.
12 Min. Ascentionall Difference 5. Degrees. 15 Min. Oblique Ascension 321. Degrees. 3
Min. Direction required 64. Degrees. 22 Min.
32. The Part of Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Jupiter, gives years 71.
Degrees. 12. Min.
Judgments upon the Precedent Directions.
IN the 22. Current year of your Age, The Direction of the Sun to the Quartile
of Mars had surely Excited some Commotion of Humors, or Misfortune in Journeys:
But that Venus Corporally Assisting the Degree of Direction, easily averted
every Adverse thing.

In the 24. year, the Sun's coming to the Body of Venus, foretold some Dignity
or Commendation of your Name amongst Churchmen, and other Great Personages.
You attained then (if I be not mistaken) to Possess the Good you wot of.

In the 29. year, the Part of Fortune coming to the Sextile Dexter of Venus,
and the Mid-heaven to the Sextile of Mars, brought an Increase of Goods, and a
happy and speedy success of your Affairs.

In the 30. year Current, the Horoscope came to the Body of Mars, and the Sun
to the Square of Saturn, which caused that Alteration of Humors whence the
Quartan Fever proceeded, which invaded you the Following year, but turned to a
Tertian. From this manifest Accident, (truly agreeing with the Significators
thereof,) the present Figure of Heaven was Corrected. And therefore no scruple
is left of the following Directions, because they are Diligently and Faithfully
enough Calculated, and made manifest in their Significations.

Venus to the Sextile Sinister of the Sun in the 31. year, will spread your
Name far and near especially in Foreign Parts: And soon after you shall
Commence Doctor in V. I. and obtain some other much Honored Privileges. In
the year of Christ, 1592. May 16. (Old Style) The Profection of the Mid-heaven
comes exactly to the Sextile Sinister; and Venus to the Trine Dexter of Mercury.

In the 34. year, the Mid-heaven coming to the Trine of the Sun, will augment
your Fame in Foreign Countries. But because the Sun is not very strong, the
Effects of this Direction will be the obscurer, and as if they were Private.

Of the same nature is the 23. Direction falling out in the 39. year of your
Age, for this will Amplify the Celebrity of your Name and Learning in the
Courts of Princes and Noblemen, and in other Places.

In the 38. year of your Age the Horoscope comes to the Scorpions Heart, which
usually brings some Evil to the Eyes, otherwise it afflicts with a Wound, or
Excites some short but vehement Fever, or Ague. Mars comes by Transite to the
Square of the Horoscope, about the 27. and 30. of August (according to the Old
Calendar) in the year 1598. and soon after to the Horoscope it self. To wit,
Oct. 13. Again Quadrangularly from Aquary, January the 8. 1599.

The Direction of the Horoscope to the Opposition of Saturn falls out also in
the 39. year of your Age, (almost Complete,) 1600. and threatens you with a
dangerous Disease, [viz. a total Dejection of the Powers of the Body, Poison,
a perilous Plague, the Pestilence, sudden Catharrs, etc.] The Profection, or
Revolution of the Sun, comes to the Opposition of Mars, in the year 1600.
about the 20. of November: The Direction of the Horoscope, to the Quartile
Sinister of Mars, about the 21. of September after the Old Calendar: In
Transite, you shall observe the 1, 7, and 8. of January, the Feasts of
Epiphany: As also the 22. and 24, of September; the 24, 25, 27, and 30, of
November, the 2, 4, and 6, of December: For on those days Mars afflicts the
Horoscope by his Transite.

QUESTION. Whether you shall escape this Disease?
I Answer: Indeed that year shall be grievous, and dangerous enough: But
because the present Direction is celebrated in Benevolent Terms, and that
Jupiter follows with his Triangular Beams, I positively conclude, that this
year shall not be Distructive unto you. Ptolomy and other Astrologers have a
Rule approved of by Experience, which is this: Benevolent Stars beholding the
Degree of a Dangerous Direction by the Mediety of their Orbs, do Refraene the
Malignity thereof, and make the Cure of the Disease Easy. Therefore the Trine
of Jupiter herein Benignely Irradiating the Directionall degrees of the
Horoscope, suffices: But let not Humane Prudence be wanting, the which if it
do not totally avert an Imminent Evil, yet so much it Declines it, that it
proves neither so grievous, nor yet so hurtful as otherwise. He that is
knowing may Divert many Effects of the Stars, if he know but their Natures.
Ptolom. Centiloq. Aphorism 5. Let such Medicines be applied beforehand, as
may both purge the Body from all Filthy Humors, and likewise comfort the
Principal Members, strengthen the Vital Spirit, and Native Heat, which are
of another Quality. The Scorpion (as also the Serpent) deduced from Heaven (I
speak with Virgill) preserves him safe that carries it about him, from Fevers,
Poison, and Pestilence. These are Secrets.

In the same year of your Age, the Mid-heaven coming to the Trine Sinister of
Saturn, presages Goods to ensue by means of the Dead: Ancient Possessions,
the Gift of some Aged Man.

The 42. and 43. year of your Age will be Honorable and Prosperous: because
the Mid-heaven comes to the Virgins Spike, and Venus her self to the Body of
Jupiter. By this means they bring some Notable good in the Increase of
Dignities and Wealth, and that by the occasion of a certain Great Personage.
You shall observe the 14. day of July, An. 602. and then the 11. and 16. of
August: Also the 3. of September. In the following year 1603. the 22. and 23.
of January; the 7. and 8. of June. Here the Profection of the Sun succeeds the
Trine Sinister of Jupiter: There the Mid-heaven shall come to Venus herself.

In the 45. year of your Age, the Mid-heaven coming to the Opposition of
Jupiter will Intercept, or subvert the Friendship of some Great Lord: at which
time take heed how you Manage your Affairs with Noblemen, etc.

In the same year upon the Sun's receding to the Trine of Mars, you shall fall
into the Friendship of some Martially disposed Person, not without some
Advantage. Use his Benevolence, and Friendlinesse, prosperously.

In the 48. year of your Age, An. 1608. The Horoscope coming to the Trine
Dexter of Jupiter, gives you a most Thriving Constitution of the Body, and
makes you Conversant with Great Men, whereby Great Good is to be Expected.

Of the same Nature is the subsequent Direction, [to wit, the Sun to a Proper
Sextile in the Terms of Venus,] falling out in the 49. year of your Age, in
the year of Christ 1609. In this year the Part of Fortune coming to the
Antiscia of Mars, will add unto your Expenses occasioned by the means of
Kindred and Journeyes: Beware also of some Theeveries of your Servants, or
Messengers.

In the 45. year of your Age, Ann. 1614. The Sun coming to the Sextile
Sinister of Mercury, and the Dexter of Saturn, shall enlarge your Authority
and Esteem with or by the Learned. For seeing you are unweariedly carried by a
certain Natural Violence, both to the Sciences of Mighty things, and also to
the knowledge of Hidden Secrets, I easily foresee What a one, how great a one,
you shall suddenly be! Go on Courageously, that you may Act things Answerable
to your Ingenuity, that you may advance and further your Fortune.

The 57. and 59. years of your Age will be very Honorable, and the most
Acceptable of any: you shall therein find a Signal Increase of your
Possessions, Renown, Dignities, and Authority: For then Venus will come to Her
Proper Sextile; The Mid-heaven to the Trine Dexter of Venus: And the Sun to the
Body of Jupiter. The Profection of the Mid-heaven to the Sextile of Venus,
falls out in the year of Christ, 1617. the 14. and 15. of January (Old Style:)
But the Profection of the Sun to the Trine of Mercury, and the Body of Saturn
will happen, about the Vernall Equinox. There are also Fortunate Profections in
the year 1618. about the Winter Solstice. Also Ian. 21. etc. Saturn in is the
second Degree of Gemini Adverse the Mid-heaven, whereby he shall in some sort
endeavor to protract an Event by the means of some Man's Death.

In the 6. year of your Age, An. 1620. The Horoscope coming to the 26. Degree
of Sagitary, the Contiguous Terms of Saturn and Mars, shall occasion a
Feverish Disease, which will easily be removed by the help of a Physician: Or
if the yearly Medicines and Evacuations were not (as is requisite) for borne
contrary to Custom, it could hardly be, that any Disease should trouble you.
The Profectino of the Horoscope and the Sun are removed from the Society of the
Malevolent Planets. The Transite of Mars (in Taurus,) by the Point opposed unto
the Horoscope, shall happen the 15. of April; then in Leo, by the Point in
Square thereunto, the 22. 23. and 24. of August: which are more to be observed.

In the 61. year of your Age, An. 1621. The Progress of the Part of Fortune,
to the Body of the Sun, shall multiply your Treasure, by the Rewards of Kings,
and some other Great Personages: The like for your Honors.

In the 63. year, the Mid-heaven coming to the Southern Lance of Libra
favors you with no mean Dignities.

In the 64. year, the Horoscope arriving at the End of Sagittary, threatens
you with a Disease attended especially with Lascitudes of the Body, Filthiness
of Defluxions, and with Pains in the Feet above all other parts, etc. Ptolomy
Affirms, That the Terms of the Signs are Iuterficient: the which I have
oftentimes found to be true. But because that here, Venus most powerfully
beholds this Place, by an approaching Sextile Aspect, I boldly Affirm ( Humane
Providence assisting) You shall not Dye this year.

In the 65. year of your Age, An. 1625. The Part of Fortune coming to the Body
of Mercury, and the Trine of Saturn, confers upon you a Large Inheritance; Or
Fair Possessions by the means of some Deceased. For Saturn being so
Fortunate, it is Impossible this Direction should be Fruitless. So in the
year 1627. The Sun coming to the Trine of the Mid-heaven, will again occasion
all manner of Good to befall you.

In the 70. year of your Age, An. 1630. The Sun coming to the Sextile Sinister
of Venus; The Horoscope also to the Sextile Dexter of Venus, point out a most
Honorable time in Dignities, Possessions, and Renown in all manner of
Benefits: The same almost is discerned by the Progression of the Part of
Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Jupiter, falling out in the 72. year of your
Life; for that also Presages Kingly Rewards from Foreign Countries. But
enough, and more then enough concerning this your most Fortunate Geniture.
Farewell. In the year 1593.

A Brief DISCOURSE OF The Soul of the WORLD, AND The Universal Spirit
thereof.
THe World is a Systeme of Celestial, and Terrestrial Bodies, constant in
Order, Number and Measure, but Living, Animate, Intellectual.

The former Part of the Definition is clear from the Holy Scriptures: The
latter is Proved of Plato, and that by manifest Reasons.

Where we say A Living Systeme, we intend a certain Natural Life, diffused
through the Bodies of the world, extended and Movably Acting together with the
Body of the World.

Where we call it An Animate Systeme, we mean the substance of the Soul of
the World whose Essence indeed is both Indivisible, and Immutable, like the
Intellect, yet it may in some sort be termed Divisible and Moveable, because
it is the Proper Fountain of some Powers that are declining to Divisible and
Moveable. Virtue also and Action) is partly Individual and Immovable, so far
forth as it agrees with Divine things, and steadfastly works: and Partly
Divisible in some Respects, both because it is Manifold, and also for that it
Declineth to a Manifold and Divisible Body: And Moveable, because it works
Temporally.

Where we term it Intellectual, we mean the Angelical Intellects, which
are properly Perfect and Indivisible (according to Place,) in their Government
of the Spheres: and Immutable in respect of time, the Natural Life, and Form
Corporeal being Opposite thereunto, [Divisible. and Mutable.]

That even these Angelical Intellects be in the Body of the World, necessity
requires it, because the Body of the World is through Life made fit for the
Intellect. Therefore, look how it is in regard of Life, and the like it is in
respect of the Intellect: And as it has not only a Natural lying hid in the
Matter of the World, but an Animal also, that is, A Soul existing in it
self: So has it not only an Intellectual Quality infused the Soul; but also
an Intellectual Substance therein remaining. For certain Qualities are every
where reduced, to certain Substances: As a Vital Quality to a Vital
Substance; so also an Intellectual Quality, to an Intellectual Substance. But
as touching these things, we shall explain our self more at large.

The whole Body of the World, is a certain Body composed of all the Four
Elements, the Members or Parts whereof are the Bodies of all Living Creatures.
For the small Body of every Animal, is a Part of the Worlds Body: Neither is
it composed of the whole Element of Fire, Air, Water, or Earth, but of some
Parts of these Elements. By how much therefore the Whole is more Perfect then a
Part thereof: by so much is the Body of the World more Perfect then the Body of
any one Living Creature.

Hence were it absurd to think, that an Imperfect Body should have a Soul:
But that it neither has a Soul, nor can live Perfect: None will be so mad, as
to say, the Part Lives and not the Whole. Therefore the whole Body of the
World Lives, whilst the Bodies of the Animals therein Live, which are the
Parts thereof.

And now seeing there must needs be One Soul of the whole World, we will in
the next place enquire, in what Part thereof this Soul may Reside, whence she
Distributes her Spirit through all things, and preserves the same so
Distributed? She fixes not, her Seat, and Pavilions, in Bodies subject to
variety of Change, and Manifold Corruption, as are the Elements and Elementary
Bodies: wherefore seeing that in Heaven, there is no Corruption of Bodies,
there certainly is her Place of Residence. And although those Elements also may
be in Heaven, (but most Purely or Spiritually:) yet is it manifest, that the
Element of Fire has therein Dominion: Even as here in this Inferior Part of
the World, where the Sovereignty of the Elements remains in the Power of Fire.
And this we are sensible of in our own Bodies: But much more, if we do but
consider, how the Fire by no means Putrefieth, nor is any way Corrupted,
notwithstanding it often Corrupts other Bodies, where it gets Preheminency.

Moreover, Nature affords it Earth, Water, and Air, as a certain Subject
Matter, whereon to Exercise its Power: The Air it self, (as also the Earth,
with the Water surrounding it, whence we are Nourished, and draw our Breath,)
is indeed so Affected of the Fire about it, that sometimes Heat does therein
predominate; otherwhiles it is so Extenuated, that for want of Heat, it leaves
its own Quality, and is forsaken of Cold.

In like manner we see such Impressions conveyed from the Fire above us upon
the Earth, and Water, that sometimes the Nature and Quality thereof is capable
of some Excess, otherwhiles of Defect, the Celestial Fire it self remaining
Entire: Wherefore seeing the Soul of the World has its Residence in Heaven,
of Necessity it must live in a Fiery Substance: For Heaven is a Fiery Essence,
but withal most Temperate, Pure, Lucid, and Incorruptible.

Nor shall they Trouble us, who deny the Fiery Heaven, in regard the Motion of
the Heavens is Circular, the Fires Motion Perpendicular. For, because our Fire
is Peregrine, and Impure, therefore it tends directly upwards, and (by a kind
of Veneration) Covets the Place of the Proper and Natural Fire* yet is it not
to be supposed such a Fiery Hot Heaven, as that it is burning or Heating. By how
much less Fire is mingled with strange Matter, by so much the less it
Burns: The which is seen in the Flaming of the Purer sort of Oil, but
especially of Oil Artificiously Extracted from Gold: the which True Alchemists
do Witness, and as these M^r^all Eyes of mine have sometimes Tried. Therefore
seeing there is not any matter in Heaven, estranged from the Celestial, no
Adustion, no Heat is made there: We see no Adustion in Comets running through
the Celestial Spheres; but only some Illustration; for that doubtless the
matter thereof much participateth of the Nature of the Celestial Bodies. But
TYCHO BRAHE, A Dane, A Nobleman, An Astronomer, and a most incomparable
Philosopher of this Age, shall anon more plainly unfold to us this matter far
different from the Madded Nursery of Peripatetiques, and that not without the
Infallible Curiosity both of Observations, and Demonstrations. Now because some
Matter Opposed is Heated and Burnt by the Rays of the Sun, contracted by a
Glass, that is, a sudden generation of Heat, and Fire, increasing by the
Flagration of the Collected Rays in the Glass, and applied to Fit Matter,
which are of another Disputation. Some will have the Matter of Heaven to be
Aereall: But for that Light is a Property of Fire, enlightening even the Air
it self; in my Judgment we do better, in supposing it to consist of a Fiery
Matter. Besides, Heaven is next to the Divine Seat, and God himself: yet not
so, as that God is not every where. God is called The Father of Light, with
whom there is no Change, by whom the Light may be Extinguished, or Diminished:
neither an overshadowing of Change, whereby sometimes he either is turned into
Night, or suffers an Eclipse. GOD is Light, in which there is no Darkness,
that is, Form, wherein there is nothing Inform: Beauty, in which there is
nothing of Deformity. As therefore GOD is Light invisible, Infinite, the Truth
it self, the cause of every truth, and of all things: So the Light of Heaven
is the splendor, or rather the shadow of Heaven, visible, Finite, the cause
of visible things: For, the whole Universe receives Light and Life from
Heaven. Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and 70 of the Elders of Israel, saw the God
of Israel, and under his Feet as it were a work of Saphire-stone, and as the
very Heaven when it is clear, etc. Exodus 24. 10. Whence we shall not speak
Absurdly, if we say that GOD shines upon us by his Light from Heaven, and the
Sun as a Candle shines through Glass, and Windows made thereof: otherwise,
we can hardly explain this matter, because of his Inscrutable Majesty.

That therefore the Celestial Bodies are Animate, is hence rightly concluded:
For, it were absurd to deny a Life and Soul to be in Heaven, and the Stars,
the which Inspire both Life and Soul even in the vilest of these Inferior
Bodies. They give Life unto Plants, which grow without natural Seed, as we
see in the Mountains and Places untilled: so likewise to the Earth: For, if a
Lump be taken out of the Bowels thereof, and for some time exposed to the
Rays of the Sun, it yields Grass, or some Herbs, oftentimes the twiggs of
Little Trees. The Stars also bestow Life upon Animalls not generated by
Copulation: nor can we be so stupid, as to imagine that Plants, Trees, etc. are
of a nobler Condition, then the Celestial Bodies, This manifest perpetual
operation cannot come but from a Pure, and Cleansed Body.

These things (I suppose) are sufficient to prove, the World has a Soul,
placed in Heaven, as in the most noble Part thereof.

But perhaps you desire it may be further Proved, that these Celestial Souls
are Rational, and participate of the Divine Mind. The Matter is not obscure.
For if the World (as Plato says) be the Best effect that could be of goodness
it self [That is, of GOD, for we Germans so express it, because (Got) sound
nothing else with us then Gut, if we rightly enquire the Reason of the Idiom]
it must certainly participate not only of Life, Sense and Reason, but also of
Intelligence. The Soul is the Perfection of the Body. And that Body most
Perfect, which has the Perfectest Soul. Wherefore if the Celestial Bodies be
most Perfect, they must of necessity enjoy the most Perfect Souls. The Heavens
therefore do Participate of the Intellect and Mind: which very thing the
Platoniques plainly approve by Musical Concords. For, seeing that Musical
Concord is, as it were, Living, Rational, and Efficacious; what Resemblance
has it unto Life it self, how Pleasing is it to the Mind, and even Ravisheth
the whole Man! And which is more, the Mind and all things else are made by the
Souls by her they are preserved, by her they are Moved. And therefore Plato
did not amiss, when he Described the Soul, to be she that made, Preserved
and Moved all Natural things, especially by Musical Numbers and Proportion;
constituted (I say) by numbers, not Mathematical, as some Calumniate, but by
Ideall and Metaphysicall Proportions of Numbers. This Harmony consists
altogether in Motion, because that by an Aerall Nature (posited in Motion) it
moves the Body, by a Purifyed Air, it stirs up the Aereall Spirit, (the
Chain of Soul and Body:) By affect it at once disposes the Sense and
Affection: By signification it operates upon the Mind. Lastly, through this
Motion of the subtle Air, it penetrates vehemently: It flows sweetly
through the Contemplation: and (by its conform Quality) powers out it self
with a wonderful Pleasure. By its Nature as well spiritual as Material, it at
once Ravisheth, and Claims all that is Man. Wherefore let us seriously
consider, how the Sounds of most sweet Music elevate, and as it were double
and treble our Minds. And in like sort judge the Melody of the Celestial
Bodies, who now by a slower, but anon by a swifter Motion, produce a tone that
is Grave or Acute: whereunto agree (in these sublunaries) Gravity and Levity,
Cold and Heat, Moisture and Dryness of Elements: so likewise Matter and Form
in the Generation of things, Meekness and Magnanimity, Temperance and
Fortitude in Humane Affairs. Seeing therefore that Motion is every where Free
in its own Nature, it might easily prevaricate, and wander, unless it were
Ruled by the Intellect, and Mind: the which we cannot further enquire of in
this Place, according to the Exigence of the matter.

Besides, it is absurd for us to have Reasons of our own works: for the
Celestial Souls, and so the Soul of the Universe, have no Reasons of theirs,
of whose spirit even we our selves are generated, and live continually.

If the Lesser World enjoy an Intelligent Soul, such also enjoyes the greater:
But we will cease to prosecute this any further; concluding, that the World is
a Systeme of Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, constant in Order, Number and
Measure, but Living, Animate, Intellectual. Whence we safely gather, that the
Soul of the World is a certain singular Life, filling all things, vivifying
all things, producing and connecting all things that it may accomplish, and
preserve one Fabrique of the whole-World; and be as a Monochord sounding out by
the threefold kinds of Creatures, Intellectual, Celestial, and Corruptible,
at one Blast, one only Life.

[The Mystery of Unity, is but known of a few.]

Now can we here pass by the Authority, both of the Holy Scriptures, and also
of the most approved Philosophers.

Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Thou shall not worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, which God has
Distributed to all Nations under Heaven. Deuteronomy. 28. 12. God shall open unto thee
his good Treasure, the Heaven, etc. Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Concerning Joseph: Thy
blessing shall be of the Precious things of the Sun, and of the Precious things
of the Moon. But above all let us consider those things which are in Levit.
26. 19. I will make (says God) your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brass.
The same is repeated Deuteronomy. 28. 23. and also in Osea 2. 21. And I will hear the
Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn,
and the Wine and the Oil, and they shall hear Israel. [Therefore we hereby
see, that God does set the Root of Worldly Benedictions in Heaven as it were in
the Soul of the Universe, so that the Beginning of Blessings is from Heaven,
as the Beginning of Motion from our Soul; which are of themselves perspicuous
enough.] To this also belongs that in Job 38. 33. Know thou the course of
Heaven, or can thou dispose the Rule thereof in the Earth?

[The Rule of Heaven proceeds through terrestrial and all inferior things as
the Rule of an Emperor or King, throughout his Empire and Kingdom: as
therefore a King is the Soul of his Kingdom: so the Heaven and the Stars
are the Soul of the World.]

Likewise that of Job 26. 13. His spirit has Garnished the Heavens: Psalm. 33.
16. By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and by the spirit of his
Mouth the whole Army thereof: [In whatsoever Body the Spirit of God dwells
and shines, that Body without doubt shall be Animate and Intellectual.]

Psalm. 19. God has set his Tabernacle in the Sun: One Day tells another, and
one Night teaches another knowledge: there is no Speech; nor Language, in
those (Heavens) yet understands he their voice.

Their Line is gone forth through all the Earth, and their words into the ends
of the World, in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun.

Psalm. 89. 5. O Lord, even the Heavens shall confess thy wonderful Works!

John 3. Our Savior says to Nicodemus: I have told you of Earth by things,
and you believe not, how would you believe if I should tell you of heavenly
things? as if he had said, I now propound the Comparison of the Generation of
Earthly things to spiritual, which are obvious to you all, and yet you believe
not: much less therefore would you believe, if I should dispute of Heavenly
things, which are not so obvious to your senses.

Christ is called by the Prophet, The Son of Righteousness: how far we
might hence Philosophize, concerning the Sun, and Celestial Fires, can hardly
be expressed.

Very notable is that place of Genesis 37. in the Dream of Joseph, who saw
himself worshipped of the Sun, the Moon, and eleven Stars, therefore his
Father Jacob, expounding this Dream Magickly, says, Shall I and thy Mother,
and thy Brethren come and worship thee? Therefore that holy Father knew that he
had the Sun in stead of his Father, the Moon in stead of his Mother, in the
World, and Worldly Generations, and 12. Stars (for Joseph was as the 12
Star, in that he was the 12. of the Brethren) to stand in stead of the 12.
begotten Sons. You may understand by those 12. Stars of Heaven, the twelve
Signs, constituting the 12. Months by 12 Conjunctions of the Sun and Moon in
them, by whose Congresses, the Year is completed, and its Annual Generations
finished.

There are other things to be seen among the Cabalists; notwithstanding we
have perspicuously enough enucleated the present matter.

We write not these things to vain Men, [that is, such as are Ignorant and
Proud,] but to the truly Honest and Ingenious, who constantly love the
Knowledge of God and his Works, and such as have Learned That Divinity is True
Philosophy, and True Philosophy Divinity (to wit, mystically) which is, (that
we may yet be more plain,) By the Workmanship of the Heavens and the Earth
(touching which all approved Philosophy teaches) and the inscrutable Systeme
thereof, to know God Himself as in a Glass, that he is the most Wise,
Ineffable and Eternal Goodness.

The other Authority is that of the Great Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle,
Pithagoras Orpheus, Trismegistus, Theophrastus, Avicenne, and the like: But we
will here follow Plato especially, (a Philosopher most full of Piety, and the
knowledge of God) and his Interpreter, the never to be too much Praised Marsil.
Ficinus, of Florence, then whom whether Italy ever afforded a greater, I shall
not easily determine.

If any man doubt (says Theophrastus the Peripatetique) whether the Heavens
live or not, let him not be accounted a Philosopher: And he that denies Heaven
to be Animate, so as that the Mover of it is not the Form thereof, destroys
the Foundations of Philosophy.

Neither are the most noble Poets to be Despised of us.

M. Manilius in his Proeme.
WHen every species of the glittering Sphere,
(The Stars returning) Ranked did appear
In their own Seats; and by the Fates Decree
Each had restored its Formal Potency;
Experience framed Art, by various use;
Example Guiding where it was Abstruse;
And (though at a vast Distance) plainly saw
The Stars All-Ruling by a Tacit Law,
The whole World Moved by REASON Alternate.
The same Manilius Cap. 2.
GOd and the virtue of the Divine Soul
Do by a Tacit Law, and sacred Course
Inspire, Turn Round, Guide, Govern, and control
This Immense structure of the Universe:
And all its Natural Parts which Framed be
In Different shapes of Air, Fire, Earth, and Sea.
Lucan Also.
HE that sustaines the earth Poised up with Air
Is a Great Part of Jove. --
And Boethius.
THou in consenting Parts disposed have
The All-moving Soul, 'midst threefold Nature Placed,
Which cut in Parts, that run a different Race,
Into it self returns, and does embrace
The Highest Mind, and Heaven does wheel about
With like Proportion --
And Virgil not the last of the most Excellent Philosophers, 6. Aen. By Mr. I.
O.
AT first the Heaven, and Earth, the liquid plain,
The Moons Bright Globe, and stars Titanian,
A spirit fed within, spread through the whole,
And with the Huge heap mixed infused a scrowle.
Hence Man, and Beasts, and Birds derive their strain
And Monsters Floating in the Marbled Main.
These seeds have Fiery vigor, and a Birth
Of Heavenly Race; but clogged with heavy Earth.
But enough of the Soul of the World. And now seeing it is manifest the World
has a Soul, it will be no less apparent, That the same World shall consist
also of a Spirit: which is called the Spirit of the Universe. Where the Soul
is, there also is the Spirit: The Soul groans in the Spirit, the Intelligence
in the Soul. The Spirit also of the Universe, is the vigor of Divine virtues,
dilated through all things, whose continual Excitation resides in the Soul of
the World, and the Celestial Bodies. Democritus, Pythagoras, Orpheus, and such
others called these virtues, Gods: Zoroaste^, Divine Allurements: Synecius,
Symbolicall Inticements: But some called them Lives, others also, Souls. Nor
that indeed undeservedly: For seeing the Soul is the Primum Mobile, and truly
of its own accord, or by it self Moveable, but the Body or Matter of it self
Ineffectuall for Motion, and much degenerating from the Soul: Therefore we
have need of some more Excellent Medium, that is to say, such a Medium, that
may be (as it were) not a Body, but yet as if it were a Soul; Or as no Soul;
and yet (as it were) a Body whereby the Soul may be united to the Body. For
such a Medium is the Spirit of the Universe it self, which otherwise we call
the Fifth Essence, because it is not wholly subsisting of the Four Elements,
but a certain Fifth over and beside them. Therefore such a Spirit is
necessarily requisite as a Medium, by whose Intervening, the Celestial Soul
may be in a Grosser Body: and this Spirit is of such a Form in the Body of the
World, as is ours in the Humane Body: because that as the Powers of our Soul,
are by the Spirit communicated to the Members; So the virtue of the Soul of
the World, is dilated by that Fifth Essence, throughout all things; So that
nothing can be found in the whole World, which wants a vivifying spark thereof.

Through this Spirit every occult Propriety is propagated unto Herbs, Stones,
Metals, and to all living Creatures, by the Sun and Moon, by the Planets and
other Stars of the Eight Orb. And those things that contain a more
plentiful and excellent Spirit of that Nature, shall perfect a more manifest
and swifter Operation in our Bodies: if so be it be duly separated from the
Body and Feces: for, the Feces profit nothing; yea, they plainly Impede and
oppress the Penetrating virtue of the Spirit. And indeed all Physicians should
have a special Regard, that they Artificially segregate the Medicinal virtues
of things from the Body, and the Elementated Impurities thereof, and not so
Foolishly hasten to their Patients, the Medicines and Feces together. But the
most part either wholly omit that Labor, or account it in a manner Dishonest;
Leaving that separating Art to the Diseased Body. Nevertheless these Men make
too huge a Progress in Philosophy, they shall often dispute against Astronomy
it self, not knowing indeed that they can nothing say, or Dispute, without
that Syderiall Spirit communicated to them, (as also to every Man, yet more or
less,) from above, by the Heavens and the Stars. Truly the Lote (which
shuts its Leaves before Sun Rise, but when he Ascends opens them by
degrees,) will be accounted more Just and Charitable toward the Celestial
Princes, then these so Rational Men. And so we believe shall the Cock, who
applauds the Rising Sun, as it were with a Hymn, from his Inferior Rousts.
But these are from the matter.

We formerly told you, There can nothing be found in this Lower World, that
wan^s a vivifying Spark of this Spirit: but yet to know, under what Star,
and in which sign of the Zodiaque, every thing Perceives its Spirit, This is
the Work, here the Labor is. Nevertheless, there has so much of this nature
bin Manifested to us, by sedulous and skillful Men, as is sufficient for Humane
Ingenuity and Pains, to find out greater things. Gold has in it the Spirit of
the Sun, and therefore is, (in value,) the most precious of all Metalls: It
also nourishes every Spirit of all things Growing: So that the Sun possesses
the virtues of all the Stars. No marvel then the Spirit of Gold (skilfully
extracted, or separated from the elementated, or Metallique Body) should
extirpate all Diseases of the Body. The reason is manifest by Astronomy it
self. But that there is Gold of the Solar Spirit, (to omit other Reasons) the
purifyed sign thereof sufficiently testifies, where you shall find Incense
Burning with perpetual Fire: which thing true Alchemists know very well; and
there yet remains such a thing to be found in some Sepulchers, that has
continued its Ardour and Fire for more then 100. years; Even as the Sun enjoys
Perpetual Light. The same Metal is not unfitly called the Terrene Chaos:
because if the Spirit of the Universe residing in it, should at a set time be
reduced to a competent Form with the Body, plainly produces the same, or even
greater things, then that Essence of the Sun, so earnestly sought for, by
Covetous Persons. So also to other Metalls, there is a Proper and Perpetual
Seed-plot in Heaven. The like for Trees, Plants, Stones, etc.

If therefore any thing growing nourishes in it an Astrall Spirit, we account
the Incensive matter of the Generative and Seminary virtue much more such, and
indeed more Perfect in Man himself. Those Philosophers who know not any such
thing in Man, can pronounce nothing certain as touching the Ingenuity of Man,
his Inclinations, Antipathy, Sympathy, of the Magnetique virtue and operation,
and such other things as are hitherto appertaining: Whence it is they so
Foolishly and Filthily heap up Reasons of Philosophizing, which are no better
then volatile Air.

We must not forget that there is a twofold Spirit in Man. One infused from the
Heavens and Stars, at the time of Generation: the other Inspired by GOD; This
was the breathing-hole of Life, in Adam; and that indeed Perfect, but
afterward Lost. The First Man was made of the Slime of the Earth, that is, of
the Greater World, of the Sydereall Creatures and Elements: whence he received
a certain Astrall Soul resembling the Soul of the World. The Object whereof,
is, The Universal World, and the things contained therein, that is, Worldly
Wisdom, generally comprehending all manner of Arts and Sciences within it
self: some such thing was Anciently called in Man, the Proper Genius, or Demon
of every one. He is not wholly Ignorant of the Natural Law, (that is, of the
Divine Will, commanding and approving the Good; but abhominating and Condemning
the Evil done unto us) because the World was the First Image of God: and Man
himself the next Example of any thing Possessing the Reason of the Word. And
although Man have Free Will, yet so it is in him, that what a one soever the
Predestination of the Mundane Soul made him: such a one also every Man would
(and desires to) Die, by a natural instinct. Thus we more plainly conceive
how Man is subject to the Stars. Hence likewise we will not deny, but that
very many Diseases, and consequently the term of Life proceed (especially in a
flourishing Age) from the Stars, touching which we have elsewhere produced
manifest Reasons, and a manifest Experience in Examples. Hereunto belongs the
whole Genethliaque Part of Astrology. Theophrastus Paracelsus has most
Plentifully and Learnedly explained the Foundations of this very Matter, in his
Volumne of Wise Philosophy.

There was another Breathing Hole placed by God in Adam, ( beyond this
Rational Spirit, and operating Soul, deducing its Original and Branches from
the Stars,) which was the Breathing Hole of Life, in which regard he was said
to be the Image of GOD: the Beauty of this Image was lost by the Fall of our
First Parents, ( a very small spark thereof surviving in us:) But may be
reduced to its pristine Condition by a Regeneration in Christ. This Spark
(Christ being Mediator) shall grow into a Flame of Celestial Wisdom; It is
the proper spirit of those that Believe in Christ. Joh. 7. Rejecting,
Despising, Deriding all those Worldly things, not as that they are the Works
of GOD (for they testify of GOD, what he is) but in that they are Corruptible,
unstable, and draw a Man from the presence of GOD, and from Eternal Joy in
Him. This Wisdom is that sorrow with the Flesh, and its Concupiscences, at
last overcoming, Christ being Conqueror. Of this is that vulgar saying,
Sapiens Dominabitur Astris. A wise Man shall Rule the Stars. By this very
Rule we are led from the Love of Corruptible things, and brought into the Love
of Eternal. By this we take the Cross of Christ upon our Shoulders, and
Follow him, that is, we shall hereby Purge out the Old Leven, crucifying our
Flesh with Evil Affections and Concupiscences, studying to learn abundantly
the Fruits of a Christian Spirit, without Hypocrisy, as Charity, Faith, Peace,
Joy, Liberality, Meekness, Temperance, Gal. 5. In a word: This Celestial
Spirit is no other thing, then Faith triumphing through Charity, without which
none shall Prevail before GOD, although (as it is in 1 Cor. 13.) He should
speak with the Tongues of Angels, and had all Faith, so that he could Remove
Mountains out of their Places, although he had all Sciences, and knew all
Mysteries, though he should give his Body to be Burnt, and were full of
Prophecy. GOD is CHARITY: we were Created and Redeemed of Charity, in Charity,
and by Charity.

Charity Preserves in us the Command of GOD. Charity is the Bond of Perfection,
Col. 3. Charity is Long suffering and Bountiful: she Envieth not, she makes
no Tumults, she is not puffed up, she does nothing whereof she is ashamed: she
seeks not her own: she Provokes not, she thinks no Evil* she rejoices
not at Iniquity, but the Truth: she bears all things; she believes all
things: she hops and sustaineth all things. Charity Builds up, knowledge
puffs up: Charity is greater then Prophesies, Sciences, Tongues; Prophesies
shall be abolished, Tongues shall be Silent, Sciences Perish: Charity remains
for ever: He that remains in Charity remains in GOD, and GOD in him.

Now we must know, there is a Twofold Man: One Astrall, External, or Carnal,
which is called Animal, (nor perceives he the things which are of the
Vivifying Spirit:) The other, Spiritual or Internal, busied in Renewing the
Corrupted Image of God, Romans 7. In like manner, there shall be a Twofold
Wisdom; One, Worldly or Astrall, the Wisdom of Arts, Sciences, Dignities,
Possessions, and of Corruptible things, wherein the Gentiles are alone Busied,
Mat. 6. The other Celestial, consisting in the knowledge of GOD, in the
consideration of his Ineffable Mercy, in the Desire of Eternal Happiness.
This Wisdom acknowledges no other Governor, then the Holy Spirit, operating
by the word of GOD: That, the Heavens and Celestial Influences: Both which may
be Joined in a Man that Pleases GOD. But in whom the Celestial Wisdom
Reigns, that other is only a Handmaid; she seeks for nothing at all, but
the Glory of GOD, and the welfare of her Neighbor: which indeed is as much as
is granted in this Life to the Elect, or those whom the Father has given unto
Christ. Now where the Astrall reigns, (suppose that alone,) There are Dogs,
and Swine, unto whom we are forbidden to cast Pearls, or that which is Holy.
Lastly where the Celestial and Astrall, do Conjunctly Rule; that is, when we
endeavor to serve Two Masters, There is True Hypocrisy, very displeasing unto
GOD. No Man can serve Two Masters: such were the Pharisees in the time of
Christ, whose Righteousness if ours exceed not, we shall not enter into the
Kingdom of God, Christ himself has spoken it.

It was but requisite that we a little touched upon those things, lest Ignorant
Detractors, (who are either far out of the way, or abhor this True manner of
Philosophizing) should take occasion to mingle Holy things with Profane, or
Profane with Holy, whilst perhaps they might take upon them to Disprove these
Realities.

Furthermore (...) hitherto we have Treated of the Soul and Spirit of the
Universe, and of the Syderiall Governor in Man: So now we may possibly be
informed concerning Four Senses in the Universe, accommodating themselves to
the Fourfold Virtue or Power of the Soul of the World.

There are Four Elements which contribute Matter to the Body of the World: and
there are also Four Powers in the Soul of the World. The first is, the
Intellect of it self Immovable, the Mover or Governor of the Sphere;
instituted by the Author of all things Governing the Spheres. The second is the
Soul of the Sphere, A Mover indeed that is Moveable, yet so of it self. The
third, a Certain Intelligence, excellently placed in this Soul by GOD, and
the superior Intellect. The fourth, is, Nature, that is to say, A Seminary and
Vital virtue, every way infused into the Matter, by the Soul. The Intellect
and Soul are indeed Substances: But the Intelligence and Nature are Qualities:
Those of the Soul, these of the Matter. The Four Images, of these are the
Four Elements: For, Fire resembles the Intellect; Earth, the Water; Air, the
Intelligence; And lastly, Water, the Soul. And as there are three things
Proper to Fire, three things also opposite to Earth, and that the Mediums agree
with Mediums by a certain Proportion, so there are three things proper to the
Intellect, and their Opposites are proper to Nature: The Mediums also to the
Mediums. For the Intellect is Individual; Uniforme, Eternal; Nature,
Dividuall; Multiforme, Temporal: The Soul (amongst these Mediums) looks
indeed (through the Intelligence) more participating of the Intellect it self,
then of Nature: But through the Animal Power, the rather agrees with Nature,
then the Intellect. Wherefore it is called Partly Individual, partly
Dividuall: Partly also Uniforme, and partly Multiforme: Again, partly
Eternal, and partly Temporal.

From Substance, Virtue, Action. Fire Subtle Acute, Moveable. Air Subtle
Obtuse Moveable. Water Gross Obtuse Moveable. Earth Gross Obtuse Immovable.

The Intellect, Individual, Uniforme, Eternal.
The Soul by the
Intelligence, Individual, Uniform, Eternal. Animal, Power, Dividuall,
Multiforme, Temporal, By Nature, Dividuall, Multiforme, Temporal.

Hence also are the Four Lives Delivered and Believed of Plato. The life of
Saturn admireing (in the Intellect) Heaven the Father thereof, that is, God
the Father of Heaven. The Ioviall in the Intelligence declining to Action yet
Moveable. The Venereall, in the Animal Virtue, yet Affecting Matter: And the
Dionysiacall, as if Drunk in Nature, that is, of a Drenched, or Drowned Matter.

And by a like Reason, there are Four Senses in the Universe. The First, in
the Soul of the World, Commune (I say) and one Sense: that is, a certain
Imaginary Virtue so accompanying its Intelligence, and touching the Particular
Forms of things, as the Intelligence does the Universal: Touching (I say)
Intrinsecally, and therefore it wants no Instruments, neither proceeds, or
suffers it any where without. The Second, is, in the Souls of the Spheres and
Stars Commune indeed, and Impatible also, but proceeding without. The third in
Particular Souls, distributed through all the Instruments, beyond Common
strength, and spreading it self without, but ending in the Judgment. The
Fourth, (and last) Sense is (according to the Pythagoreans) allowed to Plants,
yea, a certain Image of Sense, and that indeed Stupid, having no Judgment of
Quality, but Posited only in the Passion of some Pleasure or Grief.

The First Sense represents the Intellect: The Second the Intelligence; The
third, the Animal Virtue, and the Fourth, the Natural: wherein we must
remember that the Matter of the World, does not otherwise enter the Soul, then
by Nature, nor otherwise the Intelligence then by the Soul, nor otherwise the
Intellect, then by the Intelligence: Even as it receives Water by the Earth;
by the Water, Air; and by the Air, Fire.

But at length to come to our Matter, we must know, that the Lines of the
Hands, are not otherwise produced (giving GOD in the first place His Due) then
from the Imagination of the Greater World, thus, or so Affected in the
Generation of Man, yet performing its Authority and Office by the Stars. It is
hardly perceptible to our Humane Wit, how such an operation should be made in
our Hands, by Lines shaddowing out the Fate of every Man. This Imagination of
the Soul of the World is otherwise called Predestination, Science, Fate: And
she it is that performs her Power in the Conception and Birth, by the
Influence of that Star which then predominateth in the Heavens, and thence
powers out that Peculiar Genius upon every Man: If many Stars be to do the
work; the proper and accustomed Signatures are by them distributed and
Engraven, Fortunate or Unfortunate, according to the Affection of the Planets,
and other Stars, in their respective Signs and Quarters of Heaven. Those
Conjunctions and other Aspects of the Planets, which but seldom happen, do
make the most Noble and excellent Impression: such be the Conjunction and
Sextile of Venus and Mercury, the Conjunction and Trine of Saturn and Jupiter:
so also of Jupiter and Mars, Jupiter and the Sun, Jupiter and Venus; likewise
the Trine of Mars and Mercury: The Moon also partily supputated in an Angle,
or begirt with the Favorable Raye of a Noble Star, etc. yet more or less
according to the Quarters of Heaven, and the Places of the Zodiaque. The
presence of the more Notable Fixed Stars do hereunto contribute very much of
strength. So also they whom the Position of the Stars, shall incline to the
contrary. But there is so Beneficient a virtue planted in this Science, or
Predestination, and so great LOVE, that to forwarne us of Future Events (the
Times whereof the Directions of places in Corrected Genitures, which I
certainly know by often Experience, manifest) she often premits her Signitures
in this or that Place of the Hand, that if Fortunate Events be near, a Man
might happily know thereof, and by his Endeavor Nourish and Enlarge the same
to his Benefit: But if any Misfortunes, that he would and might be careful in
Averting, atleastwise in Mitigating the Evils ensuing. And indeed concerning
the LOVE extended in the First Creation, unto all things Celestial and
Terrestrial, (notwithstanding an Adjunct or Opposite Strife elsewhere) a whole
Volume might be written: See the Golden Commentaries of Marsilius Ficinus, upon
Plato's Banquet of Love.

We daily Observe how some Lines are quite Vanished, which were but even now in
our Hands, and that others Arise in Lieu thereof, with a Different Face: some
to wax Pale, and others to Flourish with a kind of Ruddynesse, etc. and indeed
deride them all, as Vain and Casual. But yet now that Experience her self
has by several practices reduced all to an Art, we cannot be so Impudent and
Stupid, as to deny them to contain some Events. Indeed it is requisite that the
Cause or Beginnings both of the Signatures themselves and the Affections
therein, should not elsewhere reside, then in that very Science of the Soul of
the World, sending as it were her Standard beforehand, by the peculiar Stars
and Progressions of the Stars of every Man: For unless this Imagination,
Science, Fate, or Predestination preceded by a certain perpetual Power,
nothing could be Generated, nothing Increased: Visible cannot be made of
Invisible things: Corporeal of Incorporeall: The Shapes, Magnitudes, Colors,
Odours and other Signatures of Bodies will not be unfoulded, whether the Efflux
of Nourishment be Plentiful, or but small: for that they have not the
Foundations, Roots, or Principles, under whose Power, Protection, and Patronage
they might be received into the Society of a New Republique. He that is
oppressed with Thirst, conceives in his mind a Species of Familiar Liquor: that
Appetite is an Individual Companion of this Imagination: And such an
Imagination is Thirst made by such an Appetite. The same is the Desired Liquor
to this Imagination: because the Species that made the Imagination is the
Property of the Liquor, and the Liquor by means of such Imagination may
satisfy Predestination, Science, Fate. Therefore what is a Nutriment* Requisite
to a Living Body, the same is the Impletion of the Events, or Impressions, the
Conceptions and Signatures of worldly knowledge; whether it be for good or bad:
which very thing the most Laudable Idea of Philosophical Phisique of Peter
Severine the Dane* a most Excellent Man in Truth, and a very Nervous writer,
does also direct us to. This therefore, that effects so great things in the
World, by a Natural and Inseparable Love, is also Employed in delineating the
Hands of Men, signifying whatsoever things a Man does, and they for the most
part are in one manner or other described in the Hand it self. Here we except
such things as ought to be excepted: the will of Man is not in every part
subjected to the Decrees of the Stars, neither also that saying, [If to day I
feed upon Flesh, whether shall I Dine to Morrow with Cole-worts or Carrets?
etc.] which are here added, to remove timely the Objections of Fools.

But if you desire to know wherefore these Signatures are found in the Hand,
and perhaps not in any other Part of the Body? you must conceive, that our
Hands are the most Noble Members in perfecting of al manner of Actions; they
are the Executors of all our Primary Conceptions: Insomuch, that if we wanted
the Benefit of our Hands for a few days, it must needs be we should all of us
Perish together: That therefore our Fate for the most part, and Our Power are
very much reposed in our Hands, we (even not knowing it) openly testify, when
with closed Hands, we make them Petitioners to GOD, or any Man, truly
declaring, we can do nothing of our own strength; we Despise and reject these
Flaggs of our Fate, folded up (like those of War) and yet that one thing
which we humbly crave, they obtain and make good unto us, as if some Sacrament
were Interposed betwixt them. I know not of whom such things as these may
seriously be considered on, in their Prayers.

It may now be Asked, wherefore the Excellent Positures of the Stars, do not
always shape and depaint the Lines very clear in our Hands? I have seen a
Noble Man, in whose Geniture all the Seven Planets were Collocated in their
Dignities: yet were not the Lines perspicuous in the most parts of his Hands:
but rather Obscure. I have seen another Nobly Descended, in whose Nativity
Mercury was excellently well posited in Gemini, and in the Cuspe of the Tenth:
yet the place of this Star had afforded him at that time no perspicuous
Signatures in his Hand, but such as were dark and slender, when notwithstanding
this Planet was both strong and Fortunate in the Geniture, and also at the time
of Conception: Besides, the same Planet disposed of the Horoscope, and was
moreover Lord of the New Moon preceding the Nativity. Now how the Power and
Dominion of this Star, then so strong and Powerful should be thus Impedited,
is the Question.

It may be again Demanded, how it comes, that sometimes you find a Diversity
of the Principal Lines in both Hands? I have seen the Epatica of the Right
Hand, adhering in some to the Line of Life; But in the Left Hand the same
Remote from the vital by a notable space: which we have also mentioned
somewhere else in our Practique part.

Touching these we must know, that many times the Seed of the Parents proves a
Great Impediment to the Superior Commotions. For indeed the Seed receives one
Condition from Parents that live in Concord, and Temperatly: but another from
such as live in Discord and Anxieties; especially about the time of Conception.
Besides, there is in either Parent a certain Pattern of the Imagination of
the Macrocosme, both of them receiving from every part thereof sundry
Impressions: And therefore when the Imagination of the Greater World is one way
affected about the Conception, and the Fathers and Mothers another way, it must
needs be that some Discrepancy will hence arise. But the Impression of the
Mothers Imagination is vulgarly known (as much as may be) at the time of the
Birth. The finding out of All Causes, is very Abstruse. Nevertheless as
touching those who have the Lines of either Hand appearing with a Different
Face, we cannot otherwise appoint and Pronounce, but that such are disposed
and inclined to a double Fortune, Good and Bad.

And now at length being about to put a Period to this our Tract: we earnestly
Desire all Learned Men, that whatsoever they know in Chiromancy, as having made
some certain trial thereof, they will be pleased freely to contribute the
same to these our Endeavors.

I confess I have not every where in my Praxis satisfied, my own self: I
know what Experience I have need of, to Complete an Absolute Praxis: And other
Men also may know I have Assayed to Dig at some such thing. It was but
requisite I annexed somewhat of The Soul of the World, and of what
appertains thereunto, as well lest some should Rashly Proclaim Incertaine
things to be Explained and Confirmed by Incertaine: as also that we might in
some sort Admonish both the Ignorant, and likewise such as Deride the Lethargy
of the Celestial (in these Terrene) Bodies, comprehending much in a few words,
from which Beginning, there may be Degrees of confirming these truly sincere
things in Philosophy, acceptable to GOD, and not estranged from the Holy
Scriptures: See the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 7. and 13. wherein the Lethargy of
Celestial things is separated from these Inferiors, lest they should Feed on
the Tares of Philosophy.

I shall be persuaded, it is possible, That the Knowing and Ingenious may
Favor these my First Endeavors. If otherwise, it suffices me that I received
a Sober Censure, at lest amongst those Wise and Learned Men, to whom I
presented this in writing: nevertheless there be some of that Profession, who
suppose it otherwise. I have nothing to do with the Ignorant and Malevolent.

AN END.

