THE Christian Subject: A TREATISE Directing a Christian to a peaceable
Conversation suitable to an holy Calling.

WHEREIN Are answered those ordinary Objections, of Haeresy, Tyranny,
Usurpation, Breaeh of Covenant.


Which some make as a sufficient plea to take them off from a cheerful
obedience TO This present Government.

Written by JOHN ROCKET, Minister of the Gospel at Hickling in Nottinghamshire.

Pacificis precibus Deus potest esse pacatus.

Cypr. in orat. Dom He walked with me in peace and Equity, and did turn many
away from iniquity.

Mal. 2.6. LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for william Gilbertson, at the
Sign of the Bible without Newgate. 1651.

To the Right Honorable, John Bradshaw, LORD PRESIDENT of the Council of
State; Health and Peace.
MY LORD,
MEN send out Books as Children of their Laborious brains, to present to the
world the Images of their Parents, and thence to derive to themselves
Commendations, and Praise, where they are unknown: but this I aim not at (if
Children always resemble their Parents) being very conscious of my own
deformities. Others by them as their paper Bellows endeavor to blow up the
dying sparks of Dissentions in Churches and Commonwealths: and as to this my
Book submits to your Lordships judgment: and indeed such persons with their
papers deserve the corruption of worms, whose cold humors should rather feed
on them, than their fire eat out the life and strength of others. However, that
Books might pass more safely, they walk under the protection of several
Personages of Honor and worth; yet protection this desires not (though never
more needed than in this crititall and dichotomizing age) hoping its subject
will be its guard, if the Reader carry the same eye and spirit as the Author.
Others devove their Labors by way of gratitude to such Patrons as have obliged
by some special favors, deserving persons to themselves. My Lord, this is the
intent of the unworthy Author, who desires to lay his works at those feet where
he owes himself: and in this I must make use of the pologeticall wish of a
Learned man, whereof he had not so little need, but I have as much: In prooem:
Episc: Cicisten sis prae Eusebius
Vtinam facultas (says he) in agendo voluntati in cupiendo respondisset; sed
fortasse ( ut Cleon apud Thucydidem) majora sp^rabam quam vires facile
tulerint, sed minora quam voluntas. And I hope your Lordship will the more
favorably accept it, in that it is the language of such a spirit as really
carries on the person to tread his written lin^s: and as the same Author speaks
of Eusebius recording the sufferings of the Saints, so he wishes in this of
the peace of the Saints amongst us, res ita in (hoc) verbis exprimuntur, ut non
demonstrari sed geri (and a me and omnibus) and ante oculos statui videantur.

My Lord, its said of the Hethen Roman, that he had one Temple dedicated to
Virtue, and another to Honor; before men ascended the latter, he must pass
through the former: this speaks as much to the Civil Magistrate as the
Soldier. I shall not cause it to look back upon your Honor, whose sober and
modest thoughts (if I be able rightly to judge) are such, that you had rather
keep before your eyes your memento mori, then your memoriae sacrum: yet I may
not conceal that care you have to preserve the standing, and tenderness over
the lapsing Christian, who bears upon him a real image of godliness. I have
also read of a Christian Roman, Constantine the pattern of Princes, S^crat.
sch^l l 1, c 12, p 338
and all Supreme Magistrates, that built in Constantinople two other Temples or
Churches, the one called by the name of the Apostles, the other of Peace: These
speak to us subjects; he that has been well taught and abides in the doctrine
of the Apostles, shall ascend the stairs and obtain the chair of peace: The
first is soon entered by many, but take only a turn or two in it, and so out
again: who never truly attain unto or delight in the latter: Yet let the
Magistrate build the first, and the subject will erect the second; and let him
defend the Temple of the Apostles in peace, and the Apostles will keep the
Temple of Peace: that so both of them might be united: for as we read, Psalm.
77. ult. Thou did lead thy people like a flock by the hands of Moses and
Aaron, Bajad: as if the Magistrate and Minister were so co-assistant and
co-existent in and for the peaceable and secure guidance, and rule of the rest
of the subjects, and people of God, as if they had but one hand, one way, one
power: to which that your Honor and the rest of the Honorable Counselors
consultations, and undertakings might be directed, shall be the prayer of

Your Honors most humbly devoted, and most obliged Servant, JOHN ROCKETT.

To the Christian Reader.
IT seems good to the Lord not only to set Ministers as l^ghts in the face of
the people to shine in doctrine, and practice; but also that the examples of
their lives should extend to their sufferings as well as to their common
conversations. God therefore above all others exercises them in afflictions and
by hands on all sides, that they, which are next to Christ the head of his
Church, might be the most like, and conformable unto him, and this not for
themselves alone but for the Churches sake, for whom alone they are what they
are, so having by all ways taught them that they might so teach others. Paul
preaches much out of his afflictions to all Churches and persons in
particular; and our Savior enjoins this on Peter. Luke 22.32. Strengthen, non
oratione tantum, urego pro Te discipulo, sed exhortatione, etc. ut Apostlus, ut
frater lapsus, etc. Not by prayers and intercessions only, as I have interceded
for thee my disciple and member; but by experimental observations and
exhortations gathered out of thy several conditions: and indeed then is truth
most savory to the Preacher and hearer, then seasonable, and commonly
effectual, when we set our seals, to the certainty of it.

I the Author hereof the unworthiest of any of Gods servants, the weakest of
all his Laborers should appear yet more unworthy and weak, did he hide any
thing of the Council of God from his people revealed to him by his word or
works; or should he not exercise and improve his improvements for his Church;
or should he hide a talent so precious and refined, or should he not bring
forth some more full and seasonable fruit by his prunings as well as his
manureings, and if this fruit prove pleasant, and healing to thee, as to him,
both may magnify that gracious and overruling skill and wisdom of the Almighty
Father, that beyond the intentions of Satan, or carnal men should produce such
eminent good out of such desperate evils: And if this contribute to the good
but of one Christian, he shall make use of that of his Author, Lips. praesat.
prolit. li^r.
ego nec labi and errare non posse solum fateor, sed debere: it behoved him,
though not became him to err; it was good for him, that he was afflicted; it
was good for thee, that he offended.

It concerns him therefore, Christian reader, who has been enlightened in the
Kingdom of Christ, and has been partaker of the sufferings of that Kingdom in
these late sad times to acquaint thee with the occasion of his writing, and the
reason of the manner of his writing.

The occasion of it is to discharge his duty in reference to thy safety, which
he desires to do with the freer mind, and fuller affection in as much of those
various censures the author expects to be cast on him being once of another
judgment: not that in any respect he would labor to reproach, or censure any
dissenting brother, but in the Spirit of meekness, and tender compassions
beseech him from what is written. and by his example to return into a sound and
quiet mind: its Gods mercy to beat thee on other men's backs, and to hold their
light to thy feet; whereto as to the hand of God the author not only willingly
submits, but is thankful that he is a servant of thine: and therefore he that
blushed at the Commission, glorys in the discovery of his infirmities.

Such was his evil as to ever look and slight Government in the hands of
persons, that might miscarry in the obtaining or managing of their power: for
Government still remains an Ordinance of God, and requires due and lawful
obedience, as thou may read at large in the treatise. It was the infirmity if
David to fret and be peevishly affected to see persons ungodly (in judgment or
practice) to flourish in an uninterrupted peace, wealth and honor: it becomes
such whose judgments vary from them (yet not able undoubtedly to search forth
the ways of Gods judgments) quietly to wait, Hab. 2.
God will speak: to stand still and be still, if they mean to see his
salvation: and sure it is, that a soft and lingering hope with a firm faith
opens to the fruition of promises. St. Hierom. Speaking to that of Ier. 29.11.
I think toward you thoughts of peace: therefore pray for peace, ut deus
captivitat is fine^, and patientia^ praesentium laborum seu spem futurorum.
That I the Lord might give ending to your captivity, and in the mean time
patience under your present bondages, and hopes for future happinesses. God
prepares for mercies by such gracious dispositions, and thou sees that he that
makes the most have, is ofts the furthest of: and hence it follows, that this
impatient and boiling passion puts a man upon an inconsiderate compliance and
confederacy with ungodly persons, to oppose that Government they so malign, of
whose ungodliness the uncessant series of providence most eminently exercised
against them might much convince thee and cautionate thee (as it should have
done the author) that thou associate not with them, least the same judgment
watch over thee, as it has done them: this was the failing of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 18. and 19. cap.
whom God suffered to join with and assest the wicked Ahab, an hater of the
faithful, a man given by himself to sin, and given by the Lord to judgment:
for which afterward he was sharply reproved, and then had like to have fallen
under the same curse by his unadvised conjunction.

And according to the nature of these the Authors sinful practices, did God
prepare and proportion his troubles as for the material part of his
afflictions, they were not so great in themselves, as in the fence of them;
which could not contain such weight, such bitterness, and pinching
straightness, but it must arise from the stopping of the daily confluence and
supply of strength from the Lord. And hence often times became his heart
straightened and shut up toward God in his greatest necessities, and hence
flowed in tumultuous confusions, that when he would gather his soul the closest
to God to refresh himself but a little, he could not; and what he received then
was through great intermissions: and this way of afflistion is not usual with
God to multiply his servants troubles, but that the practices much displeased
him: its far better, and safer for a Christians sins to be searched out by the
word, then by afflictions; that the conscience should be more kindly and
sweetly awakened by the voice of Christ, then by the lightenings and thunders
of his irefull corrections: among all these waves of God (besides his
domestical sufferings) the author was much tossed, yet sunk not: and if sunk, he
has left thee, Chrishian reader, this treatise as the topmast of a mind more
troubled, then his person, to teach thee to avoid those dangerous passages of
life, into which thy weaker, and less skillful brother has fallen: and herein
be advertised. That though no afflictions arise but from a just cause within us
yet thou take heed, least thou appear eminently isntrumental therein, that
so they may attend more glorious trial, then thy correction. And while God is
chastising take heed then of sinful deviations, and prevarications, least then
thou thicken the cloud over the face of God, by the light of whose presence,
thou must then be guided and supported, unless ineuitably thou perishest in
them. And as thou should not suffer as an evil doer, so take heed thou
fallest not into the same sna^e with evil doers, walk wo^thily before them, but
have no fellowship with them, walk not in their way, sit not in their councels.
Have reverent thoughts of them that are in authority, whether their power be
original, or derived: whatsoever their power be, and whosoever has the
administration thereof observe God in in (as he is in all things, and more
apparen ly in such) whereby it may b sanctified unto thee thou may glorify
God in it; love the Governors, pray for them, ^^^dy their peace, and be able to
appeal to thy ^ea^t for approvement of the sincerity of thy desires herei^;
such a disposition is no less ho^orabl^, then comfortable. Lay down the
spiritual ^eapo^s of a sinful warfare, as pride, covetousness, revenge, etc.
Sweet fins, but cannot be fed without the ruin, or disquiet of thy brother; its
a most vain thing for two parties to strive for superivity, to raise factions
to devide, and accasion a strife hereunto, when both have deserved well; better
it is to suffer injury by an equal, then by striving to injure both; which as
Saint James says, arises from, and nourishes our lusts only. Themistocles the
Governor of Athens, as Aelian, seeing two cocks fight most earnestly for life
and death, said; they fight neither for household goods, their country, parents,
children, nor friends, sed ne alter ab altero superetur: that one might not be
above another; and thus it is with many men, though otherwise be their
pretenses: Ambition, Self-interest, Maliciousness, are never good as causes,
directors, or ends: nay its safe, honest, our duty sometimes, (where it may
stand with a good conscience) to let fall the right of one side, rather then to
endanger the safty and right of all: and herein Christian reader, thou see
the occasion to stretch out it self as much to thee, as to the author; its for
thy sake, and for those ends he writes this small treatise for thee; which the
God of peace make useful to thee.

As to the manner of his writing; its somewhat Systoricall and that is most apt
for discourse, magnis exemplis edocti: we love to tread in others steps,
especially in doubtful, and difficult times; we see, as of old, the whole
nation modeling themselves in habit, manner, language, and Religion into the
form of their superiors; that if we should go to the most of people and ask
them as Christ did the Pharisees, whose image and superscription is this, that
is on your conversation, profession, etc. It might easily be returned, its the
image of our Ruler, and the superscription of his Ordinance; and hence it is we
are so subject to mutations: but it ought not to be so with Christians, their
manners and lives ought always to be the same, because they have the same rule
and way to walk by, an incorruptible word, an eternal truth, and everlasting
law, that has been in all ages; the same that Christ the King made and lived
by; of whom the Primitive Church was a severe and close follower. I have set
down those that are the most noble examples and worthy patterns of such as saw
Christ in the flesh, and multitudes of Christians who were their disciples
also; that so thou may see their fashion of old, what was the practice and
manners of ancient Christians living under Kings, Governors, and all kinds of
government, and changes of government, even such as first laid the foundation
of the church; first laborers in the vineyard of Christ, and watered it with
their blood; and all the blood shed so abundantly fell like oil upon the
ground, softly and quietly: those are them worthy of our imitation as Heb.
2.12.1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed, etc. Quid praeclarius (says
his author) quam ipsa christianae Ecclesiae quasi incunabula pervidere, in
quibus producta a christo, ejus verbo ab Apostolis nutrita, suisque
progressionibus usa, pedetentim crevit, venit que ad summum quid pulchrius --
quam illa tempora intueri in quibus Hegesyppus Ecclesiam castam and incorruptam
virginem memorat? Assuredly, Christian reader, thou would desire these times
to be like them when the Church was in ber purity, and the spouse of Christ
unde filed; herein is presented somewhat of them to thee, for if the author
mistake take not, the utmost example survives not ^^. years or much more after
Christ, whose funerals and ascension the Church was yet freshly celebrating:
and the Christians in those times we read exactly following this Apostolical
Canon, Let supplications, prayers, etc. Then whom we ought to follow none with
greater ambition and emulation. And its his desire, that Magistrates like the
highest boughs of the goodliest trees might be the most fruitful, and bowing
themselves down with the abundance thereof might let fall their ripe fruits
into the subjects lap, who does so plentifully water them with their prayers,
and tears; that the Lord according to our desires would rain down peace and
righteousness through the Magistrate, which we may gratefully receive, and
conscientiously employ and improve to the Common good,

Who is thine in the Lord. J. R.

THE Christian Subject: OR, A Treatise directing Christians to a Conversation
suitable to their Calling: And Resolving those common Objections Of Heresy,
Usurpation, Tyranny, Breach of Covenant.

1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men: for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: for this is good, and acceptable in the sight, etc.


CHAP. I.
PAUL writes these two Epistles to Timothy, whom he often salutes with the
appellation of Son; and this first Epistle he writes to Timothy (...) his own
son, as if he was naturally begotten by him; but such cannot be the meaning:
nor merely an adopted son, whose affections mutually ran forth one to another,
and especially in their afflictions when their affectionate assistances and
services were so great, as if they were betwixt father and son. But he is a son
in a spiritual sense, and Paul was so his father, not in that common sense
begotten by him in the second birth of Regeneration, wherein he styles
himself father frequently in other of his Epistles, and wherein he was a
fruitful parent, fiting the house of God with a numerous offspring of gracious
children; but I say in this sense he was not his father, it being more then
conjecturall, that Timothy was a true Believer before he knew Paul, and that
those gracious principles and first seeds of grace were early sown in him by
the careful education and instruction of his pious parents, as it appears by
those passages of Paul in these Epistles, wherein he in-mindes him of those
hopeful presages of him from his ripening infancy, 1 Epist. 1.18. This Charge
I commit, etc. and in the 2 Epist. 1.5. when I call to remembrance etc. and
3.15. and that from a child, etc. But he was a son (...), to the preaching of
the Gospel, and Doctrine of Faith; though a Brother and fellow Labourer in the
work of the Ministry with Paul, yet a Son too in the Ministerial Office, whom
first he begot and set apart unto that Calling, as 2 Epist. 1.6. Wherefore I
put thee in remembrance, etc. and having so begotten him, he accordingly
educates him, sets him his particular charge, where and over whom he was to
exercise his gifts, and for which he would call him to account: and being so
disposed of, he sends unto him, as his son, these Epistles; not only to
testify his paternal affection, but his care also, that he might not want
sufficient directions and encouragements to strengthen and enable him how he
should worthily deport himself in that place, like a son of Paul's, and a
Father in the Church; whose example, and fatherly precepts here are laid before
him: and in this respect and relation Paul writes unto him, as the general
scope of the Epistles evidences to us. And in particular

First, He proposes some things by way of caution, concerning some
False-teachers, or some that would be Teachers, who having found out some new
and curious Doctrine, at once would be the Inventers and Patrons of it; as also
concerning backsliders from the true Faith; and concerning sore-ridden hearers,
that could no longer endure sound Doctrine, and of high witted, boasting, and
verbal professors, that practiced and professed themselves polemical,
critical, and much historical in Divinity, as you may read in the beginning of
this Epistle, and several other touches sprinkled up and down the Epistles.

Secondly, He prescribes some positive Rules by way of Injunction, and
Exhortation, as an Apostle and Minister of Jesus Christ, to Timothy a Servant
to the same Master, and in the same Work. And

First, this is more general: charging him to Constancy and Courage, verse 18.
chap. 1. This Charge etc. -- that thou might, etc. be as a stout Soldier in
this thy Calling general and particular, both being so much for the glory of
Christ, as a Christian, as a Minister. No good warfare unless it be ad
victoriam, every Christian must be a Conqueror: How he is a Conqueror that is
constant, v. 19. holding, etc. he overcomes that is not overcome, sperans --
certus de praemio, si vincat, certus se victurum, si perseveret, being sure of
reward, if he overcomes; and as sure to overcome, if he endures. He that
suffers death for the Faith under a Persecuter, overcomes as well as he that
converts Souls, destroys the holds of Sin and Satan, confutes Heretics, etc.
so long as he makes not a voluntary shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience,
through the winds of Heresy, and storms of Persecution, though at length the
bottom sink, that frail Tabernacle of his flesh be wasted in the fire, or
devoured of wild beasts, yet he has fought a good fight, he has warred a
good warfare.

Secondly, In this Chapter he begins to lay down more special and particular
directions how he should carry himself in his special Function, as a
Minister. I Exhort therefore; etc.

In these yerses observe,

1 The circumstantiall parts 1 A rational Inference, Therefore. 2 Of Order,
First of all.
2 The material parts, wherein 1 The duty laid down in charge expressed in
many words, Supplications, Prayers, etc. 2 The Subject for whom this duty is to
be performed; 1 At large, All men. 2 More strict, For Magistrates, and them,
Kings, or others: all that are, etc.

3 The end of this duty, which is threefold; a strong inducement to Prayer,
That we, etc. 4 The Arguments to move them hereunto, taken from him to whom
we offer up these Prayers, v. 3. For this, etc. And from them for whom we do
pray, v. 4. Who will have etc.
CHAP II.
WE shall first explain these words distinctly, then deduce from thence the
intended conclusions with what plainness and clearness we can.

1 Of the circumstantiall parts of this exhortation. And

First, of the inference, Therefore, this word causes us to reflect on the
precedent verses, where they seem to have their dependency. The holy Apostle
lays on Timothy this charge, that he would war a good warfare as a Minister of
the Gospel, as a good Soldier of Christ, as a Captain going before the people,
keeping Faith and a good Conscience: and that he might advance this Gospel he
ought to seek the peace, and protection of it, that so he might prosper in this
his Warfare; and that he might not only preserve himself, but by his Ministry
enlarge the Territories of Christ, increase in his work, and gather upon the
adversaries of it; and that he might not only keep a good Conscience undefiled
in himself, but in his place discharge it aright, he exhorts him in the
public Office of the Ministry, in their public meetings for Prayer,
Preaching, and Dispensation of any Ordinances belonging to his Calling, to pray
for all men, etc. I Exhort thee therefore.

2 Of the circumstance of Order, (...), First of all.

Which First, if it has reference to the Order of Paul's directions and
precepts, then it signifies Paul's special care of this Duty, that it might not
be neglected, or slightly performed; but sets it in the front of all, First of
all, as if Paul should require Timothy to have a chief regard and care hereto.

Secondly, if it has reference to this very Exhortation it self, then it sets
forth unto us

1 The excellency of the Duty, that it is a chief duty, and above all things
however, neglect not this.

2 The season of its performance, begin with this, First of all in your
meetings take your beginning from God, seek to him by prayer, testify your
dependencies on him, and all your references unto him; and amongst others pray
for those men. Timothy a public person in his public Office must pray for
public persons, and all persons; not to exclude other seasons, but then
principally, for then a Minister of the Gospel in Christ's stead is to imitate
Christ the high Priest of all; as the Priests under the Law did prefigure and
type out Christ herein, cujus est munus (...), whose Office it was to offer for
the Errors, and ignorances of the people; Prayer now being our sacrifice, we
must offer for them unto God in Christ.

Prayer then is of an ancient institution, under Law and Gospel: it is an
Ordinance of contiunance till our prayers shall be turned into praises, our
wishes into fruitions, and resemblances into real participations in the
presence of God, and of the Lamb. Abel began with sacrifice, wherein was the
prayer of his heart; Timothy must begin with Prayer, which is the sacrifice of
the heart.

Prayer also must introduce all our works; as in public duties, we especially
come in Gods presence both in the intention and preparation of the heart, and
in the promise of God, so by prayer we are brought still nearer to God, and God
to us; and makes us as fit to entertain God into us, as God ready to bestow
himself, or any mercy (suitable to that Ordinance in hand) upon us: qui been
orat, been laborat, he that prays well, shall speed well: he that sets on his
business with prayer has already done the best part of it. We must therefore
first pray, then preach; first pray, then study, first pray then hear, etc.
Prayer is the general preface to all our actions, and as Christ teaches us to
pray thus, Paul bids us to pray this; to put up, or make supplications,
prayers, etc. Wherein is expressed

1 The duty it self enjoined, expressed in four words, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks. Some would have these words synonimous,
others to be particularly significant, and surely they may have the latter
sense and carry with them several Directions, or in general include the
method of Prayer.

Supplications; the word (...) signifies wants as well as supplications, (...),
so (...), so that by supplication you may understand deprecation against evils
incumbent or imminent; the prayers of a necessitated person for the removal or
prevention of evils spiritual or temporal, feared or felt.

(...), Prayers, you may understand them for petitions for good spiritual, or
temporal, (...), according to a man's wish, such as are promised of God, and
could be wished for of our selves, as conducing to our happiness; or they are
desirers for the restoring of good things lost, a continuance of present good,
or confluence of more good.

(...), Intercessions, or intermediating prayers, which more properly are put
up for others, and so all these several kinds of prayers are intercessions: yet
it signifies more, prayers of fervency and familiarity, when we are most inward
and bold with God, expostulating and pleading with him, which usually is more
for others then our selves, either for pardon, or the removing of some misery.

(...), Thanksgivings, a rerurning of mercies by the same mouth and heart that
begged them; which is commonly for simple and unmixed blessings conferred on
us, or evils removed from us.

And if the words carry not fully the sense of these significations as they may
do, Ephesians. 5.18. then they do more fully express the substance of this duty,
and the several parts of it; to press it more effectually on us, and to
prevent the manifold evasions of the flesh in the too frequent neglect of it.

And here you read all the words in the plural number, let Supplications,
Prayers, etc. not a prayer, a peticion, etc. to teach us that we must be
uncessant, and constant in this duty, not to pray once, but often: we must make
prayers for them, and all kinds of them as opportunity presents it self to us.

And further it teaches us, that a public prayer, is not a single prayer, but
it is prayers, a prayer involving prayers; for though one man speaks the
prayer, yet there be as many prayers put up, as there be persons joining with
him.

Again, as here we see the perpetuation of this Ordinance, so we see not a
limitation to any form, no not to the Lords Prayer, (most excellent and
comprehensive in it self, and therefore ought the more wisely and cautiously to
be used) which expresses not this precept: only here the Apostle requires us
that in all our prayers, especially in public, which are to be the most plain
and large, we should not forget but seriously and piously seek for the good of
those persons: and me thinks there is something in the words that might hint
this to us, (...), be made: let prayers be made for them. Prayers are not made
for us, but we make prayers for them; we, that is, the Spirit of God in us,
teaches us to form and make prayers for them. Thus much for the duty barely
considered.

Secondly, concerning the subjects for whom this must be performed, and they
are

1 In general laid down, for all men: that is, all kinds and sorts of men
Ministers ought to pray for, and all sexes are included under it, (...), not
(...), yet not peremptorily, but submiting to the good pleasure, ordination,
and decree of God; for, for some of them prayer shall not be effectual. Yet
we pray for all, for these reasons,

First, because we know not to whom mercy does belong, and if we should not
pray beyond the certainty of our knowledge, we should pray for none.

2 Because the promise is indifferently made to all, none by name excepted, nor
Jew nor Gentile, none of us have ever seen the book of life, to see whose names
are written there and whose are not; we ought then to pray for as many as are
in Christ, and for whom the promise is sufficient: and as no outward estate
makes persons more acceptable, so none more detestable.

3 Because the will of God is, 1 indifferently to confer his outward blessings
on all men, unjust as well as just; and all as creatures have a right to them,
and he as Creator does dispense them to his creatures: then for outward
blessings we may beg for the unrighteous as well as the holy. 2 To show grace
to many sinners we should judge past hope, and have given up as lost and
reprobates: there is none now so vile, but the Lord has showed mercy to as
vile; then for ought that thou know, God may so deal with such and such,
and it would reflect sadly on thy spirit hereafter to see them glorious lights,
whom thou have condemned to utter darkness, nor would ever afford them thy
prayers, see v. 4. of this text.

4 Because the tenders of grace from a Gospel-Minister Minister ought to be
general and indifferent; sure our prayers ought to be as large as our tenders,
and what we endeavor for, we ought to pray for.

5 It is laid down here in command.

Object. But can prayers, will some say, hasten the day of conversion to the
Elect, or do the reprobated sinner any good? will it protract this man's
punishment, or properate this man's happiness? will it alter any thing of the
counsel of God toward his creature?

Sol. No, of it self it can do nothing, but as subordinate to the will of God,
who gives what and when we ask, who can give without asking.

First, we pray for the bringing in of the Elect, whose times nevertheless are
prefixed of the Lord for these reasons,

1 Hereby we join and agree with the Counsel of God, and his determination;
we approve, affect and rejoice in the purpose of God toward such, and we that
once shall give Testimony to the execution of the Decree, to our power in
present we seal to it.

2 Herein we strive not to alter any time of Gods, but show by prayer our
dependence on God in the use of means till that time: though he has
determined it in his secret Will, yet we must use means in reference to the
execution of that Will, one of which is prayer.

3 Hereby we discover that spiritual sympathy with the whole body of Christ,
which every true member ought to have, not only with the distressed members of
Christ, already believing, but with the darkness, the hardness, the
infidelity, that dishonor Christ now receives by such, that are actually
enemies to God, and yet belong to the Election of Grace. When in public
Ordinances we meet about the salvation of our own Souls, we are not so much
taken up with them, but we think on, and long after the salvation of others; we
mourn over their present condition, nay we rejoice in the expectation of the
day of their conversion, Cant. 8.8. there is the disposition of a true member
of Christ, a child of the Spouse of Christ.

Secondly, We pray for the reprobate, yet not knowing who they are, whether
this or that person be in such an estate,

1 To testify a liknesse of affection betwixt God and us: he desires not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he might repent and live, and so we desire
not the confusion of any, but that, if it were the good pleasure of God, that
they might be converted, and saved; thus we are merciful as our heavenly
Father is merciful.

2 It is for the glory of our Profession, in the real witnessing of our true
tenderness of affection over and toward poor sinners: this is one glorious
beam shining from the children of light, in whom the love of Christ is shed,
and might somewhat what convince the ungodly of the world, could they but see,
or had hearts sensible of themselves, or that sense others have of them.

3 For the encouragement of sinners, that they might see how large the grace of
Christ is, and the sufficiency of it even for them if they had faith to receive
it; and that it is not only to be tendered to them, but begged for them: that
they might perceive how open the loving arms of the Spouse of Christ are, how
ready to receive any sinner into communion with her, did he believe.

4 For manifest clearing of the justice of God at last, and to leave the
sinners without excuse, when such offers and means have been used to reclaim
them, and yet they persist against the truth; not only the sufferings, but the
actions of his people shall be a testimony against them, even especially
against such that persecutes them that prays for their happiness, that wills
and labors for their Salvation, Matthew. 10.18.

Thirdly, admit we know not on whom our prayers shall take effect, no not of
them that are Elected, nor on whom first, nor whether we shall live to behold
the returns of them: yet it is enough that the Lord requires it of us, let us
believe and obey, let us be content to lay up our prayers in the Treasury of
God for future ages, for them we have never seen, nor shall ever see in the
flesh. Admit they take no effect on them, we shall not lose the comfort and
reward of them, Isa. 49.5. Sat est, quod ille jubet, do as the Lord bids thee,
its sufficient that he commands thee. If we enquire for reason, we shall
oftentimes find as little for our obedience, as for our Faith: The Lord tells
his people, and in them us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. the revealed thing is in the Text,
pray for all men, but the particular persons on whom our prayers shall sweetly
fall, is a secret, leave that to God, to effect in his time, which if we see,
then we shall rejoice; if not, we should be content. Thus much for the duty
and subjects in general.

CHAP. III.
NOw follows the subjects more strictly considered, for whom in special, and
individually we ought to pray for, or for whom more chiefly and above others,
primum specialius, nominatim, we ought to pray, For Kings, and all that are in
Authority.

First, here is a subject in the most strict consideration, set out by his
particular Office, King: for Kings. To open this, we shall resolve you,

1 What were those Kings then for whom they were to pray.

For their government, they were tyrannical Monarchs, that Lived and Ruled
according to their Will, who had no prescript, boundary, or moderation: and
though they might have certain Customs, Privileges, Constitutions and
Prescriptions by which they judged in their several Places and Courts of
Jurisdiction, yet even them they infringed at pleasure, especially toward
Captives and Aliens. These were absolute Sovereigns, who made, abrogated,
suspended, and altered their own Laws at pleasure; and this appears by their
practice in sacred Writ, and other Histories: Their government was not mixed as
ours have bin, nor their Kings subject to bounds and accounts as ours were.

2 For their right of Government, it was little or none; pure Nymrods, that
hunted and thirsted after victory and subduing Nations to their command, in
whom they had no title nor interest; and accordingly did several Kingdoms
arise and bear sway in the world; sometimes the Assyrian, Grecian, Roman,
etc. had their successions of usurped commands by the Sword, as the Turk has
now, and far greater: and accordingly did they maintain their Power, even by
the Sword amongst the Jews, Christians and Infidels; they seldom questioned
title and interest, but power, and strength; and had under them their petty
Kings, or Vice-Royes, praefecti, etc. created out of their own favorites and
soldiers for the most part.

3 For their Religion, they were Hethens and Idolaters, cruel persecutors
sometimes of Jew and Christian together, sometimes of one alone: some full of
Covetousness, Luxury, Cruelty, satisfying themselves in the blood of their own
kindred, and nearest relations. These things are apparent partly by Scripture,
and to any ordinary Reader of Ecclesiastical and Praphane History; and yet
even these must poor Christians suffering under them pray for.

Secondly, Why Kings specified by name.

1 Because at that time it was the most general Government in the World,
though in some places otherwise: and not only then, but even from the beginning
Monarchy has been the Government, and that more Ancient in its Original and
of greater continuance amongst the Hethens, then such as worshipped the true
God: and whether it was because they did not so much need it, or that it was
not so excellent a Government, I leave to others to determine.

2 Because many Christians might scruple praying for such Persons, being of
such lives and judgments, that were enemies to them and all that were good.
Sure if Christians then had been of the Popes mind, they had cursed them to
death, delivered them over to Satan, in stead of praying for them: nay, if they
had been of that spirit Peter was sometimes of, they would have called for fire
from Heaven, and sent them to Hell in a flame, rather then called for a
blessing on them and their Government; and they would judge it a bootlesse
thing in it self for them, and unacceptable to God. But the Apostle here
resolves them and directs them unto this duty, not by way of Policy but
Conscience, as a Christian Duty indeed; Pray for Kings, those Kings, no Kings
being excepted.

Secondly, Now as concerning the subject less restrained, (...) This is not so
large as the first, that is, to pray for all men, yet larger then the second,
that was only for Kings, this being for all that have any emminent place, or
that are in Authority: which is not to be restrained to the substitutes of
Kings, and their Officers alone, which have only a deputed Power, though these
it may respect, such as are in Scripture named Governors, Rulers, being placed
by the supreme Magistrate in Places of trust and government under him; but this
has reference still to the supreme Magistrate, whom we ought chiefly to pray
for, that the blessing of God may first fall upon that head, and thence run
down to the very skirt. Pray for all that are in Authority, whether you call
them Kings, Consuls, or of any other kind of Government, that you Christians
shall live under, or that shall be placed over you, whether you call it
Monarchy, or Aristocracy, or Democracy. For as we know, there was not at that
time one only kind of Government, nor that kind was of any long continuance,
especially among the Romans, who then were the glory of the World, and now
ruled over the Jews, Grecians, and under whom were begun many Churches of
Christ. We see how often the Government of the Romans changed, six times from
the Original. So the Grecians, changed much after the death of Alexander, some
had Kings, some were Aristocratians, others Democratians, as at Athens,
Peloponesus, Lacedemon, etc. and even in Greece there were many flourishing
Churches of God, and they were planted early, and were to pray for such as had
the administration of Government, be they what they would; here, as no Kings
are excepted, so no Authorities, no Governments. For the further clearing of
this, in the resolving of certain doubts and queries, is afterward undertaken.

Thirdly, the end of this Duty, in reference to this life, to that estate
wherein we live under them, That we might lead a quiet, etc. from whom we sue
for these blessings.

1 Peace, that is first set down, because it is the common ingredient that
makes sweet all things, strengthens and increases them; it is the ground work
of all other happiness; this is external peace and quietness we pray for,
and therein against all foreign Invasions, and intestine Commotions, against
all Oppressions and unjust Taxations, whereby the peace of the subject is
broken, or an occasion and ground laid for its breach.

2 Godliness, a peacable life lead, (...) in all godliness, all kinds of it,
in the public profession of it, and in the private practice of it: but as the
word carries it, and the scope of the Apostle writing to a Minister, it intends
for public Worship, in the countenancing of Religion by Authority, in
Ministers and People, in reference to their ordinary communion in Ordinances,
which could not be procured without the supreme Magistrate; pray then for this,
that with your power you may have the truth and way of Christ protected, you
not forced to Idolatry, etc. else your peace would be unpleasant.

3 Honesty, that is, in common commerce and fellowship with others; (...), that
the age might not be so licentious wherein we live, as to abuse them that are
Religious in their Callings, Families, Name and Persons; that there be not a
toleration of lewd persons: but that the Governors may be such, whose Laws
may afford them honest dealing with men, even Hethens, that themselves, their
wives and children, might comfortably enjoy, and make use of their own.

Lastly, the argument to provoke us hereunto, is from the acceptance of the
Duty, (...), etc. This. What? not that peace afforded to you through the
Magistrates care, though that be acceptable: but this Duty conscionably
performed by you for the Magistrate. This is comely, beautiful (as the word is
used) in the sight of God. Mark in whose sight, God our Savior, Jesus Christ;
he that died for you, and has called you with an holy Call unto this Estate;
he that has made you members of his body, and takes notice of you in all
conditions, especially under such Kings and emminent Persons, that would make
you sufferers for your profession: he delights to see you at such times so
graciously affectionated as to pray for them; he sees you then with an eye of
acceptance, and approbation as well as of discrimination; what greater
engagement can be laid upon a heart prizing the love of God, desirous to walk
worthily before him, and even in such times to have this testimony in him, that
he pleases God.

And mark, v. 4. that rational ground Paul lays to prove, that such prayers
are acceptable; because they are according to the will of God: for they labor
to draw out the mind and will of God to act for souls yet in darkness, and
unbelieving. Our Savior would have all saved; that is, some of all Estates,
some Kings, and Governors, some of the highest Authority, as well as other
subjects. His blood is ransom sufficient to redeem the most considerable slave
Satan has; and he is able by the evidence of Gospel to evince the strongest
reasonings of flesh and blood. Why may not this man prove a Paul? this Trajan
prove a Joseph? why may not some of these All be here where I live, and under
whose shadow I in peace lie down? However, whether they belong to the Election
of God, yet the duty is acceptable it self, and it was done not only in
reference to the command revealed, but to the execution of the secret will of
God to such; which might extend to these particular men in this present
Authority over him: and if it did, and these persons became true believers,
they should be sure to obtain the general and main ends of their desires,
liberty to lead a peaceable and quiet life, etc.

Thus you have the Text laid open by way of exposition before you; that part of
it, whereof we intend to make further use, is more briefly considered in
present; the conclusions here properly issuing are laid down in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
HEre is directly set forth a Christian-Subjects Duty, and by proper
consequence a Christian-Magistrates Duty. 1 the Subject-Christians Duty is to
pray for the supreme Magistrate in order to Peace, Religion, and Civility. 2
the Ruling-Christians Duty is as apparent, for what we ought to seek of God to
be conveyed to us by the Magistrate, as the next and most fit means, we may
expect as their duty to labor to the utmost to confer on us Christians, viz.
to Govern in Peace, to promote and protect Godliness professed by them, to
guard their Persons, and Estates from the injurious dealings of lewd Persons,
that are the notorious enemies of Peace and Holiness; that so through their
watchfulness and care the subject might be delivered from such fears and
troubles as are incident to them through a loose and tyrannical Government.

First, then let us look into our own duty, which is to seek of God for
spiritual and temperall blessings to be poured forth upon the supreme
Magistrate, what ever he be; and of all under him or them acting in the same
Government, that Peace may be established, Godliness advanced, Honesty
maintaind. To discuss this plainly, we shall draw it forth into these
propositions.

1. That the disposition, and inward frame of a Christian should be for a
Peaceable, Godly and Honest life. 2. That the people of God under any
Government whatsoever may be deprived thereof. 3. That prayer is a probable
means to recover a broken Peace, Religion, and Liberty. 4. That under all
Governments whatsoever this should be the practice of a true Christian-Subject,
to pray for them.
As to the first: that the inward temper and disposition of a Christian should
be Peaceable, Godly and Honest; his inward thoughts and affections so
qualified. The heart is the fountain of desires, out of the abundance of it we
speak; therefore that we pray for (according to the Apostles precept) should be
sincerely affected, and delighted in by the soul, if it could be obtained by
prayer; The things sought for are Peace, Holiness, Honesty; let these words be
the genuine, and true resemblances of the soul, and inward man, which ought so
to be, as shall appear in particular, that such a frame is Evangelicall.

First for Peace. A Christians mind is inclined to peace; what the soul truly
desires for others, it affects for himself; it desires peace, pardon,
quietness for others, even unbeleevers: The more mortified sin is in a
Christian, the more quiet and peaceable are his affections, the more humble,
selfe-denying, etc. which are great promoters of peace. The Apostle puts the
question and resolves it. Iam. 4.1. Whence, etc. Those lusts are commonly
covetousness, ambition, desire of revenge, discontent, which move the mind
till it break out with lightning and thunder; but the more mortified these are,
the more quiet and and addicted to peace they are. We read in those
Evangelicall promises of the Gospel, that they shall be at peace, all one and
alike; how? the stour Lion shall condescend to the meek Lamb, the greedy Bear
shall be lead with a child, and the peevish Wasp shall be played with. Where the
sharp Thorn and Bryer grew, there shall the sweet Fur and Myrtle grow: here
you may see a Gospel disposition; and sure it is, the more of a Gospel spirit
is in them, the more of such graces, have they abounding in them. Gal. 5. what
a nest of viprous vices, the Apostle finds out in a carnal man, ver. 20, 21.
witchcraft, hatred, variance, etc. but the spiritual man is otherwise minded,
having the Spirit of God ruleing in him, whose fruits ver. 22. are love, peace,
etc. he must have this Spirit that can truly put up this prayer; and every one
whose affections are thus qualified by the Spirit, will thus pray: and that his
internal qualifications are such, his general conversation will witness,
which is contemplative and monastical, requiring a quiet retirement: that as
God usually at such seasons appears to his people, so his people will contrive
such seasons (when their public occasions seem to deny them) that being the
most removed from humane Societies, from their worldly employments, nay from
themselves, they may solace themselves in some familiar converse, and communion
with their God: I say that this is the general frame of a true Christian,
however at some time by some violent temptation he may be transported into
other carriages.

Otherwise you shall find men unsound in their judgments to be unsafe in
their practices, men restless in the truth to be restless in their ways: nay
men, otherwise good men, at once leaveing the paths of Holiness and Peace: We
read in acred Story of two persons notorious for Commotions, and a third is
added to them by learned Historian: The first was one Theudas, Acts 5.37. vide
Joseph lib 18. ca. 1. and 12,
that professed himself a Prophet, and amongst other of his Figments,
persuaded his followers that he could divide Jordan, for them to pass through;
but these perished: The second was one Judas a Galilaean, who with another
(happily under pretense of oppression by Taxes) drew many discontented and loose
persons into Sedition. Eusebius makes mention of a third, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap.
9. p. 24. sub Claudio A^. Christi. 46.
a certain Egyptian Prophet, who seduced and raised into tumultuous Assemblies
30000 persons. After the death of Christ the Jewish Nation was seldom free from
these turbulent spirits, heading the people in several parties and places,
whereby many thousands of that peculiar Flock perished at several times, which
though occasioned by their frequent and rebellious Insurrections, yet as a sad
judgment were delivered up to such reprobate minds as to be led by such
persons to their ruin for murdering the Lord of life: and this was not perfect
in that last and sad Seige of Jerusalem, but afterward being dispersed into
several Provinces through the Eastern part of the world. We likewise read, that
the orthodox were so disquieted and troubled by the Arians, and other
Heretics, that they desired rather the habitations and society of Beasts,
then of such inhumane Christians: Tempore haeresium Arii and aliorum, Abbas
Ioachim. in Apoc. p. 161.
plures fideles elegerunt vitam hermeticam, melius decernentes cum bestiis
habitare in sylvis, quam cum Arianis participare, etc. Our late predecessors
could tetestify the late practices of the Anabaptists in Germany, enemies to
Magistracy as well as Magistrates: and we their children can witness the sad
Rebellion in Ireland, continuing till this day against their lawful Authority,
and their former National Agreements, with most feral cruelty pouring forth
the blood of the sucking infant, and dear parent, not respecting the persons of
the Priests, nor favoring the Elders, Lam. 4.16. Neither have the Protestants
in Ireland been the only subjects of that Papal Tragedy, England has suffered
much, and no marvel, their actions are but the issues of their affections, and
their practices the fruits of their principles. And if we but cast our eye
upon the Hethen, we shall find the impatient Ambition of the subject, and the
jealous Fears of their Princes, possessing and governing their Territories as
they obtained them, to be such, that on each other they are continually acting
their revengefull malice. So that this disposition that appeared early in the
world, naturally abides in all men, of what profession soever, unless begotten
again by the spirit of Grace and Peace, to be partakers of another Kingdom: And
this might be illustrated by many singular Examples.

Secondly, for Godliness: This is his predominant quality, and the natural
discoverer of the person, that he is a hater of sin in himself, and a reprover
of sin in others; he that names the name of the Lord Jesus, let him depart from
iniquity: so in the affirmative part, he is an universalist in the ways of
God, living (...), in all and every part of Gods worship: there is no path so
straight but he can tread it, no Duty so spiritual that carries not the least
rational probability of affording that fruit it offers to him, but he can
continue its practice: this was the life, and support of David, that only then
he should not be ashamed, when he had respect to all Gods Commandments. Psalm.
119.6. Up to this degree rose the resolution and intention of Cornelius, Acts
10 33. Now we are all present -- wherein are two things worth our observation
and imitation: 1 The instancy of Cornelius his obedience, immediately, he
consulted not with man, nor with himself. 2. Having met; observe with what
impartiality of affections he is furnished, he is prepared for a free
entertainment of all the Commands of God: he requites not a reason for a
command (the greatest depth of wisdom, grace, and sovereignty, lying in his
meanest, and irrational Laws) but being commanded, does i^. Every Ordinance of
Christ is of the like duration with the Law of God, which Law continued til
another came in its room from the same Power and Authority that ga^e the first;
(for God would not have an interval betwixt Covernment and Government, first
pulling down one hedge and leting his Church lie wast till he has built
another; no, this becomes not his Wisdom and Care) who is only able to
institute a new, that takes away the old: and sure it is, that that which is in
present constituted, is to remain, till he be pleased expressly to abrogate
this, as he did the former. And till then the heart of a Christian is equally
affected to all, persuaded to walk through all, because all are of a like
validity, till he shall be pleased to discharge him of any, that has required
all: for the private person to lay aside any one, or the public person to
take away their obliging Power is to divide, and share with God in his absolute
rule overus: the tender conscience of a Christian will not admit him to
distinguish of the commands of God, but urges him still to a more full and
perfect observance of them: and indeed, his heart is large enough to receive
them all, though his feet be not swift enough to run them all. But this we must
not make the chief of our Discourse.

Thirdly, For Honesty: Cicer^.
What this is, the Orator speaks, Iustitia pars Honestatis, Righteousness is
part of Honesty; and that is most true betwixt man and man, as in our language
Righteous dealing is Honest dealing, distributing to all men according to
right: there is a primo primum principium in Nature that directs men to this,
much stronger should Gospel principles be in Christians: herein are
comprehended all our Liberties, and good Laws, in reference to Justice and
Equity in Civil Commerce, and Commutations; and this accords with the Gospel
Rule by which every true Christian walks; 1 Thessalonians. 4.6, 7. That no man go
beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified: for God has
not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness: where by holiness is
understood External Righteousness, the fruit of an holy heart. Romans 13.12,
13. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light: let us walk
honestly, as in the day. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12. I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul: Having
your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against
you, as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation. In all which places we find the
forceablest argument to stir them up to this Honest Conversation, is taken
from their Calling, and that Faith they have embraced, as exceeding suitable
unto it: indeed to question it, is to question our Humanity, much more our
Christianity; for grant them the precedent disposition of Godliness, they must
be Honest. And that in this respect I might present unto you the perfect
complexion of Christians in the Primitive Times, I shall draw forth but a line
or two out of the Test^mony of Plinius Secundus Deputy Governor to Trajan the
Emperor, a persecutor of Christians; yet he acknowledged of them this Honesty
and Justice; it is recorded of him thus: Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27. page ^2.
Transs. Fox Monu.
Plinius Secundus qui inter Provinciarum Praefectos facile primus tulit,
ingenti Martyrum numero magnopere commotus, de multitudine eorum qui quotidie
erant pro Fide trucidati, Trajanum Imperatorem certiorem faceret, allegans
praeter obstinationem non sacrificandi, nihil aliud se de sacris eorum
comperisse, quam coetus antelucanos ad canendum Chrislo ac Deo, and ad
confaederandam disciplinam; homicidium, adulterium, fraudem, perfidiam, and
caetera scelera prohibentes. -- And in another place thus: Adulterium etc. and
alia nefanda peccata, quae sunt cum his aliqua quasi cognatione conjuncta,
vetant; and omnia quae sunt Legibus congruentia sedulo, exequuntur. Herein you
see the ancient fashion and image of true Christians, who by their lives
declared the Law of God to be written in their hearts; and add their actions
as a living gloss of the Canons of the Gospel. Thus much of the first, a true
Christians prompt inclination.

CHAP. V.
NOw to the second Proposition, That the people of God, notwithstanding their
gracious disposition, may under any Government be deprived of their Civil
Peace, the free use of Gods Ordinances, and Common Liberties: for as one says,
Ecclesia in nocte vitae presentis ubi variantur status temporalium, comparatur
Lunae, quia nunc clara, nunc deserta, nunc virtute, and candore plena, nunc
pravis dehonestata vi^^is, in futura beatitudine, ubi idem status erit, si^^t
Sol fulgebit. N. Lyran. in Cant. 6.
the Church of God in this world is like the Moon, sometimes clear and
beautiful, sometimes full of spots, sometimes full of virtue and power, at other
times forsaken, and defiled with vice; only her estate hereafter shall be in
glory like the Sun, and remayn always the same. The Dragon, spoken of in the
Revelations, rules and rages in the children of men, that drives the Church
into the Wilderness, where at once she is spoiled of all her comfortable
privileges, and enjoyments: to which we shall speak particularly.

First, for the deprivation of their external Peace: Christ foretold us of a
fellowship with him in his sufferings, and we know that his own Apostles were
not exempted from them: he knew their ingenuity to torture his members by
Banishments, Imprisonments, Corporal Inflictions, and to be so exquisite, that
he would not promise them so much Peace and Quietness as the ravenous Fox, and
wild Beast does usually enjoy: therefore orders them to Flight in time of
Persecution (this being in the infancy of the Church, that by their flight the
beams of the Gospel might spread further) even from City to City. We read
how far the Saints of God under the old Church were from Peace, when they
endured such variety of torments. Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. And others had trial of
cruel mockings and scourgings: yea moreover, of bonds and imprisonment: they
were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted were slain with the sword:
they wandered about in sheep skins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented: of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. There is no History of the
Eastern, or Western Churches that too plentifully abounds not with such like
examples; we need not enquire further then of our neighbor Countries, France,
Netherlands, Scotland, and our own, who will speak fully to this: and though
the Church of God being restored to a flourishing estate, decked with Peace and
Unity, has not so dealt with enemies, whose cruelty had deserved it, but in
meekness, love, and favors, entreated them: yet when again they have regained
their power, nothing would satisfy them, but the blood of Saints: not to reckon
that inhumane recreation the Turk has taken in the deaths of Christians, when
he had satisfied his lust, then his malice; not to mention that cruelty of old,
which in men exceeded that in unreasonable and unsensible creatures; the
miraculous acknowledgements of the Creatures, that they were the servants of
the most high God, would not convince, nor abate the fury of those mad
persecutors: who when the fire would not take hold on Polycarp, run him through
with their swords, insomuch that his blood extinguished the fire: when the
hungry beasts would not fasten upon Blandina, they cast her into prison: But
what need we speak of Hethens whose cruelty has been greater to a Christian
not Idolizing, then to a Jew: we read of the intended cruelty of Julian the
Apostat; but now he becomes a Hethen in his Religion, and worse then usually
any were in his cruel resolutions: We have them that bear themselves up as
the only Church of God in this world, yet we read of their infernal plot
against the Parliament of this Nation; their brutish usage of the poor Hethen
in the West Indies, our Marian persecution, the Parisian massacre, the Irish
rebellion, examples unparaleld by Hethens. Let us consider of what Spirit the
Arian is, and how he has dealt with the Saints of God, when he has sat in
the Throne, and at the Stern of Commonwealths, they have inflicted
Banishment, Imprisonment, Death it self on them; We have them thus described
by an Historian: Arianismus totas orientis Ecclesias Antiochenam, Lyndan:
Panopl. lib. 2. c. 16
Alexandrinam, Constantinopolitanam, Hierosolimitanam, expulsis orthodoxis,
occupavit, atque occidente, ejecto in exilium Liberio, Felicem i^ Romanam sedem
substituunt. Even as Christ suffered by all Nations, so his members suffer by
by all hands in all Nations, under all Governments: whatsoever the outward
policy of people be, if their Rulers be bad, the Saints of God shall be
disturbed, and persecuted: therefore we have many comparisons betwixt the
ungodly of the world, and the people of God in Scripture: amongst many, these
are called Sheep, Vines, the other are called Lions, Oaks of Bashan, not only
to signify the weakness of the one and the strength of the other, but the
contrariety of their disposition: such difference has been from the beginning,
and such dealing shall the Church receive from the prevailing ungodly to the
end of the world.

Secondly, As to the deprivall of the purity, nay the denial of any enjoyment
of the Ordinances, or exercises of Godliness in any part of the public
worship of God. It is to manifest how sadly the Church of God has travailed
herein many times, that not only the worship it self has been destroyed, but
the worshippers likewise, that upon the restoration of his worship, God has
undertaken a work almost equal to our creation to get servants. Isa. 44.3, 4,
5. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground:
I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: and
they shall spring up as among the grass, as willowes by the watercourse: one
shall say I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob:
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself
by the name of Israel. In Elijahs time there was none left that durst
publicly acknowledge and embrace the Ordinances of God, insomuch that the
Prophet (who should be best acquainted with the servants of God) thought they
had been all backsliden: the same Church afterward makes this her complaint,
Lam. 2.9. The Law is no more, her Prophets also find no vision from the Lord.
And the Prophet speaks of a company only left in secret, that durst privately
talk of the Name of God, Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heared it, and a Book of remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon
his Name. When Constantine the Great set upon and encouraged others to the work
of Reformation, the multitude of the Arians was objected to him, as likely not
to be wrought upon, and so to hinder the work: he answered, Non refer
numerum magnum vel parvum, nam Iudaeorum Ecclesia in Babylone constituta, ad
tres pueros redacta fuit: it matterd not whether the number of a Church were
few or many, for the visible Church of the Jews in Babylon was reduced to
three, and we read of no more that withstood their impious Decrees in public.
And before his time, in persecutions of those Centuries, we find that the
public places for Worship which some Hethens tolerated (by some pious
Emperors erected) were subverted to the very foundation; and the maintenance of
the Ministers thereof subtracted: and whether man or woman, Military or Civil,
Magistrate or Subject if accused thus, Christianus est, it was condemnation
sufficient: then to sin, was to live; to be innocent, was death. If Polycarp
would swear and forswear, revile, and deny Christ, he should become guiltless.
It was a very sad and grievous judgment threatened against Israel, that as it
should be without a Magistracy, so without a Ministry; and so far without, that
there should not be left the very form of godliness amongst them; not men that
durst or would serve the Lord, though in an erroneous way, if it should bear
but the least resemblance of his commanded Worship: and how frequent and
grievous the complaints of the Church were under this, let the Scripture
testify. No less was prophesied by Paul concerning the Church but then in her
swaddling clothes, and sucking in the soft principles of Religion, 2 These. 2.3,
4. Let no man deceius you, by any means; for that day shall not come except
there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son
of perdition; Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God: which was not long ere it was accomplished; when she
began but to strengthen, and wax beautiful in the eyes of the world; even in
the days of that proud and blasphemous Emperor Caius, who set up his own Image
in the Temple of the Jews, and in all other Christian Churches, to be
worshipped: as at large and learnedly you may see it paraled by Grotius in hunc
locum Thessal. and chronologed by faithful Eusebtus in Hist. Eccles. de temp.
sub Caio. And of the sad condition of the Church in this respect, under a
Christian Antichrist, it was prophesied by one to this purpose: That what the
people of God should have, Abbas Ioachim, in Apoc. Electi Der sapient sibi
ipsis id quod sapi ent, ut tamen praedicare public non praesumunt etc. Et page
168. col. 4. in illis die. bus non etit licitum praedicare, aut audire
praedicantem.
they should have to themselves, what understanding, knowledge, etc. not
dareing to publish it to others. Nay the days shall come (says the same
author) when neither the ons durst preach: nor the other durst hear him that
would preach, and to this may all the Churches of God in their season yield
ample testimonies, let us but a little receive satis faction herein. Eusebius
lib. 5. page 76. quotes an Epistle written by the persecuted Christians in
France to the Christian Churches in Asia, and amongst other cruelties exercised
toward them, relates this, Non solum aedificiis publicis, balneis, and foro
nobis interdictum est, sed etiam ne quisquam nosirum usquam locorum in
conspectum prodeat, ab illis vetitum: they were not only denied their public
places for divine exercises, bathing places for their healths, market places
for their commerce, but mutual fellowship, that Christians in no place be found
together: whereby they could not have the enjoyment of the least Ordinance,
Acosta lib, 2, cap, 15, de temp: noviss,
even of godly conference. We find another presaging to this purpose; that in
the later days we shall find Ministers weeping, Sacerdotes gementes, portas
destructa^, Altaria deserta, sacras aedes vacuas, quod non sint qui venient ad
A gni solemnitatem, Et I lem cap, ult. Ecclesiarum aedes sacras erutas,
liturgiam extinctam, psalm. morum cantionem nullam esse.
the places of divine Worship destroyed, none frequenting such Assemblies; and
the usual exercises of prayers and singing of psalms neglected. We may with
serious thoughts consider what once the Churches of the new Testament were, and
what now, not only one, but all of them are. We may take a little inspection
into Chronologers and find something spoken to this Nation of England; Vide
Bernar. Christianogr and Doni. Rob. Cott. Antiq.
That it received the true Light even upon the nearest dawnings of the Light;
yea after the rising of the glorious Son of God, and his sitting in the highest
Heavens, is very evident: And that it had as sudden, miserable, and general
c^ouding afterward is as evident; and that by one thus writing: Fasciculus
Temp. page 47 and 70 Anno Dom 294 ^64 1552
in Anglia pene tota fides extincta est h^c^tempore a Maximiniano: that under
the Government of Maximinian, the Faith was even utterly extinct: (and if my
memory fayl me not) he and another persecutor rejoiced exceedingly, that they
had rooted out of this Nation, the Supers^icion of one Jesus. And again, the
Church was in the same condition sub Edvino Rege Angliae, when not only the
Ordinances of Christ were abolisht, but the profession it self ceased. Not the
least of which but was acted under Queen Mary, who at the first had the
Ordinances adulterated, then the means of knowledge taken from them, and at last
their persons carried to prison, and from prison to the Stake. Whereby we see
how the men of this world have in all generations dealt with the Church of God
about their sacred things.

Thirdly, for Honesty and Righteousness: The godly in all ages have been the
worlds Dung-cart to carry away all their filthy languages and reproaches, to
bear their hard usages and whatsoever they were pleased to lay upon them; and
amongst them chiefly the Ministers of the Gospel: but what the Apostles spoke
of themselves, is appliable to all the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.13. We are
made as the filth of the World, and are the off^scouring of all things unto
this day. Who should the Drunkard abuse, and against whom should he vomit his
ribaldry, but David? yet happily he might be one of the chief of the people: but
the abjects and baser sort of them, whose revenge could not fasten sooner then
on a godly man, revile him also: such as sometimes begged at the Gates of Job,
calumniate him in his adversity, for his integrity. When the countenance of the
Magistrate is turned from good men, his protection withdrawn, nay when he acts
against them as offenders and enemies, the Church has deeply suffered by the
incivilities and dishonest dealings of their fellow subjects in person, name,
and goods. Anno Christi. 252. omnes ubique uno ore ^onclamabant, E quis e
Christianer m numero impia and profana verba effari recusaverit, rapiatur ex
templo, and in ignem coniiciatur. Eus^h. l^b. 6. cap, 34,
We will exemplify this a little out of primitive Histories: Under Decius the
persecutor, the common people were made the executioners of the godly, and if
they would not be as vile as the vilest, and sin with the sinfulest, they were
immediately brought to execution; it was so dangerous to be suspected a
Christian, that they must commit evil to remove suspicion. But we read of
another Decree before that, passed by Verus against Christians, Servitius
Paulus being Pro-Consul of Asia, by occasion of which the rude and vile sort of
people stole away the goods and estates of Christians in the day time as well
as in the night, Impudentes, and protervi calumniatores, atque adeo alienarum
rerum appetentes ex his Edictis occasionem nacti, palam noctu and interdiu
sutantur etc. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 25. page 73.
without punishmemt of the offenders, or restitution to the offended, they
remaining harmless sufferers under them. And lest they should not be cruel
enough, and be too much like men, Dioclesian proceeded yet higher, to vex the
Saints of God, by delivering them over to the pleasure of an unruly and
ungracious multitude: Libera potestas says Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 11. page 149.
omnibus concessa esset contumelias and poenas illis (Christianis) pro arbitratu
inferendi: hi fustibus, alti virgis, illi flagellis, nonnulli loris, multi
funibus, eos perculerunt, etc. so that when the Magistrate could not invent how
to be unjust and cruel enough, the wicked peeple must have liberty to inflict
in words or actions even unto death, what cruelties soever they pleased on
them. So merciless they became, ut sepultura martyrum cadaveribus negata, that
whom they judged not worthy to live, being dead, thought not worthy of burial.
And sure if all persecutors had become such, they would have prevented the
execution of that sottish malice of the papists that searched the graves of
Saints to burn their bones, whom they could not catch being alive: Who could
imagine men so much deboisted of reason, and to have made themselves beasts to
accomplish Satanical fury flaming in them! Nay, their malice extended yet
further, to the poor infants of the servants of Christ, (as lately in Ireland
likewise) not as Pharaoh, who in the nonage of the Jewish Church, nor as
Herod, who in the nonage of the Christian Church, in policy for their own
security, slew the infants, but in mere cruelty, not deeming one of their
posterity worthy to survive their parents, of whom the world was not worthy.
But to these may be applied the Saying of that holy Father and Martyr, Aetas
nee dum habilis ad pugnam, idonea extitit ad coronam; ut appareret innocents
esse, Cypr, Epist. 56 page 116.b.
qui propter Christum uruntur, infantia innocens ob nomen ejus occisa est: an
age not yet able to weld the lightest weapon, is fit to wear the heaviest and
most glorious crown; and that it might appear that they are innocent that are
slain for Christ, innocents, even innocence it self must endure for him. And
thus you see what entertainment has been given to the Saints of God in all
ages, you see how black the Spouse of Christ is made through those hot
persecutions: if it was necessarily pertinent, this might be expaciated by the
Examples of papists, but let this suffice for the second Proposition.

CHAP. VI.
NOw to take up the third Proposition, That though a Church should be stripped of
all those glorious Ornaments, and left naked to all her enemies; or if the
foundations thereof were shaking, and she in danger of losing those
happinesses, yet Prayer is a most probable and spiritually-rationall means to
recover a lost, and preserve a tottering condition, even prayer for the Civil
Magistrate, and Government under which in present the Church has her being: I
say the procurement or settlement of those blessed immunities probably may be
by prayer: First in respect of the Magistrate, for whom we pray and make our
intercessions. Secondly, in respect of God, to whom we pray and make our
intercessions.


1 Prayer put up to God for the happiness of Magistrates and their Government,
is a probable means to procure happiness to a Church from the Magistrate, if
we consider the Magistrate himself, who hereby may receive a clear
demonstration of the nature of their profession, whither it truly tends; since
that this is their practice, that they prey to the great God of heaven (with
whom they dare not deal deceitfully) for his safety and prosperity: and to this
they are bound by the principles of their Religion, daily both in private and
public so often as they have opportunity; yea although the Magistrate should
continue his persecution against them for professing the true God: Herein I
say, is a most clear evidence of the integrity of Christians exhibited to all
men, and more especially to the Magistrate, whereby they may the easier be
induc't to grant those things unto them, which they know them so sincerely to
seek as well for the Magistrates welfare as for their own. They having no
greater peace, no surer liberty in Religion, no clearer vindication against
personal and private injuries, then what their Profession might demand under
any Government. And though Magistrates have ignorantly received slanders cast
upon their Religion, as sedicious, factious, an enemy to peace, and all Lawful
Authority; yet by these their so sweet dispositions and deportments may the
mouths of gainsayers be stopped, and thereby may the ears of Magistrates be
opend to entertain any reasonable motions for the advancement of their
profession, and in the mean time to retain good thoughts both of it, and its
professors.

Satan of old has been an accuser of the brethren to God, and his instruments
of old have accused them to such as are as Gods in this world; not only to
abate the happiness of the Church, but to draw a clould over the dawnings of
their deliverances, under which they have sat down long in trouble. When
Isreal's troubles began, there were found enough to hasten them, this is their
cry: Psalm. 137.7. Raze it, raze it even to the foundations thereof. And when
trouble is fallen on her, many are ready to lay more weight to make her yet more
miserable: the Lord reproves Edom for this, Obed. 12, 13, 14. But thou
should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that be became
a stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in
the day of their destruction: neither should thou have spoken proudly in the
day of distress etc. And if his people but a little raise up their heads above
the waters, for a refreshment to themselves and others, how ready do they stand
to knock them down; thus they dealt with Daniel and the three Children, they
beginning but a little to shake off the baseness of their bondage, and to be
lifted up into the Kings presence (whereby not only they but the rest of their
brethren might find comfort,) were counter-plotted by ungodly persons, as we
read Dan. 3.8, 9, etc. by way of Bill and Accusation concerning their God, and
that they slighted the King. And if the Church it self begin to shake off her
prison garments, and climb up the dry banks out of the red sea of her
tribulations, how many, and potent adversaries shall she meet withal! Cyrus he
begins to open a door of Salvation to the Jew, but in the days of the next.
King, many rise to shut the door against them, and that by maliciously
aspersing the people: Ezra 4.12, 13. Be it known unto the King, that the Jews
which came up from thee to us, are come unto Jerusalem, building that
rebellious and bad City; which if it be builded, and the walls set up again,
then will they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, etc The grand accusation laid
against Christ, was, that he would be King, and thereby draw in a great
multitude to him, not only to disturb; but to depose that present Authority,
and so he must be arraigned and condemned as a Rebel and a Traitor, Mark 15
16. etc. The same charge was laid against the Apostle, as appears by that wise
and moderate answer of Gamaliel to the Council, Acts 5. And as it appears by
Histories, after the death of the Apostles, the same did the Jews insinuate
into Governors and Rulers against Christians, whereby many times they were a
great occasion of their persecution. And so likewise did their Astrologers,
Diviners, praestigiatores illorum temporum, not only draw away the Magistrate
from the Faith, as Elimas did the Deputy, but instigate them to a violent
persecution of it: as also by Apostates and other Seducers.

But the patient bearing of their troubles following upon their accusers
reproaches, and that without any resistance, but rather submitting to them with
all meekness and willingness, did engage the Saints to love and pray for
them, and did also much plead for their justification: and such was the advice
of the Apostle to all Christians in that condition, 1 Pet. 3.9, 10, 11. Not
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing,
knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing. For
he that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: Let him eschew evil, and do
good, let him seek peace and ensue it. And not only their patience without the
least contempt of Authority, did much vindicate them; but such was the
inoffensive courage and sacred pride (of that their condition) joined to their
patience, that many of their enemies were thereby convinced, and became weary
in afflicting them. We read of an Epistle sent to a persecuting Emperor by one
of his Deputies, Illis (scil. Christianis) magis in optatis est, Epist. Anton
ex Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 12.
ut in crimen adducti mortem pro suo Deo appetant quam vita fruantur, unde sua
ipsorum vita hoc pacto prodita, multo majorem clarioremque reportant victoriam,
etc. It is more desirable to Christians that they being made guilty of this
crime of professing Christ, to kiss death than enjoy their lives, their life
so lost brings in a more glorious victory to them. And surely such as had
courage to lay down their lives with this cheerfulness, had as much in other
ways to spend them; but their cruelty could not force them to a Rebellion, nor
being put to a stand, would they resist so much as in opprobrious language.
Paul brought before the High Priest, Acts 23. 3, 4, 5.
whom ignorantly and inconsideratly he called the Whited Wall, who indeed was
but the image of Authority, his Secular power being taken away by the Romans,
and his Ecclesiastical by Christ, yet sitting in the place of Judicature, as a
Ruler of his people, must not be taunted and undervalued by an Apostle of
Christ: Paul's sudden checking of himself might most clearly convince the
Magistrate, that really and intentionally he was not of a contencious and
contumacious spirit: and might also render his Profession (then in question)
the more placid and peaceable to them in Authority.

Moreover, though still they should proceed to slay these dumb and innocent
Lambs, they cannot beat them out of the life of Charity, but even upon the
Cross when their enemies hands are lifted up against them, then the Christians
voices and hearts are lifted up to God for them; even then they most sincerely
and fervently pray for them: and what they then breathed out is but (as I may
so say) the Amens of some thousands of prayers formerly put up for them: And
me thinks if every Magistrate should truly and impartially discourse this in
his mind, and raise up arguments from these men's devotions against their own
cruel actions; if there were but common humanity, or ordinary policy in them;
they should readily concede and allow that to the oppressed subject, in which
the subject so really labors to preserve his Magistrate.

Tacere liceat, nulla libertas minor
A Rege petitur --
No less a freedom can be desired, no less returned, than for a people to sit
down in silence: no Magistrate can afford less peace to him whom none can
force to break it, than to hold his peace, and therein to have his peace. Me
thinks the Magistrate might reason his own duty out of the subjects; and sure
if yet he remain unperswaded, this or nothing will persuade him: soft words
(and so mild actions) mollify wrath, and pacify the wrath of Kings. A great
King will witness this unto us, and from him it is argued by Lypsius for
subjects to live in quiet even under Tyrants; for the hearts of Magistrates are
more placed in their subjects, than in themselves, and they are often guided
more by the subjects Carriage, than their own Counsel; the end of Laws,
Governors, and all Governments, being to make men good, that the bad might not
live ba^^ but the good in peace. When the Magistrate sees thy doctrine, thy
conscience, thy practice, carrying forth nothing less in all thy prayers and
intercessions; when peace is wanting or in danger to be lost, thou
consciensciously and piously intercedest for it; when thou have it, thou
praysest God for it, of whom thou have received it, the author of peace. I say,
a Magistrate that will (as he ought) wisely read his subjects much, must learn
by these what they are, and be taught from what they are, so to preserve them
in peace and righteousness, and in Religion leading unto both; to which his
own reason if not his duty in all conscience might direct him.

2 This is a rational way in respect of God, to whom we pray, to obtain these
things, viz. by praying for the Magistrate under whose boughs we rest our
selves, and under whose shadow we find protection: nay, though we want these
things, yet the way to obtain them under such a Magistracy is, to pray for that
Magistracy.

1 In that God is the author of all blessings, and so of these, viz. Peace,
Godliness, and Honesly: to which end, he is as well the Director as the Knower
of the hearts and ways of all men; and can as well (by a secret violence on the
spirits of men) keep evil men from doing evil, as by a gracious change set on
evil men to do good: nay, without any such change he can make a Mag^^^rate
that is naturally feirce, to institute Laws for peace, an Idolater to protect
Godliness, an unjust Judge to deal justly, as well as make a cruel man
peaceable, a wicked man godly, or an unrighteous man honest. God makes
Magistrates, and God makes Magistrates good, and to become a blessing to his
people: Promocion comes not out of the East or West, but from the Lord, as to
make Magistrates; neither does Peace come from the East or West, but from the
Lord through Magistrates, whom he has made the most proper means to establish
or to destroy these blessings: they are the clouds that God has made to drop
fatness on his own inheritance, or because of them it waxes barren and
desolate. As by him Kings Reign, so by him Kings Rule, or Princes decree
justice. He turns the Conditions of Great Ones like the wheel, suddenly
placing the nethermost part uppermost; and he changes their hearts like a
River, causing them to run in what chanel he pleases, and to whom he pleases.
Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of water,
he turns it whither soever he will. God casts the hearts of men into what
disposicions he pleases, and when men have made them bad, he makes them over
again, good. Paul was a man of parts and power amongst the Rabbis, and a man
extremely violent against the Church of God, yet on an instant we find him as
fast building up the Church as he was pulling of it down. Manasseh that fed on
the lives of his subjects, became a nursing Father to them; and he that offered
blood to Idols, offers tears unto the Lord. Trajan at length laid aside his
Lions skin, and put on the Lambs. Maximinus a most licencious cruel
Magistrate, when God laid his hand of vengeance on him, before his death, was
reclaimd: tantis misertis (says the Ecclesiastic Historian) colluctans redit
ad Deum, persecutionem in Christianos sedat, Templa reaedificat, preces pro
Imperii statu petit; striveing (but not able to break from the power of
justice) with his many miseries, he returns to the Lord, quenches the fire of
his persecution, not only gives liberty but contributes his own assistance to
the re-edification of the Christians Temples, for the public worship of God,
and therein desires prayers continually to be more for the happiness of State
and Government: a wonderful change! sure it is by the mighty hand of God
conquering and leading captive such high thoughts and proud imaginacions into
obedience to himself and his Church: by any rational apprehension it could be
as little judged that this Emperor should become so merciful, as once that
Hazael should become so cruel; but he that can alter the hearts of Princes to
afflict his people, can as easily alter them to nourish his people, and to take
off their bonds: And a little further I must observe this miracle, in that so
high and blood-thirsty an enemy should appear so tender a friend, that even he
who ruined men because Christians, should invite all men to be Christians,
that he who with such zeal erected Temples and Altars to his Idols, should
throw down his Gods, sacrifice his Priests and False prophets, to their
destruction, as his deluders; and those sychophanticall fovorites, who were the
instruments to provoake him to this persecution, should be cast off by him and
become contemptible. I say, this is the Lords doing, and it is exceeding
wonderful in our ears; his hand is not yet shortened to work such changes, nor
his ear yet heavy to receive the prayers of his people to this end.

2 As he is able to work for his Church upon their Rulers, so he is nigh at
hand to do this for such as call upon him: His willingness appears in his
promises experiences directions
to his people.

First, in his promises: we see the Lord (minding the happiness of his people)
has freely engaged himself to procure such Magistrates for them, as should
yield unto them the blessed fruits of holiness and righteousness, and
accordingly he has given them such as have been more industrious to obtain
them, then his careless people have been prepared to receive them. I shall not
multiply places, but open a few material ones, wherein the promissory right of
the Church may appear hereto. In general, the Lord has promised to give to
his Son a people out of all people, both great and small, which the Word
abundantly testifies in its historical part; Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall
give thee the Hethen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
Earth for thy possession. And among his Churches such as should remain enemies
and troublers of it, he undertakes to reduce them ad (...) veritatis and (...)
Ecclesiae, to the knowledge of the Truth, and a submissive acknowledgment of
the Church; Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they
are Jews and are not but doelie, to come and worship before thy feet, and to
know that I have loved thee: these promises do much concern the peace of his
Church, and indifferently respects Magistrates as subjects; but we shall
cheifely look after Magistrates, and see how Christ has left them for her good
as the chief part of the jointure of his Spouse. We see a promise of
refineing, and restoring of the Magistrates of his people to their pristine
integrity, who were formerly corrupted, and so to make them useful that were
hurtful: Isa. 1.25, 26. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge
away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. And I will restore thy Judges as at
the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be
called the City of righteousness, the faithful City: but this is the least of
the works of God in this particular. Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their
face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know
that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me: and we see
here that God will have a Church where never any was, he will plant in a barren
and dry wilderness, where inhabit cruel and ungodly men; yet here the Church
shall increase beyond its bounds, the seed of Christ shall go beyond the seed
of Abraham, that was as the stars, and sand of the sea shore for number:
verse 20. The children which thou shall have, after thou have lost the other,
shall say again in thine ears, The place is too straight for me, give place to
me that I may dwell: this shall be to her own astonishment, and admiration,
both for the number, and the manner of their increase: verse 21. Then shall
thou say in thine heart, who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my
children, and am desolate, a captive, and remooving to and fro? and who has
brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these where had they been? then
the Lord tells thee who is the chief cause hereof, and where and whence the
Lord will gather those for thee: verse 22. Thus says the Lord God, behold, I
will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people:
and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders. And then the means he will use to bring these
things about, he will make use of the Magistrates, who in their care, and love
shall be as fathers and mothers, yet giving honor and subjection as children:
They shall bow down to thee, verse 23. Isa. 60. we see the off spring and
generation of such as know not the Church, and of such as knew her, but hated
her, were given unto her to serve her, to repair and strengthen her, verse
10.14. So much peace and righteousness that there shall be neither watch nor
ward kept amongst them, verse 11. And a great change in their outward estates,
verse 17. But the cause hereof must be in the change of men: God will take in
great men to his Church, through whom these blessings shall be conveyed to her,
verse 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and suck the breast of
Kings, etc. what is it they shall draw forth out of their breasts? their Laws,
their Sword, and Strength; even all their power and interests, for peace and
righteousness.

But you will say, that this can never be brought about without the destruction
of the Antichristian enemies of his Church, that have spoiled her of all these
blessings, and still stand betwixt her and the enjoyment of them: the Lord
therefore to remove them has promised to put a Sword into the hand of the
Magistrates, and to stir up their spirits unto this work, Revel. 17.16, 17.
And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast they shall hate the Whore,
and make her desolate, etc. If we had no more promises in the whole Word, these
were sufficient infallibly to bind the Lord to this, and faithfully to
preserve the expectations of his with him: and indeed all promises, but
especially those of this nature should have these several effects on every
true believer, viz. to transform us into the likeness of God in them; to live
so on them as if in present we shared of them, to strengthen us in faith and
patience to wait on him, in hope to rejoice in him, by prayer to strive for the
accomplishment of them, and by our practices to draw them onward to us, and to
prepare our selves for them: to conclude this with that of an holy Martyr upon
that legacy of Christ, left to his people, My peace I leave with you, says
that Christ having left or given to his Church peace in promise, hanc nobis
haereditatem Christus dedit, dona omnia sua pollicitationis and praemia in
pacis conservatione promisit. Christ has made us that believe heirs of this
peace, the only heirs of the promises of peace, and in the keeping of this he
has lapped up all blessings servient unto this, and consequent hereof.

2 As you see the promise lies before you, so we find by experience the mighty
power of prayer, effecting as great things as these promises contain: the
Saints of God by prayer have elicited the power of God, and stirred up the
tender affections of God, to put forth that power to establish his people in
such blessings. Heb. 11.33. If Faith in the promises can subdue Kingdoms,
cannot the same Faith subdue the hearts of Kings and bring promises of as
little difficulty to perfection? But further, you shall see what way prayer
has made into the hearts of Kings, and that God has wrought more graciously
on their spirits upon their prayers, than by his judicial signs and wonders.
We read of that great trouble and affliction the spirit of Nehemiah lay under
for the sad estate of Jerusalem, which the King his Master discovers in his
countenance, and to know the cause of which he was very percunctory and
inquisitive, as you may read Neh. 2. Nehemiah might well acquaint him, but
little hopes he had to prevayl, to gain a people out of captivity, or being
delivered, to raise means to enable such beggarly and poor captives to
repair the Temple, Jerusalem, and build their own houses, a work too
difficult through its greatness and their weakness: yet first Nehemiah seeks
God by prayer, verse 4. So I prayed to the God of Heaven. Then he prevayles
with the King, verse 5, 6. If it please the King, etc. The same course takes
Ester and succeeds: the Jews are in great danger and are all like to perish,
she knows not what course to venture upon to save them, but that which was
more dangerous; for to go into the Kings presence was death without the golden
Scepter; and if happily she escaped that, yet it was an uncertain way, very
improbable it was that a woman and a captive too, should upon a bare request
undo what a great Court Favorite had done, and which being executed carried a
great pretense of emolument and income to the Kings Treasury; yet mark the way
she takes, Chap. 4. v. 16. Go gather together all the Jews that are in
Shushan and fast you for me: I also and mine will etc. such as were most ready
must join in this duty, they must not delay its performance till all (that
were like to suffer) should know of it: but first they pray for her good
speed: and when she comes, she finds the heart of of the King as ready to
receive her, and answer her in all her desires, as if her soul had been
transanimated to his body, or had been long before prepared for her. See then
the mighty power of prayer, that prevails for the destruction of many and
potent enemies, why not for their salvation? does not their salvation ly in the
way of thy prayer as well as their ruin? or is it less glory to God, or would
it be less comfort to his Church rather to see them saved then ruined? prayer
has wrought favor for the Church in their eyes, and it might work favor for
them also in the Lords eyes; and sure it is, that this is the best way to make
them the Churches, for if they were the Lords they would be his peoples: and
its far sweeter to suck the milk out of the breasts of gracious Magistrates,
then wicked Magistrates, though their favors should be all one: and if prayer
be a means whereby Solomon obtains grace for himself, its a means also whereby
a people may obtain it for the Magistrate, wherein they might be made happy in
a free and real collation of these blessings on them.

3. And herein this gracious success only answers the Lords own direction: he
gives us this in command as a means to procure any mercy and in general to
encourage the necessitated to this, tells us of the power of it. Iam. 5.16. The
effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails much. But as to these in
particular; the Lord tells his his people how precious his thoughts were to them
in their captivity, that his mind stood to their grace and mercy. Ier. 29.11.
I know the thoughts, etc. And the Lord tells them this for this end, to put them
upon this divine exercise of prayer, that they might draw out his gracious
intentions into acts, verse 12. then shall ye go and pray unto me, etc. verse
14. and I will be found of you, and turn away your captivity. And again when
those thoughts of God shall be made manifest to his peoples happiness, by
enclining the hearts of their oppressors to them, even their Kings heart, God
shows of what temper and disposition his people shall be, making way for
those mercies. Ier. 50.4. In those days and at that time says the Lord shall
the children of Israel come, they and the children of Judah together going and
weeping; they shall go and seek the Lord their God. We know that the ground of
engagement to promise mercy, and of the performance of those promises lies in
himself; the same cause that moved him to make them, excites him to a speedy
and seasonable accomplishment of them: yet the Lord draws arguments from us,
even the work of his grace in us, and the working of that grace out of us up
to himself, to accelerate the work: in the forementioned promise of crowning
his spouse with such an hopeful Magistracy he gives this reason of it Isa.
29.23. for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me: first they must wait
for the glorious appearance of God in such blessings amongst his people: again
it must be granted, that this attendance must be in his own way; for its not a
dead hope, nor an activelesse faith, but such as stirrs up the soul to earnest
desires and fervent longings assured on the faithfulness and truth of God in
such promises: such then shall not be ashamed, they shall not wait in vain,
their expectation shall not fail them: whereby they should repent themselves
of that way they have walked in, nor the wicked take occasion to reproach them,
saying, where is their God. We meet with another passage in Peter, who moveing
the Christians to patience in trouble, to a true persuance of Peace, closes the
exhortation with this argument. For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous
and his ears are open unto their prayers etc 1 Pet. 3.12: as if the Apostle
should inminde us of Gods special observation of Christians deportment in such
times of trial; that it be such that their prayers may find acceptance with
him, who stands ready to receive them: nay if we had no greater assurance of
their certain availement, then in the text, it was sufficient encouragement to
us, (...) gratus, so pro^a^us, dignus admitti, commendabilis.
(...) this is a lovely and acceptable thing thus to pray for them that are in
Au, hority; the face of a soul is comely in Gods eyes thus complectioned, and
disposed; a prayer issuing from such an affection comes with great approbation
into his presence: here is then a certainety of good speed ere we go, we
desire in this a thing suitable to the mind of God, which already he has
agreed on in himself, and promised in his Word to grant us; either to give us
the Magistrate, or to give us these blessings under his government: for sure
such qualifications as these, of charity, content, patience, etc. which must be
in a soul praying for an inimicitious Governor, puts great beauty on the soul,
and power unto prayers; not to make it self meritorious, but having the
character of his own prayers, and will upon them; Christ himself will own them,
take them out of our hands and present them to his Father in the behalf of his
oppressed members: thus you may conceive the probability of this heavenly
ordinance serving unto these ends.

CHAP. VII.
FEw there be that believe the ways of God, or have had a clear experience
hereof, but will grant this, and are resolved in the use of other means, and
without the rational appearance of such means, conscionably to apply
themselves to this practice. But here it will be demanded, whether
indifferently for any Power, Authority, or Government, under which we live,
ought we to pray for them in reference to such ends: the ends are good, but
whether through any Magistracy we ought so to seek for their administracion, is
the question? and so by consequence whether God may make this present
Government serviceable hereunto, and we pray for them in reference thereto?

To this I answer affirmatively, which I shall endeavor to prove, 1 From the
practice of particular servants of God, and the Churches of God in all ages. 2
From some plain demonstrative arguments. 3 By resolving certain objections,
that may withold many conscientious Christians from the practice hereof.


That it has been the practice of the servants of God (and accordingly to them
have the judgments of many or thodox Divines fallen in) to pray for those
Governors and Rules under which they lived. The testimonies of men eminent in
the Faith, and in reforming Churches, are no infallible ground for my faith;
but where I see they accord with certain Scripturall examples, they for the
present are a guide to me, and resolve those doubts about which I might seem
so anxious and desirous of decision.

We find Abraham praying for Abimelech, and all his family, that were Hethens,
which he did by Gods special direction; and Abraham could do no less as a
grateful return of Abimelech his kindness to him, and a discharge of his duty
to God: the case was thus; Abimelech in his ignorant innocence took Sarah to be
his Concubine, from Abraham, who would not own her to be his wife, and so might
in the wrong of himself have lost her; who might as well have been secured
from danger, as she was from defilement, had he trusted the Lord: But Abimelech
knowing her to be his wife, makes restitution of that which he injuriously
(though ignorantly) had taken; here is justice. Abraham prays for him, and
that the wombs of his family might be opened to bring forth increase, because
Abimelech had not uncleanly touched that womb from which should spring a
blessing to all Nations. All this is done by Gods direction; Abimelech gives
Abraham his wife, Abraham affords Abimelech his prayers, and procures that
blessing for him without which his Kingdom (should he have had no enemy) would
soon have been wasted. And had not God commanded this, it had been no less
just in Abimelech to have restored her, and no less equal in Abraham to have
prayed for him: First, as having protection under him in his pilgrimage; then
kindness and justice from him though an Hethen: it is more for a Hethen to do
so for a believer, than for a believer to pray so for him, under whose power
and Government he lives; especially for a believing Prophet. His grandchild
does no less for Pharaoh an Idolater, Genesis 47.10. Jacob blessed Pharaoh not
only for those civil favors that he and his sons had found in his eyes, but
as a subjects duty, who was now come to live under his protection; where that
he might live in a blessed condition, it becomes him to pray for a blessed upon
that Prince, or Governor under whom and by whose means such blessings were to
be received.

But some will say, that these holy Patriarchs necessities compelled them to
seek for protection and provision from them, and therefore no less than all
manner of civil subjection was due to them: their voluntary and entreated act
threw them into these Princes arms; and humanity it self might draw down
their prayers and good wishes upon these Princes heads.

True; but this may clearly be answered: yet we will grant you so far, that
such as seek for Magistrates protection, and fly to them for safety, in reason
and conscience are bound to obey and pray for them. Yet let us diligently
search the Scriptures a little further, and we shall find the Saints of God
praying for such Princes and Magistrates to whom they were forced to yield
subjection; insomuch that they were slaves rather than subjects; neither did
they receive such goodness from them, as might draw out their solemn prayers
for them, only the command of God which is thus directed to the people in
general, Ier. 29.7. Seek the peace, etc. Seek, that is, by prayer and
practice. I know the time of their captivity was determined by the Lord, and it
was to no purpose to strive, being against the Decree of God, which laid
stronger hands upon them than the Tyrants: yet in the mean time they must seek
and endeavor after peace, which in that place should be as fully enjoyed as if
they had been at home, their walls built up, and no enemy in their Country: as
they continued in peace, so without striving they went out in peace; who else
might have bin lead out of Babylon as their forefathers were out of Egypt; only
that was a reward of their obedient and patient suffering. We read likewise
that holy Daniel was in this frame, when he was prepared for food for the
hungry Lions, being cast off from his Throne into the pit by the Decree of the
King, as if the greedy grave would have been too merciful, therefore he must
be interred in the bellies of Beasts, that the Sepulcher of this Prophet might
not be hereafter known: and notwithstanding this continued cruelty acted
against him, he prays for the King, Dan. 4.19. and 6.21. O King, live for
ever. This Darius was an usurper of the Persian and Jewish Monarchies, to whom
but little obedience by right might appear due: how many arguments from his own
Nation, from his present condition, and his cruel usurpation, might he have
assumed, to have entered him into an eternal curse: but it is impossible to
find praying Daniel out of a praying practice; he prays for perpetuity of
years to be added to Darius his aged days, being 62 years old when he entered
upon his forced Governments: And probably if Darius had heard Daniels prayer
out of his chamber window, some part thereof had been to the same purpose as
this in the pit, which the Prophet as one of the chiefest presented to the God
of Heaven; for such like directions were sent to Jerusalem, as we read Baruch
1.11.12. And pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar, etc. which questionless was
not in complement from Daniel sent to them, nor in policy peformed by the
brethren at Jerusalem, they being so much in the eyes of their enemies,
Rulers, and others mixed with them in and about that City, and so subject to any
intelligence and accusation that might be given in against the Jews to the
Babylonian King; but merely from principles of piety and conscience, knowing
they owed no less to their Governors, and so ought in reference to God to
praise him for them, who many times stirred up their hearts to show them
favors, as to pray to him for them, that they might receive favors from them;
who together blessed the instruments, and blessed God for them.

To these we read the care of Christ (a natural Jew, and who might claim as
much privilege and exemption as any) in paying his Tribute to the usurper of
the Jewish Kingdom, being then under the Roman; with what wisdom he answered
their objections made to entrap him, that he might deny their Authority; but
still he granted Tribute due to them for their maintenance, and paid it
himself: what we pay to, we may pray for, else we do but act that really
which we dare not acknowledge in words, which is the least acknowledgment, the
lesser subjection. The Apostles are frequent herein, instructing the Ministers
under them to press forwards this practice in their days, Titus 3.1. Put them
in mind to be subject to Principalities, etc. and gives the reason of it, it
being rather the genuine property of unbeleevers, unprincipled with grace and
goodness, to be maliciously affected to Superiors, (as some say the sin of the
Devil was before his fall) and thence to despise and resist them, as sometimes
we were that now do believe, verse 3. For we our selves also were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, liveing in
malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. 1 Pet. 2.12, 13, 14. Having
your conversacion honest, etc. Romans 13.1. Be subject unto the higher powers,
etc. So Jude, not to despise Government: Where in all Churches they were
exhorted to due subjection, to innocent conversation, to a reverend estimation
of them, paying unto them our dues, the least payment being the Tribute of our
prayers. Where the Apostles require obedience from us to them, not as Hethens
but as Magistrates though Hethens: and they that taught us that it is better to
obey God than man; where their commands contradict one another, taught us also
to obey them for the Lords sake, where their commands oppose not.

To these we add the practices of the Church in her primitive purity.
Dionysius that peacemaker and desirer of Unity in the Church of God, in his
Apology for Christians under the pesecution of Verus thus writes: Eusebius. lib.
6. cap 37. Anno Christi 260. Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 10. p. 122.
Nos unum Deum omnium sabricatorem -- colimus and veneramur: huic etiam sine
intermissione pro eorum regno ut firmum and stabile maneat, preces adhibemus:
we serve and worship one God the maker of all things, to whom we offer our
prayers continually, that their Kingdom and Government might remayn firm and
sure. Tercullian observes thus in his Defense of the innocence of the Church in
his days, Nos pro salute Imperatorum Deum invocamus, Tertul. Apol: cap. 30
-- precantes sumus s^mper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam,
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum
probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vora sunt: we call upon
God for the health of our Emperors, we pray continually for all our Emperors
that they may have a long life, a secure dominion, safe house, strong armies, a
faithful Council, an honest people, and a quiet Nation; what Caesar or man can
wish, we wish for them. And hereinto fall the judgments of orthodox
Expositors, and Writers, glorious Lights in their generation: to refer you but
to a few; Peter Martyr. Com. loc. Paraeus in Romans 13 Comment. and Aphorism.
Marlor. in 1 Timothy 2. Gerard. Com. loc. de Magistr. politico, page 923, 924.
Ames. cas. consc. lib. 5. cap. 25. p. 313. Debent pro ipsis singulariter orare,
idque omni genere orationis: we ought principally and in particular to pray
for them, (speaking of Magistrates) and that with all kind of prayers: praying
for mercies for them, interceding in their miseries, and giving thanks for
their happiness. Whatsoever these Caesar's or Magistrates undertook according
to the mind of God, they with all earnestness and truth of mind, blessed;
what they enterprized contrary to his mind, they prayed not for; yet even then
they prayed for the Magistrate himself, that the Lord would change his mind,
divert his course, and not suffer him to ruin himself and his subjects. This
we will close with that of learned Zanchy, speaking of Magistrates, and
therein of evil ones, Qui suum collum jugo filii Dei subjicere volunt: those
that will not submit to the rules and commands of the Son of God, quibus
majorem Dei cognitionem, melioremque mentem precamur a Deo Patre and a Domino
Jesus Christo: for them we pray of God the Father and his Son Christ, a larger
knowledge of God, and a sounder mind.

Surely this great cloud of witnesses, these many clouds following one another
do write, and are written for our instruction, and leads us into the way of
this command, That we pray for all that are over us, even for all that are in
Authority; that that power and government might be so blessed of the Lord, that
we might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And if
hitherto we have not known, nor walked in this way, let us take the advice of
Christ to his Church, Cant. 1.8. Follow ye the footsteps of the flock.

CHAP. VIII.
THat we may proceed further to confirm your judgment herein, we desire you
impartially to weigh what succeeds: We ought to pray for a blessing upon that
Government under which we live, upon these grounds, and in reference to these
ends.

1. From the true foundation of all Magistraticall power, that is, the Power,
Commission, and Ordinance of God, even as God himself under what form of
government soever we live; or in what manner soever the Magistrate does
distribute, and exercise his power, the power is no less of God. The Poet by
the light of nature could sing, (...), Kings, and so all Magistrates are of
God. So in general does the Spirit of the Lord speak in Paul indifferently,
and indistinctly, (...), There is not a power unless it be of God, which cannot
be more universal, exclusive of none; which is not to be understood alone
abstractively of authority and government, for that is but one and the same
throughout the world; but also of the several forms of government, and
administration of that power, that whosoever it is that does govern in present,
and in what manner soever, whether as the Emperor of Rome, or usurper of
Judaea? whether at Rome, as in an Empire, or at Athens, as in a Common wealth?
their power is of God, of Gods ordination, constitution, and command: its not
from Satan, nor merely founded on the best reason and policy; but decreed and
ordered from above. Therefore writes Grotius upon that place, John 19.11. Thou
could have no power against me, unless thou had it from above. After his
Criticism upon Above, (...) quod and (...) Comments thus, Cum autem dicit datum
e locis superis, nonillam communem significat permissionem, quae multa
relinquit or dini naturali, sed ex gravissimis causis deliberatam rem in
consilio divino, quae omnia impedimenta undique moverat. But when he says, It
is given thee from above, it signifies not that general permission of God that
leaves many things to the order of nature (Reason, and ordinary second causes)
but a thing deliberated in the wisdom and council of God upon most weighty
grounds, which removes all hindrances that may stand betwixt the persons and
the establishment, and the execution of the power. Though that the abusive
administration, as well as the unjust acquisition of power is not of Gods
approbation, and delectation, but permission: yet the power and authority is
divine only from God, and has a real presence of Divinity. 1. In respect of
the Original, and Fountain of government, which only is in God, as the maker
of the world, and could only ordain Adam, or any of his line to rule over, or
govern his fellow creatures, as Stewards in the Family of God; which for the
order and beauty of the Universe, had been an institution of God, if man had
continued in his integrity, and for the safety of the Universe, was still
conferred on his posterity. And this illustrates that in Jude, verse 11. They
run the way of Cain, not only of uncharitableness against his brother, but of
disobedience against his Father, of Rebellion against Adam the dominator of the
earth. 2. In respect of his order, and Commission in his word, given to man to
rule, under his hand. We have not there a Catalogue of Families and persons
that should succeed in government; nor have we Prophets now a days sent from
God to nominate and anoint our Rulers, only that man is to rule, and
Commonwealths to have Magistrates from generation to generation. Therefore we
must distinguish betwixt what is humane, and what is divine in his Ordinance in
a strict sense. For the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.13. calls it an Ordinance of man
(...), or humane Ordinance: Humane in respect of the persons that bears this
Authority; either elected by the suffrage of the people, or acquiring it by the
arm of flesh, or mixed, partly forced, partly by way of stipulation and Covenant
passing betwixt the Magistrate and the people, mutually binding; and on the
dissolution of any such Obligations on either party, both remains free; and
thus man may be said to be the rise of government, though God be the head that
feeds all the springs of it; yet the next spring, the Electors, appears the
head to us, that immediately convey the streams of power to any. Or it is
humane in respect of the person exercising, the persons on whom it is
exercised, and the ends for which it is exercised: Yet the power into whose
hands soever it is committed, and by what means soever, and however that is
executed (God having not bound all Nations to one form of government, whether
Monarchichal, Aristocratical, or Democratical? nor for their judicial Laws to
one way of administration, provided, That no Law oppose or hinder the Lord, or
any thing that is his, but rather advance, and confer establishment to his
Laws) it is of God, and is to be obeyed. (...), Epiph. l. 2. c. 3. Col. Gerard.
etc. says Epiphanius. All worldly power is ordained of God, which receives
the power is ordained of God, which receives the power of the Sword from no
other but God. Weems 2. vol. 2. lib. page 71. In Decal. vide paraei Aph. sup.
ad Romans 13.
That however the several ways of government be left to man's discretion, and
so are added or diminished, or wholly altered according to that wisdom
applying it self to several times and persons, yet still the power it self
remains an ordinance of God.

And that this Authority might have the Diviner presence in it, God has given
to the Ministers thereof his own name, an high dignity to his civil
Ambassadors. Psalm. 82.1. I have, etc. Which Psalm as one observes, was written
by Asaph, from the mouth of God himself, who calls you Gods, his Vice-God,
Judges for him over his people; representing him, and in some respects, modo
inferiori, have the same subjection (as if God should sit there in person, and
humane shape to judge for us) if they give in charge nothing but what is their
Masters mind. We ought to Honor God with our substance, who gives us all
things liberally: and so we ought to serve the Magistrate with it by paying
Tribute, who preserves us with our substance that God has given us.

We pray unto God, we pray for these unto God; we ought not to blaspheme the
name of the great God, so not to speak evil of the Rulers of his people, We
worship God with our bodies that are his, so we offer civil homage with the
same to the Magistrates: we serve God in our souls and spirits, so we ought not
to let our thoughts or hearts rise up against the Magistrates. This we ought to
give as a Free Will offering, and yet we pay it as a most due debt. What Christ
said, give to Caesar, the Apostle as a good Expositor, bids us render (...)
being the same word used in both. We give it then not by way of gratuitie, but
duty: we pay it, we render it up from our selves, as being against right to
detain it from them.

Now since that Magistrates are Gods Ordinances, and Magistrates are his
representatives; let us endeavor the confirmation of his Ordinance; and honor
both in mind and person, such as rightly judge for him: follow his decrees and
constitutions by passing our votes and supplications for them. What John said
of a brother to a brother, He that loves not whom he has seen, being the
spiritual image of Christ, How shall he love him whom he has not seen? Christ
himself. So of the subject to the Magistrate, He that honors not him whom he
has seen, that bears the office, and presence of the Almighty, How shall he
honor God himself, whom he has not seen?

The second reason is drawn from those ends, for which such a supreme order is
constituted overus.

First, We will begin with the Subordinate ends, such as most concerns us. God
made us, and made us happy, and to be happy, he therefore provided means to
promote this happiness. But man by his fall made himself miserable; God
therefore to prevent the preproperating our misery, or lessen those evils, into
which inevitably we have cast our selves, has appointed means, as remedys
hereof, even these means, viz. Magistrates. For see the ends for which they are
constituted of God, and which they ought principally to attend. Romans 13.3, 4.
For Rulers, etc. Psalm. 82.3. 4. Defend the poor, etc. and most eminently in
this Text, Pray for them, that under them, you, etc. As we are the Lords
people, so the Lord has made us their people, and delivered us to them, and
given to them Divine institutions, even such as are necessary to the
well-being, nay, the being of humane Societies. If they abuse that power to set
up their own private interests, contrary to those ends, this is neither from
God, nor naturally arises from their power; but from the corruption and
baseness of men's ambitious spirits, that makes use of their masters favor and
talents for their own advantage, seeking their own, instead of the good of
others.

A Magistrate of all men is the least his own, but given unto, and set a part
for the people: he is the greatest Servant of all men, and the best, if upright
in his place: Yet though he be the Servant of others in labor, he is the
Master of others in honor.

God therefore has appointed them to serve us with their blessings, or he has
ordained them the Pipes and Vessels through which the Fountain of good, conveys
his good things to us: or this order of the preheminency is a civil
Stewardship, in which men are to deal out the allowances of God to the rest of
their fellow Servants, to preserve and augment those blessings. Since then the
ends be so desirable, and the means so considerable, it becomes us to
strengthen and make use of those means, to pray that the Stewards may be found
faithful in their Office, that these Pipes be not broken, or stopped; that so
the stream of the Common wealth, Justice, and the stream of the Sanctuary,
Godliness and Truth, may in a peaceful, still, quiet, and proper channel run
down amongst us. Therefore, besides their Titles of Authority whereby they live
over us, and by us, so they have their Titles of Duty, to show they should live
for us, and we by them. Fathers, and Mothers; Joseph was a Father indeed, and
by his prudentiall care provided for his people. Deborah was a Mother indeed,
and carried her people out of the Waters, and mire of troubles: here we have
the true Nurcing Father and Nurcing Mother: and so should all others be that
should feed the oppressed with Justice, causing him to sit under his own Vine,
and to eat the fruit of his own labor, feeding the Poor by careful, timely,
and sufficient provisions; feeding the Righteous by protecting and providing
for their Pastors; defending the Ordinances, the bread of life in purity: sure
then if we be obedient children, expecting or desiring these blessings from our
Fathers, we ought to pray for a blessing upon our Fathers. They are called the
The foundations of the earth, the guard and Savior of a Nation, etc. To reckon
up and apply all; would be tedious, and beyond my purpose: only this, these
names were not imposed upon them in vain, but they have their Energeticall
significancies, teaching them what they ought to do for us, and what we may
expect from them: as also unto what we ought to seek of God to enable them; for
if they produce not these blessings to us, there is some great cause in them,
or us, they being so naturally, or Divinely annexed to the Office.

How heartily do we pray for, and watch over such things as we know by
experience to be the proper causes of comfort to us, as over our Children, over
the earth we manage, etc. and if there be a failing, a deviating in them, that
the channel that should afford us sweet, yields nothing but bitter water; and
our best earth that should bring forth pure grain, bears nothing but thorns, we
are much affected with it; we mourn, we pray, and beseech the Lord to divert
the curse. Do so for the Magistrates of a land, especially for Magistrates
laboring and striving to bring forth fruits suitable to their place, and to
yield better fruit, and more wholesome to the people, then ever any labored
before: pray that the Lord would furnish them with wisdom and strength
accordingly; either thou must desire mercies of God in the way of his means,
else thou temptest God. And if thou have received such benefits by the
Government under which thou live: ungrateful man! that wilt not endeavor a
recompense, viz. of Prayers and blessings. Debent illis submissam gratitudinem,
qua benificia illa, quorum participes facti sunt, ex eorum potestate, studiunt
pro viribus compensare, says Ames. lib. 5. cap. 20. page 303. We owe to
Magistrates an humble gratitude, Case Consc.
wherein to our utmost power we ought in our duties and callings to study to
compensate those benefits, whereof by their own power they have made us
partakers; pray that the same good hand may rest upon them, to coutinue the
same good to us.

And if as yet those blessings fall short of a moderate desire and expectation,
pray that they may not. Nam hoc officium non possunt praestare principes nisi a
Deo donari, etc. Zanch. t. 8. de mag. page 554. Though they are ordained of God
for these ends, yet they cannot accomplish these ends for us, unless the Lord
concur with them in the administration of their power, as he did in their
ordination. We may conclude this with that observation of learned Mr Weemes,
vol. 2. lib. 2. cap. 13. page 73, ad finem: The Jews say, Esto orans pro
salute Regni, nam si non esset. Authoritas publica, vir proximum suum
deglutiret, ut pisces majores minores: pray for those that are in Authority,
for if there were no Authority to restrain oppressors, then the wicked would
devour the man that is more righteous than themselves, even as the great fish
devour the smaller. Me thinks our own necessity should lead us unto this duty,
when we see Magistrates contriveing their Councels to our wants, we having so
many evil persons abounding amongst us. Aquin. 12. qu. 95. art. 1. ex Isod.
Factae sunt Leges ut earum metu humana coerceretur audacia, tutaque sit inter
improbos innocentia: If the Laws were for no more than these ends, that the
impudence of impious persons might be corrected, and the innocent might lie
down in safety, they were sufficient to induce us to this duty: and so far as
we do enjoy these, let us be thankful for them, for without them we should
not know what was our own. They therefore (says Paraeus Aphoris. 3. praedict.)
seem to be more necessary than our daily bread, the air we breathe in, the
Sun we walk by, etc. for even these we could not comfortably enjoy without
them.

2 The prime and highest End is the glory of God. Ames. cas. cons. lib. 5. cap.
25. page 313. Debetur autem hoc officium, non tantum quia subditorum bonum in
ipsorum bono, etc. we owe not only this duty to Magistrates, because our good
is included in their good, but because a singular price of glory and honor
comes to God out of the right administration of their power: When a Magistrate
is converted, there is not only rejoyceing for him as a common sinner, and
single, being saved himself, but as one that adds glory to the Church,
strengthens and comforts many that do believe, and may bring in many more to
the acknowledgment of the same truth. If the Lord had not cut off that cursed
Julian, into what dangerous mischiefs had he hurled the Church of God? One
Emperor only pulls down the places of public Meetings, that so solemnly,
diligently, and preparedly they should not instruct one another: another takes
away their public Schools, that so their children might not receive humane
Learning, and the principles of Religion: another takes away the means, the
outward support of all their helps to Religion and Learning, knowing that with
it all will in time perish. -- Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas? --
says the Poet.

Such was their subtle actings with the Church of God, in the primitive times,
to draw a darkness over the truth to destroy their souls; and if that will not
prevayl, then they destroy their persons; and what evil such a cruel Lion as
Nero may do in a little flock of Christ in a short time, any may cast up. But
when that unparaleld Constantine arises, what a splendent glory breaks forth
over all the Churches of God! what pleasant beauty setles on the countenances
of the godly! what praises are sung to God for him! how much is the name of
Christ advanced by him! Christus in Consistorio, Christ now sits in the
Consistory; Christ pronounceeh judgment on the Throne: Christ ruling, Christ
preaching. And in his time not the most infernal mouth durst open against the
name of Christ. Art thou a Chrstian, and wilt not pray for this glory, which in
all places and ages is usually ecclipsed or enlarged by the Magistrate? Thy
prayers may confer to the reducing of an erring Magistrate, as well as an
erring brother: and if this be of consequence, much more is that: the Apostle
makes it possible, that we might put it into act, Iam. 5. ult. Let him know
that he which converteth (any) sinner from, etc. but let him know, that he
that converts a Magistrate by prayer or any other way does much more.

And suppose thou have not been idle and unacquainted in these means; thou
have prayed from time to time, and thy prayers return not with these full and
pleasant fruits; thy prayers go out laden with the best and choicest of thy
desires, but they return empty: yet the continuance in this duty may abate the
dishonor of God. If upon this thy Magistrate become not so good as thou
desire, yet he may not be so bad as thou fear: this may stop blasphemous
mouths, check the malignant and impetuous slanderer; nay, hereafter when thou
art dead, the memorial of thy conversation may work upon and be as Balm unto
thy Hearse, and be a friend to the surviving Christians. Marler. in 1. Tim. 2.
v. 3. Cedit in gloriam Religionis Christianae, imo Domini Dei nostri, si
pacifice, mansuete, ac sedulo Dominis obsequamur, subjecti omnibus in timore
Dei, etc. this will redownd to the glory of our Christian Profession, and of
our God, if meekly and peaceably we endeavor to obey our Rulers, for being
subject to them, we show by our works that the Laws of our good God are
written in our hearts, and what those Laws are, when from us they shall
glorify God, that if it please him to visit them with his gracious mercy,
enduing them with religious and pious hearts, they shall serve and worship this
God with us; however in the mean while Orationibus nostris commendati, let them
be presented unto God in our prayers for this end: or if it please the Lord to
visit them in anger and with his rod, this may sadly reflect upon their
spirits, as one cause of their punishment; I have hated them that have loved
me, cursed them that blessed me, oppressed them that prayed for me, laughed and
mocked at them that mourned and fasted for me: I have required them evil for
good, I have despised their good, and therefore it is just that this evil
should come upon me: an heart thus truly smitten will presently send forth
cries: Ob, let them pray for me still. Oh, that I might live to pray with them,
to return those blessings I have taken from them, and to pay that to them in
part which I owe for their prayers; my blood is too little to shed for them to
protect them, that shed such tears for my heavenly protection. And if with
these wishes and thoughts they should breath out their lives, it would be
honor to God, and should be sufficient comfort to thee, though they should not
live to remunerate thee. 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your conversation honest (and thus
pious likewise) among, and verse 15. for so it is the will, etc. that with well
doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolishness: and if yet herein
thou obtainest not thy desire, but they live and dye as wicked and ungodly
Magistrates as ever they were, yet here is thy comfort, thou glorifiest God in
performing his own Ordinace; and that in hope thou continuest waiting therein
upon his bare word, without the least income of mercy suitable to thy endeavor.

Lastly, thou ought to pray for them, They may desire it of thee: and
doubtless if the Magistrate be a good man, or ever had the least acquaintance
with God in this his way, he will not so much that thou might acknowledge
his Authority, as that he might through faith and fellowship in the same duty,
be made partakers of so effectual an Ordinance, desire thy supplications and
intercession for him. Hezechiah sends to Esaiah, and in him to all the rest,
Is. 37.4. Lift up thy prayer, etc. So did Esiher to all her brethren. We see
the Elders of Judah coming to the Prophet with false and hypocritical Spirits
to desire his prayer and direction, Ier. 42.2, 3. We beseech thee let our, etc.
yet they had a free and gracious answer, verse 10. If you still, etc. as if
there had been much good intended to them, if they had really intended
obedience.

That wicked and rebellious people that had injured Samuel, yet knowing the
efficacy of prayer, comes to him, 1 Samuel 12.19. And all the people said to
Samuel, etc. This was Samuels gracious and mild answer, to that ungracious,
and discontented multitude, verse 23. As for me God forbid, etc. We ffnde that
Heathen Kings have been so far convinced of the virtue of this means, that they
have desired it earnestly, Ezra 6.10. That they may offer, etc. And to this he
engages them by special favors, verse 8, 9. Not only to defray the charges of
the Sacrifice, but the expenses of the place of worship it self. Many of their
Princes, the Eunuch, etc. have come up to Jerusalem for this end, to join in
worship with them. We have many examples hereof upon Record, and in our own
eyes to this day; I shall give you but one in the Primitive Church. Maximinus
that cruel and impious persecutor, on his bed of sickness had certain
reluctations of Spirit for his evil practices, and got up his heart to desire
the prayers of Christians, even of that remnant yet preserve from the fire, and
other torments: and that he might obtain the Christians hearty prayers for him,
did bestow upon them many liberties, gifts, etc. -- Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 29. p.
169. Unde Christani hac indulgentia a nobis concessa devincti debent deo suo
obnixe supplicare, pro nostra, pro Reipublicae, pro sua ipsorum salute, ut
quovis modo cum publieus rerum status integer and incolumis retineatur, tum
ipsi in familiis suis absque oura and solicitudine vitam degant. Having by his
decree restored to them their places of Worship, Means, Liberty of profession,
etc. Hence, says he, The Christians being bound by this indulgence granted by
us, ought earnestly to pray unto their God for our health, the health of the
Common wealth, and their own, that so the common condition of affairs being
well and safe, they might spend their lives in their families without care and
molestation. What an unworthy thing would it be in us, to deny to answer this
their desire? Where would be that Christian compassion, and charity suitable to
our profession? we condemn them for not protecting us, and we deny to afford
them our prayers to enable them to it. We judge the Magistrate for his wants,
when our wants are the greater; I say, they are the greater, because they are
the easierly supplied; it is worse that they should want our prayers
(especially praying for them) then that we should want their countenance,
assistance, maintenance. Hypocrites, Heathens have had and merited their answer
of desires herein, who tended to nothing but their personal security, and
particular happiness: much more should such Magistrates, who from pious,
sincere, and humble spirts, desire good men's prayers alone, even for this end,
That they might receive Divine influences of wisdom, courage, integrity, etc
and outward blessings, whereby they might cause their authority and power,
truly to serve the Church of God.

Thus you see how probable the effect is, how reasonable the performance is.

CHAP. VII.
IT comes now in order to discuss the last particular promised, viz. The
resolution of some Objections that have sometimes sat upon my judgment and
conscience; and the same may abide still upon the minds of many sincere, and
tender hearts, that desire truly and exactly to walk according to Gospel Rule,
and to the honor of their holy profession; which with all the candor and
freedom of spirit I can, I shall labor according to truth to remove; that so
with the more cheerfulness, and less hesitancie, we may set our selves to the
conscionable practice of this Duty.

Object. But some will say, Ought we to pray for, and to be subject to
Heretical Magistrates, and such as make use of their power to protect
Heretics?

Sol. To this I answer,

1. That if this be made in reference to this present Government, and to them
that are in eminent Authority over us, it may upon probable grounds be denied
that they are such Heretics; for this by experience I can affirm of some that
have great influence upon the affairs of this Common wealth as they are now
acted, and carried on amongst us.

1. That they are sound in judgment in the Fundamental points of religion;
zealous affectors of the Ordinances of God in purity, constant practisers of
such Duties, as carries in them the power of Godliness, and men of great and
heavenly experiences.

2. That they are sadly and deeply affected with the spreading Errors and
Heresies of these times, through which there are such numerous divisions daily
begotten in that one only Church of God, and do truly resent the departure of
good men from the Truth, not only as the common, Sins, but the heavy
Judgments of these times, from which I am persuaded they will labor according
to truth to recover this nation.

3. They are tender over the Orthodox, and thereof especially the Ministers of
the Gospel; ready to supply their indigencies, to pardon their infirmities
committed against themselves, desirous of nothing more then union with them;
exceedingly troubled to be made instruments of their affliction, and the
others restoration. To this their own actions may testify in many, and they
still will testify in the due honor and preservation of learning, and of
learned men, as a means to discover the subtilties of Satan (covered by men of
the ablest parts) and to strengthen the truth, to which we owe our noblest
excellencies, and of which at all times, even in the Apostles times (when there
was an immediate effusion of the spirit) the Lord made use of, as serving truly
to these ends. Yet I believe that there be many violencies offered against them
in their estates and names, of which they in Authority are wholly ignorant;
and I believe their actions hereafter will yet give a clearer evidedence unto
this. Hereby it may easily be deserned what kind of Heretics they be.

2. By way of concession, admit the present magistrates should be Heretics,
even under their government thou ought to live in peace, and perfectly to
obey them in all their Ordinances that are according to the mind of God; and
if otherwise he command thee, resist not, though thou obeyest not: but in thy
place reprove them, so that thy reproofs, through soundness of wisdom tend to
reformation, and not to shame and disturbance.

1. For we find not any Magistrate (admitting he has the gifts of Government)
excepted from Rule, nor we exempted from due Obedience, and honor to any
Magistrate under any such qualification. But the rule runs in general, to be
subject to the higher powers, to all that are in Authority, to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake.

2. We find not any example in the Orthodox, and reformed Churches of God,
that by any regular and approved course, by any unanimous and free consent,
have laid aside, deposed, resisted, or slighted any Magistrate, for that
Religion he has professed in the New, or Old Testament: though we know
otherwise, Religion is the common and general plea for Rebellion; and so for
excusing all allegiances, as we have too many president: of this kind. We
find not any King in Judah Deposed for Idolatry, nor the Prophets and Priests
resisting their Authority for it, though faithfully, and sharply reprehending
them. Nor find we any of the Churches of the new Testament resisting or
denying obedience to a Magistrate because Heretical, Idolatrous, or
backsliding from the truth.

Object. Good reason, for they had not Strength.

Sol. First, None can deny but the Jews had sufficient strength; they who
could irresistably revolt from Rehoboam the oppressor, could as easily have
rejected his Father, secure in the arms of his Concubines, and an Idolater.

Secondly, It is probable that the Primitive Christians had power within them
to have effected such a design, if they would. For if we should reckon those
many thousands that suffered (besides those that escaped) under one Persecutor,
we should think if they had been embodied (in so just a cause as truth alone)
they might have puzzled all their Tyrants power. And if we further consider how
many Christians were in great favor, Courtiers, and attendants to those great
Princes; many in Offices of great trust, Commanders in the field, Governors of
Forts, Towns, and Castles, it would be no great marvel (if this opinion was
Evangelical) to hear of embroilments, and insurrections.

To give you but an instance or two, besides what is largely spoken to this by
Tertullian in his Apology. In initio imperii Valeriani -- tota domus ejus piis
hominibus complebatur, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 9. p. 126.
erat que plane Dei Ecclesia. When Valerian began his Reign, his house was so
stuffed with Godly men, that it appeared truly, rather to be a Church of God,
then the Court of an earthly Prince. Who when their Emperor Apostatized into
those great impieties of Tyranny, and Persecution, probably had both power and
opportunity to have finally cut off that wicked Magistrate, as Ehud did Eglon,
Judge. 3.
if they durst have resisted that power. We meet with going along in the same
History, another Cornelius, Marinus a Roman Centurion, who being questioned
for the faith he professed, questioned not their Authority, neither made use
of that power and interest he had in the Souldierie (who might be Christians
for the most part (as that Legio fulminatrix was) or at least affected to
Christianity) for his defense and protection, or for the suppression of that
Tyrants wickedness: but after he had discoursed with Theotecnus, Eusebius. c. 14.
page 130.
an holy Bishop, who presented him with a Bible and a Sword, and praecepit
exillis duobus, quod magis esset ex animi sententia deligeret: And required him
that whether of them two he had rather have, he would choose, who without delay
threw away his sword, and with cheerfulness submitted his neck to the Axe.

Many instances of the like nature might be produced out of those ancient
Historiographers, and that modern, but faithful and learned Frenchman,
Thuanus: only thus far we have the effigies of other Christians in these,
that though they could, yet they would not resist that power they either had
protection from, or protected by their service; no, not so much as to
capitulate with them.

Thirdly, We answer, that if this should be granted, That we might lawfully
resist, or withdraw our necks from the yoke of obedience to a Magistrate,
because erroneous in his judgment, or Heretical, it would open a gapp to a
perpetual rebellion, and draw a sword that should never be sheathed up: for
there should never be any in Authority, but he would be an Heretic to some
party (every one esteeming himself in the truth) though truly Orthodox in
himself: and then that Heretic might also judge it lawful for him to resist
that Magistrate, or unlawful to obey him: and a third party judge so of this,
and so by sword and violence one will be always crouding another out of the
seat of Authority: How pernicious this would be to religion and common
safety, let any judge.

Fourthlie, We answer, That Heresy in a Magistrate is no sufficient plea for a
Subject to resist his Authority, because Heresy is a corruption of the
person, not of the authority: he errs as a man, not as clothed with
Authority: he ers as imperfect in judgment, knowing but in part, not as a
Magistrate; for an erroneous Christian may be a just and faithful Magistrate:
and if he tolerate wicked persons, and evil workers, it is contrary to that
end of his power to which by God he was delegated, viz: for the punishment of
them that are evil: and if he desinge his Sword against holiness and truth, he
has the more need of our prayers, and it behooves us the more carnestlie to
implore the God of Heaven rightly to inform his judgment, and to direct his
heart by his truth, to teach his fingers to fight, and his arm to sway the
sword of justice for the Lord aganst all impiety.

LASTLY, if this should be granted another absurdity must thence necessarily
follow: where must live the passive Christian? where should we find a Martyr?
If we have liberty to resist an Heretical Magistrate, then how shall we leave
all, yield up our lives and goods for the testimony of Christ and his Gospel?
A Christian should go like a Lamb to the slaughter, but if he resist and
prevail not, he will go like a wild Bull taken in the net, and be led to his
suffering like a Bear to the stake, truly like a Malefactor. All those
exhortations of the Apostle, to a patient running of the race, to long
suffering, etc. may be expunged as Apochryphal: that cloud of witnesses may
then vanish away, as unneedfull to guide us. All the Saints of God in the
primitive days, when the Church was in her glory, as well as in her darkness,
understood not their Christian privileges, if this be true. And the Gospel of
Christ is yet imperfect, which amongst the publications of all its glad
tidings, left unrecorded this immunitie purchased by his precious blood. And to
what end should we have so rich a treasure of sacred promises, of a Crown of
glory, Dominion, Rest, and Immortality; of a Resurrection to Christ, that shall
judge the cause of his Saints, and of pleasures at the right hand of God for
ever, made to the persecuted, afflicted, patient, well-bearing Christian? Why
should we carve for our selves here on earth by resistance, and victory, if we
mean to enjoy our possessions, and our losses returned a thousand fold over in
heaven for enduring? In a word, if we had such a Gospel liberty (or rather an
Heathenish, or Brutish licenciousness) to resist under this notion, all the
Doctrine and Examples of Christ, and his Apostles, would be to none effect.

Object. But it will be further enquired, what if the Magistrate be
Tyrannical, oppressive, and unjust, ought we then to obey him, and pray for
him?

Sol. To this we answer.

First, If still this reflect on this present Government, we shall answer by
Negation. Tyranny we know consists in the irregular, illegal, arbitrarie,
irrational, immoderate, and by-ended exercise of power; the end being to
satisfy some private lust of his or their own (that be in Authority) as
pride, covetize, luxury, revenge, etc. and not the common good. Now both in
the way of administration, and in the portended ends of it, (rebus extantibus)
this supposed Tyranny to my apprehension breaks not out, which appears upon
these reasons, which I submit to the ingenuous readers judgment.

1 Because these (I speak of them that sit at the Stern, those underdeck may
assume more liberty to themselves unknown to the chiefe-ruling Magistrate) rule
and govern by Law. Tyrants love not enclosures, to live and act in their
Offices by prescript, but to walk in Forest paths themselves, yet to have all
things else submitted to their judgment, regulated by their will; their seals
and countenances must determine cases, dispose of lives and estates; so that
the subject must have no other Oracle then such a Magistrates mouth, and the
very Law lies locked up in his breast; and if he stoop so far as to ordain
Laws, they are to be no boundary to a Tyrant, but an hedge to his people, in
which there must be left such gapps and passages that he may act beyond, beside
them; or else tread them down at pleasure by virtue of a supereminent
prerogative overtopping all Law and Reason.

Now this is apparent to any impartial apprehension, That such as chiefly rule
in this present Government, live not, act not, govern not thus: they have
embarked themselves in the common Bottom with the subject, yield up themselves
and all theirs to the trial of the same Law by which the meanest subject is
tried: and if it be tyranny in this present exigence of time, to tax and
onerate the subject with new Impositions, I say, if this be oppression, they
are then Tyrants and oppressors of themselves, and their own friends and
tenants, being no ways free themselves from them or any other burdens: and how
irrational this is to any wise man, that men should advisedly oppress
themselves, all may judge. The conclusion is, they act by Law, live under that
Law in equal capacity with the meanest, which is no tyrannical Administracion.

And to this we may add, that if any Law swel above the Liberty of the Subject,
or their privileges, they are ready to entertain any informacion or motion to
correct, or repeal (where a correction will not suffice) that Law: and so
likewise to enlarge any Law that may make for the happiness and freedom of the
subject in general: this many can assure of them in power, and all may know,
that this has no show of Tyranny.

2 We must know, that a Parliament being the Supreme Authority of this Nation,
(according to Mr. Pryn, etc.) and including alone the Legislative power, into
whose hands by free and unanimous suffrage upon serious deliberation the people
have committed their Liberties, Lives, and Estates; I say, they acting in
Parliament upon the interest of the people, and in reference to the common
welfare, according to their judgment, (to which all our National affairs are
committed) cannot be said in reason or conscience, to rule tyrannically over
the people.

3 As to their ENDS, I am not able to reatch them; but must leave that to him
for to judge, whose nature and prerogative it is to search the hearts and try
the reins, to weigh men's actions, and to judge according to men's thoughts: if
their ends be evil, and corrupt, GOD in time will find them out, blast their
enterprises and overthrow them in the making up their Ends: When they have
punished others, God will take them into his own hands, or create an unexpected
scourge to punish them also. But in the mean while, this I can affirm of some
chief Rulers, that they mind the public affairs more then their own, and
account it their being, to be spent for the Common Good. That they desire not
revenge, thirst not after blood, but could let tears fall upon the wounds of
their enemies: through patience and many special favors acted toward the
Godly, (as yet dissenting from them) they would thereby make them their Debtors,
and if it were possible bring them into one Fellowship. That they hate Bribes;
and in time it will be manifest, that they will effectually promote and settle
Religion in its purity and unity, according to the word of God, and religious
policy according with the word of God: and advance it likewise by all other
external means that may properly conduce to it. And that through their means,
the multitude of Errors shall receive a total rout, and Truth ride in triumph.
Of this we may assure our selves, if we may credit their personal practices,
their affectionate, (and I hope sincere) appeals to God both in private, and
public; their solemn promises, and resolutions; their appeals to man upon
their appeals to God, where in charity I am bound to receive such thoughts of
them that such are carried off from Tyrannical ends, and intentions.

Secondly, But admit the worst, subscribe to the clamor, That they act
Tyrannically, endeavor to set up their own iuterests, ends, and factions, yet
that does not disoblige us from this our subjects duty.

1. If Heresy and Idolatry are not sufficient grounds to dis-authorize, and
dis-office a Magistrate, then Tyranny and oppression me thinks should not, De
jure, Disoblige a people from their Duty.

2. Tyranny is an evil of a person in power, making use of that present power
to bring forth and establish the evil thoughts, and base affections of his
spirit: which power, if rightly administered, would overthrow Tyranny and
oppression; so that durante officio, we owe obedience to him, viz. his power,
though he act contrary to the ends of it.

3. We must examine, whether that Tyranny be not in the extravigant uses of a
limited power, bounded in by Oaths, Laws, Covenants, and solemn Stipulatory
acts, contracted betwixt the Magistrate and the Subjects, or no. If it be an
abuse of such a power, which he only has received in trust, and so liable to
account for the mannagement of it, he may be resisted by way of defense to
prevent the utmost execution of his unguided will, least he should destroy
himself, and them from whom, and for whom he has received his power, (so that
they that act herein, that examine and judge herein, be men in just authority)
and if he prove incorrigible, and irreducible to act according to his Legal and
entrusted power, he may be liable to sentence, and stripped of his power.

The conditions on which the Subject sets up a power and Authority over
himself ought to be performed, though to his slaverie and ruin, as in the case
of Saul: but if the Subject does faithfully perform his duty, and the
Magistrate fail, (and that wilfully) in the performance of his conditionated
duty, then the next subordinate Magistrates are bound by the Law of God and
nature, to defend those subjects from oppression, and to require an account of
the trust of the superior Magistrates. If the superior Magistrate sin alone
against God in the execution of his Office, to God alone he is accountable: but
if he be a Magistrate entering upon his Government in trust, and upon
conditions, he stands responsible to them, to whom these conditions are made,
or to them whom they appoint to require, examine, and determine according to
the trust reposed in him, which must be by men noble and worthy, invested with
a true and rightful power.

4. A great cause of your rash condemnations, and exclamations against this
power as Tyrannical, is from those unusual and extraordinary impositions of
Taxes. But know, that as a good Magistrate will not impose unnecessary
burdens, so the good subject will take heed of wronging his superior, by
calling that unjust and Tyrannical, unto which the common necessity compels
him. That which tends to the preservation of the whole, is not Tyrannical,
though sometimes Irregular: and that supreme Authority cannot act illegally,
that has power to alter, abolish and constitute Laws.

When the Magistrate sees the whole in great danger (nay, when a subordinate
Magistrate perceives a part in a desperate estate on a sudden) it is then
lawful for him to proceed in the execution of his place against Law, and to
use any means to that end, and not to stay for the ordering of those means by
Law, till all be ruined: so it is lawful to infringe some of the Subjects
Liberties, to repair and maintain the rest of his Liberties.

I know such actions work much against the spirits of the wealthy and covetous
Subject, who minds his own profit more then the publicks, and looks no further
after the business of others, then he can work into his own: and therefore
calls upon the Superiors for Justice, Justice, Protection, Peace: and the least
Prevarication (though it belongs not to him to censure) will speedily open his
mouth to cry out, Oppression! and Tyranny! But take heed; while the Magistrate
is Minister Dei pro tuo bono, repine not at him seeking thy good; condemn him
not for such actions as Tyrannical; such acts living no longer then thy
absolute necessity informs them.

5. Admit that such actions have a relish of Tyranny, yet then (a wiseman has
given advice) That a dull humor in the Subject, is better then a sharp, and
Patience better than a Sword. To foster murmurings in the breast (which are but
preparations for Rebellion, and a Civil War) is very dangerous: and our late
experiences may teach and lead us to a patient suffering, rather then an
impatient repining, which frequently precedes hazardous undertakings.

6 And if the continuance of troubles be so great (whether through the necessity
of the public or no) that they become very difficult to be born, yet let us
bear them as the servants of God did under those unreasonable and cruel
Tyrants, Nero, Caligula, etc. and betake our selves to a solemn search, and
serious repentance for sin, the true cause of all those griefs in all
relations, and persons, that so suffer; and if we be sincere therein, where in
persons or estates we shall sinde plain and sufficient cause prevencing those
troubles: which in the best sense must be afflictions inflicted to prevent
worse, as we let blood to prevent bloody-fluxes, Fevers, and such more
dangerous deseases: as that faithful Hystoriographer relates, before that long
and grievous perfecution of Dioclesian, the failings of the Church were great.
Anno Christi. 306.
Cum nos prae nimia quadam licentia in mollitiem delicatam, and dissolutam
segnitiem prolap si, cum alij alijs invidere, maledictis insectari, and prope
nos ipsi inter nos petulantibus linguis tanquam mutuis armis impugnare, etc. --
Praesides ecclesiarum, alter alterius vires infringere etc. -- cumque ficta and
adumbrata pietatis species, etc. Then fell the Church into the sad time of
travel under that cruel persecutor, and he by desolation put an end to the
Churches divisions. Our actions in Church affairs renders the English of it;
he that reads us, will interpret that. While then we groan under our
calamities, let us press out some groans for sin, let our complaints against
Superiors be turned against our selves, let us water our chamber with tears for
the divisions of the Church, and for the Magistrates also, that should
resarcire Ecclesiam dilaceratam, stand in the gap and make up our breaches. To
this penitence ad patience, bear it because so justy deserved, since we have
stretched forth the hand to fetch in and hasten these troubles upon our selves,
which carry upon them the legible characters of our sins, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore
does a living man complayn, a man for the punishment of his sins? why complayn?
will that satisfy a provoked God? or will it affect the Magistrates? Calumniando
pejores fiunt Principes: to wrong the Magistrates by our calumnies, is to make
the to wrong us, to justify our calumnies. Can vexatious and unquiet complaints
affect God? who delights to see us meek, and our souls possessed and kept with
patience, and to hear compassionate prayers poured forth for our oppressors
instead of discontented repinings.

7. Lastly, Thou look upon such Tyrants and oppressors as thy very enemies;
thou art a private person, and have no remedy left but to Petition for them to
thy God, and for thy self to them; and this is thy holy duty. For they commit
many evils in ignorance, oppressing, and persecuting others, yet may be vessels
reserved for mercy, as Paul. Our Savior tells us, That there will be many such
blind Zelots in power; Seperabunt vos censure, and authoritatis vi, Job. 16.2.
That shall, etc. And this did not they, but with color of piety and authority,
Christ prayed for such, both Magistrate and People, that proceeded so high as
to put him to death, Luke 23.24. Father forgive etc. It may be thou think it
a less matter to pray for their pardon and conversion, peace and outward
happiness: but sure the mercy is greater, and the grounds are as warrantable
for this, as that. How much is this disposition called for in us by the Lord,
to overcome their evil with our good: Cruelty is over come by Patience, and
Tyranny by a quiet subjection; Curses, by Blessings, injuries, by well-doings.
Justin. in Colloq. cum Tryph. Col. Grot. Thus writes of Christians, (...) We
pray that they all repenting may find mercy from that God of all men, a pitiful
and much merciful Father. Should we look upon any man, and above all men, upon
Magistrates to be our enemies, even above all men we ought to pray for them.
Christ directs us unto this, as to a practice exceeding nature, and a
discoverer of the excellency of his Gospel-Doctrine, wherein he appears far
more glorious then any other Teachers. Mat. 5.44, 45. But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. That ye may be
the children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise
on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust.
Where we find an argument drawn from our likeness to God himself, into which
this practice would work us: For he indifferently rains blessings on the unjust
as well as on the just: if thou will not let thy desires concur with his
providence, if thou will not pray for blessings on the unjust, God will bestow
them without thy prayers; yet though God do it without thee, and would if thou
should be silent, he he has appointed thee to pray, as a means to draw out
those blessings.

We shall then close up this with that of S. Hierom, in Jer. 19. Seek ye the
peace of this City, Ut simus non nostri tantum salute contenti, sed inimicorum
quoque quaeramus salutem, So I say, seek the peace of this Common wealth, and
silence those reasonings that may stir you up to the deeds of the flesh, that
you may not only be satisfied with your own, without others happiness, but
that you might become isntrumental to save others with your selves, even your
enemies.

CHAP. X.
YEt there remains the two most difficult objections, that lie so much in the
eyes of many pious men, that they cannot see their own duty, and the things
that belong to their own peace.

Some object against the Lawfulness of this present Authority, and therefore
owe to them no obedience, because they saw that they assumed by violence their
authority to themselves, and so are no less then usurpers, whom we ought not
to obey, nor pray for.

As the other objection reflected upon the administration of Government
obtained, so this questions the reception, and ground of the Government it
self, since it appears to many conscientious Christians to be violently taken,
and that by the hands of private persons, and therefore neither to be obeyed,
nor prayed for; For the resolution of which,

First, We shall lay down these following propositions to unty the knot it
self, by declaring the nature of our former Government, and of usurpation it
self.

1. To introduce the rest, I shall propose this Observation to any man that is
but ordinarily read in our English Chronicles. That the former power by which
our Kings reigned, and under which our forefathers lived, was many times
obtained by usurpation (the true natural Heirs either banished, imprisoned, or
murdered by them) yet to them they yielded subjection, and swore allegiance;
and by honor, and other secular preferments, having engaged certain flattering
and ambitious subjects to them (for, for this end they claim the Origin of
Nobility, and propriety in all men's estates to bestow them on such Favorites)
who co-engaged multitudes of simple subjects (admirers of Persons and Titles,
Dependants on their Families and Estates (injuriously taken from others, and
given to them or absolute slaves to their redundant power) to maintain with
their Lives and Estates such usurpers.

And hence it was that several families claiming the right of Succession, at
one time have hurried the whole Common wealth into Civil broiles, and the
blind Subject not minding his own safety, has served these particular
interests, and been industrious to enslave himself to their private lusts.

And the like we read in all Histories of Foreign Nations, both Christian and
Heathenish, That the beguiled Subjects through them, have be^n lead into such
practices to the prodigal expense of Blood and Fortunes, not carcing for
themselves for whom Princes were made, but only calculating on all passages
their Princes will, as if for them they were only made. And hence it has been
that all Nations have had so many Phocases, who by blood have ascended the
Royal Throne (affected with outward pomp and revenge) whom our Forefathers,
as well as Forreiners, most promptly have saluted as their Dread Sovereign,
without question of right or title. Indeed Treachery, Sword, and all manner of
violence have given possession to Kings, and by the same means have preseryed
it till they have been extruded as they entered: I could bring sundry arguments
to discover this

First, By their fair pretenses for Religion, sending it as the Harbinger to
take up the hearts of the people for them, which they never practiced in
themselves, minded, or loved it in others, and as suddenly laid it aside, when
by it chiefly they have obtained their desires; and by these pretexts the
zelously affected, and amongst them, even the Ministers of the Gospel have
often unadvisedly been ready to carry their Ensigns, and to advance their
Designs.

Secondly, By that difficulty in obtaining any indifferent Laws to establish
the liberties of the Subjects, to give a little ease to their burdens, or in
some small proportion to counterpoize the several acts made in favor of
particular persons, and Dependencies; and even those dearly bought, and as
hardly wrung from them by piecemeal.

Thirdly, By that ingenuous subtilty in framing Laws to Vassalize the persons
and estates of the people to their Superiors, not in reference to the
preservation of the whole (to which the Law of Nature, as well as of Nations
summons us) but for the feeding of their Luxuriant practices, and securing
their oppressive commands and jurisdictions; not that I grudge those
privileges which by Law and right belong to persons of Authority and Honor
beyond the common Subject, but that they should not by their Privileges
endeavor to destroy the Subjects liberty: and an hard thing it was to find a
limit to their privileges, when the Subjects liberties were hunted up into a
narrow corner. Yet such was their blindness, and unsensiblenesse (through
delusion or custom) that they never knew or complained of Tyranny, or
usurpation, till this present age.

Secondly, To the Objection it self: it is the manner of usurpers to come with
a pretense of right, as well as power, by which power they use to recover that
right: the right is by way of inheritance and succession, lying in a natural
descent, or collateral in marriage, David against Hanun. Constantine against
Licinius.
or otherwise in Deed and Gift: for whereas the Gifts of Kingdoms (a large
congratulation of Favorites) have been many, yet from such as have solely
conquered them by sword; and as their right was small or none so it also as
soon perished: but this has been the chiefest practice of Heathens, or others
provoked to War upon just grounds, as David, Constantine, and some others.
But here we speak to the most specious plea of Succession, which, whether it be
just and real yea or no, yet if once actually possessed thereof, they will
confirm it on their natural heirs.

Now in this alteration (called by some Usurpation) of Government, they claimed
no power to themselves as single persons, by virtue of any Hereditarie, and
innate Right in themselves, more then in any other, but as public, and
representing persons in the name of the people, by whom they were Elected, in
whom they speak, and act, and to whom they are accountable; and havi^g
dispatched their business for the people, they return into no greater a
capacity then any other Subject; having the same rule, enjoying the very same
Laws, and Immunities, performing the same obedience, having nothing beyond or
beside the meanest Subject. Neither do they, nor can they perpetuate their
Power in themselves, by conveying it to their Posterity (from whom they did
not receive it, and for whom it is too great to merit:) for it may be, that
neither they, nor any of their Posterity may ever be Parliament men again; but
still remaining in the People (whose happiness in Common, is the sum of all
things, the end of all Powers:) he that is now of the meanest rank, through
his abilities and improvements may merit the same place of Honor for his
season, by the Election of the People.

Honor, and Titles of Dignity, are Hereditarie (yet through transgression
they also may be lost, and their places of Honor too:) but in no wise ought
any power or places of trust lineally be descendent, but ought to remain in the
choice of them for whom all power is, and in former ages has been so to the
greatest Offices in this Nation; else they would justly bring upon themselves
that judgment (which is the most saddest and the most destructive of all
Temporal judgments) To have children, Babes, and Fools to judge and reign
over them; which is inevitable if power be Hereditarie.

True, though the Nobility of the Land was, and is honorable in my eyes,
especially such as have deserved it for their great services done for their
Country, yet of late being created (as they call it themselves) out of
nothing, stood in stead of nothing to the Common wealth. And being in
Parliament the Commons had not at all the least interest in them, though
created out of the out of the Commons (and therefore dissolvable into the same
principles) nay, immediately out of the house of Commons, who to advance their
private interests, might have turned all the Commons into Barons, and so left
the whole People desolate; and usual it was, when Princes found a worthy
Patriot of the Peoples Liberties among them, to remove them by Honor, and
crooken them with preferment.

3 Much strength of argument to prove this Alteration an Usurpation, in many
men's judgments lies in this; Because the power was transferd from one party
possessed of it, and by right claiming it, to another by the hands of private
persons, viz: the Army; who then were but servants to the Parliament, their
Masters. To which may be returned:

1 Though servants have not a mandative power to lay their strict injunctions
upon their Masters, to act, grant, and execute things correspondent to their
servants judgments; yet they have a negative power, to refuse the acting of
such things for their Masters as appear to them unlawful: and in duty they are
bound to restrain their Masters from such violent and unadvised prosecutions,
that will evidently cast the whole both Masters and servants into inevitable
destruction, if still followed on with industry and success by the servants:
and no further do I apprehend they did or ought to undertake. And though in
many cases servants are not fitting and competent judges of the Results and
Determinations of their Masters Counsels, yet they may and ought to examine and
judge their own actions (especially tending to such dangerous and dubious
issues) and hearken to the rational and regular dictates of their own
consciences: and men that have been led through various and wonderful
providence, exercised upon the same Business and Quarrel before, as now at
their second Enterprizings, and to men of large experiences, and still
continuing their close walking with God, and observing him in his and their own
ways, may be let to see further into the things to come then others, and may
discern further into the mind of God, may have stronger bonds and eggings of
mind, whereby they may be able to inform their Superiors, and to which they
are bound to yield up themselves, so it be upon a godly and rational,
consultation with the assistance of a lawful power.

2 Admit still there remayn some appearance of resistance of Authority in them,
yet we know that they intended not the abolition of the Authority it self,
which still they honor, obey, and stand by with all their interests: neither
did they ever oppose the whole Authority, but assisted part of them, partners in
that Authority. And this is most generally concluded as lawful, that if
lawful Magistrates, though not so great nor numerous, as the rest, should
countenance the subjects, they may oppose and correct the exorbitancies, and
riotous extravagancies of the Superior Magistrates; which yet ascended not so
high, the Parliament being the only supreme Authority of this Nation, in which
the subject properly resided and appeared; a part of which was opposed and
ejected, of which there was a fair president of their own, who lately dealt so
with the Malignant Party of the same Parliament. And to this we may add, that
many of them (thus called private persons) have been great instruments in the
redeeming of our Liberties, whom still it likewise concerned to have some care
in preserving of them, that they did not ungratefully and negligently cast away
and lose what God had given into their hands: and into this they were led by
men among themselves in just Authority Civil as well as Martial. We may yet
add, that there was the means of Servants, as peticions, etc. used before the
least violence was offered, which when acted, did not transcend the former
Outrages and countenanced Disturbances of Parliament in the same nature, if not
worse: which I know cannot excuse any fault, but others calumnies may be stopped
by their own condemnacion.

To conclude this; the Common Safety of Religion and Liberty is the End of all
Governments, nay of all men's Lives, nisi nobis solum nati: and they cannot be
preserved without an established Government: and where any form of Government
through the corruption of private persons, the contracted and encroached
privileges of great persons (through their customary continuance, or subtle
stealth on blind and sluggish ages) have worn away, and eaten up the Liberties
of the Subject, and still stand directly opposite unto it, there may be a
Change and Alteracion of that Government, and no Usurpation: So long as that
Government has its full Authority and Majesty, so long as it lays aside
personal and private interests, and through the real maintenance of
Godliness, Peace, and Righteousness, dissolves it self into the welfare of
the Subject.

Secondly: But let us a little nearer close with this Objection, that appears
so forcible, and fall under it; shall we a little admit the Objection, grant
the thing, that really they have usurped the power of this present Government
unto themselves; yet

1. We must know that it belongs not to any private person to determine of the
right of Government, nor to require an account of any Magistrate of the grounds
of his Rule; it is his goodness if he satisfy private men with the reasons,
and his Right therein, but it is not for them to demand those reasons of him;
no not by Petition, unless they have subordinate Magistrates to direct them
therein, that so they may observe Order, and that it many be manifest to the
Superiors that this action of theirs, proceeds not from a Riotous, and
Rebellious combination. The greatest Plea against this, is the case of
Athaliah, who was deposed and executed by Jehoida: but we know that Ieboida was
a public Person, and of great authority, nearly allied to, and Protector of
the supreme Magistrate, a Godly and Holy man: and the present fact of Athaliah,
was her evil intentions clearly against the judicial Law of God, and of that
Nation, and was notoriously known to be Treasonable, which makes not for the
Lawfulness of private persons to combine, act, or associat in any design
against them that are in Power.

2. It becomes not private persons, especially Malefactors, to demand the right
of power of Judicature, but to maintain their innocence by the known Law of
that Nation, or if that Law be corrupt, then by the incorruptible word of God.

It is therefore in the collected observations of Marlor. in Romans 13. Non enim
est potestas, etc. Quumigitur quaeretur, cui parendum, non est spectandum
qualis sit, qui potestatem exercet, nec quo jure vel injuria, quis potestatem
invaserit, quare ratione eam administret: sed tantum si potes^atem habeat, si
enim qui potestate pollet, jam indubitatum est illum a Deo eum potestatem
accepisse, etc. Christian, do thou see the Magistrate upon the Bench, or in
any place of judgment, question not who, or whence he is, he has power, that
is certain, and that power is of God.

3. When a Power of Government is established, no visible authority lawful,
opposing, or disputing the same: it is good for us to yield our selves up unto
it, to study the peace of it, to pray for it, that under it we, etc. It is no
less dangerous to a man's soul, then to the people where he lives to resist it,
if he impartiallie examine upon what solid grounds he can do it.

Lastly, What was said for an Heretical, for a Tyrannical Magistrate, may be
said for an Intrusive, it is but Error Personae, non Officii. The Person sins,
not the Power. The Power was, and is good, and all manner of Governments have
been abused, and to them all we owe our duty, under which we live, which is
the sum in all, though diversely, and by several administered. And sure it is,
if we make appeal to them, as we must do that lives under them, we must appeal
to God for them, to direct them in all their determinations, for the Churches
good, and our own also, in civil affairs.

Object. But suppose I have sworn, to be true and faithful to a Government
contrary to that under which I live, ought I then to obey and pray for that
Government I live under?

Sol. 1. Certain it is that we ought to make a Conscience of all our Vows,
Promises, Oaths Covenants, Protestations, and Engagements, and as sure it is,
that he that will slightly, and upon easy grounds lay aside such, will as
easily let go any of the Commands of God in his practice, especially if we made
them upon serious considerations, holy preparations, and in the times of our
necessity; and have had some gracious responces according to the occasional
grounds thereof. And indeed in their own nature they are Divinely Obligatorie,
and sits close upon a tender conscience; for though we make them to man, and
about some Civil affairs, yet it is in the presence of God to his creature, and
thy brother; and it is his command for thee to perform all thy Vows. Psalm.
15.4. He that swears, etc. Eccles. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest, etc.

2. Yet there is difference of promises made to man, of man, and of promises
made to man of God, in man's stead, though the truth and faithfulness of them
both ought to be the same. For 1. the promises made to God of himself, may
disoblige us from promises made to man; but no promises made of man,
candisoblige us from them made to God: and so of mixed promises, partly of God,
and partly of man, where both cannot be performed, man must be thrust out
first. 2. Promises made to God, binds more firmly to the performance of that,
which in equity we ought to have performed, had we not promised it; but
promises made to man are often of such things, to the performance of which, we
were free as of our selves. 3. Promises made to God binds for ever (if not in
things indifferent, but them made to man, binds not for ever, because first in
their relatives there is corruption. The man bound, and the man to whom he is
bound, may decease; and Nature it self teaches, that Vno sublato tollitur
alterum, and relatum non potest subsistere sine suo correlato; one relative
being taken away, so is the other in respect of that relation, and obligation:
actio moritur cum persona, is true in moral, as well as in Common Law. The
Apostle has a similitude that might illustrate this plainly, Romans 7.2. If ye,
etc. the woman which has an husdand, is bound by the Law to her husband so
long as he lives; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law and
bond of her husband. This is the nearest relation that can be, in which there
is a certain oneness, and if on these terms the relations, and all the
obligations are dissolvable, then much more in relations more remote. Again;
Secondly, there is a change in man himself: God is immutable, he cannot, he will
not disoblige any man from promises made to the stricter observance of his will,
but man may: and if he that made the covenant or promise dissolve it, it is
dissolved, I mean him to whom it was made, and by whose power it was made: the
reason is good; he sees no necessity of such an obligation to him, and it being
for his sake, his safety, honor, etc. and a but then to the obliged; the one
party may part with his own right, to ease another. Iuramentum prom^ssorum quo
aliquid promittitur homini, tantum in ejus gratiam desinit obligare, si ille
cut factum est promissum vel remittat, vel t^llat fundamentum illud quo
nitebatur. Ames. Med. l. 2. c. 10. The stance of an Oath must be just and
possible; it is a sin to promise what is not good to be done, or being promised
cannot be done. To promise any thing contrary to the mind of God, is
absolutely sinful, and from that God does immediately disengage thee; to promise
that thou can not do, is by consequence a sin, because thou do it not.
Sometimes God disobliges us from the performance of our Promises, when he blocks
up our ways by his providence, and will not let us perform them. The Lord has
clearly appeared herein to us in his visions of providence, wherein he has not
walked obscurely under second causes, but above them, and made his own armbare
before us all, and he himself stood in the way against the political ends of
the Covenant, literally expressed in it: and though providence be not an
assured justification of precedent actions, yet the sucession of them, and that
in a more then ordinary way, have a prophetical Declaration in them, and
in-minde us of the will of God de futuro, that he will establish such a
goverument whom he much owns, and will make us that labors in it, to understand
that of Nebucadnezar, Dan. 4.32. that the most, etc. To close this, the main
ends of the Covenant binds us more strongly to the performance of that, which
without a covenant we are bound to perform, and to clear us before men, etc.
and I hope I have great assurance (as much as man can have in man) hat the main
and principal ends thereof, this present power will bring ho^e unto us.

CHAP. XI.
THis truth, that is, the Duty of a Christian subject to pray for the
Magistrate, for that government under which he lives, may have its application,

1. To the subject, whom it Corrects, Directs, Informs.

1. It corrects the erroneous, whereof the chief is, Vid. Willer. 7. genesis
cont. in. Synop. l. 1. p. 36 Ger. de Magist. Po^^t. p. 164, etc Jewel etc.


1. The Jesuited Papist, that would have a supreme power in the Pope, the
universal Vicar of Christ over the whole world, to depose and enthron what
Magistrates he pleases, to set up a Phocas, etc. as also to change government at
his pleasure, to cause the subject to withdraw his due obedience from the
Magistrate, and instead of praying for him, Excommunicates, and Curses him with
Bell, Book, and Candle. He likewise assumes to himself the power of Dijudication
in all causes: denying that any Clerk or Person in Orders, shall appeal unto
any Magistrate but his Ordinary. As the Apostle excepts none from Magistrates,
so no subject from his duty: pray for all men, etc. let Timothy, etc. all the
Church at Ephesus, Bern. ad Henr. Epist.
Minister and people pray for him. Si^omnis anima and vestra, quis vos excepit
ab unive sitare? si quos tentant excipere, tentat decipere, says a Father; if
every soul (must be subject to the higher powers) then yours also; who has
excepted you from this universality? he that would except you, would seduce
you. 2. The giddy Anabaptist, that would have a parity amongst all Christians,
fellow creatures, fellow Christians, and fellows in all things, and because
free by Christ in their souls, therefore free from all humane obedience. What
have I to do with civil Powers and Magistrates, etc? says he: nay, he would
not have a civil Magistrate in a Christian Common wealth. Alas man! what
would thou do? how would thou defend thy self, and gain redress for
injuries acted by evil men. The very unreasonable creature might argue thee
out of this opinion: but thou say, that thou would have all men to live by
that law which is in them: alas, what is the Law of the thief, the Murderer,
the dishonest person, the man whose heart is hardened, and conscience seared
up? and will there be no such in the best Common wealth? But thou would not
have a Christian by any means take upon him the Office of a Magistrate. There
is more need of them then any; Vid. Aquin. 22. q. 104. Art. 6. Rutterford;
Woll, Gor, etc.
because there is not such able men, and good Christians in that office: it is,
that justice is refused, judgeing men's causes by their persons, and not their
persons by their causes. The Apostle checks the Christian Corinthians for this,
1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any, etc. sure it is that the Saints the Apostle spoke of, so
able to judge betwixt brother and brother, are very precious in these our
days; however its to be wished there were more, that might deserve fuller
prayers, and freer obedience from the subject.

Secondly, It directs the truly pious, and Christian Subject.

1. In point of Conscience, thou look upon many in Authority, as really:
base, and unworthy: Persons of profane lives, corrupt j^dgements, easily
biased, and only filling up a place, nay, dishonouring that place; well, thou
say that thou dare not put up any request for them, they and their
practis^s are so abominable in the eyes of God, I am afraid, to pray for them
is a sin, at the least a vain petition. Truly, that place is to be lamented
that are served with such Magistrates; but are they Magistrates, and so bad and
unable? then they have the more need of thy prayers; for want of them they are
so bad, it may be. But however in the meanewhile you must distinguish between
the Person and the Office: the Office adds to the Persons, the Persons take not
from the Office; their personal iniquities, or official corruptions lessons
not their Authority, Power, Superiority, Magistracy, but because of this, thou
fear least thou should sin in praying for them: it is thy duty, and
thou sinnest in not praying for them. Thou have a bad Child, a bad Father, a
bad Minister, dare thou not pray for them because they are such? nay pray the
more constantly, and the more fervently, the higher their sins cry, the
louder let thy prayers cry; the worser that thou do find them, the more do
thou pity them. When thou prayest for them, thou prayest not that they might
succeed in their iniquities, but become just; not to prosper and continue in
evil, but to turn from every evil way; thou ownest not, but bewailest their
faults; thou partakest not in their sin, but washest thy hand, thy conscience
from it; and if there be any virtue, any grace, any thing of God in them, of
that thou sharest, in that thou rejoyc^st.

Moreover, as I have often fore-spoken, the Apostle makes no distinction of
Magistrates; he says not, for such a Magistrate thou shall intercede, and for
such an one thou shall not; he points not out the Magistrates in their manners,
and qualifications, but for all that are in Authority we must put up all manner
of prayers; and all Persons as are to perform this, the poorest Christian that
lives upon the alms of M^gistrates must pay to them the Subsidies of prayers
(granted in the high Court of Heaven) to them as Magistrates.

2. In a duty, viz. to turn thy prayer into practice; what we sincerely pray
for, we ought diligently to labor for, using our prayers as the watring of our
endeavors; else our prayers will prove a derideing and tempting the Almighty.
Thou that prayest for all that are in Authority, that under them thou may
lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, to walk
toward the Magistrate, and so act in thy place and calling, that thou may
lay hold on that for which thou prayest, and help to work out that peace
which thou so fervently desire. Inefficax petitio est, cum praecatur Deum
sterilis oration; Cyprian. de Orat: Dom.
a barren, an idle, and a starveing prayer is an ineffectuall desire; a naked
wish is no prayer; but what thou actest as thou prayest lawfully, thou
discoverst the heartinesse and sincerity of thy prayers, and offerest a double
service unto the Lord. Make use then of such opportunities as are in thy hands,
and make them subservient to the Magistrates power; for let him use all his
^kill, and whet his sword for the procuring hereof, yet in vain will his
endeavors be, without the readiness and willingness of the Subject, who not
for slavish fear but tender conscience, not for man's sake but the Lords sake,
shall apply himself to make use of his directions, and thereunto make use of
his own interests in family, among friends, in all his relations public and
private, (...), says the Apostle, so follow after and prosecute peace, as if
thou would nere cease till thou had overtaken it. Let every man take his
Oar, and with all the might and strength he has row in some part of the Ship
of this Nation to preserve it from sinking and splitting against those many
Rocks that appear in every passage of this Commonwealth. Let the Master of a
Family, the Minister of a Congregation, and every priv^te man confer what he
has hereunto; let the lines of all our callings be drawn to this as to the
Center; then undoubtedly the labors of the Magistrate will prove effectual;
join therefore together hand and tongue, pray and work, cry to him, cry for
him, assist him in the work to thik end.

Thirdly, this informs a Christian of himself and the Magistrate.

1. Here is a glass presented to thee wherein thou may see thy own heart;
deal uprightly with thy self according to this Rule; what are thy aims and
intentions in praying for the Magistrate? are they for peace? that is well; a
Magistrate, if a good man may see another good man's heart by his own: he
desires a true and lasting peace. Qui vere pacificus est, etiam belli gerando
pacificus. Aug. his mind is so bent after peace, that he fights, he wars, he
kills and demolishes places with a peaceful mind. Pacem debet habere voluntas
bellum necessitas, non pax quaeriturut bellum excitetur, sed bellum geritur, ut
pax acquiratur. Though the Church of God, the Christian Magistra e, and
Christian Subject does hate the necessity of War and prays against it; yet
wars, that she might obtain it, she desires a peace, which is as the warm
beams of the glorious Sun to blossoming truths: holiness can never shine
without peace to cherish it; and I believe, if the eyes of many of this
Commonwealth were truly opened, they should see the loss of holiness and
truth in these late times of war would exceed her gains. War is no friend
to truth in it self, nor to the powerful and constant practice of godliness;
and every private Christian may find this in himself, if he be possessed of a
divided, wracked, and discontented, and troubled mind, for that while
holiness will be ebbing, himself abating, and flagging in the ways of God:
nay, ordinary Disputes and Divisions in Religion are no succourers of grace,
but suckers and dryers up of it; oh then its amiable peace that thou desire,
but is it that alone? thou art weary of trouble, and the fear of wars
perplexes thee, thou longest for peace: peace, oh how earnestly thou look
for a messenger of peace, how welcome would thou bid him to thy house, that
thy burdens might be removed, and thy murmurings stilled; that as Psalm
144.12, 13, 14. That our Sons might be as plants grown. etc. this prayer
proceeds from thy fleshly affections, thou may see by thy purely carnal
ends; thou seek a Magistrate alone for thy self to satisfy thy private and
peculiar interests, and so long may thou pray in vain. Jam. 4.3. Ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss etc, but would thou have a
Magistrate whose wings might protect and nourish a godly man, under whose
Government thou might lead an holy life, as well as a peaceable? thou
would have Holiness, Peace, Truth, quietness hand in hand; thou had
rather live under an Hezekiah and be besieged in Jerusalem, then sit as a
Prince upon one of the Thrones of Nebuchadnezzar, and be forced to bow unto an
Image, or be hindered from a free serving of thy God, the G^d of Heaven. Piety
is more beautiful then Tranquillity; thou had rather be a doore-keeper in the
House of God, then sit and fair deliciously in Princes Courts; both are
precious blessings, but a good man cannot be satisfied with peace alone:
present him with Riches, and Honor, and Peace, and an eleven of the choysest
and goodliest blessings thou can pick forth of Gods Treasury, yet if Benjamin
come not, he is full of sorrow; for the life of a good man is bound up in the
life of godliness and holiness: therefore he dares not pray for peace alone:
for had he his outward peace completed, he could not be at peace, while he
sees wickedness on high, and iniquity abounding, and sin in pre-eminence,
and eminent places; he cannot be at peace while ungodliness and unholynesse is
at peace and reconciled to Authority; his peace is a broken peace, his life a
dying life. Then peace indeed is sweet if not imbittered through ungodliness;
an unholy peace is ill, and therefore he desires a quiet and holy life, a power
protecting persons and goods, a power advanceing holiness and truth: such a
Magistrate he prays for, he prays that every Magistrate might be such. Heb.
12.14. Follow after peace and holiness, etc. and he would not have these two
separated, which God has joined together. Protection from open enemies, and
Seditious risings: encouragements to Piety and holy practices: deliverances
from aspersion and cruelty; the least of the blessings is the last, yet a very
precious and an acceptable mercy: If peace, if holiness; yet if we could not
enjoy our own, we were still unhappy: if a peaceable, if seemingly an holy
Magistrate, yet if not honest he would be a burden to us; though if we were
really assured of the two first, the last would undoubtedly follow: honesty
being the least part of a Christian, the stream of his holy heart, and that
wherein a Hypocrite and ignorant person might equal him; yet sure it is, a
Magistrate that sets a sure guard over his Subjects for a quiet and holy life,
will judge righteously; and though Morality be a common virtue, yet its the
desire and endeavor of the Christian Subject, being the outward illustrating
form and credit to holiness and truths profession, and gives a sweet relish
to, and is the happy solemnization of outward peace. Examine therefore the true
frame of thy spirit, and thy earnest desires, when thou prayest for the
Magistrate, is it really for the happy uniting of these three, Peace,
Godlyness, and Honesty? do thou set thy eye upon that promise made to the
Church, and put it into petitions, Psalm. 85.10 Mercy and Truth are met
together, etc. if this be thy temper, its according to the Apostles rule.

2. This presents unto us the necessity of Magistrates, in what need the
Servants of God, the Church of God stand of them, since by the Apostles order
and command they must be so seriously, and earnestly prayed for; for had not
the Servants of Christ such to defend them, they above all others should have
the least quietness, or honest dealing: could not they suck the milk of
righteousness and peace out of the breasts of Magistrates; the breasts of Mammon
and all the world besides would yield them nothing but poison. Nay amongst
themselves, their peace would sour into confusions, Truth would be laid under
Errors, Profaneness out-justling holiness, Ordinances made common and
defiled, instead of Honesty, injurious and uncivil dealings, had we not
Magistrates many times to step in to heal Church-breaches as well as the
Commonwealths. What great pains that good Emperor Constantine took for the
peace of the Church, and removing differences occasioned by some erroneous
persons; he writs letters frequently to several men of ability, and to their
Counsels; he fights with his Armies against their Adversaries, he comes in his
own person to the general Assemblies, and there woes and beseeches them to
peace, as if he had as particular a charge as any of them; he was a true
Nurcing Father, fed them with rich favors, and hushed the wranglings of godly
men, he gave them the breasts of the world, Riches, Honor, Wealth and Peace to
such to live on, nay as if that was not dear enough, he gives his blood for
them, and indures those miseries to confer on them and preserve with them the
contrary blessings. And not only in this respect have the people of God a
Magistrate, but in other respects to regulate their conversations; they have
corruptions as well as others, which may break out into as notorious acts as
in the wicked: sometimes they may fall out about the world, estates, etc. and
fall into great civil differences many times; these need not only a brother
to motion, but a Magistrate to command peace, and absolutely to determine the
cases amongst them, whence else are those exhortations, 1 These. 4.6. That no
man go beyond, etc. a caution, 1 Pet. 4.15. But let none of you, etc. that a
check, Jam. 4.1. From whence come wars and fighting, etc. a good man has the
same roote-sin, and the same temptations, that same tinder, and the same
presented to it as ungodly men have, that they may happen to fall into the same
evil and condemnation with others; therefore Gods people had need to pray for
good and wise Magistrates, that may play the part of a skillful Physician to
know how to search and judge of the sins of Persons, in the nature of them,
and how to apply his remedy, and in what degree and measure. What a sad time
was it in Israel, when they wanted a Prophet in the Church, a Judge and
Governor in the Commonwealth; Brave times might some unbounded Spirits say,
but see Judge. 17.6. In those days there was no King in Israel, etc. (That is,
no Government, for as yet they never had any King in their most happy and
flourishing estate) but every man did that, which was good, etc. What a sad
Nation should we have, if every man might do so, if every party unjustly head
themselves, and every person follow his own way, every man be his own Judge,
Lawmakers, Executioner, Councellor, and Interpreter. Find me a Nation without
men of licentious spirits, and irregular principles; and could you find a
Commonwealth of Saints, yet even then there might be need of a Magistrate:
both for the Political order and beauty of the Commonwealth, and for the
prevention of evils that may arise, and the preservation of such happinesss
which may be lost; it being no less difficult and honorable to preserve, then
to acquire such blessings. As he must cast out, so he must keep out that
evill-doer, and there is required no less wisdom and watchfulness in a
Magistrate to make and maintain a fence so strong as to keep out such persons,
that may ensnare these happy Privileges, as to extirpate and suppress them
being rooted amongst his; No marvill the Apostle requires us to pray for them
in all manner of prayers, which they themselves stands in such great need of;
the more thou observest the Commonwealth, and the more thou inquire out the
reasons hereof, the more will thou be convinced of the necessity of this Duty.

CHAP. XII.
NOw touching the Magistrate himself; all lies not on the Subject himself:
when Servants, and Children, and Wives are exhorted to love, reverence,
obedience, etc. It intimates a Relative duty owing from the Master, the Father,
the Husband; as it is in all relations, there are mutual conditions that both
of them are bound unto. Only in general, let the Magistrate make this use of
this Christian practice, Its a proper Duty of a Subject to pray for his
Magistrate.

1. Here you have the Essay and Character of a true Subject, see his
Disposition, his Affection, his heart taken out of him and laid before thee:
man's languages one to another are no certain discoveries of their mind, but
their prayers, which they dare not counterfeite when they go to their God and
Father, who is the searcher and trier of the heart and reins. Nay they not
only sometimes pray for the Magistrate, but they make it their business, this
is a chief thing that in the first of all things they must place, even the
happy Government of the Magistrate, and that they might enjoy a true Subjects
life: as God has committed them to thy hands, so they commit thee and thy
Government into Gods hand; what thou labourest for, they truly pray for, that
the Lord would enable thee with such Graces and Gifts, to guide thee by his
Spirit, and so guide himself too, that thou may rule and govern in Peace,
Holiness, and Honesty, see here his heart running in unto thee, his affections
making have to meet, his endeavors striving to answer the sum of a good
Magistrates desire, and to delight him in his own happiness; If thou be a
Magistrate and affected with men of other tempers, thou art no lover of thy
self or the Commonwealth: if thou see men otherwise disposed, be assured
that they are not true Subjects according to Gospel interpretation; or if any
of Gods people fail herein: blame not the truth and the way they profess,
they have been instructed in other Principles, better Rules are laid before
them to walk by.

Then the Magistrate ought not to account him as the only faithful Subject,
that is a solicitous informer, fills his ears with groundless complaints,
that strains, sqeezes, and forces the actions of men to speaks in such a
Dialect; that as he hates them that are good, so he would set at difference the
Magistrate and them that are good; sure it is (how charitably soever such as
are in Authority, and judge of them, and howsoever they may use them as
profitable to themselves, (unless in apparent cases of necessity, peace it
self being concerned in it) yet they are according to the first qualification
of the Apostle, the worst Subjects a Magistrate can have, bringing much
dishonor on him that hearkens to them. For as the Prophet discribes them, Isa.
29.20, 21. They watch for iniquity, that make a man offend, etc. These men
cannot live but in the flame of revenge, and the fire of envy, they delight in
the disquietation and ruin of others, and therefore labor by suggested lies,
and wire-drawn Truths to perplex the mind, to wrack and torture the Name and
Estate of the true Subject, that truly desires to lead a peaceable and quiet
life; yet questionless the eminency of their affection, and the exactness of
their subjection appears only in this.

Again this informs, that a wicked person cannot be a true Subject; the
contentious man being an enemy to Peace, disquiets the innocent Members of
Jesus Christ; so the ungodly man is inwardly an hater of the happiness of the
godly, and would be ready to entertain, and violently to prosecute motives
that might beget the disquietnesse of the Righteous; and if he should follow
the Principles of his own heart, he can neither rule as a good Magistrate, nor
obey as a good Subject; how can he pray for the Magistrate, that never prayed
for himself: his prayers as well as his person bring an abomination; The
prayers of the Righteous avail much: In truth the wicked man is subject to
none but the Devil and his own vile affections, neither can he be; while an
evil Spirit rules in him as in all Children of disobedience. He only loves a
Magistrate like himself, and delights to make him like himself, Hos. 7.5, 6,
7. In the day of our King, etc. delights to see him live like himself, Romans 1.
ult. But hear how they will sound forth the commendations of a Minister of
Justice, that will countenance or connive at their wickedness: and its easily
known in a County what a Magistrate is, by the persons that wear his Livery,
and the Herald of his Name; for such as the Subjects are, such is the
Magistrate by whom they live: especially he is such in his Admirers and Agents.
We read that this Title is given to the Magistrate, who is said to be (...),
populi, the Shepherd of his people, but sure it is: the ungodly persons are
the scab of his Flock, and a curse of his Government; the ungodly person is the
Tinder, the Contentious person is the Fire, while these two receive countenance
from the Magistrate, the best of the Subjects shall enjoy little peace.

2. This may serve to guide the eye, and direct the heart of a good Magistrate,
where he ought to place it; it may teach him, what value and esteem he ought
to place on the righteous man, considering what fruits he properly bears, so
long as watered by the Doctrine of the Apostles, viz. Peace, Godliness,
Honesty. If thou be a gracious Ruler, and desire so to govern the
people, thou will delight in, and receive to thy self such as meet thee in the
ends of thy Government. Cornelius was a good man, and loved men like himself,
as good though not as great as himself; such shall be nearest his person, and
things of trust committed to them. Act. 10.7, 8. He called two of his household
servants, and a devour etc. In those days it was a dangerous thing to be a
Patron of the Apostles, or any Ministers of Christ; if it had been known but
to their Heathenish Emperor, or any of their Deputies, he had lost his place
of Command, if not his Life: yet with this business (he had such good servants
of such fidelity) he durst entrust them. Therefore says the wisest of
Magistrates, Prove. 16.13. Righteous lips etc. such is the nature of him; and
then he directly moves toward the divine ends of his Office, Romans 13.3. for
Rulers are not etc. Mark the resolves and practices of that good and upright
King, Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: What is that
way? See one step he struck therein, verse. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon etc, They
ought to have a good man in high esteem for his works sake; and above all,
for the inward frame of himself, which is compounded of Peace, Holiness, and
Righteousness. You may behold him keeping just Laws before they be, and
helping the Ruler to that Peace and Righteousness in his way, that a Ruler
cannot help himself unto, by reason of the defect of his Law: a true
Christian makes it his business privately and publicly to pray and act for
this: No sooner are good Laws made, but he rejoices in them, lives more
securely from evil men, but no more securely in himself, having the same
standing Law in his Conscience, nay, being a living Law to himself.

King James used to say of a good Justice, that he was his best subject, and
none deserved better of him; and sure the Country may say as much of him, as a
Magistrate amongst them: But what will Magistrates say, when they see
Christians walking like so many Justices, keeping Court in their own
Consciences; and were there no Law, durst not offend, nor break the peace of
common society? Sure such are to be had in honor, that are so ready to every
good work. I know, that there are many in authority at this present, to whom
good men are dear to them as the apple of their eye; yet again I know them to
be but men, and may receive accusations privately suggested (having many
coming to their ears) and such being received, and the mind possessed of
them, its an hard thing to unsettle them, and remove them from the affection;
anger inveterated rurnes to malice, and that to worse; and some Rulers are too
apt many times to spend their judgments, according to a sudden apprehension,
or present information. A Ruler ought to be very careful herein, against
whomsoever he receives any thing, or speaks, especially of a good man, whose
heart is or shall be thus disposed presently to Peace, Holiness, and Honesty
in all things; and in some particulars that obliquely seems to oppose some of
these, gives him leave soberly and solidly to come up unto them: in the mean
time, let him not lose that esteem and good affection, that is due from thee
to him; which another day thou shall be forced to acknowledge.

3. This shows in what a perilous estate the Magistrate stands: his foot is
set upon a Hill, which if either to wet or to dry may prove ill for him: he
therefore has not only need of his own prayers and watchings, but of others,
of all good Subjects under them, of whole Congregations, Ministers, and People:
that their prayers ascend with the greatest strength and force to the Throne of
Grace: God requires us thus to act and intercede to himself for them: the
great danger they are in, appears by the the necessity of their and our
prayers, and the great care that God takes of them, who can thus bless and
prosper from himself, yet not without means, this must not be forgotten above
all things, this do first of all: and this must be constantly at all times
being a general direction, first of all; slight not this, God himself has
put up a Bill into thy hands every time thou go into the Pulpit, Pray for
all that are in Authority; and good reason, their temptations are so many and
so great, Satan waiting on Ministers, and Magistrates at all times, to be a
lying Word in the mouth of the Prophet, and a false sentence in the mouth of
the Ruler: for if they err, many err with them, and in their ruins many
perish. Moreover they do Judge and speak for the Lord, and as in his stead
and place, and thence do their sins much reflect upon the Lord; and they do
judge the Lords people, and his Inheritance, which ought tenderly to be
respected: there be many extraordinary and occasional employments, that they
need constantly to stand under the droppings of the Olive tree, and we always
to be putting up our supplications for them, for supplying influences of
Courage, Integrity, clearness of Judgment and Wisdom.

And here again is taught them, that as the care of the people lies on them,
so good people bears much care for them: they are afraid least they should
slip or fail in the discharge of their places, if they do, they mourn over
them, they seek to restore them, being very sensible of their conditions,
knowing what loss the people of God may suffer by them. And if such be the
charge of others for them, how great need have they in humility, godly
temperance, and vigilance to be overseers of themselves, and frequently to
examine their own hearts and ways, and fall fully to attend the Lord in
prayer, and all other means for strength and direction.

CHAP. XIII.
HErein by way of reflection, the Magistrate may take a view of his own duty to
the Subject; what the Subject is bound to seek for of God, what they are bound
in duty to endeavor to perform to him, for the Subject prays that he he
might lead a quiet, godly, and honest life under him, and to enable the
Magistrate so to rule and govern, that his Government may conduce hereunto,
which ought to be his study: should he not pray for him, and this calls upon me
to handle the other part, the Rulers duty, and how just the expectations of the
Subject are from him for their blessings: but I must leave this for another
opportunity, which I hope God may cast into my lap, only in present receive
these brief Observations.

1. Let the Magistrate endeavor a confluence of these three, Peace, Holiness,
and Honesty: let him not satisfy himself as a Political person, with peace
and Honesty, but if it please God to bless him with them, strive by way of
gratitude to return the other for thy self upon the Subject; you have a
dutious interest in them all, though somewhat different, yet so great as to
promote the remotest from your power, Truth and Holiness, you see how the Lord
is pleased to join them in promise, Jer. 33.6. Behold, I will give unto them
health, etc. What we have laid up in promise, we ought to strive each of us in
our calling (which may confer something to it) to draw that forth, those that
establish a lasting Peace, must build it upon these two Columns, without which
it will inevitably ruin, and those will be ruined that lie under it; let it
otherwise be laid upon the strongest Basis of Policy. I never read otherwise in
the History of any Church, either Jewish or Christian, but where either of them
two perished: either the Government it self, or at least the Magistrate
perished. When God would in a Vision represent to Nebucadnezar (and therein to
every Magistrate) his charge, he adumbrates him by a Tree, it was in it self
great and strong, though made so by the hand of God, that for Beasts it might
be both for food and shadow, and for Foul to build their nests in the spacious
and loving arms of it; The interptetation is clear.

2. That the Corruption of a Magistrate, or his Tyranny (as some term it)
consists as much in the no-execution of his power, as in the licentious
exceedings of the bounds of his just power; Its an hard thing to keep in
measue, though he must exceedingly endeavor it, that he neither two much
slacken, nor too much streighten his golden Reins; For besides his own sin,
and danger herein, its too subject to the unadvised Subject, to murmr without
just occasion. Sloth and baseness of spirit is as much detestable, as
ridgidness, and pride: there is partiality in both. Loose not what you can do,
where it is good or safe; overact not what you may do, though to your own
profit; yet there is less danger in the excess then in the defect, though
this be much to be lamented, other as much to be hated. For an oppressive
Tyrant is more tolerable for good men, and more wholesome to a Commonwealth,
then a Partial, Idle, Fearful, or unwise Magistrate, that will not, or
cannot use that Authority committed to him: for at such times we have
multitudes of Tyrants, and concludes with destruction to the whole oftentimes.

3. Acts of policy should not suspend Acts made, or delay Acts to be made for
Piety and Honesty: Lay first these as the foundations of Peace, and God
himself will build a glorious Structure for us; build Gods House, and God will
build our houses. We see in that Text that the Church in the first place would
pray for Magistrates, so Magistrates in the first place would act for them. The
Philosopher, that had more reason then Faith, could say, (...). Arist. Pol. 7.
c. 8. Col. Lyps. Lyps. lib. 4. c. 2. page 172.
Chiefly, or first, our care should be about Divine things; and sure it is the
best policy, for as a wise man said, Jam vero public, qui salvissimus, nisi
illa salva? Religio and timor Dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se
societatem. Now who may be safe in a Common wealth, unless Religion be safe?
for its Religion and the fear of God alone, that keeps the society of men
among themselves.

Let Gods way go first, and it will enlighten, and it will guard our ways; if
we walk uprightly, even our enemies shall be at peace with us. But if we lay
our own counsels deep, and lay aside (though for a while) the way of God, our
own counsels will destroy us, or God will destroy them, and make us know, that
it is the safest and best policy, to gain him, and keep him on our sides;
and in such cases it will prove the most successful, at the least the most
comfortable, to deny our carnal reasonings herein: Let us consult our
counsels with our own hearts.

Its bad to say with the worldling, I will but provide so many Portions, and
obtain such a proportion of Land, then I will rest, and serve the Lord; let us
not first seek our selves, then the Lord: its no part of true Faith, to try
what the Lord will do first for us, before we do any thing for him; and its
no wisdom, to trust our hearts till then: for they not only cool in the
mean time, but are subject to several mutations, from temptations arising out
of the alterations of our conditions. In a word, while the Magistrate makes
fences for his own Government, let him make some for Christ's, and let not his
Church lie so open, his Laws so loose, and ready for spoil and defilement;
least God pull down the hedge of the Magistrates territories, and raise up
another Magistrate, that will take care of his own.

4. The Commonwealths peace cannot be firm, without the Churches peace; if
the Church be tossed upon the waves, the Commonwealth cannot be in a calm:
but when she rides under a full sail, and all her men acting in their several
offices and places, its a sign that then the Civil Government is well, and
settled, or will be so. How-ever, no permanencie to Peace, while there is no
assured and real establishment of Religion. Says Jehu; What peace, while the
whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel are so great? While Israel ungratefully
neglected the House of God, after her deliverance, God had other secret
judgments to eat out her comforts, and to make her liberty more miserable
then her captivity.

Now there is a Negative Peace, when the Magistrate, as a third man, interposes
himself betwixt jangling parties; and by his power abates differences; this is
well, but this will not long continue: the severitie of a Judge may make the
high way so plain and peaceful, that a rich man with his wand may walk in the
duske of the evening; but till those men's spirits be made honest, there will be
such to inrerrupt it again. Now there is an Affirmative, where there are holy
and sure grounds for reconciliation and unity laid for the Church to walk by,
its probable then to be One indeed, and a real Peace established. Quibus
spiritus unus est, unus sit and animus and sensus, Cypr, in Orat Dom. in whom
there may be one spirit, one mind, one meaning: surely, to have one way in
general to walk by, is the next way to reduce men unto it. A great Politician
was in judgment, that it behoved a Commonwealth to have but one Church in it,
Lyps. lib. 4. c. 2. pene toto.
which is directly conductive to civil Peace. We all desire to see this
liberal and beautiful Queen, Peace, to be Regent amongst us, and to command
us to beat out our Drum-heads, and beat our Swords into Plough-shares. But
do thou desire this for thy self? so does many: for the public? that is
more noble: for God? that is Christian: Thou ask it; ask it for Gods sake;
not only as the efficient cause and ground in himself of bestowing it on us,
but as the final cause, on which thou would bestow it.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it. Jerusalem
was the chief City, and place of justice; Jerusalem was the chief place of
worship, and type of the Church of God, pray for the peace of both; pray out of
worldly and ardent affection, from a sincere and entire heart, desiring to see
Sion in her beauty, and these tears of division, of loss, of fear, of
blood, to be wiped off; sure such prayers are full, and will be most like to
speed: but alas! what love men bear to Sion, their faint and very wishes for
peace do too much testify! Howsoever pray for it, thy prayers may
counter-worke others endeavors. Therefore we pray for Magistrates, as our
duty, being subjects, as Rulers over us, and Nurses of Sion; both Magistrates
and people pray for Sion, because they all are, or ought to be her subjects,
and to lay all they have at her feet, to serve her: And let them know, that
such as out of pure affection pray for her, shall prosper. Here is the
encouragement of all, they shall prosper, etc. Men may pray for peace, and not
love the peace of Sion, nay be inward enemies unto it, therefore they prosper
not. Men never saw in the Promise the excellency of Sion, what is foretold of
it, therefore neither pray for, nor love it, these prosper not likewise. But if
the private man would prosper in the Shop, the Field, the Family: if the
Minister would prosper in his Calling among his people, or the Magistrate in
the administration of his Government: let them love the peace of Jerusalem, let
that love break into the flame of desires, and pray for it. And let the God of
peace, for Christ his Sons sake the King of Peace, and head of his Church, send
down his Spirit to guide the hearts of all his people in the way of Peace, that
so his Jerusalem here below may be restored to her glory, that is now in
trouble, Amen.

FINIS.

