ROMBVS The Moderator: OR, THE KING Restored.

From whence follows the Arraignment of seven incomparable Malefactors: with
their faults, Confessions, and Astraeas severe Sentence, Rombus his
qualifications: The Prisoners reprieves, and several PUNISHMENTS.

A certain strange Accidental, alias, his Excellenscey begeting, and a presage
of his Fortune, with other remarkable PASSAGES.

What Soul could once imagine that these Dons
Wise props of State, should prove such Nebulons,
As force Astraea from her glistering Throne,
And Heavens diviner Joys, to wait upon
Their mortal crimes; Rombus; we all know wept
Long since, for Sidneys death, and thence has kept
So sure a Guard, about his drowzie eyes
As none durst ever wake him, till our cries
And Royull CHARLES: whose word bars all denial
Vnlock'd his Golden slumbers for this Trial.
Reader, first dress thine ears; then stretch them wide
To hear Astraea judge: and Rombus chide.
Printed in the Year. 1648.

ROMBVS THE MODERATOR, OR, The King restored.
BY your leave my Masters, I had a Mother too, as well as the proudest of You.
What Is here, the Counter-scuffle? Men at Tennis with the Cakes, Cream and
Custards of the Kingdom? Are ye all mad? Hold your hands -- or by this -- I
shall -- shall grow angry in earnest, and then: whsrein lies all our undoings;
become indifferent for ever, whither you turn again to your five Senses, or go
to Bealam for good and all: I say again, leave your quarrelling about
fiddle-fadles, Trisles of little value. For what is the fillipping down of two
or three Kingdoms, or so; and look at me. Rombus himself presents his grave
presence for Moderator, and proffers to make ye all happy: but then ye must be
ruled; leave your sooling at at blind man's buffe, and make some honest use of
your own eyes. Be Judges your selves, Is it fair play, think you, that some
should run away with all the wit, and others with the money; while I that am
Crier of this Court, that wears better clothes than a Burgess, and
constantly shift a shirt once a fortnight, must stand idle, without the least
particle of a share, and gaping with my finger in my mouth, like a Cornish
Chough, which marking Mr. Aldermans Ape, my Lord Majors Babcon, and her
Ladyships Monkey; how they look, and act like men, and yet sees plainly they
are none: he wonders, The Faction.
who the Devil made them such pretty mumping Counterfeits. Well, it is decreed
this once, that the Wits shall be pardoned their engrossing, but the
Money-masters must fine for it. -- Room for the illustrious Lady, Divine
Astraea -- A chair for Mr. Rombus, Withdraw the Prisoners into the next Room --
What lifting up of hands is here? -- Ye shall have Justice better than ever
Martin did his Whore; for when he casts her off she never gets of him due
conduct money, to return her either to honesty, her health, or hope of ever
being good again; but Ye shall be provided for -- All but William Lenthall
depart; and Guard, present them single, as you hear them called.

Rombus prepares to speak

Silence in the Court, Tace, tace.

Let me use the faculties of my long silent Tongue, first to thee the late
Speaker -- Lent all, Lay down thy Bags, leave Lucifer to guard thy
Accumulations of Gold, and travel about thy silver mountains: but do thou
answer me, Rombus calls thee to account, and bids thee Lenthall to speak on,
thou Captain of the Tribe of Dan, Rombus speaks.
speak on, -- not as formerly for thy Brethren, but not for thy self -- so --
Thus you that would never extend favor, desire it -- Come hither Fellow --
without these tremblings -- tell me -- from what tap of low-prized drink did
you draw these high conceits -- To make your self in a trice (as a man may
say) as rich as Crassus -- as powerful to do mischief as a Tribune of the
People: and swear to sit no longer in that unfortunate Chair than while you
may be allowed a King for your Cushion: you are indicted of Treason and
Extortion: you hired the Soldiers to cut the Citizens throats, for Wine and
Money: you are an Atheist: and lastly a principal Contriver with those
Grandees, Beelzebub and Cromwell, about the Kings Enchantment -- Is this all?
-- You see Mr, Lenthal we have heard you with the patience and temperance of
Philosophers, -- and you say in general, that a necessity was laid upon you,
you must needs use the benefit of time: And then the safest and shortest cut to
wealth, in your opinion, was by the way of several Offices, and taking Bribes:
this with the rest must be considered of, Jury confer your notes, it is past
ten, I fear the Prisoner faints, he wants his breakfast: guard him to Hell,
his Soul I know is there already; you will find (my Friends) whole Herds of
Presbyterian cattle grazing there; let one of those beasts be sacrificed to
the appetite of this Caniball, your Independants are hungry Fellows, and love
that flesh better than a Banquet.

Henery Martin, hold up thy hand.
In the name of our Sovereign Lord the King. Martin Arraigned.
Thou Henery Martin art charged to have forsaken the Christian Faith: for like
an arrant Pagan, thou have committed Idolatry with two of Homers Gods, Bacchus,
and Venus: Thou have robbed the Orchard of Hesperides, and tempted Chastity
with Golden-Apples: Thou carest not a Nutshell for the choicest Beauties, after
thou have deflowred them. Item. That the cracked Virginities which thou have
taken for current, and so paid for, till they fell in pieces under thy use, are
numberless. -- That all those Mobees thou see there, sit weeping in dust and
ashes, with dishevelled hair, wry mouths, and snotty noses: were lately
fifteen honest Matrons, Wives, young and beautiful, and of a sweet repors, but
now the Trophies of thy Perjury: It Is affirmed upon Oath and Evidence
sufficient, that these stiff Chastities could never be foiled, till thou
struck up their heels; nor tamed by any charm, till thy fraud mingled with
some force, laid salt upon their tails, and powdered them in so unfortunate a
season, that they have stunk ever since. Item. That having sold those rotten
Purchases thy corrupt Father left thee, thou have conspired against thy
Sovereign Lord, and seized the Royal Inheritance of Him and his Children, to
the use of thee, and thy Bagages. -- Make answer -- Jury, observe him -- Well
Sir. You cry guilty too, His Submission and Apology.
yet this in effect is your desire, that you may be looked upon, as a bold free
Member, brim full of Impudence, but not a drop of flattery for any but women:
Therefore no Courtier, no hope to thrive that way: Besides, you plead that
Mother Shipton, being your great Granam by the Fathers side, you could not
choose sometimes but consult with her Prophesies, and then for kindreds sake, do
something for Anarchy, which she wished well to; least say you, that reverend
Witch (being so near to me in blood) might have failed me in her Praedictions,
and so have tainted the whole Family with the loss of her own reputation: As
for the King, it seems you cannot love him for two Reasons. First, because he
takes himself for a better man than you are.

And Secondly, by reason he did not hang your Father for cheating the Kingdom,
from which cousenages, you complain, he derived so much wealth as you fear
has brought a Judgment upon his name, and made you his Graceless Son fall
into lewd courses -- This Tubbe is without a bottom -- His Breakfast he shall
find in Hell, let him partake with Lentall.

Cromwell hold up thy hand.
I Rombus will not style thee as thy familiars do, Crumwels Tried.
such as Aulicus, Elencticus, Pragmaticus, or the like, with the Title of Noll,
or sometimes King Noll: These (although thou may be confident they love
thee) yet value them not, for they are Dwarfes in Epithets, and cannot reach
thy height, but I shall give it thee. Thou Phlegon, Gorgon, Tetraegramaeton,
great Patron against Mice and Emrauds; thou God of Ekron, hear thy mortal
Charge: Thou Oliver stands Indighted for having distempeted the State,
distracted the Church, and poisoned the wholesome constitutions of three
flourishing Kingdoms. Item, Thou did send the King to that isle in a
Magical Whirlewinde, and fixed him there till some power, above thine, shall
finish his Enchauntment, and hang thee up like another Absalom: Thou have
endeavored to supplant thy General, toward whom thou art perfideous; that
(in imitation of Julius Caesar, whose points thou arr not worthy to untrusse)
thou have enslaved the Senate, and London City, that thy self might reign
alone, and be perpetual Dictator: Thou conversest daily with Mackiavels; and
for assurance that all this may be done, have finally given thy self to the
Devil.

Guilty or not guilty -- it is well -- you know what follows. Crumwell yields
and is confounded and tilent.
Confession, -- but indeed Mr. Crumwel your Crimes are of such a haughty
nature, so proud and popular, as would have quarrelled away the very veil that
should pretend to hide them, -- Consort him with his fellow States till the
Court rises, let him eat porridge, Hell is within his jurisdiction, he cannot
be unwelcome there, pitch him by Martin --

Stephen Marshall hold up thy hand. Marshall Tried.

You Stehpen are Indicted of Treason against Heaven and Earth: For you drive
Religion before you for a Stalking-horse, and change your Opinion touching
Church and Government, as we use to put Cowes into fresh Pasture, only for
increase of Milk: You are Seditious, Factious, and a Schismatic: You have
taught the people to Rebel, expressly against that Text of Scripture that calls
Rebellion like the sin of Witchcrast. Item. That having split your own hope of
Heaven upon the Rock of wilful Perjury, you have likewise tempted his Majesty,
by sundry Insinuations from little Learning, and less Honesty, to do the like,
and so make a wrack of himself for ever: That the late Scotch Proposition, of
dividing the Church from the Civil Magistrate; on whom, say they, it shall have
no dependency: Whereby a greater Tyranny than Papal is ready to be Introduced;
is an Egg of your laying, and only by you recommended to the Scots for
hatching. Item. That when you went with the Commissioners for Scotland, you
carried into that Country a strange Pipe with you; some affirm it Gold, others
Silver; whose Music was so ravishing, as robbed many Ministers there of their
wits; for at the sound thereof they are ready to dance naked, run through fire
and water; protest against Parliaments, be of any Religon, and turn Turk,
Inpependent, or what you please, only at your appointment; That you exceed the
Scribes, and Pharisees, not in Righteousness, but ambition, Covetousness, and
damned Hypocrisy; that you are a Wolf in Sheeps clothing. Item. You were of
the Counsel with those that sent his Majesty to the Isle: That you Preach
Charity; but never practice it: And when they proffer you 4. pound for a raw
Sermon of Repetitions, you are never contented with it. Memorandum, His Father
a poor Watchman at Huntington: this is true. Marshalls party Confession, and
delatory Answer.
That you are not to be trusted by any man, for when a Collection was made, of
fifty pound for an aged Indigent brother, by your entreaty, from several
Churches, you detained more than forty pound of the Money, delivering to the
distressed but sive; and so cosened your own Father, who was the party; --
Guilty -- or not Guilty -- In the Substance Guilty, but wronged in the
Circumstances -- The Witnesses shall clear it -- Let his habitation be in Hell;
and his Office to say Grace there. -- Oliver will be proud of his Chaplain.

Rainsborough hold up thy hand.
You Rainsborough, stand Indicted of Felony and Treason; of Felony in diverse
parts of the Kingdom, Rainsborogh Indicted.
during the late War; wherein you were observed to play the part of a cruel
Thief, and pick up your crummes greedily. Item. Having taken upon you, like
another Phaeton, to guide those Chariots of the Sea: our Navy: You first
provoked Vantrumpe to fight, and then suffered him to beat you handsomely, you
running away with severally of the Ships Royal: which were never baffeld
before: So that by thy Ignorance and fear, those Invincible Fortifications:
and outworkes of the Kingdom were in Election to have been taken or slighted:
Item you were careful of nothing but the Kings escape, under which pretense,
and searching for Letters, you rifled all ships and passengers by your
Ministers, that were as very thieves as Caons; -- Answerr to thy Charge: He
yields.
Guilty -- or not Guilty, The proofs indeed are pregnant, and thy faults
manifests. Let him srolick in Hell with Jesuit Marshall and the rest: let their
bellies swell with barley broth, till the husks break. --

Haman -- hold up thy hand. No age has paralel'd this prodigy: Haman accused.
since Judas Iscariot, that killed his Father, and got his Mother with child:
other Subjects Act evils against the King being absent, yet in his presence
they spoke him fair, but thou durst slight him to his face: put bolts and
bars upon his liberty: press him in rude language, (only Natural in such a
Cerberus) to things distastefull and injurious; limit his walks and Recreations
as thou art fancied to be pleased, or pettish, Letting him further know, that
the changes of his Fortune are but the influences of thy smiles or frown: And
lastly, thou have laid profane and violent paws, upon his sacred Person --

Speak -- they all submit: He would feign implore mercy: but cannot speak. His
Excellency brought trial.
he trembles every joint. Away with him too. The Infernal palace, let him not
want Hell broth, Give it him scalding hot, and fire enough -- string him next
Rainsborough: A chain made up of such would be an excellent bracelet for the
Devil.

-- A Guard for the grand Signeur -- Thomas Fairfax: Eldest son of Ferdinando
Fairfax: not Ferd: the Emperor, nor any of the Archdukes, but a poor Irish
Baron: and petty Lord in Yorkeshiere. Stand forth, and hear thy charge --
Thou, Thomas, art accused of deeds darker than the Powder Plot; thy treasons
are so hideous that children cry, and dogs fall a barking when they are but
named, for thou have shaken our Land like an Earthquake; Thou have exiled our
Peace, bound our Laws in chains, Robbed us of our Estates and Liberties; and
dressed Religion in fools a Coat: Thou art joined in Wedlock with a Moabitish
woman, as very a heathen as thy self, or the Babylonian Semiramis; by which
pissekitching and Cromwell, thou art led by the nose: like Zimri; thou have
conspired against thy Master: Thou have shut up thy Lord in a straight prison
whom thon feedest with the bread of Affliction, and like a liberal Gentleman
give him his own tears for drink, while thou thy self shinest in the Title
of his Excellency, and farest deliciously every day: In a word: thou and thy
Cockatrice are to be forthwith excommunicate: for you are turned renegadoes,
and you both have denied the faith; -- Guilty or not Guilty? This is the very
Answer of old Adam: My wife beguiled me, And the Devil, beguiled her. And so it
seems, you made a shift to beguile one another to the end of the Chapter: but
here is the first part of your punishment: That the King being returned to take
possession of his own Garden, you are both to be thrown out of Paradise for
ever: and this to be done immediately --

Astraea rises.
Astr. fair and softly goes far -- Master Rombus you have spoken well but
unseasonably; the faculty of judging is ours. We came from Heaven on purpose,
and therefore we proceed and say, That having duly weighed the offenses of the
heinous Malefactors, and pondered the proofs; which being Transparent, and
Elegant in themselves, do still receive a further perspecuity and brightness
from the prisoners own Confessions. We thus give Sentence.

You Fairfax that coveted your Sovereigns Glory, shall ride like the Welsh
Prince, Astraeas Judgment. The Prisoners condemned: and first his Excellency.
in the English Chronicles through London upon a Jade with your face reversed.
A paper Crown upon your loggerhead, and a Crier before you; that shall
proclaim and say: This is he that would needs be honored in despite of God
and the King: you shall be thus led to the place of execution, and from thence
thrown into another world: usque in Infernos: by extremest Torments; none of
thy name shall ever be styled Nobilis: And thy wife shall be burnt for a
Sorceresse, as Joaene the rampant puzzel, was in France.

Cromwell, alias Williams, shall dye the same death, only with a little
qualification of the pomp: his house shall be made a lakes; The best of his
name shall be a Brewer of small Beer And the biggest of his vessels but a
Kilderkin.

Martin shall be hanged in chains, and alive for his presumption. And none
suffered to bewail him, but kitchen queanes, and hedge whores, such as make
venery their profession, for to these only he has been beneficial.

Haman knows already the height of his own Gallows,

Rainsborough shall be devowr'd by a Whale: in whose belly he shall live so
long, and feed so much upon salt water and herrings, that in fine he shall
loose his humanity, and be turned into a fish, called a Porpoise, or Sea-hogge.

You Marshall shall think upon your predecessor: that false And Covetous
Apostle Judas, with whose Example, you shall be so far in love, that you
shall do as he did, first hang your self, and then drop into your own place.

Last of all: You Lentall: shall be flead, and have your skin nailed to the
seat, where by virtue of a false Seal, you counterfeited the Chancellor: and
took more than double fees, thy Carkas shall be buried in a quagmire, And this
Inscrition upon a rotten Post adjacent.

Lentalls Epipitaph.
A Lawer: Briber, Speaker: Traitor. Mass
Of Independent frawd: A Golden Ass
All quarter here; wrapped up in one poor shirt
Sic transit: Lentall; Glutted now with dirt.
Finally, for thy sundry wrong judgments, and the reputation of thy pelf,
thou shall purchase for thy self the Fortune of Midas, and thy posterity shall
challenge a propriety in Asses ears, which shall be their Crest for ever.

These Principalls are thus culd out from the rest, for the special uses set
down; And to suffer as Grandees: About two, or three hundred of the Inferior
fry, their fellows are to be hanged up here, and there, in several places, to
beautify the Nation, and make the hearts of Good men Glad. --

Thus having smoothed perplexed Englands snarles
We mount to Heaven: and reinthroned CHARLES
To his just height on Earth: where he shall sit
A Terror to his Foes, that envy it
Let Kings alone with Crowns, and Subjects move
In their own Sphere: that's duty: prayers and Love.
Aristaea vanishes.

Rombus rises.
Astraea gone: we Rombus next succeed
In power to save, or make the Prisoners bleed,
That done, we will weep once more, like tender men
For peerless Sydneyes death: then sleep again.
Now you generation of Vipers: Have ye not done finely? Rombus is angry, but
pitiful.
think you to bring up your mothers children to this: What terrible Fellows
were you but lately, when you looked all as furiously as Holofernes, before his
head fell off, bigger than bears and bulls: And now to see how suddenly the
case is altered, and all for fear forsooth of a little hanging. -- Come hither
ye snotty noses, leave your sniveling, And peg up your hearts, like Stephen
Marshall: Oliver: there, and the double Traitor Haman; who look all three, as
if they were resolved to put Astraeas Sentence in execution, and hang
themselves in spite of pardons: the King has referd you entirely to my
discretion, and whereof one of his predecessors has had proof, to some time,
especially in Hamsteed Gardens: Now I considering this to be a time rejoyceing
for his Majesty's restoring and your miseries, do thus moderate Astraeas
sentence, which in justice should have fallen upon you to your own knowledge.
His qualification with their several punishments.


You shall live: because you submit, and are sorrowful; but you must do your
penances; That's first, be soundly scorched in the hand, All, but Martin: for he
shall be burnt in another place: You Lentall shall build, at your own proper
Cost and Charges, an Hospital as large as Suttons, and endow it with as fair
revenues: It shall be a refuge for honest Cavaliers, lamed or undone in the
late Service: You shall loose the rest of your substance, which shall be
divided betwixt his Majesty and those high-suffering Spirits, that would never
pay Composition money, though their Lands flew up and down like March dust,
and the Devil took all: such I say, as would not yield an inch to those Rats in
Corn, or Mice in Cheeses you Vermin parliament, one whole year ye shall plead
for nothing, and during that time, be Trencher-scrapers to the new Society.

You Martin shall likewise purchase an ample place, Harry Martins penance.
with fit allowances, which you shall call The College of Relief, and
discipline for the Sinner Martin and his poor Whores: in which your self shall
be chief Penetenciary; you shall fast three days in a Week for Mortification,
and upon the other four; when you are permitted to eat some Scraps, six of thy
she-Tygers shall be chosen out daily, who shall pinch you for an hour without
mercy, and if you cry not out thrice, God save King Charles, your Posteriours
shall be visited by the like number of outrageous old Women, whose hands shall
be armed with Rods of Correction, and they shall be labor you by turns; after
the manner of the Jews you shall be circumcised in the foreskin of your
flesh, that while you are fore, you Viragoes may come upon you with their
force, and prevail against you, as the two bold Patriarchs Simeon and Levi did
once against the Sichemites; in short, you shall be pared close, that is
perfectly eunuched, and so be lodged nightly betwixt two handsome Girls, that
you may remember your former Excesses, and sigh at your present incapacity --
This to continue for a year --

Rainsborow, you for the first half year shall serve as Swabber in one of the
Whelps Royal, and there receive three hundred stripes weekly, with a salted
Eel, for being such a Puppie, as to skrew your self into the disguise of a
Vice Admiral, considering, that if they hide a Fool never so much, he will make
some shift to discover himself, as you have done sufficiently. The other six
Months you shall be given to some honest Boat-swain displaced perhaps for
drinking the King's Health, he shall carry you about the Kingdom for the Term
aforesaid, and show you for pence a piece -- he shall call you a Sea-Gull --

You Haman shall likewise be granted to Captain Burleigh's Widow, in part of
miserable amends, to whose use you for the like time shall be dressed and
discovered as a very strange thing, in all lineament and outward proportion, a
man, but otherwise a monster as ever the jarring Element, when they were sick,
angry, and in Physic, dropped out from their back door, amongst their most vile
and tainted Excrements: the total of your Estate shall be shared by even and
equal portions amongst the children of that Captain, whom an ignoble death by
this malice, Indignified --

Marshal, though but a thredbare Scholar, that is hardly a Latinist, you shall
get pass for an old Grecian, and be allowed to beg at Whitehall gate, your
Offenses upon your Breast in Text Letters, but your recantantation in a small
print, behind you, to signify that your sorrow in the opinion of many, is but
worldly -- that you took a wonderful delight in turning; and that Religion
with you has a long time gone arseward -- your goods shall be distributed
amongst poor Scholars, to buy Books and Sack, having loitred above three
years for lack of employment, and are now grown lousy with drinking of Rot
gut surnamed Sixes: your name shall no more be called Stephen but Simon, and
Marshal be translated into Magus that Conjurer.

You Oliver shall lay down your Assumpsit of Cromwell, and take up your old
Fathers, Williams is your proper name, and so you must be called; and as your
Designs were black, so shall your calling be, for you shall fulfill your
years penance in a Colt-pit, wherein you shall become an Anchorite, by day you
shall dig incessantly, and at night call up your spirits, with whom you shall
practice your Conjuration: but a vizard of proof shall be clapped upon you, least
meeting with that combustible Fuel your nose should set it a fire, and so
kindle as unquenchable a flame in the bowels of the Earth as you have done
already upon her face and your own, you shall hew out her lodging in the
quarrey, you shall be clothed with your own skin, and your Diet shall be
Garlic.

And lastly Fairfax, because it was once in your sole power to have righted
your wronged prince, quieted all Troubles, and established an honest greatness
to your self, all which you neglected; nay, refused being admonished: your
name shall therefore no more be Tom, but Tony; and a Fools cap with a button
rampant shall always be your upper Garment and cognizance; you shall undergo
the first part of Astraeas sentence: and when you ride, in stead of a Diadem
which you aimed at, you shall be garnished in the feathers of a Goose, which
shall inviron your most excellent Coxcombe; In the rest your penance shall
follow on in the track of your Predecessor, Lambert Simenell, first be showed
in the stocks thrice a week; next you shall be made Comptroller of the black
Guard, or chief turnebroach: And lastly, to suite a little with the soaring of
your high thoughts, you shall be one of his Majesty's Faulconers till your
year be out: which finished, and your estates disposed to the profit of the
Malignant party, you shall be assembled together, to take upon you the faculty
of fooling, as you term it, and be made players in spite of your teethes.

You shall be called: The Mag^^^^os and Grandees turned Players.
the society of Goblins; you shall practice tumbling: picking of pockets, and
plackets, with all the Science of Legerdemaine: the play you shall be always
presenting shall be famous, and entitled, The English Gipsee, and her damned
Crew: which shall be capable of enlargement, for variety, but never loose the
Tittle.

Of this Company, you Fairfax shall be King: touching whose fortune first and
last, Tradition renders it thus: In the carnal minute of thy parents quiet
copulation, A strange chance.
and engendring thee, a horrible Tempest declared suddenly, which threatened the
Room, and so affrighted thy father, that forgetting his wonted method, and
discreet leisure at such an Exercise, he hastened the work, and threw thee into
thy mothers lap, with so violent an expedition, as she doubted then, least thy
tender brain, might be dashed against some mistaken vessel, and so cracked,
which imparted with a Caldean, and his judgment required, he thus blessed thy
nativity, The Prediction of an Astrologer: not of the City Lilly: but a
flower of the field.
That thou should be coupled with a Serpent, who should poison thee not so
much by a Corporal as an Animal Taint: that thou shoulds be martial, always
inclining to Rebellion, and in that audaciously, bold: perhaps fortunate too,
for a few years: but never in esteem, for valiant, wise, nor honest: that
thou should gather all the luster of thy Tribe to thy self: and glitter for
a time, but being suddenly quenched, thou shall leave none to succeed thee in
Honor: and the light of thy family shall with thy self be extinguished for
ever: this is the true Reason though kept from thee, why thou art aspected so
ghastly, and thy actions always without fear or wit.

I say again: you Fairfax: or by your new and more significant name Tony: of
this Company you shall be Rex, King of the vagabonds; Oliver shall be your
malus genius, or evil Counselor. Lentall, the Prologist, and Treasurer.
Martin, the Humorist, or Mad Lover Marshall, Annanias, or the White Devil.
Rainsborough, the Intelligencer, or Scout. Hamon, the Doorkeeper.
Madamoiseille Fairefax, the Gipsee, or Stigan Proserpine. And Chaloner, though
exempt from public Trial, shall likewise pass upon his part, and play the
Fool egregiously, Your Scean shall be the banks of Acheron; you shall Act in
Hell, and be bound to fix your Stage there, from everlasting, to everlasting,
world without end, Amen.

WE have fulfilled our trust. I that was Servant to Queen Elisabeth, and Sir
Philip Sidneys immortal Friend, have obeyed King Charles in this particular, be
you the Gazers here his Subjects as dutiful -- ye Mutiners of London, that
dare fight against your King, but never for Him: You that give solemn thanks
to a murdering party for killing your Brethren, and send them Money to increase
the slaughter: You that deliver up your defensive Chains, that the Fetters of
a true Bondage may manacle you and your children; and, being weary of your
unworthy Lives, You that offer your throats to be cut, because ye will not see
(which your selves may easily prevent) the rifling of your Bags by Ruffians,
-- your fair Wives squeezed like Grapes, and your selves cornuted to your own
faces -- You whose Eyes have observed this Miracle of your King's Deliverance
-- that it came from Heaven, and the dead, without your help -- You that have
seen the fall of these Miscreants; that have heard their trial, or shall
hereafter read it; for I imagine, so famous an Occurrence, will hardly escape
the Press. To all you Englishmen my quondam Countrymen, I speak to you.

Behold the price of treason, fill your veins
At length with loyal flames, for death and Hell
Feed on a Rebels heart, the high disdaines
Of Heaven and men are yours; Fools, now farewell,
Let CHARLES reign King, bless him for your Reprieves.
And Rombus patron of your forfeit Lives.
FINI

