THE Figg-less Fig Tree: OR, THE DOOM OF A Barren and Unfruitful Profession
LAID OPEN. IN AN EXPOSITION UPON THAT PARABLE: A Certain Man had a Fig Tree
Planted in his Vineyard, etc. Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

By Nehemiah Rogers, a Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

Now learn a Parable of the Fig Tree,

Math. 24.32. LONDON, Printed by J. S. for George Sawbridge, and are to be sold
at the Sign of the Bible on Lud-Gate Hill, 1659.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Worshipful and Religious Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Roberts, of
Little-Braxsted in Essex.
The Continuation and Increase of all needful Blessings in this Life, and
eternal Life hereafter.
Good Sir,
THe Roman Orator tells us, Quod exemplo fit, jure fieri putamus; There are few
Writers (humane or Divine) but they entitle their Labors, intended for
Public, to some particular Person whom they make choice of, either to
Pattonize their Persons and Works, (in which Case Wisdom directs them to some
Learned Mecoenas, one of high Place, and eminent Parts and Power; who is able
to shelter them from the malice of carping Momus); Or to testify
thankfulness, for some special benefit received: (and in that Case discretion
guides them to pitch their thoughts on some singular Benefactor). The Community
of the Act, may plead an Immunity for my Action, in going the common road of
Writters. Yet I close not with those who crave Protection; there is no need of
that: for if it be Truth that I Preach and Print, it is God's, and needs no
other Protector: If it be Error, all the Powers under Heaven are unable to
support it: That I aim principally at, in my Dedications, is, The Testification
of a thankful heart, to those, from whom I have received undeserved kindness;
And in the number of those, should I forget you, I should forget my self.

To you Sir, I am many ways obliged, for your abundant favors, and fruits of
love, really expressed, even then, when it pleased God most to darken my
outward Estate. For three years space I most comfortably enjoyed my Ministry,
(through Gods goodness and Yours,) in that Parish where you now Dwell; all
which time, I found your house to be both to me and mine, as the house of
Onesiphorus was to Paul, a house of great refreshment; 2 Timothy 1.16.
The shadow of your Trees was to me, as Jonah his Gourd was to him, Jon. 4.
very comfortable; but it pleased God to prepare a worm (what worm I will not
say, but it went under the notion of an unknown Friend) which did smite my
Gourd, and so gnaw the Stalk of my Shroud, that it soon withered, to my grief.

I, wanting those means (whereby the World does usually testify their
thankfulness to their Benefactors) desire by this outward evidence, to give
evidence to the World, of the inward disposition of my heart, in presenting to
you, and sending forth under your name, this Fruitless Fig Tree: The Title
promises little, yet, I hope under the Leaves thereof you will find some Fruit
that will please your Religious palate.

I cannot doubt, but that, as you were a Religious Hearer of something of mine,
that has formerly past the Press, (which, in transitu, as it was passing by,
you called in, and gave it friendly entertainment), so you will be a profitable
Reader of this, and give it House-room and Heart-room; and seeing it comes unto
you, under your own name, it will be a welcome Guest unto you. And my poor
Prayers shall accompany it, and follow you:

The Lord so assist you with his Grace, that by this, and all other good means,
you may grow from Grace to Grace; that so perfecting your Sanctification in the
fear of God, you may be made perfect in every good work, to do his will;
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen. Thus prays he, who is

Most obliged to you in the bonds of Thankfulness. Nehemiah Rogers.
Dodding-Hurst, November. 1. 1659.
and To the Pious and Religious Gentlewoman Mrs. Dorothy Roberts, his Virtuous
and Worthy Wife.
The Continuation and Increase of all needful Blessings in this Life, and
eternal Life hereafter.
Good Mrs. Roberts,
THere is no Monument so lasting, 2 Timothy 1.5.
to perpetuate the memory of godly Parents, and make them to survive after
Death, as is the godliness of the Child: Solomon brings in the Children of the
Virtuous Woman, spreading of her praise; They arise up, and call her Blessed,
Prove. 31.28. which is not to be restrained to a Verbal praise, given by
Children to Parents whilst they live, (for that may proceed (as many times it
does) from self-love and flattery); but it is principally to be understood, of
an Actual and Real praising of her, both Living and Dead): which is done; when
those shining virtues of Modesty and Humility, and other Graces that were in
the Parent, appear in the Child, and proclaims the Piety and care of the
Mother in their Education.

Your Mother, Mrs. Pert.
(now with God) was a Godly and Religious Matron, (whom, for her more then
ordinary endowments, both of Nature and Grace, I honored whilst she lived, and
cannot but gladly make mention of, being Dead); She had always a great care of
her Childrens Religious bringing up; John, Epist. 3.
and her joy was greater to hear, and see, that they walked in the Truth, then
that they enjoyed fair Estates, and large Possessions in this World. I need not
embalme her, being Dead with my Report, who living, was so well reported of by
all that truly knew her, and the grace of God that was in her; and now being
dead, yet lives in the godly Conversation of her Children (both Sons and
Daughters) who manifest the fruit of their religious Education, by such a
Conversation as becomes godliness.

Should I speak of those excellent Parts that God has bin pleased to endow you
withal, your Modesty would not like it, and those that are not well acquainted
with you, would think I flatter, (but that is beneath my Calling, and above my
Skill). This I may truly say (without flattery), that God has enriched you
with that which is more precious then Gold, A true and lively Faith,
accompanied with the grace of Knowledge, the Government of Temperance, the
Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, the support of Patience, the Splendour of
Humility; so that whilst you live, your Mother is not dead: and albeit, God
has not given you a fruitful Womb, yet he has blessed you with a fruitful
Heart; insomuch, as that which the Prophet speaks, may in a good sense be
applied unto you: The Desolate shall have more Children then the married. Isa.
54.^1.


To my self in Particular, 2 King. 4.10.
you have bin like that godly Shunamite to Elisha; you have joined as a Partner
with your Husband, in his love and bounty, providing Light and Lodging,
House-room and Frying, and other necessaries fitting for an Elisha: and
therefore I make bold to join you with him in this Dedication, craving the like
acceptance from you as from him. And I shall put up this prayer to Heaven, both
for you and for him:

The Lord so assist you with his Grace, that by this, and all other good means,
you may grow from Grace to Grace; that so perfecting your Sanctification in the
fear of God, you may be made perfect in every good work, to do his will;
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen. Thus prays he, who is

Most obliged to you in the bonds of Thankfulness. Nehemiah Rogers.
Dodding-Hurst, November. 1. 1659.
TO The Reader. And more Particularly, to my welbeloved, the Congregation of
Dodding-Hurst in Essex.
Good Reader,
IN the Closure of my Exposition upon that Parable of a Friend going to his
Friend at Midnight, Luke 11.5. etc. I intimated my intent to go on, in the
next place, with that ensuing Parable, of a Son asking Bread of his Father,
Luke 11. verse 11. etc. But this, (as thou see) is stepped into the World
before it: Yet know, that it is upon the birth, albeit, as yet, there is no
strength to bring it forth: I doubt not, but with God's assistance, thou shall
see, The Father's blessing to attend both on this, and that before mentioned.

To you that have bin Hearers (in part or whole) of what is now set forth, I
shall use the words of St. Paul, To write the same things to you, which you
before have heard, to me it is not grievous, Phil. 3.1.
but for you it is safe: For to use the words of St. Peter, In this that I now
write unto you, I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance. 2 Pet. 3.2.
The best of us are dull to conceive, hard to believe, apt to forget, and slow
to practice: Let our minds be never so pure, yet there is great need of
stirring up: Dead Ashes we stir not up, but Embers, that be warm, to
reenkindle the live-coals that lie hid under them: When we lay on green wood,
we blow the fire, and do not stir it; when dry, we stir the fire, and need
not blow it: Proselytes stand in need of kindling; well-improved Christians of
stirring up, and quickening. And such I trust you are, (if you be not, it is
your shame:) God has blessed you with the means for many years together; and,
through the Religious care of worthy and conscionable Patrons and Patronesses,
Dodding-Hurst.
(for which this Place and Parish above many other have great cause of
thankfulness) there has bin a succession of godly and painful Pastors, who
have bin set over you, to watch for your Souls; whose Labors God has so
blessed, that there is not (for any thing that I yet perceive at present) any
Faction or Fraction amongst you: No Papist, Anabaptist, Quaker; nor any such
like Schismatique: you live in amity and peace one wi^h the other (generally);
which is not ordinary, and, in these times, a singular mercy. And yet I fear,
That charge which the Apostle lays upon the Hebrews, may be laid on some of
you: when as in regard of the long and plentiful means you have enjoyed, you
ought to have bin Teachers (not Public Preachers, Heb. 5.12.
for that you ought not to be, but Teachers) to your Families, and one of
another, in private communion; you had need to be taught the first Principles
and Fundamentalls of Religion.

It has pleased God to bring me amongst you, and give me a comfortable Call
unto you: For, besides the Nomination and free Presentation of me to that
Place, by the Godly and Judicious Patron; I was acquainted with the joint, and
unanimous desire of you all, (which you testified under your hands, by way of
petition to the Patron, that he would pitch his thoughts upon me), that I might
be your Pastor; This indeed, made me (it being undesired) much more willing to
undertake this Charge, which otherwise (I believe) I should hardly have bin
drawn unto; And now, having undertaken it, I desire God's assistance, and your
prayers, that I may be found faithful therein, 2 These. 3.1. Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
whilst it shall please the Lord to continue me amongst you; And that the Word
may have free passage, and be glorified in us, and by us, both Minister and
People: And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all Judgment, that you may approve things that are excellent;
that you may be sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ, being
filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the
glory and praise of God: I shall second my prayers with my best endeavors.
Read diligently what you have heard, apply conscionably what you read and hear,
and bring forth fruit accordingly: so shall we one day rejoice in this (both I
and you), that we have not heard in vain, nor labored in vain.

Dodding-Hurst. November. 1. 1659. Your Servant for the furtherance of the
Salvation of your Souls, Nehemiah Rogers.
The Errata's that have past the Press, you shall find in the end of the Book.



The Text. Luke, Chap. 13. verse 6. 7, 8, 9.
Verse 6. HE spoke also this Parable: A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in
his Vineyard, and he came and sought Fruit thereon, and found none.

Verse 7. Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard; Behold, this three years
have I come, and sought Fruit of this Fig Tree, and found none; Cut it down,
Why cumbereth it the ground?

Verse 8. And he answering said unto him; Lord, let it alone this year also,
till I shall Digg about it and Dung it.

Verse 9. And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that, thou shall
cut it down.

A Summary of all the Principal Doctrines, Collected and Illustrated from the
several Verses of the Fruitless Fig Tree, Luke 13.6, 7, 8, 9.
Verse 6. HE spoke also this Parable: A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in
his Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Doct. 1.
The word spoke by the mouth of God's Ministers, is no less to be esteemed the
word of God, than that which was spoken by Christ immediately. Page 9 Doct. 2.
Weighty matters should be pressed and insisted on. Page 11 Doct. 3. Repentance
is a difficult, yet a necessary work. Page 17 Doct. 4. Christ was no silent
Minister of his Church. Page 18 Doct. 5. Christ spoke Parables. Page 26 Doct.
6. God is resembled to Man in Scripture. Page 37 Doct. 7. He takes upon him the
Profession of an Husbandman. Page 40 Doct. 8. The Church is a Spiritual
Vineyard. Page 44 Doct. 9. The Church of Christ is but one. Page 58 Doct. 10.
It is the peculiar Inheritance of the Lord. Page 68 Doct. 11. Man is a Tree
Mystically. Page 71 Doct. 12. Those Trees wherewith God furnishes his Vineyard
are of a Fruitful kind. Page 80 Doct. 13. Those Trees which God expects Fruit
from, are planted Trees. Page 84 Doct. 14. The Church is God's Nursery. Page 89
Doct. 15. Visiting follows Planting. Page 102 Doct. 16. Fruit is expected from
every Fig Tree that God has planted in his Vineyard. Page 105 Doct. 17. Where
God has well deserved, there many times he is ill requited. Page 127
Verse 7. Then said he unto the Dresser of his Vineyard; Behold, these three
years I come, seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none: Cut it down, Why
cumbreth it the Ground? Doct. 1. The Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, are
the Dressers of the Lords Vineyard. Page 153 Doct. 2. The Dressers of God's
Vineyard should be as one, in their Master's work. Page 171 Doct. 3. God makes
known his mind unto his Ministers, and acquaints them in a Familiar manner with
his intents and purposes. Page 194 Doct. 4. Great attention and regard is to be
given to matters weighty. Page 203 Doct. 5. Sin may not be looked upon with a
regardlesse eye; or, God's complaints are not to be slighted or past over,
regardlesly. Page 206 Doct. 6. Barrenness in a Fig Tree is fault enough. Page
210 Doct. 7. Circumstances of sin, give Aggravations to it. Page 218 Doct. 8.
God allows and allotteth to every Fig Tree, growing in his Vineyard, a due
proportion of time for the bringing forth of Fruit. Page 221 Doct. 9. Time
allotted (for bearing fruit) neglected, aggravates the fault. The longer Time
the greater Crime. Page 224 Doct. 10. To sin against the means, adds weight
unto the sin, and is most provoking. Page 249 Doct. 11. It is God's usual
manuer to Speak before he Strikes, to pronounce Judgment before he Executes it.
Page 261 12. Abscission and cutting down, is the Doom of an Hypocritical and
Barren Professor. Page 282 13. No outward Privilege can secure a sinful
People from the stroke of Vengeance. Page 300 14. God's severest Judgments have
always most equitable reasons. Page 304 15. Barren Professors are Cumbersome.
Page 313
Verse 8. And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also,
till I shall Digg about it and Dung it. Doct. 1. When God falls to complaining
and threatening, it is high time, for such as have any Interest in God, to fall
to praying. Page 326 Doct. 2. When God is offended, Christ steps in and
mediates, and puts a stop to the present proceedings of Justice. Page 334 Doct.
3. Faithful Ministers may not be wanting (neither are they wanting) in
interceding and praying unto God in the behalf of that unprofitable People
which is committed to their charge. Page 342 Doct. 4. Reverend Styles and Names
should be given to our Superiors. Page 361 Doct. 5. The Lord of the Vineyard
is Lord Paramount. Page 362 Doct. 6. The Lord alone is to be sought unto, in
our prayers, and by our prayers. Page 366 Doct. 7. It is as great a favor as
can be expected or desired, for a sinner to be a while-longer spared: Or, To be
let alone or spared a while longer, is as great a mercy as can be desired on a
Sinner's behalf. Page 370 Doct. 8. God's Patience has a Period. Page 380 Doct.
9. Faithful Ministers seek not themselves, but the good of those committed to
their Charge. Page 383 Doct. 10. Good Ministers are great pains-takers. Page
386 Doct. 11. Digging is one part of the Ministerial Function. Page 409 Doct.
12. God's Ministers are to Dung as well as Digg. Page 420
Verse 9. And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shall
cut it down. Doct. 1. A faithful Minister cannot but be deeply affected with
grief, in the behalf of such as remain unfruitful under his Ministerial
Labors. Page 427 Doct. 2. Where the Dresser's diligence accompanies the
Owner's patience, there is hope even of the most barren Tree. Page 430 Doct. 3.
All will be well if we bear Fruit, though it be late first; Fruitfulness at
last will make amends for all. Page 436 Doct. 4. Barrenness may be found under
the best and powerfullest means. Page 443 Doct. 5. The Dressers of God's
Vineyard should be inclined to acts of Mercy, and not too forward in provoking
God to acts of Justice. Page 456 Doct. 6. By frequent prayer God is so
overpowred, as that he cannot presently destroy. Page 459 Doct. 7. Whatever be
the Instrument, or who ever be the Agent: God is the principal Efficient of
those Judgments which befall a People. Page 469 Doct. 8. Greatest severity
attends upon despised Mercy. Page 483 Doct. 9. We are to rest satisfied and
contented in the just and deserved condemnation of the wicked; albeit, they are
dearly beloved of us. Page 491
Reader,
THis same Author Mr. Nehemiah Rogers, has lately printed, An Exposition on
that Parable, Luke 11.5, -- 11. Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go
unto him at Midnight, etc.

Also on that Parable, Luke 7.40, -- 51. There was a certain Creditor, which
had two Debtors, etc.

Also on that Parable, Luke 10.30, -- 38. A certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst Thieves, etc.

All to be sold by George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Lud-gate-Hill.

The Analyticall Table. Showing the Method Observed and Followed (for the most
part), in this Exposition of the Parable of the Figg-less Fig Tree, Luke 13.6,
-- 10.
^his Pa^^e we ^^e consi^^^ble, The Preface, verse. 6. He spoke also this
Parable: where The Reference in that Particle [Also] The Instruction [He spoke
this Parable] notifying The Doctor [He spake] The Doctrine [This Parable]

The Parable which is Propounded, verse. 6. A certain man, etc. where The
Subject, and there is showed The Owner, Who he was [A certain man]. What he was
[A Vinitor or Husbandman].
His Possession, where The Nature of the Inheritance [A Vineyard], where take
notice, Of the Unity of it, It was but [One], Of His Propriety in it, It was
[His Own].
The Plant of note, therein growing, (...) set forth For Kind. Generically [A
Tree,] Specifically [A Figg-Tree].
For Quality, showing It Is Plantation it was [Planted], Its Situation [In his
Vineyard.]



The Praedicate, He came and sought fruit, etc. where The Owners Visitation of
it [he came] His Expectation from it, He sought, fruit, etc. where The Owner's
gracious Acquisition [He sought fruit thereon] The Figg-Tree's unthankful
Retribution [He found none],


Prosecuted, verse. 7, 8, 9. where we have An Expostulation about it, verse. 7.
where The Persons Considerable in it, Expostulating [Then said He]
Expostulated-with, [The Dresser of his Vineyard]
The Substance of it; Behold, these three years, etc. which contains in it, A
sad Complaint, and there consider we The manner of it [Behold] calling for
Attention. Observation.
The matter [these 3 years], etc. where is showed The Grievance, which was
Sterility and Barrenness. The Aggravations From the time specified [three
years] From the cost bestowed intimated, in these words [This Fig Tree.]


A severe sentence cut it down, etc. where The Object, [It] The Doom [ cut it
down why Cumbers it, etc. and there The Severity of the Sentence [Cut it down]
The Equity of it [Why Cumbers it the Ground?]



The Intercession made for it, verse. 8.9. And there The Persons Interceding [He
said.] Interceded [Lord.]
The Request, Let it alone this year also, etc. where The Boon or thing
requested, which is Specified [Let it alone], From the Circumstance of Time
[This year also]. From the End [till I shall Digg about it and Dung it.]
Enlarged, and that
The Terms on which the Request is made, and that On the Dresser's part, he
would take pains with it; and Digg about it, Dung it.
On the Figg-Trees behalf, which has two Branches: 1. Affirmative, If it bear
fruit, Well; where A Supposition [If it bear fruit,] A Determination [well].
2. Negative, If not, then after that, etc. and there An Addubitation or
Suspicion [If not], A Concession [After that, thou shall cut it down.]








THE Figg-less Fig Tree.
TEXT.
LUKE 13.6.-10. He spoke also this Parable, A certain man had a Fig Tree
planted in his Vineyard; and he came, and sought fruit thereon, and found none,
etc.


IT is storyed of Caligula, Dio. in vita Calig.
that he feared nothing so much as Thunder, to drown the noise whereof he had
an Ensign made, wherewith he would make a kind of thundering noise. when it
thundered in the Clouds, and by the help of Burning-glasses (which he used) he
would cast forth flashes of fire, in the face of Heaven. Not much unlike is the
practice of Impenitent and obdurate sinners they seem to tremble at the
Judgments of Almighty God; when notwithstanding they go on in a provoking way,
daring the God of Heaven, to their utter ruin.

Cast your eyes but a little back, and you shall read of some ( Galilaeans it
is thought) who acquainted Christ with Pilat's cruelty, in massacring of diverse
Galileans, the followers of that Judas the Gaulenite, of whom Gamaliel speaks,
Judas Gaulonites.
Acts 5.37. Who joining in confederacy with one Sadoc a Pharisee, Joseph.
Antiq. Jud. lib. 18. c. 1. Theophil. in loc. Oecum. in Act. 5.
became the Author and Ringleader of a new Sect, different from the Pharisees
in this, that they maintained none ought to be called Lord, but the Lord of
Heaven, and did thereupon refuse to acknowledge Caesar to be their Lord:
endeavoring by what means they could to shake off the Roman yoke, refusing to
pay that Imperial Tax imposed on them; in pursuance whereof (as it is very
probable) they assembled the people together, and under color of Religious
sacrificing (as the Prophets were wont) they hoped to gather into a Body, 1 Samuel 10.17.
the better to effect their design: whereof Pilate understanding (He being
then Governor of Judea for Caesar) sent armed troops, and cut them off before
they were aware. Even whilst they were sacrificing, they were sacrificed; and
so their blood was mingled with that sacrifice which they offered. The Occasion.


Luke 12.58.
and that betimes, whilst they were in the way; before they be arrested by
Death, and haled before the Judge (no man knowing either the Time or Place or
manner of his death). The Relators (it may be) supposing that the present
instance of those so lately and cruelly murdered, was very pertinent to the
purpose, and suited well with our Savior's scope, acquaint him at this time
with it, and seem desirous to have his Judgment both of the Fact, and Persons.

The quick and peircing eye of our Savior (probably) discovered therein, Lyra.
Bernard.
a train or trapp laid, to entangle him in his talk, (whatever other pretense
might by them be made). Should he have Patronized the Persons slain, then he
would have bin accused for a friend of Rebels, and seditious Persons; should he
have spoken the least against Pilate's cruelty, he might have bin charged to
have bin an enemy to Caesar; should he have approved of the Fact, then had he
bin accused to the People as an Abettor of the Roman President in that bloody
Massacre; Our Savior (therefore) gives no direct answer to them, but takes
occasion from thence, to enlarge his former Doctrine, and enforce it upon the
consciences of the Reporters, as well as others; Suppose ye that those
Galileans were sinners above all other Galileans, Verse. 2.3.
because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish.

And that they might not think him to be beholding to them for that example
(for the illustration of his Doctrine) he puts them in mind of another Accident
which fell out not long before, and nearer home, Verse. 4.5.
which was the fall of the Tower of Siloam in Jerusalem, whereby eighteen of
the Builders, or Repairers of it (which is most likely): were slain outright:
these were not alone destroyed, because they alone were wicked. For some are
punished when others no less wicked are spared; in whose temporary
repreivement the Judge of all the World does represent the necessity of the
last Assize, and may assure such as live in the like sinful courses, of the
same, or soarer vengeance without Repentance. They are punished that we may be
warned, they corrected that that we may be amended, (for executions are done
upon offenders for the benefit of the living, and not of dead (who cannot be
bettered by Admonition nor Example) so that we may not rashly judge and censure
them to be worse then others, whom we see to be afflicted more than others: Nor
yet flatter our selves in our sinful ways, for that the like Judgments have
not befallen us, that have on others; For I tell you (says our Savior) (as
before I told you), Except you Repent, you shall all likewise perish.

But were we as great sinners as they, (might some of these his Hearers say),
how comes it to pass that we speed better then they?

This silent Objection Christ gives an answer unto, in the Parable now read,
resembling God unto a Husbandman; The Scope.
who having a barren and fruitless Fig Tree growing in his Vineyard, from
which after much pains and cost bestowed on it, and some fruitful return with
much patience expected, finding none, he expostulates with his servant about
the sterility and barrenness thereof, giving him a charge to cut it down, or
stub it up, that it may no longer take up that room in his Vineyard, whereon a
more fruitful plant might grow. But the Dresser of the Vineyard (his servant)
being grieved, that so goodly a tree (^o look upon) should be stubbed up at the
root, desires his Master's patience a while longer, promising to bestow some
more pains upon it, than formerly he had done, hoping that then it would
recompense its former deficiency; which if it did not, then down it should, and
no longer be suffered to stand. This is your case (says Christ.) and the case
of the whole Jewish Nation: God has chosen you to be a peculiar people to
himself; He has planted you in a rich and fruitful soil, flowing with milk
and honey: He has sent his servants amongst you, who in no good point of
Husbandry have bin wanting to you; and, with much patience, has long expected
some answerable return of fruitful obedience from you; which not finding, he
long since past sentence against you, and resolved upon your utter extirpation
and ruin: But through the earnest prayers and supplications put up unto him by
his Servants and Prophets on Jerusalems behalf, he has hitherto spared you,
proving if at least, now at last, you will bring forth fruit meet for
Repentance: which if you do, it will be well for you; but if not, no privilege
will exempt you from the stroke of Vengeance. And thus we have acquainted you
both with the Occasion of propounding this Parable, and with our Savior's
Scope and drift in the propounding of it.

I shall in the next place cut out my work, and lay before you the several
parts and members of it.

The Parts are Generally two, The Parts.
the Preface, and the Parable it self.

The Preface we have in these words of the Evangelist; He spoke also this
Parable, intimating a Reference to what went before, in that Particle [Also],
And the Instruction which follows after, He spoke this Parable. Where we may
take notice of the Doctor or Teacher [He spake], And then the Doctrine or
lesson taught [This Parable].

The Parable it self, is first Propounded, A certain man had a Fig Tree, etc.
verse. 6. And then Prosecuted, verse. 7. -- 10.

In the Propounding part, we have the Subject and the Predicate considerable.

The Subject, A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard; And there
the Owner, and his Possession.

The Owner, A certain man, where we shall show you, first, who he was, A man:
2d what he was, A Vinitor or Husbandman;

His Possession, he had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, notifying first
the Nature of his Inheritance in General, [A Vineyard]: For Unity one, A
Vineyard, not Vineyards; and for Property, [His.]

Then the Plant of note in special thereon growing, which is set forth by its
kind and quality: for kind Generally, A Tree; specifically, a Fig Tree. And
for Quality: No wild one but planted, (such was its Original); and that in no
barren soil, but in the Vineyard before mentioned, there was its site or
placing.

The Predicate, [He came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.] And there
we have to take notice, first of the Owners Visitation of that his Vineyard and
Figg tree, he came unto it: secondly of his Expectation from it, [he sought
fruit thereon, but found none]; fruit he sought, none he found.

The Prosecution of this Proposition we have, verse. 7.8, 9. And therein, an
Expostulation with the Dresser of the Vineyard about the sterility of that
Fig Tree, verse. 7. and the Intercession of the Dresser made for it, verse. 8.9.

In the Expostulatory part observe we, first the Person Expostulating, the
Owner of that Fig Tree, Then said he: And Expostulated with, the Dresser of
his Vineyard: Then said he unto the Dresser of the Vineyard.

Secondly, The substance of it, [ Behold these three years I come etc.] Wherein
we have first a sad Complaint, Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on
this Fig Tree and find none. Secondly, A severe sentence, [Cut it down, why
cumbers it the ground?]

In the Complaint, we cannot but take notice of the Manner, and Matter of it.
The manner [Behold] calling for special attention and observation. The matter
declared in these words [These three years I come seeking fruit on this
Fig Tree, and find none] where the Grievance [Barrenness] The Aggravation from
the Time [three years] and from the cost and pains bestowed on it, employed in
these words [ The Figg tree] this which I my self planted, and that in mine own
Vineyard where nothing is wanting that might conduce to fruitfulness.

The severe Sentence follows, Cut it down, why Cumbers it it the Ground? where
the Object doomed, [It] that is, the Figg tree before mentioned; And the Doom
it self, [Cut it down] showing the severity of it, not lopp it, prune it, but
Cut it down at the very Root, wholly extirpate it. And the Equity thereof
expressed by way of Interrogation, [Why cumbers it the ground?]

The Intercession made for this Fig Tree follows, verse. 8. And he answering
said unto him, Lord let it alone this year also, etc.

Where we have observable, first the Persons interceding, [he said],
Interceeded; [Lord]: Secondly, The Request made, Let it alone, etc. And there,

First, The Thing Requested, which is Specified [Let it alone] forbear it a
while longer, and then Exemplyfied and enlarged from the Time [this year also.]
And from the End [till I shall digg about it and dung it] that it may become
fruitful. This was his Aim in General,

Secondly, The Terms or Conditions in special on which this Request is made,
which are twofold; one on his part that was the Dresser of it, [I will dig
about it and dung it,] I will bestow more pains upon it then heretofore I have
done, if thou will be pleased to let it stand one year longer.

The other on the behalf of the Fig Tree, which has two branches, the one
Affirmative, [If it bear fruit, Well]: The other Negative, [If not, then after
that thou shall cut it down.]

The Former has in it a Supposition [If it bears fruit] suppose it do so; Then
a Determination [Well] there is no more to be said (which albeit it be not
expressed in the Original, yet it is employed). In the latter we have an
Addubitation or suspicion [If not] he could not say it would; And a Concession
in Case it did not, [After that thou shall cut it down,] I will give way to the
sentence, and no more speak in the behalf of it.

And thus I have laid before you the several parts and branches of this
excellent Parable, which albeit it concerns a fruitless and barren Fig Tree,
whereon the owner could not find so much as one Figg growing, Cap. 35.
yet (as Solinus speaks of the Egyptian Figg tree) we shall find it richly
laden with wholesome Doctrine, and heavenly instruction; bearing fruit not
only on the main stock and body of it, (which is the principal scope,) but on
every branch and twigg thereof; which being wisely gathered, and with the hand
of Faith plucked and applied, shall (I hope) nourish our souls with much
sweetness.

What Fulgentius speaks of all Scripture generally, may be truly said of
Parables more particularly; they have in them and quod robustus comedat, and
quod parvulus sugat, Meat for great ones, and Milk for weak ones: That which
makes for the nourishment of weak ones, habet in publico (says he); that which
makes for the nourishment of the stronger, habet in secreto. Three things in
every Parable are Principally considerable, Cortex, Radix, Fructus; The first
is the Rind or Bark, the words or terms in which it is delivered, or the thing
from which the Similitude is taken: The second is the Root, The Intention or
purpose of the Parable, The drift or scope of it, beyond which the similitude
may not be extended: The third is the Fruit or profit, which is to be gathered
from it, and that arises from both the former (for the very Letter of the
Parable will afford some good matter for heavenly meditation). But in the
Letter we may not rest: the Rind is modesty to be put aside, the Veil is to be
drawn, and the spiritual Sense is especially to be perused. Take we notice
(then) of the Mystical meaning of what is here propounded to us, in this
Parabolical way; under this Similitude.

A certain man had a Fig Tree, Text. The Mystical sense.
etc.]

By this Man understand we the God of Heaven, who is so termed, not that he is
so, or has any humane shape; but, for the Capacity and comfort of men on
earth, he is pleased to resemble himself to man, and ascribe unto himself
sundry positions, notions, and transitions of men, and so to speak in man's
Language, that he may be the better understood by man: Lex loquitur liuguam
filiocum hominum.
Here he resembles himself unto a Husbandman, to set forth his care over his
Church, which is here resembled unto a Vineyard.

This Vineyard is the Church Catholic here on earth, and so it is often
termed in Scripture, Psalm. 80.7, 9. Isa. 5.7. Math. 21.33, 45. Psalm. 24.1, 2,
and 95, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 9.26, 29. Psalm. 33.12, and 68, 9, and 78, 62, 71, and 79,
1. and 106, 5.
as Psalm. 80.8, 9. Isa. 5.7. Math. 21.33.45. And however the whole earth be the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, as we read, Psalm. 24.1, 2, and 95, 4, 5. Yet
this Vineyard the Church, he terms his Inreritance as if he counted himself
to be owner only of that, Deuteronomy. 9.26, 29. Psalm. 33.12, and 68, 9, and 78, 62,
71, and 79, 1, and 106, 5.

This Fig Tree planted, and fited in his Vineyard, is principally intended of
the Jewish Nation, but more generally to be extended to every Particular Church
and Congregation; yea to every Individium or Particular Person, that profess
themselves members of the Church Catholic, and live within the pale of it
(says Austin.)

The Dresser of this Vineyard mentioned, is to be understood of Christ
principally and primarily; and of the whole Company of Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers of the Gospel secundarily; who are all the Under-Dressers of it, and
though many, yet by an Enallage numeri, are summed up in one, [Dresser,] not
Dressers.

The fruit expected is faith and good works, as is showed, Isa. 5.2. Math.
21.34. This fruit God finds not, but the contrary, Isa. 5.2. Math. 21.34.
Isa. 5.7.

The three years spoken of (in reference to the Jews) may not amiss (I
conceive) be understood of the time of Christ's public Ministry amongst them,
which had now bin three years and upwards: And his coming for fruit; of his
several goings up to Jerusalem at three solemn Passovers, year by year, John
2.13. John 5.1. John 6.4.
for three years together. But in reference to us that live under the Gospel, I
understand that large proportion of time which God allows to us for our
Repentance, and producing of the fruits of Faith and Obedience; Three being put
for many; a definite for an indefinite, a certain for an uncertain number, as
elsewhere we find, 2 Cor. 12.8.
2 Cor. 12.8.

The Cutting down of this Fig Tree, (as it respected the Jewish Synagogue and
state) sets forth the utter subversion and extirpation of it, with the
destruction of the City and Temple by the Romans: But as it concerns us, so it
notes the Lord's rejecting and casting off a people for their barrenness,
according to that we read, Heb. 6.8.
Heb. 6.8.

The year, craved for sparing of it in respect of the Jews, is thought by some
to be that very year when as Christ propounded this Parable unto them, which
was the fourth current of his public Preaching; but better they, who
understand it of the time of the Apostles preaching amongst them after Christ's
death, and before the destruction of Jerusalem: One year put for forty (says
Cajetan). And in Relation unto us we understand it, of the time of Gods patient
forbearing of us; obtained by the Prayers of Gods faithful Servants,
notwithstanding our manifold provocations.

The Digging and dunging about the Jewish Fig Tree, sets forth unto us, the
pains and labors that Christ's Apostles and faithful Servants bestowed on that
people, to bring them to Repentance; immediately after the Death of Christ: and
so likewise it denotes the pains and labors that the Ministers of the Gospel
now take, about the Christian Fig Tree, for the fructification of it. All this
with other particulars we shall (God willing) declare more fully in the
Prosecution and Explication of each part in order. And first of the Preface.

He spoke also this Parable]. Text.


Which words are the words of the Evangelist, and not the immediate words of
Christ, Obs.
and yet no less to be esteemed the word of God, then that which Christ spoke
with his own mouth.

Of all holy Writ it is Generally said, 2 Pet. 1.21. Luke 1.70. Heb. 1.1. Exodus
4.12. Jer. 1.9. Acts 1.16.
Holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. In the old
time God spoke by his Prophets, Luke 1.70. Heb. 1.1. I will be with thy mouth
(said God to Moses) Exodus 4.12. I have put words into thy mouth said God to
Jeremiah, Jer. 1.9. The Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David, said Peter,
Act. 1.16. And this is true also of those who wrote the New Testament; for all
Scripture is given by inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
says Paul, 2 Timothy 3.16. Gods spirit did suggest and dictate, both for matter
and manner whatsoever they wrote or delivered for Doctrine. It is not you that
speak, but the spirt of my Father which speaks in you, says Christ, Math.
10.28.
Math. 10.28.

I do not say, that all things which these holy men wrote, were written by
divine inspiration, for some things which they wrote, were written humanely,
(as their humane affairs, common to them with other men, Robins. Essay of the
Holy Scripture: Obs. 8.
required), nor was all which they spoke suggested by the spirit immediately,
neither was all wherein they were divinely inspired both in preaching and
writing, brought into the public treasury of the Church, and made a part of
Canonical Scripture; but only so much as the Lord in wisdom saw requisite to
leave to his Church, as the Rule of Faith and Obedience; so as that the
Scripture should neither be defective, through brevity, nor yet burdensome by
too great largeness and prolixity. But this I say, that whatsoever we find
written in the Holy Scripture, (albeit upon some special occasion penned by the
Penmen thereof, as this Preface was) is no less to be esteemed than the word
of the eternal God, than that which Christ himself spoke immediately, with his
own mouth, when he was on Earth.

It is a point that might afford us manifold Use, Cornelius did, who came not
so much to hear Peter, what he should say, as what God himself should speak,
Act. 10.33.
Act. 10.33. The same did the Thessalonians (for which St. Paul blesses God).
When they heard the word they received it not, as the word of men, but as it is
in truth the word of God; 1 These. 2.13. 1 Cor. 14.25.
1 These. 2.13. Then it is most likely to work effectually to our Conversion,
and the Salvation of the soul, 1 Cor. 14.25. We that are Ministers must speak
as the words of God, always putting a difference betwixt it, and the words of
man, yielding the eunto greatest Reverence as our Savior did, Luke 4.16, 20.
Luke 4.16, 20. and absolute credence and obedience: But I shall carry this
point no farther.

In this Introduction or Preface we have to take notice, first, of the
Dependence or Reference in that Particle (...), Also (before we come to the
kind or nature of the following Instruction). [Also] is a Copulative, and knits
the Parable ensuing to the former discourse: Our Savior had before called upon
his Hearers, for a serious and seasonable Repentance, urged and pressed that
Doctrine from the sudden Judgments that had befallen others, and would befall
them in case they speedily repented not; Repeated and reiterated what he had
asserted, that they might lay to heart, and rest assured of the truth of what
he had delivered, and after all this (when one would think that he had said
enough to the point) he adds this Parable [also] to what had bin said: thence
we conclude that,

Weighty matters would be pressed on the Conscience, and insisted on. Once
speaking is not enough, there must be an often reiterating, repeating, and
inculcating of the same thing, if it be of weight and moment.

Solomon, styled by way of eminency, the Preacher, speaking of the vanity of
the World, and worldly things, and seeking to expel and supplant out of men's
heart the love of them, how often does he inculcate the vanity of it? Eccls.
1.2. Cap. 2.1, 11, 17, 26. Cap. 4.7, 8, 16. Cap. 5.7, 10. Cap. 6.2, 4, 9. Cap.
7.6. Cap. 8.10. Cap. 11.8, 10.
Vanity of Vanities says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity;
which one verse. (says Chrysostom) they who are great in the world, (if they
were wise) would write on all their walls and garments, in foro, in ^omo, in
januis, in ingressibus, and ante omnia in conscientiis suis, in their common
meeting places, in their private houses, on their doors, in their entries, and
above all in their Consciences; that so they might have it always before their
eyes, and always have it in their minds.

And our blessed Savior (a wiser the (...) Solomon) discoursing of the
Kingdom of Heaven (a matter of much moment) that he might leave the stronger
impression of it in our minds, propounds many Parables one after another, as
we read, Math. 13. He begins with the Parable of the Sower, Math. 13.3. Verse.
24. Verse. 31. Verse. 33. Verse. 44. Verse. 45. Verse. 47.
verse. 3. and having ended that, Another Parable put he forth (^aith the
Evangelist,) and then Another, and after that Another, and then Again, and
Again, and Again, pegging in (as it were) one with another, inculcating the
same doctrine over and over, that we may attain to the understanding of those
things, which concern the Mysteries of that Kingdom, which do so nearly
concern us.

And this is not more then needs; Phil. 3.1.
for us it is safe, Phil. 3.1. and that, first, in respect of our Ignorance and
dullness in spiritual matters, (especially in such points as most especially
concern us) the eye of the mind is opened by degrees, now a little and then a
little, Isa. 28.10.
Isa. 28.10. Precept must be upon precept, and line upon line, and it is not
ordinary to understand aright what is delivered upon the first delivery: which
might be one reason why the Gentiles desired Paul to Preach over the same
Sermon unto them, Acts 13.42, 45.
Acts 13.42. which he did accordingly, verse. 45. Beer newly broached, tastes
better at the second or third draught (we know) then at the first: and so it is
many times in Sermons.

Secondly, In respect of the weakness, and slipperinesse of our Memories,
which like Sives or Boulters let slip the finest flour, and retain little
besides the bran: in regard whereof the frequent inculcation of the same
doctrine is necessary. When the Disciples were put in mind by the two Angels,
of the words of Christ, Luke 24.6, 8. Mark 14.72.
then they remembered them, Luke 24.6, 8. and upon the second Crowing of the
Cook, Peter called to mind the words that Jesus had said unto him, Mark. 14.72.

Thirdly, In regard of our backwardness to believe and Practice, that which is
required of us. Upon the first voice that came to Peter, Acts 10.13, 14.
willing him to Rise kill and eat, Acts 10.13. He replies, Not so Lord, verse.
14. but when that Voice is heard a second and third time, verse. 16. That wood
which with a single wedge will not rive, is split with a double or treble one.
Nunquam satis dicitur; quod nunquam satis discitur: Seneca.
Till we practice enough, it is never said enough, said Seneca.

This tends to the Justification of the practice of such Ministers as repeat to
their Auditory, what they before have heard and learned, and sometimes insist
somewhat long and largely upon an useful point. Seeing they do but imitate
their Lord and Master herein, they need not be ashamed of so doing. What we
have said before, we may warrantably say again, and repeat and beat upon the
same Doctrine, till we perceive that our Hearers do rightly understand it, and
are affected with it: Holy Doctrines are not like tricks done by slight of
hand, to be showed but once, for fear that what is admired at first, upon a
second showing will become ridiculous; but, the oftener they are taught, the
better (usually) they will be understood and liked.

Yet this tends not to excuse any man's Ignorance, Praeoccu.
who is not able to Preach seasonably, and to break and distribute the bread of
life according to the emergent necessities of the Congregation at that time:
nor is it intended to excuse any man's idleness and laziness, that will not
employ his time, his whole time upon his study, but is enforced through a
willful and contracted necessity, to Preach the same thing again and again,
that he Preached before; He is not a Preacher sufficiently qualified that does
so: Dr. Done.
but this I say withal (says a Learned Doctor) that he is not a Preacher
sufficiently discreet, that forbears the pressing of any necessary point,
because himself or some other before him has handled that before. Did not the
Priests walk with the same Ark upon their shoulders every day, Jos. 6.3.
once for six days together, about the walls of Jericho, and on the seventh
day they compassed those walls seven times before they fell? 2 King. 13.18.
Was not the King of Israel commanded to smite the ground again and again, and
blamed for striking it no oftener, albeit he had struck it thrice? It is not
once plowing, but the often breaking of the earth that makes it fruitful; so
not once speaking but often urging, and frequent inculcating of divine truths
that proves successeful: Reverend and learned Melancthon found this to be true,
which caused him to go over the Epistle to the Romans, tend several times in
his ordinary Lectures.

And yet in seeking the profit of our Hearers, care must be had, caution.
that we clogg not their Stomachs, and mar their Appetites, (which may soon be
done if the greater care be not had). There is Defatigatio in Intellectualibus,
the sold may be wearied and tired as well as the body: Have thou found honey,
eat so much as is sufficient for thee, (says Solomon) lest thou be filled
therewith, and vomit it. Prove. 25.16. R. Moses.
Upon which words an Hebrew Rabbin has this Note, It is not said, that if thou
be cloyed with it, thou may distate it afterward, or be disaffected
toward it; but thou may vomit it, and a vomit works so, that it does not
only bring up what was then eaten, but what was formerly taken, and in the
Stomach, and we may apply it to the point in hand: Give we must of that honey
which we have found, to sufficiency, but not to the surfeit of our Auditory,
lest it cause them not only to vomit up, what is then of that point delivered,
but take a distaste, yea a loathing of all the rest that they have heard from
us.

And this may happen either by a frequent and disorderly repeating of the same
thing, (which usually is occasioned throught want of method, or want of matter)
or by an overlong insisting upon some truth, which being known, makes little or
nothing to the Edification of the Hearer.

Some things must needs be recalled, by the Minister in Preaching, to guide the
attention of his Auditory, into the ensuing discourse; but the attention of an
Auditory, may not be discouraged with needless Tautology or Battology, nor
tedious repetition of the same thing that has bin often said before. It is not
commendable when a Minister, with the Clock shall tell all that was told many
hours before, and content himself for that time, but with one stroke more;
rather, as Joseph's brethren upon their return to their brother, Genesis 43.15.
Jer. 36. ult.
brought double money in their Sacks mouths; and as Jeremiah added in the
second role many words like unto the former. So should a Minister in his
Repetitions, add to what was before delivered: Something (it may be) needs
clearer explanation, and something better confirmation; And something, it may
be, upon the first delivery slipped the memory: Now as in payment of money, if
what was overseen in the first telling, be made up in the second; such a
drawing over will not be very grievous either to the Creditor, or Receiver.

And it is likewise necessary, that some truths should be oftener inculcated,
and longer insisted on then others, (according to the Doctrine that you have
heard) but it would be, Dr. Stoughton, his Right man's Plea. Ser. 5.
of such truths as are most useful and necessary; There be some things (says a
very Learned and Excellent Divine,) that are more necessary then others, and we
are not weary of using them often, yea always: And somethings again though
necessary and useful, yet if we use them always, we shall quickly grow weary
of them, if we feed constantly on them (as on Bief, Mutton, and the like);
which albeit they are the best, and we can hold longer with them, yet if we use
them always and without change, the stomach will be cloyed therewith: But
bread we are not weary of, allbeit we use it always; nor are we weary of
Drink, though we drink it constantly at our meals; whatever other dainties and
delicates we have, yet these are common concommitants of all our eating and
feastings: so it is wi^h holy and divine truths; There are some which it may be
more convenient to conceal, then to make mention of, in a public Auditory (as
might be showed in some specialties appertaining to the seventh Commandment).
And there are others which albeit sound and good, yet they are too intricate
and high for an Auditory of a mean capacity; which a Minister (albeit his Text
gives him an occasion to deal withal) may with good discretion, forbear
largely to insist upon, John 16.12. John 16.12.
But there are other divine truths which are necessary to be known of all,
being of daily rise, either for the stablishment of Faith, or practice of Life;
the state and welfare of the souls of our people, does very much depend on the
frequent iteration and inculcation of them; nor will the Stomach of the Hearer
be so soon cloyed with these, as with other.

God has spoken once, yea twice have I heard it, Psalm. 62.11. Object. Resp.
Psalm. 118.6.
(says David) Psalm. 62.11. that Power belongs unto God, what God speaks
once, we may well hear twice; again and again, for it is worth the Hearing. But
this is an ordinary Argument (may some proud spirit say) we have heard it an
hundred times, till we are weary in hearing, that God is Almighty, what great
matter is in that? Isa. 25.3. Jer. 10.7. Math. 10.28. Romans 4.20.
And have you heard it so often? then me thinks you should get it (by heart
shall I say? nay) in your heart, so as to make the right use of it, so as to
fear him, believe in him, humble your souls before him, walk with him in
uprightness; If thou make not this Use of it, it is requisite that thou
should hear it a hundred times more, and a hundred to that, 1 Pet. 5.6. Genesis
17.1.
till it appear that thou have profited by what thou have heard.

Chrysostom preached many Sermons to his people of Antioch against swearing;
his Auditory began to be weary of that subject and asked him, When he would
leave Preaching against that sin and choose some other Subject to discourse of?
He told them, that when they had left Swearing, he would leave Preaching
against it, and not before. And I have read of an Epigrammatist, who reading
his Poems and Epigrams in a certain Auditory, one of his Hearers interrupted
him, saying, This is an old one, I heard it from you the last year. It is like
you did (said he); but is not that vice in you yet, which the last years Poem
reprehended? If your curiosity bring you to say to any Preacher, I have heard
this Doctrine handled by you before; this Text, or this Sermon on that Text
preached by you a year or two ago. You did so, may he say, and you may hear it
again the next year, and the next to that; till it appear by your amendment
that you did hear it, you may hear it often. So long as the Devil fights with
the same sword, give us leave to defend with the same Buckler; whilst he does
not vary the sin, nor the temptation, but tempts the Son to the same
wickedness that he did the Father, the Daughter to the same uncleanness that
he did the Mother; what need we vary the Doctrine?

Away then with that niceness, with that itch of the ear which the Apostle
complains of, 2 Timothy 4.3.
to whom any reiteration, any Repetition of the same thing (be it never so
useful) is yrksome and fastidious: Peter was greived because our Savior said
the third time Love thou me. John 21.17.
We ought not to be so; we may not be offended at the often inculcating and
frequent pressing of the same truth, seeing for us it is a sure thing. Make the
right use of it, Phil. 3.1.
say not, If I had thought to have heard the same again; I would not have come
to Church to day, I knew this before, have heard this often: But commune with
thine own soul rather, after this manner; I thought indeed that I had bin
sufficiently iustructed in this point, but I find it otherwise, God sees that I
have not enough learned it, and that I must make some better use of it, he will
not have me to take out, turn over another leaf, nor take out a new lesson,
till I have learned the old one better. I will hear it as if I never heard it,
read it as if I never had read it before: It is Gods desire to fasten that
nayl, which he knocks in with so many hammers.

As we have taken out this lesson from Christ's method or Manner of Preaching,
in pressing and inculcating his Doctrine on his Hearers; so from the Matter
pressed, something might be observed.

When things are much urged and ingeminated, in Scripture, usually three things
are imported (as concerning the matter that is pressed on us): One is the
Difficulty, another the Necessity, the third is the Excellency thereof.
Repentance is the subject matter that Christ presses (as you have heard) upon
his Hearers, and all these three do meet in that duty.

Repentance is a d^fficult work, God must work it; 2 Timothy 2.25.
It is not in man's power, 2 Timothy 2.25. And he peradventure will give it, no man
is certain of it. It is a Supernatural Grace, not only above nature
corrupted, but nature created; for man in Innocence had no need of it.

It is a Necessary work: our Savior before showed the necessity of it, Except
you Repent, you shall all perish, verse. 3.5. So, Luke 13.3, 5. Math. 3.10.
Math. 3.10. Turn or burn, there is no remedy.

And it is a most Excellent grace; A fair Daughter of a foul Mother, yet the
Father that begat the Daughter could never abide the Morther, nor ever came
near her bed. And this fair Daughter was the death of her Mother; she killed
her that bred her, and was blessed for so doing: She was no sooner born but she
spoke, and did declare her own desires, and ever after does work miracles; She
makes the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, and casts out
Devils: She looks backward, and moves forward; is her self a dark Cloud, yet
brings a fair Sun shine: Is this a Riddle to you? I will read it: Sin is the
Mother, Repentance is the Daughter, the Mother is black and ugly, the Daughter
fair and lovely: God is the Father of Repentance, and He could never endure the
Mother sin, but hates her society; being born she slew her Mother, for by
Repentance sin is slain, and in so doing God does bless her; she no sooner
receives breath, but she cries for pardon and forgiveness. Miracles she works:
the blind eyes are by her made to see the filthynesse of sin; the deaf ear she
causes to hear the word of truth, the dumb lips to cry out for grace, and the
heart that was dead, becomes now alive to God, and the Devil that ruled in it
is now expelled; She looks backward to sins past, and is humbled for them, yet
she moves forward to holiness and perfection. In short, Repentance is her self
cloudy, and made up of sadness, yet everlasting joy and happiness does attend
it.

But this is too large a subject for me to discourse upon, from so little
warning as my Text gives, and yet were it not that I have pitched my thoughts
upon another Text, which requires a larger handling of this Doctrine; I would
spend these few minutes that remain, in enlarging of the former particulars;
wishing that the voice of this Turtle were more heard in our Land, that Gods
faithful Ministers would not forbear Preaching it; nor the people ever leave
practicing it, till God be prevailed withal, to turn away his wrath from us,
which yet hovers over our heads, as some birds do over their prey. Nothing but
Repentance will clear our Coasts: Repent England, Repent, Repent, said Mr.
Bradford at his death and Martyrdom.

From the word of Connection [Also] we pass to the Instruction, [He spoke this
Parable]. And there we have the Doctor and the Doctrine, The Teacher and the
Lesson taught, to take notice of.

The Doctor teaching, [He spake] He, before spoken of, Jesus Christ the Savior
of the world, the promised Messiah, of whom the woman of Samaria spoke; John
4.25.
I know that the Messiah will come, and when he shall come he shall declare all
things, John 4.25.

That Christ is the chief Doctor and Teacher of the Church, we have heard
proved from some other Parables; True Convert. Doct. Math. 4.23, and 9, 35, and
26, 55. Luke 4.15, 16, 17, 22.
I shall not at this time enlarge upon that subject. That which I commend at
present to your Observation, is,

Christ was no silent Minister, no dumb Priest: He was not tongue tied, but a
Preaching Minister, as appears, Math. 4.23, and 9, 35, 26, 55. Luke 4.15, 16,
17. etc. Insomuch that all bare him witness of this, verse. 22.

He was the Word, John 1.1, 14.
John 1.1, 14. and that excludes silence and dumbness; In a man there are
three kinds of speech. 1. Sermo innatus, that inward speech which the thought
of man reflecting on it self produces within, Psalm. 14.1.

2. Sermo illatus, a speech of inference; that speech which is occasioned in
him by outward things, from which he draws conclusions and determines.

3. Sermo prolatus, that speech whereby he manifests himself to other men.
Christ is all three, He is Verbum Innatum, so he is the Natural or Essential
word, which God produced out of himself, and so he is God: He is Verbum Illatum
or conceptum, the word occasioned by the Fall of Adam; which is Gods decree of
sending that his Son to be the Redeemer of Mankind. He is Verbum Prolatum,
which is the execution of that decree, or the manifestation and application of
Christ; whereby this word God-man becomes ours. That Christ, our Jesus, he that
was anointed, our King, Priest and Prophet, becomes our actual Savior. In
neither of these senses, can he be said to be a dumb or silent word: but we
have now to do with the last, He was the word manifesting and applying himself
unto us, for our eternal salvation.

But how came it then to pass, that he stood so often dumb, Math. 26.62.
and said nothing, being questioned for his life, as before Caiphas, (when
false witnesses gave evidences against him) the like before Herod, and before
Pilate; Luk 23.9. Math. 27.14.
before these he spoke not a word.

And good Reason there was for his silence before these. Being falsely accused
before Caiphas he was silent, Pet. 2.21. Thirdly, for that he knew he should be
condemned, albeit he should have cleared his Innocence; for his enemies were
resolved to have his blood, and that hour he knew was now come.

He held his peace before Herod (say some) because he had before taken away his
voice, in cutting off John the Baptists head (who was his voice as we read,
Mark 1.2, 3.) and how can one speak that has lost his voice? Mark. 1.2, 3.
But other reasons may be rendered for that; First, it might be to abate the
pride and vanity of Herod, who imagined that Christ would have shown some
miracle before him, Luke 23.7. but our Savior to show how little he esteemed
of his worldly greatness, Luke 23.7. Isa. 53.7.
would not so much as answer him a word: Secondly, he knew he should do no good
with him, he being a man given up to all Voluptuousness and vitiousness of
Life; Thirdly, for that he knew he was to receive sentence not from Herod a
Jew, but from Pilate a Roman, and that he was to dye by crucifying, after the
Roman manner.

And being before Pilate he held his peace; First, for that in his conscience
he was convicted of his Innocence, and therefore there needed no Apology before
him. Secondly, he showed thereby his magnanimity, in contemning death, had he
answered any thing, it might have bin thought that he had bin desirous to save
his Life, which he thirsted to lay down for man's Redemption: Thirdly, that be
might acknowledge our sin-guiltinesse, he standing in our stead, and being now
ready to discharge our debt: These may be some reasons of our Saviors silence
at those times; Then he stood dumb as a sheep before the Shepherd, that the
Scripture might be fullfilled, which had so foretold, Isa. 53.7. Acts 8.32. But
when, or where do we read that he stood dumb as a Shepherd before his sheep?
Isa. 53.7. Acts 8.32,
and that is the point we have now in hand.

Let us make a twofold Use of this; First, seeing Christ was not dumb in
speaking to us for our good, Phil. 2.11. declare his Truth, Psalm. 40.9, 10, and
119.46, 172. set forth his praise, Phil. 2.11. Psalm. 40.9, 10, and 119, 46,
172. Romans 10, 10. Psalm. 22.22. Psalm. 108.1.
Psalm. 34.1, 35, 28, and 63, 5. Vivat and regnet Christus, said Luther, in
spite of all adversaries. The tongue is the best member that we have for this
service, so our old English Plalmes do read, Psalm. 108.1. I will sing and give
praise, with the best member I have, even with my glory, as our new Translation
has it, And why my glory? Not only because it was one of the Excellences and
Prerogatives of Man, above other Creatures, that he is enabled to use his
tongue to the expressing of his mind, but for that it is the Instrument
ordained to the setting forth of Gods glory, in the advancement whereof the
glory of man (as Gods principal Creature) does consist: Thence it was, that the
Devil (as it were in spite) took away from diverse the use of the tongue in the
days of our Savior, and possessed them with dumbness, Luke 11.14.
that they might not with the tongue give God that service, which was due unto
him from it. And yet to this day he continues his malice, for this dumb Devil
is rife every where, B. B. Hall. Cont. in N. J.
(says a Worthy of our times), He is on the Bench when the mute or partial
Judge, speaks not for Truth and Innocence; He is in the Pulpit when the
Prophets of God smother, or halve, or adulterate, their Master's message, etc.
And whilst he stopps the mouths of Christians from these useful and necessary
duties required to be by the tongue performed to God or Man, the dumb Devil
rages and reigns.

This dumbness is of dangerous consequence, That standing still of the Sun,
and Moon, which we read of, Joshua 10.10.
Joshua 10.12. gave an occasion of shedding so much blood of the Ammonites. Now
in the Original it is not, siste sol, Sun stand still, but sile sol, Sun be
silent, (as the Margent of your Bibles will inform you) he bids them say
nothing, make no noise, no motion, stir not; suppose the Sun to be the
Magistrate, and the Moon to be the Minister, (let it be so in your conceptions
at present) if these be silent and dumb; if they command not* pray not,
maintain not God cause, Christ's cause, and the Churches cause, the Case is
dangerous, and yet it is to be feared, much blood has bin spilt through such
silence.

It is dangerous in all, but in those who are in a more especial manner deputed
to set forth Gods name, declare his truth, and give warning to the people, it
is deadly; Ezekiel. 3.18. Isa. 62.6. Tenuisse silentia clerum. Isa. 56.10, 11.
Ezekiel. 3.18. You that are the Lords Rememberancers be not silent, says the
Prophet, Isa. 62.6. Silence is the basest tenure says one, that a Minister can
hold his living by; Those Priests of old, that did not bark, were branded for
dumb dogs, Isa. 56.10. yea they were greedy dogs, says he, who can never
have enough, verse. 11. no marvail then that they were dumb. A bone (you know)
in a dogs mouth does mar his barking, that man, is such a Lecture's good
Benefactor, yet he is an Usurer, a Drunkard, or an Unclean liver: But those
sins must not be spoken of, least so much be lost Quarterly, etc. here is the
mouth of the dog stopped with a crust: Others have attained to some high place
and preferment, and no sooner are they come to the high place, but they make an
end of Prophesying, 1 Samuel 10.13.
as did Saul, 1 Samuel 10.13. these likewise are choked with bones, and are
gagged with preferment. A dog, and a Jews trump, (we say) are good for nothing
if they have lost their tongues; if it please you, you may add the third, and
take a Minister into the number.

And yet there is a time to speak and a time to keep silence, says Solomon,
Eccles. 3.7. Psalm. 38.13, and 39, 2. Amos 5.13.
Eccles. 3.7. David observed it, Psalm. 38.13, and 39, 2. and every prudent man
shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, says Amos 5.13. when
there is danger of doing more hurt, then good by speaking; when Gods glory is
not therein interested, the peace of the Church, and truth of the Gospel
endangered by our silence, and our own liberty by speaking hindered; then may we
stand as Mutes, albeit we live in the midst of raging Consonants: And so St.
Paul at Ephesus, forbore exclaiming and crying out against Diana, and their
gross Idolatry, as may be gathered from the speech of the Town-Clark, Acts.
19.37. And why there, Acts 19.37. Acts 17.16.
more then at Athens? his spirit was stirred in him there at Athens, when he
beheld that Idolatry that was amongst them, Acts 17.16. Surely because he saw
that such an invective, would have done no good but much hurt, for it would
presently have abridged him of his liberty, and have raised up bitter
Persecution against him: And upon the same ground did our Savior charge them,
upon whom he had wrought his miracles not to speak of it to any man, Mark 1.44,
45. Christian prudence enjoynes silence in evil times. Mark 1.44, 45.


Indeed, this is rather true in private persons then in those whom God bath
sent to deliver his message unto his people; God lays his burden on his
Prophets, to burden all sorts of men, with all sorts of sin, and to tell the
greatest Potentates on Earth, that Potentes Potenter, the Mighty shall be
mightily tormented, and where we are commanded to speak, we may not hold our
peace, Ezekiel. 2.6, and 3, 18.
(albeit briars and thorns are with us, Ezekiel. 2.6, and 3, 18.) It is safe to
hold our faith, hold the truth, hold our profession, and to hold fast the form
of sound words; but hold our tongues we may, in no case. 1 Cor. 9.16.
But yet affirmative precepts not binding ad semper to all times, only pro hic
and nunc (as the School term is) wisdom should be showed by Ministers as well
as others, (and much rather) in reproving and inveying against some corruptions
that are either in Church or State. And albeit his Text gives him occasion to
do it, yet if the iniquity of the times be such, that they will not endure it,
and that more hurt (in all likelihood) then good will follow thereupon, he may
(without fear of being a Time-server) be silent and forbear; And this is the
first Use we should put this point unto. The second is,



Frist, Math. 17.5.
God the Father commands us to hear him Math. 17.5. Filius pronunciat quae Deus
pater dictat, As my Father has taught me, I speak these things says Christ.
Joh. 8.26. Shall we hear the Serpent hissing; the Schismatique seducing, John
8.26
etc. and not Him speaking? shall not he that made the Ear command the Door?
he that gave the Hearing be heard before any other, calling on us for Attention?

Secondly, He only is worthy to be heard, and that both in respect of his
Person, Office, and message that he brings. For his Person he is both God and
man, 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Timothy 3.16. Phil. 2.6. John 1.1. Romans 9.5. Act. 11.22.
God manifested in the flesh, so, Phil. 2.6. God he is, as is evident, John
1.1. Romans 9.5. and God speaking is worthy to be heard, Psalm. 50.1. It is the
voice of God and not of man, said Herod's flattering Subjects, Acts 11.22. But
we may truly say when he speaks, Non vox hominem sonat, O deus ille! It is the
great God that speaks to us, o let us hear him.

And as he is God, so true Man, Phil. 2.7. Romans 1.3. John 1.14. the greastest,
wisest and eloquentest of all the sons of men, Phil. 2.7. Romans 1.3. John 1.14.
and these three sorts of men usually command the ears of their Auditory.

When great men speak, all listen with great attention, every man holds his
tongue, Eccles. 13.24. Acts 12.22.
and look what he says, they praise unto the Skies (says the Son of Syrach).
So we read the people applauded Herod, Acts 12.22. But who greater than Christ?
who can compare with him in greatness, before whom all Kings cast down their
Crowns, Rev. 4.10.
Revel. 4.10?

He is the wisest of all the sons of men. The Queen of the South came from a
far Country, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and esteemed those happy who stood
before him to hear his sayings, but behold a wiser then Solomon is here, Math.
22.42.
He is the wisdom of the Father, all treasures of wisdom and knowledge dwell
in him, Colos. 2.3. 2 Samuel 16.23.
Colos. 2.3. Solomon was but a Child to him, Achitophel (whose words were
esteemed as Oracles) was to him a fool, he makes foolish the wisdom of the
world, and takes the wise in their own craft. 1 Cor. 1.20.


Nor is any able to come near him for Eloquence, St. Paul was excellent that
way, ( Tertullus came short of him) he was a Master of speech. Acts 14.12.
Cicero.
The Eloquence of Demosthenes was more feated by Philip then all the warlike
Engines of the Athenians. And it is said of Cyneas that he conquered more
Cities by his eloquence then his Master Pyrrhus did by puissance: but never man
spoke like Christ, John 7.46. Cant. 5.13.
John 7.46. His lips like Lyllies dropped sweet Myrrh, as we have it in the
Canticles, the most oily words are unpleasant, the smoothest elocution harsh,
compared with his Language: Thus in respect of his Person, he best deserves our
best attention.

Next consider him in reference to his Office, so he deserves to be heard of
us, speaking to us: for as He is both God and Man, so in both these Natures He
was designed and anointed by the Father, to be King, Priest, and Prophet of
the Church.

He was a King, and that of Gods own making and appointing, Psalm. 2.6. such a
King as has the Law of all truth and goodness in his own breast, Psalm. 2.6.
the only Lawmakers, whose Laws are of such power as that they bind
conscinece, which no humane Law of it self can do.

He had the Office of a Priest as well as of a King, Psalm. 110.4. He was the
High Priest of our Profession, Psalm. 110.4.
and it was one of the principal works of the Priest under the Law, (as the
Type) to teach men knowledge; from his mouth they were to seek it, Mal. 2.7.
Mal. 2.7. But this is the Dignity of Christ alone under the Gospel, (as the
truth to that Type). He is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, which he has
sent, Luke 4.18.
Luke 4.18.

And he was the Prophet of the Church whom God raised up unto us, of our
Brethren, Acts 3.22. Acts 3.22.
like unto Moses in that he was Man, (but unlike to Moses in being God-man).
Glorious Mysteries, and hidden truths were by him revealed unto us from the
Father. And thus, in respect of Office, he above all is worthy to be heard.

Lastly, He is worthy to be heard in regard of the Message that he brings unto
us, which is the only worthy Message to be received with all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
1 Timothy 1.15. His errand was to save us, and that not from a temporal, but from
eternal death, and damnation, Luke 4.18.
Luke 4.18.

Yet more Particularly, if we take notice both of the matter, and manner of His
Preaching, we cannot but confess he is worthy the hearing. For the Matter,

He speaks Sublimia, high and heavenly Mysteries, Psalm. 49.1, -- 5. Math. 13.11.
appertaining to the Kingdom of Heaven, Psalm. 49.1, -- 5. Math. 13.12. Now,
strange and unheard of things usually we lend an ear unto.

He speaks Suaviae, that which is sweet and comfortable to us all; he speaks
words in season to those that are weary, Isa. 50.4.
Isa. 50.4. and milk's out to his people consolations, and abundance of glory,
Isa. 66.11, 14. Math 11.28.
Isa. 66.11, 14. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, says
Christ, Math. 11.28. and I will ease you; Oh comfortable and sweet! Sweeter to
the taste than the honey or honey comb.

He speaks Vtilia, of what is profitable for us, (as well as pleasant unto us):
He tells us of a treasure hid in a field; Math. 13.44.
which field and treasure being found and purchased, will make us eternally
happy. And of an Orient pearl, Math. 25.
yea,

He speaks Vera, nothing but the Truth; all that He speaks is true, Prove. 8.7,
8. Prove. 8.7, 8. John 14.6.
The two Testaments are the two lips of Christ; and the opening of those lips
are right things. Wickedness is an abomination unto them. Not a word in them
but is the word of Truth, I am the Truth, says Christ.

Now for the manner of Preaching, and delivering of his Message, it may very
well command Attention, for,

He speaks Familiariter, familiarly unto us, as a Mother does teach and
instruct her Child at home, Cant. 8.2. and as one Friend speaks unto another,
Cant. 8.2. John 15.15.
John 15.15.

He speaks Amanter: Lovingly and compassionately with singular tenderness,
fitting himself to every nature and ability, Isa. 40.11. Isa. 40.11.
He feeds his flock like a Shepherd, He gathers his lambs with his arm, and
carries them in his bosom, and guides them with young, etc. And as the Eagle
bears her young ones upon her wings, and teaches them to fly; So he traineth
us up, bearing with our infirmities, Deuteronomy. 32.11.
Deuteronomy. 32.11.

He speaks unto us Gloriose: Gloriously, with a mavelous shining light of
knowledge, that may ravish our hearts and much affect us, 2 Cor. 3.18. 2 Cor.
4.6. John 5.25. 1 John 2.27.
2 Cor. 3.18. and 2 Cor. 4.6.

He speaks to us Efficaciter, Effectually, so as if our hearts were dead within
us, yet he will revive them, John 5.25. To this end he has given us the
anointing, even his spirit in our hearts to teach us all things, 1 John 2.27.
You see then what great reason we have to hear him speaking in all these
respects.

See then that you hear him speaking, and despise him not, for if they escaped
not, who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we
turn away from him that speaks from Heaven (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.25.
Heb. 10.28. Numb. 15.32. Numb. 16.49.
Heb. 12.25.) they that despised Moses Ministry escaped not, Heb. 10.28. The
man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day contrary to Moses Law, was stoned
to death; Corah, Dathan and Abiram that murmured against him, were swallowed up
by the Earth; and they that took their parts, were destroyed: and can you think
to escape, if you despise the Ministry of the Son of God, and turn a deaf ear
to Him, when he speaks to us: (...), look to it therefore says the Apostle,
for it is as much as your souls are worth.

This is a heinous crime indeed,

It is well if you be not, despisers of Christ, who yet have a good opinion of
themselves. It may be that thou art no open despiser of him, none of those that
send after him, Luke 19.14. Luke 16.14.
to tell him plainly that they will none of him to Reign over them, nor of the
number of those who hear, but deride his sayings, (as did the covetous
Pharisees): but art thou not one of those, that when he speaks and calls for
attention, putt'st him off with frivolous pretenses and excuses, (as did those
Recusant Guests, who were invited to the wedding Feast;) I have bought a yoke
of Oxen, says one, hired a Farm, Luke 14.18.
says another, am new married, says the third, and must be excused; So I have
this business in hand, such a way to go, I cannot to Church to day to hear
Christ? Or if thou do hear, do thou not hear dully and drowsily,
negligently and carelessly; entertaining his Doctrine like a tale that is told
of no concernment? If so, then a beit you be not found in the former rank of
Despisers, amongst open and profane ones, yet you will be found in the other
amongst secret and close despisers of him; and it will be required at thy hands.

But Christ is now in Heaven, he speaks not to us,

He that hears you hears me, Resp. Luke 10.16.
and he that despises you despises me, (says Christ to his Disciples) (and
in them to all the Faithful Ministe^s of the Gospel); when any of them speak to
us, they speak in his name, and he to us by them: thus he is said to preach
peace to them who were a far off* and to them who were near; Ephesians. 2.17.
both to Jew and Gentile in that he did it, by his Ministers, whom he put in
Commission to do it. What he did in his own Person before his Ascension, he did
after, 2 Cor. 5.20. John 13.20. Math. 28.20. Math. 25.40. Math. 13.14. Acts
28.26. Romans 11.8.
and still does by them, 2 Cor. 5.30. John 13.20. Math. 28.20. So that to all
such Objectors, Christ may answer as he did to those, Math. 25.40. In as much
as you have refused to hear these, you have refused to hear me; And such a
refusal of him shall be (questionless) punished with his refusal of us at the
last day, (without Repentance here) and in this Life usually some other
Judgment does attend it, (as dumbness and blindness,) one mischeivous
impediment of salvation or other, as we read, Math. 13.14. Acts 28.26. Romans
11.8. And so much be spoken of the Person speaking, Now to the Kind of Doctrine.

This Parable.

A Parable, say some, is nothing else but a similitude derived from the truth
of a thing, whereby one thing is understood by another. Or (as others) a truth
wrapped up in some obscure and dark words; Suidas describes it to be, a setting
forth of a matter by way of a similitude from something else, that differs in
kind, and yet in some sort resembles and illustrates it. And the like
description does Jansenius give of it. It cannot be denied, but the word is
variously used; for, any Aenigmaticall sentence, dark or obscure speech, is
termed a Parable, as, Psalm. 49.4. I will incline mine ear to a Parable, Psalm.
49.4, and 78, 2. John 16.29.
I will open my dark saying upon the harp* So, John 16.29. Now speak thou in
plain words, and no Parable.

Secondly, Any Adage, proverbial or common speech, well known and generally
used, (especially by the wise) is termed a Parable. Luke 4.23. (...).
So, Luke 4.23. You will surely say unto me this Parable, (for so the words
are), Physician heal thy self.

Thirdly, Pythie and grave Sentences, serving as Rules to direct our lives and
actions, are termed Parables: so, Prove. 1.1. the Proverbial sentences of
Solomon, are called the Parables of Solomon: Prove. 1.1, and 26, 7.
So, Prove. 26.7. by a Parable is there meant a wise-saying.

Fourthly, Allegories and Poetical fictions, are likewise accounted Parables:
so, that fiction of the Trees assembling together to choose them a King, Judge.
9.7.
Judge. 7.9. is termed Jonathan's Parable.

Fifthly, Any Comparison or Similitude fetched from things earthly, to help our
understanding in things heavenly, are so styled. Math. 13.53.
So, Math. 13.59.

Sixthly, Comparisons drawn from men's actions and manners, these are more
strictly and properly termed Parables; For however similitudes and Parables
seem in Scripture to be Synonymaes, yet there is a difference. (...). of (...),
Assimilo.
For, a Similitude is more General, A Parable more special; In every Parable
there is a Collation, and comparing of two things together, (as the notation of
the word imports) but every such Collation and Comparison cannot properly be
termed a Parable: A similitude may be drawn from any thing in nature, but a
Parable (strictly taken) only from humane actions or doings, and such a
Parable is this which our Savior at this time spoke.

Of Parables, some are Perfect, and some Imperfect; Perfect, where the
Exposition is added, such are the Parables of the Sower, Math. 13.3, 18. And of
the Tares, Math. 13.3, 18, and 24, 57.
verse. 24.5, 7. But there are others (and so the most are) barely propounded,
but not expounded (in which respect they are termed Imperfect), the bread
whereof we must eat with the sweat of our brows or brains; we must search
them diligently, and descend into the bowels of them, as we do into the bowels
of the Earth to find out silver; Prove. 2.4.
we must digg as for hid treasure to find out the spiritual meaning, which with
a slight observance or superficial diligence cannot be attained: And yet of
this sort, all are not alike obscure; of some we may say as Gregory does, that
they rather require a Practiser then an Interpreter; and of that Nature this
seems to be. That which I shall commend to your Observation is, That

Christ spoke Parables.

So says St. Mark 4.2. He taught them many things by Parables. Mark. 4.2.
And it seems by the Evangelists, that he much affected this Parabolical way of
teaching. We read of Eight several Parables, that he propounded in one Sermon
to his Hearers; St. Matthew mentions seven together, Math. 13.1, 24, 31, 33, 44,
45.47. Mark 4.16. Math. 13.34. Math. 4.34. Chrysostom. Hom. 50. in Math. Aug. Quest.
Evang. 25. John 16.29.
Math. 13.1, 24, 31, 33, 44, 45, 47. And there was another (omitted by St.
Matthew, but) recorded by St. Mark, Cap. 4.26. The Parable of the Tares which
was at the same time delivered, and (as it justly is conceived) immediately
after the Parable of the Sower, (and so was the second in order). And without a
Parable he spoke not to the people, say both those Evangelists, Math. 13.34.
Mark 4.34. and that, not only at that time, and in that one Sermon (as
Chrysostom understands the place) but at no other time (as Augustine shows):
for albeit very many things were by him properly spoken as appears, John 16.26.
yet never any whole speech of his was plain, and proper, without some Parable,
Proverb, or Similitude wherewith he did adorn it.

The Reason why our Savior used so frequently this kind of Teaching, may (in
general) be this; There is no kind of speech, understanding, Parabola Heb.
Mashal, a radice Mashul. regere cu^ imperi^. Buxtorf. Sandei Symbol. fol. 168.
and has greater command over the affections, than a Parable. It is most
powerful to command attention; and effectual to move devotion: and of all ways
of teaching, this amongst the Jews was esteemed to be most powerful, insomuch
as they termed Parables and Comparisons, Potestates, Powers, or powerful
insinuations, and they had an order of Doctors there amongst them, that
professed this Parabolical way of teaching of the people; these they called
Moselin, from power and dominion which they had over the affections of their
Disciples; for teaching them in an obscure way, they created an Admiration, and
a reverence in their Hearers, and laid a kind of necessity upon them, of
returning again unto them for the interpretation, and signification of those
obscure and dark sayings which they delivered; and in reference to this manner
of teaching, it may be conceived (and so it is by some very learned Divines)
that the Evangelist tells us that Christ taught as one having Authority, Dr.
Down. Mat. 7.29. Luke 4.32.
Math. 7.29. and that his word was with power, Luke 4.32. But however;
undoubredly he gained a reverend esteem among the people, by this his manner of
Preaching, insomuch that they held him at least to be some great and excellent
Prophet.

More special, Mat. 13.10. -- 28.
and particular reasons are rendered by Christ himself, why he thus taught,
Math. 3.10, -- 28. To the Elect it was in mercy and made for their Edification:
But it was for Judgment unto the wicked, that the Mysteries of Gods Kingdom
might not be revealed unto the scornful. Psalm. 78.2. Isa. 6.9. Mat. 13.34 See
my Exposition on Luke 15. v. 3.
Besides, the Scripture must be fulfilled which was foretold, Psalm. 78.2. Isa.
6.9. Math. 13.34. Of this we have said more on another Parable, wherefore the
less here may suffice. Now to the Use.

Ezekiel had (according as he was commanded) denounced Judgment against
Jerusalem, under some obscure Types and dark Allegories, the perverse people
took exception against him, and quarrelled with him for the obscurity of his
Prophesies, and of this the Prophet makes complaint, Ezekiel. 20.49. Ah Lord God,
Eze. 20.49
they say of me, Does he not speak Parables? that is, he speaks Riddles, (as
it were) to us, we know not his meaning: Thus apt are we to object against Gods
Ministers, for their Allegorical expressions, Parabolical Illustrations,
similitudinary Amplifications of their Doctrines; as if we, for want of other
matter stuffed our Sermons with Fables, Fictions, Lies, and we know not what:
But when Jotham propounded that Parable of the Trees choosing themselves a
King, whereby he convicted the Sichemites of their unthankfulness toward him,
and his Fathers house, Judge. 9.8.
was that a Lie? And when Jehoash the King of Israel, propounded a Parable of
the Thistle in Lebanon, 2 King. 14.9.
which sent to the Cedar in Lebanon about a marriage for his Daughter, will you
term that a falsehood? fictions they were indeed, but lies and falsehoods they
cannot be called, in as much as they were not propounded to deceive, but rather
to discover the truth, in a familiar and unfeigned manner, the mind and the
tongue agreeing together, and the same end aimed at: And the like might be said
of Tropical, Judge. 20.16. Joh. 21.15.
Metaphorical and Hyperbolical speeches wherewith the Scripture does abound.

Were it unlawful for Ministers to Illustrate their Doctrines by such
Allegorical and Parabolical expressions, we may well think that God would not
have commanded his servants to have done it, as he did, Ezekiel. 17.2, 24, 3. Nor
would Gods Prophets have used it, as they did, Nathan he comes to David, Ezekiel.
17.2, and 24, 3. 2 Samuel 12.1. 1 King. 20.39. Isa. 5.1. Jer. 17.11. Hos. 7.11. 1
Cor. 15.36, 39, 40, 41.
and teaches him by a Parable. Ahab is reproved by the Prophet under the
Parable of a Prisoner. Israel is taught under a Parable of the Vine. And the
other Prophets, as Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc. abound therewith in all their
Prophesies. The like might be showed, was the practice of Christ's Apostles,
under the new Testament. So St. Paul, preaching of the Resurrection,
illustrateth it by many natural Similitudes. What shall I say more? if we
peruse the writings of the ancient Fathers (especially Chrysostom) and of
latter writers, we shall find that they make use of Parables very frequently,
and to very good purpose. Nor do any writings more abound therewith than
sacred. There we find a whole book of them bound up together, termed the
Parables, or Proverbs of Solomon; He set in order three thousand of them: as we
read, 1 Kings 4.32. They were the chosen Rules of his divine Art, some of which
(even so many as God saw expedient for the good of his Church, 1 King. 4.32.
) he has left us as a rich treasury, being full of wisdom, and divine truth:
Questionless, the spirit of God would not have suffered the leaves of
Scripture to have bin fowled with so many Apologues, Riddles, Parables,
Proverbs, Allegories, as are therein recorded; nor would our blessed Savior,
in whose mouth was never found any deceit or guile, have spoken so many, might
they not lawfully and profitably have bin used of us: but, in so doing he gives
us to understanst the liberty that his servants have, in their Ministerial
function, not only barely and nakedly to propound their Doctrines, but to use
the help of Invention and Art, for the Illustration of them: Provided,

First, That the Majesty of the Word be carefully preserved, and that no
occasion be given to any, to think unreverently of so high a Mystery, by
propounding any base and sordid stuff, unto the Auditory, in a Parabolicall or
similitudinary way. The Rule is, Cant. 5.10.
Inspeaking of things Excellent, Comparisons would be fetched from things that
are excellent: as, Cant. 5.10. etc. But if of things vile and base, 2 Pet. 2.22.
the Comparison would be taken accordingly as, 2 Pet. 2.22. Yet in speaking of
things most base, nothing would be said unbeseeming the Majesty of the Pulpit.
All we speak, must become sound Doctrine.

Secondly, Comparisons and Similitudes that are brought for Illustration of
Doctrine, should be fetched from such things as are most familiar, and best
known unto our Hearers. When the Prophets had to deal with the Aegyptiaens,
Isa. 19.4. Ezekiel. 27.10, 21, and 26, 12.
they alluded to fishers, and fishing; when with the Arabians, they took their
Comparisons from flocks and herds: when with the Tyrians, and Sidonians, from
Merchandise and Navigation: And thus did Christ as Theophylact observes, Math.
13.
He took every man in his own trade, and applied himself to that which they
best understood in all his Parables: Bodin. Aug. in Psalm. 138. Melius est ut
n^s reprehendant Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi.
Hera^litus for his obscurities was styled the dark Doctor, and he was so
affected with that way of teaching, that he would often will his Scholars to
deliver themselves darkly; But Gods Ministers are studiously to shun obscurity.
So Austin being more desirous of his peoples profit than his own credit,
professes that he had rather Grammarians should reprove him, than that the
simplest should not understand him; It was Origens fault to turn all into
Allegories, and so (by destroying the letter) he made plain things, obscure;
this may not b^. Should our Allusions and Comparisons be of things unknown unto
the Hearer, what Plato sometimes said of an obscure Example may in this case be
spoken, Exemplum, o hospes, eget exemplo, Another example had need to be
brought to i^su^rate your example by.

Thirdly, That we use them not for ostentation of wit, Hierom. Epist. ad Marcel.
but for edification and profit; Hierom taxes those women who were nimio
candore deformes, they deformed their native beauty, by painting themselves too
white: No less worthy of blame are such as fill their Sermons with Allegories,
and poetical Fictions, and take more pains to preach art and wit, than to
preach Christ; There is a good use to be made of Wit, Invention and Art; these
are the good gifts of God which may be used, and expressed in Similitudes,
Allusions, Proverbs, Parables, etc. for the hearts of all are not so
sanctified, that their ears need not to be delighted; we have to do with some
of quiesie Stomachs; with others of dull Capacities; with some who must be
entised and allured with a bait of Eloquence, and industry of pretty and witty
Sentences and Simile's (as some term them). The Israelites were willed to
borrow of the Egyptians, jewels of gold, and jewels of silver; to the end that
they should offer them to God for the use of the Ark, and not to make a golden
Calf of: So may we make use of humane Arts and Sciences for the furthering of
us in the work of the Ministry, but we may not make Idols of them, nor
secretly seek to be worshipped in them, and by them; this i^ a robbing God of
his honor, and the Scriptures of their Excellency. The highest Preferment that
Art and Wit can aspire unto, is, to be handmaids to Divinity; nor may they in
their attendance on her, exceed in their dress, and flaunt it too much.

These general Rules observed, God's servants may after the example of their
Lord and Master, warrantably use their liberty in the discharge of the work of
their calling, not only barely and nakedly to propound Doctrine; but by
Parables, Similitudes, Allegories, and the like to exemplify and illustrate
what they have propounde for their peoples profit. Math. 13.13.


But, Was it not in Judgment, that Christ spoke by Parables unto the people?

Parables may aptly be resembled to the Cloud that led the Israelites:
Ezekiel's Auditors him, and many in these days, us; who, notwithstanding the
clear light of the Gospel shining out in such glorious means, remain
ignorant); this is a singular Judgment of God upon us, 2 Cor. 4.4.
and a soar punishment of our unthankfulness, in shutting our eyes against
the light of the Gospel sent unto us; Nor can a more fearful Sentence be
uttered in this life against a man, Dr. Tailor on the Parable of the Sower.
(says a holy and reverend Divine) than to have it said, as Christ said of
some, Omnia ipsis in Parabolis fieri, All is spoken to them in Parables.

But, although it be in Judgment to the wicked, to be thus spoken unto, yet it
is in mercy to the godly, as our Savior shows, Math. 13.11. Sacra Velamina.
Dion. Areopag.
Mat. 13.11. For albeit Parables are truly called Sacred Vails, yet when the
Vail is drawn, and the Parable unfolded, and the shell cracked, the Kernel
proves most sweet, and the light most beautiful and pleasant to a spiritual
eye. I shall give you a most remarkable Instance, mentioned by Reverend Beza,
in the story of the life and conversion of Galeacius Caracciolus, an Italian
Marquess, in the Kingdom of Naples and Nephew to Paul the V. This Galeacius
being persuaded by one Caeserta to hear Peter Martyr preach (who was then a
public Reader a^ Naples), upon his motion went; yet not so much for any
desire that he had to learn, as moved and tickled with a curious humor, to
hear so famous a man as then Peter Martyr was accounted; A^ which time, he was
preaching on St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians; and as he was showing
the weakness and deceitfulness of humane Reason, in judging of spiritual
things, as likewise the power and efficacy of the Word of God, in those men in
whom the Lord works by his Spirit, he amongst other things used this
Similitude. If a man, walking in a large place, see afar off, Men and Women
dancing together, and hear no sound of Instrument, he will judge them to be
mad, or at least foolish; but if he comes nearer to them, and perceives their
order, and hears their Music, and marks their measures and their courses, he
will then be of another mind, and not only take delight in seeing them, but
feel a desire in himself to bear them company, and dance with them: even the
same (said Peter Martyr) betides many men, who, when they behold in others a
sudden and great change in their looks, apparel, behavior, and whole course
of life, at the first sight they impure it to melancholy, or some other foolish
humor; but when they look more narrowly into the matter, and begin to hear and
perceive the Harmony and sweet consent of God's Spirit, and his Word in them
(by the joint power of which two, this change was made and wrought, which
before they accounted folly) then they change their opinion of them, and first
of all begin to like them, and that change in them, and afterward feel in
themselves a desire and motion to imitate them, and to be of the number of such
men who forsaking the world and her vanities, do think that they ought to
reform their lives by the Rule of the Gospel, that so they may come to true and
sound holiness. This Comparison so wrought upon that Marquess, that through
God's goodness, and the gracious assistance of his blessed Spirit, from that
very hour he resolved with himself (as he told (many times) his friends) more
carefully to restrain his Affections from following the vain delights and
pleasures of the world as before be had done; and to set his mind on those
things which made after true happiness, which accordingly he did. And thus was
his conversion wrought, B B. Abbot in Jon. Lect. 30. Plus movent figurate
dicta. Aug. Epist. 19. ad Jan.
at least his sanctification furthered, by this Similitude. Indeed no kind of
saying, nor way of teaching, conveys the truth with more delight to the
understanding, works more on the Affections, sooner strikes the Will, more
helps the Memory, leaves a deeper impression with a feeling conceit, than this
Parabolicall and Similitudinary way of preaching does: God reckons it for a
favor that he used Similitudes to his People, by the Ministry of his Prophers,
Hos. 12.10.
Hos. 12.10. And it will aggravate our sin (as it did theirs) if we profit not
by such a manner of preaching. And thus we have done with the Preface or
Introduction to the Parable, Now we come to the Parable it self, propounded by
our Savior.

A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, Text.
and he came and sought fruit thereon, but found none.

These words contain the Propounding part, wherein we have considerable, 1. The
Subject spoken of, 2, The Praedicate, or what is said of that Subject.

The Subject matter, A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard.
Where we are to take notice, First, Of the Owner or Proprietor [A certain man]:
Secondly, Of his Possession, or the thing owned, he had a Fig Tree planted in
his Vineyard.

The Praedicate makes known, First, His Visitation of that his Possession [He
came unto it], Secondly, His Acquisition [He sought fruit thereon, but found
none].

[A certain man]

Who this man was literally, is not necessary to enquire: Should there be no
such thing in being (or possibility of being), as that to which a Parable has
relation, De vacuo, Similitudo non competit: de nullo, Parabola non convenit.
it is no Parable; says Tertullian. This is a Parable, and such a thing there
either was or might be, and that may suffice. It is not material who it was:
Quidam a certain man he was, be he who he would be, that is not to the point
nor purpose. But, Mystically, God is this man spoken of in the Text. I hope
there are none present, that have so gross and carnal a conceit of God, as to
imagine that God is corporeal, and has a humane body and shape as man has,
which was the absurd opinion of the Sadduces, grounded upon a Text of Moses,
(for other Scripture they admitted none besides his five Books) which Text was
that in Exodus 33.20, 22, 23. where we read that God willed Moses to stay in a
cleft of a rock, Exodus 33.20, 22.
and there putting his hand upon him, did show him his back parts, but would
not suffer him to see his face: Now inasmuch as Moses there attributed to God a
right hand, and other parts, they concluded that God is corporeal, and has a
body as man has: and of the same opinion was Tertullian (as Austin witnesses)
and some Heretics besides, De Orig. animar. Vol 2. Tit. 23.
who by Epiphanius are called Audiani, and by Austin, Vadiani. But an opinion
it is, so absurd and gross, that the maintainers of it are rather to be
severely punished then answered.

It is very true, God is resembled to man in Scripture.

He likeneth himself to man, and speaks after the manner of men unto us. And
many parts of man's body are ascribed unto him; as face mouth, ears, eyes,
arms, feet, etc. And so humane affections and passions, as joy, grief, sorrow,
anger: And sometimes the inordinate and irregular passions and perturbations of
man, as drowsiness, frowardness, scorn, and derision, etc. But it is a true
Axion in School Divinity, Quecunque de Deo corporaliter dicuntur dicta sunt
Symbolice. Lex loquitur liaguam filiorum hominum.
Whatever is spoken of God bodily and humanely, must not be understood
literally, but figuratively; as setting forth some of his excellencies and
attributes: He speaking to men with the tongues of the sons of men (say the
Hebrew Doctors), that men may thereby have their conceits raised up to some
knowledge of him; and that we b^ing well acquainted with the Use, Office, and
Effects, of things natural in our selves, might the better be helped in the
conception of that God to whom they are ascribed by Translation.

Who is like unto the Lord our God (says David) that has his dwelling on
high? who yet abaseth himself to behold things in heaven and earth; But this we
speak of, is a lower abasement than that; he does not only look down from
heaven, but descend down from heaven, take on him man's nature, and become like
unto us: The Gods are come down unto us in the likeness of men, said the
Lycaonians, (of Paul and Barnabas) most blasphemously; but we may say truly and
religiously, Act. 14.11.
God is become like unto us, in appearing to us men, like Man; Lord what is man
that thou should so regard him, says David Psalm. 8.1. And Job to the same
purpose, Psalm. 8.1. Job. 7.17.
Chap. 7.17. What is man that thou should so magnify him, as to liken thy
self unto him; and apply thy self and words to his infirm and gross Capacity?
Etiam in baculo equitare.
Like the loving Father who to teach his Child, will Show himself as a Child;
so Thou, to teach us, becomest like us.

Sometimes indeed, God takes up terrible resemblances, and exhibites himself
sometimes like a Lion, Hos. 5.14. Lament. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29.
sometimes like a Bear, and sometimes like a consuming fire; but this is when
he has to deal with the wicked and impenitent, and when he is enforced unto
it; No resemblance better pleases him, nor by any does he more frequently, and
more familiarly express himself unto us, then by this in our Text* which
shows the great love that he bears unto man, with whom his delight and
business is; yea, so dearly is he beloved of God, that we may safely say (for
Scripture warrants it) that for his sake God loves the very ground he goes
upon: I took my solace says wisdom in the compass of the earth, and my
delight is with the children of men, Prove. 8.31.
Prove. 8.31.

Remember this and show your selves men: Isa. 46.8.
bring it again to mind, O! ye transgressors, Isa. 46.8. The true Essence of
humanity lies not in the outside; Nebuchadnezar during the seven years of his
transformation, had not his outward shape changed, his heart was. Let his heart
be changed from man's, Dam. 4.16.
and let a beasts heart be given him, was the word of his Vision: when the
heart is Beastial or Diabolical, in a Case of humane flesh, (says our Reverend
B B. Hall); It is not the shape that can forbid man to be Beast or Devil.

This Beastly heart many have under Man's shape, it were a very easy thing to
find in every vicious man more Beast, then hide or horn does discover. David
for utt^ring some rash and erroneous speeches in a strong temptation, says,
that he was foolish and ignorant, Psalm. 73.22. 2 Pet. 2.10, 12. Jude 10.
and a very Beast before God in so doing; What then think you are they, whose
lives are merely sensual, and voluptuous, who walk after the flesh in the lust
of uncleanness, and what they know naturally, in these things they corrupt
themselves as bruit beasts? Are they men, whose greatest delight is in drowning
their reason, and extinguishing the light of understanding in them, which makes
them men? Are they men, w^o make themselves beasts, and express the condition
of the worst beasts, by returning with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow
to their wallowing in the mire.

It is thought, that there is no beast on Earth which has not its fellow in
the Sea; we may truly say there is no Beast in the vast desert of the World,
which is not paralleled in some men. We behold several sorts of beasts through
their Denns, where they are kept, and we are told, that is a Lion, and that is
a Leopard, and that a Tiger: should there be a grate to look through the heart
of every wicked man, you should behold variety of beasts there, as Bulls and
Unicorns, Psalm. 22. Psalm. 74. Psalm. 80. 2 Timothy 4. Luke 13. Zeph. 3.
such were David's Per^ecutors; Dragons, such were the Churches enemies; wild
Boares, such were those who sought the ruin of her: Lions, such a one was
Nero: Foxes, and such a one was Herod: Wolves, such are all greedy Judges, and
false teachers, of whom we are warned to take heed. Should beasts be separated
and taken away from amongst men (says learned Morney), you would not marvail
that Jeremiah should be willed to run too and fro, about the Streets of
Jerusalem, Jer. 5.1.
and seek in the broad places thereof to find a man: Or why the Philosopher
should seek with a Lynck at noon day in the populous City of Athens, amongst a
great crowd, and in the midst of a great assembly of men, to find one man
amongst them all. But, as it grieved the Orator to proclaim, as sometimes he
was encorced to do; O my friends! there is no true friend amongst you; so it is
no little grief to us, who must give an account to God of your souls, that we
are enforced to complain thus; Oh you sons of men! there is scarce a man
amongst you to be found.

1 Cor. 12.
let us not uncover them. If thine Eye be adulterous, thine Ear lascivious, thy
Tongue blasphemous; how shall God resemble himself to any of these parts? would
not a great man count it an high indignity to be resembled to an Ox, Ass, Dog
or Serpent? Or should a Painte be willed to draw a man to the life, and he draw
the Effigies of a Monkey, or the like, would not all condemn his skill? God
made man not only according to his Image, but according to his Similitude and
likeness, Genesis 1.27.
Genesis 1.27. And the likeness stands not in having a body and soul, but in the
ability of both to work answerably to the righteousness and holiness of God:
this should be our care, I beseech you brethren see to it.

Yet we have somewhat more to take notice of, Husbandman, resembling Himse^f to
a careful and painful Vinitor that had a Fig Tree p^anted in his Vineyard etc.

There are three parts of Husbandry; Pasturage, Tillage, and Vintage. All three
are applied to him, Pasturage, Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3. Isa. 40.11. Ezekiel. 34.11, 12.
etc. John 10.11, 14. Tillage, Ezekiel. 36.34, 35, 36. Jer. 31.27. Math. 13.3, 4,
24. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods Husbandy, or (as the word in the Original does
properly signify) his Field-in-tillage; (...).
Vintage, so, Isa. 5.1. etc. Math. 21.33. John 15.1. where He is expressly
termed a Husbandman in relation to the Vine.

Ancient as any. God assigned it to Adam; Genesis 3.19. and 4, 2.
he* and his Children were Husbandmen, and Tillers of the ground, Genesis 3.19,
and 4, 2. It is as profitable and commodious as any, neither Prince nor Subject
can subsist without it, Eccles. 5.9. It is as free from guile and deceit as
any, Genesis 25.27. Esau was indeed a Politic hunter, Eccles. 5.9. Genesis 25.27.
and a man of the field; so termed, not for that he was a Husbandman, but in
regard that he was continually conver^ant in the field in hunting; that was his
sport, there was his heart: But Jacob dwelt in tents as those did, who employed
themselves about cattle, and he was a plain man without craft or subtility: And
it is in as good account with God, and good men as any. God has honou^ed it,
in that He has so frequently resembled Himself unto it (and so He has not to
Goldsmiths, Drapers, Mercers, and other Gallings of great esteem in the world)
and Kings themselves have not disdained it, as we read, 2 Chronicles. 26.10. Little
reason then have any to scorn it, 2 Chronicles. 26.10.
as do many of your Courtiers and Citizens, who esteem no otherwise of
Husbandmen then as Clownes and Peasants: But to pass by this.

toward man, for his good. He made us of Clay, and so he became our Potter: He
stamped his Image upon us, Isa. 45.9. Romans 9.21. Genesis 1.27. Genesis 3.24. Act.
20.32. 2 Pet. 2.5. Psalm. 121.4.127.1.
and so he became our Statuary, or Minter: He clothed us when we were naked,
and made garments for us, and so he was Vestiarius, our Tailor or
Wardroah-keeper: God builds us up a spiritual hou^e and Temple for himself,
and so he is our Architect or Builder: When the Church is built, He watches
over it, and keeps it from all ghostly and bodily enemies, and so he is our
Sentinel or Watchman: Hos. 2.19, 20. Psalm. 86.11 and 32.8.
He weddeth us and marries us unto himself, and so becomes our Husband: He
teaches us, and instructe^h us in the Doctrine of Salvation, and so becomes
our Schoolmaster: He cures our sicknesses and diseases, and heals our wounds,
and so he is our Physician: And, to plead our cause, Hos. 14.4. 1 John 2.1.
and non-suite all Actions that are brought against us, he is our Advocate. And
that nothing may be wanting to us, He plants us and waters us and gives the
increase; 1 Cor. 3.6.
and so he is (according to the point delivered) our Husbandman.

Thus what the Apostle professes of himself, 1 Cor. 9.22.
I am made all things to all men, that I may, by all means, winsome, may in a
pious sense, be applied to God himself; who, to gain us, turns himself after a
sort into all shapes, and makes heaven all things to all, that he may gain all:
To the Merchant-man, Math. 13.44, 45, 46, 47. Math. 13.33. Verse. 24.
it is a rich Pearl: To the Purchaser, it is a rich Treasure: To the Fisherman,
it is a Nett cast into the Sea: To the good Heuswife, it is a laying of Leaven:
And to the Husbandman, it is a sowing of seed. Christ puts no man out of his
way, or out of his Calling, to get to Heaven: He pre^ents himself to us in our
own Element, and becomes to our souls what ever they can desire, that they may
be wrought upon and enflamed with a love toward him.

1 Cor. 3.9.
1 Cor. 3.9. and shall we not submit to his husbanding of us? The Earth is
content to be rent and torn with Cu^ters and Shares, yet it patiently endures
it, and returns fruit to the Plowman: The Vine suffers it self to be cut and
wounded, and although it weeps and bleeds, yet it bears, and brings forth for
the profit of the Vinitor: Let us endure all things that God, in his wi^dom,
h^th ordained for the making of us fair and fertile: the best have much Fallow,
yet to be be broken up, the most fruitful Vine has luxurious branches, to be
pruned and lopt off; Viti non est luxuriandum. Isa. 28.23, 24, 25.
better enduring the pruning hook than the fire; though we bleed, and bleed to
death, better do so then burn. But God is a tender hearted Husbandman, He looks
on our corruptions with grief of heart, and loves not to be always chiding,
nor will he be all day plowing: when he comes with his plough and harrow, with
iron teeth, it is not to break our bones, but to kill our weeds, and mellow our
hearts: when he comes into his Vineyard with his knife and pruning book in his
hand, it is not to kill us, but to mortify and kill those Lusts that are in us,
Ezekiel. 36.36. Isa. 4.4.
which, if they were suffered to grow, would hinder our growth in Grace, and be
our utter undoing. God will not be wanting to us, if we be not wanting to our
selves. His ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas. Aug.
Say with Austin, Cut me, burn me here, that thou may save me hereafter: and
with that Martyr in those Marian days, Here is my Back, do thou beat; to save
my Soul from Hell's heat.

Pliny), Plin. lib. 18. c. 3. Cato.
and when they would speak in many man's praise, they used to say, He is an
honest man, and a good Husbandman. But who can be compared with the Lord
herein? It is from him that all other husbandmen have their skill; His God does
instruct him to discretion, Isa. 28.26.
and does teach him (says the Prophet). Indeed, if we should cast our eyes
upon the outward face of the Church, in the condition that it sometimes lies,
and upon the face of our Church, in the present condition as it now is, all
overgrown with Thorns of Errors, and Nettles of Heresies, and the stone wall of
discipline broken down, you would judge it to be rather the Vineyard of a
sloathfull and sluggish man, Prove. 24.30.31.
then of a wise God. But this our Husbandman is wonderful in counsel and
excellent in working (says the Prophet, Isa. 28.19.
Isay 28.29.): He best knows how to do all things well, and proceeds with
height of deliberation and knowledge in all his actions; he best knows the
Seasons, when to begin, and when to make an end; he has his time to fallow,
and his time to sow his Seed: Sometimes his Church is as a Fallow, and then no
beauty appears on the face of it; the hedges are broken down, Hoggs let in to
root, the ridges groan many times with weeds and thistles, great clods lie
unbroken, all seems to be out of order: but it shall not always lie thus; when
he has brought it in fitting case, (and in case he will bring it, albeit he
makes use of his and the Churches enemies to do it, as Psalm. 129.3.) then he
sows his Seed, Psa. 129.3.
makes up the hedges, luggs the Hoggs that are broke in to annoy it, and then
some beauty shall begin to appear, Psalm. 90.16, 17.
and the work of the Lord will be seen to be excellent and admirable, in
bringing his counsel to pass, and causing all things to frame to a sweet,
seasonable, blessed, and comfortable end. God has made every thing beautiful
in his time, (says Solomon, Eccl. 3 11.
Eccles. 3.11.) they appear beautiful, when we observe, both the beginning and
the end of them; As it is with pieces of Tapestry, which before they are joined
together, we know not what to make thereof; here lies a Bird, there a Beast,
here a piece of an Arm of a man, there a piece of a Leg, there a head, etc.
but if we come a while after, when each piece is joined together, you may read
a perfect story. Such was God's dealing with Joseph, whom he purposed to
advance unto high place and dignity, according to that made known unto him by
his dreams, Genesis 37.5, 9. Genesis 37.5, 9.
which dreams he likewise made known unto his Father and Brethren, but was
envyed by his Brethren, and rebuked by his Father, for imagining a matter so
unlikely: And indeed, if we consider God 's working therein, to bring his
counsel to pass, there was no likelihood at all in the judgment of flesh and
blood, that it would ever be. First he was sold for a Slave, then falsely
accused by his Mistress, and thereupon cast into prison (and that for a long
time), and there laid in Irons; yet God, Ps. 105.18.
who is wonderful in coun^ell, and excellent in working, turned all this to
Joseph's good, and made way thereby for his advancement, so that the end was
beautiful, as the Psalmist shows. Other Instances I might give you, as in Job,
David, etc. Wherefore wait with Patience, and rest assured that God will bring
all to a good Issue in the end.

Lastly, we may from hence be directed what to do, and (almost) wasted by the
Beasts of the field, who have got into it, and make havoc. Give ear O Shepherd
of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou that dwell between
the Cherubims, Psalm. 80.1. 94, 1, -- 7.
shine forth; Ps. 80.1, and 94.1. -- 7. As David there and then did fly to God,
and acquaint him with the injuries that were offered to his Church, by the
enemies thereof; so should we now, it is high time, Return we beseech thee O
God of Hoasts, look down from Heaven, and behold and visit this Vine, and the
Vineyard which thy right hand has planted, Psalm. 80.14, etc. Verse. 18.
Psalm. 80.14. etc. So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will
call upon thy name, verse. 18. Of this Vineyard (the possession of this man
before spoken of); and of the Plant of note thereon growing, we are now to
speak.

A Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard. Text.
]

A Vineyard He had, that was his Inheritance in general; and a Fig Tree of
note thereon growing which was his, His after a more peculiar manner.

By this Vineyard, we are not to understand any terrestrial Possession, such a
one as Noah planted, Genesis 9.20 and Nabal possessed, 1 Kings 21.1. but Vineam
Intelligibilem, an Intellectual Mystical Celestial Vineyard, Psalm. 80.8, 9, 15.
Cant. 8.11, 12. Isa. 5.1, 7. Jer. 2.21. Math. 20.1, and 21, 28. Quest. Mark
12.1. Resp. Luke 20.10. Heb. 3.2, 5, 6. Cant. 4. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 3.9. Math. 3.12.
which is the Church of God on earth. And that,

The Church is a spiritual Vineyard, is a truth that has strong confirmation
from Scripture. In the old Testament we find it so styled, Psalm. 80.8, 9, 15.
Cant. 8.11, 12. Isa. 5.1, 7. Jer. 2.21. The like in the New, Math. 20.1, 2, and
21, 28, 33. Mark. 12.1. Luke 20.10.

But why is it resembled to a Vineyard, rather than to another thing?

It is compared to many other things in Scripture, besides a Vineyard, as to a
house, to an Orchard, to a Garden enclosed, to a Field in tillage, to a
threshing floor, etc. But of all other resemblances of earthly things none does
so fully express, and set forth the nature and condition of the Church, as this
of a Vineyard, which that it may appear the better, let us take notice of some
particulars, wherein this spiritual Vineyard the Church does hold resemblance
with the other.

First, A Vineyard, is a place, separated and enclosed from other grounds. No
Vineyard is naturally a Vineyard; See my Expos. on Isa. 5.1. Page 73. Levit.
20.24, 26. Numb. 23.9. Deuteronomy. 14.2. Joh. 15.19.
hand and art must go to make it so: The Church is called, and separated from
the world, both in life and conversation, as appears, Levit. 20.24, 26. Numb.
23.9. Deuteronomy. 14.2. John 15.19.

Secondly, No Vineyard is in its perfect glory, so soon as it is taken in. Her
plants being set, come not presently to perfection and growth, but by degrees:
So it is with the Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Diverse Workmen and Laborers are
ordained to be employed about it, for the perfection of it, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
even after it is planted. The Apostles took great pains in planting Churches;
but, had not Evangelists followed after, and watered what they had planted with
a diligent hand, all had bin lost: And for this purpose St. Paul left Titus at
Creta, after he had planted the Church there, to redress things that were
defective, or to straiten things that were aptto grow crooked amongst them, Tit
1.5. (...)
and to perfect his work. And hereto tends that prayer of Peter, 1 Epist. 5.10.

Thirdly, A Vineyard when it flourishes, 1 Pet. 5.10.
and is come to some perfection, is a place of great delight; both in respect
of the pleasant smell that it yields, and comfortable shadow that it
affords; So is the Church, Hos. 14.6, 7. The smell of it is like unto a field
that the Lord has blessed. Hos. 14.6, 7. Genesis 27.27. Cant. 2.13, 14. Cant.
4.13, 14. Isa. 4.6. Exodus 9.27, 28.
Her graces are compared to things most sweet, Cant. 4.13, 14. And it affoards
a Refrigerium, a comfortable shadow, and Arbor against extremity of heat,
according to that, Isa. 4.6. There shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the
day time, from the heat; and for a place of Refuge, and for a covert from
storms and rain. The very enemies of the Church have found this to be true*
Pharaoh flies to Moses and Aaron, and begs their prayers. So did Marcus
Antonius of the Christians, in the time of his distress, and was with his
whole Army delivered from that danger that he was in, through their powerful
prayers.

Fourthly, To a Vineyard it may be compared in inspect of the Fertility, or
fruitfulness thereof. It bears much fruit, and fruit of the best kind: A
Vineyard is stored with diverse plants (one plant makes not a Vineyard); and
those plan^s are laden with fruits, they bring forth in bunches and clusters,
and not a berry here, and another there, but the load is such, that the
branches bear, that it seems many times to exceed the strength of the branch
that bears them; The Church is fertile of Children, there are multitudes of
them that believe: Acts 4.32. and 5, 14.
So fruitful is the Church of Children, as that she wonders at her own
increase, and says, The place is too strait for me; give place to me, that I
may dwell: Isa. 49.19, 20. Cap. 54.1. Romans 15.14. Phil. 1.11. Acts 9.33. 2 Cor.
8.7.
Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my Children and am left
desolate, Isa. 49.19, 20, and 54, 1. (which is to be understood of the calling
of the Gentiles, after the casting off of the Jews). And every member of the
Church, every branch of the Vine is laden with good f^uit, they abound in
every thing in faith, in utterance, in knowledge, in the works of Charity, 2
Cor. 8.7. and therein beyond their power they are willing of themselves, verse.
3. they do all that ever they can do, Luke 21.4.
and indeed many times more then they seem able to do, in the service of God,
and love to man, as did the poor widow that cast in all that ever she had into
the treasury.

And as a Vineyard is more fruitful then any other plantation, so it yields
the best fruit of any other. No fruit is more delectable to the taste, Judge.
9.13.
nor more comfortable to the heart, then that which comes from the Grape. Let
the Vine it self be heard speaking in Jothams parable, My wine cheareth both
God and Man. Math. 26.29.
It is an high Hyperbole, yet seconded, by the God of truth, Math. 26.29. It
must needs be an excellent Liquor (says a Learned Divine) which is used to
resemble the joys of Heaven. And what fruit can be compared with the fruit
that a Christian beats? all other fruit that grows without this fence, is but
sour and bitter, seem it never so fair and glorious to the eye, yet it is but
hedge fruit, or like unto the grapes of Sodom, and clusters of Gomorrah, Deuteronomy.
30.32.
Deuteronomy. 32.32. Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, without the Church no salvation is
to be expected.

Fifthly, A Vineyard is a well ordered place, there the Hillocks may be seen
equally swelling, the Stakes pitched in a good height and distance, the Vines
handsomely pruned, the ground cleanlily kept, and well howed, all things are
well ordered in it. And so is it in the Church, insomuch that Balaam himself
could not but admire at it, and in a rapture cry out, How goodly are thy Tents
O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel: Numb. 24.5, 6. Expounded.
as the Valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the Rivers side, etc.
Numb. 24.5, 6. as if he should have said, I see in this people (the Church of
God) a most goodly order, in the pitching of their Tents according unto their
Tribes, insomuch that my senses are therewith ravished, and I want words to
express the glory and beauty of it; And in regard of this goodly order in it,
Solomon compares it to an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.10. Colos. 2.5.
Cant. 6.10. St. Paul rejoiced to see order in the Church of Colosse, and
commended them for it, Colos. 2.5.

Sixthly, To a Vineyard the Church may be compared, in respect of the
Imbecility and weakness of it. No possession (says Cato) requires more
pains about it then a Vineyard does; Corn comes up and grows alone of it
self, without the Husbandman's care, Invisa virescunt gramina, Mark 4.17.
Mark 4.17. But the Vine is fragile lignum, a frail kind of plant, it must be
supported, sheltered, daily dressed and attended, else it soon waxes
luxurious, and is in danger to grow wild, after it once waxes wanton: The
Church is in it self weak, compared to a woman, Revel. 12.6. (and she is the
weaker vessel) yea to a worm, Isa. 41.44. It cannot stand without support;
Revel. 12.6. Isa. 41.44. Cant. 8.5. Amos 7.2, 5. Isa. 27.2, -- 7. Isa. 5.2.
She leanes on her Beloved as her only supporter, Cant. 8.5. and being fallen
it cannot raise up it self, Amos 7.2, 5. Hence it is that God takes such pains
with it, Isa. 27.2, -- 7. and sets up a Watchtower in the midst of it, Isa.
5.2. lest the faithful City should become a Harlot, wild, wanton, adulterous
and idolatrous, as did the seven Churches of Asia, after their Candlestick was
removed.

Seventhly, A Vineyard is very subject to be annoyed and wasted, by the Beasts
of the Wood, and Foxes of the Field which love to burrow under it, and delight
to be cropping and pilling of her plants, and eating of her grapes, as Solomon
intimates, Cant. 2.15. So is the Church, Cant. 2.15 Psalm. 83.2, -- 13.
her enemies are many that conspire against her, Psalm. 83.2, -- 13. There is
the Boar of the Wood; (Tyrants and bloody Persecutors) that seek the vastation
of it; and the wild Beasts of the Field (profane and vicious livers) that
intend her destruction? Psalm. 80.13, 17, and 94, 5
Besides the Foxes and the little Foxes, (Heretics and Schismatiques) who
profess friendship to the Church, yet subtly seek the ruin and subversion
of it. Such a Beast of prey was Saul, before his conversion, Acts 8.3.
Acts 8.3.

Eighthly, There is no Vineyard without some unfruitful branches; it has
something in it that is not of it: A Spider or Toad may get into it, stones may
be found in it, weeds spring up amongst the good plants: So in the Church they
are not all Israel which are of Israel, not all fish that is in the Net, not
all wheare that grows in the Field, Romans 9.6. Math 13.25, 47. John 15.2.
not all fruitful that are professed branches of the true Vine. There is a
mixture of good and bad in the Church, and so will be till the coming of Christ.

Ninthly and Lastly, the Church may be resembled to a Vineyard in respect of
her despicable condition; in hard weather, and after it has left bearing, then
her beauty vanishes, and no possession seems more contemptible: whilst the
Church is in a flourishing condition she is regarded; but when she is
persecuted and afflicted, then she is scorned and despised, her enemies laugh
among themselves: All that pass by her clap their hands at her, Psalm. 80.6.
they hiss and wagg their heads at the Daughter of Jerusalem; saying, Is this
the City that men call the perfection of beauty? Lament. 2.15, 16.
the joy of the whole Earth, etc. Lament. 2.15, 16.

Other Resemblances We might bring wherein the congruity betwixt an Earthly,
and this heavenly Vineyard may be seen, but enough has bin said, if we make
good use of what has bin said, which let us endeavor to do.

And first in general, we may hence be informed of the excellency of the
Church above all other places, Pliny) it yields the best revenew). Glorious
things indeed are spoken of thee, Plin. lib. 18. p. 552. Cant. 2.1. Cant. 4.13,
15. Cant. 1.8. Cant. 4.10. Psalm. 122. Isa. 4.5. Cant. 2.2.
thou Vineyard of the Lord. Thou art the Rose of the Field; the Lilly of the
Valleys, an Orchard of Pomegranates, A fountain of Gardens, a well of springing
waters; The fairest amongst women, The Spouse and Sister of Christ, The beauty
of the Earth, The glory of the World: And (being compared with other Societies)
as a Lilly amongst Thorns, and like the Apple amongst the Trees of the Forest;
All which comparisons and resemblances (with many more which might be
alleged) do evidently set forth (besides this in my Text) the excellent
dignity, and glorious excellen^y of the Church of God; and consequently the
happiness and dignity of those who are members of it: which caused the good
Emperor Theodosius to say, Malo esse membrum Ecclesiae, quam caput Imperii, I
had rather be a member of the Church, than head of the Empire; And David,
rather to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of
wicked men, Psalm. 84.10. Psalm. 84.10.
But more particularly from the former Resemblances, we may be Instructed in
sundry Duties.

Acts 2.40. Ephesians. 5.11. and by sundry strong Arguments pressed, 2 Cor. 6.14,
-- 18. Oh! that our Church did abound with such separatists! Acts 2.40. Ephesians.
5.11. 2 Cor. 6.14, -- 18. Psalm. 26.4, 5. Cant 1.2. Revel. 2.13. 1 Cor. 5.10.
such as did separate themselves from all unclean courses, and had no Commerce
with the lusts of the Gentiles, and from all unclean company, so far as our
Callings and Relations will give leave, Psalm. 26.4, 5.

It is true, that Lillies may grow amongst Thorns; Pergamus may have her
dwelling where Satan's seat is: And if we should altogether avoid the company
of wicked livers, we must (as the Apostle speaks) go out of the World, 1 Cor.
5.10. But there is a twofold society or fellowship to be taken notice of: One
is more general and cold, as in buying, selling, trading, and in other
commerce, when Nature. Necessity, and other Exigencies of our Calling, either
General or Particular, does warrantably lead us thereunto: The other is more
special and intimate, when we join our selves with those that are wicked
voluntarily and needlessly, making them to be of our bosom Friends, men of our
Counsel, etc. This may not be, God is offended with it, as taking part with his
enemies, 2 Chronicles. 19.2; and 20, 37. and it may enfeoff us both in their sin and
punishment, and so it is dangerous: 2 Chronicles. 19.2, and 20, 37. 1 Cor. 7.10, 11,
12.
If then at any time we be necessitated to keep company with sinners and wicked
livers either in regard of Divine Ordinance which does require it, as, 1 Cor,
7.10, 11, 12. (and so in other Relations); Or by an Act of Divine Providence
which does administer it, as, Luke 14.15. let us so associate with their
Persons, as that we communicate not with them in their sins: Society in sin may
not be had with the best; Luke 14.15. Si cum malis, non tamen in malis.
Society, Inward may not be had with the worst; but Civil Society may be had
with all.

Secondly, As the Church is a Vineyard in regard that it is not presently
brought to perfection upon the planting of it; then it may lesson some that are
of the Schismatical separation; who, because of some infirmities that are in a
Church, will not own it to be a Church. Should we separate for some defects and
wants, to what particular visible Church on Earth will we associate our selves?
Only the Church Triumphant in Heaven, is absolutely perfect, and without
blemish; Corruptions in any Church, call for a Reformation; but all corruptions
do not warrant a Separation: Corruptions in men's manners do not; for albeit in
private conversation we are to separate from the society of notorious
Offenders, (except in cases before excepted) yet a separation from a particular
visible Church, 1 Cor. 5.11.
cannot be thereby warranted. The Church of Corinth was a true Church,
notwithstanding their manifold disorders: And the Church of Ephesus a true
Church, 1 Cor. 11. Revel. 2.4. Cap. 2.13.14.15. Verse. 20. Revel. 3.1. Verse.
16.17.
notwithstanding her declinings: So was the Church of Pergamus, notwithstanding
she was seated in Satan's circuit, and pestered with the Sect of Baalamites and
Nicolaitans: Thyatyra a true Church, notwithstaning her Jesabellizing; So was
Sardis, notwithstanding her secure deadness; And Laodicea, notwithstanding her
lukewarmnesse, poverty, and nakedness: All these Churches had their failings
in point of manners, yet were they the Churches of Christ, and might not be
seperated-from; for that God had not forsaken them. God indeed had threatened
some of these, that if they would not repent and amend, he would unchurch them,
and take his Candlestick from among them; but till he put his threat into
execution, and removed his Tabernacle and worship, they were to be acknowledged
and reverenced as the true Churches of Christ: So such corruptions may be in a
Church as deserve God should forsake it, and for which God in his word has
threatened that he will forsake it; but before it appear that God has indeed
forsaken that Church (which does not appear (but the contrary) so long as God
continues his word, Levit. 26.11, 12. Psalm. 76.1, 2.
and doctrine of salvation to a people, Levit. 26.11, 12, Psalm. 76.1.2.) we may
not forsake it.

It is not then Corruption in manners, that warrants a separation from a
Church, it must be corruption in Doctrine. Nor do all Errors that a Church
holds even in point of Doctrine, warrant us to separate from it, but errors,
great and weighty: smaller errors cut not off salvation, and therefore may not
cause a separation. For where salvation may be had from these Assemblies,
separation may not be made, 1 Cor. 3.15. John 6.68. Gal. 1.2.
John 6.68. Nor may all errors weighty, even in the substance of Doctrine or
Foundation, cause a separation, for they may be held of weakness, and through
infirmity, but if they be obstinately maintained, and wilfully persisted in,
then with a good conscience we may (nay must) separate from such a Church, as
does so maintain them, Act. 19.9.
Act. 19.9. And upon this ground have we separated from the Church of Rome; for
whilst she onelytaught her damnable Doctrines, and pressed them not upon us, as
matters of faith, to be believed on salvation, but came with, It may be; our
Fathers forsook her not, but sought her cure. But when she would not be cured,
but persisted in her damnable errors, bringing them into Canon, pressing them
upon the conscience with It must be, as Articles of Faith de jure to be
received, believed, and practiced; Anathematizing us if we did not so,
Excommunicating us for not doing so, giving us no room amongst them but the
fire: So forward were they to burn Heretics, that they counted it Heresy not
to stay to be burnt (as one speaks). Indeed we went from them upon God's call*
and not upon their driving; but, had we upon that account left them, they had
little cause to chide us for leaving of them. To conclude (then) this branch of
my Admonition; If any of you be inclined to separate from the Church which has
begotten you, born you in her womb and arms, nursed you at her breasts; and
wherein God has sealed you up to himself in Baptism, Examine well what errors
those are that are in her, and of what nature they are, before you separate:
good consideration must be had that they be fundamental, and maintained with
obstinacy; and then, what well-grounded assurance you have, that those errors
are repaired, and no other as great as those, admitted in that other Church to
which you join your selves: Errors there will be in all Churches, and to think
to find a Church without any imperfection, you must then (as that Religious
Emperor Coustantin^ said to Acesius, Hos. and Eccl. Hist. Lib. 1. c. 7.
a Novatian Bishop one of the same humor) set up a Ladder to Heaven and climb
up thither alone; In the mean-time mark, how St. Jude has marked such, as
separate themselves from our Church Assemblies under pretense of corruptions
that are in it, Jude 19.
These be they that separate themselves, sensual, not having the spirit, verse.
19.

Nor let any of us dream of attaining to an absolute State of Perfection here,
which was the opinion of the Catharists and Novatians, Aquin. in Phil. 3. Lect.
29.
and it is maintained by some Anabaptists and others: There is a twofold
Perfection, says Aquinas, Viae and Patriae, The former is incident to man in
the state of grace, whilst he is yet a way-fairing man, and a stranger on
Earth, the other is that which he shall have in the State of Glory, in his
Heavenly Country: Of the former we now speak. We deny not, but there is a State
of Perfection attainable in this life, which we are willed to seek after, Math.
5.48. Heb. 6.1. Genesis 6.9. 2 King. 20.9. 1 Cor. 2.6. Phil. 3.15.
Math 5.48. Heb. 6.1. And confess that some have bin said to be perfect in
this life, as, Genesis 6.9. 2. K ng. 20.9. 1. Cor. 2.6. Phil. 3.15. But we must
distinguish again; This is two fold, First, of Justification, that admits of no
latitude, neither magis nor minus; it is perfect in all, and that, the first
hour; one is as perfectly justified, as another: This is here to be had. The
other Perfection is of Sanctification, and this is either Partial or Gradual;
of Parts, or Degrees: the former is when the Image of God is so repaired in us,
as that no part is wanting in the new man; every part and power of the soul is
renewed and formed: As the Child has all the parts of the Father, when it is
first born, and brought into the World, this is haveable. The other is, when
there is not only all kinds of graces, but that fullness and perfection in
them, as may suite with the state of grace, in this life, and so far as man is
thereof capable during his earthly condition. But here we must make bold to
distinguish again.

This Perfection of Degrees, which the Saints are capable of in this life, is
Absolute and Acurate or Comparative and tolerable: Accurate Perfection is, when
a man attains to that degree of it as he ought to have, and does every thing so
absolutely, that no exception can be taken against it: This none on earth have;
None have done so much good as they ought to have done, or might have done.
None have attained to that degree of holiness, that they might have attained
unto; And yet, Phil. 3.14.
in that they might have attained unto it, there is a possibility of it, as the
Apostle intimates, Philip. 3.14.

Comparative Perfection, Genesis 6.9. Phil. 3.10.
is that spoken of Genesis 6.9. Phil. 3.15. Though a man has not attained to that
degree he might have attained unto, yet (...) in respect of others he may be
said to be perfect. Thus the true Christian is Perfect, being Perfectly
Justified, Perfectly Sanctified, having all parts and powers of soul and body
renewed. And for Degrees, perfect comparatively; but that Absolute Perfection
which he ought to have here, and that fulness which hereafter he shall have
when he comes to his own Country, he yet wants, and here in this life shall
want; yet such a Perfection as may suit with the condition of a Christian,
travailing here on earth to heaven, he ought to seek after, and endeavor, and
by his lawful endeavors, he may attain unto it: Who so aims not at the
Perfection of Degrees cannot comfort himself in this, That he has the
Perfection of Parts in truth in him.

Thirdly, the Church (as you have heard) is comp^red to a Vineyard, for the
pleasant smell that it gives, and the shadow that it yields, in both which
respects we are to show our selves the true Members of it: Pliny tell us that
the smell of a Vineyard is such, that it drives away all Serpents, and venomous
Creatures; And such should our lives and conversations be, as that by our
well-doing, 1 Pet. 2.12, 15.
the mouths of foolish and wicked men (who are apt to pry and spy into our
courses, to see what evil they can find out, and fasten on us) should be
silenced (or muzled), 1 Pet. 2.12, 15. And that all the world may see, they
lie. when they speak evil of us (says Hierom). Such a Conversation is sweet*
both to God and man; Ut nemo de nobis ma^e: loqui absque mendacio possit. Hier.
Epist. ad* Col.
God is delighted with it, Man is comforted and allured thereby, to love and
like the way of Godliness, and to bless God, that ever they saw the power of
it, in the lives of Christians.

The Primitive Believers led such convincing lives, (as Tertullian shows) that
they were honored of their very Enemies. Justin Martyr confesses of himself,
that by beholding their piety in life, and their patience in death, he
concluded that they walked in the truth, and thereby he was brought to glorify
God in the day of his visitation. Luther led such a life, as that it was
approved by all men, (says Erasmus); his very enemies could not accuse him for
any thing in point of Practice: The like was said of Bucer, who so lived, that
neither could his friends sufficiently praise him, nor his foes justly blame
him: Bradford was had in such great reverence and admiration for his holiness,
that a multitude who never knew him (but by fame) lamented his death; and a
number of Papists themselves wished his life. A godly life is like a sweet
Ointment, compounded after the Art of the Apothecary; Oh that the whole House,
the Church of God, were filled with the savor of it, that it were more sented
in all places, in all companies, where we come. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Ye are a chosen Generation (says St. Peter) that you should show forth (or
preach forth) the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Our lives should be as so many Sermons upon the
life of Christ. And that Ointment that was powered on the head, should savor in
every member of the Body.

And as we must send forth a sweet Savor in our lives, so should we likewise
yield a Shadow, to them that are scorched by heat of the Sun; and be a Shelter
to them from the violence of the weather. Such a shadow was Job to the
Fatherless and the Widow, Job 19.15, 16.
the oppressed and distressed; he was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame:
A Father to the Poor, and the Cause which he knew not he searched out, Job
19.15, 16. And such a Shadow should all in authority be, as was good Obadiah to
the persecuted Prophets of the Lord; 1 King. 18.4, 13.
he hid them by fifty and fifty in a Cave and fed them with bread and water, 1
King. 1.8.4.13. O that Great men and Courtiers would give such a Shadow: Every
one in his place should affoard a Shadow to such as are in distress, 1 These.
5.14.
according to that 1 These. 5.14. Comfort the feeble minded, support the weak,
etc.

The Roof of the house is a shadow; Genesis 19.8.
so we find Genesis 19.8. Therefore are they come under the shadow of my Roof
(said Lot). All Household Governors are to be a Shadow to those under their
charge; the Husband to the Wife, as the Fowl is to the young ones which she
covers under her wing, Ruth. 3.9. Ruth. 3.9.
the Parent, to the Child; the Master, to the Servant, etc. Care must be had
that they that dwell under our shadow may return, and revive as the Corn, and
grow as the Vine. Hos. 14.7. Hos. 14.7.
Yet our Shade must be good and wholesome, no harbor for Swearers, Drunkards,
nor other vicious Livers. Psa. 101.6, 7.
Psalm. 101.6, 7.

Fourthly, The Church is a Vineyard in respect of its Ferrility, bearing much
fruit, and best fruit: This calls upon us to be fruitful, and that in the best
kind: Christianity is no barren Profession, it will be doing. What Pliny speaks
of the nature of the Vine, that rather then her life she will be always
bearing; Plin. lib. 17. c. 22.
the same may be said of every good Christian, He is never well but when he is
doing good; It is the delight, and joy of his Soul, to be rich in good works,
and full of good fruits; 1 Timothy 6.8. Gal. 5.
to see his heart and life laden with fruits of the best kind; as Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Me^knesse, Temperance,
and such like fruits of the Spirit: Of which fruitfullnesse, we shall speak
shortly more fully.

Fifthly, As the Church is resembled to a Vineyard in respect of the Order that
is in it; so it calls upon us who profess our selves Members thereof, to walk
orderly. The want of this the Apostle sharply reproves in Professors, 1 These.
5.14. 2 These. 5.14. 2 These. 3.6, 11. Mat. 20.6.
and 2 These. 3.6, 11. And such are they

First, Who live without a Calling, and have no special settled course of life,
wherein they may employ their Gifts, and Time, for their own and the Churches
good.

Secondly, Such as are dissolute and negligent in their Vocations, and
Callings: these the Apostle terms disorderly Walkers, and addresseth his speech
especially unto, 2 These. 3.7, 11.
2 These. 3.7, 11.

Thirdly, Such as intrude upon other men's Callings; these break their Ranks,
and disorder all: 1 Cor. 7.20, 24.
Let every one abide in that Calling whereunto he is called. 1 Cor. 7.20, 24.

Fourthly, Such as trangresse Ordinances, and Rules, established for the
ordering of life and conversation, 2 These. 3.10. 2 These. 3.10.
The Scripture gives Rules of Direction how to carry our selves in every
station, and has promised much peace and comfort to such as walk according to
Rule, Gal. 6.16.
Gal. 6.16. Agur tells us of three things that go well, yea four that are
comely in going. A Lion, Prove. 30.29, 30, 31.
which is strongest amongst Beasts, and turns not away for any: A Gray hound:
and a He Goat: and a King, against whom there is no rising up. Prove. 30.29,
30, 31. These patterns of comely going are propounded to this intent, that
every one in his P^ace, and Calling, should have a special regard of orderly
walking. When Magistrates know how to rule well, and Subjects to obey;
Ministers to teach, and People to learn; Governors of Families to command, and
Inferiors to observe their Precepts: there will a comeliness and beauty appear
in the face of Church and State; but before, it cannot be expected. The world
looks upon Ministers only, Psalm. 50. Ult.
as Men in orders, at least such as ought to be so. But it concerns you, as
well as them, to walk orderly, if you expect Salva^ion.

Sixthly, In respect of the Churches Imbecility, and Feebleness, it is like
unto a Vineyard; It cannot support it self. And so it teaches us not to trust
to our own strength, but take hold on the strength of God, as we are willed*
Isa. 27.6. The Vine carries with it, Isa. 27.6.
her Key as well as her Bunch or Cluster, and with the Key, it windeth it self
about its prop: Faith is the Key, and Love is the Cluster; every living Branch
has both. Gal. 5.6. Gal. 5.6.
By the Grace of God I am that I am (says the Apostle), there is his Key: And
his Grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain, but I labored more
abundantly then they all, there was the Cluster, 1 Cor. 15.10. Psalm. 119.117.
John 15.5.
1 Cor. 15.10. So David, Hold thou me up and I shall be safe, there was the
Key: and I will have respect unto thy Statutes continually, there was the
Cluster, Psalm. 119.117. Without Christ we can do nothing, as he tells us John
15.5. but being strengthened by him, and supported of him, we shall be enabled
to do all things, Phil. 4.13. Oh take heed of presuming on your own strength:
Phi. 4.13.
Peter did so but a little, and you know how dangerously he fell. Bring the Key
with you, wind your selves about the Prop that must uphold you: Bestrong in
God, Ephesians. 6.10.
and in the power of his Might, and fear not falling.

Seventhly, Whereas the Church is a Vincyard in respect of Danger: Let all be
stirred up in general to seek the safety and welfare of it, by our prayers and
pious endeavors: Lament. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold, and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me: Such is the Churches
complaint at this day, and yet the ruins and breaches of Zion we behold with a
regardlesse eye; we look to our private wealth, and particular estates; 2 Samuel
11.11. Neh. 1.4, 5. Dan. 10.2, 3.
and if it go well with us (as we think), we regard not much, how it goes with
the Church of God: Vriah did not thus; Nehemiah did not so; Daniel did not so;
These grieved, mourned, fasted, prayed, under the pressures of the Church,
albeit they themselves, for their own personal concernments, were in peace.
Questionless, there is no one Sin, for which God has more a controversy with
this Land, then this, That the Wants, and Maimes, and Breaches of his Vineyard
are looked on with a regardlesse eye, and so little laid to heart: I looked and
there was none to help, Isa. 63.5.6.
and I wondered that there was none to uphold, Isa. 63.5, 6. Can we think our
selves lively Members of the Church, Branches of the true Vine, or that we have
the Affections of God's Children in us, when we see the Vineyard of the Lord
sustain loss, and be in hazard of waste without any remorse? Let Magistrates
use the power of the Sword; Ministers, of the Word; All, one the other, Lament.
5.21.
assist by their prayers, Turn thou us to thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned:
renew our days as of old. Even so be it Lord, so be it.

More particularly, from the Dangers that God's Vineyard is liable continually
unto; Every one within the Church, Prants of this Vineyard, may be warned to
expect trials, and prepare for them. In the World (says Christ) you shall have
tribulation; Joh. 16.33.
or bruisings (for so the word is, John 16.33.); Grievances, bruisings,
pressures, expect, and look for: Ye are goodly branches of the true Vine (says
Cyprian), Cyp. ad Marcel.
hanged with Clusters of ripe Grapes; Secular persecution is your treading, and
pressing upon; Your Wine Press is the prison; and instead of Wine, your blood
is drawn from you: The fairest Grapes are pressed, that they may yield the
sweetest juice. This World is not a Paradise, but a Purgatory, to the Godly. Ye
have not yet resisted unto Blood, many of our Breath en have, Heb. 12.4.
and who knows what we may do?

Eighthly, In that, as in a Vineyard so in the Church, all in it are not of it;
Let us not content our selves with this, that we live within the pale, and are
accounted members of the visible Church, that we have bin baptized, and so
externally and sacramentally engrafted into the body of Christ; for there are
two sorts of branches in the Vine as appears, John 15.2.
John 15.2. Some that would willingly be esteemed so, and are esteemed so to
be, by reason of their outward Profession, and external engrafting into him,
but they do not take; they bring forth no fruit; and these kind of branches
soon dye, and admit of a cutting off, not having the sap of grace ministered
unto them from the stock. Others, are bearing-branches, such as are both
externally, and internally engrafted into Christ, and receive sap from him, and
bring forth fruit in him: These shall live and abide for ever. And unless thou
be such a branch, engraf^ed into Christ, by a true and lively faith, and
made one with him, as the Branch is with the Vine, Thou will perish eternally,
for all thy outward Profession: How these may be known from the other, we shall
show you afterward.

Lastly, If the Church be as a Vineyard, despicable when it has left bearing;
Oh! then look unto your selves, that you cast not your leaves and become
barren; Indeed there is no Vine but has a Winter season, but still the sap
remains in the Root; and after it is cut, and has bled, it recovers it self
again, and brings forth abundantly as before; In case it do not, it is good for
nothing but for the fire, as God shows Ezekiel in that Parable, Ezekiel. 15.
Ezekiel. 15. Have thou then bin forward, and fruitful in works of piety, mercy,
etc. but now have given over bearing? make use of God's corrections, bleed for
thy provocations, and recover those things that are ready to dye in thee, for
fear burning be thy end: And so much of the Uses which we may make of the
Allegory in general, in that the Church is resembled to a Vineyard. Now
something, of the Unity of it, and Gods propriety and Interest therein, would
be said.

Vineyard. Text.


It was One; not Vineyards, many: And from hence we may conclude that,

The Church of Christ is one, and but one.

My Dove my undefiled is but one (says Christ of his Church) and she the only
one of her Mother. Cant. 6.8, 9.
And yet there were threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number, Cant. 6.8, 9. As if Christ should say, There are a great number
of people and Nations, of Churches and Assemblies, Dr. Hall Paraph. in loc.
which challenge my name and love, and seem to plead a great Interest in me,
and much worth in themselves; Yet thou, my true and chaff Spouse, pure and
undefiled in the truth of my Doctrine, and the imputation of my holiness, art
one in thy self, and the only one in my love; Thou art she, that, Gal. 4.24.
Jerusalem which is above us all, acknowledges for her only true and dear
Daughter, Psalm. 144.15. Psalm. 87.3. Joh. 10.16. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor 12.12. Ephesians.
1.23. Object. Gal. 1.22. Rev. 1.20.
and whom all Foreign Assemblies which might seem to be Rivals with t^ee of
this praise, do applaud and bless in this estate, saying, Blessed is this
people whose God is their Lord. And thus it is termed a City not Cities; A
Sheepfold, not Sheepfolds; A House, not Houses; One body Mystical, not many;
And it is an Article of our Faith to believe the holy Catholic Church* not
Churches.

But we read of Churches: Paul was unknown by face (as he says) unto the
Churches of Judea, which were in Christ, Gal. 1.22. So, Revel. 1.20. The seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches, How then is the Church but one?

The multiplicity of Particular Churches do not hinder the unity of the
Catholic; all these are but parts of it, Multae Ecclesiae una Ecclesia. Aug.
as one tree that has several arms and branches: Many stones make but one
house, many houses one City, many Cities one Kingdom; so, many men one
particular Congregation, many Congregations one visible Church, many Churches
one Catholic One. Or as the Ocean-Sea is but one in it self, yet running by
diverse Countries and Coasts, has the name according to the Coast it runs by;
As the English Sea, the Irish Sea, the German Sea, etc. yet all but one Sea: So
we distinguish of Churches, yet all is but one and the same, One Catholic
Church and no more.

For, it has one Head, and no more: Ephesians. 1.22, and 2, 21. Colos. 1.18, and 2,
19.
Christ is the alone Head of his Church, and can have no other partner to share
with him in this Dignity, Ephesians. 1.22, and 2, 21. Colos. 1.18 and 2, 19. It is
great arrogance in the Pope to Style himself, Caput Ecclesiae, the head of the
Church; But they distinguish of Heads: There is a Principal and a Ministerial
Head; the Pope is only the Ministerial, Christ the Principal. But the
Prerogative of the Head is not to serve and minister, but to command and
govern. In different respects one may be said to have diverse heads; for besides
the natural head (which every man has) he has a Spiritual Head which is God,
and a Politic Head which is the Sovereign Magistrate; but there is nothing in
the World that can have two Heads of the same respect and rank but it is a
Monster; and so should the Church be if it had both Christ and the Pope for
Heads: Albeit one be above, and another under, (as they pretend); for that
their Headships is of one and the same kind, Spiritual.

Secondly, It is One, for that all the godly are Mystically united into one
Body. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 20, 27. Gal. 3.28. 1
Cor. 10.17.
As we are knit to the Head by Faith, so are we knit one to another by Love and
Charity. The members of the body are many, some have a higher place, and more
honorable Office than others; yet the Body is but one. So is it in the Church,
Jew and Gentile, Bond Free, Male Female, all one in Christ, Gal. 3.28. This is
lively testified and expressed in the Use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 10.17. We being many, are one bread and one body; many grains of wheat
go to make one loaf, and many members make up the body of Christ: And as one
body can have but one head, so one head but one body.

Thirdly, It is one in respect of the visible profession of the same service to
God, holding the same entire Doctrine of Fundamental Faith and Religion,
acknowledging one and the same God; believing in one and the same Father, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Savior and Mediator betwixt God
and Man; having one Hope, one Faith, one Baptism, one Spirit to quicken us,
Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
and one Law to guide and rule us, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. Now let us briefly Apply this.

Basil Reports with astonishment what he found by experience in his travails,
Ascet. p. 186.
that when in all Arts, and Sciences, and Societies, he saw peace and
agreement, yet only in the Church of Christ, for which he died, he found
discord.

by their heretical opinions, and make a rent in her by Schismatical
distractions. This was the disease of the Church of Corinth, she fell asunder
into as many divisions, as her Church had Teachers, 1 Cor. 1.12. One side said,
I am of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.12. Explained.
they admited his plainness, his matter being powerful; and suspected Apollo's
structure for the gaudy varnish: Another admires the powerful eloquence of
Apollo, sleighting St. Paul as too flat and heavy, and his speech contemptible.
Act. 18.21. 2 Cor. 10.10.
A third sort are taken with St. Peter's draught; you are for Paul, and you for
Apollo, and what was Paul? was he not a Persecutor of the Church of God, a
Friend to the high Commission Court, Act. 9.1, 2.
one that carried Letters missive up and down to fetch them up (whether men or
women) that professed Christ? And what is Apollo? had not he the best of his
Divinity from Aquila and Priscilla, a Layman and a weak woman? Act. 18.26. Act.
2.41, and 4.4.
There is Cephas a more powerful Preacher then either of them; He converted
three thousand souls at one Sermon, and five thousand at another, (as the
Report goes) he is the highest in my esteem. Well resolved, says a fourth, but
did not Peter curse, and swear, and deny his Master? Excuse me, I am neither
for Paul, Apollo, nor Cephas, I am a Christian, and depend holy on Christ, I
expect immediate Revelation from Him, and care for never a Preacher in the
World, not regard I to hear them. This was Corinths distemper, and is not the
same ours? Whose heart does not bleed within him, to behold what gathering
there is into distinct and separate Churches? what engaging there is into
parties, and factions in the behalf of their Leaders? 1 Cor. 1.13.
But is Christ divided (says the Apostle) is he one in Paul, and another in
Apollo, another in Cephas? Is he not one and the same in all his Messengers? if
so, why go you about to make a Schism, and a rent in the Church, and hazard you
Interest in the head, by disjoyning your selves one from another.

Dico and obtestor, (says Chrysostom etc.) I say, In Ephesians. Hom. 11.
and pro^est that no man may plead ignorance, Schism in a Church, is as great a
sin as Heresy: At the coming of Christ, there will be little difference put,
betwixt such as have wounded the Church in her Head with Heretical opinions, or
in her Members, by Schismatical distractions. However, that saying of Augustine
concerning Donatus would be minded, Persecutor non fregit crura, Donatus rupit
Ecclesiam, etc. The Soldiers would not break the legs of Christ, but Donatus
tea^es the Church of Christ; As long as his body hung upon the Cross, amongst
Thieves and Malefactors, it remained whole; but when it was received by
Christians it was rent, and torn into many parts and factions; And in so doing
we deal worse with the body of Christ then the Jewish Soldiers did with his
Garments, which they cast lots for, but made no division of.

Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Ephesians. 4.2, 3. the means in the former verse he had prescribed, with all
lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love.
It is by pride that contention comes (says Solomon). All ages have found this
to be the Mother of Heresy and Schism: Prove. 13.10.
What bred Arrians and Donatists in ancient times, but a priding themselves in
their own wits? And in these latter days, what is the cause of so much faction
and fraction? but Pride of spirit, men having too high a conceit of their own
worth: Meekness and lowliness of spirit would help this, Romans 12.3, 16. Romans
12.13, 16. Greg. Epist. l. 11. Math. 11.30.
Gregory calls Humility Radicem pacis, the Root of peace; Learn of me (says
Christ), I am meek and lowly, and you shall have rest to your souls.

Love and Charity likewise, makes much to unity. Be kindly affectioned one to
another with brotherly love, (says the same Apostle, Romans 12.10.): So
elsewhere he often and vehemently presses it, Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.2, 2.
Explained.
Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love,
if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercy fulfill you my joy,
that you be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one
mind; As if he should say, Let me not entreat you only, but adjure you, as ever
you would receive any comfort in Christ, as ever you would receive any benefit
by his love and your own; if you have any sense of that spiritual communion
which is between the Saints of God; if ye have any compassion on me and the
Church of God; do you herein, make up the mea^ure of my joy, in that you be
peaceable and lovingly affected each to other: can any thing be spoken more
pathetically, or perswasively? and whereto tended all this, but to the
preservation of the Churches peace and unity? And, Colos. 3.14. Love is charged
upon us, Colos. 3.14.
above all those excellent graces there mentioned.

Where love is, there is a Sympathy, a fellow-feeling of our Brethrens
miseries, and a pitying of their weakness; it causes us to be alike affected
as if we were in their case, Heb. 13.3.
Heb. 13.3. And where love is, there is Symphony, a Harmony and consent in
believing of holy truths, and in the worship and service of the true God as we
read, Acts 4.32. Acts 4.32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one soul, though
they were many in number, yet they were but one in soul; and being different in
quality and condition, Anima una, quoad Intellectum, per unitatem fidei: Cor
unum, quoad Affectum, per unitatem Charitatis. Amb. Ser. 9. de Unit. Trin. Tom.
5.
they differed not in faith and affection: They were (says one) of one soul in
regard of their Judgment, by the unity of faith; they were of one heart in
regard of their Affections, by union of Love, So that, as St. Ambrose tells
us this spiritual Love and unity of the Faithful far excels the natural Love
and Unity of Brethren. That has in it, the resemblance and similitude of the
Body only; this declares the Unanimity. That sometimes, is contentious; this
always peaceable; That into company refuses a Brother, this into society
admits a stranger. That divides with heart burnings, things common amongst
themselves; this communicates with cheerfulness, things proper unto others.
Thus did the Primitive Church receive her most happy beginning, from the
concord of her Children. And for want of this, Cant. 1.8.
our Church (which was the fairest amongst Women, Judge. 19.29.
being united) is with the Levite's wife, being divided and cut asunder (as it
is at this day) become the object of scorn and pity.

Want we motives to stir us up to keep the Unity of the spirit, Ephesians. 4.4, --
7.
in the bond of peace? The Apostle is not wanting, Ephesians. 4.4.5, 6. A seven
fold obligation lies upon us for preserving of i^. First, The Church is but one
body, (as we said before) and we are members of that body; Now as in the body
of man, the members (though diverse, and of diverse offices) sweetly agree: Romans
12.5. 1 Cor. 12.25, 27.
So should it be with the Church, the Mystical body of Christ, Romans 12.5. 1
Cor. 12.25, 27. Me thinks this very consideration (should the Apostle bring no
more) might prevail with us, to forbear discord, and agree in one.

Livy tells us a Story, That when the Common wealth of Rome was in great
danger, Decad. 1. Lib. 2.
through the broils that arose between the Commons and Nobles of that City;
The Senate sent Menenius Agrippa (a famous Orator) to pacify the People, who
told them this Parable: The Members of the Body objected against the Stomach;
that it devoured all, and yet lay idly and sluggishly in the midst of the Body,
whilst the rest of the Member, labored full sore to feed it; thereupon the
Feet refused to carry it, the Hand to put Meat to the Mouth, the Mouth to
receive it: The Stomach being empty, the Eye began to be dimn, the Hand weak,
the Feet feeble, all the Members grew faint, and the Body withered; so that at
last they were all necessitated to grow friends with the Stomach, and be at
one: By which Parable he quie^ed the people. And I could wish it might prevail
with us: For as the health and safety of the Body depends upon the concord of
the Parts, in the mutual performance of their duties; so does the well fare of
the Church, when we show out selves to be Members one of another.

Secondly, There is one Spirit which we are all partakers of, 1 Cor. 12.13.
Ephesians. 2.18. As in the natural body there are not diverse Souls, 1 Cor. 12.13.
Ephesians. 2.18.
according to the diversity of Members; but one that gives life and motion to
every Member, and quickens it: so is it in the body of Christ; and this Spirit
is the Spirit of Union; it keeps all together, which else would shatter, and
fall asunder: How can such think they have this Spirit, that live in discord?
Hear what St. Jude says of such, ver. 19. They are sensual, Jude 19.
and have not the Spirit: We need not load them with any other guilt than that.
Are you not carnal (says the Apostle to the contentious Corinthians, 1 Cor.
3.3.)? Yes you are, 1 Cor. 3.3. Romans 8.6.
and void of the Spirit; and to be carnally minded is death, Romans 8.6.

Thirdly, One hope of our Calling; that is, we are called unto one and and the
same Inheritance, which we all hope for, where we shall live sweetly and
blessedly together; Fall not out therefore by the way (as Joseph said to his
Brethren). It is shame, Genesis 45.24.
and pity, to see discord, and contention, between them that must forever live
together in peace and love: Indeed it is a sad sight to behold two Heirs, to be
at daggers drawing, when the Inheritance cannot, nor shall be divided.

Fourthly, One Lord, which is our head Christ Jesus, whose Cognizance and
Livery, is Love and Unity, John 13.35. Joh. 13.35.
This Cognizance was so apparent in the Livery of Christians, who lived in the
Primitive times, that the very Heathen knew a Christian by it: See (said they)
how they love one another. Tertull.
And see, said the Christians of them, How they bate one another. Is it not a
great dishonor to our Lord, and Master, that we cast off this Livery, so that
now the very Heathen may say of us, as then Christians said of them, See what
differences, what discords, are amongst them? Had we many Lords to serve, no
wonder if we differed, (for no man can serve two Masters, Mat. 6.24. Zeph. 3.9.
much less many): but seeing we have but one Lord to obey, let us put one
shoulder to his work.

Fifthly, One Faith, which is the Soul of our Souls. One, whether we understand
it of the Doctrine of Faith, which is believed, (called, in Athanasius his
Confession, the Catholic Faith of all Christians); or, of the Gift of Faith,
whereby we believe to Justification; which Grace is but one and the same, in
all the Elect, 2 Pet. 1.1. 2 Pet. 1.1. Tit. 1.4.
and therefore called the common Faith, Tit. 1.4. for that all Beleivers do, by
one and the same Faith, believe in one and the same Christ: As there is but one
Church in the Faith, so but one Faith in the Church; Una fides specie, non una
numero, One Faith in nature, not one in number; One, ratione Objecti, which is
Christ, not one ratione Subjecti; For every Believer has his own Faith, Hab.
2.4. Hab. 2.4. Mar. 5.34.
And so there are as many Faiths as there are Beleivers: We may say of Faiths
as of Faces, Facies non omnibus una, Non diversa tamen; One Light, many Rays;
one Fountain, many Streams: This Faith being but one, we should therefore study
to keep the unity of it, in the bond of Love; and so compose our Affections as
that we may go out with one heart, and one mind, in the profession of it: We
can do nothing (says the Apostle) against the truth but for the truth, 2 Cor.
13.8. 2 Cor. 13.8.
So long as there is found agreement in fundamental truths betwixt us, and
dissenting Brethren, it shall be our wisdom to silence our disputes, and leave
off wranglings about matters merely notionall, and curious. But if in case this
One Faith, which was once (for all) given to the Saints, be resisted by
gainsayers, then it is our duty to contend for it, Jude v. 3. (...).
as we are required, Jud. ver. 3. and conflict one after another (as the word
signifies).

Sixthly, One Baptism, which is the Seal of the aforesaid Faith. The Apostle
indeed elsewhere speaks of Baptisms, Heb. 6.2. Exp^ained.
Heb. 6.2. as if there were more then one; but the Apostle there, either puts
one number for another, the Plural for the Singular (as we find it ^ometimes
put), (so some conceive); Or because certain times were appointed for Baptism;
as Easter, and Whitsontide, (so others); or, in regard of the three Immersions
that were used in Baptism, to signify the Trinity, for the party baptized was
wont to be three times dipped in the water, and therefore he might call it
Baptisms or dippings; Or else by way of Allusion to the manifold washings, or
Baptisms, under the Law; and so by Baptisms is meant that Doctrine which
teaches the cessation of them, and the use of one Baptizing only instituted by
Christ, and so the rest abolished: Or else it is to be understood of the
Outward and Inward Washing which the Schools call Baptismum Flaminis and
Fluminis, The Baptism of Water, and of the Spirit; that Washing af
Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
and the renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. The signification of both which,
were taught the people in those times, that they might learn to put difference
betwixt Baptism by the Minister (which an Hypocrite may have); and the Inward
Baptism by the Spirit, which Christ bestows on his own Elect: And that they
might be instructed in the nature of the Sacrament, and the signification
thereof; and withal (it might be) of the Baptism of suffering affliction for
the Gospel, whereunto the Sacrament of Baptism obliges. The first and the last
of these Expositions are most followed, but the latter best approved: However
the Apostle speaks of Baptisms, not for that men were often to be baptized (as
some would have it); For as we are born once, so baptized but once: They were
but once circumcised under the Law, and we are but once to be baptized in time
of the Gospel, nor that Christ instituted more Baptis^s ^hen one. And this one
Ba^tism, wherein we are all ba^tized with water into the Name of On^ God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, should be a strong motive unto us to live in
Unity, and godly Love; this being one use of Baptism (amongst others) to
distinguish Christians from other Sects, 1 Cor. 12.13.
and to knit the hearts of Christians together in a holy Communion, 1 Cor.
12.13.

Seventhly, and Lastly* One God and Father of all, who above all things
delights in the Unanimity of his Children. Mal. 2.10.
Have we not all one Father (says Malachy)? Yes, we have; Why then dissent and
jarr we? can we think it a matter pleasing unto God? Is it not one of those six
things that God hates, Pro. 6.19.
Discord amongst Brethrens? Prove. 6.19. We are Brethren, both by the Father and
Mother's side, and it is a shame for Brechren in nature to be separated in
Affection; so much more sinful and shameful, for those whom Grace has joined;
whom one heavenly Father, Faith, and Religion, has coupled, to be be
disunited, and make a breach in the Body of Christ: Gen, 13.8.
Let there be no strife between me and thee (said Abraham to Lot), for we are
Brethren. The very name of Brotherhood is an Argument of Unity, and has a
sweet violence to persuade; Abraham could find no such enforcing motive to
peace, as it: Moses used the like Argument to those two Hebrews that were
striving together, Fall not out (said he) for ye are Brethren: Act. 7.26.
And when the Servants of Benhadad observed the word Brother to come from the
mouth of Ahab, they hastily laid hold on it, as an excellent praeparative to
the settling of those differences which were betwixt those two Princes, 1 King.
20.33. 1 King. 20.33.
But how little does it prevail in these days? We find that true which Solomon
speaks (by woeful experience), Pro. 18.19.
A Brother offended is harder to be wonn then a strong City, and their
contentions are like the Bars of a Castle, Prove. 18.19. The War that is betwixt
spiritual Brethren is almost irreconcilable; our dissentions are like that
[(...)] great Gulf, spoken in the Gospel, through which there is no passage
of meeting. Let us be earnest with God, Luke 16.26. Ezekiel. 37.7.
that he would show his power in the compounding of them, it is he alone that
must do do it, the Wind of his Spirit must blow upon these bones before they
ever come together.

To these seven Motives, used by the Apostle, tending to Unity, more might be
brought, both from the good of it, and the ill or discord; But I have been
somewhat prolix already, in this Use, but the Usefulness thereof may excuse
me; I have out a word or two to say more, and so I shall dismiss the Point.

If the Church be but One, One entire Body made up by the Collection and
Aggregation of all the Faithful, Church Ordinances, and Rites, we may claim
and Interest for our Salvation; 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 3.21.22.
In the Gifts of all God's Ministers we have a Right and Title, and may, as
occasion shall be offered, make use of them; The Privileges of the Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of
the Body, and Life everlasting, all are ours; None of us that are of the Body,
(neither Particular Persons, nor Particular Congregations), are to work as
several divided bodies, by themselves; but as parts conjoined to the whole,
all of us are (as in a shop, when one servs this Customer, another that) to
bring to the common box, and in employing of our gifts to aim at the good of
the body, for every one within the Church has such a Relation unto, and
dependence upon the Church, as parts use to have in respect of the whole; which
is full of comfort and encouragement (being well digested). But enough has
been said concerning this special property of the Vineyard's Unity. Now
briefly of the Owner's peculiar Interest, and Propriety, therein. It is His
Vineyard.

How His?

The whole Earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the round World,
Resp. Psalm. 24.1.
and they that dwell therein (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 24.1.) and yet in
regard of the Affection that he bears unto the Church, he does in a manner
count himself owner of nothing but this.

The Church is the peculiar Inheritance of the Lord, Deu. 32.9. Exodus 19.5.6.
Isa. 46.13. Ezekiel. 7.20.
He does more respect it that he does all the World besides.

The Lord's Portion is his People, Jacob is the Lot of his Inheritance (says
Moses), Deuteronomy 32.9. they are his peculiar ones, Exodus, 19.5.6. His Glory, Isa.
46.13. his Ornament, Ezekiel. 7.20. His Thorn, Jer. 4.21. His Diadem, Isa. 62.3.
Jer. 4.21. Isa. 6.2, 3, 4. Reas. 1.
His Hepthzibah, Isa. 62.4. his only delight is in her.

He has chosen then from the rest of the World; Only the Lord had a delight
in thy Fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above
all people, as it is this day, said Moses to Israel. Deuteronomy. 10.15.) The Lord
has chosen Zion, Deuteronomy. 10.15. Ps. 132.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.9.
he has desired it for his Habitation (says David, Psalm. 132.13, 14.) Ye are
a chosen Generation (says Peter, 1 Epist. 2.9.) God chooses for his Love, and
loves for his Choice; they are called His by Election.

Ahab, 1 King. 21.15.
who purchased Naboth's Vineyard, by the cruel shedding of the right owners
blood and unjust robbing of the right Possessor of it; but by giving the blood
of his own Son to redeem it out of the hand of Justice, where it lay engaged, 1
Pet, 18.19. 1 Per. 1.18.19. 1 Pet. 2.9.
hence it is termed The people of his Purchase, 1 Pet. 2.9. as comprehending
all his gettings.

their God, and take them for his People, Hos. 2.13. 1 Pet. 2.10.
and so he has not with the World besides, Hos. 2.13. 1 Pet. 2.10. with Christ
first was this Covenant of Grace and Mercy struck up on our behalf, and so with
us in him.

ill Will to Zion, that they be not too busy: The fingers of many itch to be
pulling the Fence of Gods Vineyard, breaking down her Wall, robbing her Vines,
yea, stubbing up both Root and Branch, etc. But let all such Boars of the Wood,
and Foxes of the field, Psalm. 80. Zech. 2.3.
remember that the Vineyard has an Owner, who holds it as dear as the Apple of
his Eye; Israel is Holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his
increase, all that deavour him shall offend, evil shall come upon them (says
the Lord, Jer. 2.3.
Jer. 2.3.) God will bring his Action of Spoil and Waste against all such, (and
that is none of the cheapest Actions as some know) he will arrest them and
attaint them at the Bar of his Justice, and plead against them, and in the end
all such shall know, that however his Vineyard seems to lie awhile as
unregarded, yet Her Name is, Sought out, Isa. 62.12.
A City not forsaken.

make long their furrows, and harrow us to purpose, but to forsake us utterly
that he will not: Psalm. 129.3. Levit. 25.10, 23, 28.
He gave a Law to his people, and established it for an Ordinance to his
Israel, that none should sell away the Inheritance of his Fathers, (this,
Naboth made conscience of) and if in case he had morgaged any part of his
Inheritance, and by reason of poverty he were not able to redeem it, yet at the
end of fifty years if should return to him again, Levit. 25.10, 23, 28. And
shall we think that God will part with his Vineyard, his own Inheritance for
ever? No, No, it cannot be, The ga^es of Hell shall never prevail against it:
Even so, Return O Lord of Hoasts we beseech thee, Math. 16.18.
Look down from Heaven, and visit this Vineyard which thy right hand has
planted, and the branch which thou madst strong for thy self. Psalm. 80.


We are thine, o Lord: as for the wicked thou never bear Rule over them: No
wicked man can lay claim to God in respect of this Interest. Isa. 63.19.
To the wicked says God What have thou to do to take my name into thy mouth,
Psalm. 50.16.
Psalm. 50.16. that is, to boast that I am thy God, seeing thou hate
Instruction, etc. It is not a dishonor think you to God, to be counted the God
of Drunkards, Swearers, Licentious Livers? What a God (with a mischief) is it
that these men serve, said the Indians, beholding the cruelty of the Spaniards;
But God is not ashamed to be called the God of Believers, Heb. 11.16.
Heb. 11.16. It is indeed a debasing of himself thus to exalt them, but God is
not ashamed of it, he makes over himself to us in a special manner, so as to be
ours and take us for his own; For the Covenant of grace runs in this Tenor, I
will be their God and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.33.
Jer. 31.23. And thus will I say to them which were not my people, Thou art my
people, and they shall say, Thou art my God, Hos. 2.23. Hos. 2.23.
God challenges us to be his, and we may challenge him to be ours, as did the
Spouse in the Canticles, Chap. 2.16, and 6, 2. Cant. 2.16, and 6, 2.
I am my well-beloveds, and my well-beloved is mine.

And hereof we have great cause to boast and glory, Romans 5.11. Psalm. 18.1, 2.
. Romans 5.11 So did David, Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee O Lord my strength,
The Lord is my Rock and my Fortress and my deliverer, my God, my strength, in
whom I will trust, my Buckler, the horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower.
Nine several My's there are in those two verses; The poor Christian can have no
greater nor sounder ground of comfort, neither in Life, nor Death, then this
that he is Gods, and God is his: All happiness comes along with God. Psalm.
119.94. Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 5.8. 1 Timothy 5.8. Psalm. 33.12, and 144, 15. Deuteronomy.
33.29. 1 Samuel 25.16. Dan. 4.30. Luke 4.8, 9.
Upon this ground we may expect Protection, so David often, I am thine, save
me: Who will not defend his own? and upon this ground we may expect Provision,
and all necessary supplies; He is worse then an Infidel (says the Apostle)
that provides not for his own: This alone is enough to make a man perfectly
blessed, Psalm. 33.12, and 144, 15. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Let Nabal (then) boast of his
Sheep and Wine, Shall I take my bread, my water, my flesh, with a haughtiness;
let Nebuchadnezar point to his great Palace that he had built, and boast of
the might of his Power, and the greatness of his Majesty: Let the Devil
himself point to all the Kingdoms in the World, and say, All these are mine,
yet all this is nothing to that a true Believer can say, God is mine; It may be
thou have no money, house, friend, to call thine on earth; yet cast thine eye
upward, that Heaven, and the great God that dwells in that Heaven, thou may
call thine: He is the portion of thine Inheritance, thy lines are fallen into a
pleasant place, Psalm. 16.5, 6, 7.
thou have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.5, 6, 7. And so much of the Vineyard,
now to the Plant.

Had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard. Text.
]

The Plant here mentioned, may be considered in its Kind and Quality. For Kind
generically, a Tree; specifically a, Fig Tree. For Quality, no wild one but
planted, and that in no barren soil, but in a Vineyard, even in the Vineyard
before spoken of, a rich and fertile soil.

Man is frequently resembled to a Tree in Scripture; Obs.
so Job 19.10. Dan. 4.10, 11, 14, 20. Isa. 44.23. Jer. 11.19. Ezekiel. 17.24.
Math. 3.10, and 7, 17, 18, 19, and 12, 33. The Resemblances are many; take we
notice of some.

First, In respect of Shape, A Tree has its Root, Trunk, or Body, Boughs,
Branches, and smaller twiggs issuing from thence: Man's Head is his Root, his
Body answers the Trunk or stock of a Tree, His Arms and Legs are his boughs
and branches: His Fingers and Toes the smaller twiggs, Only here is the
difference, Man is Arbor inv^rsa, 2 Tree turned upside down, Arist. Plat.
Scalig.
(says the Philosopher). For the Root or Head of a Tree stands on the Earth,
and extends i^ self toward Heaven in the stock, boughs, and branches of it;
But man, (this Mystical Tree) has his Head upwards, as his Root; and his
Branches and Boughs grow downward to the Earth: to teach us (says one) whence
we have our sap, moisture, and nourishment, not from the earth below, as the
Tree has (which was Esau's blessing, Genesis 27.28, 39.
) but from the dew of Heaven, which was the blessing of Jacob, Genesis 27.28, 39.

Secondly, In respect of Growth, there is some good Resemblance. A Tree is
first tender in the twigg, them stiff in the stock; and lastly, withered and
doting in the age of it. So man, in his Childhood and Infancy is flexible,
easily enclining to virtue or vice, Prove. 22.6.
as he is taught and instructed: like wax he is apt to receive any impression
that shall be put upon him, and (as Pliny speaks of the Firr-Tree) the nearer
it is to the Root, the more smooth it is, and less knotty: So the nearer man
is to Infancy and Childhood, the less sinful, and freest from vicious courses;
but when he once comes to be stiffened, and confirmed in the strength of his
stock, by man-age, then he waxes more tough and violent in his courses, 2
King. 12.14. 2 Chronicles. 24.17.
(as did Rehoboam and Joash): the elder we grow, usually the worse we are. Adam
was worse in his breeches then he was before; so is it with his sinful
posterity.

And as man grows thus in his youth, so he is drooping in his age. Let him be
as strong as the Oak, as tall as the Cedar; as strait as the Pine Tree, as
green and flourishing as the Laurel or Bay Tree; when age s^iseth on him, his
strength is wenkened, his talln^sse ^b^^^, his ^tr^itn^ss^ ^^ooked, his
greenness withered. When Isaac waxed old, his fight waxed dim; when David
waxed old, Genesis 27.1. 1 King. 1.1. 2 Samuel 19.34. Eccless. 12.2, -- 7.
his natural heat decayed; when Barzillah waxed old, his sen es failed, and he
became unserviceable. In old age, the Keepers of the house wax feeble, the
P^llars of the house faint, as Solomon excellently sets it forth, Eccles. 12.2,
-- 7. At hi jam mortui sunt (said Milo, looking upon his Arms when he saw the
young Champions striving for masteries).

Thirdly, There are several sorts and kinds of Trees; some greater then other,
and some taller; some straiter, some broader; some younger, some elder; some
barren, some fruitful; so is it amongst Men: All are not of the same same Rank
and Quasity, some are of high degree, other low, Psalm. 62.9. Jam. 1.9.
Psalm. 62.9. Some exalted, others brought down: Saul was a tall Tree, higher
then others by the head and shoulders. 1 Samuel 10.23. Luke 19.3. 2 Samuel 14.25. 2 Samuel 4.4
Zacheus was a low Tree, lower then the people by head and shoulders; Absalom
was a goodly green strait Tree, none in Israel to be compared with him for
beauty; Mephibosheth was a tree lame and crooked from his Childhood, by a fall
that he god out of his Nurse's arms: Some are fruitful, others unfruitful: Of
which more hereafter.

Fourthly, In respect of Outward State and Condition the Resemblance holds.
High Trees are subject to greatest dangers, being exposed to the violence of
the winds, blasts of Lightning, the dints of Thunderbolts, and usually the
higher the less fruitful: Low Trees are subject to the browzing of Beasts,
trampling down with feet, and twenty other Annoyances; The Tree of a middle
Stature is usually safest, and bears the best fruit. Thus it is with Man:
Those in high place lie open to the winds of alteration, to the lightnings of
Dysasters, 2 Samuel 1.19.
to the thunderings of envy and malice; How are the mighty overthrown (said
David in his Epitaph for Saul.) Oh! how are they fallen? how often are they
split with the weight and greatness of their own boughs? Psalm. 123.4. Psalm.
10.9. Prove. 19.4, 7, and 22, 22. Isa. 3.25.
Those of low estare are trampled upon and scorned, their souls are exceedingly
filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of
the proud; where the hedge is lowest, every one will be trampling over. Who
more wronged than the Widow and Fatherless? The mean estate has always bin
found to be the best and safest; such are beneath envy, and above scorn. This,
Agur preferrs to either extreme, Prove. 30.8. and of this Rank are those poor
that receive the Gospel, Prove. 30.8. Math. 11.5. 1 Cor. 1.26.
or were Gospel lized, Math. 11.5. So, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise men according
to the flesh, not many mighty, not may noble are called, but those of lower
rank and quality, yet not of the lowest; for experience makes it good, that
those who are of the lowest rank of all, are most graceless.

Fifthly, Trees are not without their diseases, as Pliny shows, not is man
without his; Plin. lib. 17. c. 24.
The same Author tells us that, to that time, 300 several diseases were
discovered, which man was subject unto: (some Philosophers say 2000, and that
there is 200, to which the very eye of man is incident). Sure I am, there is no
Tree subject to so many diseases as the body of man is: Besides those two worms
which lie at his Root, Day and Night, which will kill the Tree in the end, and
be the destruction of it.

Lastly, In respect of the Use, Man may be resembled unto a Tree; some Trees
are for building, others for burning, being once felled: So it is with all
mankind, being felled by death; some are for the building up of that house
which is not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. Heb. 6.8.
2 Cor. 5.1. others for fuel in Hell, their end is to be burned, Heb. 6.8.
Other Resemblances we might acquaint you with, but I must observe measure; Let
not this that has bin said be passed over without some useful Application.

We read, Mark 8.24. that when the Blind-man began to recover his sight, Mark
8.24. Explained.
he saw men walking like trees, that is, (says Beda) he saw the forms of men,
but by reason of the dimnesse of his sight, he could not discern any lineaments
of their bodies; As if he should say, I see a weak and confused glimmering of
men, which seems to me rather trees then men.

This (say some) is not without a Mystery: such is man's blindness, that we
look no otherwise upon men, then we use to do upon trees: This man we commend
for his strength, another for his stature, a third for his spreading branches;
and thereupon says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 150.
if thou see a goodly tall man do not admire him, for trees also are of a
great tallnesse; and if thou see a man great in wordly estate, do not gaze
upon him, it is but worldly greatness that is in him: But I may safely say,
that he is blinder then that blind man, who does not see himself (in some
sense,) and others likewise, walking like trees on Earth. Thou art now tall and
high, in a prosperous state and condition, green and flourishing; be not
secure, thou know not how soon thy top may be taken off, thy goodly branches
shred and lopped, thy trunk and body felled by the Axe of Death (which it may
be some long for, that they may gather some of the chips that fly from thee at
that time). Art thou of a low condition, and mean rank, yet thou art a Tree and
must prepare for Winter storms and alterations: No man continues at one stay,
in the midst of Life we are in Death: many of those violent storms which taller
trees do meet withal, thou may escape; but all thou can not, whilst thou
have thy growing and abiding on the Earth: Man that is born of a Woman, Job
14.1.
has but a short time to live, and is full of trouble.

Thou have now the favor of Great of men, Princes and Potentates of the World,
in whom thou trustest, under whose shadow thou refresh^st thy self, and in
whose boughs thou buildest thy nest; yet remember these are but Trees, their
leaves will fade, and they themselves must give way to the stroke of Death, and
what becomes then of all the Birds Nests that were built in their Branches?
Dan. 4.14. Dan. 4.14.
And this is the very Argument that David brings to dissuade from trusting to
Worldly greatness, their breath departs, and they returning to their Earth,
all their thoughts perish: It may be, Psalm. 146.3, 4.
thoughts they had of doing thee good, but all comes to nothing, they dye with
them.

In short, remember what you read, Jonah 4.6. Jonah 4.6.
God by his power and providence, raised on the sudden a little tree out of the
ground, in the shadow whereof Jonah took exceeding delight and pleasure, for
that with the leaves thereof he was defended from the scorching heat of the
Sun; but the joy he took therein lasted not long, for by the morrow-morning,
the next day, the life of that green plant was destroyed by a little gnawing
worm, so that it proved dry and withered, and his de ightful shadow vanished.
Abbot on Jon. Lect. 48.
What kind of Tree that was we will not dispute? It has bin done by some
Learned Expositors to good purpose, albeit, as one of them says, unless there
be some second Adam, King. on Jon. Lect. 45.
to speak his mind, or another Solomon who was able to speak of the Trees, from
the Cedar to the Hysop the controversy will not be ended: (Be it what it was)
I only allude unto it. There is no man but has his tree, or gourd; something
in the shadow whereof he solaceth himself, as Ahsuerus did in his Princes and
Servants, Esth. 1.3, 4. Dan. 4.30. Isa. 39.2. Luke 12.18.
and the riches of his glorious Kingdom. Nebuchadnezar in his goodly Buildings;
Hezekiah in his silver, and gold, and spices, in the house of his Armor and
Treasuries: The rich fool (mentioned in the Gospel) in his great Crops and
spacious Barn^s; But they forget the worm, some messenger of the Lord of
other; either sickness, or bands, or death, which will smite this Tree, and
give it a mortal stroke, as if a workman had come with his Axe to fell it, and
lay it on the ground. In that Tree or Ivy (says a very Learned Divine, Dr.
John White senate the Spittle.
speaking to rich men) behold all your State, or Riches; Let the greatness and
pleasure of your mind be the greenness of it; Let the increase of your wealth
be compared to the growing of it; Let your Tenants, and Children, and
Followers, be the leaves of it; Let your peace and contentment that you take
there, be as the shadow: but then again, remember the withering of this Tree;
the worm that bites it, is death, the fading of it, is the decay of your
estates, when you shall be spoiled of all you took pleasure in: The wind that
smote Jonahs his head, is the misfortune that may blow upon you; and his grief
is the sudden astonishment of mind that shall take you, when all this comes:
The like may be said of all other worldly delights, Job 24.20.
which are but the shadow of that Tree which shall be broken, or blasted: Thus
much in the general, as it was a Tree: let us now take a more particular notice
what kind of Tree it was, and of what quality. Fox Kind it was,

A Fig Tree. Text.
]

It was no ordinary nor trivial Tree, but of a noble and generous kind (called
upon by other Trees to be King over them) and brought forth sweet and delicious
fruit, Judge. 9.10.
Judge. 9.10. By which Fig Tree the Jewish Synagogue is especially meant, and
to them in a more strict sense it is to be applied, but Communiratione, in a
general consideration, every Christian Congregation, yea, every individual
person of such a Congregation is intended, as being concerned there in.

Why a Fig Tree should be mentioned, rather then any other Tree, some Reasons
may be rendered, as this in general; The Fig Tree was very common in Judea,
Mald. in loc.
and frequently planted in their Vineyards, for that the Vine delights much
in its neighborhood and shade; and thence is it that we so frequently find
them joined together in the Scripture, Dent. 8.8. 1 King. 4.25. Psalm. 105.33.
Joel. 1.7. and 2.22. Amos 4.9. Hag. 1.19.

More particularly, In reference to the Synagague of the Jews, and that State;
The Fig Tree, above other Trees, did best set forth their condition. The
Fig Tree is a succulent Plant full of leaves and luxuriant Branches; so did
that Nation come out, Rarrard. in loc.
and spend its sapp in outward Observations and Ceremonies, contenting it self
with the fair leaves of outward profession, crying out, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9.
drawing near with their Lips when their Hearts were far off.

Again, The Fig Tree is the first that buddeth, but the last whose fruit is
ripe; The Jews budded long before the Gentiles, Romans 11.25, 26.
(and it is to be prayed for, that the time of their ripe fruit may be
hastened); but the fulness of the Gentiles must come in, before their ripening
can be expected, as the Apostle shows, Romans 11.25, 26. As yet there is an
emptiness amongst the Gentiles, both in regard of number, Parr his Comment on
Romans 11.15.
and in respect of Grace (which last emptiness is a very great impediment to
the calling of the Jews): but when fullness of the one, shall be come in, and
the number of converted Gentiles made up (which assuredly shall be), then shall
follow a general conversion of the other; the whole body of the Jews in
geneaall, (albeit nor every several and singular person) shall be received to
grace and salvation. This is a Mystery, and of us not sufficiently understood:
how and when these things shall be, God only knows (says Origin) let that
satisfy; only let all further their ripening, by earnest prayers and speedy
repentance, for those Sins which have been hitherto Bars and Obstacles to
hinder it.

In Reference to the Christian Church, under the New Testament, the Figg tree
is named in respect of sundry properties, wherein it does hold resemblance.

First, The Fig Tree is full of sapp and moisture, it is the most juicefull of
any tree, the Root of it does abundantly feed it; Is 2.53.
so does Christ his Church, he is the Root of it, and on the Root depends the
firm standing thereof, and the life of every branch; from this Root we have our
radical moisture, from his fulness we derive Grace, Ephesians. 1.^, 23. Col.
1.19. and 2 3, 9. John 1.16. Psalm. 1.3. Jer. 17, 8.
and Grace for Grace, John 1.16. (or Grace upon Grace), that is, a daily
increase of Graces, one after another; thence it is, that our leaves shall not
wither, but always remain green; we shall not see when heat comes; nor be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit, Jer.
17.8.

Secondly, The Fig Tree is fruitful above other Trees; It has fruit one
under another, insomuch that one Figg thrusts off another, through its
abundance: The Egyptian Fig Tree (says Solinus) bears fruit seven times in a
year, pull off one Figg, and another breaks forth in the place thereof, very
shortly after; So fruitful is the Church of God, and every sound Member of it,
they are filled with the fru^ts of righteousnesses, Philip. 1.11. ever bearing,
Phil. 1.11. James 3.7.
being full of Mercy and good fruits, James 3.7. they are fruitful all over,
as one said of Nehemiah, in that he never rested from doing good to his people.

Thirdly, The Fruit of the Fig Tree is a most delicious fruit: Shall I leave
my sweetness said the Fig Tree, Judge. 9.11.
Judge. 9 11? And such is the fruit of every good Christian, acceptable and
pleasing both to God and man: What the Apostle speaks of the work of Charity,
Phil. 4.8. Heb. 13.16.
Philip. 4.8. Heb. 13.16. may be said of every other Gift and Grace, it is an
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing unto God; we are a
sweet Savor unto God (says the Apostle). 2 Cor. 2.15. Cant 6.2.
The fruits of our Graces are God's dainties, Cant. 6.2.

Fourthly, Mat. 24.32 Psa. 110.3. Gal. 1.16. 2 Cor. 8.10 and 9.2.
The Fig Tree is forward in putting forth it foretells a Summer as our Savior
shows, Math. 24.32. Gods people are a willing People, Psalm. 110.3. Forward to
every good work, that God requires to be done. Gal. 1.16. 2 Cor. 8.10. and 9.2.
even in this sense the godly may be said to be Primitiae Dei, the first fruits
of God; Jam. 1.18.
And this their forwardness promises a Summer; it brings a blessing upon a
Nation.

Fifthly, The Fig Tree makes not so glorious a show as do other Trees, it
neither blooms nor blossoms and yet bears abundantly: so is it with the sound
Christian, he makes not that show that the Hypocrite does, but he is more
fruitful, Mat. 6.3, 4, 6. Luke 18.11, 12.13, 14.
Mat. 6.3, 4, 6. Luke 18.11, 12, 13, 14. The Harlot exceeds the chaste Matron in
gaudy Attire, as the Church of Rome does ours.

Sixthly, The Fig Tree best bears the brunt of Winter storms, and is freest
from Summer's thunder (says Pliny) that never strikes it: Sure it is, that the
godly Christian is best armed for hard weather, and best enabled to go through
variety of conditions, Phil. 4.12, 13. Phil. 4.12, 13.
Nor do the Thunderbolts of an angry God ever strike him: that Thunder and
Lighting which comes from the Throne comes through the Rainbow, the Covenant of
Grace and Mercy, before ever they come at him, Rev. 4.5.
Revel. 4.5.

Seventhly, Amongst all Trees there is none whose Leaf does so much resemble
the Hand of a man as does the Figg-tree's: The Leaf of the Asp resembles the
Tongue, but the Leaf of the Fig Tree, Man's Hand. Christianity sers us to
work, it stands not in a verbal Profession, but in action, Mat. 21.28. Joh.
13.17. Jam 1.22.
Mat. 21.28. John 13. 17. Jam. 1.22.

Lastly, (For I will not press the Resemblance too far); The Fig Tree has
such a virtue in it, says Plutarch, Plut. Symp. lib. 6.
that if a wild Bull be tied unto it, for a small time, it will become tame and
tractable, albeit it were never so fierce and fell before; In this a Christian
is like a Fig Tree; if he cannot tame the fierce nature of another, (which
notwithstanding he sometimes does, by his presence and pious life), yet he can
tame himself, and, through the power of God's blessed Spirit, subdue the unruly
passions of his Soul; of angry and revengefull he becomes meek and gentle, etc.
and such was foretold should be the fruits of Christ's Kingdom under the Gospel,
Isa. 11.6, 10.
Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. I shall carry the Resemblance no farther, that which has
been said is enough to show the fitness of the Resemblance, and why the
Christian should be likened to a Figg Tree above all other Trees.

In that the Jewish Synagogue of old, and every Christian Congregation now, is
Resembled to a Fig Tree, and not to the strong Oak, tall Elm, smooth Ash, or
any other fruitless Tree, it may teach us that,

Those Trees wherewith God furnishes his Vineyard, are of a fruitful kind, No
barren, but bearing Trees are for his use and service.

A Christian, says Bernard, of all Creatures is resembled to a Lamb, of all
Birds to a Dove, of all Flowers to a Rose and Lyllie, and of all Trees to a
Vine and Fig Tree. Indeed we shall seldom or never read in Scripture, that
the Church or any lively member of it, is compared to any other Tree then those
that are of a Fruitful kind. He shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of
water (says David) which brings forth fruit in due season, Psalm. 1.3. Psalm.
52.8. Psalm. 92.12. Jer. 11.16, and 17, 8. Ezekiel. 47.12. John 15.1, 2.
Psalm. 1.3, I am like a green Olive tree in the house of God, says the same
Prophet, speaking of himself, Psalm. 52.8. and such as are Righteous he
resembles to the Palm or Date tree, and to the Cedars in Lebanon, Psalm. 92.12.
which Pliny tells us are very fruitful: So, Jer. 11.16, and 17, 8. Ezekiel. 47.12.
John 15.1, 2.

The Arc of Noah was a type and figure of the Church, and it was not without a
Mystery that God commanded Noah to make it, Genesis 6.14.
not of unfruitful but fruitful Trees, of Gopher wood, which some conceive to
be the Turpentine Tree, which bears a berry. Others, the most excellent kind of
Cedar; And so that other Ark which was a Testimony of his presence, must be
made of Shittim wood, Exodus 25.10.
which Vatablus and Junius understood to be the fruitfullest amongst all
Cedars: Trees of an unfruitful kind are not for God's house and building. Let
not this Observation pass without some profitable Use.

The Heathens of old were Idolatrous, Hesiod) whatever they best liked, that
they created a god, and so of whatever they most feared; Of a Clap of Thunder
they made a Jupiter, of a Tempest at Sea they made a Neptune, of an Earthquake
they made a Pluto, etc. And to these their created gods, they erected Temples,
Altars, and consecrated the goodlyest, and fairest Trees that they met withal:
which ancient practice of dedicating this, and that kind of Tree, to several
gods as proper and peculiar to them, was always observed, (says Pliny) and
yet remains to this day: Plin. Lib. 12. c. 1.
Thence Lucian took occasion to deride the practice of those times, feigning
their Idol-gods to sit in Parliament, and every one making choice of that Tree
which he most fancied; Jupiter makes choice of the Oak for its strength,
Apollo of the Bay Tree for its greenness, Neptune of the Poplar for its length,
Juno of the Eglantine for its sweetness, Venus of the Myrtle Tree for its
beauty. Minerva sitting by, demanded of her Father Jupiter, what might be the
reason, that seeing there were so many fruitful Trees, they all made choice of
those Trees which were fruitless; he answered her, Ne videamur fructu honore^
vendere, that we may not be thought to chaffer our honor away for fruit; well,
said Minerva, do you what you please, I, for my part, make choice of the Olive
for its fattnesse and fruitfulness; All commended her choice, and were ashamed
at their own folly. This you will say is but a fiction; and it is no other, but it
discovered the folly of men of that generation, and so it may do of ours: In
elections and choyces, fruitful Trees are least of all regarded. The Ambitious
he seeks after unprofitable honor, high place, Rule and Government, and would
be advanced above the rest of his Brethren, he affects the Cypress for its
tallnesse (A Tree that great men much esteem of, and nourish in their walks,
but it is hardly made to grow); and when it is come up, the fruit is good for
nothing, the Leaves of it are bitter, Plin. Lib. 16. c. 33.
the Scent strong, neither is the shade thereof wholesome. The young Gallant is
for the double-coloured Poplar, all for form and complement: Oh! there is much
of a Gentleman in that, the leaves of this Tree are soft, and full of down,
which soon flies away like the down of the Thistle into the Air, this Tree is
an Emblem of Dissimulation; The flattering Courtier likes well the clasping
Ivy, which yet is an enemy to all Trees and Plants, it undermineth walls, and
is good only to harbor Serpents, and venomous Creatures; insomuch that Pliny
wonders it should be honored by any, or counted of any worth; and yet Heathen
Emperors have used to make them Garlands of it, and wear them on their Heads:
Rehoboam too much affected these Ivy codds, 1 King. 12.8.
1 King. 12.8. And it is the fault of greatness. The covetous worlding
preferrs the Ash to all other Trees, he loves to bear the Keys, and delight in
being the Jailer of his wealth. The Body and bulk of this Tree is hard and
tough, and the leaves unwholesome to any Beast that does not chew the cudd:
Plin. Lib. 16. c. 13.
In short, some choose for beauty, some for sweetness, some for greatness,
some for greenness; but where is He or She that makes Minerva's choice, to
choose for fruitfulness? As Samuel said of the Sons of Ishai (one having a
goodly stature, another a goodly countenance) Surely now the Lord's anointed
is before me; 1 Samuel 16.6.
So we think of these goodly and tall Trees, (but fruitless in grace) if
Honor comes, Wealth comes, Beauty comes, etc. This is the anointed of the
Lord, this must be he. Verse. 7.
But God sees not as man sees; man looks on the outward appearance, but the
Lord looks on the heart, as was told Samuel.

And seeing (as we have heard in the former Doctrine) we are all of us (one and
other) Trees, B. B. Hall.
in the Ditches and Hedgtows of the World; you may spread far, and shoot up
fast; shade well, and show fair: but if you be barren, and not of a fruitful
kind, you are not for the Vineyard of the Lord; there grows none but Vines,
and Figg-Trees; Olives, and Pomegranates.

But are not all that come from the Loins of Adam,

They are so:

The former is that estate wherein he was at first created, after the Image of
God; in which estate he was perfectly happy, and had ability to do whatsoever
his Creator should require of him, and might be compared to those Trees of
Paradise, richly laden at their first creation; always bearing fruit, fresh,
and ripe: and in that respect our blessed Savior might curse that Fig Tree
which stood in the way fruitless, Mark 11.13.
albeit the Text says, the time of Figgs was not yet, for that came through
the sin of man, had he stood in his Integrity. Figgs would have bin upon it:
but from this happy estate man soon fell.

And now consider man as fallen in Adam, and so he is a Fig Tree still, but a
wild one, Look upon him Philosophically, in genere Entis, in respect of his
natural endowments and abilities, as he is a reasonable Creature, has an
Immortal soul, endowed with Noble faculties of Understanding, Will, Memory,
Conscience, etc. and is capable of Divine Objects, and has a Body which is a
fit Instrument for his soul to act by; Thus he stands yet as a Fig Tree, and
is of a bearing kind, for without these natural abilities, he were not capable
of grace; were he a Stone or Logg, and wanted Reason, he were not to be wrought
upon: What Philosophy often says, Nihil in Intellectu quod non prius in sensu,
till some Sense apprehend a thing, the Judgment cannot debate it, nor discourse
it, may in some sense (says a Learned Doctor) be said in Divinity, Dr. Donn.
Nihil in Gratia quod non prius in Natura, there is nothing in grace, that was
not first in nature; so far, as that grace always finds nature, and natural
faculties to work on: and though that nature be not disposed to receive grace
when it comes, yet that nature and those faculties which may be so disposed by
grace, are there before that grace comes. But if we consider man in this his
lapsed estate Theologically, so he is but a wild Olive, and wild Fig Tree; the
Figgs which he bears are such as those which Jeremiah speaks of, Jer. 24.2.
bitter, so bitter that no man can eat them, Romans 7.5.
his fruit is fruit unto death, nor does God delight in any thing that he does.

Consider man in a third estate, as he is restored to his first estate, and
has the Image of God again repaired in him: And so he is a Fig Tree
trans^planted, taken out of old Adam, and planted into new Christ, Genesis 2.8, 9.
who from the beginning was described unto us by the Tree of Life, Genesis 2.8, 9.
And so in the end of the New Testament, Revel. 22.2. Rev. 2.22.
By whom a New life is put into us, and from whom we receive the sap of grace,
so as to become fruitful, Romans 7.4.
and bring forth fruit unto God, and these are bearing and fruitful trees that
God makes choice of.

The Fig Tree mentioned in my Text, was no wild one, it was Ficum Plantatum, a
planted Fig Tree; of which plantation we are now to speak, laying down this
for our Position.

Those Trees which are of a fruitful kind, and wherewith God furnishes his
Vineyard, are planted Trees.

The Church it self is termed Gods plant, Isa. 5.7. and the planting of the
Lord, Isa. 61.3. and the Branch of his planting, Isa. Isa. 5.7, and 61, 3, and
60, 21. Psalm. 1, 3, and 92, 13. Jer. 17.8.
60.21. and the godly are resembled to the Tree that is planted, Psalm. 1.3, and
92, 13. Jer. 17.8.

But there is a twofold Plantation which we must take notice of. The one is
Terrestrial and Earthly, The other is Spiritual and Heavenly: The Terrestrial
planting of a People, is the bringing of them from one Country to another place
there to settle, that they may increase and multiply: of this planting the
Psalmist is to be understood, Psalm. 44.2, and 80, 8, 15. Isa. 5.2. Jer. 11.17,
and 12, 2. Ezekiel. 17.5, 8, 9. Colos. 1.13.
Psalm. 44.2. Thou did drive out the Heathen with thy hand, and plantedst
them. So elsewhere, as, Psalm. 80.8, 5. And, Isa. 5.2. Jer. 11.17, and 12, 2.
Ezekiel. 17.5, 8, 9.

The Spiritual and Heavenly Plantation of a people, is the calling of them out
from the World, and planting them into the Kingdom of Christ; of this speaks
the Apostle, Colos. 1.13. He has delivered you out of darkness, and has
translated you into the Kingdom of his Son, that is, unto his Church, his
Mystical Body, into which we are by Baptism inserted and incorporated.

Now as the Church is distinguished, into Visible and Invisible, so may we
distinguish of Plantation. A man may be actually planted and inserted into the
visible, alone, which requires no more then an External Profession of the true
Faith; and so all in the Visible Church that call themselves Christians, and
have bin baptized into the name of Christ, are planted into Christ, and his
Body mystical; such belong to Christ, no otherwise then Ivy does to that Tree
unto which it externally adheres. And there is a planting into the Invisible,
which besides the outward Profession, and common graces of the spirit, requires
the inward Spirit of Adoption: And this Distinction is grounded on, John 15.2.
John 15.2.
Every branch in me that bears not fruit, etc. There are some branches in him
that bear not, that is, some that are like branches, but indeed are not; These
are tied only unto him by a thread of outward Profession, and put into him by
the outward Sacrament of Baptism, which causes a faint and unprofitable
fellowship with the Root, so as to furnish themselves with leaves, but not with
fruit; There are other branches that are in him indeed, Interually ingraf^ed by
a true and lively faith, which draws sap from the Root, so as to bring forth
not only leaves, but fruit, and these he purges, that they may bring forth
more fruit. This Fig Tree mentioned in my Text, was not of this latter sort,
but of the former. Let us apply this.

From hence we may be informed of the condition of every one, that is in the
estate of Nature; Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, Math. 17.16, 17.18,
or Figgs of Thistles? Even so every good Tree brings forth good fruit, but a
corrupt Tree brings forth evil fruit; A good Tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit, Math. 17.16, 17, 18.
Good fruit proceeds not from natures production, but from a spiritual
plantation; The Tree must first be good, before the fruit can be so; till then,
all our works are not only stained with sin (for so are the best works of the
most regenerated person) but are also really and truly sins, and that both in
their own nature, springing from a corrupt fountain, for that which is born of
the flesh is flesh, John 3.6. John 3.6. Mat. 3.17.
and also in Gods estimation, because he beholds them as out of Christ, in
whom, and through whom alone, he is well pleased.

This is censured by them, of the latter Church of Rome, for a bloody sentence,
Crudelis est illa sententia, says a Popish Postiller; and the Rhemists advise,
by all means, Amb. Spildra. Rhem. Annot. on Romans 14.23.
to beware of Heretique's comments on that place, (you know who they meant by
Heretics) who, (say they) go about to prove thereby that Heathens and
Infidels sinned, in honoring of their Parents, relieving of the poor, fighting
for their Country, tilling of their grounds, and in all other works which they
did, etc. And in teaching so, they teach truly, according to the plain evidence
of Scripture, (as before you heard), and the judgment of the Ancients. Aug.
cont. Julian lib. 5. c. 3. et cont. duas Epist. Pel. ad Bonifac. lib. 3. c. 5.
Austin's judgment concerning such men's works, is well known, insomuch that
they are enforced to confess him to be, therein, for us. If a Heathen (says
he) shall cloth one that is naked, deliver him that is endangered, etc. is it
not to be judged Sin, because it proceeds not of Faith? Verily forasmuch as
it proceeds not of Faith, it is Sin: not because to cover the naked is Sin,
in it self; but not to glory in God, of such a work, it is sin: And this
(says he) none denies, but the wicked only. This he proves; for that virtues
must be defined, not by actions, but by the end; and likewise from the
absurdity which otherwise would follow, that an evil Tree should bring forth
good fruit, contrary to the saying of Christ before mentioned.

Thus then we answer this cavil; Quoad substantiam operis. Quoad modum. Romans
2.14.
A thing done may be good in the Substance of the work, and yet evil in the
Manner of doing of it. The Substance of every moral Action is its Conformity
with the Rule of goodness; that is, the Law; when that thing is done which is
commanded by the Justice and Equity of the Law: and thus the Gentiles, which
did by nature, the things contained in the Law, did good: And this Moral
goodness in heathen men, was (without doubt) pleasing and acceptable unto God,
so far forth as that he liked the work and approved of it, with that common
allowance which he affords to all things, Genesis 20.6
that bear any stamp of his own goodness. The Circumstances or Manner of the
Action consists in the Efficient cause, or Person, that does the work, and in
the End or Scope that he proposes to himself in the doing of it. Heb. 11.4.
In the Person is required Sanctification, that the work may be acceptable. And
in the End a right Intention; for albeit a good Intention makes not an Action
good, yet without a good Intention, 1 Cor. 10.31.
the Action cannot be accepted as good, in God's sight: The Glory of God in
Christ must be the Scope of all our Actions. And herein the Heathen failed, (as
does every other man in the state of Nature) their Persons were unholy, their
consciences defiled, their purposes perverse and crooked, etc. And so, albeit
the work they did was Ethically and Morally good, in the sight of men, and to
humane purposes; yet not being clothed with all due circumstances, they were
not Theologically and Divinely good, such as to be accepted of into any special
favor of Grace; yea, so far were they from being so, that they were no better
in God's account then glorious sins, Splendida peccata. Aug.
and beautiful deformities, seemed they never so glorious in the eyes of men:
the like is to be conceived of the works of every unregenerated Person.

Wherefore let every one, that would bring forth good fruit, and have some
comfortable assurance of God's accptance thereof, look to his planting. Let our
gifts of Nature be never so great and excellent, yet Va soli, Woe to Nature if
she go alone: Judge. 4.8.
Barach durst not venture upon Sisera without Debora went with him: no more may
Nature venture upon any holy duty without Grace; nor shall we be esteemed for
any other Trees, then Barren, and fruitless, Joh. 15.4.5.
whilst we remain in our natural soil of Corruption: Without me (says our
Savior) you can do nothing. The Bud of a good desire, the Blossom of a good
resolution, and the Fruit of a good action, all proceeds from our spiritual
plantation and ingrafting into Christ, who is that Root, from whence we have
both sap and safety.

But we are all within the Vineyard, branches of God's own planting, we believe
in Christ, profess his name, etc. Resp.


And it is a great mercy that we are so; many Privileges belong unto us in
being so, (as the Apostle speaks of the Jews, Romans 3.2. Wisd. 4.9.
Rom, 3.2.): But that external Plantation may not be rested in; there are
Adulterinae Plantationes, Bastard Plants, (as Wisdom terms them) such as are
not planted with that spiritual and internal planting, before spoken of. Thy
planting (it may be) is from man's Injunctions, Joh. 19.12. 1 Pet. 1.18. 1 Cor.
2.4.
or out of some By or Politic respect; If you do thus or thus, you are not
Caesar's friend; Or by the Tradition of your Fathers, or else the enticing
speech of so me man's wisdom; humane persuasions effected it, and such as these
are not Plants of the Father's planting: Mat. 15.13.
It affoards no further strength then to produce Figg-leavs, mere formal and
hypocritical Conformities, wherewith to cover our nakedness (as Adam did after
his fall). The Father's planting is into the state of Grace and Regeneration,
and does cause us to participate of the life, sap, and influence, of the Root;
which kind of internal planting is that, and only that, which will affoard us
true and solid comfort, without which the other will but subject men unto sorer
condemnation, for despising Christ in his Word and Spirit, with whom, in their
Baptism, they made so solemn a Covenant.

Luke 17.16, 17.
and but one of them returned thanks, and he was a Samaritane, a stranger from
the Commonwealth of Israel; God's own arable would not pay the Tithe, the wild
Forest did it: Act, 18.2.
And St. Paul finds more kindness amongst Barbarians, than his own Countrymen;
they receive him out of the Rain and Cold, when his own Nation shall whip him,
and turn him into the Rain and Cold. Shall Mercy and Fidelity be without the
Church, and falsehood be found in it? shall Turks be given to good works, (as
building of Temples, Colleges, Hospitals); and we who call our selves
Christians and Believers spend our Zeal in defacing and demolishing of them?
Shall they make conscience of their Vows, Promises, Dealings; and we that
profess better, come short of them many paces? What a dishonor would this be
to our Religion, shame to our Profession? And yet so it is, (to our shame be it
spoken) that many of us, who have blessed means of direction and instruction,
for the due ordering of our hearts and lives, (which the Heathen want,) may yet
be sent to School to learn moral honesty of them, both in the detestation of
gross enormities, and in the conscionable practice of many virtues. Woe to
such as give occasion to any to tell the World, that it is better to trust a
Pagan than a Professor; and to have dealing with a Turk rather than with a
Christian. I know not how any such can make their peace with that of our
Savior, Unless your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes Mat. 5.20.
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Unless
we have a Righteousness that goes beyond theirs, how can we think to escape the
nethermost Hell? if we exceed them in unrighteous, and unjust practices? But I
will strike no longe^ on this sad string, we pass from the Figg-Tree's
Plantation to its situation, (...).

In his Vineyard].

That the Church is the Vineyard you have heard before; Text.
and in what respects it is so compa^ed, here you see.

The Church is Gods Nursery.

The Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Teee, Psalm. 92.12, 13. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Psalm. 132.13, 14. Psalm. 84.20. Cant. 4.13. John 10.16. Romans 11.25. Acts 2.47.
Math. 13. Aug. Sermon. 137. de Temp. Reas.
and shall spread like a Cedar in Lebanon; such as be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, (says David, Psalm. 92.12,
13.) The Church is Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.15. there he delighte to dwell, and
there his exercises are observed, there are his Courts, and that is the soil,
the Orchard of his delight for his plants to flourish in, and that not for a
time only, but for ever: This is that Sheepfold into which the elect Gentiles
were to be brought out of the wast Deserts of the World, upon their conversion
to Christ, John 10.16. The fullness of them are to come in thither, Romans 11.25.
and such as God will have saved, he daily adds unto his Church, Acts 2.47. And
in this respect is the Church Militant here on Earth, often compared to the
Kingdom of Heaven, for that it is the inlett into it. Per portam Ecclesiae
intramus in portam Paradiss, (says Austin).

The fruitfulness of any plant is improved principally by four helps. First,
The fecundity of the soil whereon it grows. 2ly, The Kindly heat of the Sun,
chearing it up with his influence. 3ly, The contribution of the Clouds toward
it, with their dews and showrs. 4ly, God's blessing; without which, all the
other are as nothing. All these requisites are in the Church, whereof the
plants therein growing, partake in an ample manner.

The soil it self is fat and fruitful. Cant. 8.11.
Solomon had a Vineyard at Baal-Hamon, which he let out unto Keepers, Cant.
8.11. by which Vineyard (Mystically) the Universal Church is to be understood.
Christ is the Solomon that owns it; The site of it at Baal hamon, that is, in a
very fertile and fruitful place (what place soever it was) that was able by the
heat of the Sun to bring forth store of wine, Dominus multitudinis.
and a multitude of grapes unto the Owner: Isaiah terms it Cornis filius Olei,
an horn of the Son of Oil, Chap. 5.1. Isa. 5.1.
Now by horn, the Hebrews understand strength and height; and by Oil, plenty
and fatness: we render the words in our translation, A very fruitful Hill, A
Hill preferred to all Hills, Isa. 2.2. Psalm. 68.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 32.14, 15. Ezekiel.
39.28. Amos. 4.1. Isa. 25.6.
Isa. 2.2. The high hills of Bashan were not to be compared with it, Psalm.
68.15, 16. Bashan, was a very fat and fruitful mountain, the cattle that fed
upon it were very fat and strong; but neither Bashan nor any other mountain on
the Earth is comparable to mount Zion for fatness; albeit they leap and insult
proudly, of their outward pomp and glory. In this mountain (says Isaiah)
shall the Lord of Hoasts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of
wine on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees, well
refined, Isa. 25.6. Needs much that be a fruitful Soil that affoards such a
Crop.

Secondly, Semper in sole sita est Sylicius. Mal. 4.2. Explained.
The Sun does always shine upon it (as was said of Rhodes). To you that fear
my name (says God) the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing under
his wings, etc. Mal. 4.2. The beams of the Sun may be aptly resembled unto
wings; because thereby the Sun does stretch forth, and extend it self to the
nourishing, fructifying, and quickening of all things; Now look as the light of
the two first days was collected and placed in the body of the Sun, and so
carried about the World for the cherishing of things that are under it; so has
God collected, and placed all spiritual light in his Son, John 5.21. Psalm.
119.50, 93. John 6.63. 1 Cor. 15.45. Math. 23.37. Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 17.8, and
36, 7, and 57, 1. Cant. 2.3. Isa. 4.6.
and from him it is conveyed unto the Church which is quickened by his word and
spirit, as by a double beam that comes from him, or (to keep to the Metaphor
used by the Prophets) which are his wings, under which his Church is both
brooded and protected, Math. 23.37. So, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is both Sun and
Shield; Look what the Sun is to the World, the same is God to his Church; And
where shines this Sun, but in the Church? That is the Goshen, where this light
is; and in the Ministry especially, it displayeth its beams. And as he is a
Sun, so a Shield to shadow us and defend us against all storms and tempests,
that may annoy us, Psalm. 17.8, and 36, 7, and 57, 1. Cant. 2.3. Isa. 4.8.

Thirdly, This soil is a well-watered soil, Ezekiel. 47.1, -- 13. Ezekiel. 47.1, --
13.
What are these waters that run from under the threshold of the Sanctuary, but
the graces of Gods spirit, and the sacred Scriptures? these are those streams
which run through this Eden, Psalm. 46.4.
and make glad the City of God; they cause admirable fruitfulness, insomuch,
that on both sides of the River shall grow all kind of fruitful Trees, whose
leaf shall not fade, nor fruit fail, Jer. 17.8. Psalm. 1.3. Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Jer. 17.8. Psalm. 1.3. The bigg-belly'd Clouds distill their showrs on this
Earth, Deuteronomy. 32.2. their dew falls on this mount Hermon, which furthereth her
fruitfulness.

Lastly, whereas Paul's planting, and Apolloe's watering is nothing, without
God's blessing, A blessing is promised, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Psalm. 133.9.
yea commanded to come out of Zion, Psalm. 133. ult. that is, to fall upon the
heads of those that are members of the Church: With abundance of blessings will
he bless his Church and People, both for this present, and future life. And
that we may not think this promise was peculiar to the Temple, or Tabernacle,
or place of God's Ceremonial worship, (which had indeed some privileges above
our Temples) you shall find that it is spoken, of all places where God is
worshipped: In all places (says God) where I record my name, I will come unto
thee, Exodus 20.24. Math. 18.20.
and I will bless thee, Exodus 20.24. And lest we might conceive, that it was a
promise made only to the Jewish Church, under the old Testament, and nothing
belonging to us who live under the Gospel; Christ has assured us, that where
two or three are gathered together in his Name, that is, to worship him
sincerely, there will He be in the midst of them, Math. 18.20. there he will
meet them with a blessing. In all these respects it appears that the Church of
God is the only soil for plants to thrive in.

And being so, Have we not great cause to bless God, David, The Lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places, Psalm. 16.6.
yea, I have a goodly heritage? This was that One thing which he did with so
much earnestne^s desire of God, Psalm. 27.4.
that he might dwell in God's house for ever, Psalm. 24.4. The happiness of
such, as have that privilege, he does highly magnify and set forth. Psalm.
24.4. Psalm. 84.4, 10.
Psalm. 84.4. preferring a door-keeper's place in Gods house to all worldly pomp
and dignity, out of the bounds of the Church, verse. 10. It was not for nothing,
Genesis 9.27.
that when Noah blessed his Son Japhet for his filial affection, and goodness, in
covering his nakedness, he prayed only that God would persuade Japhet to dwell
in the Tents of Sem, for in desiring that, he desired the salvation of him and
his posterity. Out of the Church there is no salvation (ordinarily) to be had,
but salvation is in it. The Tree of Life grew no where, but in the midst of
Paradise: Nor is Christ to be found, nor life eternal to be had other where,
than in the true Catholic Church of Christ: His promises are only made unto
his Church; His Covenants only drawn up betwixt Him and the Church; to be out
of the Church, is, to be without the Promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
without the Covenant, without Christ, without God in the World; and, without
these, without happiness, without Salvation.

But the Papists say, that they are the Catholic Church, and that all others
being out of their Church and communion, Schismatiques and Seperatists, they
say, that the true Church is amongst them, and them only, and that all other
are but limbs of Antichrist, false Churches, and not the true one.

Indeed the Church of Christ (whereof we confidently averr that we are members)
is crucified (as Christ the head thereof) betwixt two Thieves, Papists on the
one hand, and Schismatiques on the other; and it stands us much upon, and is of
great concernment, that we be able to justify our standing; and that we are
indeed the true Church of God, and that this is the true grace of God wherein
we stand. 1 Pet. 5.12.


The safest, and only infallible way, to find out the true Church is by the
Scriptures, as Austin shows, The question is, says he, Aug. de unit. Eccl. c.
2.
(speaking of the Donatists, who held their heretical and particular faction to
be the true Catholic Church) (as the Papists at this day do theirs) Where the
Church should be; What then shall we do, shall we seek it in our own words, or
in the words of our Lord Jesus? In my Judgment, we ought rather to seek the
Church in his own words, for tha^ He is the truth, and knows his own body.

Now we read, John 4.22. in that conference that was betwixt Christ and the
Woman of Samaria, John 4.22.
that our blessed Savior thus determines that Question, which was betwixt the
Jews and the Samaritans, viz. Which was the true Church of the two, and who had
the true worship; Ye worship ye know not what (says Christ), we know what we
worship, for salvation is of the Jews; The reason that He brings to prove the
Jewish worship, true, was this, They had the word of God amongst them, the
doctrine of salvation giving them direction how to worship God savingly; and
that by salvation there is meant the word of God, and the Ministry thereof
appears, in that it was the chief Prerogative which the Jew had above others,
as appears, Psalm. 147.19, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Romans 3 2.
20. Romans 3.2. (and so is mentioned there by our Savior) besides, it was that,
whereby the Jews knew how to worship God aright, (else there had bin no
consequence in this Reason, We worship that we know, for salvation is of the
Jews). And Lastly, The salvation spoken of is that, which was to be derived
from them to Gods people, of all Nations, the very same in effect with that of
the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 2.3. Isa. 2.3.
The Law shall go from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, before
Christ's coming in the flesh; the Jews were the only Church, and all that
professed the true Religion of God, Est. 8.7. Romans 9.4. Math. 15.24. Luke
24.47. Acts 11.19. Romans 1.16. Acts 2.41.44. Romans 15.26, and 11, 24.
received it from them, and joined themselves unto them; for to them pertained
the giving of the Law, Romans 9.4. After Christ's coming in the flesh, the Gospel
was first Preached unto them, Math. 15.24. Luke 24.47. Acts 11.19. And though
many rejected the word, yet many amongst them were the first that embraced it,
Romans 1.16. Acts 2.41.44. And all Churches of the Gentiles gave special honor
and respect unto the Church of the Jews, as to their Mother Church, Romans 15.26.
and were grafted into that stock, Romans 11.24. So then we cannot doubt but, by
Salvation, in that place the Doctrine and means of salvation must be meant, as
it is in other places of Scripture, Heb. 2.5. And from hence it is evident,
Heb. 2.5.
that the Profession and Preaching of true Doctrine in all fundamental points,
is the only proper and certain note of a true Church.

They of the Roman Church give us many Notes, whereby the true Church may be
known, (which they bring as Arguments to prove themselves to be the true
Church, and no other) as Universality, Antiquity, Succession, etc. to the
number of fifteen are given by Bellarmine, De notis Ecclesiae.
(supposing to do that with number, which he could not do by weight): but
Christ does not determine the question in the place before quoted (nor else
where) by any of those marks, but by this Note, the Doctrine of salvation,
which was amongst the people. It was a Church wherein salvation might be had,
and therefore the true Church of Christ. This was the chief Badge, and
Cognizance of the Old Church, whereby it was known to be the Church of God,
Romans 3.2.
Romans 3.2. And this is the Cognizance of the true Church under the Gospel, as
appears, AAs 2.42.47.
Acts 2.42, 47. where the Holy Ghost gives an exact pattern of a true Visible
Church, for all succeeding Ages to be examined by, and conformed unto, that (if
our state and standing in the Church were questioned) true Believers might be
able to justify themselves, and convince all false Churches whatsoever; And
that, from the prime of the Primitive Church, (the first visible Church after
our Savior's Ascension) (and so a fit pattern for other Churches to be
censured by). Where the word of God is soundly, and truly Preached, Sacraments
administered, the Duties of Prayer to God, and Love to our Brethren, Religiously
and conscionably practiced, there is a true Visible Church wherein salvation is
to be had; And for further confirmation of this, John 10.4, 27, and 8, 30. Ephesians.
2.19.
read John 10.4, 27, and 8, 30, This mark (praised be God) is not wanting
amongst us: We build upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.19. The word is truly and
sincerely Preached to the conversion of many Souls; The Sacraments administered,
Vid. Bernard. against Seperatists in 80. page 164.
the Duty of prayer to God, and Love to our Brethren (in some good measure)
conscionably and religiously practiced (notwithstanding faylings) and therefore
we are the true Visible Church of God; which the Church of Rome wanting is not,
neither can be.

Yea but (say the Separatists) your Assemblies are full of enormities;
Discipline is wanting amongst you, many corruptions are in you; Your worship is
polluted with men's writings, stinted-prayer, etc. You a Church (say they)? you
are a limb of Antichrist.

We answer them, First, that there is nothing done in Gods public worship
amongst us, but it is done by the Institution and Ordinance of the Lord: 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. Act. 13.15. Act. 15.21. Psalm. 95.1, 2. Mat. 26.30.
Col. 3.16. Mat. 3.13. 1 Cor. 11.22, 23. Numb. 6.23. Deuteronomy. 10.28, ^.21, 5. 1
Cor. 16.23. 2 Cor. 13.14. Romans 9.25.26. 1 King. 16.2. 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. 2 Cor.
12.20, 21. Rev. 2. and 3.
It is his Ordinance that whenever the Congregation assembleth, prayer should
be used; It is his Ordinance that his Word should be publicly Read: It is his
Ordinance that his Word should be opened, and applied in our public
Assemblies; It is his Ordinance that in our publicly Assemblies, Psalms
should be sung; It is his Ordinance that the Sacraments should be administered,
and that in the public Assembly; And it is his Ordinance that the Minister
should dismiss the Congregation with a blessing, as Scripture does evidence.

Secondly, All Corruptions that are in a Church do not unchurch her; The Ten
Tribes, after their defection, notwithstanding their gross Corruptions and
Idolatry, yet because they professed by circumcision, and other ways the true
Jehovah, they remained still a true Church, (though a very impure and imperfect
Church,) and were still called the People of God, the Beloved of God, the
Children of the Living God. So the state of the Jews was wonderfully corrupt in
Christ's time, and yet salvation even at that time was from them, and they the
true Church of God: the like might be showed of the Church of Corinth, and the
Churches of Asia; Great corruptions were to be found in them, and yet they were
still the true Churches of Christ, (as we showed you before, when we spoke of
the Properties of the Vineyard.)

Thirdly, Those may be esteemed Corruptions in a Church which are none at all.
It is no corruption in the preaching of the word, to make use of the writings
of men, so long as God's Word is made the Ground of all, the Touchstone of
all, and the Judge to determine of all truth: Had this been so, the Apostles
and Prophets themselves had corrupted the Word, in alleging the sayings of
others, (yea, of Heathen Writers): Dan. 4. and 6. Ezra 1. Act. 17.18. 1 Cor.
15.33. Tit. 1.12.
Daniel recited the Decree of Nebuchadnezar, and the Decree of Darius, and the
Edict of Cyrus, King of Persia: St. Paul alleged the Sentences of Heathen
Poets; as of Aratus, and of Menander, and of Epimenides: St. Jude alleges the
Prophesy of Enoch, (which both Augustine and Jerome, with others of our latter
Writers, conceive to be Apocryphal). Whilst humane Learning is made a Handmaid,
to wait upon Lady Truth; it is no dishonor, but rather an honor to her.

Nor is it a corrupting of God's worship, to use stinted and set forms of
Prayer in his service. It is evident enough in Scripture, that the Church has
used, and might use them, in God's worship: In blessing the people it was
enjoined, Number. 6.23, 24. so at the setting forward of the Ark, Numb. 6.23, 24.
Numb. 10.35, 36. Psalm. 92. tit. and 102. tit.
Numb. 10.35. and at the resting of it Ver. 26. Many of David's Psalms were
committed to the Church-Musitians to be sung, not only as Meditations and
Doctrines, for the Instruction of the Church, but as Prayers unto God; so Psalm.
92. was penned for the Sabbath; and Psalm. 102. a Prayer for the distressed. It
is very probable that St. John taught his Disciples a sett-From, Luke 11.1.
Luke 11.1. and thereupon our Savior prescribed to his Disciples a form of
Prayer, not only to be to them, and the whole Church, a Rule and Sampler,
according to which, all our prayers should be framed (as appears, Math. 6.9.)
but even for them to say, using the very words as appears, Luke 11.2. And it is
evident that our blessed Savior himself, prayed the same paayer, and used the
same words in prayer, more than Once, Mat. 26.42. He used the same words (says
the Evangelist), nor were they ever the worse for being often used. As for that
which is objected, Of stinting the Spirit, and pinnioning the wings of the
Dove; How is it more a tying of the Spirit up, than it is (to the Hearer) when
the Speaker prays his conceived prayers? for to the Hearer that Prayer is a
stinted Prayer, and as a set form to him; he must keep his mind intent to what
is said by him that prays. Secondly, Although there are a tie of words, yet
there is not a tie and restraint of the Spirit; for the heart may be enlarged
therein, and the largeness of the heart stands not so much in the variety of
expression, Dr. Pressed: Saints daily exercise. p. 82.
as in the extent of the Affection; But the newness of his opinion, says a
Reverend Divine, is enough to discover the falsehood of it.

Lastly, For that Discipline which they charge this Church of ours to be
wanting in, and thence infer that we are a false Church; It may be answered
that we are not altogether without it, albeit we want that Discipline which
they pretend. 2ly, It is an error to make Discipline so essential a property of
the Church, ^s that that which is without it, is no true, but a false Church.
That it is necessary for the beauty and well being of the Church, we willingly
grant; but that it is so essentially and imseperably necessary to the truth and
being of the Church; cannot be proved by evidence of Scripture. Is a household
having true matter and form, and essential properties; a false household,
because Government is wanting? or for that they in the Family have not that
care as they ought to have one for another welfare? or because there is not a
Broom in it to ridd out the dust? So in this case, the utmost that can be made
of it, is, that such a Church is a defective Church, a maimed Church (by which
it is also corrupt, and may without great care suddenly come to ruin): but
that this defect can make it either no Church, or a false Church, cannot be
maintained. In a word then, this know;

That the profession of Christ in the right use of those sacred Ordinances,
which the Lord has ordained and instituted, to be parts of his worship (as
Preaching of the word, administration of the Sacraments, and Prayer) is that
which does constitute a true visible Church; and differenceth it from all other
societies: It is no visible Church, that is without these; and that is a true
visible Church that has these. And these I suppose none of you but are
convinced in your conscience to be found in this your Mother Church of England.
These we have, and in having of them, we are the true Church of Christ, having
Him for our Head; Ministers and People, for the body of it: and that our
standing in this Church is warrantable, safe and good. In the Communion of
which Church let us stay our selves, and not hea^ken to those seducing spirits
which would entice you from us. Christ forewarnes of such in these last times,
who shall say, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, (for he that tells us
of a new Church, may as well tell us of a new Christ): Math. 24.23.
but believe them not (says our Savior): so I say unto you, give no ear unto
these, go not after them; stand fast in that Christian resolution of Christ's
Disciples, who, when they were asked, will you also forsake me, answered
whither shall we go, Joh. 6.68.
Thou have the words of eternal life. You live in a Church, which (through
God's mercy) has a womb to be^r you, and papps to give you suck; say ^en
whither shall we go? Thou, O blessed Mother, ha^^ the words of eterral life!
Thou art the Pillar, and ground of truth; Oh! make use of this happiness of
being in this Nursery, and of this Society; praying the Lord earnessly to
continue* is Ordinances amongst us, that for our unfruitfulnesse we may not be
deprived of them: for if they be taken from us, farewell Church, farewell
Salvation. 1 Samuel 4.21.
The Glory is departed from England.

etc. then it may inform us of the sad condition of two sorts of Persons; First
of such as are Aliens and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.
without the Pale, (as all Heathen and Pagans are.) It is a Maxim of the
Fathers Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, and Qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem, non
habet Deum patrem; but this must be understood of the Church Invisible and
Catholic, and not of any visible Church: When the visible Church was confined
to Abraham's seed, we cannot say, No other of the sons of men were saved. What
were Job, Jethro, and such others? A man may be a true member of the invisible
Church, who is not actually (otherwise than in Vow) a member of the Church
visible. Potter's Charity mistaken. p. 4.7.
Secondly, of such as have bin members of the Church-visible, yet keep not
within the fence. Either Actively by a voluntary separation they excommunicate
themselves out of it; The imperswasible Recusant does so; the negligent
Libertine does so; the froward Fantastic separatist does so. These are self
excommunicators, and keep themselves out of this Nursery, Jude 19.
and fat soil. The mark that St. Jude has put upon them (before spoken of)
would not be forgotten: Sooner shall the Vine of Sodom, and the grape of
Gomorrah, yield a liquor to refresh the heart of God and Man, then such please
God by their rash and furious zeal, (these sort of Persons we have met withal
before).

O^ such as Passively, by exclusion or ejection are justly cast out of the
Church for their wickedness and misdemeanors by Excommunication, which is the
soarest and severest sentence, that the Church has: and is not to be inflicted
rashly, but upon serious deliberation: nor by one alone, but by the Church; or
such as have power by the Church, put into their hand: not upon every offender,
but such as are offenders in a high nature: nor upon ^uc^^ suddenly, but after
other means have bin used to being them to repentance and they continue
obstinate: 1 Cor. 5.4. Math. 18.17.
nor out of by-respects, but for this end that God may be glorified, the Church
edified, and their own souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

It is a sentence of the Church. When you are gathered together in the name of
Christ, says the Apost^e, 1 Cor. 5.4. So our Savior wills, Tell the Church,
Mat. 18.17. that is, those who have the managing of the public censures of
the Church, an^ not all the Congregation, but such as were to speak to the
party* that he might hear; these were a few to whom the Authority was given,
Verse 19.
as appears verse 19. these were to pass sentence as appears St. Paul did, 1
Cor. 5.3.
1 Cor. 5.3. and the sentence past to be executed in the open Congregation.

Secondly, it is to be inflicted on him that is a member of the Church, that
is, on such Persons as profess themselves to be members of the Visible Church,
and have given up their names to Christ, and have submitted themselves to the
doctrine and discipline of the Church; as for others, hear what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 5.11, 12.
1 Cor. 5.11, 12. What have I to do to judge them that are without.

Thirdly, It is to be inflicted for some grievous crime. The causes are
generally mentioned Math. 18.17. Then in special, Math. 18.17. 2 These. 3.6. 1
Cor. 5.11. 2 Epist. John 10. 1 Cor. 6.9.
2 These. 3.6. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Epist. John 10. It is not to be in inflicted for
matters trivial, light, and petty* but in such cases as more expressly shut out
of Heaven mentioned, 1 Cor. 6.9. But whilst these things are secret,
Excommunication has no place, but they must be public and minifest, and the
Church acquainted with it.

Fourthly, It stretches not to all such, but to those that cannot otherwise be
brought to repentance. Obstinacy and impenitency, is the cause why the Church
is compelled to proceed so severely, with any of her members: The Surgeon
coming to a Patient, and finding swellings and soars in the body, does not
presently proce^d to the cutting off an arm, or leg; he uses all other
means to save that member, Mat. 18.16.
(if he can) before he s^ver it from the body. So must it be in this Case;
First, Admonition; ^econdly Suspersion; If that serves not, then
Excommunication follows Mat. 18.16.

Fifthly, it cuts off from the Communion and fellowship of the faithful, 2 Timothy
1.20.
it drives out of the Church, and so delivers up unto Satan, forasmuch as he
Reigns over those that are without the Church, and there sets up his Throne:
yet this must be understood with some Cautions.

First, Dr Tailor. on Tit. c. 3. Verse. 18. p. 709. Baldwin Cas. Cons. p. 1132.
This censure infringeth not the Bonds of civil right, and society. An
excommunicate Magistrate remains a Magistrate still, and must be so
acknowledged and obeyed. So Ambrose obeyed Theodosius whom, and when, himself
had excommunicated. This censure only makes them as no Christians, not as no
Magistrates.

Secondly, It loses not from the Bands of common humanity, but that every
thing must be administered unto such a one as is necessary for the preserving of
his Life, Romans 12.10. If thine enemy hunger, Romans 12.10.
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink.

Thirdly, This censure takes not away natural right. Such as are of the Family,
in consangunity or affinity, must perform all duties to such a one, which such
a Relation has made his due: the House, Bed, Table, must not be denied to
these from whom it was due before this Censure. He that was a Brother before
remains a Brother, though not a Christian-Brother.

Fourthly, This censure loses not the Bands of all spiritual society, but
that, notwithstanding it, we may and must love the excommunicate in the Lord;
we ought to pray for him, (though not with him) we must admonish and rebuke him
still, and upon his Repentance receive him like a Brother as before.

But this censure takes a man off, first from all Communion with God's people
in the Word, Math. 6.7
Sacraments, and Prayer, and renders such a one as a Dog or Swine: for whom
these holy things are unmeet, Math. 6.7.

Secondly, It takes a man off from converse* so far as necessarily we are not
bound unto them. So John the Evangelist finding Cerinthus in the Bath, skipped
out of it; and such was the carriage of Polycarpus toward Marcion, as
witnesses Irenaeus.

Sixthly, The scope and end of this censure is, first in regard of the
Offender, the salvation of his soul, and recovery of him, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 These.
3.14.
and that, 1. by bringing of him to shame, 2 These. 3.14. 2ly. by working sorrow
in him for his sin, for the destruction of his flesh, and fleshly corruption
which is the ground of true Repentance, 3ly. That his spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord.

Secondly, In regard of other members of the Church, that they may not be
corrupted and infected, 1 Cor. 5.6.
1 Cor. 5.6. There is great danger in the rest of the Church to retain such
wicked men in their society, Better that one member be cut off, Bald. Cas.
Cons. 1134.
then that the whole body perish.

Seventhly and lastly, Upon Repentance and manifestation of it, there must be a
receiving. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.
The manner how, see 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.

By this you may perceive what a great Maim it is in any Church, where this rod
is either not used, (as at this day amongst us); or where it is not used
aright, (which was a great blemish and scandal to our Church when it was used)
being sent out for trivial causes, and compounded-for (before the Congregation
was satisfied): the keys were too oily, being chiefly used to open a door for
Mammon to fill the purse, and to make men stoop before pride and affectation of
Dominion; so that it was become a word, In nomine Domini, incipit omne malum.

And by this you may perceive how severe a sentence it is, to be justly cast
out of the Church; Other sentences reach unto our Bodies, Goods, or Liberties,
this to the Soul; by other sentences we are committed to the Jayle, but by this
to Satan; which is worse then to be clapped up in the vilest Dungeon: for
although it damn not a man, yet it damms up that man's way by shutting him out
of that Church, through which he must go to Heaven* which being so great a
danger, let every one take heed of falling into those sins that may draw on him
this censure; for however it be lightly and slightly set by, Math. 18.18, 19,
20.
yet that sentence that is justly pronounced on Earth, is ratified and
confirmed in Heaven, if Scripture may be believed, Math. 18.18, 19, 20.

And so we have done with the Subject considerable in this Proposition: now we
come to the Predicate.

He came and sought fruit thereon, and found none].

Two things, Text.
we are here to take notice of. First the Owner's Visitation of this his
Vineyard and Fig Tree, [He came.] Secondly his Acquisition; He sought fruit
thereon and found none. Of the first, his Visitation.

He came.]

The Prophet David having spoken of Gods planting his Vine, Psalm. 80.8. Psalm.
80.8, 14.
speaks afterward of God's visiting his Plant, verse 14. And indeed the
Husband man or Vini^or's duty con^ists principally in these two Particulars; so
here we find. After this man spoken of in the Parable, had taken pains in
planting this Fig Tree, he comes and visits it, expecting to find some fruit
of his Labors: so Christ came first Personally in the days of his flesh, when
he took Man's nature on him, John 1.11. He came unto his own, Joh. 1.11.
albeit his own received him not: of that coming speaks the Apostle, Phil. 2.6,
7, 8.
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. And secondly, He came Ministerially by his Deputyes and
Servants whom he sent unto them; Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, Math.
23.24. (that is, Math. 23.24.
Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers,) so he calls his Servants by the Customary
names of that Country; These he sent, and by them came to gather his Fruit, and
Inn his Vintage, as we have it more plainly expressed in another Parable which
gives light to this, Math. 21.33, -- 42.
Math. 21.33. -- 42. That you may hence learn for your instruction is;

Visiting follows Planting.

Where God has planted a Church or People, there will he come and visit that
Church and People in a p^culiar manner. Visiting is a coming to see how things
are, Act. 15.36.
Acts 15.36. God is said to visit men, when he comes amongst men to work a
redress of what is amiss; and so in a special manner he visits his Church,
when he manifests his care and providence over it, and comes to see the estate
of it.

This may be gathered from that answer which the true Church gives to foreign
Congregations, who demanded of her, Where her beloved was, that they might seek
him with her? My Beloved is gone down into the Garden, Cant. 6.1, 2.
into the Bed of spices to seed in the Gardens, and to gather L llies that is,
amongst the Assemblies of his people, the Garden of his own planting; there you
shall find him walking, there he is solacing him self with those fruits of
righteousness which they bring forth unto him, Cant. 6.2. And the Church
complaining of Christ's absence so long from her, is told by him in the same
Chapter that he went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the
Valley, and to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranate budded; as
if he should say, Thou complainest of my ben^e O my Church! But there is no
cause; for I was but walked down into my Orchard of Assemblies, to view their
fo^wardnesse, and take notice of the growth and happy progress of those plants
newly set, and converted unto me, verse 11.

Now God visits his Church two ways, either by Benefits, or by Judgments:
with a Visitation of mercy, or with a Visitation of severity. His visitation of
mercy is, when God comes amongst men to show some special mercy, and that
either concerning things Temporal as, Genesis 11.1. Exodus 3.16. G^n 50.24.
Genesis 21.1. and when he lets his Church know that he takes notice of their
sorrows, as Exodus 3.16. and so sends deliverance; of this is spoken, Genesis
50.24. Or in spiritual things revealing his everlasting mercy to his Elect: So
he visits either by Christ, who came not only to see us, but to save us, Luke
19.68. Cap. 7.16. Or by the Preaching of the Gospel: Luke 1.60, and 7, 19. Hos.
2.6. Luke 19.44.
So the time wherein Jerusalem heard the Oracles, and saw the Miracles of our
blessed Savior, is called the day of her visitation, Luke 19.44.

And he has a Visitation of severity and correction when he punishes for sin,
Exodus 20.5. Psalm. 59.5.
Exodus 20.5. Psalm. 59.5. and comes with unlooked-for calamities: And thus God
threatened to visit the Offenders of the House of David. I will visit their
transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. ^9.33 Isa
13.11. Jer. 5.29. Hos 9.7.
Psalm. 89.33. Isa. 13.11. So, Jer. 5.29. Shall not I visit for these things,
says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? And Hos.
9.7. The days of Visitation are come, the days of Recompense are come: Israel
shall know it. This Visitation is not without all mercy; for when God refuses
to visit, it is the soar^st visitation of all, Hos. 4.14. Therefore David beggs
in the b^hall of the Church, Look down O Lord behold, and visit thy Vine. Hos.
4.14. Psalm. 80.14.
And so in severity, he visited this Fig Tree, for not finding what he
expected, he commanded that it should be cut down, as hereafter we shall show
you.

Let it admonish every one of us to expect a Visitation, Clergy nor Laity, all
are gone and down, but Fratres, aliam vobis prounncie Visitationem, There is
another Visitation, my Brethren, to be thought upon; God himself is a Visitor,
and he has his Articles to be enquired of concerning his Day, his Worship, and
his Service on that Day; the Manner of performance thereof, our Life and
Conversation, whether it be suitable to our profession. And to these, a
Personal answer must be given: It were well if we would put that question to
our own souls; Job 31.14. Object.
when He comes, What shall I answer him?

But it may be long to this Visitation, and so we may do the better.

No, in this Life, and in that which is to come. God visits us in this Life
three ways; First Praedicando, by the Preaching of his word, when God sends
his Prophets and Ministers unto us, to declare his will then he comes to visit
us, Numb. 23.21. Math. 18.20.
Numb. 23.21. The Lord his God is with him, the shout of a King is amongst
them, (says Balaam). So, Math. 18.20. there God is by his Authority, Power,
and Command; and where the King's Proclamation is, there God is Authoritively
by his Authority; yea, where his word is Preached, there God is Virtualiter by
virtue and efficacy working with it; instructing the ignorant, comforting the
weak, correcting the stubborn, confirming the Religious: And to this
Visitation you are all cited, and must answer to your names? If no lawful
impediment be alleged, it is a contempt and you must answer for it. Every
week he keeps a constant visitation amongst us.

Secondly, He visits inwardly, Inspirando, by the inspiration of his holy
Spirit, putting into our hearts holy thoughts, good desires, and motions. He
comes thus to us at one time or other; so he came to visit hard-hearted
Pharaoh, Exodus 9.27. and to Balaam, Exodus 9.27. Numb. 23.10. John 9.16. Mat.
19.16. Rev. 3.20.
Numb. 23.10. and to those Jews, John 6.34. and so Math. 19.16. It is a fearful
thing to resist these motions, to quench them, and smoother them; he stands by
us knocking, but we will not answer.

Thirdly, He comes a visiting Corrigendo, by correcting of us; so all his
Chastisements and corrections are Visitations: Thus Job calls his Trials, Job
7.18. we call the Pestilence God's visitation; Job 7.18.
and so are other sicknesses less mortal (as that which is now upon us): Oh
that we would now visit our selves, so should we save God a labor; If we would
judge our selves God would not judge us, 1 Cor. 11.31.
1 Cor. 11.31.

And yet there is another day of visitation, besides that in this life, which
is at the general day of judgment; and those who are not visited here, shall
assuredly be visited then; and the^e will be no plea, no excuse, for absence no
appearance by a Proxy: Mich. 7.3, 4. Jer. 49.7, 8.
This will be a time of great calamity and perplexity, counsel will perish
from the prudent, Mich. 7.3.4. Jer. 49.7.8.

What is man (says David) that thou art so mindful of him, Psalm. 8.4.
and the Son of man that thou visitest him, Psalm. 8.4. David could not but
admire God's goodness herein; Elizabeth wondered that the Virgin Mary should
give her a visit, Whence comes this, Luke 1.43.
that the Mother of my Lord should come unto me? Luke 1.43. Much more may we
admire, that the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, should visit us, and that in his
own person, taking our nature on him (as we spoke before), doing all things
that belonged to a good Visitor; reforming, cleansing, purging, punishing
offenders with his own hand, by his own mouth; and comforting, succouring,
relieving all such as were weak, sick, and distressed: And, after that in his
own person, he had done all this; when he ascended up to the Throne of his
Glory (from whence he descended), such was his care, that he left not his
Church without Visitors, to oversee it in his absence, till he comes again, who
(if faithful) will be careful of doing what was left them in charge. Now, in
that he has this care for us, what shall we do for him? All that he requires
of us, and expects from us, is to answer his pains and care in our Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification, Preservation; by our fructification: Which is the
next point we come unto.

[ And he sought fruit thereon and found none. Text
]

This Husbandman having bestowed pains upon this Fig Tree, in the planting of
it, expects a return of fruit; but, contrary to his expectation, he found none
at all: fruit he fought, none he found: we begin with the first, The Position is

Fruit is expected from every Fig Tree that God has planted in his Vineyard.

Who are meant by the Figg Tree, you have before been showed; and what is to be
understood by this Plantation in the Vineyard you have likewise heard: It
remains now to give you to understand, what kind of fruit it is that is
expected; which being done, we will then come to the Confirmation and
Application of the point.

This word Fruit, is very fruitful of signification (says one, and that
truly): For it is taken Properly or Improperly, what Fruits are, Genesis 1.11, 12.
and 4.3. Psalm. 67.7. M^t. 21.19 Deuteronomy. 28.4 Ps. 127 3. and 232.11. Lam. 2.20.
Luke 1, 42. Act. 2.30. Mat. 7.17. Gal. 5.22. Ver. 19, 20. Pro. 12.14. Romans
15.28. Phil. 1.11. and 4.17. Col. 1.10. Jam. 3.15. Hos. 10.1. Amos 6.12. Mat.
7.16. and 12.33, 34 Isa. 3.10. Prove. 8.19. and 31 33. Psalm. 127.13. Pro. 12.14.
Gal. 5.22. Heb. 12.10. Jam. 3.17, 18. Romans 6.22.
in the proper and native sense, we all know. That increase which comes of the
Land, Trees, or Cattle, and other Creatures, is Fruit Properly, (but in a
general sense) so Genesis 1.11, 12. and 4.3. Psalm. 67.7. But more strictly, it is
taken for the last issue of Trees, and so it is opposed to leaves and
blossoms: So, Math. 21.19. that Fig Tree which grew by the way had leaves
many, but fruit none, and therefore Christ curied it.

Improperly, the word is used and applied, either to Persons, or to Things. To
Persons, so Children are termed the fruit of the Body and of the Womb, as Deuteronomy.
28.4. Psalm. 127.3. and 132.11. Lament. 2.20. Luke 1.42. Act. 2.30. And that,
first, because they are derived from the bodies of their Parents, and proceed
from their loins as fruit from a Tree. Secondly, for that they are delightful
to the Parent, as the fruit of the Tree is to the Palate.

It is applied unto Things; both to Actions and Rewards. To Actions both Good
and Bad: Good Actions are termed Fruit: so Inward habits of the Spirit whence
good Actions do proceed, Gal. 5.22. And of the Flesh, whence had Actions issue,
ver. 19.20. And outward works, issuing from those habits, whether good of which
we read, Prove. 12.14. Romans 15.28. Phil. 1.11. and 4.17. Colos. 1.10. Jam. 3.15.
Or bad whereof we read, Hos. 10.1. Amos 6.12. Math. 7.16. and 12.33, 34.

Rewards that follow upon our Actions, are likewise termed Fruit: so the Reward
that come^h of well-doing, is fruit, Isa. 3.10. Prove. 8.19. and 31.33. This
Reward is either in Blessings Temporal, Psalm. 127.3. Prove. 12.14. Or in
Blessings spiritual, Gal. 5.22. Heb. 12.10. Jam. 3.17, 18. Or eternal, Romans
6.22.

The Reward of Evil works is likewise termed Fruit, Prove. 1.31. Jer. 17.10.
Jer. 6.19. Jer. 21.14. Mich. 7.23. Romans 6.2.
Prove. 1.31. Jer. 17.10. So that which they suffer in this life is termed the
Fruit of their thoughts as Jer. 6.19. and the fruit of their doings, Jer.
21.14. Mich. 7.13. And that which they shall suffer hereafter is Fruit too,
Romans 6.21. What fruit had you in those things? for the end of those things is
death.

The fruit here spoken of, is not to be taken literally, but figuratively; Nor
yet for Persons, but Actions: Our good works are the fruit, and that not in a
strict sense, as opposed to thoughts, and words, (as Jam. 2.17.) But in a
larger sense, Jam. 2.17. Jer. 17.10. Rev. 2.2. and 3.1.
for thoughts, words, and Actions, as Jer. 17.10. Revel. 2.2. and 3.1. Again
good works are ranked into two files; Offices of Devotion, as A^ms, and such
like; which be Opera Misericordiae. And Duties of Religion as Faith,
Repentance, Obedience Prayer etc. these be Opera justitiae. The former be
manuum Sacrificia, the latter cordium Sacrificia: In the first, the withered
hand is only healed; in the la ter, the Dead is raised; both sorts are
expected: Fruits Inward, as good thoughts, purposes, desires, etc. and all
those good Affections mentioned, Gal. 5.22, 23. Gal. 5.22.
And Fruits Outward, good words, good works, etc. These are aptly termed Fruits.

First, for that they spring from a Good Root, the Righeousnesse of God in us,
Phil. 1.11. that is, Phil. 1.11
such as spring out of the righteousness of God, in us: we must be righteous
by the righteousness of God in us, before we can bear any good Fruit having
the inherent righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and righteousness
inherently wrought in us by the Spirit of God. Righteousness is the Tree, and
good Works the Fruits of the Tree.

Secondly, for that they are in the sapp of Faith, Mat. 4.28.
hidden in the heart; which buds, and puts forth, first in blossoms, then in
leaves, then in fruit, and so ripens by degrees, as we read Mark. 4.28.

Thirdly, for that they prove life in the Tree, as fruit does; Indeed buds and
blossoms are indications of a Tree's growth, but not of a Christian's: There
must be more than purposes, and inten^ions, and outward profession, to prove
life in a Christian. Thus having showed you what that fruit is which God
expects, we shall now prove it unto you that God does expect such fruit from
every Christian.

I went down into the Garden of Nuts (says Christ) Cant 6.11. to see the fruit
of the Valleys, Cant. 6.11.
and to see whether the Vines flourished, and the Pomegrantes budded. Had he
not expected fruit from those plants of his, he would not have gone down to see
the growth, and progress of them: He expected fruit from them, and went down to
see if they answered his expectation. So Cant. 7.12. Cant. 7.12.
Let us get up early to the Vineyards, (says the Church to Christ); let us see
if the Vines flourish, and whether the tender Grapes appear, and the
Pomegranates put forth: She calls upon her Beloved to visit with her the
Assemblies of her believing Children; that, to their mutual comfort, they might
be witnesses and partakers of all the signs and fruits of Grace, which they
yielded, and was by them expected should be produced. This is farther set forth
by a comparison betwixt Solomon's Vineyard and God's, Cant. 8.11, 12.
Cant. 8.11, 12. Solomon expected frui^ from his Vineyard that he had planted
in Baal-Hamon, but by reason that he was not able to dress it, and mature it
himself, he was enforced to let it forth unto others, who went away with some
part of the increase for their pains; yet he expected the greatest part of the
profit, (as well he might). But I (says Christ) reserve my Vineyard in my own
hands, I dress it with my own labor; And therefore if thou, O Solomon, can
receive from thine so large a Rent, I expect more from my Vineyard, and that
the gain and profit thereof should arise wholly and only to my self.

For further and clearer proof, Isa. 5.4.7.
read Isa. 5.4. God having bestowed so much pains upon the House of Israel,
his Vineyard; in plan^ing, fencing, stoning of it, and discharging all the
parts of a good Husbandman about it; He tells us what he expected from it, I
looked that it should bring forth Grapes, (and those good and not wild): He
looked to find Judgment and Righteousness exercised therein, ver. 7. Whatever
he found, yet this was that which was expected. And the like expectation has
he from his Vineyard now in time of the Gospel, as appears by that Parable
propounded by our blessed Savior, Mat. 12.33. etc. Mat. 12.33


And there is good reason for it, for all Labor is for a Cropp. Prove. 27.18. 1
Cor. 9.7. Verse. 10.
Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.7.) He that plants, plants in hope; and he that plowes,
plowes in hope, verse. 10. that is, to be made partaker of his Labors; and
shall not God expect some return from us, for all his pains bestowed on us,
and taken with us? Psalm. 128.2.
Surely it is but just and equal that He should taste of the Labor of his
hands Here I meet with an Objection which would be removed before I come to
apply the Point.

Did not God know before he sought, that this Fig Tree was fruitless? is any
thing concealed from him? does not he know all men, and needs not that any
should testify of man, John 2.24, 25? how then can it be said that he expected
fruit from it, and that his hope was frustrated?

It cannot be denied, but that God did foresee it, Isa. 48.8.
and knew full well the barrenness of this Fig Tree, Isa. 48.8. I knew (says
God) that thou would grievously transgress, therefore I have called thee a
Transgressor from the Womb: His expectation cannot be deceived as the hope and
expectation of man many times is, or as if there were in God a doubtful hope,
of what will follow; but he would give us to understand thereby, how meet it
was that this Fig Tree should have bin fruitful, his Quaerit as one speaks
is a Requirit, He did not seek that which was hid from him, but requires a
debt that was due unto him: Let us make some good Use of this.

If God expects fruit where he has bestowed pains in planting, then
multitudes are deceived in the World, who think to put God off with Leaves or
Blossoms, much less with wild or blasted fruit.

Some please themselves, (and think to please God too) with their good
intentions and purposes; It may be, they bloom very fair, resolve to amend
their wicked lives, forsake their Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoring, and all
their vicious courses, Hos. 6.9.
but nothing is done, their goodness (like Ephraims) is but like the Morning
Cloud, and as the Morning Dew that vanishes away, their purposes are like unto
a Ball (blown out of a Box or Nutshell) of soape and water, which when it
comes to a swelling ^ullnesse bursts of it self, and vanishes to nothing.

It is true, good Purposes and Resolutions are to be respected; but if they
accompany not good Actions, they are no better then Qualms and Passions which
may be in very reprobates (as we find in Balaam, Saul, and Judas himself, who
came so far as to say, Mat. 27.4. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 2 17. Prove. 31.19.
I have sinned in betraying Innocent blood.)

Austin meditating on that which is spoken of the Virtuous Woman, Prove. 31.19.
She lays her hands to the Spindle, and her hands take hold on the Distaffe,
wills us to ob^erve that in spinning, there are two Instruments, the Spindle in
the right hand, and the Distaffe in the left: about the Distaffe the Wool or
Flax is folded up, by the Spindle it is drawn out; that which is on the
Distaffe is to pass to the Spindle, that which is on the Spindle is already
passed: And he applies these two, to the Intention of doing well, and to the
good work done; Intentions do but fold up the Wool or Flax upon the Distaffe,
it is Doing that draws it out and spins it: Opus tuum sit in fuso, non in colo
(says he), Let thy work be done on the Spindle, not on the Distaffe; it is
that which must comfort thee; it is that which must do thee good. Purposes and
Performances, are like unto Jacob and Esau, our Purpo^es are the firstborn,
but Performance (with Jacob) carries away the Blessing. Your Intentions and
Purposes are like sweet buds in the Spring, but that is an uncomfortable Spring
that is alls buds and no setting. Coelum bonis operibus, Gehennam vanis
desideriis (says one), Hell is full of good Intentions and desires, but Heaven
full of good works, (as a holy man that we read of saw in a Vision.)

Othersome conceit that if to these buds some green leaves of outward
Profession be added, it will yield abundant satisfaction; Talking-Christians
they are, but not Walking, nor working Christians; Their leaves make a rusling
noise with every blast of wind; Prodigal enough they are in hearing Sermons,
and talking in all Company of what they have heard, but that is all: not a
berry can be found under any of their leaves, yet they would be accoun ed for
good Christian Professors.

But these should do well to remember what St. James says, Pu^e Religion, and
undefiled before God the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widow
in their affliction, and to keep a man's self unspotted from the World, Jam 1.27.
Jam. 1.27. though a man say he has Faith and has not Works can such a Faith
save him? No it cannot, Jam. 2.14. It is no sign of a good Tree when all the
sapp runs into leaves, and spends it self that way; Nor of a good Christian
when all his grace shoots up into words, when his goodness is only verba^,
there is no reality at all; It is fruit that God expects fructum laborum, the
fruit of our labors; an^ he will not be put off with fructum labiorum, the
fruit of our lips. You hear much, praise the Preacher, talk of the Sermon,
repeat largely, fayl not in returning every Quotation in the right Verse and
Chaper: Eufolia, ubi fructus? All these are but leaves, where is the fruit?
without which the other in God's account is but a kind of talking Craft or
Sophistry.

Believe it Brethren, a speechless life has more force in it then a livelesse
speech: to see one man converted by our Ministry, and bringing forth such
fruit as may beseem Repentance and is worthy amendment of life, will edify a
Congregation more then twenty of our Sermons. When Peter and John Preached in
the Streets, the People marvailed says the Text, Act. 4.13. for they had
understood that they were unlearned men; but beholding also the man that was
healed standing by, they had nothing to say (says the Text, Acts 4.13.
) they were so clearly con^inced of a greater power working in them, and by
them, as that they had nothing to object against it; And this is the only way
you have to out-Preach us: And without this, all your Figg-leaves will not hide
your shame, nor will they be able were they as bigg as Targets (as Pliny says
the leaves of the Indian Fig Tree are,) to bear off that shower of wrath which
shall one day fall upon the heads of all barren and fruitless Professors:

Lastly, Others there are, that bring forth fruit as well as buds and leaves,
and yet their fruit shall not be accepted.

First, For that it not natural and kindly fruit, but degenerate; In the
Creation every seed and plant brought fruit after its kind so it is in the
Regeneration, Genesis 1.12. Phil. 1.27, and 3.20. Romans 16.2. Ephesians. 5.3. Gal. 5.19.
good Trees bring forth fruit answerable to the Stock wherein they are
engrafted, and the sap they thence receive, and the Profession that they make;
but these men walk after the lusts of the Gentiles, and bring forth the fruits
of the flesh, (such as those mentioned, Gal. 5.19.) no manner of way answering
to the seed that has bin sown in them by the Ministry of the Word, which
they have heard, and the doctrine which they have bin taught.

Secondly, Say it be fruit of a better kind, yet it is not seasonable fruit; It
may be that they are ten or twenty years in Blooming, so long before they come
to any good Resolution, to leave their vicious ways and courses; and then they
trust to latter springs and showrs for the perfecting and ripening of it, and
so neglecting the due season of fruit, it happens that, with Esau, Heb. 12.16,
17.
they find no place for Repentance, though they seek it carefully with tears.

Thirdly, Their fruit is not sound fruit, but rotten at the coare, (however it
be goodly and fair to look upon) like those Apple Trees in Assyria (of which
Solinus writes) the fruit whereof is as yellow as Gold, but being touched is
rotten, or like the Apples of Sodom, beautiful to the eye; but being touched
they fall to Cindars: zealous they seem outwardly, when they are cold at heart,
or else lukewarm: Their aims and ends in all their devotions is Self, like
that Cardinal Wolsey, who laid a fair Foundation for a good Work, but his Ego
et Rex meus marred all the Structure: he sought to raise his own honor and
reputation by the Ruin of his Sovereign's dignity. Such was the fruit the
Pharisees of old bare: Math. 6.
and such is the fruit of Papists at this day, who seek themselves, in thinking
to merit by their good works at the hands of God.

Fourthly, their fruit is not fair, it is shrivelled up, either in some few
duties of the first Table, as Hearing, Reading, Praying, etc. but in the duties
of the second Table they are very tardy, Isa. 58 3, 5, 6. Math. 23.14.
Isa. 58.3, 5, 6. So the Pharisees made long prayers, and under that pretense
devoured up Widows houses, Math. 23.14. and such is the fruit of all
Hypocrites. Or else they are observant in the duties of the second Table, with
neglect of of the first, Math. 23.23.
as, Math. 23.23. and such is the fruit of the Civilian, and moral man.

Fifthly, Their fruit is not lasting: it holds good for the Summer season of
prosperity, but when the Winter of Adversity and Persecution comes, Luke 8.13.
it sails, Luke 8.13. And such is the fruit of the Temporary Believer, and
Time-serving Christian; his fruit lasts not all the year, not during term of
Life, when as a good Fig Tree is never without some Figgs, hanging on the
tender boughs, Winter nor Summer: A good Christian like the Palm Tree spoken
of, Psalm. 92.12. Ps. 92.12.
grows fat and flourishing even in old age.

Let these and all such other, be advised not to flatter themselves nor suffer
themselves by vain pretenses to be undone. It is not a fair blossom, a green
leaf, nor Fruit of outward Profession, external reformation, common
illumination, or any of the like Nature, that will satisfy God's expectation:
he looks for fruit, and good fruit too, from every Fig Tree, and at your hands
he will require it.

fruit of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11. fruit unto Holiness, Romans 6.22. fruit
unto God, Romans 7.4. that is, to the Glory and Praise of God, and such as he
will accept of.

Now that this Use may be the more profitable, I shall acquaint you with three
particulars; First with the Properties or Qualifications of that fruit that
shall find acceptance. Secondly, with the means that must be used for the
producing of fruit so qualified. Thirdly, with the motives that may stir us up
to the bringing forth of such fruit: Of each of these briefly, and in order.

That our Fruit may be rightly qualified, and so accepted, care must be had of
the Quality and Quantity of them.

For the Quality, they must be Good, both in respect of Substance and
Circumstance.

For Substance they must be good quoad fontem and quoad finem. They must
proceed from a good Fountain, the Spirit of God; and aim at a right end, the
Glory of God.

The Fountain must be good; They must be the fruits of the Spirit, and proceed
from the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Gal. 5.22. Semen naturae non consurgit in f^uctum
Gratiae. Joh. 6.3.
To bring forth good fruits, more than Nature is required. Natural abilities,
be they never so excellent, no, nor moral principles, be they never so eminent,
are sufficient hereunto. A Tree must live before it bear fruit, and it is the
Spirit that quickneth, and to prevent deceit herein, (for many pretend the
Spirit who have it not) care must be had that what we do be warranted by the
Word, Joh. 3.21. if it answers not the Rule, it proceeds not from the Spirit of
God but from a deluding Spirit and cannot be good. Joh. 3.21. Romans 14.23.


As the Fountain must be good, so must the End be that we aim a^. It is not
color, nor juice, that distinguishes a Crab from an Apple; but the relish:
The End of an Action, is that which gives relish unto an action: The Vltimate
End is the Glory of God, Ephesians. 1.12. Israel was counted an empty Vine for that
it brought forth fruit unto it self, Ephesians. 1.12. Hos. 10.1.
Hos. 10.1. albeit Secondarily, both our Own and our Neighbor's good is to be
respected. By our fruitfulness our Neighbor must be edifyed; our own faith
and thankfulness testified; our high Calling in Christ answered; Sin and
Judgment diverted; Heaven and Happiness in the end obtained.

As Substance, so Circumstance must be respected in the fruit we beat: and
that, 1. Of Person, or Calling. 2. Of Time. 3. Of Place.

It must be Our own Fruit, Psalm. 1.3. Besides the fruit which is of a General
kind, Psalm. 1.3.
and grows upon every Tree of God's planting, and upon every Branch that is
grafted in the true Vine (as Love, Joy, Peace, and the rest, mentioned Gal.
5.22.) there is a more special and particular Fruit, Judge. 9.10.
which every Tree must bring forth according to its kind. As the Olive Tree
has its fatness; the Figg Tree, his sweetness; The Vine, his Wine, that
cheareth God and man: So every Christian has his proper fruit, whereby he must
be known in that Calling, wherein God has set him. A King (says Austin)
serves God after one sort as he is a man, Aug. Epist. 50.
after another sort as he is a King: As he is a Man, he serves him by living
faithfully; as he is a King, by making Laws for the keeping of his Subjects in
peace and tranquillity. And so it may be said of God's whole Household, and
Family; each one owes a service to God, after one sort, in the general fruit
of holiness; and after another in the proper fruits of our particular Callings
and Stations: Whence it is, that that may be good in one, that is not in
another; as appears by two remarkable Instances. 2 Samuel 6.6. Number. 18.3. 1 Chro.
13.10.
The one of Uzzah, who (it is likely) out of good intent put his hand to the
Ark, to stay it, when it tottered, and was like to fall: This was not his
Fruit, none might touch the Ark but the Levites only; therefore God was
displeased with it, and smote him for it, so that he dyed presently before the
Lord, 1 Chronicles. 13.10.

The other Instance is in King Vzziah who went into the Temple to burn Incense
upon the Altar of Incense; 2 Chro. 26.16.
This was not his Fruit, it appertained not to him to do it, but to the
Priests, the Sons of Aaron, (as Azariah told him, Ver. 18.
2 Chronicles. 26.18.) and therefore it made not for his honor, for he was
immediately struck with Leprosy, which appeared in his forehead to his shame,
Ver. 19.20.
insomuch that he was thereupon thrust out of the Temple for a Leper. It is not
enough (then) that our works are such as beseem Repentance in the general; but
they must be such as have a due respect unto the performance of those things
which we are called unto in our Repentance, Isa. 1.16, 17. Luke 4.12, 13, 14.
Isa. 1.16, 17. Luke 4.12, 13, 14.

As it must be proper fruit, so it must be seasonable. It is said of the godly
man, that he brings forth his fruit in his season, Psalm. 1.3. Eccl. 3.11.
Pro. 25.11.
Psalm. 1.3. Every thing is beautiful in its season: A word spoke (much more
deed done) in due season, is like Apples of Gold with pictures of Silver, Prove.
25.11. Then is our Fruit ripe, pleasant, profitable, and acceptable, when it is
well timed; for want of this it rotts and putrifies, as does the untimely fruit
of all Hypocrites.

Nor may the Place be altogether neglected; For (as King Theodorick speaks in
Cassiodore), Aptum est omne bo^^^ locis suis, et laudabilia quaque sordescunt,
nisi congrna sede potiantur. Cassio. lib. 5. Var. 22. Joh. 2.14, 15.
every good thing is proper in its place, and all things praiseworthy lose
their commendation, unless they do enjoy their proper seat. Buying and selling
is good, but not in the Temple, as appears Joh. 2.14.15. Those Buyers and
Sellers of Sheep and Oxen, and Money changers, did no other then what might
lawfully be done, in providing Sacrifices ready for those who came from far,
and in exchanging Gold for Silver; great pieces for smaller; strange coin for
money current in that place: Their fault was, that they did all this in the
Temple, and encroached upon a place consecrated to God, which they profaned
with their merchandise, in which regard Christ whipped them ^ut like Dogs; and
that upon this ground, Isa. 56.7. Mat. 21.13.
my House shall be called a House of Prayer. And thus you see of what Quality
our Fruit must be that it may be accepted.

Now for the Quantity of it, our Fruit must be full; the want of this was
objected to the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3.2.
Rev. 3.2. And St. Paul's prayer on the Philippians behalf was, that they might
be filled with the fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11.
Phil. 1.11. Now our fruits may be said to be full, when (like that Tree of
Life mentioned, Rev. 22.2. Cant. 7.13.
Revel. 22.2.) we bear twelve manner of Fruits, and (as we read in Cant. 7.13.)
all kind of sweet Fruits, old an new: when we manifest in our lives every grace
of the Spirit, as well as any, and make conscience of every Christian duty, as
well as of any; when every member of the Body, power and faculty of the soul,
Jam. 3.17.
is laden with Fruit, no branch empty, Jam. 3.17.

Secondly, When our Fruits are answerable to the means, and cost bestowed on
us. The want of this was blamed in the Hebrews, Heb. 5.12.
Cap. 5.12. Of which more hereafter.

Thirdly, When our works are finished they they are full, Act. 9.36. Till then
they are not ripe, nor have they attained to perfect fullness. Acts 9.36.


And thus much of the first Patricular I propounded. Now to the second; the
Means that must be used, that the Fruit we bear may be thus Qualified: and so;

First, Get to be engrafted into a lively stock, that is, into Christ; He is
the Noble Stock into which all the Plants of Paradise must be set and
engrafted, Romans 7.4. Colos. 2.7. Joh. 15.4. Numb. 17.8. Luke 23.39, -- 43.
Romans 7.4. Colos. 2.7. without him we can do nothing, John 15.4. but being once
set in Him, were we as dry as Aarons withered Rod, we shall presently be
charged into a flourishing and fruitful Tree, as was the Thief converted on the
Cross Luke 23.39, -- 43. Who no sooner took hold on Christ but presently
became another man; manifesting the fruits of his engrafting, in believing,
confessing giving testimony of Christ's Innocence, reproving his fellow
Offender for his Blasphemy; He is his own accuser, and humbly desires to be
remembered in mercy.

Secondly, Earnestly beg the spirit of God whereby the sap may be conveyed from
the Root, Rom 8.9. Ephesians. 2.22. Romans 8.11. Ephesians 3.16. 1 These. 5.23.
into every branch; without it, we can have no communion with Chrst. Romans 8.9.
Ephesians. 2.22. by it we shall be quickened, Romans 8.11. and strenghened to every
good work and action, Ephe. 3.16. Sanctified throughout, in body, in soul, and
in spirit, 1. These. 5.23. If the Clouds be full, they will power forth Rain
upon the Earth, (says Solomon, Eccles. 11.3.): So it a man be thus enriched
with the spirit of grace, he cannot but be fruitful. Eccles. 11.3.
For as Christ and his Spirit are not sundred; so cannot the Spirit be sundred
from the fruits of the Spirit, which are those mentioned, Love, Joy, Peace,
Gal. 5.22.23.
Long-suffering, etc. Now by fervent and faithful prayer unto God the Spirit
may be obtained, Luke 11.13. being accompanied with careful and conscionable
hearing of the word, Luke 11.13. Act. 10.44.
Acts 10.44.

Thirdly, Look that there be store of suckers and feeders about the Root, these
are they (you know) that by spreading themselves this way and that way, gather
strength and nourishment to the Tree, and every branch thereof, whereby it
becomes fruitful: Holy affections, Love, Joy, desire, Fear, Grief, etc. These
are the feeders of the Soul, and should draw nourishment unto it from every one
of Gods Ordinances, from the Word Read or Preached, Sacraments administered, and
from all Providential Administrations whether of Mercy or Judgment. David was
abundant this way, as appears in the whole Book of the Psalms, especially in
Psalm. 119. where we may find in every verse almost he catches hold on Mercies,
Judgments, Psalm. 119.
Promises, Threatenings; as the Ivye catches hold with its claw on every twigg,
to climb up to its stature.

Fourthly, Preserve the Bark; let not that be peeled off from the Tree; It is
threatened as a soar Judgment against Israel that the Fig Tree should be
barked with the teeth of noisome Creatures, that God would send into their Land
to punish them, insomuch that the boughs thereof should be left white; Joel
1.7.
Joel 1.7. To be left white without bark, was an indication of a speedy
withering. That bough that lies open without bark (says Gregory on that place)
looks white, but perishes. Thy conscience is like the Bark of the Figg Tree;
presumptuous sins are like those Creatures, that peel off the bark, beware of
them; for by them, the conscience is wasted and consumed as iron is by rust: We
sin too much through ignorance and infirmity, but when we sin wilfully and
presumptuously against knowledge, and the light of conscience, our boughs will
soon wax white; How frequent is it to see men that lose a good conscience, with
it to lose their gifts, 1 Timothy 1.19. If the Ship of conscience wrack, (...)
the Merchandise of Faith will soon suffer wrack: Our outward actions, (as well
as affections) may have a color of good (as white is of Innocence); but our
bark being pilled, it is no good whiteness, but an indication of a perishing
condition; without a good conscience all our actions, yea our best performances
are so far from goodness and acceptance, that they are abominable and
distasteful unto God: our Affections and outward Actions may have a color of
good, but all is defiled before God. Tit. 1.15.
Tit. 1.15. the conscience being defiled, it defiles all it meddles with; Hence
David prayed so earnestly to be kept from this barking of his boughs by any
such sins, Psalm. 19.13. The like care had Paul, Psalm. 19.13. Acts 23.1.
Acts 23.1. That for the time past, and for the time present, and future, he
did exercise himself to have a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Men, Acts 24.16. Act. 24.16.
And in so doing we shall grow in the fruit of Righteousness, and have cause
to rejoice in our fruitfulness, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 1.12. Heb. 13.8. Prove.
21.8. Phil. 1.10.
Conscience is our Paradise, there cut Trees will thrive, we shall live
honestly, Heb. 13.8. Work Righteousness, Prove. 21.8. and walk without giving
offense, Phil. 1. 10.

Fifthly, Be frequent and abundant in the exercises of mortification; Bare the
Tree about the Root, cast away all loose earth; withdraw thy soul from all
worldly stays and comforts: when the world has left us naked, and destitute
of her vain succors, we shall then take faster hold on Christ our Savior, in
whom the Fatherless find mercy; Hos. 14 3.
lopp off all superfluous twiggs, and excremental branches which steal away the
nourishment that should maintain the Tree, Jam. 1.21.
Jam. 1.21. get a humble and a tender heart, the hard and stony heart suffers
not the seed to take Root, Mat. 13.4.
Math. 13.4. For this end, make good use of all Crosses and Afflictions, let
them cause thee to acknowledge thy sins, and break thy heart in the sight of
God; beseech him that thou being exercised under them may at length bring
forth the quiet fruit of Righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
Heb. 12.11. Weed often, and do it on thy knees (as weeders do); this is the
way to be fruitful.

Sixthly and Lastly, To all this, the Influence of Heaven must be added, else
no Fruit can be expected (as before has been showed) The Heavens must hear the
Earth, Hos. 2.21. The beams of the Sun of Righteousness shining in his
Church, Hos. 2.21.
must warm and cherish us, Mal. 4.2. The former and latter rain must moysten
us, Joel 2.23. Mal. 4.2. Joel 2.23. Cant. 4.16. Psalm. 65.10
The winds of Gods spirit must blow on us, to quicken us, Cant. 4.14. This is
the way to have fattnesse drop down upon us, Psalm. 65.10. As for those who
delight to live in the shade, and shelter their souls from the influence of
Heaven, that withdraw their hearts from the directions and comforts of an
effectual and painful Ministry, let not such ever look to become fruitful: And
so much of the second Particular that I propounded to you; Now to the third and
last, which is the Motives to sti^r us up to the using of these means, that we
may bring forth fruit so qualified as has bin declared; and they are many.

Some respect God, some his Gospel, some Man, others the Creature.

In regard of God, we ought to be fruitful. First, for that he has deserved
it. Secondly, he seeks for it. Thirdly, and when he finds it, he counts himself
honored and glorified by it.

First, He has deserved Fruit from us, in that he has bought us at a dear
rate from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Luke 1.75. Tit. 2.14. Joh. 15.16.
to serve Him all our days in Holiness and Righteousness, He has chosen us
to be a Peculiar People unto himself, zealous of good Works, and made choice of
us before others, that we should be Fruitful, and that our Fruit should abide
and abound. Ephesians. 2.10.
He has made us his own work nauship, by the effectual calling of grace, and
created us to good works* to walk in them. He has planted us, Isa. 5.
hedged us about, manured us, watered us with the sweet dews of his Word and
Gospel from Heaven; trimmed us with his pruning book of Judgments and
Corrections: And what could he do more for us that he has not done? And what
can he expect less from us, toward all his pains and travails with us then
Fruit? He that sowes, sowes in hope (says the Apostle). 1 Cor. 9.7.
God has set in hope, planted in hope, watered in hope, of some answerable
return, and shall it be denied? or can thou imagine that God has took all
this pains with thee, and bestowed all this cost upon thee, that thou should
bear green boughs, or gay blossom somes only? Indeed leaves come of the
seed, and chaff from the kernel: but does any man plant for leaves, and sow for
chaff? you know it is fruit that they look for: Had it not bin for that, thou
had bin no Tree; Fruit was that, for which thou were set, and have been thus
long preserved. As God (then) has had his time of planting, Ps. 128.2.
so in equity and justice let him have his Vintage, and now at lengh eat of the
labors of his hand.

Secondly, He has sought it of us, as our Text speaks. The Prophet Nahum tell
us, Nah. 3.12.
that the first ripe Figgs if they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the
eater, Nah. 3.12. Such rip Figgs we ought to be. The very signification of Gods
will, should be motive strong enough to persuade obedience, 1 These. 4.3.
albeit no other reason nor inducement appears: we should offer and present our
selves and fruits to him, Psalm. 4.5. Romans 12.1.
and not put him to the trouble to seek for his own; but when he does come and
seek to us for it (which he need not do) it is not safe for us to disappoint
him.

Now seeking implies diverse things; First, an earnest desire to find the thing
sought for, as, Luke 15.4. Math. 13.45* Such an earnest desire has God to find
Fruit on us, Luke 15.4. Mat. 13.45 Deuteronomy. 5.20, and 32, 29. Psalm. 81.13. Hos.
6.4. Luke 13.34, and 19, 41, 42. Cant. 3.1. -- 5. Luk, 15.8. 2 Timothy 1.17. Mat.
23.37. Ver. 34.35.
whom he has planted in his Church, as appears by those pathetical speeches
which he uses, Deuteronomy. 5.29, and 32, 29. Psalm. 81, 13. Hos. 6.4. And in this
Chapter, Luke 13.34, and 19, 41, 42. By all which, and many such like, it
appears that He does seek seriously, and fervently for fruit, and is much
grieved when he is deceived in his expectation.

Secondly, Seeking imports diligence and frequency: It is no rare but a
continued Act. So Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Luke 15.8. 2 Timothy 1.17. Thus God comes
and seeks for fruit, not once, nor twice, and then gives over, but he comes
often; How often would I have gathered thee (says Christ), Math. 23.37. not
once, but often, and that by the external ministry of the Prophets, sent before
him, ver. 34.35. and often in his own person, (as on the next verse we shall
hear more fully). And how often has he come seeking fruit from us, by the
ministry of his Servants* since his departing from us, whom he has sent unto
us to receive your Fruits, Cant. 8.11. Mat. 21.34.
and gather up his Rent, Cant. 8.11. Math. 21.34. One day in seven we come
constantly unto you, (besides other times, as we have occasion), and are still
put off; we spread out our hands all the day long, but not one penny that we
can take; no fruit of Faith, Repentance, new Obedience, Isa. 65.2.
that appears in your lives, after all our labors: so that we are enforced to
complain to God of your barrenness, and he compelled to take distress,
sometimes on your Bodies; 1 Cor. 11.30.
sometimes on your Goods; sometimes on your friends and children; which yet he
is willing graciously to restore, upon promise of better payment: In short, no
way of finding, but that God has used in seeking Fruit, hoping to find it at
last; and does it not concern us then to be fruitful?

Thirdly, Seeking implies mildness and gentleness: Luke 15.8.
She that lost her groat swept her house gently, Luke 15.8. she laid not about
with her broom, nor raised too much dust, that was not the way to find it: God
comes to us in a mild way, not wounding, and killing, Genesis 3.8.
but as he came to Adam. Genesis 3.8. so he comes to us in the cool of the day, he
did not run upon him as greedy of revenge, but walked, as loath to punish; Nor
was it in the heat of the day, when the Sun was at his full height, but in the
cool of the Evening, that he came, to take an account from him, for eating of
the forbidden Fruit: And so, with a soft and slow pace, in the cool of the day,
in much Love and gentleness, he comes to require the commanded (and deserved)
fruit from us. God does beseech you by us his unworthy Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20.
And I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, 2 Cor. 5.20.
that you present your bodies a living sacrifice holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service, and the Fruit that God thus graciously seeks
for, Romans 12.1.

Thirdly, We should bring forth fruit, Romans 12.1.
for that God holds himself gloryfied by it: Herein is my Father glorified
(says Christ) that you bear much fruit, Joh. 15.8.
John 15.8. St. Saul prayed earnestly and incessantly, for the Thessalonians,
that they might be enabled to walk worthy of that calling whereunto they were
called, 2 These. 1.12.
and that they might fulfill all the good pleasure of his will, and the work of
Faith in them with Power: And the ground and reason of that his prayer was,
that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ might be glorified in them, 2 These.
1.12. Fruitfulness in the former graces was the means of bringing glory unto
Christ, and the main scope of a Christian is to glorify his name; Nor can we
look to be glorified in him, but in and through our own glorifying of him;
Math. 5.16.
No better way to do this than by our fruitfulness, Math. 5.16. our
Fruct-fying and God's Glorifying are joined together. You kno^ we blame the
Root of an unfruitful Tree, or fault the Husbandman, but in case of
fruitfulness we commend both; so is it in this case. Let this prevail with us
to bear fruit to God: It is a high honor that God does put upon us, to esteem
himself honored by any of us; he needs not our furtherance therein, yet he
esteems himself to be honored by our fruits. We pray with our tongue, Hallowed
be thy name, let us endeavor it in our lives by bringing forth such fruit as
may make to his praise. And thus of the motives which respect God.

Secondly, We ought to have a special regard to the credit of the Gospel, Tit.
2.11, 12.
which is the Doctrine of Gods grace, and teaches men to be fruitful, in
denying all ungodly lusts, and in living soberly righteously and godlily in
this evil Word, Tit. 2.11, 12. yea such is the power and efficacy of it, Colos.
1.6. Jam. 3.17. Act. 13.48. 2 These. 3.1. Romans 2.24 Ephesians. 36.20.
as that it brings forth fruit, in all that embrace it, and entertain the
truth of it in love, Colos. 1.6. It is a wisdom full of good fruits, Jam.
3.17. which fruits when we show forth, then we glorify it, Acts 13.48. 2 These.
3.1. but on the other side if we be barren and fruitless, who do profess it,
or any way vicious; the Gospel is dishonored and blasphemed by us, Romans 2.24.
See! say some profane ones of the World, (when they hear of any thing amiss
in a Professor) these are your Gospellers your Bible bearers; here is the fruit
of running after Sermons, etc. and so, as Jacob said of his son's cruelty
toward the Sichemites we may say of these, they make the Gospel to stink in
the Nostrils of the Inhabitants of the Land: Genesis 35.30.
their vicious life is like a loathsome five in that precious box of Ointment.
Thus Dioclesian (as Eusebius reports) seeing and observing the loose carriage
of some professed Christians, was induced to think that Religion was no other
then a wretched device of wicked men.

Great care therefore ought we to take that the Gospe^ be not s^andalized by
our unfruitfulnesse; As the feet of those are beautiful that bring unto us the
glad tidings of Salvation; so should the hands o^ those be beautiful that
receive the same, Romans 10.15.
that the Gospel be not ashamed of us. Live as it prescribes, Phil. 1.27.
and as you profess; let your conversation be such as becomes it, Phil. 1.27.
Remember God could not end are to have such holy things profaned under the
Law, as were but Types of the Gospel, (as the Vestments and Utensils of the
Temple): And can we think that he is less jealous of the Gospel it self, that
it be not discredited, and dishonored by us? This seriously considered, cannot
but be a quickening motive to fruitfulness.

In regard of man there are other considerable motives why we should be
fruitful; Prove. 10.21.
The lips of the Righteous (says Solomon) feed many, Prove. 10.21. If the fruit
that grows upon that one bough be so richly laden, and that many a soul is
comforted by the fruit of the Lips of a good and godly Christian, How many,
think you, are fed and refreshed with the fruit that grows upon the other
branches of the Tree? How many are comforted with the fruit of their eyes?
ears? hands? Job. 29.11, -- 17.
Job 29.11, -- 17. Of every fruitful Christian we may say, as is said of the
Vine, Isa. 65.8. Destroy it not, Isa. 65.8.
for a blessing is in it.

More Particularly, by our Fruit we feed both others, and our selves; in both
respects we should be stirred up to fruitfulness.

Others are much refreshed and comforted therewith, nothing does more refresh
the bowels of God's Ministers, (the Dressers of his Vines and Figg-Trees) then
to see the branches laden with the Fruit of Faith, Love, Obedience, etc. In
which regard the Apostle praises God for the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.2, -- 10.
1 These. 1.2, 10. and counted them his Joy, Glory, and Crown of rejoicing, 1
These. 2.19, 20. And thus much St. Paul intimates to Philemon, Brother let me
have joy of thee in the Lord; (or, let me enjoy this Fruit from thee in the
Lord) Refresh my bowels in the Lord, Phil. v. 20.
Phil. v. 20. that is, If thou will grant what I desire in the Lord of thee, in
so doing thou shall refresh and revive my bowels within me. The work of the
Minister is full of labor and toil in Digging, Dressing, Dunging of the Trees
planted in God's Orchard, (as hereafter with Gods good leave shall be showed)
but nothing does more revive them after all their wearisome labor, than their
Peoples fruitfulness.

And as Ministers, so private persons, are much revived and refreshed by our
Fruits: Luke 22.32.
Our Savior's command to Peter was, that he should strengthen the Brethren,
Luke 22.32. Those who are already converted (if weak) are hereby confirmed, and
further strengthened; or (if strong) further provoked, to go on in a Christian
course, Math. 6.16. Act 11.28, and 15, 3.
and their hearts gladed; they are made to laugh (with Abraham) to behold the
Fruit of the Gospel in our conversations, Math. 5.16. Acts 11.8, and 15* 3.

Those who are not converted, (if they belong to God's Election) are hereby
prepared to conversion, and wonn (even without the word) to a liking of the
word and profession thereof, which they see to be so Holy, 1 Pet. 2.12, and 1
Pet. 3.1.
Charitable, and Fruitful, 1 Pet. 2.12. etc. 1 Pet. 3.1. So Justin Martyr
seeing the Patience and Constancy of the Martyrs in those times, fell in love
with Religion, and became himself a Martyr: And we read of one Cecilia a
Virgin, who by her constan^y and exhortations before, and at her Mar^yrdome,
converted four hundred: Latimer blessed God, that ever he knew Bilney. Exempla
trahunt mores, Exemplary good works are, as an Admant, very attractive; An
excellent Oratory, ha^h a fruitful conversation to winn others.

As for those who are not Elect, and belong not to God; yet by a godly and
fruitful Conversation, their mouths will be stopped, muz^ed, or buttoned up, 1
Pet. 2.15. they cannot bark, (as they gladly would) against the truth and the
professors of it. 1 Pet. 2.15, and 3, 16.
Chrysostom calls good-works unanswerable Syllogisms, invincible
demonstrations, to confute Pagans. Thus did the Primitive Christians confute
their Adversaries, Text. ad Scap. Hist. Wald. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
(as Tertullian shows) and Lewis the 12 King of France, hearing much evil of
the Waldenses in his Realm, sent cerrain to enquire into the business, and
hearing what they related of them, that they found them not guilty of any such
crime as was reported, but that they religiously observed the Sabbath day,
baptized their Children after the order of the Primitive Church; taught them
the Articles of the Christian faith, and the Commandments of God. The King
said (and bound it with an Oath) that they were better men, then either
himself, or any of his Subjects. A fruitful life will thrattle envy, and stop
the mouth of malice. And thus in regard of others, our care should be to become
fruitful.

Lastly, In regard of our selves, and our own good, 1 These. 5.45. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Joh. 15.8. and 13.25. 1 John 3.7.
we should be fruitful: For first, hereby we shall make our Calling and
Election sure, 1 These. 5.4, 5. 2 Pet. 1.10. and have a comfortable Testimony
that we are indeed Christ's Disciples, Joh. 15.8. and 13.35. 1 John 3.7.

Secondly, We shall so far get into God's favor, as that we shall speed in all
our suits; Joh. 15 7.16. Mat. 15.28.
nothing shall be denied us that we ask, if it may make for God's glory and our
good, Joh. 15.7.16. Mat. 15.28.

Thirdly, God will have a special care of us. The Israelites in their conquests
were forbidden to lift up an Axe against any Tree that bare fruit, Deuteronomy. 20.19,
20. Ezekiel. 9.3. Gal. 5.22, 23.
Deuteronomy. 20.19, 20. God will provide for all fruitful Christians, in public
calamities, Ezekiel. 9.4.

Fourthly, No Law shall be against such, Gal. 5.22, 23. Those who bring forth
the fruits of the flesh, have no Gospel for them; those who bring forth the
fruits of the spirit, have no Law against them: they have indeed a Law to
direct them, but none to compel them, nor condemn them, Romans 8.1. Jer. 17.10.
Romans 8.1.

Fifthly, It shall be unto us according to our fruit, Jer. 17.10. We read that
Zerxes adorned the Plane-Tree, and hang it with many rich and precious j^wels,
because he delighted in the shade thereof; much more will God adorn fruitful
Trees, for that he delights in the fruit thereof. In this life he will reward
with glory and honor; Cant. 7.17.
A fruitful Christian carries a Heaven in his heart, Joy and Comfort, Cant.
7.17. a happy and blessed communion there is betwixt Christ and him; and
hereafter there is a Blessing abides him for ever, Heb. 7.8. Heb. 7.8.
And thus you have heard what reason we have to be fruitful, both in respect of
others, and of our selves as well as others.

Lastly, If we cast our eyes upon the whole Creation, and every creature
therein that God has made, we may be stirred up and provoked to fruitfulness.
The Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, and all therein, are fruitful in their kind;
and shall man be barren and fruitless, for whom all these are fruitful? Does
not the Sun come forth as a Bride groom out of his Chamber daily, Psalm. 19.
rejoicing as a Giant to run his course, to enlighten the earth wi^h his beams,
and nou^ish and cherish all things with the heat thereof? The Moon, and the
Stars, quicken this lower World by their operative Influence; The big-bellied
Clouds, which tly up and down on the wings of the wind, deliver their moist
burdens on the earth, and shower down their seasonable dews, to cool and
moisten it, that it may bear fruit: Does not the Earth make a thankful return,
and yield her fatness and riches to innumerable creatures that live on it, and
depend upon her as their common Mother for maintenance? and what creature is
there that lives on it, but yields some fruit? Beasts, Trees, Plants, all bring
forth after their kind for the good of man, that man may bring forth fruit to
God, for whose Glory he was created.

Let these considerations prevail with us, that we may in some sort answer the
Lord's expectations from us; he looks for fruit, let him find it in us: Oh that
it could be said of us, as it was of the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9.
Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. It is a good Land a land of Brooks of Water, of Fountains
that spring out of the Valleys and Hills: A Land of Wheat and Barley and Vines
and Figg-Trees and Pomegranates; A Land of Oil Olive, and Honey; A Land whose
stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills thou may dig Brass. We have Springs
of means to inform our minds, and Brooks of knowledge, to direct our course;
Our good works should stand like those fields of Wheat and Barley; Vines,
Figg-Trees, and Pomegranates, let be our fruitful Meditations; Oil and Honey,
the Grace of our lips: our Understanding full of good things, our whole life
Wells and Vineyards to comfort both our selves and others: our very rocks
should be Iron, and our hills yield brass, our most barren works should be
profitable to others, our very Falls others warnings to prevent
high-mindednesse: And so,

Almonds did Aaron's Calling to the Priesthood; It may assure us, that we are
regenerated, set into Christ, quickened by his Spirit, and that we live in him,
out of whom we could not be fruitful in good works. Good Fruit is an undeniable
Argument of a good Tree, for that a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit
(as our Savior tells us). Mat. 7.18.


I know the most fruitful Christian comes far short of that fruitfulness that
should be in him; and his defectivenesse in holy duties (both to God and man)
may sometimes cause him to question his estate, Mat. 4.28.
but that should not too much deject the spirits of any of us; for the fruit of
the Spirit, like the fruits of the Earth, ripens by degrees, and much of it is
nipped in the bud and blossom, and comes to nothing; but a little fruit, if it
be of the right kind, proves that Tree to be good, and the promise is, that if
there be any fruit at all, God will purge that branch, and help it against
corruption, so that it shall bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15.1.2. But when
there is no good Fruit to be found under our leaves, that is a miserable
sterility indeed; Joh. 15.1, 2.
And yet such was the sterility of the Fig Tree mentioned in my Text.

He came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.] Text


[And found none.]

Shows of fruit it made, but brought forth nothing less. It was like the
deceitful ground, that mocked the Husbandman: Expectata seges vanis elusit
avenis. Virg.
Had there been here a Figg, and there a Figg, like the shaking of an Olive
Tree, two or three in the top of the uppermost boughs, or outward branches,
the Husbandman had not been altogether deceived in his expectation, (albe it
that had not answered his cost and pains bestowed on it) but there was none, no
not one Figg that could be found growing upon it. Thus you see.

Where God has well deserved, there many times he is ill requited.

The Gentiles who lived without the Pale of the Church are charged with this
sin of Ingratitude, Romans 1.21. Romans 1.21.
God had bountifully declared himself unto them, even by the light of Nature,
and the Book of the Creatures, so as they knew there was a God, and that he was
most wise, good, just, punishing the bad, and doing good to the good; and that
this God ought to be worshipped according to his Will: but they worshipped him
not as God, not conceiving of him as God ought to be conceived of, nor giving
him that Glory which was suitable to his Infiniteness, and divine perfections;
and so were unthankful to God for hose bl^ssings which they had received; which
caused God to punish th t ingratitude of theirs, by delivering them up to all
manner of uncle^nnesse, and brutish lusts, Ver. 25.26.
ver 25.26. A fearful punishment indeed, none greater can be inflicted, out of
the place of torment.

But what speak we of the Gentiles? Ingratitude is not all without the Pale; In
God's own Vineyard it may be found.

Hear what Moses speaks at large unto the point, Deuteronomy. 37.7, -- 19. Explained.
Deuteronomy. 37.7. -- 19. God had done much for his people Israel, never more (no not
so much) for any Nation under Heaven; His mercies are mentioned and declared,
first, more Generally, ver. 8, 9. When the most High divided to all Nations
their Inheritances, that is, to those seventy Nations reckoned Genesis 10. He
^spied out the Land of Canaan (which was the Glory of all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6.)
for those seventy souls of Israel, Eze. 20.6.
mentioned, Genesis 46.27. Deuteronomy. 10.22. these were to him as his portion and
peculiar Inheritance, Exodus 19.15. Isa. 19.25. 1 Pet. 2.9. Deuteronomy. 7.78.
Exodus 19.15. Isa. 19.25. 1 Pet. 2.9. them he made choice of, above all people
of the World, for his; yet not for any desert of theirs, but out of his own
mere love, Deuteronomy. 7.78. Then more particularly he reckons up the blessings and
mercies bestowed on them, ver. 10.15. he found them in a desert Land, and in
the wast howling Wilderness; that is, Jacob's posterity whom he found, and was
present with, in the desert Wilderness, a place of howling of wild beasts,
where were no Inhabitants, no dwelling City, no food to sustain them, Psalm.
107.4, 5. Jer. 2.6. there God found them, in loc.
that is, provided for them, and sufficed their necessities (so the Greek
translate it, and so the word is used, Numb. 11.22.) This mercy Moses had put
them in mind of before, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Ps. 136.16.
Deuteronomy. 8.15. and David remembers, Psalm. 136.16. He instructed him, and that
both by his word and works; or by his Law and Spirit, as Neh. 9.13, 20. He kept
him as the Apple of his Eye, Neh. 9.13, 20.
that is wi h all diligent care and love, the Apple of the Eye being the
tenderest piece, of the renderest part; keep me, says David, as the Apple of
thine Eye, Psalm. 17.8. Zach. 2.8.
Psalm. 17.8. that is, with all care and ten ernesse, so God does his people, as
we read Zach. 2.8.

The Grace and favor of God toward this people is set forth by an exce^lent
Allegory, ver. 11, 12. As an Eagle stirs up hor nest, fluttereth over her
young, spreads abroad her wings, bears them on her wings, so the Lord alone
did lead him, etc. He stirred up this people with his word and promises, (as
the Eagle does her nest, that is, her young ones, with her cry), and that
whilst they slept in their ^n in the Land of Egypt, as is decclared by the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 20.5, 6, 7. Genesis 1.2.
20.5, 6, 7. he fluttered over them as the Eagle does over her young, by the
motion of his blessed Spirit, in their hearts. So the word is used, Genesis 1.2.
the Spirit of God moved (or fluttered) upon the face of the waters; He spread
abroad his Wings, hovered, and covered them with his divine protection, as the
Eagle does her young. And he took them, and did bear them on his wings as the
Eagle does her young, (and not between her Talons as other birds do, says
Munster); Munst. in schol. in loc. Exo. 19.4.
he was choice and chary of them, (as Moses showed, Exodus 19.4.) securing them
from all other enemies, who could do them no more hurt then one can do to the
young ones of the Eagle, when they are upon her wings, and she soaring aloft in
the air with them. All this did God for them; And there was no strange God
with him. ver. 12. neither with this great God, to help him; nor with Israel to
help them. He was their only Leader, and did all by his own power, and
therefore he liked it not, that any should share with him in his Glory, and
service; And all this he did for them before they were possess d of that good
Land. And after that he had brought them unto it, and plac^d them in it, he
made them ride upon the high places of the Earth. ver. 13. that is, to subdue
and triumph over the most defenced and high-walled Cities: (to riding is
sometimes used in Script^re for conquering and subduing; Psalm. 45.8.
Psalm. 45.4. and 66.12. Revel. 6.2.) He blessed them with plenty, and
abundance, as with the fruits of the field* yea he made the most barren places
fruitful to them, the craggy and stony rocks to yield them delica ies, Honey and
Oil, and the meat that they did eat was of the best; Butter of Kine, and Milk
of sheep, with fat of Lambs, etc. ver. 14. with the fat of Kidneys. of Wheat,
with the very b st of the best. And they drank of the best too, of the pure
blood of the Grape, that is, of the juice of the Grape, which is red colored
like blood, so Psalm. 45.8. and such was the best wine in that Land: By these
seven things, Honey Oil, Butter, Milk, Fat flesh, Fine Bread and Wine, (under
which number all other are comprehended) Moses comprehends the manifold
blessings which the people of Israel enjoyed in that Land; Thus, every way, God
deserved well from this people.

Now what requital did they make to God, for all this? Jeshurun was fat, etc.
ver. 15. that is, This my people whom I styled righteous, and should have been
Jeshurun, (that is righteous, or upright before the Lord) abu ed this my
bounty, and turned my grace into wantonness, being pampered by this my
merciful provision, kicked with the heel; as young Mules, which, when they have
sucked, kick the Damm's dug^; they carried themselves rebelliously against me
forsaking God that made them, by creating and advancing them; yet they forsook
his service, and lightly esteemed the rock of their salvation, Mat. 16.18.
that is, the mighty God, who is a firm foundation to his Church, Math. 16.18.
Him they ligh^ly e^teemed, and foolishly despised, and provoked him to jealousy
with strange Gods, etc. ver. 16. that is, they exceedingly angered him, (for
jealousy is the rage of a man, Prove. 6.34.) with the service of their Idols,
Pro. 6.34. Ps. 78.18.
(as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 78.18.) And indeed in serving them they served
Devils and sacrificed to them, and not to God, ver. 17. For what are Idols but
Devils? 1 Cor. 10.12.
1 Cor. 10.20. These were their Gods whom yet they knew not, nor their Fathers
feared not; such Gods were these Idols which they served, which could neither
do good, nor evil; (as is said of them Jer. 10.5.) Thus they were unmindfull
of the Rock that begat them, 20. Jer. 10.5.
and forgot God that formed them, ver. 18. So before, ver. 6. In all these
respects Moses (there) sharply rebukes them by way of Interrogation, and
Question; Do you thus requite the Lord? etc. i. e. with such pride* contempt,
iniquity and impiety, this is a woeful requiral indeed; but thus and no other
way did they requite God's love and bounty.

A like complaint we have, of the unthankfulness of this people, made by God
himself, Isa. 1.2, -- 5. Explained.
Isa. 1.2, -- 5. Heaven and Earth are summoned to hear it, (as Moses had done b
fore Deuteronomy. 32.1.) these are called in to bear witness; God declares against
this people, puts in his Bill against them for their horrible Ingratitude:
Showing, first, what he had done for them, He had adopted them to be his
Children, who we^e by nature Children of wrath, (as all are); and, passing by
^l others, chos^n them to be a peculiar people to himself, Exodus 4.22.
Secondly, he had nourished them when they were young, as we read, Hos. 11.3. I
taught Ephraim to go, etc. and provided for them in Egypt, in the wilderness
of Canaan (as we heard in the former Instance). Thirdly, he had brought them
up, and made them every way great; They had good education under such Laws and
Statutes as no people under Heaven had the like, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 9. Romans 9.4, 5.
Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 9. Romans 9.4, 5. (And to these three heads, all other mercies
showed to them, may be referred). Now, what requital made they for these
mercies, they have rebelled against me (says God) that is, rote up in arms
against me, (as Absalom did against his Father) such was their Rebellion, as
that the ^ike was not to be found in the worst and du^^est sort of Creatures;
For the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters crib but Israel does
not know, etc. ve s. 3. Four Epithetes he gives them which loades them
sufficiently with gui t. A sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity; a seed
of evil Doers, Children that are Corrupters: And lest they may be thought to be
overcharged, he mentions their Particular Crimes by a Logical gradation of
three degrees; They have forsaken the Lord, They have provoked the Holy one of
Israel to anger, Thy are gone away backward. Such a requital, and no better did
they then make. And the same Prophet (yet more excellently and elegantly) sets
it forth in a song which he made in the behalf of his Beloved, Isa. 5.1, -- 8.
See my Expos. on the Strange Vineyard.
Isa. 5.1, -- 8. (which I shall here but touch, having given a large exposition
thereupon.) Indeed, it speaks fully to the point delivered, under the Parable
of the Vineyard, planted in a very fruitful Hill, strongly fenced in, weeded,
watched, warred, pruned, and every way well husbanded, and cultured by the care
and cost of the painful Husbandman, so that nothing was wanting that was
requisite to the fructifying of it. Yet after all this pains and cost bestowed
it could not be wonn to bring forth any thing but wild and stinking Grapes;
such was the State and condition of the Church of Israel and Judah, (for to
them it was proposed and applied, verse. 7.) God had planted them in a very
fruitful Land, the Land of Promise, the plenty and pleasures thereof, Deuteronomy.
8.7, 8, 9, and 11, 11, 12.
we read, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. and 11, 11. He fen^ed them from spoils by his
mighty protection, his eyes were always upon it and them, from the beginning
of the ye^r to the end of it, Deuteronomy. 11.12. this was that kedge which Moses
calls the resuge and defense of Israel, the shield of their help and the sword
of their glory, O^^t. 33.28, 29. Deuteronomy. 33.28, 29.
He cast out the stones that were in it, and cleansed the soil, in driving out
the Nations before them, the Cananites and Hittites etc. Psalm. 44.2 and 80, 8.
Having thus cleansed the soil, Psalm. 44.2, and 80, 8.
he planted it with the choysest plants, the seed and posterity of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob; and from amongst them made choice of the best, some to Rule and
Govern them, some to Teach and Instruct them, Psalm. 78.71, and 99, 6.
others to Minister in the House the Lord, and every one of them to serve God
and benefit the public, in his several place and calling.

And for the further safety and defense thereof, He built a Tower in the midst
thereof, not in a corner, or by-place of the Vineyard, but where it might be
most conspicuous, and that not only for the beauty of it, but for a Watch and
Guard unto it; that it might be a defense and preservative to them that were
within it: By which, some understand Jerusalem the great and Metropolitan City
of the Jews spoken of, Psalm. 122.1. or as others, Psalm. 122.1. Psalm. 87.70.
the Temple that was builded therein by Solomon, Psalm. 87.70.

And that nothing might be wanting, in this his Vineyard; He sets up a
Wine Press therein, that when the grapes were come to their full ripeness,
they might be improved to an useful Vintage, which may be understood of the
Altar in the Temple, upon which they were to offer the fruit of their freewill
offerings, Psalm. 51.19.
Psalm. 51.19. Or (which seems most probable) the Exercise of that godly
Discipline; in the use thereof, the sweet jnyce of holiness and righteousness
was wrung out of them, under the government of those godly Kings and Princes,
Priests and Prophets, Judges and Captains which the Lord had raised up, and
placed over them; of which we may read at large in the Books of Joshua, Judges,
and the Kings; All which being laid together, God might justly appeal to their
own consciences, and make them Judges in the case, what could have bin done
more to my Vineyard that I have not done verse. 4. And now what did God expect
from this his Vineyard, in liew of all these his favors showed unto it, and
pains taken with it? Surely no other then what every man that p^anteth a
Vineyard, expects from his plants; I looked for grapes, verse. 2. fruits natural
and proper for a Vine; But how his expectation was answered, the words
following show, It brought forth wild, rotten, and unwholesome grapes, He
expected Judgment, but found Oppression, Labruscas. uvae putidae Pagnin.
Righteousness but behold a cry, the fruit and effect of that venomous fruit
of Oppression, verse. 7. In the rich was found Covetousness, verse. 8. In the
Voluptuous, willful debauchednesse, verse. 11. A settled purpose to do evil in
the Impenitent, verse. 18. Impudency and desperate impiety in prophave ones,
verse. 20. Math. 21.33, -- 40.
And in their own ways self conceitednesse, verse. 21. yea a Gloriation in
their ryotous excess of wickedness, verse. 22. Such was the requital which
they made to that good God, who had so well deserved at their hands.

And lest we might think, that this Ingratitu ^e was to be sound only in the
Israelitish Vineyard, our blessed Savior transfers these things to us, (who
live under the Gospel) and to our use in another Parable (wherein he alludeth
unto this former) Math. 21.33. -- 40. There was a Certain Houshoulder which
planted a Vineyard, and hedged it round bout, etc. The same Ingratitude is to
be found amongst, us that was amongst them, yea, in a higher degree; we beat
his Servants that he sends to us for his Rent, kill one, stone another, nor
have we spared his own Son, whom he has s^nt amongst us, but have by our
wicked hands crucified and slain him: yea, Acts 2.23.
so spirefully are many set against him, as that they could find in their
hearts to crucify him again, if it lay in their power; and make him a
mocking-stock to all the World by their open profaneness, Heb. 6.6.
and shameful revolt from him: Horrible height of Ingratitude!

Besides these general instances, many particulars might be mentioned, whereby
the truth delivered might be confirmed, 1 Samuel 1.15, 17, 18, 19. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8.
2 Chronicles. 32.26. Luke 17.18.
as in Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17, 18, 19. David 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, and in good Hezekiah,
2 Chronicles. 32.26. all these are charged with Ingratitude, in not rendering to God
according to what they had received. And that mentioned by St. Luke 17.18.
would not be forgotten; Ten Lepers were cleansed, and but one of them found
that returned thanks to God, and he a Stranger. A Samaritane; He only was the
Figure (says one) the other nine the Cipher: thus you have heard the point
largely proved, now hear it applied.

Our English Nation stands deeply guilty of this sin, God has done as much for
us, Israel; he has chosen us out from all the Earth, and severed us after a
sort from all the World; Toto d^visos ^^be Britamos.
that we might be a pattern of his bounty. He has settled this our English
Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill, eminently Fat, and Fertile, richly provided
of all fruitful Commodities. Insomuch that as Pliny (the younger) writes of
Egypt; Plin. in Fa^^gyr.
She was wont to b^ast that she owed nothing to any Foreign streams, for her
fertility, being abundantly watered by the sole inundation of her own River
Nilus; The same may this our little Island say (in some sort); for she has
moisture enough in her own shell; Other Nations stand in more need of us, then
we of them.

We have bin thoroughly fenced in (as the mount was within the R^yles) with the
hedge of divine protection, which has bin as a brazen wall about us; Never had
Land more convincing proofs of Omnipotent tuition, both against Foreign
Powers, and Homebred Conspiracies, than ours. It is hard (says a Reverend
Prelate of our Church) (who has wrote a whole discourse of this Subject) to
find any Precedent even amongst the people of God, B. B. Carleton, his Thankful
Rememb. of God 's mercies. Epist. Ded.
(since the time wherein God showed his miracles, in protecting the people of
Israel,) that for so many years together have bin continually preserved and
delivered from so many, so cruelly intended, so dangerous assaults as we have
bin.

He has picked the Stones out of this his Vineyard, Those Popish Laws and
Statutes which did inhibit the worship of the true God; together with those
false Doctrines of Popery and Heretical pravity; wherewith this our Land and
Nation was formerly tainted, and made us a true Orthodox Church, eminent for
puri^y of Doctrine, and reverend administration of the Sacraments.

He has planted this his Vineyard with his choysest plants, Princes of the
best for Learning and Piety; Judges of the best for Prudence and Gravity;
Divines of the best for Soundness and Integrity, etc. All of the best and
choysest, insomuch that no people under Heaven were able to compare with us
herein.

Nor has any Watchtower in the Christian World bin better furnished with
vigilant and careful watchmen than this, which he has in his English vineyard.
Other Nations excel us in Glorious Buildings, Temples, etc. but for Pulpits
England has the praise.

Nor do we want a Winepresse therein, godly and wholesome discipline, in the
execution whereof when man has failed, he has turned the screw himself
following us, sometimes with Famine, sometimes with Pestilence, and lately with
the Sword; that what is in us might be made known, and that he might fetchout
such juice as might beseem Repentance and new Obedience.

And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee? (as Moses sometimes
said) so may I say to thee O England! Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Something (Questionless) is expected that should be returned, (though not as
(...), a Recompense for these Favors yet as Testimonies and signs of
Thanksfulnesse) to so good and gracious a God who has so well deserved of
thee, which cannot be less then fruit. I looked for Grapes (says God of
Israel,) such as in Nature, Quality, and Quantity, Isa. 5.4.
may be something answerable to his Love, Care, and Pains bestowed: The like
looks he from us (without doubt); but what finds he? what return have we
made unto him?

Have we not (with Israel) despised the pleasant Land, Psalm. 106.24. Psalm.
29.11. Psalm. 122.7.
Psalm. 106.24. That blessing of Peace, (the C^ild of Heaven) and Plenty, (the
Child of Peace) wherewith God has promised to bless his People, Psalm. 29 11.
and for which David so earnestly pra^ed, Psalm. 122.7. It has bin undervalued
by us, and vilified a no^gst us; And the sword (one of the deadlyest arrows in
God's qui^er) preferred.

The fence which has bin made about us, we have plucked up with our hands, and
trampled upon with our feet. God's Laws are openly transgressed, and Mans's
Laws cannot be heard for the noise of Drumms and Cannons: our discords and
contentions have ^ayd open a wide gap, both for the Bear of the Wood, and for
the Fox of the Field ^oenter.

Those Stones of Popish Doctrine and Heresy, cast out and exploded by our
Church (long since) are cast in again; and whilst we seemingly drive our
Innovation and Popery at the foredoor, we let it in at the back; and have
proved our selves to be the best Friends to it, that it has found in England
these many years.

Our Watch-Towers have bin empty, through our own wickedness and cruelty; how
many of Gods faithful Watchmen have we beaten, and buffeted, slaundered, and
pillaged; cast out and Imprisoned, killed and murdered for a constant discharge
of their d^ties, in telling Israel of their sins, and Judah of her
transgressions?

Our Winepresse is broken down, in respect of humane Discipline; and whereas we
complained of a bad one, now we justly may complain for want of One; God indeed
has set up his Press amongst us, he has scruzed us with many Judgments and
Afflictions, but if you would know what liquor comes from us, take a taste from
the mouth of a Prophet. What he said of Israel is too too true of this our
English Nation. Hos 4.2. The Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of
the Land, for that there is no truth nor mercy nor knowledge of God in the
Land; Hos. 4.2, 3.
What then? Swearing, Lying, Killing, Stealing, Whoreing; and so we break out
into horrible outrages, so that blood touches blood: murderers are so
frequent, that there seems to be no intermission of blood shed: Is not all this
spoken of our times (think you)? Exodus 7.20, 24.
The waters of Egypt being turned into blood, were loathsome to the
Egyptians, so that they could not drink thereof, Exodus 7.20.24. and whose soul
does not loath to ta^e of such liquor? I spare to speak of the Pride, Avarice,
Luxury, Contempt of Gods Ordinances, Violation of his Sabbaths; that is
generally to be found amongst us.

These be the fruits wherewith we requite God for all his mercies, in plan^ing
fencing, we^ding, watching over us. O ^elt it not in Gath! 2 Samuel 1.10.
How happy had it bin for us, if we had not given advantage to our enemies, to
censure our Profession, for these our foul enormities. This is a Lamentation,
and shall be for a Lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14.
Ezekiel. 19.14.

But what is generally said o fall, is as good as not spoken at all. I must
weave my net a ^tt^e closer, it I would fish successefully. Who is there
amongst you all that hear me, that can wash his hands from the guilt and stain
of this base Ingratitude? Besides, the share that we have had in those general
mercies before mentioned, (which have not bin small), Psalm. 68.13.
Which of us all have not had many Particular n^e^cies multiplied on him, by
this our bountiful and gracious God? Who called thee from amongst the Pots, thy
sooty and soylie condition, to serve ^im? Who planted ^hee in that fruitful
Hill, that Country County, Town, Parish, Fami^y, where thou enjoyest, so
plentifu^^y the means of grace, which many want? Who has protected and
defended thee from the Cradle to this hour: and when Father and Mother forsook
thee took the charge of thee? who has cast out those ^^ones which were
naturally in thy heart, Psalm. 27. Ezekiel. 11.19, and 36, 26. Isa. 4 4. 1 Pet.
2.11. Joh. 15.2. Psalm. 68.19.
and clean ed thee from those foul lusts (mortif^ing and subduing them in some
good measure, which did fight against thy soul? Who was it that has pruned
thee, with so many fatherly Chastisements and Corrections, that thou might
yet become more fruitful in a holy li^e and conversation? Who is it that
loadeth thee daily with his blessings, undeserved, undersired, unexpected,
every morning, yea every moment renewed? Has not this good and gracious God
done all this for thee, and for every soul of us that stands here before the
Lord this day? Add unto all this, that blessing of blessings; G^ft of all
Gifts, Joh. 4.10.
his own Son, who came down from Heaven; was born in poverty, lived in penury,
dyed with intolerable pain and sorrow, and all to recover thee and me, from our
willful fall; and to restore us to our former happiness.

Now what retu^n have we made to God for all his mercies? Has he not great
cause to say of us as David of his enemies, they have showed me hatred for my
good will, Psalm. 109.5.
to the great grief of my Soul? He expects Humili^y and behold Pride, He looks
for Love, and beho^d Envy; for Liberali^y, and finds Covetou^nesse; for M^rcy,
and meets with cruelty; etc. Do you so requite the Lord, O foolish People and
unkind: Math. 13.27. Heb. 6.8.
We find a great complaint in Scripture of such Soil, as b^ings forth Thorns
and Weeds and ^ares; yet all these are good in their kind, and useful to the
wise; but the worst fruit that the groaning Earth bears, is, man himself, our
sinful and unprofitable selves, from whom God has so long expected fruit, but
after all his cost and pains when he looks for fruit, he finds none, or worse;
bad fruit instead of good.

As this our Ingratitude should humble us for time past, etc. the rain which
now falls upon us, will cause an appearance of weeds in us; but if you bring
hearts thither, like a well tilled Field, or cultured Vineyard, then you will
recompense those Instructions which shall be given you with Increase of good
fruit.

The ill requital that we have made to God for all the good we have received
from him, has bin in part discovered. Now give me leave to discover unto you
the vileness of this vice [Ingratitude], that we may shun it, and hate it; And
the rather, because we have bin foretold, that it is one of those sins that
renders these times perilous. 1 Timothy 3.1.


I am not able with the best skill I have, to draw it to the Life; and
Anatomize it as I ought. Could we but see it in its own colors, we could not
but detest it; I must desire you to rest satisfied with that rude draught of
it, which I shall present unto you: And so first, take notice that it is a
Compounded sin; it has many poysonful Ingredients in it, which makes it
extremely evil; and amongst others, these.

First, Ignorance, and such an Ignorance as whereunto mercy is de^yed, Isa.
27.11. He that made them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27.11.
being a people of no understanding, it being willful and affected: Thus God
complains of Israel, Isa. 1.3. Israel does not know, Isa. 1.3. Hos. 2.8.
and, Hos. 2.8. She did not know; The meaning is, they would not know; they did
shut their eyes, and would not acknowledge God to be the bestower of that good
which they had; in that respect the Ox and the Ass is preferred to ^srael. It
is wor^e then brutishness; what Creature can you resemble an ungrateful Person
unto? unless it be to the Hog (who eats up the Acorns which fa^l from the
Tree, and locks not up unto it). And yet though they look not up to the Tree,
whereon the Mast did grow, they know their trough, and take notice of them that
use to feed them at it.

Secondly, Idolatry: Ingratitude does not only pass by, without notice-taking
of good bestowed, but ascribes all to others. Thus Israel ascribed all their
plenty, their Bread, their Wine, their Wool, their Water, etc. to their Lovers
or Sweet-hearts, that is, to their Idols and false Gods, Hos. 2.5.

Thirdly, Pride, is another sinful ingredient, that goes to the composition of
it: Hos. 13.6.
Their hearts were exalted (says God of ungrateful Ephraim) therefore have
they forgotten me, Hos. 13.6. And this is rendered as the reason, why Hezekiah
returned not to God according to that he had received, his heart was lifted up
in him, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. 2 Chro. 32.25. Psalm. 73.6, -- 10.
There is no one thing in the world that causes unthankfulness so much as
Pride, Psalm. 73.6. -- 10. It is Pride that causes a man to undervalue the
Mercy, and to overvalue himself, as if he deserved better; thence it is, that
God does so often, and strictly warn Israel to beware of it. Deuteronomy. 8.14, 17.
Prove. 6.16. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
is a sin that God abhors, Prove. 6.16. and resists Jam. 4.6. and no marvel, for
it resists him; other sins fly from God and decline him, but this opposes him
to his very face.

Fourthly Envy, that is the Daughter of Pride, and will wait upon her Mother;
where the one is, the other will be; Non potest quisquam et invidere et gratias
agere. Seen.
we grudge no men the praise of their kindness, but whom we envy and hate: And
by experience we have found that true, which Tacitus says of extraordinary
favors, which lighting upon ill minds cause hatred instead of love; whence
arose that Proverb (so often in use), Save a Malefactor from the Gallows, Quo
plus debent magis oderint. Senec. Ep. 19.
and he will be the first that will condemn thee (if he can), as Judas did
Christ, (who, as some say, had been (before he was called to be an Apostle)
d^livered by his means, being otherwise likely to have suffered for a
flagitions offense). This Envy comes in with her comparisons, disdaining that
others should be equalized, (much less preferred) in bestowing and receiving
gifts. Thus the Elder Brother looked upon the younger Brother's enrertainment
with an evi^l eye, Luke 15.18, 19.
insomuch that he sticked not to charge his Father with unkindnesse, as if
nothing at all had been done for him, albeit the Inheritance was his, Luke
15.18, 19. It is our imbred emnity against God that makes us so loath to
acknowledge God, and his goodness toward us.

Fifthly, There is much of Sacrilege in it; The Ungrateful man robs God of
that honor which is due unto him and which he ha^h rese ved ^o himself, (nor
will he give it to any o her): God is content that we should have the good of
all, b^t the prai^e of all h^^looks to have himself. That, is as the Ewe that
Nathan spe^k^o^, 2 Samuel 12.3. Mal. 3.8.
in the Parable, which God puts in his own bosom: Will any man rob his God? he
is a wretch that does so; And such a wretch is the ungrateful person, who
steals away God's Ewe-Lamb, having large flocks and herds of his own.

Six^hly, Psalm. 73.11. Job. 21.25.
and lastly, There is Atheism in it. Thus those ungrateful wretches, mentioned
by ^ob, whom God has blessed with temporal abundance, ask, What is the
Almighty that they should serve him, Job 21.25. and should Job have been
ungrateful toward God, for those blessings which he had received from him, he
professes plainly that he should have denied the God that is above, Job.
31.28. Ps. 63.21.
in so doing, Jeb. 31.28. An unthankful heart is an Atheistical heart wherever
it be found, Psalm. 73.11. Thus you see, what a bundle of sins are wrapped up in
this one (albeit you have not seen the one half) which is enough one would
^hink to make us abhor-Ingratitude, But

Secondly, I^ is a sin that all Law condemns. The Law of Nature is against it;
For naturally every effect is brought back to its cause, Aquin 4.22 106. Art. 2.
(as all waters come out of the Sea, so all re^u^n thither again). Now God^s
the cause of all things, and persons therefore Nos, nostraque, whatsoever we
have, and whatsoever we are, must be ascrib^o unto him. And shall not the
Rivolets of praise and thankfulness return to that p^ace from whence our
benefi^s do spring? By Instinct of nature Men have been thankful to Beasts, of
whom they have go ten any good: So Romulus and Rhemus set up in Rome the Im^ge
of a Wolf, for a kind remembrance of that Wolf that did feed them with her
Mi^k: And Beasts have been thankful to Men. God sends the ungrateful to the Ox
and the Ass, to learn of them, Isa. 1.3.
Isa. 1.3. And to Birds and Beasts, Dogs and Lions, we may send such, on the
same errands. Of the Stork i^ is storyed, that she offers the first fruit of
her young ones to God, by casting one of them out of her nest, as Rent for her
house room. And of the Elephant it is reported, that, coming to feed, the first
spring he breaks, he turns it toward Heaven in testimony of thankfulness: A
poor Spaniell, that is fed with a bit and a knock, and now and then remembered
with a crust of bread, how gratefully will he remember his Benefactor? (says
Ambrose). Amb. Hexam. Plin. lib. 8. cay. 40.
Pliny relates many memorable Instances of the fidelity of Dogs to their
Masters, which are too long to recite: The like Gratitude we read in Aulus
Gell: of a Lion out of whose foot a young man had pulled a stub, and cleansed
the wound; Aul. Gel. noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 14.
the name of the man was Androclus, a Slave to a noble man in Rome, who had run
away from his Master, and fled into the Deserts, where happening into a Ca^, a
Lion comes to him, groaning and halting, offering to him his paw, grievously
wounded with a stub; Androclus pulls it out, dresseth the wound, so that in a
short time the Lion was cu^ed; in recompense whereof, the Lion brought him
every day a part of his prey for the space of three years: Afterward,
Androclus was taken, and sent to Rome, and there by his Master imprisoned. Not
long after, this Lion was also taken alive, and sent thither, where he was kept
(after their manner) for pastime; Androclus was condemned to combat with this
Lion; and being brought out of prison, and put unto the Lion, expecting nothing
but sudden death, the Lion came to him, and fawned on him, licking his hands,
and feet, and would not hurt him; Hereupon the Emperor pardoned Androclus ^set
set him free, and gave him the Lion; of whom the people usually said, Hic est
Leo hospes hominis, H^c est homo medicus Leonis: This is the Lion that fed the
man, this is the man that ^hysickt the Lion.

The Asp is a vene nous Creature, Plin. l. 10. c 74.
and yet we read in Pliny of an Egyptian that had one, that ordinarily came to
his Table, and there took meat at his hand: This Serpent afterward had young
ones, and one of those young ones happened to sting on^ of the Aegyptian's
Children, whereof it dyed; which when the old Asp perceived, she presently
killed they young one which did it, and afterward, as ashamed of the wrong
offered to her feeder, departed from the house, and never returned more. And
the Fish in the Sea likewise, they say, are in their kind grateful: Athenaeus (
lib. 13.) reports, that Milesius having bought a Dolphin alive, and letting it
go again into the Sea; afterward, himself being cast away by shipwreck, and
ready to perish in the midst of the Waves, that Dolphin took him, and carried
him to the shore, and so preserved his life. Albeit I doubt of the truth of the
Narration, yet I doubt not of this truth, that it is more then beastly
Ingratitude to be ungrateful. These Instances I give you to manifest that
Ingratitude is hateful to Nature even in the Creature, to the Creature: Oh! how
detestable then is it in the Creature toward the Creator? Common Morality
condemns it, and informs every common capacity of this common principle, Suum
cuique, Let every one have his own. There is no book of Ethics, of moral
doctrine, that we meet withal, wherein there is not (almost in every leaf) some
detestation, some Anathema, against Ingratitude. We owe God thanks in point of
Morality, and Honesty; as he is our bontiful Benefactor, and gives so liberally
to all: Every benefit carries with it the force of an obligation (as we all
confess); let us receive one small kindness from another, we acknowledge our
selves much bound unto him for it; and this the Heathens confess. And then it
is a due owing unto God in point of Covenant, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me (says
God) in the time of trouble; Psalm. 50.15.
I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. Which Scripture (says one) is a
kind of Indenture, God is the Landlord he demiseth a Tenement [I will hear thee
in the time of trouble] but he requires Covenants from the Tenant: first a
common Fine must be paid, [Call upon me]; And then a continual Rent must be
rendered, Thou shall glorify me: Justice by Ingratitude is violated, and
therefore carefully to be avoided.

Religion and Piety will not own it, What is Religion (said the Orator) bu^
Gratitude to God? Piety, but Gratitude to Paren^s? Loyalty, but Gratitude to
Princes, etc. Thankfulness to God is a Religious Act, part of that service
whereby we worship and honor him, Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise
glorifieth me. And it may, in some sort, be said to be a more excellent part of
God's worship then Prayer, for that it is of a larger extent; we have many
things to praise God for, which we never prayed for, (as for our Election,
Preservation in our Infancy, and many other daily favors, which we begged not
at God's hands; No, nor may pray for, as for this or that particular
Affliction, which yet happening unto us we are bound to bless God for, it being
a fatherly correction laid on us for our Amendment). Besides, it contributes
more to God's glory, to acknowledge, by thanks, that God has given, than to
acknowledge by prayer that God can give. The one belongs to them that seek,
the other to them that have found what they sought, etc. Both Suit, and Service
is owing unto God our Lord, 2 Cor. 4.15
Prayer and Praise; and yet the last is that wherewith the Lord seems to be
most delighted, as that whereby he is most honored: Nor can that man be a
Religious man, that does neglect it, and is ungrateful. You see (then) in what
state he stands that is Unthankful; he is Outlawed, both by the Law Natural,
Moral, and Spiritual, which is the second Motive I commend unto you, which,
being being well cosindered, may teach us to avoid Ingratitude.

Thirdly, Consider the Recompense and Reward of it; It provokes revenge, both
from God and Man: What the sin against the Holy Ghost is in Divinity, (says
one); the same is Ingratitude, in Morality a sin unpardsnable. It was said of
Alexander that he exceeded all in Bounty; And of Caesar, that he exceeded all
in Patience; yet it was observed, that the one did never give unto, and the
other never forgive, an ungrateful Person. The Laws of Persia, Macedonia, and
Athens condemned such to death, as requited not a good-turn (it being in their
power): For they judged, that such a one would not stick (in a very high
degree) to neglect their friends, their Parents, their Country, their Gods;
inasmuch as he that is unthankful is also shameless and he that is not ashamed
will not stick to commit any Villainy. Philip of Macedon caused a Soldier of
his, who offered unkindnesse to his Host, (who had courteously and plentifully
entertained him, yet at his going away begged some of his Host's lands), to be
branded in the fore ead, with ^^ere two words Hospes ingratus, But we shall not
need to god w^ to the Philistines to sharpen our Mattocks; Scripture affords us
Instances of Revenge justly taken (or at least intended to be taken) upon
Ingratitude. 2 Samuel 10.4.
David was highly incensed against the Ammonites, for that despite which they
offered to his Messengers, whom he sent in kin^nesse to visit their King,
(after the death of his Father Nahash). They shaved off the one half of their
Beards (laith the Text)* and cut off their Garments in the middle, even to
their Buttocks, and sent them away: The Beard is a Natural Ornament of the
Body, and so it was accounted in Israel; for had this trick of shaving the
Beard (in use at this day, amongst the Romanists; and now in fashion amongst
us) been the use in Israel, the Messengers needed not to have been ashamed (as
they were), for they might more easily have cut off the other part of the Beard
remaining (as one says), Ver. 5.
than to have stayed at Jericho till their Beards were grown, as they were
enjoined to do. And the Garment is an Artificial Ornament of the Body, Ver. 6.
which covers the nakedness of it: In both the King of Ammon sought the
disgrace of David's servants; which Ingratitude so stank in David's nostrils,
that he revenged it with the slaughter and overthrow of seven hundred of their
Chariots, and forty thousand Horsemen. And how greatly (and justly) was David
exasperated against Nabal for his ungrateful carriage toward him? 1 Samuel 27.
David had done much for him, in preserving all that he had, Ver, 14.21.
and being a defense unto him, and as a Wall unto all that was his, both by
Night and by Day; (as Nabal's own Servants did testify). Now, David being in
want in the wilderness, and hearing that Nabal made a feast for his
Sheep-shearers, sends a friendly Message to him, desiring some relief from him,
for himself and his, what he thought good himself, (not prescribing what he
should send); an honesmotion, and as easy for him to grant at such a time: But
Nabal forgetting the kindness that he had received, does not only refuse to
return kindness for kindness, but gives railing and reproachful words: Who is
David, or who is the Son of Ishai? Why Chur^e, he is God's anointed; he that
hilled Goliath, and had defended the people o God in general, from the
Philistines: and that in particular had kept thee, in the wilderness, and done
many courtesies for thee in Carmel: And it is one degree of Ingratitude, not to
retain the memory of a Benefactor's kindness. But he proceeds yet higher in
slandering David and his ca^se, making him and all that were with him no better
then Fugitives and R^magates from their Master: and so no only denied David
that courte^y which was desired, but he reviles his Person, and condemns his
Cause; Ver. 13.
and in so doing sends him stones instead of Bread: which Ingratitude of his
did so incense David, (albeit he had been long in the School of Patience and
well profited therein) that he armeth himself to take revenge, Ver. 22.
and binds it with an Oa^h, that be would slay all that belonged to Nabal,
even to the Dog that pisseth against the Wall. Verse. 23, -- 32.
And questionless had proceeded in his purpose, had not Ab^gail ( Nabal's wife)
met him by the way, and by her wisdom pacified his wrath, and hindered him from
his bloody intention: Ver. 33.34.
For which David blessed God, and acknowledged his providence therein, in
sending Abigail out to meet him, and blessed Abigail as that Instrument that
was used to keep him from that bloody act, which was intended by him: And yet,
Ver. 37.38.
notwithstanding that David spared this churlish and ungrateful Nabal, God
would not spare him for that his Ingtatitude; he takes the matter into his own
hand, and punishes Nabal with no less punishment then the stroke of Death;
yea, with a blockish and senseless Death his heart dyed within him, and he
became like a stone, whereat David rejoiced, and for which he bless God, Ver.
39.
who had judged his righteous cause, in bringing the wickedness of Nabal upon
his own head.

And indeed, you shall find that Proverb to be most true, Pro. 17.13.
Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his House, Prove.
17.13. Plagues and Punishments from God (and many times from man also) light
upon such either in their Persons, or Posterity. Jer. 18.20, 21.
God's wrath has been revealed from Heaven against it, and that in a very high
degree, (as Jeremiah shows by the Spirit of Prophecy, Jer. 18.20, 21.) And if
Ingratitude of man toward man be so hateful; what think you of man's
Ingratitude toward God? shall that ever escape unpunished? Consider advisedly
and give sentence.

We read that when Tamerlane had overcome Bajazet, he asked him. If he had ever
given God thanks for making him so great an Emperor? Bajazet replied that he
had never thought of that: It is no wonder then (said Tamerlane) that so
unthankful a man should be made such a spectacle of misery, as thou now art.
God will be unto such as forget him, a Lion, a Leopard, and as a Bear robbed of
her Whelps* Hos. 13.6, 7, 8. Jer. 8.13. Hos. 2.9, -- 13. Rev. 2.5. Number. 4.25,
28. Romans 1.21. Mat. 25.30. Opposita, juxtase posita, magis illucescunt.
as it is threatened, Hos. 13.6, 7, 8. And ungrateful Israel found it to be
true, (as the whole Book of the Judges testifies). Sometimes he punishes
Privatively, in taking away his Mercies from us, as Jer. 8.13. Hos. 2.9, 10,
11, 12. Revel. 2.5. And sometimes Positively, with Judgments Temporal, as
Numb. 14.25, 28. Spiritual, as Romans 1.21. and Eternal, as Math. 25.30. Let
this prevail with us, to beware of so foul an evil.

Lastly, Let us on the other side take notice of the Good of Gratitude, that so
the ill of Ingratitude may the better be discovered.

There are but three heads whereto we refer all that is Good, Jucundum, Vrile,
Honestum; Pleasure, Profit, and Honesty: each of these (singly) we count Good,
but when all these three concur we count that Excellent. Now, in this one Duty
of Thankfulness all these meet, Psalm. 147.1.
Psalm. 147.1. O praise the Lord for it is good yea, it is a pleas^nt thing* and
Pra^se is comely. It is Good, as it brings Profit with it; and Profi (we know)
is a very moving Argument. The Benefit is great that comes by Thankfulness
unto us; for by it we retain the old, and invite new Mercies.

Blessings, already conferred on us, are retained and kept by our
Thankfulness; no better way to preserve what we have than by being thankful
for what we have.

And the thankful Acknowledging of Blessings invites new Mercies, Gratiandi
actio est ad plus dandu^ invitalio. Ps. 9.10, 11. Luke 17.15, 19.
as appears by that which David speaks, Psalm. 9.10, 11. So Luke 17.15. that
Leper which returned back to give God thanks, received a second time
forgiveness of sins, ver. 19. There is nothing that obtain h more of God than
Agnition of favors received. Such a one we say, deserves to have kindness
showed him; he is so mindful of a good turn.

On the other side, Unthankfu^nesse is a great loser; it forfeits all that has
bin by Prayer obtained, Si c^ssat Gratiacum recursus, c^sset gratiarum
decursus. Bern. Mark 6.5.
and ^oppeth the cour^e of Gods blessings; and dries up (as it were) his hand
that he cannot stretch it forth to co us good: so we read, Mark 6.5. Christ
could do no mighty Works in his own Country, And why not there as well as
e^sewhere? their unthankfulness and ingratitude toward him, transfused as it
were a dead Palsy into the hands of his Omnipotency; Such is the venomous
nature of it. As David said of unthankful Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21: So says God of
an unthankful Christian, 1 Samuel 25.21.
In vain have I kept all that this fellow had in the wilderness, etc. So, in
vain have I done so much for this ungrateful wretch.

Thankfulness, is good as being Pleasant, and delightful; It is the Exercise
not only of the dumb Creatures on Earth, but of the glorious Angels in Heaven,
to give thanks unto the Lord, and praise his name, Psalm. 148.2, 3, 8. Revel.
4.8, 11, and 7, 11, Psalm. 148.2, 3, 8. Rev. 4.8, 11, and 7, 11, 22.
22. Yea, there is more delight in this, then in Prayer, (says Reverend and
Humble Hooker) for the one has pensiveness and fear, but the other joy
annexed. But in Ingatitude there is no delight at all, nothing but envy,
murmuring, and discontent: Serpents have venom within themselves, which they
put forth to the hurt of others; but an ungrateful wretch has his venom
within him, wherewith he is tormented daily.

Lastly, Gratitude is an honest and comely Good: Nothing does more commend a
man to God and Men, than it, Luke 17.15. Luke 17.15.
But Ingratitude is a foul and ignominious thing, It leaves an aspersion on the
name and fame of a man, no vice greater: so did the very Heathens judge of it,
Ingratum dica^ omnia dixisti. Senec. de Benisic.
they counted it for the fowlest imputation that could be laid upon a man, to
say, He was Ungrateful; Term him so, and you have called him all the fowl names
that may be. It overflowed all other particular vices; No other vice could get
a name amongst them where that was; it swallowed all, devoured all, and became
all. Su e I am, that our Savior joins these two together, the unthankful, and
the evil, Luke 6.35. the unthankful man has his brand to be a naughty man; and
St. Luke 6.35.
Paul sets the unthankful and unholy together in that bead-roll of vitions
Persons, 2 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 3.2.
intitimating in what e^teem they are to be had amongst us. Lay altoge^her, and
then tell me if we have not great cause, not only to beway our former
Ingratitude, but for the suture to beware lest we be charged with it, which we
cannot avoid, unless we make some thankful return to God for all his Favors
bestowed.

But God's gifts are free, Psalm. 50.7, -- 14. Psalm. 16.2. Resp. Mich. 6. Psalm.
50.14.
he gives and looks for nothing again, Psalm. 50.7, -- 14. Psalm. 16.2.

God looks for nothing to be done by us, by way of Exact Recompense; Thousand
of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil cannot do that; but something he
expects should be done by us by way of acknowledgement, and declaration of his
goodness and care of us, Psalm. 50.14. and that for the good of others. I will
publish the name of the Lord (says Moses* Deuteronomy. 32.3.) Ascribe ye greatness
unto our God. We must report, that they who hear may give glory to the God of
Heaven. He that makes a Clock, bestows all that Labor on the several Wheels,
that thereby the Bell might give a sound and the Hand show to others how the
time passes away: so this is a Principal of that Thankfulness which God
requires of us, that we make an open declaration of his mercies, for the
winning and confirming of our Brethren.

Secondly, Our best Retributions being proportioned to the infiniteness of his
merits, may justly be esteemed Nothing: What is a Pepper-corn. to the worth of
a large Farm? God looks but for thanks for the large mercy we hold of him; and
what is that, but Nothing? Gratias dicere est Gratias facere (says August)* To
utter our thanks to God is all our performance of thankfulness.

And yet, we must not think that Gratitude lies wholly in the Tongue; As if a
general acknowledgement of God's favors, or recounting of some eminent mercies
were sufficient, when in the mean time our Hearts are far from him, and our
lives are wicked and un^eformed: Thanking of God is a thing that most do, and
yet few do as they should: Bern. in Cant. Scr. 13.
Bernard in his time complained that Deo Gratias, God be thanked, was made as
it were a By word, as it is amongst many of us at this day, who being asked
about the health and welfare of our Selves and Friends, usually come with God
be thanked, and God be praised; when their lives are wicked and unreformed:
There I may resemble to some pretty Birds that are painted on Clothes, that
hang upon the walls in some A^e-houses; which have goo^ sayings in their
mouths, as, Be sober, and watch, Fear God Honor the King, Pray continually;
But Drunkenness, Swearing and Vomiting is in the Room or at the Table. Such a
pretty Peacock was that boasting Pharisee of whom we read in the Gospel, Luke
18.11.
Luke 18.11. He came with God I thank thee in his mouth. And many other had
Hosanna between their lips one day, that the next cried Crucify him. Crucify
him. John 12.13, and 19, 15. Math. 26.40. Verse. 67.
Such praise in the mouths of wicked ones is no more acceptable unto God; then
Hail Master was in the mouths of those who spat in the face of Christ, and
buffetted him with their fist. It adds unto our Ingratitude and makes it more
vi^e, inasmuch as we do not only wi^hhold from God his right, which is
Sacrilege; but we add Hypocrisy unto it; take his name in vain, and mock him
for his kindness doing that in good earnest, which boys do in sport; we stand
upon our heads, and shake our heels toward Heaven: At least we are like some
crafty and dishonest Tenant, which makes a kind of tender of Rent, and when we
have done we sweep it up again, and go our ways: Habere Gratias cord. Psalm.
116.12, and 111, 1. Agere gratias ore. Psalm. 22.22, and 45, 1, and 66, 16, 17,
and 71, 24. Refer gratias opere. Psalm. 116.13, and 138.2. Prove. 3.9.
Give me leave therefore (before I end the Point) in a word or two, to show you
wherein true Gratitude consists, and what is expected from him, that would
approve himself to God, to be truly thankful.

Thankfulness is either in Affection in Profession, or in Action:
Thankfulness in Affection, is when we heartily accept of the benefit
bestowed, think our selves indebted for it, and heartily desire to make some
return to testify it, Psalm. 116.12, and 103, 1, and 111, 1.

Thankfulness in Profession, is, when we make known the benefit received to
others, praise the Giver* and vow or promise to requite it according to our
Power, Psalm. 22.22, and 45, 1, and 66, 16, 17 and 71, 24.

Thankfulness in Action is, when any convenient or beseeming Recompense or
return is made for the benefit received, (be it more or less:) Psalm. 116.13,
and 138, 2. Prove. 3.9.

He that would be truly thankful, must manifest his thankfulness all three
ways; in heart, by word, and by deed; Our Hearts must lead the way, our
Tongues must follow our Hearts; and our Hands our Tongues. Our Hearts are the
Fountain of every good Action, there must it be originally. The Tongue is the
Messenger of the Heart, there it must be declaratively: The Life is the
manifester of the truth of both, there it must be Actually.

When we call to mind, Recognition. Psalm. 107.13. Psalm. 68.14. Numb. 11.6.
Psalm. 106.24. Commemoration. Psalm. 117.2. Psalm, 78.4, 6. Psalm. 22.22, 23. Math.
12.34. Retribution. Psalm. 50. ult.
and keep in mind Gods favors bestowed on us; when we highly prize them
according to their goodness, and put a right estimate upon them, stirring up
our souls to thankfulness (as David did) then Gratias Habemus, we have thanks
in our hearts for God, or we have thankful hearts to God. For want of this
Israel was blamed, Numb. 11.6. Psalm. 106.24. Think and Thank God, is a good
Motto.

When we confess Gods goodness, and with our lips set forth his praise; when
we publish abroad the loving kindness of the Lord, and tell our Children what
God has done for us, and provoke others to this duty, then Gratias agimus; we
give thanks to God with our Tongues; Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks.

When we express a thankful heart in our lives, using these blessings which
God has bestowed on us to the right end, improving Gods gifts to the Giver's
honor; when we lead a godly life, and order our conversation aright, and
abound in good works, then Gratias referimus opere, we return thanks to the God
of Heaven by our lives.

In short, that Gratitude is grateful and acceptable to God, whose Root is in
the Heart, Blossoms in the Tongue, and Fruit in the Hand: whose Root is Faith,
Blossoms Praises, and Fruit, Good Works. Blossoms in the lips may soon be
blown away with a breath, Psalm. 39.30, 31.
it is a fading thing; but when the heart and life is thankful, that pleases
God better then a Sacrifice that has horn or hooffe, Psalm. 69.30, 31.

But what if one be not able? We would pay God this Rent and Tribute of thanks,

There are but few Tenants, so impudent (says one) as to say, They will pay no
Rent; Indeed, impotent that they cannot pay. To these, I give this Answer.

First, God is no hard Landlord, he lets out his Farm or Vineyard at such a
Rent, that the Farmer may live well upon it. Cant. 8.11.
You read ( Cant. 8.11.) that a thousand pieces of silver were to be paid for
Rent of the Vineyar, but yet two hundred pieces were allowed to them that kept
the Fruit; (which was a great gain): So, Math. 21.33. they could pay, but would
not. Math. 21.33.


Secondly, Gratitude will be casting about, and projecting what to return, Isa.
32.8. He devises, studieth, meditareth how he shall compass his Rent; how to
pay it: So, Psalm. 116.17. Isa. 32.8. Psalm. 116.2.
The word of God will help those that are inquisitive, and give directions; and
the Works of God will furnish us. We read in the Gospel of a Fish that brought
money in the mouth to Peter, Math. 17.27. wherewith he paid Tribute. Math.
17.27.
There is not a Fowl in the Heavens, a Fish in the Sea, a Beast on the Earth;
not any worm that crawles upon the Earth, but brings something in the mouth of
it, to help a thankful heart toward the payment of that Rent which is due to
God; Persius found it in a foal Toad, which when he saw, he wept, and being
asked the reason why he wept, he answered, he bewailed his Ingratitude, who
served not the Lord as he ought, who had made him a Man; and not a Toad.

Thirdly, He is not always unthankful who does not Par Pari refer,
recompense a benefit: but he would not, although he could. Furnius told
Augustus (who had multiplied favors on him) that in one thing he had damnified
him, yea, undone him; You have done so much for me (says he) that I must live
and dye unthankful; that is, without showing my thankfulness, by equivalent
recompenses.

Fourthly, Where there is an endeavor and desire to testify the thankfulness
of our hearts, and to make requital in the best manner that we can; God accepts
of it. We read that the Grecians in a great solemnity, did present to Philip of
Macedon many goodly gifts; amongst others, a Painter presented him with his own
Picture in a Table, set forth with many Pearls and Jewels, artificially drawn,
and over every Jewer was inscribed Vellem and hoc, I would I were able to give
such gifts as th^se; So says the Thankful heart; I would I could render more
and better. To be thankful in affection, when there is no more in our Power, is
true thankfulness, which has ever a care to profess and perform, so far as
it can.

Fifthly, Where other abilities are wanting, let us still make our thankful
acknowledgements I can never give to God sufficient thanks, (said the moral
man); yet I will ever acknowledge that I cannot give Him thanks sufficient.

Sixthly, And having nothing else to give, give him thy self, as Aeschines did
to Socrates, who receiving great rewards from his Scholars for his reading to
them; This Aeschines being a poor Auditor of his, and having nothing else to
give, told him Quod unum habeo, meipsum tibi dono, etc. I bestow my self upon
thee, having nothing else to give thee; this Socrates took so kindly, that he
answered him, Habebo curam ut te tibi reddam meliorem, quam accepi; I will have
a care to restore thee better to thy se^f, than I received thee. To this return
we are exhorted, Romans 12.1. Romans 12.1.
And it will be to our great advantage to make such a Retribution unto God. To
conclude, I have read of a poor Spaniard of Sevil, to whom a Father of the
inquisition sent for some Pears growing in his Hort-yard; Mr. Thomas Fuller.
The poor man presently (for fear) plucked up the Tree, Root and Branch, with
all the fruit thereon, and sent him. What sudden fright and fear made him to
overdo, etc. let our Cordial Gratitude to our good God cause us to do most
cheerfully, to offer up the whole man unto him, Soul and Body. Oh! that God
might find such a return from us; then would it not be said of us, as of this
Fig Tree, He came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.

I have yet one word more to say to you, from the point propounded; David
complained much of it, Psalm. 35.12. and elsewhere: Psalm. 35.12.
So in these days it is a general complaint, Never any (say some) were so
dealt withal; So sometimes a Father complaining of a wretched Son, Never (I
think) had Father such a Son as I have: The Son straightway replies, yes, my
Grandfather had. Thou may apply this unto thy self: consider how ungrateful
thou have bin unto thy God, and it may cause thee to bear patiently the
injuries that are offered to thee in that kind. But I forbear pressing this,
having held you very long in the point, but the necessity of it may excuse the
prolixity; it being one of those sins which make the times so perilous, 2 Timothy
3.1.
2 Timothy 3.1.

Then said he unto the Dresser of the Vineyard, Behold, Text. Verse. 7.
these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none; Cut
it down, why cumbers it the Ground? etc.

The former Proposition is here Prosecuted, and the manner of proceeding with
this barren Fig Tree, is, in these and the words following, specified, wherein
we have;

First, An Expostulation with the Dresser of the Vineyard, about the
Barrenness of the Tree; in the words now read [ Then said He, etc.] Secondly,
The Intercession which was made by the Dresser on the behalf of that Fig Tree,
verse. 8.9.

In the Expostulatory part we shall take notice, First, of the Person
Expostulated with, [ The Dresser of the Vineyard]. Secondly, The Subject matter
of it, [ Behold, these three years I come, seeking fruit on this Fig Tree,
etc.] We begin with the first.

Then said he unto the Dresseer of the Vineyard. Text.
]

This Dresser was an Angel (says Athanasius). So Theophylact conceives it may
be understood: It is true, the Angels pitch their Tents about the Vineyard of
the Lord, and do many good offices unto it, and for every Fig Tree planted in
it; yet we do not read that they Digg about it and Dung it, as this Dresser
mentioned in the Text promised to do; most conclude.

The Ministers of the word and Sacraments are the Dressers of the Lord's
Vineyard:

God himself is said to be the Husbandman of the Vineyard, John 15.1. Joh.
15.1. John. 18.30. Jer. 1.10, 18, 9. Ezekiel. 3.17. Math. 28.19, and 16, 19. Joh.
20.23. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3 Heb. 13.7. Quest. 1.
And Christ the Master-Dresser; for He and His Father are one, John 10.30. But
notwithstanding this, in a Subordination, the Ministers of God in their several
times and places are truly said to be the Dressers of it. So were the Prophets
in their days, Jer. 1.10, and 18, 9. Ezekiel. 3.17. And the Apostles and
Evangelists in theirs, Math. 28.19, and 16, 19. (the Keys of the Vineyard is
put into their hand, John 20.23. 1 Cor. 3.9.) And so We, their Successors, in
ours, Ephesians. 4.11.11. To us is the like charge given that we take the like
care, 2 Timothy 4. 2.1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Heb. 13.7. we are joined in the same holy
work, (albeit in an inferior order.)

But why does the Omnipo^ent God depure frail men to this Office? Why not the
Angels? Why not some of those glorious Cherubims and Seraphims, who attend
about His Throne continually, and are ready to execute his will and pleasure?

It is not safe for us to be over-busie, in demanding a reason of Gods
proceedings; liberty to enquire with sobriety, and light to find out, so much
as may give us reasonable satisfaction: To satisfy you (then) in this thing;
There are diverse Reasons that may be rendered, why the Omnipotent and Wise God
imposes this Charge, not on the Glorious and Celestial Angels, but on poor and
despicable men; (even on such as are no better esteemed, then the Refuse and
Offscouring of the World): 1 Cor. 4.13.
S Some respect God, other some the Angels, and others have respect to Us, to
whom they are sent; And lastly, there are other, which have respect to the Work
where-about they are employed; Of each of these, somewhat.

First, God has respect herein to his own glory; for the infirmity of the
Instrument makes to the glory of the Agent: This ^eason the Apostle gives, 2
Cor. 4.7. (...).
2 Cor. 4.7. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, (or in Oystershells) (as
the ill favored Oyster is said to have a pearl in it) that the excellency of
the Power may be of God and not of Men: We are apt to think, if an Angel from
Heaven should bring the message to us, it would much make for Gods glory;
should a Cherubin or Seraphim preach the Gospel to us, we should readily and
diligently obey, etc. but God sees not as men see, He well knows how apt we
are to Angel-worship, and ascribe too much to the immediate instrument of our
good, (as the Heathen did to those who had bin beneficial to them, and in that
respect deified them, Acts 3.12, and 14, 11, 15.
) but when God is pleased to hang great plummets on weak lines, and work strong
effects by weak causes, the glory of the work redoundeth only unto him, to
whom, of right it appertains: And this one thing has confounded all the
wisdom of the World, to see much mighty things effected, and brought to pass,
1 Cor. 1.17.
by means so weak, vile and despised: 1 Cor. 1.17. So Sampsons Victory was the
more glorious, in that it was obtained with such an Instrument, as the Jaw Bone
of an Ass, Judge. 15.15, Judge. 15.15, 16.
16.

Secondly, In respect of the Angels themselves; For first, it suits not with
their Nature to have such ordinary and visible converse with men, as is
requisite for the Dresser of the Vineyard to have, who must always be digging,
and pruning, and dressing of the Vines and Figg-Trees therein growing; God
(indeed) uses them for the good of his Church many times, Heb. 1. ult.
and has caused a visible appearance; but their part is not to be always on
the Stage, as the Dresser must be.

Secondly, They have another office designed in the Vineyard, than this kind of
dressing of it; They are appointed to Protect it, and to be Reapers at the end
of the World, Math. 13.39. but we read not that they are Sowers, to sow the
seed: Math. 13.39.
They direct, protect, and assist Gods Ministers in their Ministerial function,
but we find not any where, that they did exercise the Public Ministry, that
appertains to the Ministers of the Church: we read (indeed) that they have
revealed from God to his Prophets, some part of his will, which those Prophets
were to make known unto the Church (as Zach. 2.4.) But that they themselves did
publish these things unto the Church, Zach. 2.4. 2 Cor. 5.18. Acts 8.26, and 9,
10, 11, and 10, 9, and 16, 9.
we read not, for that appertained not to their Ministry, but to the Ministry
of Man, 2 Cor, 5.18. And what appertained to the office of the Ministers of the
Church, they left for them to do, as appears in diverse Instances, Acts 26, and
9, 10, 11, and 10.9 and 16, 9.

Thirdly, God does this ex Gratia, and has respect to the good of man; in
deputing Men and not Angels to this service; and that diverse ways.

First, In regard of man's weakness; It suits best with our nature, to be
dressed by Men, and not by Angels; he knows our infirmity, and whereof we are
made; how timorous and full of fears we are, since our Fall, so that we cannot
endure to behold those glorious Angels (whose nature is far superior unto
ours). Thus, when Israel had seen, and heard those majestical things, (but
terrible to flesh and blood,) which were showed at the promulgation of the Law,
(wherein the Ministry of Angels was used, Act. 7.53. Exodus 20.19.
Act. 7.53.) they fled, and stood afar off, and said to Moses, Speak thou to us
and we will hear but let not God speak unto us any more, lest we die, Exodus
20.19. And it was generally thought of old, that if any did see an Angel, he
should die (as appears Judge. 6.22, 23. and 13.22.) It is certain that the best
of men have trembled at the appearance of Angels, Judge. 6.22.23. and 13.22.
Luke 1.12. Luke 2.10. Mat. 28.5.
as Luke 1.12. Zachary, a holy man, a Priest, and about his Priestly function,
yet trembled. So Luke 2.10. Mat. 28.5. In which respect, God is pleased to
condescend to our frailty, and make choice of such to dress us, and husband
us, as our selves are, who may say to us as Elihu did to Job, Job. 33.6.7.
Behold, I am according to thy wish, I also am cut out of the Clay, Behold, my
terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee,
Job 33.6, 7.

Secondly, The ministry of man is a more likely way to do us good, and, in all
probability, will be more effectual then the ministry of Angels, in sundry
respects.

First, Being men like our selves, and subject to like passions and infirmities
as we are, Jam. 5.17.
they cannot but sympathize with us, in our sorrows: where there is a
symbolical Quality between Agent and Patient, there is the easiest
transmutation, (says Philosophy). If one see his own flesh weep, will not he
weep likewise? If he sees his own flesh afflicted, will he not be compassionate
toward it? When Origin wept, he set all the Congregation on weeping; and when
some few in a Congregation mourn, Act. 21.13. 1 Cor. 11.29.
it causes the Minister to mourn with them. This Sympathizing, we find in St.
Paul, Act. 21.13. So 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak and I am not weak? Who is weak
by Passion, and I not by compassion? Who is offended and I burn not? that is,
am not exceedingly grieved on his behalf? Thus Calvin was affected toward the
afflicted Churches of Christ, (though far remote) as if he had born them on his
shoulders: Nothing can move compassion so much, as sympathizing and a fellow
feeling of the same affliction. And this was one cause, why Christ became man;
that he might taste of our infirmities, and in that respect have a
compassionate disposition toward us in all our sufferings, Heb. 4.15.
Heb. 4.15.

Secondly, Being men like our selves, we can the more readily and without fear
run to them for Instruction, and comfort. We may the more freely and
familiarly, resort to them for advice in our doubtings; Mal. 27. 2 King. 4.
for comfort in Afflictions; Knowledge in Ignorance; Instruction in Godliness,
and assistance in all wants and weaknesses etc. Familiar dealing is an
excellent Art to win Affection. This Familiarity we cannot have with Angels,
(as was showed).

Thirdly, In that being men, as we are, they might be able to perfect their
Doctrine by their Practice; that so all may know, their precepts are feasible,
by seeing them done, (for who can think that that Physician can cure a disease
in another, that is always sick of the same); And that they indeed intended
obedience, when they shall add a Commentary of practice, to the Text of
Preaching. This way of Illustration of Doctrine, by Example prevails most with
the Hearer, who is more apt to believe the Eye than the Ear; in which regard,
St. Paul exhorted Timothy to be an Example to his flock, both in word and in
Conversation, 1 Timothy 4.12.
1 Timothy 4.12.

Fourthly, Hereby the danger of deceit and delusion is prevented, which we
should ly open unto, if we should be taught and instructed by the appearance of
Angels: For albeit the Truth in an Angel's mouth is more weighty in it self,
yet it is not more certain to us; for Satan can turn himself into an Angel of
Light, he can transform himself into that show; 2 Cor. 11.14. Dr. Stoughton.
Nor is it an easy matter to give such infallible characters, whereby divine
illuminations might be distinguished from diabolical illusions, that all
ambiguity might be taken away. This deceit to preven, and for the better
security of our souls, God is pleased to use the Ministry of men, and not of
Angels, who, albeit they are subject to Error, yet far less dangerous then
then the former; in that we have a certain rule given us, whereby to try the
Spirits, 1 John 4.1.
whether they be of God or no, 1 John 4.1. according to which, if they speak
not, there is no truth in them. And thus you see how this way of furthering our
good by the Ministry of Man, is more likely to be effectual than the Ministry
of Angels.

Thirdly, God has respect to man herein, in that by this means he makes trial
of our obedience; Whether we will, for his sake, submit unto the rule and
government of such as he has set over us, Heb. 13.18. Geo. 22.12.
being men like our selves (or perhaps inferior), and yield obedience to him
therein, whose Will they publish. Now I know (says God to Abraham) that thou
fear me; seeing, for my sake, thou have not spared thine only Son, Genesis
22.12. God knew Abraham's fear before, Nunc omnibus declarasti. Chrysostom. Gal.
4.14.
but now he made experience of it, and so as to make both himself and others
know that he feared God indeed: So may he say to us, if we receive his
Ministers, as an Angel of God, (as the Galathians did Paul) not confidering so
much the meannesse of their Persons, as the truth of their Doctrine; which must
be as carefully received, and as certainly held, Gal. 1.8.
as if an Angel from Heaven should deliver it (for should an Angel say, Thou
shall not forswear, Thou shall not lie; it is no truer in the Angel's mouth
than it is in the Minister's). Now I know that you fear my name, you have given
an experiment of that which is in you; and made manifest, both to your selves
and others, your mind and disposition to fear me and obey me, in a willing and
cheerful submission to my Ordinance. These are some reasons in reference to
men, (amongst others that might be mentioned,) why God makes choice of men
rather then of Angels, for this service, to dress his Vineyard.

Lastly, Other reasons may be drawn from the work whereabout they are employed,
which is Man's Redemption, and eternal Salvation and Happiness. Now, as our
Redemption was to be wrought and performed only in the Nature of Man, and not
of Angels; so there is a decency and fit respond^nce to that work, Act. 3.22.
that our Redemption should be preached to us by Men and not by Angels; and
that the gifts of Grace which tend to our happiness, should be conveyed to
us by the same Nature as by a Conduit-Pipe. And this reason the Apostle seems
to use, 2 Cor. 5.18.
2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God who has reconciled us unto himself by
Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of Reconciliation. And thus
you have some Reasons rendered, Why it pleased God to make choice of Men, and
not of the glorious Angels of Heaven, to dress and husband his Vineyard.

There is another Quaerie, which would be answered before I come to the
Application of the Point.



God's Vineyard is under the Protection and care of both Powers, Resp. Isa. 5.2.
both Civil and Ecclesiastical; The Tower built in the midst of it Isa. 5.2.
was both for Moses and Aaron. By the power of the one, the Boar of the Wood is
kept out; and by the care of the other, the Fox of the Field is discovered:
Both are Fathers to the Church, to nourish and cherish it, Isa. 49.23. 1 These.
2.7, 8, 10. Romans 13.4. (...)1 Cor. 3.5. 1 Timothy 4.6. Eusebius. de vit. Constable.
Isa. 49.23. 1 These. 2.7, 8, 10. And both are the Ministers of God, to provide
for the welfare of it, Romans 13.4. The same Name and Title is given to the
Ministers of the Sword, as is elsewhere given to the Ministers of the Word, 1
Cor. 3.5. 1 Timothy 4.6. Ego communis quidam sum Episcopus, I am a certain common
Bishop among you, said Constantine to God's Ministers in his time. Both
Magistrates, and Ministers of God, are ordained for the Vineyard's good, yet
both Magistracy and Ministry (qua tales) are distinct: Both agree in their
Institution, which is from God, and in the general End, which is the good of
God's Vineyard; yet both to the one, and to the other, Job 26.
God has set bounds and limits, (as he has done to the Sea,) which they may
not pass. The Pastor's charge is only about spiritual things; The Prince's
and Magistrate's extends both to things spiritual and temporal: yet may not
the Magistrate meddle with things merely spiritual, as the Preaching of ^he
Word, Administration of of the Sacraments, and exercise of Ecclesiastical
Discipline: They are to hear us, but not to step up into he Pulpit, to preach
unto us; they are to receive the Sacrament from our hands, but not to give it,
nor consecrate it, with their own hands: These things the Magistrate, by his
Authority, ought to command to be done; but he has no Calling, nor warrant to
do these things: Luke 12.14.
Nor may the Minister of the Word ascend the Tribum, to judge Civil or
Criminal Causes; yet ought he to teach and exhort Magistrates, that Justice be
done without respect of Persons. Deuteronomy. 1.
They are continually to help the one, the other; but neither to incroach nor
invade upon the others work. Nor can God's Vineyard be well dressed without the
help of both: And the like care belongs to inferior Officers in their places,
they being subordinate to the higher.

And as Magistrates, and public Persons, are Dressers of the Vineyard, Luke
22.33.
so is every Private Christian (within the compass of his Calling). Who is it
that has not some Vineyard or other to tend? When thou art converted thy self,
strengthen thy Brethren said Christ to Peter, Luke 22.32. The like charge is
given to others as well as to him. As every man has received a gift, 1 Pet.
4.10.
so must he minister: None of us has received Grace for himself solely, but
for the good of others likewise, 1 Cor. 12.7. Hence are those exhortations so
frequent in Scripture, 1 Cor. 12.7. Gal. 6.1. Col. 3, 16. 1 These. 5.11, 14.
Heb. 3.13. Genesis 4.9. Pro. 27.23.
Exhort one another; Admonish one another; Comfort one another, Edify one
another: And who but a Cain will say, Am I my Brother's Keeper? More
especially, those that are Governors of Families stand charged with this Duty,
Prove. 27.23. You that are Parents, Masters, etc. stand as strictly charged with
the Souls of those under your roofs, as the Minister does with the Souls of his
Congregation; yea, every one has a Fig Tree of his own to tend. Cant. 1.6.
Bern. in loc.
Mine own Vine have I not kept. (says the Spouse in the Canticles, cap. 1.6.)
Sermo non est de Vinea, sed de Anima every man has a Vine within him to dress
and tend; a Soul of his own, out of which there are many stones of offense to
be cast; many luxuriant Branches to be pruned and lopped off: Prae omni
Custodia (as Hierom reads), Above all Keepings, Keep thy heart with all
diligence, Pro. 4.23.
Prove. 4.23. Keep, Keep, Watch, Watch, etc.

Notwithstanding, all that has been said, (both of Public, and Private
Persons,) the Ministers of God's holy word, and Sacraments, are the Dressers of
the Vineyard, (...), in a more eminent manner, being next, Mat. 28.19. Mat.
16.19. Joh. 20.23.
and more immediately knit to the custody and care of it: They (and only they)
being called, and put into commission, to preach the Gospel, and administer the
Sacraments, and into whose hands the Keys of it are putin trust. In which
sense, we may truly say, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? Hosius ad Constable.
What have Kings and Princes (much less others) to do with these things? Uzzah
not being content to sway the royal Scepter, would needs lay hold on the
Censer, and presuming to burn Incense to the Lord, 2 Chro. 26.20.
provoked thereby the wrath of the Lord against him; and taking upon him to
cleanse the People, he himself was smitten with an unclean and fowl disease to
the day of his death, 2 Chronicles. 26.20. Thus having given you an Answer to these
Quaeries, (which serves for the clearing of the Point) we come now to apply it.

Office of God's Ministers, the Dressers, and the Honor due unto them in that
respect.

The Dresser's work is such as he need not be ashamed of: For however, the
Calling of a Dresser of a Vineyard or Garden, may be esteemed but mean and
base, in some men's eyes, yet it is a Calling that Adam in Paradise was employed
in, Genesis 2.15.
even in the state of Innocence, Genesis 2.15. and in the eyes of God, and of his
Saints, this Calling of the Minister is honorable, Luke 1.15. Luke 1.15.
Nor is there any reason, why it should be despicable in the eyes of any. It is
the worthiest Subject in the World, that they deal about, even the Salvation of
the Soul. They are sent to preach the Word; to teach people the way to Heaven;
to pray for the People in the Congregation; and to carry their prayers to God;
to celebrate the Sacraments, to the comfort of their people; all for the
Salvation and good of their Souls. The Art of a Goldsmiths we count more worthy
then the Art of a Blacksmith; and the reason is, for that the matter whereupon
he works as his Subject (which is Gold), is more excellent and perfect than
Iron, on which the other works: In this respect it should be preferred to
other Callings, (were there no other). But besides, they labor for God; tend
his Fig Tree; dress his Vineyard, yea, and more, they are (...), 1 Cor. 3.9.
Coworkers with God in this service, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 3.9.
They are sent from God* to bring men to God; and keep them with God; and make
them active for God; Heb. 5.1.
that in the end they may be eternally saved, and blessed by God: And if this
be not a worthy Work, 1 Timothy 3.1.
as the Apostle terms it; judge you?

For the better accomplishing and perfecting whereof, there are three principal
Virtues, (as implements) which are necessarily requisite in these Dressers of
the Lord's Vineyard.

First, Skilfulnesse and Ability to do this work that he is called unto; 2 Timothy
2.2. 1 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 2.25. Luke 12.42. Hos. 4.4. Levit. 21.17.
This is required, 2 Timothy 2.2. and 1 Timothy 3.2. He must be (...) one apt to
teach; able to divide the Word of God aright, that all may be edifyed, 2 Timothy
2.25. and (like a wise Steward) know how to give God's household their portion
of meat in due season, Luke 12.42. Such as refuse knowledge, God has threatened
to refuse, so that they shall be no Priests to him. Hos. 4.4. So Levit. 21.17.
That blindness of the body figured the blindness of the mind. Under this head
are many Members comprehended; as Sufficiency in himself, having some competent
knowledge in the Tongues and Arts; Secondly, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. Tit. 1.9.
an Ability to express that Sufficiency; the Door of Utterance is necessary:
Such a measure of Knowledge must be had, as that he may be able to defend what
he has taught; exhort, comfort, confute, Tit. 1.9. which cannot be without
Knowledge.

Secondly, Faithfulness and Sincerity; He that has my Word, Jer. 23.28.
let him speak my Word faithfully, (says God, Jer. 23.28.) This is required in
a Steward, 1 Cor. 4.2
That he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Such are to be made choice of, for the
work of the Ministry, 2 Timothy 2.2.
2 Timothy 2.2. This is of a large extent; It respects both Doctrine and Life;
Fidelity in our Dispensation; Sincerity of Conversation, 2 Timothy 3.10. Act.
20.20, 27. 1 Cor. 11.23. Ma^k. 4.33. Joh. 16.12.
2 Timothy 3.10. Thou have known my Doctrine and Manner of living; These two are
conjoined, and may not, in any faithful Minister, be separated. In Point of
Doctrine, they must be found faithful for Matter, in making known the whole
counsel of God unto those to whom they are sent, so far as they are acquainted
with it, and People capable to apprehend it, Act 20.20 27. 1 Cor. 11.23. Mark
4.33. Joh. 16.12. And for Manner, they must so speak, as becomes the Oracles
of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. in plainness and power, 1 Cor. 2.4. giving to every one
their portion as need shall require, 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4.2. Luke
12.42. 1 Cor. 3.2. 1 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 2.7, 8. Phil. 4.9. 1 Timothy 4.12. Prove.
27.23. Bed. in. loc. Cant. 4.12. Isa. 21.5, 6, and 62, 6. Jer. 6.17.17.^ Heb.
13.17. Act. 20.28.
Luke 12.42. 1 Cor. 3.2. 2 Timothy 4.2. Adorning their Doctrine with a holy life
and conversation, Tit. 2.7, 8. Such a faithful Pastor and Dresser was Paul,
Phil. 4.9. And such ought all other to be, that are called to this service, 1 Timothy 4.12.

Thirdly, Care and Vigilance; Be diligent to know the State of thy Flocks, and
look well to thy Herds, says Solomon, Prove. 27.23. which Beda particularly
applies to the Pastor of the Church, showing it to be their duty to know the
dispositions and actions of every one particularly that is under them, (if it
may be). My Vineyard is before me, that is, The Vineyard committed to my care
and keeping, I am continually mindful of to manure and dress. The Prophets of
God were to stand upon their Watchtower to hearken, and to hear what the
People did: The like care ought the Ministers of the Gospel to have; Therefore
they are Styled Watchmen, Heb. 13.17. and Overseers of their Congregations,
Acts 20.28. They are to have an eye over the life and manners of their People,
as the Dresser has on every Vine and Fig Tree in the Vineyard: without this
spiritual acquaintance with the State and Condition of our People, we shall
never be able to apply our selves unto them as we ought; We may preach twice
every Sabbath, and it may be solidly and accurately, and yet not do that good
either in converting souls, or building up in godliness, as we might, and
should do, if we had more frequent and familiar converse with our People; for
then we should be better able to speak unto their hearts, (as Abraham's Servant
did unto the heart of the Maid,) and apply our selves unto their Particular
estates. And thus I have acquainted you (in general) with the work of the
Minister, the Dresser; In the faithful discharge whereof they are worthy to be
respected by their People, and to have that which is required by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 5.27, Chrysostom Amb. Haim^ Aquin. Calvin.
Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

This double honor due to the Dresser of Gods Vineyard, is, generally to be
understood, and Reverentiae and Subsidii, of Reverence and Recompense; of
Countenance and of Maintenance.

You Reverence them, First, when you have them and their calling in high
account and estimation, Phil. 2.29.
as, Phil. 2.29. Receive him in the Lord with all gladness (says Paul of
Epaphroditus) and hold such in reputation; This is that knowing of them which
the Apostle speaks of, 1 These. 5.12.
1 These. 5.12. We beseech you Brethren to know them which labor amongst you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: That knowledge there spoken of,
is not a bare knowledge, and simple notice taken of their Persons; but a
knowledge of Approbation of their calling, accompanied with an acknowledgement
of the inestimable benefit which we receive by it, 1 Cor. 4.1
1 Cor. 4.1.

Secondly, When in your affections you have them in singular love for their
work's sake, 1 These. 5.13. (...)
1 These. 5.13. esteem them very highly in love (says the Apostle) or more then
exceedingly (for so the Greek has it) with an overflowing measure, after a
sort excessive; one would have thought that, that one word (...), abundantly,
had bin enough; but St. Paul abounds above that, and puts an (...) to it, and
then an (...), he could go no higher. The Apostle exceeds in his expression, so
should People in their Affection toward their Minister: Such an excess of
love did the Galatians for a while bear toward Paul, that if it had bin
possible, they would have pulled out their own eyes, and have given them unto
him. Gal. 4.15.
Gal. 4.15.

Thirdly, By People's Obedience they are to manifest their reverence which they
have of them, John 10.4. Good sheep know their Shepherds voice, Joh. 10.4.
Explained.
and follow him; Such was the manner in the East-Countries, the Shepherd drove
not the Sheep before him, Heb. 13.17. Explained.
but they followed Him; the meaning is, they go in and out according to His
saying: So, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you and submit your
selves, that is, give over your selves to be Ruled and Directed by them
according to the Word. 1 Cor. 2.9. Phil. 21.
No greater proof of a Reverential respect to the Dressers of God's Vineyards,
than this: 2 Cor. 2.9. Philem. 21.

To this honor of Reverence, must be added the honor of Maintenance; Gal.
6.6. (...)
They are to be maintained both in Ability of Purse and Dignity of Person: Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that has taught in
all good things; A large allowance (you will say); and such should their
allowance be (for the Ministry of the Gospel is as worthy of it as the
Ministry of the Law, as hereafter you shall hear): They are the Ambassadors
of Christ, and their maintenance should beseem the honor and dignity of that
Person, 2 Cor. 5.20.
whom they represent; and of that Service, wherein they minister. And thus you
have heard (in short) the sum of what may be expected, both from Minister and
People: Now let us with as much Patience hear of the faylings both of the one
and other.



There are four sorts of Dressers in the Vineyard of the Lord; Some have a will
to dress it* but want skill to do it, some have skill to do it, but have no
will unto it; some want both; They have neither will nor skill, yet they would
be esteemed the Dressers of it: And there are some that have both skill and
will, these only make good their Calling.

The former sort are they who like well the Work, and affect the Calling, but
they want the gift of Knowledge, Utterance, etc. and yet (with Ahimaaz) they
will be running (albeit they have no tidings to carry) and needs must undertake
the calling of the Ministry; 2 Samuel 18.20.
As if good Affections and Inclinations were a sufficient Qualification of them
for so weighty a service. Were nothing else required then to be willing,
Tailors, Tinkers, Tapsters, etc. might take upon them to dress the Vineyard of
the Lord; But these were not those gifts, which when Christ ascended up on
high, He sent from thence for the building up of the Church, and edifying of
his Body. Ephesians. 4.8.
To such Christ will one day say, as the King in the Gospel to him that wanted
a wedding Garment, Friend, how came thou in hither? Who made you a Dresser in
my Vineyard, and know no better to handle your spade, and use the pruning hook?
Math. 22.12.
Who made you a divider of the Word, that thus mangle it, and cut it out into
Gobbetts? Who made you a Builder in my House, that know not how to square a
Stone, or hew a piece of Timber for the Building? I will say no more of these,
only put you in mind of an Ordinary experiment: After the Ox that lies on
the grass, and oppresses it; and after the Horse that feeds on the grass,
and devoureth it; A Sheep will feed. But after the Goose that stancheth the
g^asse, it has no stomach to graze: little nourishment can Gods Sheep receive
from him, that puts a scorn upon his function, by his Ignorance.

The second sort are such, as have both outward and inward abilities, yet have
no heart unto the service which they have undertaken. A Talent (and that a
large one too) they have received, but they wrap it up in an ilde brain without
practice, as Goliah's sword was in a Cloth, without its use: the Fountain of
their knowledge is sealed up, as was Laban's well, with a stone of Security or
Saturity. The Raven before she has got a prey cries on every Steeple; she has
no sooner got it, but she lies under a sunny-bank, beaking her self. And of
the Stork it is storyed, that whilst she is young, she has a sweet voice; but
when she waxes somewhat in years, she becomes hoarse. Indeed the aged Levite
(whose age had disabled his strength,) was dispensed with, Number. 8.26.
and and dismissed from cleaving the Sacrifices, yet he was commanded to
Minister to his Brethren, that is, by teaching what they should do in the
service of the Tabernacle: So, though Age, may somewhat weaken the Dressers
natural faculties, that neither his understanding is so apprehensive, nor his
memory so retentive as formerly; and in that respect somewhat excuse them from
their former diligence, yet this gives them no toleration to be wholly
negligent. The faithful Witnesses mentioned, Rev. 11.7.
Revel. 11.17. finished their lives and testimonies together. But as for those*
who in the Midst of their strength, start aside like a broken bow, and having
wings (like the Ostrich) yet fly not with them; Psalm. 78.57.
Or having gotten Wealth and Preferment with the Herculian Idol, silence
themselves; such must look to be called to a reckoning for it: And albeit God
say not to them, as he did to that unprofitable Servant, Luke 19.22.
ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth, (for they say nothing); yet ex silentio tuo,
by thy silence, yea, for thy silence, I will Judge thee.

A third sort of the Dressers, there may be found in the Vineyard of the Lord;
who have neither will nor skill to discharge their function, and with these the
Church of Rome does most abound.

One, (and he no mean one) amongst them, tell us that he cannot bu^smile at the
folly of us, of the Reformation; who preach and yet have no calling to it. We
might retort it upon better ground (says one of our men) (if it were a thing
to be smiled at) that they who have a calling to preach, (as they say they
have,) yet neither can nor will: Clemang. de cor^up. stat. Eccl.
It was said of old that it was as rare a thing to hear a Bishop Preach, as to
see an Ass to fly; and we read how innumerable Parish Priests amongst them,
came to their Benefices; not from the Schools, but from the Plough, and servile
occupations, which could neither read nor understand Latin, nor know B from a
Battledore: and that some of their Bishops had neither read, nor heard, nor
learned the Sacred Scriptures; nor so much as touched the Bible, and very
likely so; for the Bishop of Dunkelden replying to a Minister (who said that he
had read the Old and New Testament) I thank God, I never knew what the Old and
New Testament was, said the Bishop. Joh. Fox in Hist. Scot. inter annos. 1540.
and 1543.
But why look I so far from home? It is to be feared, that there are amongst us
such as the Prophet Zachary speaks of, Cap. 13.4.5. who are no Prophets but
Husbandmen and Heardsmen from their youth up; Zach. 13.4, 5.
such as are more fit to go to Plough, and dress Horses heels, then dress the
Vineyard of the Lord: happy were it if Gods Church were purged of such
Dressers; and happy for themselves if they would cast off their rough garment,
and no longer deceive God's people with their fancies.

There are a fourth sort of Dressers, who have both ability and will to do
their Masters Work, and dress his Vines and Figg-Trees: who are Workmen
indeed, such as need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, and
with such as these, this English Vineyard is as richly stored, as any Vineyard
in the Christian World (blessed be Gods name): albeit they have as little
respect and honor given them, Joh. Eohem. de moribus omnium Gent. Diod. Sicul.
l. 2. Bodin de Repub.l 3. c. 8.
as any Ministers in the Christian World. Ministris eorum nihil vilius (said
Campian). Indeed what Nation under Heaven do less regard their Dressers, then
our English Nation? The Turks, Moors, and Arabians have their Priests in
highest estimation; the Syrians adorn their Priests with a Crown of Gold: The
Brackmans, with a Scepter of Gold, and Mitre beset with precious Stones: The
Romans Styled their Flamen, Regem Sacrorum; and who knows no, in what honor
the Papists have their Mass Priests at this day? Much might be said to this
purpose, (but all to no purpose): yet amongst Protestants, (and especially
amongst us English) Ministers and Preachers are of least regard (unless it be
it amongst some few that receive comfort by their Ministry.) Some indeed give
them the honor of countenance, but with hold the honor of maintenance; Some
give them the honor of maintenance, but withold from them the honor of
countenance; some withold both, and affoard neither the honor of countenance
nor maintenance; but the number of those is very single that give them that
double honor, Dyke Comment on Phil. p. 316.
both of countenance and maintenance that the word requires (as one well
observes).

There are those, who seem to love and reverence their Ministers, but they must
be spared in matter of maintenance; They will commend them for their labors,
countenance them with their presence, speak well of them, courteously salute
them, and give them the good time of the day; and this they conceive to be a
sufficient recompense for all their pains: Zenocrates said once to the
Children of One, who had bin liberal unto him, I have requited your Father
abundantly, in that all men speak well of him for his kindness showed to me.
So these men think it a recompense sufficient; in that they cause others (by
their Commendations) to speak well of their Minister. Could the Ministers of
the Gospel add Miracles to the Preaching of the Word, these men would mightily
extol them; (for it it no less then a miracle for a Lamp to burn without Oil,
for a Minister to labor, and live by his labor, and yet have not wherewith to
sustain him in his labors). But such as these may be resembled to those
Hypocrites which St. James speaks of, Cap. 2.16. Jam. 2.16.
They say unto their needy Brother depart in peace, be you warmed and filled,
notwithstanding they give not those things which are needful to the Body. Such
mouth-mercy and airie courtesy is good Cheap, and many a faithful Dresser in
God's Vineyard meets with it: (especially where the Ministers maintenance
arises from people's benovolence). Some kind of forwardness they may find in
people for a time, but it soon grows cold; and the best benovolence which they
can get, is, good words for all their pains, (which notwithstanding is expected
at the Dresser's hands as much as ever) and therein they are used like
pack-horses, which have heavy burdens laid upon their backs; and bells hung at
their ears to make them music, that they may cheerfully undergo their load.

Others there are that give them the honor of maintenance, but then they
withold the honor of countenance: This is ordinarily found where Gods
Servants the Ministers have a competent maintenance made certain to them by
Tything; which kind of maintenance, the Lord ratified under the Law by plain
Praecepts: And albeit the Gospel does not, interminis, assign them to his
Ministers now, Levit. 27.30. Numb. 18.21. 1 Cor. 9.14.
as he did to the Levites under the Law; yet the Apostle tells us that the Lord
has ordained, and taken order for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. implying a Statute for the same. Now let any show what
certain maintenance did ever the Lord appoint for the Ministry but Tithes.
Certain it is, that the custom of Tything has bin practiced in the Church
many hundreds of years, and has the Authority of Councels, and the Command of
Princes to back it; nor to this day can any better way be devised or found out
for the maintenance of the Ministry than that: and yet how grudgingly are they
paid, how fraudulently many times detained and purloyned, (albeit by the Law of
the Land, the Minister has as much right to them, as any Man has to that he
does possess); as hereafter you shall hear more fully. Let the Minister demand
his own, then the countenance is cast down upon him, as Cain's was toward his
Brother Abel: Genesis 4.6.
Men lowre, and look upon him like a Dog (as we use to speak) under the door,
and let him beware his shinns; either they will not hear him any more, or but
seldom, and then to watch his halting; If their sins be met withal, they will
revile, and rail, traduce, and slander: O! he speaks against the State, Jer.
20.10.
against Government, etc. Now he shall be charged with sedition, covetousness,
unprofitablenesse, and what not? And if he sit not sure in his saddle, he must
look to be laid upon the ground before he be aware. This woeful experience has
taught us to be true: He must be more then an ordinary honest man, that will
pay his Tithes honestly and cheerfully.

There is a Third sort amongst us, that will neither allow the Dresser of the
Vineyard Countenance nor Maintenance; such as are possessed with an
Anabaptistical Spirit, crept into many Places and Parishes in this Kingdom, who
deny any need of the Office of a Dresser, and public Teacher, and that any
other maintenance is due from People to their Minister, then what is freely
given to them as an Alms by way of courtesy and gratuity.

All Christians (they say) are Priests to God, and it is no better then a
gullery of the People, to persuade that one is more a Dresser of the Vineyard
then another man.

But that there is such a Calling as the Ministry (distinct from other
Callings) is evident enough from Scripture to sober spirits; Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
God gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors, some Teachers; for
the building up of the Church of Christ, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. Are all Apostles, are
all Pastors, are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29.
which Interrogation is a flat Negation, They are not all so: All the Body is
not an Eye; no more in the Body-Mystical is all a Minister. And does not the
Scripture expressly distinguish betwixt those that are taught in the word, and
those that teach them? Gal. 6.6. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
Gal. 6.6. betwixt those that feed the flock, and these that are fed by them? 1
Pet. 5.12. If no peculiar Church be committed to them more then to others, or
more then what belongs to all Professors; whence is it that there are so many
Rules given to Believers, how to carry themselves toward them, 1 These. 5.12.
as to know them, 1 These. 5.12. to obey them? And why are they enjoined to
watch over the souls of others, as those who must (in a special manner) be
accountable to God for them, Heb. 13.17. And whether it were the Institution of
Christ, Heb. 13.17.
or the Invention of Man, that at Ephesus and Miletus there should be El^ers,
who should take heed not only to them selves, but to all the flock, whereof
(not only men, but) the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, Act. 20.17.
and to feed the Church of God which he had purchased with his own blood, Acts
20.17. let any understanding Christian Judge.

It is true, every Christian is (after a sort) the Dresser of a Vineyard (^s
has bin said); 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
he is a Spiritual Priest to God, and is to employ his gifts for the good of
others, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. But where it is required, that they should do this
Publicly, and Ministerially? Are not Christians called Kings as well as
Priests? Revel. 1.6, and 3, 10. Revel. 1.6, and 3, 10.
And yet I suppose no man will be so audaciously foolish, as to step into the
Throne, and offer to Rule the Nation in that respect. And is it safe for any
(except those who are thereunto called by God) to enter upon the Priest's
Office, because they are styled Priests in Scripture? But I may spare my breath
in speaking of these.

There is a fourth and last sort, that indeed give to their Ministers this
double honor both of Reverence and Recompense, and that for their work's sake;
and these only are they, who entertain aright the Servants of the Lord, and
may expect a blessing. It is possible for a man to give his Minister both
honor of Countenance and Maintenance for by-respects as for Birth, Education,
Learning, Urbanity, Peaceablenesse, good usage in payments, etc. But unless
the work of the Ministry be that which draws affection, that thou can say;
I reverence and honor this Minister that God has set over me, for that he
teaches me to know God, to fear God, etc. He informs me of my duty, reproves
me for my faylings; therefore I reverence him; thou honor him not as thou
should. And to be thus honored, and preferred in the hearts of our People,
for our Work and Labor, is the highest preferment on Earth that we should seek
after. But I shall proceed no farther at this time, on this un relishing Use.

Dresser. Text


We have done with the Name, but not with the Number; why Dresser, seeing there
are many of them? propter unitatem (says the Gloss), All being of one heart
and mind (as were those Believers mentioned, Acts 2. and 5, 32). Thence we
infer;

The Dressers of Gods Vineyard should be as one in their Master's Work.

One (I say), not in respect of Power and Jurisdiction: for in that sense, a
parity in the Ministry is very dangerous, the Mother of Sects and Schism^,
which to prevent (says Calvin), Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 4. Sect. 2. and 4.
the Elders, that were the Ministers of the Word, did choose but one of every
City, from amongst themselves, unto whom they gave the Title of Bishop, Ne ex
aequalitate, ut fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur, Lest, by equality, as
usually it happens, dissentions should arise: And in that very Text, brought by
those who are otherwise minded, Mar. 20.25.
Mat. 20.25. we find a Maximus and Minimus amongst Christ's Disciples, He that
is greatest amongst you, let him be as the least, and he that is chiefest as
him that ministers; so the grea^est became as the least, to serve and minister
to the rest, and therein, One in the work of the Ministry: All have Idem
Ministerium, (says our Reverend Jewel) albeit diversam potestatem; Christ
granted to none of his Disciples any Primacy, or Superiority, in that respect.
Episcopatus non suscipit magis and minus (says Hierom): Hier. ad Evag.
One Bishop may be richer than another, or more learned than another, but he
cannot be more a Bishop than another Bishop is. When Christ gave unto his
Disciples their Commission, he gave it equally and generally to them all, Math.
28.19. Man. 28.19. Joh. 20. 19, 20, 22.
Go and teach all Nations; So Joh. 20.19, 20, 22. Christ stood in the midst of
his Disciples, and breathed on them all saying, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose ever sins ye remit they are remitted etc. He leaned not to Peter, nor to
James, nor to John; nor to any one of the rest did he give the Authority of
binding and loosing particularly; but he stood in the midst of them all, and
gave the same power to them all.

This the great Apostle of the Gentiles confesses, 1 Cor. 3.9.
1 Cor. 3.9. We together are God's Laborers, (one of us as well as another),
we work together with and for the Lord. St. Paul was a wise Master Builder, and
had a higher degree of Ministry than others, (for he was an Apostle, and so a
degree above an Evangelist) yet he did account of the Evangelists as of his
fellows, and equals, in the work of the Ministry, and joins them with him as
his Assistants, 2 Cor. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Colos. 1.1. 1 These. 1.1.
as we read in sundry of his Epistles, 2 Cor. 1. 1. Phil. 1.1. Colos. 1.1. 1
These. 1.1. Nor did he only esteem thus of those who were Evangelists, but he
esteemed of Pastors (a degree lower then the other) as his Fellow Laborers: So
he calls Epaphroditus, his companion in Labor, and fellow-Souldier, Phil.
2.25. Phil. 2.25. Col. 1.7. and 4.7.
So others, Epaphras, Tychichus Clement etc. he terms his Fellow Servants, and
Fellow Laborers, Colos. 1.7. and 4.7. acknowledging those who were his
Inferiors in degree, to be the same that he was in the Ministerial Function.

For the further clearing and confirming of the Point, let me show you, first,
wherein they are to show themselves One in their Ministerial Function:
Secondly, The Grounds and Reasons of it, why they should be as one in their
Master's Service: Of the first.

Ministers should manifest their Unity and Oneness, three ways especially;
First, in Doctrine, they are to teach the same Truth, and be of the same mind
and Judgment, at least in all fundamental and necessary Points, Gal. 1.8, 9.
Gal. 1.8, 9. Explained.
If any other preach any other Gospel then that which you have received, let
him be accursed (says the Apostle); and left he might be thought to go too far
in so saying, he reiterates it, As we said before so say I now again, If any
man preach another Gospel unto you than that which you have received, let him
be accursed. By another Gospel, he means any Doctrine, diverse from the
Fundamentals which they had laid; as is plain, in that, coming to explicate the
Gospel to which the Galathians were turned, he pi^cheth only upon that one
point of Justification by works, or the necessity of keeping the ceremonial Law
in all Believers: Such a care had the Apostles that there might be a consent in
their teaching, as that they drew the maine Articles of the Gospel into a
Comp^nd, called the Symbol of the Apostles, by which all Doctrines should be
regulated; or if not they, yet certainly it was done by Apostolical men, in the
most pure and ancient times of the Church. And in respect of this consent,
God's Servants are said to have one mouth, Luke 1.70. as he spoke by the mouth
of his holy Prophets. Luke 1.70. Isa. 52.8.
not mouths; And one Voice, Isa. 52.8. Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice,
with the Voice together shall they sing: which though literally, the words are
to be applied to Israel's delivery out of captivity, which the Prophets should
publish with great freedom and consent of Spirit; Calv. in loc.
yet (says Calvin) they have respect to the times of the Gospel also, showing
the great union that shall be 0 betwixt God's faithful Ministers in the work of
Christ, unto his second coming.

Secondly, As they are to be one in Judgment so in Affection they are to be as
one. Paul never spoke of any faithful Minister without signification of special
love and brothe^^y Affection: He terms Tychichus not only Brother, Ephesians. 6.21.
but dear Brother Ephesians. 6.21. and Epaphroditus he styles, not only
Fellow Servants, but his dear Fellow servant, Colos. 1.7. 2 Timothy 1.2. 2 Pet.
3.15.
Colos. 1.7. and Timothy not only his Son, but his dearly beloved Son, 2 Timothy
1.2. And Peter speaking of Paul, styles him his beloved Brother, 2 Pet. 3.15.
(albeit there had been difference betwixt them, and he had been sharply
reproved before by St. Paul, for his dissembling, Gal. 2.11.) And it is (not
altogether impertinently) taken notice of, Gal. 2.11. Mat. 4.18, 21.
that our Savior called to the Apostle-ship three pair of Brethren, (at the
least) intimating therein what brotherly Love and Affection should be amongst
the Ministers of the Gospel. The general calling of a Christian should be a
sufficient bond to knit together the hearts of all true Christians in Love, but
when to this Bond a second is added, that of Vocation and Calling, this should
knit our hearts more fast and firmly each to there.

Thirdly, We should be one in the helping and assisting of each other; we
should say, as Judah said unto Simeon his Brother, Come up with we into my Lot
that we may fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into
thy Lot, Judge 1.13.
Judge. 1.13. So it was prophesied as a fruit of the Gospel, that Ephraim and
Judah should cease to vex one another, and that they should both join together
against the common adversary, Isa. 11.13, 14. Mar. 6.7.
Isa. 11.13, 14. This was one reason why our Savior, when he sent out the
twelve, sent them out two by two, Mark 6.7. that one might be aiding and
assisting to the other in their doings. Brother that holds with Brother is
like a fortified City, Eccl. 4.10, 12.
says the Proverb. And hence it is that Ministers are termed Fellow-helpers;
So St. Paul styled Titus, 2 Cor. 8.12. Zeph. 3.9.
2 Cor. 8.22. And this is that serving of our Master with one shoulder, as the
Prophet phraseth it, Zeph. 3.9. (And so the Original has it.) And thus you
hear wherein God's Servants, the Dressers of his Vineyard, are to be as One.
Now let us hear what ground there is for this Unity.

That Text (formerly mentioned, and made use of to persuade to Unity), Ephesians.
4.4. etc.
Ephesians. 4.4. does in a more special manner concern Ministers, than any other,
and lays a stronger bond on them than i^ does on any private Christian.

First, Mar. 23.8, 9.
There is Unus Dominus, one Lord; one is our Doctor and Master, and that is
Christ, Ma^h. 23.8, 9. All of us are Scholars unto him, and of the same form,
and have the same Lesson read unto us, and it is a shame for us if we should
not be as One in his Service.

Secondly, Vna fides, It is one Faith that we preach and teach; Quisquis fidem
se tenere credit, unitatem teneat. Cypr. 1 Cor. 1.13.
Nothing is more ordinary with St. Paul, in his Epistles, then to cry out upon
diverse and different Teachers, as the greatest bane of the Church.

Thirdly, Vnum Baptismum, One Baptism, that we administer; nor are any baptized
into our names, 1 Cor. 1.13. but into the name of one God, and admitted into
his Family.

Fourthly, Vnum Corpus; The Bride that we are to trim and dress is but one,
our pains and care must be altogether about her, that she may be presented
glorious.

Fifthly, Vnus Spiritus, Spiritus Sanctus est nexus. Ephesians. 4.16. 1 Cor. 12.4.
the Spirit is but one by which we are tied together, and from whom we have
received our gifts and abilities, (albeit there be diversity of them,) 1 Cor.
12.4. and this Spirit moves the wheels together, so that they go one way, and
this one Spirit calls us.

Sixthly, In una spe, in one common hope of life and happiness: It is one
Heaven we hope for; one mark, the prize of our high Calling, we all contend
for; one port that we steer our course unto; By this one hope there comes more
strength to this Union, Joh. 4.36, 37. Now then, since there is one Lord, Joh.
4.36, 37.
(so we are one in the head:) One Faith, (so one in the heart;) One Baptism,
(so one in the face;) One Body, (so one in the hand;) Is there not great reason
that Head, Heart, Face, Hand, all, should look one way, and make after the same
place, which is Heaven, our common Hope?

It is a Doctrine both of General and Particular Concernment.

Ephraim, Divisum est cor eorum, their heart is divided, Hos. 10.2.
Hos. 10.2. So may it be said of these in these our days, and this is no small
Judgment upon this Nation. Shepherds observe, that when Sheep butt one against
another, a storm follows; And the Sheep of Christ observe, that when the
Shepherds are at variance, and contend amongst themselves, the Church is
endangered. It is never more merry with Wolves and Foxes, than when the
Sheph^rds are together by the ears; lamentable are those Flocks, miserable are
those Sheep! Divide and Regna was Machiavel's rule, and the old Serpent makes
use of it; nor does he labor in any thing more than in blowing of the coals,
and in creasing the heat, of contention, betwixt God's Ministers, by his
Incendiaries: well knowing.

First, That nimium altercando veritas amittitur, by heat and humor of
concention, Publius Mim.
the very Grounds and Maxims of Religion use to be shaken; which, of all other
things, should be most certain and indubitate.

Secondly, That it is very hard and difficult for men, whilst they avoid one
extremity, not to run perversely into another (as Austin shows); De Genesis ad
lit. l. 9. c. 8.
for whilst one party opposes another with heat and haste, it falls out,
that each of them, looking toward the adverse Tenet, do proceed to some
contrary extremity of Doctrine, as dangerous, many times, and sometimes more,
than that that which they do oppose.

Thirdly, Discord amongst these does more especially reproach and disgrace
Religion, and exposes it to the scorn and derision of the World. Chrysostom. in
Gal. c. 1. Eusebius. vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 60. l. 3. c. 12. Socrat. Hist. Eccl.
l. 1. c. 3. Sozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 15. The: Walsing Hist. Angl. in Hen. 4. p.
420. Plin. Not. Hist.
For this cause (says Chrysostom) are we become a reproach to Jews and
Gentiles, because the Church is rent into a thousand factions: This,
Ecclesiastical History verifies; And not only so, but it has raised up bitter
persecution against the Church. The cruel persecution under Dioclesian was
occasioned chiefly by the petulancy, pride, and contentions of Pastor's and
Bishops (says Eusebius). And two hundred thousand people were slain in the
garboyle which followed upon the Schisms of Popes (says Walsingham).

Fourthly, Whilst the Guides of God's People, Amphisbenalike, strive one
against another, which should be the Masterhead, the Body is in danger: It is
impossible to follow our Leaders, when their Faces look a contrary way, and
their backs are to each to other: Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar nescio, (as
Cicero sometimes said of the faction betwixt Caesar and Pompey): Our people
know not what to do when their guides call them contrary ways, and they are so
distracted, that many times they put on a resolution to fly all, and follow
none. These are some of the evils, which Satan knows will follow upon our
discords and contention: And these, in a great measure, we have found to be the
effects of our discords and contentions, which we have reason to bewail; and
not only so, but in the second place,

Calvin of the Churches peace, that he professed, he would willingly travail
over all the Seas in the World, to put an end to the differences of the Church.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, Math. 5.9. Math. 5.9.
And so this Doctrine is of Particular Use, both to Magistrates and Ministers;
to Ministers and all the people of God.

Minister of God as well as the other; Both are employed to do service for one
Master; These, (...) Romans 13.4. Ezekiel.37.18, 19. Ruth 4.11.
like those two Sticks or tallies mentioned Ezekiel. 37.16, 19. are to be one:
Both together, like Rachel and Leah, will better build up the House of Israel,
the Church of God, then asunder; when Magistrates, (Christ's Substitutes in his
Kingly Office,) and Ministers (Christ's Substitutes in his Priestly Office,)
stay one another, as Butter^sses below, or Spars above; then all stands film,
but if d^scord arise betwixt these, both Callings suffer by it. As Sampson
(herefore) said unto his Brethren of Judah, Swear unto me that you will not
fall upon meyour selves, Judge. 15.12.
Judge. 15.12. so may the Minister say unto the Magistrate, and the Magistrate
unto the Minister; for if contentions arise be wixt the^e, and one seeks to
pull the Sword out of the others hand, we may say as Jocasta sometimes said
weeping over the malice of her two sons Eteocles and Polynices, Senec. in
Thebard.
Tu times illum, and ille te; ego utrumque, sed pro utroque: Thou fear him,
and he fears thee, I fear you both, because I fear the destruction of you
both.

Yet more Particularly, God's Ministers of the Word are especially interessed
in this business, and to be exhorted (seeing they are as one) that, with one
heart and hand, they give themselves to the Lord's work, Mark. 9.49. Aug.
Epist. Hier. inter opera Hier.
and be at peace amongst themselves. Augustine passionately lamented the
differences that were betwixt Hierom and Ruffinus, two famous Pillars of the
Church, and dressers of God's Vineyard; Woe is me (says he) that I cannot find
you both together; how am I moved; how am I greived; how willing would I be to
fall down at your Feet? I would weep according to my Power, and beg according
to my Love, now of the one for the other, and then of both for both; and for
others also, (who with great perilland scandal see you), that you would not
suffer these great dissentions to spread. And great cause we have to do so; for.

First, It would be remembered that all our Labors should meet, in that one
term, the edifying of the Body of Christ, that is, his Church, Ephesians. 4.12.
Ephesians. 4.12. Now, the Church of Christ is not built up with blows and noise:
The Matter of the Temple was framed in Lebanon; 1 King. 6.7.
at the setting of it up in Zion no stroke was heard, neither of Axe nor
Hammer. Confusion of Languages hindered the building of the Tower of Babel; Genesis
11.5.
so variety of opinions and strife of tongues, is a great let to Temple-work:
whilst our Languages are so variable that we cannot understand each other, or
for our Impatiency will not, the progress of the Church is hindered. Our
contentions are a scandal to those that are without, and a great hinderance to
those that are within; It keeps many from us; opens the mouths of many against
us; weakens the hands of such as remain with us, and encourages others to
forsake and leave us: when as by Unity and Concord, the credit of our Ministry
would be greatly strengthened; our Doctrine more regarded, and become more
fruitful and powerful in the hearts of our people, as appears by that we read,
1 Cor. 14.25. 1 Cor. 14.25.
Where the consent and agreement that was found amongst God's Servants in their
Ministry, is rendered as the reason of that ignorant man's falling down on his
face and worshipping, this extorted from him an acknowledgment that God was in
them indeed.

Secondly, The great advantage that we give unto the enemies and adversaries of
the Truth, would not be forgotten. Melancthon (a man famous in his Generation)
persuading the Protestants, in his time to be at peace and unity, propounded to
them a Parable of the Wolves and Dogs, who were marching to fight, the one
against the other; the Wolves sent out their Scout to know the strength of
their Adversary; the Scout returns, and tells the Wolves, that indeed the Dogs
exceeded them in number, but yet they needed not to fear them, for he had
observed, that the Dogs were not one like another; Besides, he had observed in
them, that they did march as though they were offended, rather with themselves
than with their enemies; grinning and snarling, yea, biting and tearing one
another, as if they would save their enemies a labor; nor did they keep their
ranks, nor observe any order in their march, wherefore let us not be
discouraged (said the Scout to the Wolves), but march on resolutely. You can
easily apply it: Our discords are the sweerest Music in the ears of Papists,
Anabaptists, etc. they have weakened us and strengthened them. Sirs, (said Dion
to his contentious soldiers,) your enemies see your mutinous behavior,
(pointing to the Castle wherein their enemies were;) Oh! that we would spend
more then a few thoughts upon it; our enemies see, and are glad to see, and
make use of what they see, in beholding our differences and discords, and clap
their hands to see us wring ours. Highly to be commended were Basil and
Eusebius, who perceiving the Arrians to improve a difference that was betwixt
them, to the prejudice of the Orthodox Faith, were soon reconciled, and united
their forces against the common enemy. And we read in story that Aristides
perceiving the open scandal that was like to arise by reason of the contention
sprung up betwixt him and Themistocles, he besought him mildly after this
manner; Sir, We both are no mean men in this Commonwealth; our dissentions will
prove no small offense unto others, nor disparagement to our selves: Wherefore,
good Themistocles, let us be at one again, and if we will strive, let us strive
who shall exceed the other in Virtue and Love: Oh! that there were such a
strife between Minister and Minister! Such a strife would be our glory.

Thirdly, Unity and concord amongst God's Ministers is very acceptable, and
pleasing unto God, and delights his spirit. In the 2 Chronicles. 5.13. 2. Chron. 18.
we read, that when the Trumpeters and Singers were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord; there the House was filled with
a Cloud, even the House of the Lord: God drew near, and manifested his gracious
presence amongst them. And, Acts 2.1, -- 11. Diverse spoke in diverse Languages
at once, Acts 2.1, -- 11.
yet all consented in the thing which they spoke, for all spoke the wonderful
things of God; and then the Spirit of God was amongst them, (...)
and fell on them, and that in the likeness of cloven tongues (not of cloven
hearts). Thence Interpreters conclude, Animarum unio and concordia, est optima
d spositio ad recip^endum Spiritum sanctum, that unity and concord is the best
disposition of the mind, for receiving of the holy Ghost. But on the other side
God is not present with his favor; his spirit abides not where discord and
dissension is: That merry Cardinal intimated as much to his fellows, in the
Conclave* when they could not agree about the choice of the Pope, Let us (said
he) untyle the House, quia Spiritus sanctus nequit ad nos per tot tecta
ingredi, because the Holy Ghost cannot get in unto us through so many Tyles:
Differences and contentions amongst us, keeps Gods spirit from us: Nay, yet
more;

It causes God to be highly offended with us, and to smite us when we agree
not, that we may be made to agree together. A very remarkable passage hereof we
read in Socrates great difference and contention did arise betwixt two famous
Bishops, Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 13.17, 21.
Epiphanius and Chrysostom, insomuch that in a rage they parted asunder, using
some unchristian imprecations; I hope, said Epiphanius to Chrysostom, that
thou shall not dye a Bishop; and I hope, said Chrysostom to Epiphanius, that
thou shall not return alive into thine own Country; both which fell out
accordingly: for Eiphanius dyed at Sea, as he was returning home; and
Chrysostom was deprived of his Bishopric, and dyed in exile. Many were slain
in taking parts; the Cathedral Church and Senate House in Constantinople was
burned to the ground, in persuit of revenge; A fearful president of Gods
displeasure against the discords of his Servants; think how God loathes that
which he so severely punishes: Ridley and Hoper could not agree about black
and white, God made them to agree in red.

Lastly, The after-throes, that we put our Mother the Church unto, by our
Dissentions, would be laid to heart; Genesis 25.22.
Rebeccah finding a struggling in her Womb, cried out Why am I thus? So says
the Church, Oh! why am I fruitful of Children; when they prove such dissenting
and diagreeing Children? Diens. Alexandr. Apud. Niceph.
Time was when it was said by the holiest men that then lived in the Church,
non minoris esse laudis non scindere Ecclesiam, quam Idolo non sacrificare,
that it was no less praise worthy, to abstain from renting the Church, then to
forbear sacrificing to an Idol: These things well considered, would (without
all question) work somewhat toward unity and concord between dissenting
Brethren (whose divisions do cause great thoughts of heart in every faithful
Christian who desires to see our Vines and Figg-Trees flourish). Judge. 5.15.
And provoke them to use all good means of reconciliation, and hearken to all
lawful proposals that may make for peace. Now what these means are that by
Gods Min^sters must be used whereby this unity and concord amongst them may be
attain d, would be showed; And so (besides those general directions before
given) these particular Rules are very useful.

First, Let us make our peace with God; for till that be done, no peace can be
expected with man, Phil. 4.7, 9. It is in Judgment that God divides our
hearts, I will divide them in Jacob, Phil. 4.7, 9. Genesis 47.7.
etc. St. Basil lamenting the discord that was in that Church, imputes the
cause thereof to men's contempt of their Heavenly King; As did the troubles of
Israel, and the Judges, arise from this, that there was no King in Israel.
Questionless, our dissentions are Paenal and Judicial punishments, for that
willful Rent which has bin made amongst us; and till God be appeased still
dissension will abide. You may read, Zach. 11.4. of two Pastoral Staves, Zach.
11.14.
wherewith the Flock of God is fed; the one is Beauty (which signifies safety
and protection) the covenant made betwixt God and his People? the other Bands
(which signifies unity and concord amongst God's People. Now the Staff Beauty
God takes and breaks, showing their wicked dealing with the Covenant of God;
then Bands cannot hold: This is our case, (it is to be feared) our covenants
with God have bin violated, we have broken the staff Beauty and God in his just
judgment breaks Bands that it holds not.

Secondly, Let our care be to stock our selves well with Heavenly wisdom, that
Heavenly wisdom which is from above; that is, with the knowledge of Divine
things. Such I hope is the Resolution of the associated Ministers of this
County, as appears by their agreement. Essex.
We resolve through the grace of Christ to contend daily, to the comprehension
of that Ministerial knowledge and wisdom, whereby we may understand our way;
and to study more, and strive after that excellent Wisdom, and Art of winning
Souls, etc. Indeed we profess our selves to be Wisdom's Scholars, yea,
Wisdom's Children: Now Wisdom looks to be justified of her Children, Math.
11.19. and she is justified by them, Math. 11.19.
when they show forth the fruits of it in their carriage, which fruits are laid
down by St. James, 3.17. to be these; Jam 3.17.


First, Chastity or Purity: That is pure which is without mixture and (so
understanding it) it suffers not Light to be mixed with Darkness, Truth with
Error, Superstition with Religion; these cannot stand together, 2 Cor. 2.17.
2 Cor. 2.17. We are not (says the Apostle) as many who corrupt the Word of
God: (the word is taken from Hucksters, or deceitful Vintners, who mix their
Commodities,) We do not Huckster it, it still retains a pure and chaste mind in
out Breasts, and pure affections in our Hearts to the Truth, so that it will
not suffer us to admit of any error; or do any thing against the Truth, but for
the Truth. Unity without Verity is no better then Conspiracy, if it be joined
with falsehood; it is not Chastity but execrable Adultery (says Cyprian). Hence
was it that such care was had in the Primitive times to maintain the Truth, and
not give way to the smallest Errors, where the consequence might prove great.
In the Council of Chalcedon there arose a difference about one little word, a
Monosyllable, the question was about Ex and In. The Heretics (condemned then)
confessed Christ to be ex duabus naturis, composed of two natures at first; but
not to be in duabus naturis, not to consist of two natures after; and for that
In they were thrust out. In the Council of Nice the difference was less (one
would think) about a little letter; a man would think it but a small difference
betwixt (...) and (...), it was but one letter, a small Iota, and yet (as
Theodoret witnesses) right Believers could not be brought, Parva non sunt
parva ex quibus magna proveniunt Damasc. Joh. 17.3.
either to admit the one, or omit the other: Nothing is to be neglected as
little, from which great things may arise. So, for the placeing of words, what
difference has bin, and is? as betwixt sola fides and fides sola, nay, very
pointings may alter the case, as, John 17.3. The Arrians in making the Comma
after only, would seclude the Attribute, the true God from the Son and Holy
Ghost. It is not Chastity of spirit to have our minds corrupted, 2 Cor. 11.3.
from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Corruption in Judgment is
the most dangerous corruption of all other, Mr. Hild. on Psalm. 51.
worse then corruption in manners, (says a grave Divine); as the Leprosy in
the head was of all other Leprosies the most dangerous and destructive, Levit.
13.44. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean, his plague is in his
head: Levit. 13.44.
had the Leprosy bin in the hand or feet, even that had made him unclean; but
being in the head he is utterly unclean, says the Text.

Secondly, Peaceablenesse is a second fruit that proceeds from wisdom from
above; it causes us to fly strife and contention what may be, and, if it be
possible, to have peace with all men. Abraham being endued with this wisdom,
Romans 12.18. Genesis 13.8, 9.
being provoked by Lot's Herdsmen, desired Lot that there might be no falling
out betwixt them, for that they were Brethren; and for peacesake, divided the
Land, and gave Lot the choice to take which hand he would: This will prevail
with us to silence our own private opinions (if we perceive they tend to the
disturbance of the peace of the Church) according to the Apostles Ru e, Romans 14
22. Have thou faith have it to thy self, Romans 14.22. Explained.
thy particular and private persuasion of the Liberty of all days, and free
use of the Creatures (and other things of an indifferent nature) keep private
to thy self, and do not divulge thy opinions, (they not being absolutely
necessary to Salvation) whereby the peace of the Church may be troubled, and
the consciences of others perplexed; Better an unnecessary truth should be
lost, than the public peace disturbed, and the unity of the Church lost. The
advice of the Trent-Historian is; Sometimes to yield to the imperfections of
others, Hist. Trent. p. 62.
and for pity to accommodate to that which in rigor is not due, yet in equity
convenient.

Thirdly, Meekness and Gentleness is another branch of that Wisdom that comes
from above; This meekness of wisdom will give a Charitable censure of other
men's sayings and actions, and take things (not in the worst, but) in the best
sense; it shuns all bitterness of contention about differences in our
reasoning about them: If we reason one with another, it will cause us to do it
in a Brotherly manner, and to follow the Truth in Love, Ephesians. 4.1, 5. It
removes groundless jealousies and suspicions, Ephesians. 4.1, 5.
which we are apt to have one of another, (which is the cause of many needless
distempers amongst us, and has bin): It will cause us to lay aside all odious
Names, and Words of Reproach which serve only to provoke and engender strifes.
We should sooner be reunited, if these newborn Names of Independent and
Presbyterian did not keep us at such a distance (says one that knows much.)

Fourthly, Tractablenesse or easiness to be entreated; It causes a man to
hearken to advice and counsel, and reverently to yield to Reason; and submit to
the Judgment of Superious. The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.32. Those who reach are subject to the scanning
and examining of other Teachers, whether their doctrines be sound and good: and
so to submit to their censure and judgment. There are those who will persist
in their own conceits and fancies, albeit they have no sound ground, nor
sufficient reason, nor evident proof to induce them to their false persuasions,
yet they will still hold them, albeit all the Ministers in the World be
contrarily minded; These want this Wisdom which is from above, which causes us
to be tractable, and not willful.

Fifthly, It is full of mercy and good fruits: whereby, deeds of Charity seem
not to be meant, (for they are not the Subject of that discourse) but Mercy
toward them that are out of the way, and err from the Truth. Those who are
wise will pity such and mercifully seek to reduce them to rights, by all means
of Humanity and Love, so Romans 14.1, 2, 3. Romans 14.1, 2, 3.
14.1, 2, 3. There must be no despising of him that is weak, but a receiving of
him in Love. If there be difference in Judgment, yet should not this sever us
in our Affections; though they err, and cannot see the truth in many matters,
(as we think we do,) yet God has received them to mercy, and they may be God's
dear Children, and faithful servants, as well as we our selves, (agreeing in
Fundamentals). Till the Lord clear those truths to us, wherein we differ, we
should pity one another, pray for one another, love one another. Polycarpus
and Anicetus Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. 23.
differed in opinion about Fasting and Observation of days; yet they lived in
love, as Ireneus witnesses in a Letter that he sent to Victor, Bishop of Rome,
and withal gives this Testimony of the Church then, and before his time, That
all such which held contrary Observations, did notwithstanding hold fast the
Bond of Love and Unity: It Is my Brother Parmenian (said Optatius). So Calvin of
Luther; Though Luther call me Devil, I will call him Brother, and esteem as my
Brother and the faithful Servant of Christ. Without Question, this wisdom will
keep one Minister from branding another with scandalous names, etc. and cause
them rather (as the Ministers of this Association profess^) to bear with one
another differences that are of a less and disputable nature, without-making
them a ground of Division.

Sixthly, This Wisdom is without Partiality, It will not have the Faith of God
in respect of Persons: Not this to be the Truth, because such a man holds it,
(as we fancy): Hierom said (but he said amiss when he so said) that he had
rather err with Origin than think the Truth with other men: And it was too much
for Nicephorus to say, That he was as safe in Chrysostom's opinion, as he was
in the Word of God: This is to glory in men, 1 Cor. 3.21.
which may not be. We may trust too much to Antiquity; The ancient Fathers and
Councils are to be reverenced, but not to be confided in: we may assent unto
them as Ancients, but not as Oracles; they may have our minds easy and
inclinable to their opinions, but not fettered and captivated thereunto: The
best men are but Problematical, they speak probab^y (oftentimes), It may b^
thus, or, It is likely to be thus. It is the Spirit of God, in the Holy
Scriptures, that speaks Dogmatically and Certainly: Our dealings and
proceedings are appointed to be in Yea and Nay; 2 Cor. 1.20.
Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay; but God's are Yea and Amen. We are not then to captivate
our Judgments to any one, but to be informed by the truth, and without respect
of Persons, to believe the truth, and embrace the truth, a from the mouth of
Christ himself, the Author of Truth.

Seventhly, Without Hypocrisy; Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. c. 19. and 25.
not speaking one thing, and minding another, as did Arrius the Heretic, who
being called upon to recant his errors, and subscribe to the Nicene Creed; he
craftily, to delude Constantine the Emperor, gave him in writing a Profession
of Faith, which he, and other of the Clergy that were of his party, held, which
was sound and Orthodox; but in his bosom (say some) he had wrote his own and
their damnable Heresies in a Paper, and clapping his hand upon his bosom,
protested before God, That that was the Faith which they believed; and being
afterwa^ds called to his Oath, about the Truth of that he seemed fainedly to
subscribe unto, whether or not he believed as he had subscribed; he carried his
former paper, wherein his own opinion was written, under his Arm, and laying
his hand on the Book, swore, that as he had written so he believed; however, he
notoriously dissembled, and played the Hypocrite, seeking by all cunning ways
and means to overthrow that Faith which he had subscribed; raising up tumults
in Alexandria, setting the whole City in an Uproar, through parts-taking: which
Perjury and Hypocrisy of his, God severely punished, for he no sooner was
departed out of the Emperor's presence, (after he had the second time
subscribed to the Canons of the Nicene Council, and craftily sworn that he
believed as he had written) but he was taken with a great Lask, and, going to
the stool, voided, with his excrements, his guts; and blood, together with the
Spleen and Liver, gushed out (says Socrates), and so he died like a Dog: And
thus you have heard what an excellent mean divine Wisdom is of Unity and
Concord, and a preservative against Discord; Had we but this, what need we
more? And yet, in the Third place,

Let us (if we desire Concord) practice the Lesson of Self-denial, and be good
Proficients in that; Jer. 45. ult.
Seek thou great things for thy self, seek them not. Augustine, and with him
almost thirty Bishops besides, had learned this Lesson of Self-denial, whilst
they agreed either to admit partners into their See's, or else to lay down
their Episcopal Authority, for the Unity of the Church; Thus they reasoned with
themselves, Did Christ descend from Heaven into our humane members, that we
might be made his Members, and nos de Cathedra discendere formidamus, and are
we afraid to come down from our Sees to prevent division in Christ's Members?
The like zeal (as Ruffinus shows) was in Gregory Nazianzen against himself, to
avoid the troubles of the Church, Si propter me est illa tempest as, etc. If
this tempest be by reason of me, take me and cast me into the Sea (like Jonas),
and so let this Tempest cease: where are those that will thus deny themselves
for peace? In all our Discords and Contentions in the Church, there is too much
Self to be seen. What was said of Lucilla's faction, may be truly said of the
Divisions and Fractions that are at this day amongst Ministers; Anger bred
them; Pride fosters them.

It were easy (as one says) if it were not beyond an Auditories patience, to
derive all our Schisms and Contentions, from the Concupiscible or Irascible
Appetite, and resolve them, either into Ambition, or Avarice, or Pride, or Envy.

Nothing has more ruined the Church of God, corrupted Zeligion, overthrown
Piety, than the Ambition of the Clergy. Korah takes it grievously that the
Priestly dignity was translated to Aaron, Number. 16.1, 2.
and challenges Moses therein, of partiality; as if he had preferred his own
Kindred, and followed his private Affection, rather than God's direction. Hence
arose a Schism, and rent amongst the people, by which means much mischief
followed, Numb. 16.1. Diotrephes was ambitious of pre-eminency; he affected
high place, rule, and Authority over others, 3 Ep. Joh. 9.10.
3 Epist. Joh. 9.10. and was a great disturber of the Churches quiet; Arrius
(before mentioned) being ambitious of a Bishopric, and missing it, stirred up
so much discord in sowing his tares of Arrianism in the field of God: And what
a Plague, the Ambition of that Popish Prelate, has bin to the Church, Who
knows not? with such Ambitionists the Church has ever bin pestered; which
caused Luther to make this prayer. A Doctore glorioso and a Pastere
contentioso, liberet Ecclesiam suam Dominus: From vainglorious and contentious
Preachers, the Lord deliver his Church.

Covetousness; 2 Timothy 6.5.
That puts to the hand, and is a furtherer of our Divisions: Some make gain
their godliness: they are the golden Bells and Pomegranates which are upon
Aarons Roabes, Exodus 26.34.
that causes many a seditions Corah, to invade the Priestly function; That
which they chiefly affect is the satiating of their Avatice. This was the White
that those Authors of Schism aimed at, Romans 16.17. 2 Timothy 4.20. Deuteronomy. 13.4. 2
Pet. 2.15. Acts 20.23. Boys his Remains on Hab. 1.
as appears, Romans 16.17. It was the love of the World, that caused Demas to
forsake Paul: And it was the deceit of Balaam's wages that drew him to seek the
ruin of God's Israel; and from this base covetousness have many of our late
divisions arose. St. Paul was free from this Vice, Acts 20.23. and Luther
professed of himself that he was never tempted to covetousness, and in this
(says one) I could wish that we were all Lutherans; then I doubt not, but
there would be less contention and more peace amongst us.

Pride, that is likewise a principal cause of our discords; It is a Bastard
begot betwixt a Learned Head, and an unsanctified Heart; which being once
conceived in the soul, it causes it to swell till it bursts, 1 Timothy 6.4. Phil.
1.16.
1 Timothy 6.4. St. Paul tells us of some that Preached Christ of contention,
Phil. 1.16. that is, they out of Envy and Pride, desired to be esteemed better
Preachers then he was. Nazianzen speaking of such as raised contentions in the
Church, attributes it to the Pride that was in them, Spirituales isti fastuosi
etc. These spiritual proud men, judging and condemning all but themselves, and
accounting of every thing too too lightly, Alsteel Chron. p. 520.
when they are so disposed withdraw themselves from our company, and refuse it
as ungodly and wicked: Luther showed too much of this, for when the Reformation
at Wittenberg was wrought in his absence by Carolostadius, he was so much
discontented, for that it was done without him, that the doubted not to approve
of those things, which (till then) he had disapproved and to disapprove what
before he had approved of, to the great disturbance of what was wrought. And a
chief cause of Theodotio's heresy was (as Austin relates) a greater care to
maintain his Reputation, Ad quod vult. Haer. 33.
than the Truth; For by the heat of persecution being driven to a denial of his
Savior, he thought it a disparagement to confess his fault, and therefore
labored to defend it by maintaining one denial with another: And thus some
there are that having possessed the World with a conceit of their abilityes,
study to defend what they have delivered, and maintain their opinions held, Non
quia vera, sed quia sua (says Austin) not because they are true, but because
theirs; fearing that otherwise they may suffer in their Reputation, which they
seek to maintain more then the Truth.

Anger and Envy is not seldom the cause of our Distractions; A froward man
(says Solomon) sowoth strife, Prove. 16.26. Therod. l. 1. c. 2.
Prove. 16.28. Arrius could not stifle his Envy against Alexander (who had
gotten the Bishopric from him,) but vents his fury against him, by accusing
his Innocent truths of error and absurdity, and calumninating of his writings:
Upon the like ground, Novatus made a faction against Cyprian. And diverse others
discontented Churchmen against their Bishops and Superiors. Eras. Epist. ad
Card. Mog.
Erasmus speaking of Luther's writings, says, that Many things he spoke, had
others said, had not bin complained of; the self same things are condemned as
Heretical in his writings, that in Augustines and Bernards Works, are read as
Orthodox, and regarded as pious sen^ences. Now if in case we had learned this
lesson of Self-denial, all this evil would be cured, and our Church not be
pestered with so many discords as at this day are amongst us.

I shall end this Use with that Observation which Pliny has of two Goats:
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. c. 50.
They meeting together upon a very narrow bridge, under which a very deep and
fierce stream glided, and seeing there was no going blindly back, nor passing
by, nor contending for Mastery, they were content, that one should lie down,
and the other pass over, to secure both their lives from death and danger:
These are not times to contend in, let us deny our selves for the common safety.

Lastly, Caution (...) ^^^^^ition; you have heard what our Duty is, we are to
be as One in our Master's business; now then,

First, Hearken you to that which the Apostle says, Romans 16.17, 18. Romans
16.17, 18. E^plained.
I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary
to the Doctrine which ye have Learned, and avoid them; for they that are such
serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, and by good words and
fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. The Apostle puts on the Person
of a Supplicant, not for his own profit, but ours: The Parties concerning whom
the Apostle uses this vehement entreaty, are the Authors of Dissension, such
as cause Divisions and Offenses; The Duty required of us, is, first to mark
them, have a jealous eye over them, and put as it were a mark on them, that you
may know them from others, and not be deceived: Secondly, avoid them as you
would a Serpent (says one) in your way, and poison in your meats. The Reason
of this Admonition, is twofold: First, they serve not Christ, but their own
Bellies, whatever they pretend of the service of God, they have base ends of
their own; they serve themselves, and their own turns, whatever becomes of the
service of Christ; knowing, that there is no fishing like to that in troubled
waters: Secondly, they deceive the hearts of the simple by fair words, As
Cheaters use to do, drawing on to play, and then cozen, by cogging of the Dye.

And this is that which our Savior requires of his Sheep, that they hear not
the voice of the Stranger, Joh. 10.5. they that are the Sheep of Christ, will
not follow such, but avoid them, and fly from them; Joh. 10.5.
lest they should be seduced by them; It is not safe to reason with such
seducers, 1 Timothy 6.5. If He might not, 1 Timothy 6.5. Sozom. lib. 7. c. 7.
much less a private Christian. We read in Ecclesiastical Story, of Placilla
the Empress, that when Theodosius Senior desired to conferr with Eunomius the
Heretic, she dissuaded him very earnestly, lest being perverted by his
speeches, he might fall into Heresy. As did Anastasius the second Bishop of
Rome, Jac. Reu de vit. Pantif. p. 42.
who whilst he sought to reduce Acacius the Heretic, was seduced by him.

Secondly, If differences happen to fall out amongst them, be not offended
thereat. Woe unto the World because of offenses (says Christ,) it must needs be
that offenses come, but woe be to that man by whom the offense comes, Mat.
18.7. Interpreted.
Mat. 18.7. there is a threatening, a condemning woe belongs to him that gives
the offense; yet there is a lamenting a condoling woe that belongs to them that
take the offense; and to these our Savior intends the former part of his
speech, Woe to the World because of offenses; that is, to the better part of the
World, who are apt to take offense, and to be turned out of the way of
holiness, by reason of such offense as is given.

Indeed, it is a great stumbling block to many, and the Devil takes great
advantage by it; to see God's Ministers to dissent and differ in Judgment, in
Affection, etc. And Woe to such as are the cause thereof; But yet, Woe to us if
we are easily scandalized at this, considering,

First, That we are foretold of it by our Savior, It must needs be that
offenses come; Needs in respect of man's frailty, Satan's malice: and God's
providence, (who knows well how to make a wholesome treacle of the poysonful
Viper) permits it should be so; And so St. Paul tells us that there must be
differences in Opinions, Errors, Heresies, that the approved may be known, 1
Cor. 11.19.
1 Cor. 11.19. The most wise God will keep his Children in breath, and exercise
their graces, and try his own by these fires of contradiction; yea, and purify
his truth (it may be) thereby: How many excellent truths have bin brought to
light (at least better cleared) by oppositions? Austin by occasion of the error
of Pelagius examined more diligently, and so propounded more clearly, the
truth in the points of Predestinntion and Free will than others his Ancients:
If Arrius had not held a Trinity of substances, with a Trinity of Persons; and
Sabellius an Unity of Persons, with an Unity of Essences, that Mystery of the
Trinity had not bin so clearly explained by those great Lights of the Church:
Wormwood is bitter to the taste, yet it is good to clear the eyes. We may say
with the Hebrew sentence, Nisi ipse elevasset lapidem, non fuisset inventa sub
eo haec margarita: If the stone had not bin lifted, the pearl had not bin found
under it: the striking together of the flint and steel, sends forth many
lightsome sparks to enkind'e many a shining Taper. Now he is willful that will
stumble at a stone, that he is before hand warned of.

Secondly, The best of God's servants in this life do but see in part, 1 Cor.
13.9.
and know in part: Whilst we live here, it cannot be expected that God's
Servants should agree in all points. Perfect Unity is not to be found in the
Church of God, till the number of all the Elect be fulfilled, and the Church be
come to her Perfection, Ephesians. 4.13. Ephesians. 4.13.
The light whereby we see in this State of mortality is very feeble and very
different, in regard of the Spirit's illumination, the Capacities of men and
their diligence in Study, Prayer, and other means of attaining knowledge.
Whence it is that Unity of opinion in the Church is very contingent, now
greater, now less, never absolute in all Particulars. Barnabas was a good man,
Acts 15.38, 39.
and yet S^. Paul saw more then he, and clearer then he; He saw how unfit it
was to take John and Mark with them, who before had given great offense by
departing from them as Pamphylia; This Barnabas saw not: Samuel was surprised
with a little sleep in the Temple, and did not answer God at the first and
second call, but ran to a dim-sighted Eli; but at the third Call he made
answer: So some Ministers who are the dear Children of God, may not perceive
God speaking in his lawful Magistrates; nor be able for a time to distinguish
betwixt God's voice and Man's, in things of an indifferent nature, which they
may in God's time, and then they will contend no more about them: I am now
going to a place said Grynaeus, Ubi Lutherus Calvino been convenit.
(on his death bed) where Calvi and Luther now agree well together. In Heaven
we shall agree, though not on Earth.

Thildly, The differences that are amongst God's Ministers concern not
Fundamentals, but Circumstantials, not the Primitive Articles of Faith, which
are necessarily to be believed; But concerning other Secundary points of
Theological conclusions, fit for discourse of a Divine. Indeed there are hose
in the Church that hold damnable tenets; but they are not of this Church.
Faithful Ministers differ not in matters of Faith, but in matters of opinion;
as about Ceremonies, Administrations, and the like. Such is their difference,
as was betwixt Paul and Bernabas before mentioned, not like that which was
betwixt Simon Peter and Simon Magus: And therefore let not any stumble, and
take offense at the Different Judgments that are amongst them, seeing all agree
in that which is necessarily required for thee to do; if thou would be saved.

Thirdly, If there be difference amongst God's Ministers, be not thou one of
those that make the breach wider; but endeavor, what lies in thee, that they
may accord. Hearers are many times too factiously inclined, as the Apostle
shows, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12, and 3, 3.
1 Cor. 1.11, 12. and 3.3. they made a choice to themselves, of this or that
Preacher, whom they would follow, with contempt of the rest, (albeit God's
faithful Servants); So is it amongst us at this day (as has been showed
before). Some affect those only that are of the same Judgment with them, (it
may be Episcoparian, or Independent, or Presbyterian, for so now we use to
distinguish them) albeit all teach the same fundamental tru^hs, and the same
Christ; and those that are of another Judgment than they are of, they utterly
dislike, and will not afford them the hearing: Others affect those only that
are most eminent for gifts, with a neglect, yea, a contempt of others; As that
Frenchman of whom Zanchy speaks, who being advised sometimes to hear Mr. Viret
as well as Mr. Calvin, answered, that if St. Paul himself should be upon the
earth, and preach at the same time when Mr. Calvin preached, he would not leave
him to hear Paul. It is true, Christians may acknowledge a difference of Gifts
in Teachers, and prefer one before another, and esteem best of that Ministry by
which he has received most good, and got most profit; yet ought we to esteem
all that are good; hear all as occasion is offered; reverence all; and bless
God for all.

This factious disposition in the Hearers of the Word, has been a great cause
of dissension amongst Ministers; for when People have engaged their affections
for their Pastors, and have swelled one against another, in their quarrel (as
the Apostle intimates by that speech of his, they are apt to do, 1 Cor. 4.6.
Joh. 3.26.
1 Cor. 4.6.) then they come and endeavor to engage their Teachers, for their
Affections: You have an Instance of this, Joh. 3.26. John's Disciples fall a
daring of Christ's Disciples, about purifying, and (as it seem^) receiving the
foyl, they come to John, and would engage him in the quarrel, and incense him
against Christ; telling him, that he erected up a Ministry, and baptized
likewise, and that all men followed after him. Thus it was, and thus it will
be, and hence it comes to pass (oftentimes) that discord and dissension is
raised betwixt those Ministers, who otherwise would live and love as Brethren:
Too too apt are we to claw this Itch of our People, and so it soon breaks forth
into a Blyster. And thus, I have acquainted you with what concerns you, as well
as with that that concerns our selves, for the preventing of discords and
contentions amongst us, and breeding of Unity. Oh that these things were
thought upon, and made the right use of! Look upon Thieves and Murderers, they
are at peace amongst themselves; and shall not we? Shall they go with one heart
about their Master's work, and we with a divided heart about God's work? Shall
they go more friendly to Hell than we to Heaven? that were a shame for us: To
conclude, Ezekiel. 37.1.
we read Ezekiel. 37.1. in that Vision of dry bones, that bone lay from bone
scattered, till the Spirit did blow on them, and then bone came to bone, and
stood up, and were a mighty Army. Bone has been from bone a long time; Oh that
the Spirit of Wisdom and Judgment were given to us, (which is promised to be
given under the Gospel) that we might be united in one! then we should be
enabled to join our strength against the common Adversary, and God should have
the Glory. We have done with the Persons expostulated with, and with the Name
given to God's Ministers, and Number: Now we come to take notice of the Person
expostulating with them.

He said. Text
]

Plutarch reports, in the life of Numa, that he was always with the Goddess
Ageria; And many other Heathens, that we read of, used to have familiar parley
with their Gods and Goddesses; as Herodotus amongst the Bythinians; Endymion
amongst the Arcadians; and so others: Here we see what familiarity there is
betwixt the true God, and his Servants, the Ministers of the Word; he does
single them out from the rest, and talk familiarly with them, and acquaint them
with his purpose and intent. For this is that which is imported by the Owner's
parley with the Dresser, about this Fig Tree; That is the Note,

God makes known his mind unto his Ministers, and acquaints them, in a familiar
manner, with his intents and purposes. He makes them acquainted with his mind,
(as concerning his proceedings with his Church and People). He acquaints them
with his grievances; makes known unto them his purposes and Intentions, what he
is minded to do in the case. Hear what the Prophet Amos speaks to this point;
Amos 3.7. Explained.
Surely the Lord will do nothing but he reveals his Secret to his Servants,
the Prophet, Amos 3.7. He will do nothing; non faciet verbum, he will not do a
word; he will do no such thing as was before spoken of, in the former verse; no
evil of Affliction, Pain, or Punishment, will he inflict on his Church, but he
makes it first known to his Servants, and reveals (his Secret) (...), as
Theodocio renders it and (as it may well be rendered, Sedh.
says Drusius) his Counsel; for the Hebrew word signifies as well Counsel as
Secret, (albeit most Expositors read Secret rather than Counsel). Not as if
God revealed all, that he does in Heaven, unto them; But it is to be understood
of things done on Earth (says Hierom). Nor yet is it to be understood of all
things that God has done in the World, Par. com. in loc.
from the Creation (says Pareus) but especially to be understood of
Punishments inflicted, (as before was noted) the purpose and decree of God to
punish a people for sin, is his Secret; and this he evermore reveals. Thus,
before he brought the Flood on the old World, he revealed his mind to Noah,
Genesis 6.13. Before he sent Fire and Brimstone, Genesis 6.13.
to consume the Cities in the plain, he revealed it to Abraham, and then to
Lot, Genesis 18.17. and 19.12, 13. Genesis 18.17. and 19.12.13. Exodus 3.19. Jon. 1.2.
and 4.10.
Before he executed his Judgments on Pharaoh and his People, he revealed his
mind to Moses and Aaron, Exodus 3.19. Before he would destroy Nineve, Jonah
shall be acquainted with his mind, Jon. 1.2. and so for the sparing of it, cap.
4.10. It was God's usual manner to single these out, and acquaint them with
what he was about to do.

And yet it may not be thought, that this is the only Secret that God reveals
unto his Servants the Ministers; for there are other supernatural Secrets, such
Secrets as no man can attain unto the Knowledge of, unless it be revealed unto
him of God, such are those n^ysteries of Religion, 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Timothy 3.16.
These God is pleased to make known unto his Servants, the Ministers of the New
Testament, 1 Cor. 2.12, 16. Interpreted
and of these Secrets the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have the Spirit of
God, that we may freely know the things that are of God; And again ver. 16. Who
has known the mind of the Lord that he may instruct him? But we have the mind
of Christ: as if he should have said, albeit no man can perfectly know the
Counsels and mind of God, Estius in loc.
yet God is pleased to reveal to us (that are his Ministers and Apostles) by
his Spirit of Revelation, the mind of Christ in these matters; and so he
removes a tacit Objection, that might be made against their preaching of
spiritual matters; If none know them, why do you preach of them? Yes, we know
them, that we may make them known unto the Church of God. Before we render you
the Reason, it will not be amiss to answer a Scruple or two: It may be
questioned,

Are these Dressers the only men that are acquainted with God's Secrets? 1.
Ps. 25.14. Dan. 2.28. Genesis 4.21. Number. 22.9.
Does not the Scripture tell us, that the Secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him? Psalm. 25.14. yea, and sometimes with them that fear him not, Dan.
2.28. So to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.1.2. So to Balaam, Numb. 22.9.

It does so: Resp.
and it cannot be denied, but that others, as well as they, are acquainted with
them, but the ordinary outw^rd means, whereby the Godly become therewith
acquainted, is by their Ministry; neither Pharaoh, nor Nebuchadnezar knew that
Secret, till God's Servants revealed it.

Secondly, To the wicked sometimes God is pleased to reveal his mind, but then
it is either for their conviction and condemnation, or else for the Churches
confirmation; as appears by that we read, Judge. 7.13.

Does God reveal to these all that he intends to do? Quaest. 2.
Is not much of his Will and Counsel concealed from them?

No meet and mortal Creature was ever made privy to the whole Counsel of the
Highest, Resp. Mat. 24.36.
no not the Angels of Heaven, Mat. 24.36.

Secondly, All that God is ple^sed to make known, is not made known to any one
man, but so much of his Counsel as is fitting for him to know: the best know
but in part. The Familiarity that God had with Elisha was great, and yet the
Shunamite's loss was concealed from him, which he was not ashamed to consesse,
2 King. 4.27. Nathan was deceived, 2 King. 4.27. 1 Samuel 7.3.
in his approving of David's purpose to build God an House, 2 Samuel 7.3. the
Spirit of Prophesy rests not always on the Prophets.

Thirdly, Nor does God reveal to All alike, That may be revealed to a Babe or
Suckling, which is concealed from the more judicious. Elisha, the Servant, knew
something that was hid from Elijah, his Master, even whilst Elijah was upon the
very threshold of Heaven, he knew not that God had revealed his departure to
Elisha; and thence it was that be would so gladly have shaken him off at
Gilgal, at Bethel, and at Jericho, 2 King. 2.2, 3. And this God does, for two
Principal Reasons; First, to maintain his own Prerogative; And, Secondly, 2
King. 2.2, 3. 2 Cor. 12.7.
For his Servants Humiliation, lest they should be exalted above measure
through abundance of Revelations. In natural Revelations, the greater Wit, and
deeper Judgment, carries it; but in divine, in the Revelations of God, the
favor of his choice swaies all, and not the power of our Apprehensions.

Let me now give you the Grounds or Reasons of our proposed Doctrine before I
put it to Use.

One Reason, why God makes known his mind unto his Dressers, concerning his
proceedings with his People, We are made (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 4.13. 1
Cor. 4.13. Trap. in loc.
as the filth of the World, or (as the Word may be rendered) the Sweepings of
the World, or as the dirt that is scraped (says a good Expositor) from off the
Pavement thereof, (and we are the off scouring of all things to this day; The
Dung-cart (says another) that goes through the City, into which every one
brings and casts his filth: But albeit they are thus in the World's eye, yet
they are otherwise in God's; they are a sweet savor unto him. 1 Cor. 2.16.
And God is pleased to give the World to understand, by this his dealing with
them, that they are both of his Court and Council.

Secondly, These Dressers are near to God, they are his Secretaries, and
evermore at his Elbow, (as we use to say of some Attendants upon great
Personages,) they are his Chaplains in Ordinary and have more frequent converse
with him than other men As the Lord lives, 1 King. 18.15.
before whom I stand (says the Prophet Elijah to Obadiah, 1 King. 18.15. I
call you not servants (says our Savior to his Disciples); for the servant
indeed does not always know what the Master does, but I have called you
Friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, Joh. 15.15. Haec pro
amicitia nostra non occultavi. Tiber. John 21.20. Colos. 2.3. Amb. in Psalm. 118.
I have made known unto you: John 15.15. that is, all things requisite to your
Salvation, I have imparted to you, as to my Friends. And Friends (as you know)
will discover their secrets unto their Friends: yea, they are Bosome-Friends,
as St. John was, who leaned upon Christ's breast, John 21.20. Now the bosom of
Christ is the treasure of Wisdom, that wherein all the treasure of Wisdom and
Knowledge lay hid: Those breasts (says Ambrose) did John suck, those profound
Mysteryes and Secrets wherewith his Writings are more enriched, than the
Writings of any other of the Apostles (says Beda). Had he not had that free
access to Christ's breasts, Beda in Evang. Joh.
he had not bin acquainted with those Secrets: Those hidden, and Heavenly
Mysteryes, made known to him above the rest; he had out of the bosom of Jesus:
So Gods Ministers, having more converse with God then other; and being his
Friends and bosom Friends; cannot but be acquainted with more of the mind, and
will of God then others ordinarily are.

Thirdly, God acquaints his Ministers with his mind, that they may make known
to others what He makes known to them. The Visible Sun casts a more Radiant
and bright Beam upon Pearl or Glass, that reflecteth it again, then it does
upon gross and obscure bodies, that dead the Rays thereof: So the Sun of
Righteousness casts the fairest luster upon that Calling, Jer. 36.2, -- 7.
which most of all illustrateth his glory. Thus God wills Jeremiah to take a
Role of a Book, and write therein all the words that he told him, concerning
Israel and Judah, and acquaint them therewith; which he did accordingly, Jer.
36.2, -- 7. The like did Ezekiel, Cap. 3.17. so the rest of the Prophets. St.
Paul shamed not to declare unto the Church of Ephesus the whole Counsel of God,
Ezekiel. 3.17. Act. 20.26, 27. Verse. 30. Verse. 35.
Acts 20.26, 27. He ceased not to warn them Night and Day with tears, verse.
30. showed them all things that were necessary for them to know, verse. 35. Who
is so fit to make known the Kings mind, as the King's Ambassador?

Fourthly, God acquaints these especially with his mind, concerning his Vines
and Figg-Trees, for that they are tender hearted, and are loath with Hagar to
see the death and ruin of any Ismael. Genesis 21.16.
God is willing to be prevented; He had rather use the pruning book, then the
Axe; and therefore expostulates with his Dresser, that he might be moved and
entreated to be sparing in the execution of his Judgments. And this was one
chief reason why he had parley with the Dresser about this Fig Tree; and
acquainted him with his purpose before he struck the Stroke, that the Dresser
might get upon it (as it were) and save it from the Axe, as Zacheus did the
wild Fig Tree which grew on the way-side (whereon he climbed) and in so doing,
preserved it from the curse, which other barren Figg-Trees met with: Christ
could not curse it, when he saw such fruit upon it, as he was; Thus of the
Reasons: Now for the Use.

Moses after he had bin in the Mount with God, Exodus 34.29.
Exodus 34.29. To be with our selves (says one) is to be in ill Company; To
converse with the World, leaves filth and soil upon us (as when we are amongst
Collier) but to converse with God, which our Calling requires, leaves a sweet
smell of Heaven behind; and a dye and color of another World which cannot be
rubbed off. To hear a Minister discourse of the Earth, and things Earthly, to
talk loosely and carnally, gives great cause of suspicion that such a one is
very seldom in converse with God, at least, has not bin lately with him; Here
is a Veil indeed before the face that should shine; but whether the face of
such, or vail of such, is most hated of God, is questionable.

them, and be directed by them in the things of God.

We are all sick of an Athenian humor, and doat on nothing more then secrets,
and are very inquisitive after the knowledge of S^ate affairs: Resort unto
your faithful Pastors and Dressers, advise with them, they can, and will
acquaint you with such secrets, as no wit of man is able to find out; no
affoardment of Nature, no Mystery of Art, no Secretary of State can reveal and
make known unto you: Christ that had it from his Father, has revealed it unto
them, that they might discover it unto you. We speak the wisdom of God in a
Mystery (says the Apostle) even the hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8.
which none of the Princes of the World knew: this is that which God is pleased
to make known by our Ministry.

In all our doubts about soul affairs, resort to them for Resolution; Without
controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16.
great is the mystery of godliness (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.16.) the
mystery of godliness should be without controversy, yet a World of
controversies have risen about it, many of which every Christian is not bound
to trouble himself withal (for without all controversy, there are many in
Heaven that never studied controversies) notwithstanding, there is none that
has a care to know God's will, but shall have occasion to question much about
what they read and hear (as did the disciples often). And it is very necessary
to seek for Resolution in such cases: Mar. 4.10, and 7, 17, and 10, 10. Luk,
3.10, 14. Act. 8.34. 1 Cor. 2.16. Isa. 21.11, 12.
Now, to whom shall we go but unto such as God has revealed himself unto? Who
has known the mind of the Lord, that he might instruct him? But we have the
mind of Christ.

In matters of Danger (as well as Doubt) advise with these, and take warning
from them: Watchman, what of the Night, Watchman, what of the Night? they can
tell you; the morning comes, and also the night, and they will rightly advise
you: If you will enquire indeed, enquire you, Return and come, Isa. 21.11, 12.
These stand upon the Watchtower, and questionless (if they be not asleep) see
more then those that stand below in the Valley. 1 King. 18.44.
Had any other then Elijah seen from Carmel a Cloud arising about an hands
breadth, they could not have warned of a storm coming, but the finest tempers
are most sensible of change of weather.

But Ministers have not such certain knowledge of the mind of God, as formerly
the Prophets and Apostles had;

It is true, that in these days we have not that open access to God which the
Prophets had, Peter, a more sure word, namely, the holy Scriptures given by
inspiration of God; 1 Per. 1 19. 2 Timothy 3.16.
And these show what sins do most offend God, and soonest pull down Vengance
from God: And in particular, what sins they are that cause God to punish with
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence: On which ground many of God's Ministers
observing the sins of this Nation, foretold that which we have felt to our
cost, albeit they were but little regarded; which had they bin, we should not
have sustained (or gained) this loss (as St. Paul said to the Centurion, Acts
27.21.) And yet they tell us, Acts 27.21.
that unless we Repent of our evil ways, heavier things will befall us, then
yet have done. One woe is past, Rev. 9.12.
but two woes more there are to come, for God will not be out-mastered. Make
not a mock at their warnings; (as the old World did at Noah's, and Lot's Friends
at his): A friend knows by the very looks and gesture of his Friend; Numb.
16.46. Veritas loquendi grande praesagit malum. Lactan. Instir. l. 4. c. 26.
Vives de cause. Artic. corrupt. lib. 1. Exodus 10.7. Jer. 11.7, 19, 21.
what a stranger or an enemy knows, but by his actions: So it was with Moses,
Numb. 16.46. And so it is with God's faithful Ministers, out of the
acquaintance that they have with their Masters proceedings, they know that evil
is intended against us. I know what Lactantius spoke of his times, our times
have verified, Truth does presage great evil to the speaker; And that of Vives
is most true* Men dare not speak what you are bound to know. It is dangerous to
teach what is honest to learn if they speak truth to this wicked Generation,
they must look to be questioned for their Liberties (it may be lives) as other
of Gods Prophets have bin before them. If they fore^ell Judgments they shall be
accused, as the Authors of them, Exodus 10.7. As if the bathing of the Ducks in
a Pond, were the cause of that fowl weather which follows after.

And hence it is, that some timorous Watchmen become Consonants, their people
are as the Vowels, whose sound they follow. But this may not be. When the
people would needs go up, Moses would not stir a foot, Numb. 14.42.
for that the Cloud stirred not; nor may we consent where the word warrants
not. Should we approve your wicked ways, and sinful undertakings, or not
reprove them; Judgment would be never the further off from us nor you, but come
on more swiftly: Hear a Story.

There was a City which stood in some f^ar of a Neighboring Enemy; It was
often given out, to the terror o^ the Citizens, that the Enemy was at hand, but
it proved not so; whereupon Command was given upon pain of death, that none
should dare to speak any more in that kind, and raise up such rumors as the
approach of an enemy: Not long after, the Enemy came indeed; besieged,
assaulted, and sacked the Town; And this Epitaph was made upon the Ruins of it,
Here stood a Town that was destroyed with silence. When people say to their
Prophets, Prophecy not unto us, Mic. 2.6.
they are near to ruin: It is dangerous when a City is in hazard to tie up
the Alarm Bell; to be regardless of the watchmans warnings, and take no notice
of the firing of their Beacons: Happy we, if we would take warning: Proceed we
now from the Persons between whom the Expostulation was, to the subject matter
or substance of it.

Behold, these three years I come seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree and find
none: Text.
Cut it down, Why cumbers it the ground?

Wherein we have first an Accusation, or sad complaint of it; Secondly, a
Commination, or severe sentence denounced against it.

In the former, the Complaint, we may take notice, First, of the Manner,
Secondly, of the Matter thereof.

The manner of it intimated in that Adverb of Demonstration, or note of
Observation; (...).
Behold, which calls for special regard: for wherever we find it (and we find
it frequently in Scripture at least six hundred times, if some be not mistaken
in the account) it is ever placed, before matters of great weight and moment,
very good or very ill. Some resemble it to a Beacon set on a Hill, to give
warning to the Country: It is like a Sea-mark (say others) to direct the sayler
how to steer, and which way to direct his course, that he may safely arive at
the harbor; Holy Bernard calls it Notam stelliferam; a starry-note; a note
that does point out some rare matter, like a Hand, or S^arr in the Margent of a
Book, pointing and directing to some remarkable passage, and of great
consequence; or, as the Starr which at the Birth of Christ stood over the
House, and pointed to the wise men, where the Babe was: Others resemble it to
John the Baptist, evermore the Van-currer of some excellent matter. It is used
in three cases (principally), First, when some admirable thing, and of great
note is presented to the Eye, as, Joh. 1.47, and 19, 5.
John 1.47, and 19, 5. The strangest sight indeed that ever mortal Eye beheld!
This is Ecce Indicantis, an Eye Ecce.

Secondly, When some remarkable matter is commended to the Ear, which with the
bodily Eye cannot be beheld, as, Isa. 7.14. Mat. 13.3. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
Isa. 7.14. Math. 13.3. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. this is Ecce Annunciantis, an Ear
Ecce.

Thirdly, It sometimes implies both these, and calls on us, for a serious
attention, and consideration and due regard of what is seen and heard, as,
Math. 21.5. this is Ecce Meditantis, Math. 21.5.
an Heart Ecce. And so it has a double work, the one without doors, preparing
the Ear to hear, or the Eye to see, what is said, or done, and presented to
one, or both: as, John 19.27. Luke 2.10, 11. Lament. 1.22. 1 John 3.1. Revel.
1.7.
John 19.27. The other within doors, stirring up the affections, as the matter
shall require, either to Joy, and Rejoicing, as, Luke 2.10, 11. Or to sorrow,
as, Lament. 1.22. Or to Love, as, 1 John. 3.1. Or to Fear, as, Revel. 1.7. And
in this la^ter sense, it is here (in my Text) to be taken. Behold this
Fig Tree, so as to lay to heart, the wrong I suffer by its barrenness; Look
upon it, hear what I will say of it, and regard it well: And this exposition of
the Word is given in Scirpture, Math. 6.36. Behold the Ravens; Mat. 6.26. Luke
12.24.
interpreted by St. Luke, Cap. 12.24. Consider the Ravens. In a word; It is but
a word, and yet the Epitome of that whole sentence, Let him that has ears to
hear, hear: Let him that has Eyes to see, see: Let him that has any fear of
God before his Eyes, Behold, and take special regard of what is delivered. From
hence we may take out this general Lesson.

Great attention and regard is to be given to matters weighty, Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2.
Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2. when Moses his Doctrine (weighty and winning) dropps as the
Rain, and his speech distills as the dew, that it may soak and sink, and
showers on the herbs, then both Heaven and Earth, Prove. 8.6, 8.
must give ear and hearken: So, Prove. 8.6. I will speak of excellent things,
etc. Therefore, hearken and give ear. Indeed all the words of Gods mouth are
excellent (as Solomon in the same Chapter speaks) and highly to be regarded,
but some things are of special concernment, which must especially be regarded
by us: And to things of that nature, we are in a special manner incited in
Scripture, by two words especially; the one Initial, or in the beginning of a
speech, which is this in my Text, Behold, the other final at the end of a
saying or sentence, which is Selah; used frequently in the Psalms, albeit else
no where, but once or twice in Habakkuck, Hab. 3.3, 9.
Cap. 3.3, 9. But wherever we read it, it requires a stay, stop, or pausing
time to consider seriously on the foregoing matter; as if he should say, Mind
that.

The usual Incitement in the preaching of the Word, used by Prophets, Apostles,
and the Servants of God, is, Hear, Hearken, Attend, Give ear, etc. as appears
by diverse Scriptures both in the old Testament, Psalm. 45.10, and 49.1. Isal.
1.2, and 7, 13, and 46, 3, and 51, 1. Jer. 2.4, and 7, 2. Hos. 4.1, and 5, 1.
Joel. 1.2. Amos 3.1, and 4.1, and 5.1. Mich. 1.2, and 3, 1, 9. And in the New,
Acts 2.14, and 15, 13. Jam. 2.5. And our blessed Savior did both begin and end
his Sermons, calling for Attention, as, Mark 4.9, 23, and 7.14.
Mark 4.9, 23, and 7, 14.

This is a point that is very useful, and may very well be pressed; This is a
people that come nigh me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; Or
as St. Matthew has it, Math. 13.15. This Peoples heart is waxen gross, Isa.
29.13. Math. 13.15.
and their ears are dull of hearing; There is a mavelous unaptnesse and
untowardnesse in the very best, to attend to that which is of greatest
concernment (and much more in the worst): that Judgment is upon many that is
mentioned, Math. 13.13, 14. Great need we have of a Cynthius to pull us by the
ears, Math. 13.13, 14.
and awaken us: Many a drowsy Hearer sits before us, who (as singing-men use,
to keep time by moving of the hand, so do these) seem to note every Observation
with the nodding of the head: Or, if they be awake, it is at the relation of
some matters of less moment. Erasmus has a relation, Deumbra Asini, delivered
out of Demosthenes the Orator, who discoursing of matters serious, his
Auditors fell most of them asleep: he to awake them, told them that he had a
pretty Story for them. At which news, they suddenly started up: He tells them
of a young man that hired an Ass to carry some Commodities for him from Athens
to Megara, traveling in his journey in the heat of the Day, he couched under
the Ass to take the benefit of his shadow; The Muletor who let him the Ass,
denied him that benefit, saying, that he let him the Beast to bear his
burden, but he let him not the shadow of the Beast; the young man replied
that he would have that benefit by his hiring: the difference was great, so
that they grew from Words to Blows; And there, whilst all were gaping on
Demosthenes, the Orator brake off his speech; The Auditory desired him to go
on with his Story, that they might hear the issue: The Orator answered them,
See what wise People you are, I told you of wholesome and profitable
Observations, and all that that while you were careless; and, now I tell you
of trifles, of the shadow of an Ass, you are all very Attentive. Surely this
was the Reason why the Prophet Esaias personated a Balladsinger, Isa. 5.1. He
would sing his Hearers a song, Isa. 5.1.
that thereby he might provoke them to mind, and attend to such matters as were
weighty. And if we propound unto you some Fables, or things feigned, it is to
cause you to attend to truth's weighty, which you shall find in the moral of it.

so Christ be preached, let us seemingly be but as fools and Asses in your
esteem, Phil. 1, 18.
so we may cause you to attend and give regard to what is said. A cold People
makes a cold Preacher; a dull Auditory, a dull Ministry: I might use many
Motives to quicken your attentions, but (having spoken more largely of the
point in another Text,) I intend not now to insist upon it; I shall only
commend unto you the practice of Constantine the Great, who (as Eusebius tells
us) after long standing at a disputation concerning divine matters; Eusebius. de
vit. Can. l. 4. c. 33.
he was requested by those Divines that disputed before him, that he would be
pleased to sit down, and take his ease; he answered, Nefas est habitis
disputationibus de Deo, etc. he judged it to be an impious thing, whilst
disputations concerning God were held, to sit down and hear negligently: What
think you then of those that sit down to sleep, 1 Samuel 3.3.
and settle them to sloth? Good Samuel may sometimes be overtaken with a
slumbering fit, but he is soon awaked. The Ears of them that hear shall
hearken, says the Prophet Isa. 32.3. and Act. 16.14. Isa. 32.3. Act. 16.14.
God opened the heart of Lydia, and she attended on what was spoken, and till
God do the one, we shall never do the other. But I shall carry this Point no
further: Now more Particularly.

Behold.] What? That which God complains of, the Barrenness of this Figg.
Tree, i. e. the unfruitfulnesse of the Jewish Nation, (in the Letter) but
spiritually, of such as profess Christ in the Church: Observe (in General),

Sin may not be looked upon with a regardless eye, God's complaints are not to
be slighted, or past over regardlesly; It must be beheld, and so, as that the
Heart be deeply affected with the sight of it, and what we hear concerning it.

This is commanded. Ezekiel. 6.11. Say, Eze. 6.11. and 21.6.
Alas! for all the Abominations of of the House of Israel, and 21.6. Sigh
therefore thou Son of Man (says God) with the breaking of thy Loins, and with
bitterness sigh, before their eyes: Such a sighing God requires, as may break
the girdle, and this with bitterness, and before the eyes of the People too;
that they might be brought to bitter sighing, for their provocations spoken of
in the Chapter before, and for the Judgments that should continually follow, 2
Pet. 2.8. Isa. 24.16. Ps 44.15.16. and 69.9. and 119.53.136. 2 King. 19.
which shall cause them bitterly to sigh, for that they did not sigh in time.
The sighing of the Minister may cause sighing in the people, as Origen's
weeping did (as formerly was said).

And this is commended in the Servants of God, who have laid to heart the sins
of others (as well as their own), so as to be deeply affected therewith: 1.
Ezra. 9.2, -- 6. Isa 16.9. and 24.16. Jer. 9 1. and 4.19. and 13.17. Romans 9 2.
Phil. 3.18. 2 Cor. 2.4.
So did Lot with the sins of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. he vexed and grieved to
see God to be dishonored by them; what he beheld with his Eye, and what he
beheld with his Ear, that he beheld with his Soul, and was not regardlesse of
it: So David, read Psalm. 44.15, 16. and 69.9. and 119.53, 136. So Hezekiah, 2
King. 19.1. So Ezra, cap. 9.2, -- 6. So Jeremiah, 9.1. and 4.19. and 13.17. So
Paul Romans 9.2. Phil. 3.18. and 2 Cor. 2.4. with many tears, and much anguish of
heart, he wrote to the Corinthians about the incestuous Person, whom they
connived at: And our blessed Savior himself, Luke 19.41. Luke 19.41.
When have but two clear Records in Scripture of Christ's weeping, and both in
respect of Sin, Joh. 11.39. and Luke 19.41. and that was for the sins of us,
not for his own, for he had none.

Shall I render you the Reasons hereof; First then, Isa. 1.24.
In respect of God, forasmuch as he is much wronged, grieved, and dishonored
by sin; It is loathsome grievous, injurious, unto him; A breach of his Law; a
defacing of his Image; a defying him to his face; Treason, Rebellion, against
him: Now what Son canindure to see his Father wronged, abused, and not stand
out in his Father's defense? Did not Nature so work in that dumb Son of
Croesus, that when he saw one ready to slay his Father, it brake the strings of
his tongue, and caused him to cry out, Oh man, Do not kill Croesus! And will
not Grace prevail much more in us? If we love God (as we profess), we cannot
be regardless of his Dishonor, Psalm. 69 9. Psalm. 69.9.


Secondly, In respect of Others; the Land in general. Does not Sin cause a
whole Land to mourn, Hos 4.3. Jer. 23.10.
Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. (especially, Swearing), because of Oaths (says Jeremiah) the
Land mourns. Then the Sinner in particular; Should we see one to rend and
tear himself; gash and wound his carcass; pull out his own bowels; leap into a
fiery Furnace; could we do any less then pity such a one, mourn for him,
lament his sad condition? now, What do wilful Sinners other? Is not every sin
the wounding of the Soul? Is it not a piling up of Faggots, casting another
shovel full of brimstone into the Flame? And then Sinners themselves leap in
after this. Who can look on this sad Spectacle with a careless eye? We often
endeavor to deterr young men from sinning, upon this Motive; You Will grieve your
friends, break your Parents heart, undo your selves; I grieve for you with my
heart: So would we do, if we did as we ought. Psalm. 119.158.
I beheld the Transgressors and was grieved, Psalm. 119.158.

Thirdly, In regard of our selves; For if we be regardlesse of sin, when we see
it or hear it we are in danger to be infected by it: However, it does enfeoffe
us in the sin, 1 Cor. 5.2.
(as the Corinthians for not mourning for that Incest committed,) and not only
so, bu^ in the Punishment too, Ezekiel. 9.
Ezekiel. 9. but if we grieve, it is a Testimony of our Love to God; Love to Man;
and Love to our own Souls.



Psalm. 119.53.
and Sexes? Psalm. 119.53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy Law (says David); and yet more, Rivers of tears run
down mine eyes because they keep not thy Law ver. 136. Ver. 136.
which, however some of the Ancient, (as Hilary, Ambrose, Angustine) yea, and
some of our Modern Writers likewise, understand it to be spoken of his own
eyes, in regard of the transgression of them, and their offense; yet it is
generally understood, and ordinarily referred to Men, because they keep not
God's Law, but break it daily. A Law, so righteous, holy, and good, and the Law
of so great and gracious a God; this opened the fluces of his eyes, and sent
forth a swift Current of Tears. What would he have done (think you) had he
lived in these days; to have heard our Oaths and Blasphemies, and beheld our
sinful and wicked conversation? Surely, he would have wept an Ocean. Our Times
call for, not only a David's Eye, but a Jeremiah's Head, to weep day and night
for the wickedness thereof: Old men contemn God; Young men provoak God; All
men offend God; yet few or none are affected in the Cause of God. Complaining
times (indeed) these are, the Poor complain of the Rich, that they are too
cruel; The Rich, of the Poor, that they are unthankful: The Buyer complains of
the Seller, that he is deceitful; the Seller of the Buyer, that he is
unconscionable: The Borrower of the Lend^r, that he is uncharitable; the Lender
of the Borrower, that he is forgetful. Thus one complains of another, whilst
God complains of all; yet we can hear his complaints without remorse; may more,
we can be merry when he mourns and grieves. It was once sad to see in Israel at
once, a weeping Savior, and a deriding City, Luke 19.41. How is it now (think
you) to hear a God complaining, Luke 19.41.
and a Nation mocking and persisting in sin, Have you no regard, all you that
pass by, Lam. 1.12. albeit all pass by with a regardlesse eye, and will not
Behold, yet those that stand betwixt the Porch and the Altar should have
regard. Lamen^. ^.12.
It is to the Dresser that the Vinitor does address himself, and make his
grievance known, as you find in my Text, [Then said He to the Dresser, Behold,]
What the grievance is that must be beheld, is in the next place to be
considered.

These three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, Text.
and find none.]

The Gravamen, or fault complained of, is specified to be the Sterility and
Barrenness of the Fig Tree; He complains not of the Imperfection or Paucity
of Fruit, but of the Nullity, He found none.] And this is aggravated.

First, From the Time of standing (three years), time enough to Root and
Settle: the Husbandman had not bin hasty with it, but long borne, and expected
Fruit from it.

Secondly, From the means affoarded to it, and pains bestowed on it, to
further the fruitfulness thereof; employed in these words, [I come seeking
Fruit on this Figg-Tree] He had not bin wanting to it, it was a well-manured
Tree, his eye had bin ever on it, it grew in his own Vineyard, yet not a Figg
to be found on it. We will begin with the Grievance or fault complained of, the
barreness of the Fig Tree.

And find none. Text.


It seems by this that it was a harmless Tree; none of those that bare such
Figgs as Jeremiah spoke of, Jer. 24.8.
Ficos valde malos, Figgs, so bitter that none could eat, Such fruit was not
hid under the leaves thereof. Had such fruit grown upon it; it may be, we
would conceive that, it deservingly might be deemed to the Axe and fire; but
being only barren, it might be rather born withal. But we are to know that,

Barrenness in a Fig Tree is fault enough.

Had it bin a Thorn or Bramble, the Husbandman would never have expected Figgs
from it; For no man gathers Grapes of Thorns, or Figgs of Thistles, but being
a Fig Tree (and so fitted for Fruit) and a planted Fig Tree (as before has
bin showed) and so qualified for bearing of good Fruit; just cause there was to
complain of its barrenness.

If we peruse the Scriptures, we shall find; First, many sad complaints made by
God against his People, for their very Omissions. Judah is complained of, and
branded for their not serving of God, Mal. 3.18. Eccles. 9.2. Isa. 46.7. Aug.
1.2. Eccles. 4.1. 1. Cor. 5.2. Amos 6.6. Rom 3.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 14.2, 3.
Mal. 3.18. and not sacrificing is taxed, as well as Profane service, Eccles.
9.2. The People of God are blamed for not stirring up themselves to take hold
on God, Isa. 46.7. and for not building of God's House, Hag. 1.2. The Oppressed
had no Comforter, Eccles. 4.1. The Corinthians are blamed for not mourning. and
for neglecting due censure of the incestuous Person, 1 Cor. 5.2. Scripture is
full of such complaints: There is none that does good, the fear of the Lord is
not before their eyes. Such like querulous notes do abound.

And Secondly, For such like Neglects and Omissions, sad threatenings are
frequently denounced against a People. He that brought not the offerings of the
Lord in the appointed season, Numb. 9.13. Judge. 5.23. Jer. 10.25, and 48.10.
should be cut off, etc. Numb. 9.13. Meroz must be cursed for not helping the
Lord against the Mighty, Judge. 5.23. Yea, whole Nations are threatened for not
calling on Gods Name, Jer. 10.25. Let him be who he will be He is liable to the
curse that does the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10.

Thirdly, For very Omissions men have bin not only threatened, but punished
severely; As may appear in sundry Instances.

It was the not believing of God that kept Moses from entering into Canaan,
Numb. 20.12. The not Circumcising of his Son, Numb. 20.12. Exodus 4.24, 25, 1.
Sam. 3.13. 1. Sam. 15.8. Deuteronomy. 23.4. Mat. 22.12, 13. Math. 25.10, 11. Verse. 25.
Verse. 41. Mat. 3.10, and 7, 13.
had like to have cost him his life, Exodus 4.24.25. Eli's not reproving his
Sons, lost him the Priesthood, 1 Samuel 3.13. and the not slaying of Agag that
lost Saul his Crown, 1 Samuel 15.8. Moab and Ammon were bastardized and banished
the Sanctuary to the tenth generation for an Omission, because they met not
Gods Israel with bread and water in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 23.4. It was the
want of a wedding Garment that exclused the Guest, from the wedding Supper,
Math. 22.12, 13. For want of Oil, the foolish Virgins could not enter with the
Bridegroom into the Bride-chamber, Math. 25.10, 11. And the not employing of
his Masters Talent, that cast the evil Servant into fetters, Math. 25.25. and
the not Visiting, Clothing, Feeding of Christ's members, that will condemn the
World, Math. 25.41. In a word, every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit,
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire, Math. 3.10, and 7, 19.

Positive Law, which commands the contrary: we are not only commanded by God,
to abstain from evil, but commanded to do good; Every Negative includes the
Affirmative, as every Affirmative does the Negative; This evidently appears, by
that Exposition which our Savior gives of the Law, Math. 5.37. etc. Mat. 5.37.
So that there is the like Reason, of not doing good, and of doing evil; either
way, the Law is transgressed; and against the one, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
as well as the other, the curse is denounced, Deuteronomy. 27. verse. 26. The breach
of the Negative brings Death; and want of Obedience to the Affirmative,
excludes from Life.

Secondly, Omissions proceed from Original corruption (for it is that which
makes us unapt for good, and to leave undone what the Law requires of us) and
being a fruit of Original corruption, there cannot but be a great deal of guilt
and iniquity in them, Psalm. 51.5.
Psalm. 51.5. David accounts his Original sin, as the corrupt fountain of all
his impurities; and he makes way to it, with an Ecce; Behold, I was shaken in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Job. 14.4. Verba Pelagii: ut
sine virtute, ^a si^e vitio pr^creamur; anteque actionem propriae voluntatis,
id solum in homine est quod Deus condidit. Rom 7.18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25.
Now who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, Job 14.4? The Pelagians
long ago denied any such sin as Original, or Natural corruption, affirming that
as we are begotten without Virtue so without Vice; and before the acting of our
own wills, that only is in man which God made. Augustine took this heresy to
task, and very learnedly confuted it, albeit it is since revived by the
Anabaptist: But not David alone, but St. Paul likewise charge his Omissions,
as well as Commissions, upon his corrupt nature, Romans 7.18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25.

Thirdly, And do we not profess our selves to be the Servants of the most high
God? now that Servant that will not do what his Master requires of him, what
does he else but despise and contemn his Master? Not to obey is to disobey. Nor
will we take it well from our Servants, if they should spend their time in
idleness, and doing nothing; or excuse themselves, in telling us that they
have not plotted with Thieves to Rob us and Spoil us, not set our house on
fire, nor served those who were our enemies, etc. We expect more from Servants
then so; we hire them to follow our work, and do our business, and not to sit
still and forbear only doing of us any mischief; they are to do us good as
well as no hurt: It is true, the best of God's Servants omit many things out of
ignorance and frailty, that God requires; but a continual neglect and omission
of open and enjoined duties proclaims open contempt; Let us now apply this to
our Use.

There are many that please themselves with a kind of Negative Divinity, taxed
with any gross crime, Luke 18.11.
they are no Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterous, etc. And it were to be wished,
that more amongst us could say so; and that there were more civil
righteousness and honesty amongst men, than is. Athanasius sometimes wished
that there were more Hypocrites in the Church, in regard that public sins
were more infections and offensive; So say I, in this Case: But yet, let such
Negative men know, that all this they say is not enough, Isa. 1.16.17. Psalm.
34.14. Romans 20.9. Luke 16.15. Mat. 5.20.
nor will it bring them to Heaven. Ceasing from evil is but one step thither,
doing of good is the other, which must necessarily follow, if thou expectest
Salvation. That Pharisee (whose outside only had a fair show, his inside being
full of filthiness) sounded the Trumpet of his own praise, not only for the
Omissions-of evil, but also for the doing of good Luke 16.15. whose
righteousness if we exceed not, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Math. 5.20.

And yet, what abundance of dead soil, may be found amongst us, which brings
forth nothing? Idle wretches that sleep out the time of grace (albeit their
damnation sleep not) who return all Heavens Rain, and influence with a naked
and neutral acceptance, no way answering the Sender's hopes. A barren Earth we
call an unthankful earth; a barren Heart is no less an unthankful heart, as in
the former verse you have heard.

Dan. 9.6, 10.
then hitherto we have done. Daniel bitterly laments this, Dan. 9.6, 10. So
others of Gods Children. In matters of Faith; Numb. 20.12.
that which God charge Moses withal may be laid to our charge, Numb. 20.12.
You believe me not* to sanctify me, before the eyes of the Children of Israel:
Luke 24.25.
and what our Savior said to the two Disciples in their walk to Emmaus may be
said to the best of us, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken Luke 24.25.

As we are slow-Faith's in believeing; so we are slow Bellies in doing; Our
faylings in those duties of Piety Justice, Tit. 1.12, 13. Tit. 2.11.
and Charity, (which they that have learned Christ, are taught by his saving
grace) are too too gross and pal pable; our Prayers are full of coldness, Zeal
is wanting; our Hearing full of dullness, Attention is wanting; our converse
with others, full of unprofitablenesse; Love and Charity is wanting: and yet
few lay to heart, their saylings in these things (and the like) as they ought.
It may be, if they fall into some gross sin, Swearing, Lying, etc. they seem
to be humbled for it, but Omissions of Duties are looked upon with a
regardlesse eye: And there may be some Reasons rendered of it, amongst others
these.

Omissions are not so contrary to God, nor are they so scandalous in the eyes
of Men, as sins of Commissions (such as Lying, Swearing, Drunkenesse,) these
(with the Snayl) leave a slime behind them; But Omissions make no great noise,
and are slighted, under a pretense of Infirmity, and do less trouble the
conscience then the other.

Secondly, Affirmative precepts do not bind adsemper, as the Negative do: I am
always bound not to kill, not to ^eal; but the Affirmative do not bind to the
ever doing of them all at all times. Now Intermission being next to Omission,
(and under pretense of Christian Liberty) men do more easily fall into
Omissions then Commissions and are less sensible thereof.

Thirdly, the Observation of the Affirmative Commandments, does more cross a
man's nature (which is most contrary to virtues Commanded) and brings him under
more opposition and hatred of the World, then the keeping of the Negative
Precepts do; therefore we are more apt and inclined to omit the Duties of the
Affirmative, than of the Negative, and be less humbled for them.

But if we be as we ought to be, we shall take to heart our faylings, in not
being as we should be, as well as in being what we ought not to be; we shall be
humbled before God for our not loving, not fearing, not trusting Him enough:
for our not honoring His Name; not sanctifying His Sabbaths as we ought, and
for our other Omissions of Duties required, either by virtue of our General or
Particular Calling: and that for these Reasons.

First, There is both more Virtue and Vice practiced in Affirmatives, then in
Negatives; Mat. 3.10. Mat. ^.19.
It is more good to do good, then not to do evil; and more evil to do evil,
then not to do good; Albeit both the Tree that brings forth evil Fruit, and
that which brings forth no fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

Secondly, In doing no good, it is impossible for a man to abstain from evil;
for not to gather, is to scatter, Mat. 12.3. Mat. 3.4.
in Christ's account: not to do good, is to do hurt; not to save life, is to
dedestroy it. Virtue and Vice being extremes without mean contraries, which
want a Medium, and therefore the absence of the one (in subjecto capaci) in a
Subject capable of it, argues the presence of the other; So that if we be
destitute of Virtue, then are we attended with Troops of Vices: Mat. 21.44.
If our Houses be clean swept of spiritual graces, then they are convenient
lodgings for unclean Spirits; If we be not endued with knowledge, then we are
blinded with ignorance; if we be destitute of Faith, then we are full of
Infidelity; if we forbear to do good, then we prostitute our selves to all
ungodliness: Jam. 1.14.
and being once drawn away from God, a man easily becomes ensnared by his own
lust, Jam. 1.14. Besides God does often in justice punish sins of Omission, by
giving men up to the Commission of gross and open sins: Now many are overtaken
with the sins of the times, because they lament not the sins of the times? 2
These. 2.10, 11.
How many are given up to strong delusions, to believe lies, because they
receive not the Truth in Love? And how often is a man's idleness and laziness
in not doing what he should, made an occasion of doing what he should not, as
it fell out in David's Case, 2 Samuel 11.

Thirdly, Sins of Omission do exceedingly grieve the Spirit of God, and quench
it in us; thence it is, 1 These. 5.19, 20.
that the Apostle having charged the Thessalouians not to quench the spirit,
(neither in themselves nor others,) adds immediately, Despise not prophesysing,
1 These. 5.19, 20. Now it is despised, (not only when it is openly contemned,
but) when it is neglected, and not attended unto. So Israel grieved, (yea
vexed) Gods blessed spirit in not hearkening unto his voice, nor regarding his
wonders, Psalm. 95.10.
Psalm. 95.10. Fire (we know) may be quenched, as well by taking away the fuel,
as by casting on water; So may the Spirit of God, as well by neglecting of the
Ordinances, as by falling into other finful courses. Besides, Omissions
challenge the Power of Sanctification in us: Were we sanctified throughout by
the spirit of God, we would make as much conscience to do what God requires, as
to forbear the practice of that evil he forbids.

Fourthly; The greatest loss that possibly can betide us, arises from our
Omissions, and want of doing good; and that is deprivation of Life and
Happiness; which consists in the fruition of God (who is infinitely good,) and
is lost by Omission, and want of good; Heb. 12.14. Poena Damni poenalior est,
quam poena sensus Chrysostom.
for without Holiness no man shall see God, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. and
the pain of loss in Hell, is more grievous then the punishment of feeling and
smart; albeit it be not so to our seeming; Therefore, both in the Scriptures
and Fathers, the torments of Hell are termed damnation, in respect of the
loss, of an infinite good, which is God; this is Hell in Hell, as the enjoying
of God's presence is Heaven in Heaven. In all these respects (besides others
that might be showed) great cause we have to be greatly humbled before God for
our Omissions and Neglects, to lay them to heart, and be much affected
therewith,

Heb. 13.16.
To do good, and distribute, forget not, (says the Apostle), Heb. 13.16. So to
hear, pray, etc. forget not. It is a sin to omit our Duty; more to omit it
willingly; but most horrible to do the contrary: It is not enough that thou art
not an ill man, by sins of Commission against the Negative Commandments of
God, but thou must show thy self a good man, by thy conformity to Gods
Affirmative precepts: And as thou desire not only to escape the Damnation of
Hell, but to obtain the Glory of Heaven; So it is requisite that thou be not
only careful to avoid those sins, which subject thee to the former, but that
thou also do those Duties, and embracest those Virtues whereby thou may be
fitted and advanced to the latter. Say not, because I am not thus or thus,
therefore I am as I ought to be, it is too poor a Counter, to be laid in so
high a place: Suppose that no man can condemn thee for evil, yet unless God
and thine own conscience commend thee for good that thou have done, thou art
far from God's Kingdom. It is not enough for the Minister to say, I have not
seduced this People, nor led them out of the way; if he has not instructed
them in the right way wherein they should walk: Nor for the Magistrate to say,
I never wronged the Poor, nor condemned the Innocent; unless he can say with
Job, I have stood up for them, and pleaded their Cause. Nor may the Landlord
bless himself in this, that he did never wring nor gripe the bowels of his
Tenants, if he has not succored and protected them. Let him that stole, steal
no more, (says the Apostle;) Ephesians. 4.28. but, Ephesians. 4.28.
Is that enough? No, Let him labor with his hands the thing that is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs. Verse. 25.
And so for the Liar; let him not only cast off lying, but also speak the Truth
unto his Neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25. and so of every other; Let the wicked not only
forsake his wicked ways, Isa. 55.7.
but likewise turn into the ways of Righteousness, Isa. 55.7. In a word, let
all labor to have Job's Letters of Commendation, which he carried from God to
the World; which did run in this Tenor, Job 1.1.
He feared God, and eschewed evil; and remember the Point delivered, that,
Barrenness in a Fig Tree lays guilt enough upon it, and is sufficient to
expose it to the Axe and Fire. Omission of Dyer, brings diseases which cause
death; So Omission of Duties, brings damnation to the Soul.

He that runs, may read it. Hab. 2.2.
If barrenness in good be so full of guilt, and so displeasing unto God; what
think you will become of such Trees, Deuteronomy. 32.32. Psalm. 58.2. Psalm. 26.10.
Prove. 9.10. Acts 7.15. 2 Pet. 2.14. Romans 3.13, 14. Psalm. 10.7. Luke 16.22.
Psalm. 14.4.
as from the root of a filthy and fleshly heart, bring forth, like the Vines of
Sodom and Gomorrah, Fruit as bitter as Gall? whose hearts within them imagine
mischief, whose hands without them exercise cruelty upon the Earth; whose feet
run to evil, and are swift to shed blood; whose ears are uncircumsised, eyes
full of Adultery, and cannot cease to sin; whose throats are open Sepulchers,
whose tongues are used to deceit, under whose lips the poison of Asps, and
whose mouths are full of cursing and bitterness? Shall Dives be damned that
would not vouchsafe crumbs to hungry Lazarus; what will become of those (then)
that eat up the Poor as Bread, and grind their faces? Must they go Captive with
the first, that are not sorry for the affliction of Joseph; Amos 6.6, 7.
whither shall be led and carried, that have caused the affliction of Joseph?
If he was bound hand and foot, who prosecuted his own right with extremity
against his fellow servants; Math. 18.33.
whither shall they be cast that labor the unjust vexation of men, pretending
title to that whereunto they have no color of right? If they that did but
Build, and Plant, and Marry, and give in Marriage (things lawful in themselves)
were swept away with the Universal flood; whither shall the Tempest of God's
fury carry them that blaspheme his Name, persecute his Messengers, contemn his
Ordinances, and wallow in all manner of Voluptuousness? If they shall be
sentenced that visited not Christ in Prison, etc. what will become of those
that cast him into Prison? pulled the meat out of his mouth, etc? These things
I will leave to your serious considerations, and proceed to speak of the
Aggravations of the fault: First, from the Time affoarded to it for bearing
Fruit [These three years]. Secondly, from the means that had bin taken with it,
that it might be fruitful; employed in these words, [I come seeking fruit on
this Fig Tree.]

As Scripture calls us to take notice of sin, so it does frequently put us in
mind of the Circumstances: for (as from hence you may Collect),



So we find the Quality and Condition of the Person faulty, Joh. 3.10, and 13,
18. 1 Samuel 2.22. 2 Chronicles. 33.7. Isa. 58.3, 4. 2 Samuel 16.22. Isa. 33.1. Math.
11.24.
aggravates the fault, as, John 3.10, and 13, 18. Sometimes the Place where it
is committed is an aggravating circumstance of it, as, 1 Samuel 2.22. 2 Chronicles.
33.7. Sometimes the Aggravation arises from the Time of committing of it, as,
Isa. 58. 3 4.

Sometimes from the manner of doing it, as 2 Samuel 16. verse. 22. Isa. 33.1.

Sometimes from the Means, as, Math. 11.24. and as we shall hear shortly more
amply.

This is a Point might be made good Use of. shall leave it to your own
Meditations, and come to the Particulars: we begin with the Time, (...).

These three years.]

I should try your patience (and that I would be loath to do) in relating the
several Conjectures and Opinions of Expositors, concerning the three years here
mentioned; I shall only touch upon some of them, and then acquaint you with
that which is best approved.

Some by these three years (in reference to the Jews) understand these three
Times, Before the Law; Under the Law; and Under grace: before the Law when as
God sought that People by Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the other Patriarchs: under
the Law, Ambros. August. Chrysol.
when as God sought them by Moses and the Prophets: under the Gospel, when as
God sought them by Christ and his Apostles. Others understand by the first
year, the Time before the Captivity of that People; By the second, the time of
their return unto Jury; By the third, the time of Christ's coming in the flesh,
to Preach unto them. One of these ways, most of the Ancient take.

Latter writters conceive, that by these three years is to be understood, the
whole time of Christ's Ministry on Earth, Preaching, and Working Miracles; the
first three years of his public Ministry, he planted the Gospel in the Land
of Jury; and in the fourth year thereof, he was put to death: All which times
the Jews continued unconverted; And to this time one year more was added, which
was the time of the Apostles preaching, and laboring amongst them: which they
neglecting, going on still in their impenitency, were afterward cut down by
the Romans.

Others are of opinion that our Savior had an eye especially upon his commings
up into the Temple, at three several and solemn feasts of the Passover, before
his Passion. One was in the first year of his Public Ministry, of which we
read, Joh. 2.13, 14.
John 2.13, 14. at which time he found no fruit, but buying and felling Oxen,
and Sheep, and Doves in the Temple, making the House of God an House of
Merchandise.

A second coming to look for Fruit on that Fig Tree, was in the second year of
his Ministry, of which we read, John 5.1, -- 9. Joh. 5.1, -- 9.
and then he wrought that Miracle in healing of a Cripple who lay at the Poole,
having had an Infirmity eight and thirty years, for which the Jews cavil at
Him, and persecute Him.

His third solemn going up unto the Temple, was, that we read of, Joh. 6.4.
John 6.4. where he taught openly, but the People charged him to have a Devil;
and the chief Priests and Pharisees are angry with their Officers for that they
apprehended him not. No better Fruit did He find on that Jewish Fig Tree at
His three several comings up, to seek for it.

From this third Passover and solemn Feast, the Fig Tree stood until our
Savior's Passion, which time was the year of this Figg-Tree's reprival; in
which year it was that our Savior propounded this Parable to the Galilaeans,
and then, after that, this Jewish Figg Tree began to fall; the Curse being
executed by degrees upon it, as, God willing, you shall hereafter hear more
fully. And this opinion seems most probable.

But Lastly, Others conceive that our Savior in mentioning three years,
alludes only to that in the Old Law, Levit. 19.23, 24. Leut. 19.23, 24.
When you come into the Land and plant all manner of Trees for Fruit (says
God), then you shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised; three years
shall it be as uncircumcised to you, but in the fourth year all the Fruit
thereof shall be holy to praise the Lord withal: There was a Natural Reason of
this Law as well as Political; The Civil and Political Reason, say Divines,
was, for that the first Fruit of Trees being full of moisture and waterish,
Vid. Willet in loc.
it was not so wholesome for the People, and likewise to restrain them from
inordinate feeding on it (especially at the first) which might breed sursets in
them: But the Natural Reason was, for that a fruit-Tree requires one year to
settle the Root after the Plantation; in which regard the Husbandman will not
suffer a Tree new-se^; the first year to bear; the second year the sapp most
commonly runs out in Leaves and Branches, and the time of Fruit is not yet
come; but the third year (if there be any hopes of its fer^ility, and the soil
and season be any thing kindly) it bears fruits and is well laden; This
Reason may be admitted, albeit the former is preferred.

now in Reference to us, who live under the Gospel, and are patted in the
Church as in the Vineyard: Theoph. in loc.
By these three years some understand the three Ages of Man; Youth, Middle Age,
and Old Age: those three Ages which St. John makes mention of, and calls upon
for fruitfulness, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. 1 John 2.12, 13, 14.
Childhood or Youth; Middle age or Manhood; Old age or Father-hood. In all
these three several Ages God does come to us, and seek for Fruit from us: In
our Youth, Eccles. 12.1. Eccles. 12.1.
In our Middle age by Crosses and Troubles, by Changes and Alterations in our
Bodies and outward States. In Old Age, by Aches in our Bones, decay of senses,
by gray hairs that are here and there upon us, Hos. 7.^
Hos. 7.9.

Others by three years, understand many years, a certain number being put for
an uncertain; a definite for an indefinite time: and so we shall find that
number used in Scripture, as, 2 Cor. 12.8. 2 Cor. 12.8.
I besought the Lord thrice, that is, frequently: God does come to seek fruit
of man three years, that is, many years, before he commands him to be cut down.
God deals with us (says Calvin) as the Husband man does with his Trees; who
allows time enough for the standing of them, and uses all means to make them
fruitful, which if it prevails not, then he cuts them down, and fits them for
the fire. And this Interpretation we may safely follow, and from hence lay down
this Conclusion.

God allows and allotteth to every Fig Tree growing in his Vineyard, a due
proportion of time for the bringing forth of fruit. Or, Where he expects
fruits, he allotteth time sufficient for the producing of it.

Three years you see the Husbandman bears with this Fig Tree. Time long
enough, to wait for the proof of it; for if the Fig Tree bear not Fruit the
third year, it will never bear (says one). Had it bin a Nut-Tree, or an Olive
(says another), Cornel. a Lapide Mald. in loc.
three years had not bin enough to wait; But it is enough for so growing and
succulent a plant as the Fig Tree is; and three years God allows it: all
which time He waited, and made no complaint thereof unto the Dresser, nor
denounced Vengeance against it (that we read of.)

To every Nation, to every Church, Congregation, and Particular Person, God
allows a fit proportion of time for producing Fruit, (albeit to some more to
some less, yet) to all sufficient): Three years He bore with this Fig Tree;
Forty years space the Children of Israel had given them in the Wilderness; an
hundred and twenty years He allotted to the Old World for Repentance: Heb. 3.9.
Genesis 6.3. Ezekiel. 4.5. Genesis 15.16.
three hundred and nin^ety years He forbore the Idolatrous Israelites; four
hundred years were granted the Ammonits, and with Antichrist He has borne
above one thousand two hundred years: mention is made of the times of the
Gentiles, Luke 21.24. Romans 11.25.
Luke 21.24. Romans 11.25. They had time allotted them to come in, and before
that time came, God bore with them above two thousand years: It is evident
then, that God is not hasty, he allows sufficient time for all, He looks not
for his Rent before the Day, as appears by that we read, Math. 21.34. When the
time of Fruit drew near (says St. Matthew), Math. 11.34.
He sent his Servants to the Husbandmen: At the season, says St. Mark, 12.2.
When the Rent Day was come, He sent that he might receive of the Fruit of the
Vineyard; Mat. 22.2.
He allowed these Farmers time to make their Rent before he sent for it, all
which time he forbore with patience.

This God does that he may be justified, Pharaoh, to require the tale of Brick
of the Children of Israel, and yet allow them no straw wherewith to burn their
Brick; nor yet time to gather it.

But we read of that Fig Tree which grew by the way-side, that it was cursed
for its barrenesse, Mark 11.13. Resp.
when the time of Figgs was not yet come, Mark 11.13.

Some answer it thus, Had not man fallen, that Tree had not bin barren; for
before the Earth was cursed for Man's transgession, all Fruits should have bin
more frequent, and aboundart; yea, almost continually like the Trees in the
Paradise of God: And so our Savior to show, not only his Power, but his
Righteousness, cursed it; because it was not so fruitful as it was by Creation,
taking no notice of the unfruitfulnesse of it; or of the wan^ of Fruit which
came to pass at this time of the year, by reason of the Curse through our
corruption.

Secondly, That may be understood of the Vintage, and time of gathe^ing Figgs
(according to that of Matthew, Math. 21.
21.34. When the time of fruit grew near, that is, of gathering, and Inning of
it) which not being yet, Christ might well expect Fruit from it,

Thirdly, Although the time of Ripe Figgs was not yet, yet green Figgs might
have bin upon it, It was a season for some Fruit, Vid. Danaeus Quaest. in
Evang. secund. Marc. Quaest. 48. p. 192.163.
albeit it had not attained to its perfection. The Fig Tree (as before has
bin showed you) is a plant (if not altogether barren) that yields a continual
succession of increase; whilst one Figg is ripe, another is green; Christ
looked for some Fruit from that great show of leaves; had he found but green
Figgs only, it is likely that it should have escaped blasting.

Fourthly, That punishment was not inflicted (properly) on the Fig Tree, but
upon fruitless and barren professors, signified by that Fig Tree. That which
was done to this Fig Tree was done in a figure, Mystically and Parabolically;
Seda.
(For Christ did not only speak Parables, but work Parables) and this was no
other then a Real Parable of His: and that which Christ aimed at herein, was to
teach his Disciples (and us in them) how much he hated an unfruitful
Profession; and to foreshew what judgments should befall that barren
Generation, for their unfruitfulnesse; For this end he took the liberty to
destroy that Plan^, (though without fault) and well he might; for as he made
all things for his own glory; so he has power to use them at his pleasure,
that his Church may be edified, and his own name glorified.

It is an ordinary and usual Plea, that is brought by many; want of time. They
would Hear, Read, Pray, etc. but they have no time to do these things; why, how
comes that about? God requires no Duty of us, but he allows us time to do it
in, if we had but wisdom to apprehend it; there is a time allotted to every
purpose (says Solomon), Eccles. 3.1. -- 9. Eccles. 3.1, -- 9.
there is no Action nor Accident, intent and event, incident to the affairs of
this life, but has some part and portion of time laid out for it; Indeed there
is no part of time there mentioned for Repentance, and bringing forth of good
Fruits; nor is there any part of time laid out for sin and doing ill: and the
reason may be this, for that well-doing is a duty which must be concurrent with
every moment of time.

The business of Salvation is to have every season, nor is there any time or
season allowed for sin; no moment of time should be allowed to it: yet that
which should have a share in all seasons, has the least; and that which should
have no part of time, has the most. It is no want of time, but waste of time,
we have cause to lament; we are wanting to our selves, and that will make to
our greater condemnation, (as in the next point you shall hear.)

2 Timothy 2.2, 25. Ubi paterfamilias largus est, dispensator ejus non debet esse
tenax: Ubi Deus Benignus est, homo non debet esse Austerus Aug. Psalm. 13.3, and
94, 3, 4. Jer. 12.2, 3.
but patiently wait proving if at any time God will give them Repentance.
Where the Master of the House is liberal, the Steward should not be hold-fast
and miserable; where God is merciful, man should not be cruel: And yet the very
Saints of God seem sometimes to be somewhat troubled at God's patience, Psalm.
73.3, and 94, 3, 4. Jer. 12.2, 3. But that should not be: If God in Justice had
destroyed the Samaritans, when the Apostles would have had them destroyed, How
should they afterward have bin converted by the preaching of Christ? Had Demas
bin hanged as soon as ever he began to play the Thief, how should he have bin
converted unto Christ upon the Cross, or Christ have bin glorified by his
confession of Him? Had God taken away Paul, when Paul began first to persecute
the Church, how should the Church have bin confirmed in the Faith of Christ, by
the Doctrine of Paul as now it is? If thou would have Fruit, leave a Tree
(says Augustine): and if thou woulst that thy Brother should Repent, grudge
him not his life. And so we pass to a second Observation, which concerns the
aggravation of the fault.

Time allotted (for bearing Fruit) neglected, aggravates the fault; The longer
time, the greater crime.

Solomon speaking of the ignorance of man, in not knowing of his time, compares
him therein to Birds and Fishes that fall ignorantly and suddenly into a net or
snare, Eccles. 9.12.
Eccles. 9.12. And Jeremiah preferrs the brute Creature before man therein, who
yet is a Creature far more excellent, Jer. 8.7, 8.
and better able to make use of his time, (being endowed with reason which they
are not.) Now this must needs be an Aggravation to his sin, to throw his (...)
to the ground, and become like the Beasts that perish, (...) he m^tched with a
Beast, is a great disparagement to man's nature; and to be like to a Beast (in
that sense) is worse then to be a Beast indeed: To be a Beast, is without any
fault in the Creature, God made it so; but to be a man, a Christian man, and
yet to be like a Beast, is not without man's fault and sin, and so Aggravates:
More Particularly, you shall see the Point proved in sundry Instances.

This aggravated the sins of the Old World, as appears by that of Peter, 1
Epist. 3.20. God waited all the while that the Ark was preparing, expecting
their amendment and turning; 1 Pet. 3.20.
but they jeared, when they should have feared, and so the Flood came and swept
all, except eight souls from off the Earth: and it was laid to the charge of
Israel, Jer. 8.7.8.
as an aggravating circumstance of their wickedness, Jer. 8.7, 8. the Fouls of
the air are preferred before them, as having more skill to know their time,
and observe it than they had, and it is rendered as one cause of their great
Fall; They should so fall as to rise no more, verse. 4. And this was that which
Christ bewailed with reats over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41, 42. Oh! Luke 19.41 42.
Enlightened
if thou had known at least in this thy Day, the things that belong to thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes; This was no small aggravation of
Jerusalems sin, that she knew not what concerned her happiness; No, not on
that their Day; that time that was now lent unto them, that Christ was amongst
them, and did Preach unto them; And what was likely to follow thereupon, Christ
shows in the words following, Thy enemies shall cast a bank about thee, etc.
And the reason of all these fearful Judgments that would befall them is this,
because thou knew not, (that is, would not know) the time of thy
Visitation: Revel. 2.21.
This likewise did aggravate the sin of that Jezabel, of whom we read, Revel.
2.21. God gave Her space to Repent of Her fornication, but She had neither
beart nor grace to make good use of it, for which God threatens to cast Her
upon a Bed of sickness and inflict a grievous Disease upon Her, Verse. 22.23.
and plague all those that commit adultery with Her, with many soar Judgments,
and that He would sweep away her followers, the Children of her fornication
with violent death, verse. 22.23. and all for that she despised this mercy, of
making good use of that time granted to Her, to bring forth the Fruit of
Repentance. I shall not need to insist any longer upon the proof of the Point,
(being in these few Instances sufficiently cleared) I shall only render you
the reason of it, and then come to apply it.

Disposer of times, and has appointed them (as Job speaks of this Life, Job
14.14.
all the days of my appointed time). But this choice of God for us we slight,
and think he has not given us a due and fitting portion of time; we will
choose for our selves.

Secondly, The greater the mercy is, the greater is the sin in the contempt of
it; To neglect the time affoarded for our good, is a despising of the Riches of
Gods goodness and mercy (says the Apostle): Romans 2.4.
we are said to despise a thing, not only when we set it at naught, Act.
13.41. Prove. 15.5. Prove. 5.30. 1 These. 5.20.
and make leight accuont thereof, as, Acts 13.41. Behold, you despisers, and
wonder; But likewise, when we neglect to make the good use thereof, which we
ought; So Children that follow not their Parents Counsel, are said to despise
it. So the leight regarding, and careless hearing of the word, is a despising
of it, Prove. 1.30. 1 These. 5.20. And so in this Case, we despise the Riches of
Gods mercy, when we make not the right use of his patience, and long-sufferance
in being led thereby unto repentance. And how provoking a sin that is, I shall
hereafter show you; but for the present leave it to your felves to consider of.
And now let us put what has bin said to some Use.





What Nation under Heaven has God come so near unto in mercy, (in this
respect) as he has to us! What a long Jubilee, has this land enjoyed? Jer.
13.27.
how long has God waited, expecting our amendment, saying, (as, Jer. 13.
last), When shall it once be? Not only three years, but threescore, yea,
fourscore years and upwards, have we enjoyed Halcyon days, to the admiration
of all other Nations of the World. Under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth we had a
flourishing Land and Church, for the space of 44 years and 4 months: Under the
Reign of King James 22 years the Church of England flourished: Under the Reign
of King Charles almost 23 years 11 months, till a Cloud overcast our Sun: All
which time we have had our standing and yet do remain in his Vineyard a growing
Fig Tree; but whether this fourth year be the year of reprieve, God only
knows; but we have cause to fear it, for the time of fruit is not yet: Acts 5.31
We read, Acts 9.31. that when the Church had a little rest throughout Judea,
and Galilee, and Samaria, they were edified, and, walking in the fear of God,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, they were multiplied. But has it bin so
with us? Indeed the long time of peace enjoyed has bin an edifying time, we
have improved it to edifying and building, never so much in any Age within such
a space of time; but what edifications have we reared? Surely sieled Houses for
our selves, glorious Structures, goodly Fablicks, for the credit of our
Worships, which we have Built by the strength of our Purses; as Nebuchadnezzar
did great Babylon by the might of his Power, and for the honor of his Majesty.
Every City, Town, Village* is graced with such; but the House of God lies wast,
the inward Temple of our souls is not kept in good reparation. Isa. 1.8.
It is like a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, like a be sieged City, Isa. 1.8.

But I shall come somewhat closer, and with Athanasius and Theophylact, apply
these three years to the three Ages of man; Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, and
endeavor to give you a taste of the Fruit that is produced by us, in each of
these Years or Ages, which being done, I hope we shall be convinced of much
guilt that lies upon us, by reason of our neglect of the time allotted us for
Fruit.

As for out Infancy and Childhood spent in misery and folly, and ratled away in
toys and fooleries, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 13.11. I shall not speak
of that; 1 Cor. 13.11.
there is permitted to Childhood, that Childishness which without violence to
nature, and the God thereof, cannot be driven from it: and I may say of this
Age, as the Apostle does in another Case to the men of Athens, Act. 17.30.
Acts 17.30. The time of Childhood God winketh at: Not as if God were
altogether regardlesse of that Age, for he expects that the seed of grace
should be then sown in the hearts and minds of Children, Prove. 22 6.
even so soon as they be able to receive it; and are capable of it, as appears
by that speech of the Prophet Esaias, 28.9. and by Precept, Isa. 28 9. Deuteronomy. 6.6,
7. Prove. 22, 6. Ezekiel. 4.14. Math. 21.15. 2 Timothy 3.15. Prove. 20.11.
Deuteronomy. 6, 6, 7. Prove. 22.6. and by practice of those that have feared God,
Ezekiel. 4.14. Math. 21.15. 2 Timothy 3.15. And a great guess may be made how our
Children will p^ove when they grow in years, by their dispositions when they
are young, Prove. 20.11. Even a Child is known by his doing, whether his work
be pure, or whether it be right: As young plants declare by their growing and
budding, what Trees they are like to prove, and what Fruit they will bear
hereafter. Let a Child be deformed when it is young, there is little hope it
will be well-favoured in Age; And experience has often proved in a number of
lewd men, Isa. 7.15. Psalm. 34.11. 1 John 3.7, 18, and 4, 4. 1 John 5.21.
our English Proverb to be true, Soon it pricks, that Thorn will be: But being
attained to riper years, so as to know the right hand from the left, what is
good, and what is evil, to choose the one, and refuse the other; then God comes
and looks for F^uit at our hand. 1 Samuel 21.1. Psalm. 119.9. Eccles. 12.1. 1 Timothy
4.12, 13, 14. Tit. 2.6. 1 Samuel 1.18, and 3.10. 2 King. 22.2. 1 King. 18.3, 12.
Dan. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1 5. Psalm. 78.63 Jer. 11.22, and 18, 21, and 50, 30.
As appears not only by his gracious Invitations, Psalm. 34.11. Come you
Children, etc. 1 John 3.7, 18* and 4* 4. 1 John 5.21. my little Children, etc.
These were not such Children as hung upon the Breasts, or were new weaned from
them; but such, as were David's followers, spoken of, whom the Priest asked
him, An vasa pue^orum sancta, 1 Samuel 21.4. whether those Children or (as we
render the words) if the young Men have kept themselves from Women: likewise
the Heavenly Rules and Directions which God gives to youth, shows what he
expects from them, Psalm. 119.9. Eccles. 12.1. 1 Timothy 4.12, 13, 14, 15. Tit.
2.6. and the high praise and honor that God has put upon such Trees, as have
bin fruitful in this Age (as on Samuel, 1 Samuel 2.18, and 3, 10. Josiah, 2 Kings
22.2. Obadiah, 1 Kings 18.3, 12. Daniel, 1.4. Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5. with others)
whom Scripture makes a very honorable mention of, for that, being young, yet
they were Religious; And Lastly, by the Judgments that God has inflicted, and
curses denounced upon this Age, for not being fruitful, Psalm. 78.63. Jer.
11.22, and 18, 21, and 50, 30. Lament. 1.15, 18, and 2, 21, and 5, 13. Amos
4.10. Lament. 1.15, 18, and 2, 21, and 5, 13. Amot 4.10.
Many Instances might be produced of such as God has cut off in the flower of
their youth for their unfruitfulnesse, (as Nadab and Abihu, Hophni and Phiue
as, Ammon and Absalom; By all which it is evident, that God expects Fruit in
this Age of Youth; yet we are generally possessed with a conceit that Youth is
exempted and privileged by their age, to commit sin with greediness, and
without controu^ment; and that he who calls on you^h to be godly and gracious,
comes to torment them before their time.

Fly the Lusts of youth (says the Apostle Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.22. 1 Timothy
3.6. Job 32.7.
2 Timothy 2.22.) Now the Lusts of youth are Pride and Rashness, Pleasure and
Wantonness, contempt of Superiors, and such like. And these are the Fruits
wherewith the Boughs and Branches of our Figg-Trees in youth are laden; so
that God may say of the youth of England, Isa. 3.5.
as he sometimes spoke of the youth of Israel, The Lord does take no joy in our
young men, Isa. 9.17.

You that are of this year's standing, deceive not your selves, Isa. 9.17.
nor suffer your selves to be deceived by the Devils suggestions, nor the
temptations of others; Satan does most violently seek to seduce your youth,
and to-corrupt it; he has a special spite at youth to poison it; he sucks
after young and sweet blood especially, hoping that God will never take his
leavings; nor marry that Strumpet which he has oftentimes defiled: Indeed,
what man of Chastity will marry that person that has lived a Harlot in her
youth; and can we think that God will? Wherefore arm thy self in this Age of
thy Life, against discouragements of early and timely holiness: Does Satan,
or thine own false heart suggest unto thee, that God expects not Fruit from
thee in this Age, and that thou may be too forward; soon ripe, soon rotten;
young Saints, old Devils; etc? Oppose thou the Lords good will and pleasure
against these temptations, He requires the firstborn for his; the first of
our Flocks, the first of out Fruits; to teach us to whom the first of our
Selves does of right appertain: And if the first abilities of Soul and Body are
to be employed in His service, Is it fit to spend them in the service of
Satan? Will a Prince accept of a Book for a Present, that has the beginning
of it rent and torn? And shall God accept of thee and thy service, if thou
neglectest to serve Him in thy youth? Besides, thy youth must be devoted, and
bestowed on some, (either God or the Devil) and Who has most right to it? Is
it fit that God should be fed with the Devils reversions, and accept of dry
nones, when the Devil has sucked the marrow out? And does not experience teach
thee, that if the Fruit be nipped in the Spring, there is little hope of any in
Autumn; and if young Saints prove old Devils, yet it oftener falls out on the
contrary, that young Devils seldom prove old Saints, but old Beelzebubs.

Yet again, the Devil may suggest, That in riper years when you grow more
stayed, and better know what you do; it is then more seasonable to think of
being Religious and of bearing Fruit. If so, then answer him thus.

First, This is a controuling of God's Wisom, who expects that Youth should be
Fruitful.

Secondly, That none can assure thee of thy standing another year in the
Vineyard: Look as the Laborers were sent into the Vineyard, Math. 20.1, 2, 3.
so they go out; that is, at all hours. Some dye in youth, as in the third
hour; some at thirty, and some at fifty, as in the sixth and ninth hours; and
some very Old, as in the last hour of the Day; but who can promise his head,
that it shall have a snowy hair? how many dye in youth, in comparison of one
that lives to old age; Although some Fruit fall from the Tree by a full and
natural ripeness, yet all does not so: more are pulled from it, or wither upon
it, by nipping frosts, or are beaten down whilst they are green, than hang on
till it be mellow.

Thirdly, Say thou should live to perfect age, or till thy hairs grow gray,
Art thou sure that then thou shall be bearing the Fruits of Piety and Holiness?
Is it not usual with God to punish a lustful and wretched youth, with a dotish
age?

Fourthly, Say that God, in the riches of his grace and mercy, should vouchsafe
thee Repentance in af^er-Age; yet know* that it will prove a corrasive to thy
heart to remember how thou have spent thy youth in van^ty and lust; and how
great dishonor thou have brought God's name thereby: Psalm. 25.7.
David prayed God to forgive the sins of his youth, not without a bitter sense
and sting of them: Psalm. 25.7. Ephraim was ashamed and confounded, because he
did bear the Reproach of his Youth, Jer. 31.19. Jer. 31.19.
Take these things into consideration, you that are young and in the flour of
your age, let them lodge in your hearts, and make good use of your time; that
God may be honored by you, and you honored of him for your Fruitfulness:
otherwise thou have cause to fear, that he will one day say unto thee, let him
that had thy Youth, take likewise thine Age; let him that had thy beginning,
take the end likewise.

The second year of his coming to seek for Fruit, is in our middle age, or
perfect Man-age, (suppose it be from 25 to 40 years or thereabout,) God expects
more from you that are of this age, then from the former; because you are of a
longer standing, and have attained the highest degree of perfection in the
temper of your bodies. Joh. 2.14.
I write unto you young men (says St. John) because you are strong, and the
word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked one. The glory
indeed of young men is their strength (says Solomon, Prove. 20.29. Prove. 20.29.
) The Hebrew word there rendered young men, signifies choice men for military
employments: Strength is for War, said Rabshekah, Isa. 36.5. Isa. 36.5.
In regard of your strength, you are most fit for the spiritual combat; nor
can you better show your valor then by resisting of the evil one, and fighting
against the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes; and pride of life
(whereof St. John speaks): 1 John 2.16.
You are the chief Champions, either for good or evil: If your streng^h be
spent in the practices of Piety and Religion, such works are the more
excellent, because they are performed with the more Courage, Zeal, Strength,
and Resolution: But if you power out your strength unto any vice, your Actions
become so much the more sinful and outrageous; In this year of your age God
comes to you, and you see what is expected from you, even those Fruits
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.12, 13. And, Tit. 2.4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 4.12,
13. Tit. 2.4, 5, 6. Isa. 49.4.
But does God find these Fruits in us in this our Man-age? may we not say, as
the Prophet Esaias in another Case, I have spent my strength for naught, Isa.
49.4. Many may so say, and confess it truly: Some show their strength in
drinking Wine, and bearing Drink, against whom a woe is denounced, Isa. 5.22.
Some spend their strength in Whoredom, and upon their filthy lusts, Isa. 5.22.
disswaded-from, Prove. 31.3. Prove. 31.3. Hos. 4.11. Prove. 22.23.
A Vice that enfeebles strength, and weaken's the powers and faculties of the
mind, Hos. 4.11. and consumes the estate, Prove. 7.22, 23. Strength of Body and
strength of Purse (for so much does the Original word translated strength in
that place signify) are both consumed by that sin, as we find in Sampson and
the Prodigal: yea, it takes away the strength of a Nation too. Jos. 2.15.
The walls of a City are the strength of a City, and Rahab the Harlot dwelt
upon the walls of Jericho, Genesis 38.25.
Thamar had Judah's Staff and Signet, so the Harlot goes away with a man's
strength and c^edit: or if the strength of this age be not spent on such lusts
of the flesh, yet the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life goes away with it,
they weary themselves with carking cares, how to become great in this World;
and toylesome labors how to get the wealth of it, forbearing no sinful and
unjust course of deceit and fraud how to attain their ends.

It is said of John Baptist that he grow and waxed strong in spirit, Luke 1.80.
Luke 2.52.
Luke 1.80. and of our Savior that he increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in
favor with God and Man, Luke 2.52. But we grow not so fast in years as vices;
our sins en^rease faster then our days: In the first age, the time of Figgs is
not yet come with us, that is put off till another year, till old age come,
then men intend to mind Heaven.

And when that is come, and that in this third year God comes for Fruit, does
he find it then? This indeed is esteemed to be the age of Wisdom; the Spring
has Pleasures but the Autumn Profits; the Fruits of Age are much better then
the Flowers of Youth: Multitude of years (says Elihu) should teach Wisdom, Job
32.7. Psalm. 92.12. Tit. 2.2.
Job 32.7. And Trees of God's planting bear most Fruit in their old age, (as
David shows, Psalm. 92.12.) And what the Fruits of this age are, or at least
should be, St. Paul specifies, Tit. 2.2. Sobriety, Gravity, Temperance,
Soundness in Faith, in Patience, and in Charity; these and such like are the
Fruits that God expects the third year from every Tree of that standing. But
are these Figgs growing on Trees of that age and ^tanding? Surely very rarely;
It may be said of the English, as Erasmu^ spoke of the Flemmings, Eras. in
Moriae Encom
that Quo magis senescunt, eo magis ^ul^^scunt; the Elder the foolisher: Are
not many old men as i^te as any other? as wan^^^ (...) worl^ly, as ignorant, as
unchariable, as impatient as any of the younger sort. Nay, some of these Vices
are more incident to that age then to the other. Prove. 20.29.
Gray hairs are the Crown of old age (as Solomon shows, Prove. 20, 29.) but it
is to be understood with that Proviso, that they be found in the ways of
Righteousness, Prove. 16.31.
Prove. 16.31. Age is venerable, not for number of years, but for desert: An
Elementary old man (as one does phrase it), having no other Argument of old age
but his gray hairs and wrinckled forehead, is a most contemp^ible and
ridiculous Creature. These are the signs of wisdom and promise it; but if
wisdom be wanting, and no Wine within, it is a folly to have the Bush hang
forth.

Dionysius, distoabing Apollo of his golden Cloak, said, Nec aestate nec hyemi
vestis haec convenit; So do many (says Ambrose) play with God, and deceive
their own souls in the business of Repentance; or, As the Philosopher said of
marriage In youth I was too young, in middle age I had other business, and now
I am ^oo old to mind it: So say some old men, who think it as much too late to
become godly, as young men think it too soon.

Oh! That we should live to this age, and yet be now to learn to become godly;
and yet, which is worst of all, to think our selves too old to be taught; that
when we perceive our faces and eyes look drooping to the Earth* yet our spirits
are never a whit the more lifted up to Heaven; that when every man can see, and
say that we are spent and come even to a period of our days, yet no man can
say that we are come to the beginnings of grace. Such as are aged and godly,
God seems to boast of, Act. 21.16. Dan. 7.9. Rev. 12.9.
Acts 21.16. these resemble the Ancient of days, but to be old and vicious,
these resemble the old Serpent: our gray hairs make our sins to be the
blacker, and power contempt upon us. See then you whose Allmond Trees do bloom,
that you bear better Fruit then such as does presage the boyling-Pot, Jer.
11.13. Jer. 11.13. Rev. 22.7, 12, 20. Jer. 20.15.
If God comes (as come He will) and that very quickly, and finds no Fruit, or
no better Fruit then generally this Age bears, it will be very sad with you;
You will have cause to curse the time, that ever i^ was said, a man child is
come into the World. It is high time for such to look about them: Old age is
the Winter of our life; No Spring to be expected, but that of the Resurrection,
which shall be to Salvation or Damnation. And yet who so old but hopes for
longer life? No Stake so old (we say) but may stand one year longer in the
hedge; True, but yet ere Winter be over it may be plucked up, and cart into the
fire. Thus I have showed you what the three years or ages of man's life
produce^h; these three years many of us have stood in the Vineyard of the Lord,
and yet the time of Fruit is not yet come: how can we answer it?

I might come a little nearer home, and apply it to this Place, Parish,
Congregation, and every particular soul within the hearing, but I hasten to a
second Use.

Pet. 4.2, 3. and thereupon make good use of the time remaining, that you may
become Fruitful, that God may find some Figgs under the leaves of your
Profession, lest it increase your condemnation.

I might say much, and use many Motives, that this Exhortation may take with
you, and become effectual; Indeed, all that can be said is little enough; nay,
not enough, unless God be pleased to accompany it with his blessing. Some
considerations I shall commend unto you, and leave the success to God.

First, Consider the worth of Time. Many things are far fetched, and dear
bought, fit for rich Purses and curious Palates; but there is a poor
contemptible herb in the Garden, Time, more precious then all; this we pass by
with neglect, which is especially worth our gathering.

Time, in it self considered as it is God's Creature, is more precious then
Gold: Some Philosophers have defined it to be Eternity limited; It is the only
measure, out of which God powers out all his gracious administrations; and for
the continuance whereof he keeps all the Celestial Orbs at continual work,
daily and hourly; It is a most precious Cabinet (albeit in it self empty) and
made to contain in it the most precious Jewel that ever the World had, Gal.
4.4. Gal 4.4.
Every moment of time brings some blessing or other with it: Thou crownest the
year with goodness (says David, Psalm. 65.11.) Psalm. 65.11.
It brings Heaven and happiness with it, to such as will accept it; In which
regard (says one) every Minute of It is as much as Heaven is worth; for that
Heaven and our Souls Salvation lies upon the well using and improving of it;
Nor is all the wealth in the World able to purchase one hour's time when Death
and Judgment come, nor to recover one hour's loss. Other things may be
recovered and ^^cht back again; If we have embezelled our estate by ill
Husbandry, we may repair it by thrift and industry; If we have morgaged our
Lands, the Morgage may be satisfied, and the Land restored; if we have pawned
our Plate or Housholdsluff they may be redeemed; Health lost, may be recovered;
Jewels lost, may be found, albeit cast into the Sea (as Polycrates his Ring
was, which a fish, bought in the Market, brought back again into his Kitchen.)
Yea God's favor and loving countenance lost, may be regained (if sought in
Time;) but Time it self being lost, cannot be recovered at any hand: Of it, we
may say as one does of Virginity; Jewels once lost are found again, this never:
It Is lost but once, and once lost, lost for ever.

Let it be secondly considered by you, how short the time is that is allotted
to you for the bringing forth of Fruit; for albei^ it be sufficient for the
performance of special and commendabl^ Actions (in case the whole be employed),
yet it is but the time of Life at longest; and what is that but a day, and that
not a natural, but an artificial day, consisting of 12 hours, Hohn 11.9. 2 Pet.
3.8.
John 11.9. Indeed a thousand years with God are but as a day; the eldest man
that ever lived, lived not out that day; we live but an hour of that day they
lived: Of a thousand years, Adam lived 930, and left but 70 for us, which is
but the twelvth part, one hour of that day; Yet none may reckon upon the whole
twelve hours; our Sun may set at Noon, not one of a thousand fullfills his
natural course, and runs through all the hours of that Day: Amos 8.9.
To speak as the truth is, we live but a minute of an hour; no more time can we
make reckoning of, but the very (...), Punc^ (...) est qu^^ (...).
the very instant time and moment that we now live, which is but a point, like
too lines laid acrosse, which touch but in one place. Time past, and time to
come, touches not; only that minute we live touches; and none of us have any
more then one minute at once given to us, which is gone whilst I have bin
speaking of it, and another has succeeded it; which is to be esteemed ours.
Time is but a succession of minutes one after another, and being so short, need
there is to make good use of it, and this is the Argument S^. Paul uses, 1
Cor. 7.29.
1 Cor. 7.29. to improve our Time.

Thirdly, The Importance and weightinesse of the Work we have to do, may be
another strong motive to make good use of the time allotted to us for the doing
of it; for albeit it be but a moment, Ex hoc momento pendel Aeternitas Aug.
yet Eternity depends upon it; yea, a double Eternity, e^ernal happiness, or
eternal misery; We use to cunt our Time more, or less precious, according as
the bufinesse we have to do, is of more or less concernment; Now, Is any thing
of greater consequence then the obtaining of heaven, and the Salvation of these
poor souls of ours? Time is the chiefest and principal part of that Stock which
God has put into our hands to trade for Heaven with. Nothing but time is
properly Ours, and to lose that, Omnia aliena sunt, tempus tantum nostrum. Neh.
5.3.
is to lose all our Stock at once: So the answer that Nehemiah gave to his
Enemies (who under pretense of a parley with him, would have hindered the work
he was about) we should give to the World, Flesh and Devil, which seek to make
us waste our time; I am doing of a great Work, it concerns my Salvation, so
that I cannot come, Why should the Work cease whilst I leave it and come to
you, Neh. 4.3? The Work being of so great weight, Nulla Dies sine linea,
Apelles. Plin. l. 35. c. 12.
no day should pass without drawing some lines.

Fourthly, Consider how long we have loytered, and cast our selves behind hand;
much of this little time allowed for so great a Work is already past, and
wasted unprofitably. It is often said of the godly in Scripture, that they dyed
full of days; and that not only in regard of length of time, Genesis 25.8, and
35, 29. Job 42.27. 2 Chronicles. 14.25. 1 Chronicles. 23.1. Act. 13.36, and 30.24.
so that they lived so long as themselves desired; But for that they had
fullfilled the will of God, and improved their time well, and done that for
which they were sent into the World, Acts 13.36, and 20, 24. Now if it be so
said of them in that respect, then on the contrary it must be said of the
wicked, that their days which they live, are empty days and void, So
Carthusianus expounding those words of Job, Empty months, or months of vanity,
I have reckoned to my self, Job 7.3.
tells us, that every Penitent sinner may very well say, that he has wasted,
consumed and spent his time and days without Fruit and Profit. Should we call
to mind how long we have lived, Magna pars vitae nobis perit dum nihil agimus,
multo maxima pars vitae dum inutilia agimus. Senec.
and how little good we have done; how much of our time has bin spent in
superfluous Sleeping, Eating, Drinking, (more then Nature requires,) in in
prond dressing the Body, Tatling, Sporting, and things unprositable, (which
might as well have bin left undone as done); or if we call to mind how much of
our time has bin spent in sinful actions, which ought not to be done; we must
needs confess the greatest part of our life is consumed in Vanity, and that
our days have bin empty; and it should provoke us to a careful employing of
what time remains, as did that Prince Mycernius, who being told that he should
live but six years longer, (take what course he would) answered, that he would
then make those six years twelve, and he knew how to do it, which was by for
beating his wonted sleep and recreations, by setting up Lights every night,
which burned continually; by reading and studying, etc. This is the way to live
much in a short time.

Fifthly, The time that remains of our life is very swift and uncertain. By
three Adverbs, Time is ordinarily expressed in Scripture, Nunc, Tunc, Olim:
Nunc is only good debt that we can reckon upon: Tunc is uncertain, Olim is
desperate: Now as Merchants use to divide their debts, some are doubtful, some
desperate, some certain; so may we devide the time of Life: Time past not well
spent, is but a Desperate Debt; Time to come is doubtful, therefore the Prophet
speaks of it with an If Psalm. 90.10. If a man lives till he be fourscore, that
is suppose it be so: Psalm. 90.10.
The present time of life is the only certain time and that flies away full
swiftly. We are carried to our journey's end in the Chariot of Time, and we
measure Time usually by the motion of the Sun when it has gone an entire
round, from the East unto the W^st (that makes a natural day). When we look
upon a Sun-Dyal that discovers the motion of it, every hour of the day (whilst
it is in our Horizon) it seems to us to pace very slowly, (or to stand still
rather); for whilst we look upon the Dyall we cannot perceive the Sun to move,
(albeit it runs many thousands of miles every minute, no arrow can fly so
swiftly, nor bullet with such speed as the Sun goes; could a Bird (say some)
fly round about the compass of the Earth in a minute of an hour, yet the Sun
exceeds that Bird in swiftness. Sure it is, that however we cannot perceive by
steady looking on a Dyal, how swiftly the Sun passes, yet we may easily gather
that the Sun stands not still, by the shadow that passes from hour to hour;
and, by its running over all the figures from the Rising of the Sun to the
Setting of it, we may conclude, that it is of an incredible swiftness: Thus
does thy life pass swiftly, albeit the motion be insensible to thee: thou
discernest not whilst it is going; but in a short time thou shall find that thy
life is so far spent, that it is near unto a period, ere thou be aware: My
days are swifter then a Post (says Job,) they fly away; they see no good,
they are passed away as swift Ships, Job 9.25, 26.
as the Eagle that hastes to the prey, Job 9.25, 26. where the gradation is
well observed by some. It is likened to a Post that makes haste, yet sometimes
stays by the way: And then to a Pirates Pinnace which with great swiftness
makes after the Prey; yet that undersayle may be becalmed; And then to an Eagle
which flies through the Air, but leaves no mention of her passage; the noise
of her wings may be heard, but no token of her way can be found: Such is the
life of man.

Sixthly, Rev. 10.6.
Consider that time is irrecoverable; When this time of Life is ended, Time
(with thee) shall be no more: There is then no more work to be done, whereby it
is possible for thee to further or procure the Salvation of thy Soul; If grace
and mercy be not obtained within the compass of Time, it can never be had;
when the Tree is cut down, it cannot be expected that any more fruit will ever
grow upon it. Eccles. 11.3.
As the Tree falls (says Solomon) so it lies; if it falls fruitless, it shall
lie fruit esse; and as Death leaves thee, so will Judgment find thee: Oh! what
would the damned give (think you) to be now again upon the Earth in the Land of
the Living? how many days would they willingly spend, and that in the most
hard and difficult services, that they might enjoy but one Year more; Nay, one
Month, one Week, one Day's time of standing, as they did, in God's Vineyard?
Might Time be carried to Hell to be fold (says Benardnus de Sena) a thousand
Worlds would be given for one hours time, if they had them to give. Should God
ask them, would you be content to ly in fetters a hundred years in the darkest
Dungeon on Earth, and there be fed with bread and water? Would you be content
to be put to the Rack, and suffer the most exquisite torments that ever any
suffered in the World, if you might enjoy on day one Earth, or one hour's time;
so that by the well improving of it you might be within compass of mercy? How
readily would they answer, That or any thing else, Lord, that thou will impose,
so that we might but enjoy it: And will thou be so foolish, as now, having life
continued, carelessly to waste this time, which being past is irrecoverable?

Seventhly, Consider how God in his just Judgment cutteth off sinners, from
enjoying the benefit of Time, who make no r^ckoning of it to profit themselves
thereby, as they ought and might have done; according as we find it threatened,
Psalm. 55.23. Job 15.32, 33, and 22, 16, and 36, 14.
Psalm. 55. Job 15.32, 33, and 22, 16, and 36, 14. The meaning is, that they
shall be cut off before they have attained to that age which they might have
attained unto, had they improved their time as they might have done, and ought
to have done; David was afraid of this, and deprecated it, Psalm. 102.24. Psalm.
102.24.
Take me not away in the midst of my days; As if he should have said, Lord I
fear, that for ill employing of my time, my life shall be cut off and
shortened, according as thou have threatened in Judgment, to inflict upon those
who spend their time in wickedness, not regarding the worth of time, which
thou affoardest them for their good. Bernard. Tom. 2. Quadrag. 2. Dom. Quadrag.
Ser. 17.
I have read of a terrible and fearful accident which happened in a certain
Village, near to the Kingdom of Valentia, which, however it may seem incredible
to us; yet having so good and learned an Author for it, I shall relate it to
you: A young man of 18 years old, having bin a very rebellious and disobedient
Child, and falling into many flagitious courses, becoming at last a notorious
Thief, was appreh^nded, and (after due proceeding) was condemned to be hanged
in the open Marketplace; which sentence was accordingly executed on him. The
young man being dead, and ^ill hanging on the Gallows, most of the Town being
present, they perceived his beard to sprout out, and much gray hair to grow,
and his face suddenly to wax wrinkled and withered, so that he seemed to the
Company to be as one of ninty years of age: This accident the Bishop was
acquainted withal (who then resided in that Village): he calling the People
together, humbly besought God that he would be pleased to reveal unto them the
mystery and meaning of so rare an Accident; which being done he said thus unto
the People; You see, my Sons, that this young man dyed at the age of 18 years,
who now appears to you full of gray baits, as if he were one of 90 ye^rs of
age; and this is that which God would teach you hereby, that, after the course
of nature, he was to have attained to the age of Ninty, but for his sins and
disobedience, the Lord has cut off ^o many of his years as are from 18 to 90;
and because this might be made manifest, and apparent to all men, he has
wrought this miracle before your eyes. And this, says my Author, was made
known to the Bishop by Revelation. O be wary how you abuse the pre^ent time of
life by living in sin and wickedness. Eccles. 7.17. Explained.
Be not over much wicked (says Solomon), neither be thou foolish for why
should thou dye before thy time? that is, be not careless of falling into
any gross sin; he that sins lea^t sins overmuch, but yet the goodness of
God is such (says Cajetane) that he thinks not overmuch of it, Cajetan. in loc.
unless our negligence and willfulness be such, as that it carries us from
sin to sin, into some heinous crime; for that cause will God to cut thee off
before thy time; or (as some render the words) in a time that is not thine;
that is, before thine Old Age, for that is man's time of dying, when the time
of living (according to the course of man's nature) is expired: neither feed
thy fancy with hopes and promises of time to come, saying, as some do; let me
have this day, and God shall have to morrow; For as Bildad speaks of the
wicked, Job 18.10.
The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way; this
thou may find in thy greatest mirth and jollity; Thou may be taken
suddenly in the trap, and be enforced to suffer a sudden overthrow.

Eighthly, Should thou be suffered to live long upon the Earth, yet thou must
remember that a strict account must be given to God of all thy Time; and how
thou have spent it. It is a great Tallent that God will (without question)
reckon with us for. The Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations has this passage,
Thou will bring the day that thou have called, and they shall be like unto me;
which words, Lament. 1.12.
(however they are prop^rly to be understood of the Enemies of the Church, on
whom God would in due time execute those threatenings denounced against them,
and then their estates should be as sad as the Churches now was, Bernard. Tho.
Aquin. Sap. 5.
yet) are expounded by some of the day of Judgment who read the words thus,
Vocavit adversum me Tempus the Lord called Time, to witn^sse against me, and we
may make use of that reading. For amongst other things whereof we are to be
charged and burdened; one will be Time, and when all Creatures (the Devils not
excepted) shall come, and commence their suits against all sottish and
senseless Sinners, accusing them, and requiring Justice against them for the
wrong they did, both against the Creator and Creature, by abusing them,
misapplying them, and enforcing them against their wills to serve their lusts
and brutish appetites; Time shall be one of the principal accusers, and be
called to bring in her Evidence: Come Time (will God say) look upon the
Prisoner at the Bar; Do thou know that Man, that Woman? Yea, Lord, very
well, I have bin acquainted with them, and served them by thy appointment all
their life, for 30, 40, 50, 60 years (more or less): Well; speak Time, what
can thou say against them? How have thou bin used by them? speak truly and
freely, etc. Great God, and most Righteous Judge, Thou did appoint me to
attend on them, and to furnish them with opportunities for their souls good;
and to call on them to hear, to read, to pray daily; (besides the seventh
part, reserved to be wholly employed this way); but I have bin wasted and
consumed by them, in serving of their several lusts; sometimes I was spent in
sluggish idleness and sottishness; Complaint was often made of a want in Me,
for the performance of what thou requiredst to be ^one, when I was misspent and
abused: So many years were consumed in vain sports, idle company, superfluous
feeding and sleeping, whole nights in playing and gaming, and yet not one hour
(all being put together) in a year, that was spent in praying and calling on
thy Name; most part of my Service they employed in hun^ing after the World, in
vile courses of profaneness and filthiness, and doing mischief, in getting and
going to Hell; which had I bin emp^oyed rightly, they might with far less
trouble have done much good, an^ attained happiness and glory; Few hours (nay
few minutes) was I employed in seeking thy glory, doing good to others, or
working out the Salvation of his Soul; Besides, Lord, this I can further say
--. Nay, Time, Thou have said enough! Now what can thou say, poor Soul? what
will thou p^ead in this case? Why? (it may be thou will p^ead) I have indeed
spent my time id^y and sinfully; but I expected that time would have continued
longer with me, and then I would have improved it better: And will this plea
stand thee in any stead? Think I beseech you of the day of reckoning for time
misspent, and that in time.

ninthly and Lastly, Consider what a stamp both of honor and disgrace the Holy
Ghost puts upon such as use, or use not, the time that God has allotted for
doing of good. Such as have used their time aright, and laid hold of
opportuniti^s offered, they are e^teemed wise and understanding men; Eccles.
8.1, -- 5. Explained.
Who i^ as the wise man (says Solomon), Eccles. 8.1? that is, What Creature
under Heaven is so excellent as the wise man is? none to be compared to him,
Now who this wise man is, he shows in the words fo^lowing, and exemplifies it
in sundry Points, which require great wisdom: and then determines, verse. 5. The
heart of the wise man discerns both Time and Judgment: he discerns the time
when every thing should be done, and the best way how it should be done. Deuteronomy.
32.19. Psalm. 90.12, 1 Ch^on. 12.32. Est. 1.13.
This wisdom Moses wished on Israel's behalf, Deuteronomy. 32.19. And prayed for,
Psalm. 90.12. And for this were the Sons of Isachar highly commended, 1 Chronicles.
12.32. they were men that had understanding of the times to know what Israel
ought to do: So Ahashuerosh his Counselors are ^tyled wise men, because they
knew the times, Esther. 1.13. that is* they could order things fittly to the
times, and that justly according to the Law; and were able to order all
businesses and affairs accordingly. Ephesians. 5.15.
And this St. Paul (likewise) counts wisdom^ as a^ pears by that advice of his,
Ephesians. 5.15. Walk Circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise men; redeeming the
time, because the days are evil: as if he should have said, If you h^ve once
learned to rede^m your time in th^se sinful days, you shall show your selves
to b^ truly wise, and not fools.

For (on the contrary) such disrespect and scorn does* the Scripture cast on
those as want this wisdom, Folly is with them that have such a price as Time
put into their hands, Prove. 17.16.
but have not a heart to make the right u^e thereof. How do ye say, We are wise
(says God to the Jews), (yea, to the learnede^^ of them) (by his Prophet
Jeremiah, Jer. 8.8?) That is, Jer. 8.8. Enlightened.
how can ye say it for shame; with what face can you speak it? And why so?
Surely, for that they were more brutish and ignorant in laying hold on time and
opportunity, than mere Animals. The Stork in the Air knows her appointed Time,
and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow ob^erve the time of their
coming: this People (says God) knows not the Judgment of the Lord, verse. 7.
And for ignorance, and neglect of this, our Savior brands the Scr^bes and
Pharisees (those learned Doctors of the Law) for Hypocrites, Math. 16.1, -- 5.
for that they did not Discern the signs of the Times Math. 16.1, 2, 3, 4.
They could Prognos^icate fair or foul weather by the face of the Sky; but they
could not by those clear Predictions of the Prophets, and the miraculous
demonstration of Christ's Power, discern the time of Christ's coming into the
World, who was sent for the salvation of mankind, nor what this time called for
at their hands; and therein they showed themselves no better then a Company of
Hypocritical fools; and so he left them: Thus you see how God esteems of the
one and other. If then you would show your selves truly wise, and not have the
fools-Capp put upon your heads; make the right use of that time which God
affoards you for your good: Many more Motives I might bring, that have much
weight in them to quicken your dullness, and hasten your endeavors in making
use of your time: As from the practice of the Heathens; Titus Vespasian cried
out Amici, diem perdidi, for as much as no man had received benefit by him that
day: And from the Practice of worldly men, who watch for all Tides, wait for
all Times, Sail by all Winds, Court all opportunities, and greedily catch, and
thirstily use them, to promote their ends; Yea, from the Devil himself, Rev.
12.12.
who is busy because he knows his time to be short. But I desire not to say
all, that I might say to this Point; but enough and enough has bin said. If by
all that has bin said, any of you be wrought upon to husband the time of your
^^nding in Gods Vineyard, better then heretofore you have done; Remembering that
the time of this life is not for the Body but for the Soul, and for Her only
was it assigned and appointed: Let not (then) thy Body bereave thy Soul of that
time which belongs to it, for its welfare; but for thy Soul's good, abridge
thy Body rather of what it craves: Should some special friend, or great man
come to take up his Qua^ters in our House, we are content for a time to
withdraw into the worst part of it, that he may be well accommodated. Do thou
the same, says Bernard; and be content for the good of thy soul to abate of
thy delights and pleasures, ease and sleep; Genesis 40.14.
and say unto thy soul as Joseph to Pharaoh's Butler, Think on me when it shall
be well with thee; and I will remember thee if thou now do this for me, Genesis
40.14.

But, Amasa whom Joab had slain (which the men of Judah stood gazing upon) and
must be removed before we proceed in ^ur march. 2 Samuel 20.12.


If t^y hard and impenitent heart suggests such a thought as this,

What thou say, is not impossible: but that thou, who have bin long settled
upon thy Lees, and yet go on presumptuously in a course of sinning upon hope
of long life, and repenting then, should in thy Old age meet with Repentance,
Non dico, Salvabitur; non dico, Damnabitur. Aug.
is very improbable and unlikely, (albeit we dare not determine any thing): I
shall first illustrate this by Comparisons, and then render you the reasons of
it.

The unlikelinesse of it may be set out, by these and such like Similitudes: If
one after a great Rain cannot go over a running Brook at noon, when the waters
are low, will it not be much harder to get over that Brook at night, when all
the Streams are come to one course or current? So will it not be harder
(think thou) to repent after the committing of a hundred sins then ten? Are
not sparks sooner quench^d then flames? and green wounds sooner healed than
festered soars? Is not the Nayl that is driven in with the Hammer into a piece
of Timber, fastre^ with many blows? At the first driving of it we strike but
easily, but afterward we redouble our strength, and with often striking, drive
it so home that it cannot be gotten out till the Timber comes to be consumed in
the fire. Many the like Similitude are used to good purpose by Divines, to give
you to understand the danger of delaying to bring forth good fruit to God, till
old age. But I shall leave Resemblances, and come to the Reasons of it, which
are many.

First, In regard of the habit of sinning, which through custom and long
continuance in sinning, thou will get. And a habit is hardly left: Can a
Blackmore change his skin, Habitus qui multis actionibus acquiritur,
difficillime amittitur. Jer. 12.23. Enlightened Job. 20.11.
or a Leopard his spotts (says the Prophet), then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil? As if he should have said, Ye are so habituated in evil,
that there is no hope at all of your reclaiming: As soon may the Blackmore turn
white, or the Leopard spottlesse, as ye turn good after so long and obstinate
persistance in your wickedness: Read Job 20.11. there you shall find, that the
sins of Youth are hardly left in Age.

Secondly, Whilst we are in our sins, we are in the power and possession of
Satan; and the longer we inure our selves to sin, the faster hold has the
Devil on us, and the more established and strengthened is his Kingdom in our
hearts: He holds his possession with more power and strength, when he can
prescrib^ so many years, or time out of mind; Oh! how hard will it be then to
expel him?

Thirdly, The longer we live in sin, the more does God withdraw his grace; and
depart the further from us; and without his grace, our conversion will never be
effected. Poenitenti veniam spopondit Deus; sed vivendi in crastinum non
spopundit. Chrysostom.
He that has promised forgiveness to the Penitent, has not promised to give
the grace of Repentance to him that deferres it, Albeit he has promised to
accept of thee, if thou turn to him to morrow; yet he has not p^omised that
thou shall live till to morrow.

Fourthly, Put case thou do live till old age, and then bring forth the Fruit
of a Reformed Life; yet that time is not so seasonable for Fruit, in regard it
will not be so comfor^able to thy self; nor so acceptable unto God, as the
fruit of the first or second year will be.

When old age falls in travel of Childe-birth, that had bin before Childlesse,
there is like to be a hard brunt, and sad banquet of it; So is it in the new
birth of old sinners: For old age is that time that Solomon speaks of, Eccles.
12.1. etc. Verse. 2. -- 7. Explained.
Eccles. 12.1. Years, where^n thou will say I have no pleasure in them: And the
reason is rendered, verse. 2. -- 7. I is an age wherein the Sun the Light, the
Moon, the Stars will be darkened in respect of any delight, thou can take in
their sweet shine: Those Creatures which God has made for the comfort of Man,
either by Day or Night, shall be all darkened unto thee; and all comforts,
taken in thy younger years, will be turned into discomforts: And the Clouds
will return after Rain; there will be a continual succession of miseries, (like
the weather in April); as one shower is unburthened, another is brewed; and thy
sky will still be overcast with Clouds: In that day, the keepers of thy house
shall tremble; Thy Arms which are the guard of this thy House of Clay, and thy
Hands which are for thy hodies defense, shall be taken with the Palsy; And thy
strong men, thy Thighs and Legs, which like Posts and Pillars b^ar up thy House
(the Body,) those strong supporters shall bow themselves, and sink under thee.
And thy Grinders, thy Teeth which like Milstones grind thy meat, shall fail
thee, because they are few, or none; their mortizing will be loosed, their
sockets cast them, and those that remain so worn out with daily use, that they
will be unserviceable to thee; grinding very slowly and with great difficulty.
And those that look out at the Windows; Thine eyes which look out at thy
eyelids, will be darkened, either blind or dim: The Doors will be shut in the
Streets when the sound of grinding is low, such will be the weakness of O^d
Age, that it shall affect privacy and retiredness, not caring to go abroad to
feastings and merry-makings; thy slow feeding having made thee unfit for other
men's Table. And thou shall rise up at the Voice of the Bird; thy sleep shall
depart from thine eyes, so that every little noise, the Crowing of the Cock,
the Chirping of a Bird shall awake thee. And all the Daughters of music shall
be brought low; those many parts of the Ears and Instruments of Hearing shall
be humbled; The Anvile is worn, the Hammer is weak, the Drum is unbraced, the
Air is grown thick, the Music is marred; 2 Samuel 8.35.
and (with old Barzillai) thou will take no pleasure in the sweetest melody.
Thou will then be afraid of that which is high; not only of God (as some
understand it) to whom thou art speedily to give an account of thy self; But
thy decrepit Age, shall make thee so unfit to move, that thou shall not be able
to go up any ascent, afraid to ascend a staire; even in plain ground, thou
shall be afraid of every rubb and clodd that lies in thy way, lest thou
stumble at it. Then thy Almond Tree shall flourish, the white blossoms of Age
shall cover thy head: And the Grasshopper shall be a burden to thee; thy
stooping shoulders (which in aged persons stick up and cannot bear a load)
shall seem burchensome. And desire shall fail, those lusts and strong desires
after pleasures which were in former times of thy youth, shall now be gone and
past, for that thou art now going to thy long home, that is, the grave. And the
mourners go about the Streets; thy Neighbors and Friends, or hired Persons
prepare all things r^ady for thy Funeral, and are expecting when they shall
follow thy Hearse to the place of Burial.

now, can any imagine that such an Age as this is, is seasonable to begin such
a work in, as Repentance is? Nehemiah complained of the Jews, that in building
of the walls of Jerusalem, they laid the heaviest burden on the oldest men; we
are too cruel to our selves in putting off the hardest task to our latter time.
Therefore Solomon goes on; Hierom. in loc.
and presses this Exhortation to young men; Before the Silver cord be loosed,
or the Golden bowl be broken, or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the
Wheel broken at the Cisterne; that is, B. B. Hall. Paraph. in loc.
before all our natural and vital Spirits, be utterly exhausted, and all the
Functions and Offices of Life be quite discharged, which shall be in the last
act of Death; that they would remember God: For as when the Cord is loosed, and
the Bucket broken, and the Pitcher broken at the Well, or the Wheel at the
Cistern, no water can any more be drawn; So when these Vital parts of ours
fail, there can be no longer protraction of Life: We would think him little
less then mad, that having a great journey to go, and a great load to carry,
and having choice of other lusty Horses, would lay all his Carriage upon a poor
feeble jade, that could scarce stand upon his legs, or bear himself up, and
suffer the other to go empty; yet such is thy folly, who put off thy
Repentance and amendment of life till thy hairs grow gray.

Besides, It will then be very hard to find out the true ground from whence
that Repentance of thine arises; and to assure thy self of the Truth of it.
That repentance which men take up in time of sickness or old age, and trust
unto, is rather a mere cessation from sin, then true Repentance; sin leaves
them rather than they leave sin; Or else it arises from self-love, and not
from the love of God; the Soul being then possessed with the fear of Death and
Hell, which causes them to bewail their former misspent lives; And if this be
the ground thereof, what is there more then nature in thee? When a Beast falls
into danger it will struggle to save it self: Nor can the Stream rise higher
then the Fountain. Were it out of love which thou bear to God, that thou now
forsakest thy sins, and resolvest to enter upon holy Duties; why was it not
done sooner? Proceeded those things from love, when they are soonest done, that
man shall greive that they were done no sooner.

And put case that thy Repentance shall then prove true and sound, yet it will
not be so Acceptable unto God: for as much as he has not so much honor by the
Fruit which we then begin to bear in our Old Age, as he would have by that
which we bring forth in Youth. The Repentance of the Theif upon the Cross,
(which is often pleaded, and from whose example so many presume of mercy (and
it is a hard case (says one) when a Thief must guide us, Dr. Done.
and be an example to us) albeit it was true, and sufficient for the Salvation
of his Soul, yet it brought not that glory to God, (setting aside the miracle)
which it might have done, had it bin earlyer; nor so much glory to himself. For
as he that spends his Patrimony prodigally, has the lesser portion from his
Father in the end; so he who spends his days sinfully, must expect the lesser
glory from God, if in case he (in the end of his days) obtains a pardon.

Wherefore, as you tender the Salvation of your souls, make a due application
of these things unto your selves, and consider seriously, whether it will be
easier for you to amend, and reform your lives now, or hereafter; now in
health, or hereafter in sickness; now when the burden of your sins is lesser,
or hereafter when they will be heavier upon your Consciences; now, when grace
is near, or hereafter when it shall stand at a farther distance: And take heed*
that you add not sin to sin, by your delays: Say not to thy Neighbor, Go and
come* again to morrow (says Solomon,) much less, say so to thy God, Prove 3.28.
and to his blessed Spirit. God likes it not to be thus put off; he loves not
those who have Fruit to seek (as the Foolish Virgins had their Oil), when he
calls for it. To Day if you will hear my Voice, Math. 25.
harden not your hearts (says God, Psalm. 95.8.
Psalm. 95.8.) Let not the cry of that di^mal Raven, Cras, Cras, To morrow, to
morrow, be your note; This was that which Austin misliked in himself, Aug.
Conses. c. 5.
and confessed: Why not now Lord? Why not now? Lay hold upon every opportunity
offered for thy souls good, and make good use of the acceptable time. 1 Cor.
6.2.
Behold, this is the acceptable time, this is the Day of Salvation, even whilst
God calls upon thee to be fruitful, 1 Cor. 6.2. Otherwise take heed lest God
deals by thee as Alexander dealt by a Soldier of his, whom he found mending of
his Arms when all the Battle was in array, and ready to fight; He cashierd him,
saying, Inutilis aci qui pararet arma tunc, cum iis utendum. Plutarch.
that he was unworthy of his Service, who was then to provide his Arms when he
was to use them. Take heed that God does not casheire thee with contempt and
scorn, who, neglecting the time, allotted to thee for thy good; think
hereafter to amend thy ways and reform thy evil life. And so much of the first
aggravating Circumstance of this Figg Tree's barrenness; It had stood three
year and bore nothing: The next aggravation is from the means it had of
fruitfulness, in these words,

(...), Text.
On (this) Fig Tree.

This Tree which I have thus planted in my own Vineyard, and on which, I have
had an eye for many years together; This Fig Tree which has bin cultured and
dressed by my pains and labor; and which I have nourished, visited, spared;
This is that Tree on which (notwithstanding all my care and pains) no Fruit is
growing. Observe,

To sin against the means adds weight unto the sin, and is most provoking:
The more means we have to make us good, the greater is our sin and danger, if
we become not good, or profit not thereby.

This People (said Moses to the Lord concerning Israel) have sinned a great
sin, Exodus 32.31.
and have made them gods of Gold, Exodus 32.31. A great sin it was in its own
kind and nature; Idalotry is a sin that God detests; but it was the greater,
being against so many means: A Law had bin delivered unto them not long before,
in a most terrible and fearful manner, that they might know how great a God
they served, Exodus 19. and 20, 22.
which forbad that sin: Moses was gone to the Mount for more; Aaron was left
with them, to counsel and direct them until Moses was returned; yet they call
for other gods to go before them back into Egypt, Acts 7.39, 40.
Acts 7.39, 40.

You shall often find the sins of that People aggravated from the means that
they had, Psalm. 78. Ezekiel. 16. Isa. 1, 2, and 5, 1, 2, and 65, 2. Jer. 7.43, 14.
and yet despised, Psalm. 78. Ezekiel. 16. that whole Psalm, and that whole Chapter
is spent on that subject. So, Isa. 1.2, and 5, 2. etc. and 65.2. Jer. 7.13, 14,
15. Dan. 9.5, 6. Mich. 6.3. etc.

Thus was David's sin aggravated, (as Nathan shows by a Parable, and enforces
him to confess as much). Dan. 9.5, 6. Mich. 6.3. 2 Samuel 12.2.
So was Solomon's, 1 King. 11.9. the Like was King Ahaz's, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. By
many examples out of the Old Testament, might we confirm this Truth. 1 King.
11.9. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. Mat. 11.21.


Nor is the New Testament wanting to us, for proof of what has bin delivered;
Hear how Christ upbraydeth and testifies against those three Cities, Corazim,
Bethsaida, and Caperuaum, for their not profitting by the means, Math. 11.21.
Woe to thee Corazim, etc. These were Cities of Galilee where Christ often
Preached; and where most of His Works were done: Out of Bethsaida He called His
first Disciples, Joh. 1.44. Lue 4.31.
Peter, Andrew and Philip: In Capernaum he Preached almost every Sabbath Day,
and made them astonished at his Doctrine, Luke 4.31. And because they had all
these means, heard all his preaching, and profited not thereby; therefore their
case was worse, and their Judgment would be heavier then that of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Mat. 10.13, 14. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at
the Day of Judgment then for those who have the means and contemn it: Mat.
10.13, 14.
Go^ can better bear any thing then the abuse of his grace in the free offers
of mercy.

Hear also what Christ says of his Countrymen the Jews, Joh 15.24. If I had
not done the Works amongst them, John 15.24. Enligh^ened
which no other man did they had not had sin, but now they have both seen, and
h^ted both me and my Father; the meaning is, Not that they had bin absolute^y
free from sin but Comparative^y without it; they had not stood guilty of so
heinous a sin as now they do, in contemning both me, and my Father that sent
me: And this may b^ farther confirmed by that passionate and pathetical
Complaint which Christ made over Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37, 38.
Mat. 23.37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem* -- how often would I have gathered
thee under my wings? And the soar punishm^nt, inflicted on them for this their
sin shows the heinou^nesse thereof, for He never punishes any, Vltra
Condignum. Now the soarest Judgments have bin inflicted on those that have
de^pi^ed the means of grace here in this life, and will be in the life to come.

Take wi^h you one or two more Particular instances. Of Judas, our Savior
says thus to Pilate, John 19.11.
He that delivered me into thy hand, has the greater sin: Treason is a sin
odious enough, but his was the greater, for that he had received so many
favors from Christ; he was called to be one of his Disciples and Followers*
had seen his miracles, heard his sweet and blessed Sermons, was made his
Treasurer and Pursse-bearer; Now to betray such a Master must needs aggravate
his Sin, and make it the more loathsome.

I shall further instance in Herod, who, in putting John into Prison, Luke
3.19, 20.
committed a sin more fowl than either Adultery or than Incest, Luke 3, 19.20.
that was added above all, that is, above all his other evils which he was
guilty of, (and they were more then a few) this was a sin above the rest; more
hateful to God, and odious in his eyes in contemning the grace of the Gospel;
and offering Violence to the Messengers of it, especially to them that we have
go^ some good by, (as Herod had done by John). Enough has bin said for
confirmation of the Point. I will briefly lay down some Grounds or Reasons of
it, and so put it to some Use.

Sins of this nature are accompanied with horrible ingratitude against the God
of Heaven; His mercy is undervalued, more dishonored then by the sins of
simple ignorance. Now unkindnesse from them of whom we have well deserved is
the more grievous: Psalm. 35.12. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Joh. 10.32.
Man complains of this, (^o dio David, Psalm. 35.12. and God complains of
this, Deuteronomy. 32.6. So did Christ, for which of my good Works do ye stone me?
Joh. 10.32. (of which sin we have spoke largely before).

Seco^d^y, The more of the will is in any thing, the more is in the well or ill
doing of it; now in sinning against the means, there is much of the will in it,
and so the more contempt and obstinacy, yea, Jo^. 5 40. Mat. 23.37. Job 34.27.
1 Samuel 15.23.
rebellion against God therein, He added rebellion to his sin, Job 34.37. Now
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, as Samuel told Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23. (and
of Witches we cry out, To the ^^re with them, burn them). The more willful any
one is in sinning, the more vile and sinful he must needs be. Every sin rolls
the stone to the door of the Sepulcher, but willfulness and ob^^inacy is like
the sealing up of that stone before rolled, Math. 27. verse. 66. Math. 27.60. 2 Samuel 12.11.
It makes our sins as reproachful as Absolom's, who committed wickedness in the
face of the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.11.

Thirdly, In sinning against the means all excuse is taken away from man, John
15.22. now they have no Cloak for their sin; Such cannot plead. Joh 15.22.
They knew not. Had they known, they would not have done it. Have they not
heard, does not Israel know says the Apostle, Romans 10.18, 19.
Romans 10.18, 19. yes verily, their sound went into all the Earth, and their
words unto the end of the World. No^e so deep in Hell as knowing-men, Luke
12.48. Did not I warn you said Reuben to his Brethren, Luke 12.48. Genesis 42.21.
and you would not hear, Genesis 42.21. So will God say to such as have ha^ the
means, and profit not; Did not I tell you, warn you, advise you, threaten you?
but you have despis^d all my w^rnings; This presses the o^scien^e with a h^avy
weight of guiltiness.

Fourthly, In respect of the proportion and correspondence that the account is
to bear with the receipt the sin must be great: By how much the ^re^te^ the
grace is, Amos 3.2.
by so much stricter the account must be. Much g^^ce recei^ed, asks for much
duty; an^ great du^y neglected, must needs be great sin in the receiver; and
the greater sin the greater punishment: Luke 12.48.
^o whom God gives much, of him he requires much; He requi^es a larger fruit,
or a larger punishment. Let us now come to the Application of the Point.



The sins of the Jews were greater (caeteris paribus) then the sins of the
Gentiles, for in Jury was God known; Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He has not dealt so (says David) with every other Nation, neither have they
known his Judgments. And the sins of the Christian (if other Circumstances be
matches) are greater then the sins of the Jews; sins committed under the Law,
were not so great in God's account, as those which are committed under the
Gospel: we have greater means, and a clearer light, Isa. 25.7. 2 Cor. 3.18.
and a larger effusion of the spirit then ordinarily they in those days had;
they had but an aspersion of the Spirit, a sprinkling of it; but on us (living
under the Gospel,) there has bin a pouring of it forth in a very large and
plentiful measure; Acts 1.17.
which greatly aggravates our sins and will inhance the reckoning, Heb. 2.2, 3,
Heb. 2.2, 3, 4.
4.

And amongst us that live under the Gospel, the sins of some must needs be
greater, then the sins of others: How did our forefathers (say some) who l^ved
a hundred or two hundred years ago? I must tell you, That might be (and
questionless was) accepted in them that will not be in us; they lived but in
the dawning of the day, in Comparison of that light which we now enjoy. A man
in the beginning of a clear night, can count the S arrs that do appear; but
after a while they appear so fast, that he is confounded: So those Stars, I
mean Godly and Faithful Preachers, in the Days of our forefathers were very
few, and might easily be numbered; Such a painful Minister five miles or ten
miles off (it might be not within twenty): but who are able to reckon up the
number of those shining Lamps, that our Heavens are now bespangled withal?

And yet some P^^c^s, some Congregations have enjoyed more means, and that a
longer time then others; Faithful preaching they have had for thirty, forty,
sixty years amongst them successively; and can we think that God expects no
more from them, then he does from those, who have enjoyed the labors of a
faithful Pastor, but for some few years only? to whom much is given, of them
much shall be required, where he has given (...), have ac^epts not (...).

And (to come a little nearer, and closer with the point); Some Persons stand
^^ore guilty before God of sin then others; they have bin of a longer standing
in the School of Christ, read more, and heard more, and know more of God's will
then others, and therefore must look, in case of disobedience, to be beaten
with more stripes then others. Beloved,

Sweet Ointment cau^eth rank, and strong bodies to smell worse than they did
before. And the Sun shining upon the Dunghill and heating it with its beams,
causes it to send forth the more loathsome ^avour; So is it with a wicked
heart it becomes more vile, for the sweet favor of the Go pel; and their sins
more noisome in the No^^rils of Almighty God: Hence is it that Satan is well
content that we shall attend unto the means, and resort to God's House, Hear,
Read, and Pray, etc. p ovided that we sin against the means, in not profiting
thereby; He knows full well, that such sins do press the conscience with more
guiltiness, dishonor God, discredit the Gospel most; and (as a Taper in the
hand of a Ghost) it causes the sinner to seem more ghastly: Swearing, Lying,
Killing, Stealing, Whoreing, and such like; are not so foul, so loathsome, so
ghastly in any Nation under Heaven, as in the English Nation. Nor shall they be
so severely punished by God in any Nation, as in Ours (as anon I shall show).
We have bin lifted up to Heaven a great deal higher, in regard of the means
then any other Nation has bin, and therefore must look to be thrown lower into
Hell then any other, Ideo deteriores estis, quia metiores esse debetis.
because of our contempt. The Devil (says one) will stand in Hell on tiptoe
upon and English man's back, and if ever he has a dainty bit, he will pick it
from off the carcasses of such, as live under plenty of means, and profit not
thereby: And when such shall plead for themselves at the last Day before Christ
their Judge, and say, Lord, We have often heard thee preach in our Synagogues,
we have eat and drank in thy presence we have bin frequent resorters to thy
House, both upon Sun-Dayes and Week-Dayes; this shall but aggravate their
wickedness: True, will Christ say to such (as being wicked yet thus plead,)
Thou begannest the week with hearing two Sermons, and ye^ did Cousen,
Defraud, Oppress, and Lie, Swear again and again, that very week when thou
heardest those two Sermons; And that very day when thou wentest to such a
Lecture, did hear a man of note and fame, that very day thou were drunk,
did act such or such a wickedness etc. And can thou think that thou shall
fare the better for that? no surely, but as Galba answered that rich Guardian,
who hoped to find the more favor for his wealth; So will God answer thee, in
that respect, Thou shall have this favor to have the higher and the whiter
Cross: the like favor did Ahasuerosh show his Favorite Haman, Esth. 7.9, 10.
whom he hanged on the Gallows that was 50 cubits high.

India, which closes it self against the beams of the Sun; Nor like those
Fields which Pliny makes mention of, which are the dryer for the Rain, and
moyster for Dust, Plin. l. 31. c. 4.
(which caused Cicero jestingly to say that in that place Rain did cause dust,
and Sunshine dirt). God expects better things from us; as I shall now more
particularly show you.

First, He looks that we should not only profit by the means, but that our
profiting should be answerable to the plenty of means affoarded whether they be
Publiq^e or Private, Outward or Inward; Verbal or Real: The rain coming often
upon the ground must cause it to bring forth herbs, not one here, Heb 6.7.
and another there; but, plenty of herbs for the Dresser, Heb. 6.7. According
to the plenty of means he looks that our profiting should appear to all. 1 Timothy
4.15. 1 Timothy 4.15.
There are many needless and unprofitable enquires made concerning God's
Ordinances; as whether Reading, be not Preaching, and to be preferred before
it? and whether Prayer be not preferred to either? Each Ordinance has its use
and end, and is appointed for thy profit and benefit; and it is expected that
thou should profit by all, both by the one and the other, by thy Reading,
Hearing, Praying, Singing, Communicating. Leave contending, and fall to
profiting. Wherefore has God furnished his Church with such plenty of means,
variety of gifts? but that we should thereby be better edified, Fox. Mart. fol.
150.
and bring forth abundantly? Bradford bitterly laments his own
unprofitablenesse, under the variety and plenty of means. Here in London (says
he) be such, and so many godly and ^earned Sermons, which these uncircumcized
ears of mine do hear (at the least thrice in a week) which were able to burst
any man's heart, to relent, to repent, to believe; to love, and ^o fear that
Gracious and Omnipotent Lord; but my Adamantine, obstinate, most unkind and
unthankful heart, hearing my Lord so sweetly crying and calling unto me, now by
His Law, now by his Gospel, and now by all His Creatures, to come, to come,
even to Hi^ self; I hide me with Adam, I play not only Samuel, running to Ely,
but I play Jonas, running to the Sea; and there I sleep upon the hatches,
until He please to raise up a Tempest; to turn, and look upon me as he did
upon Peter, etc. Had he cause to Complain of his own unprofitableness under
such variety and plenty of means, What cause then have we to Complain thereof
^t this Day?

Secondly, As our profiting must be answerable to the plenty and variety of
means; so according to their Excellency. The better ^oo^ (we say) the better
blood. Our Savior aggravates the sins of the Jews, showing, that the sins of
the Ninevites were not so great as theirs, Math. 12.41.42.
in this respect, They repented upon the Preaching of Jonah, and now a greater
then Jonah was there; at whose Preaching they repented not, Math. 12.41, 42.
And the Queen of the South (whom the Ethiopian Chronicles call Mackeda) She
shall rise up in Judgment against them to condemn them, for that she came out
of a far Country to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, and that they having a greater
then Solomon amongst them, would not vouchsafe to step out of their Doors to
hear him. And this our Savior took very ill (and well he might) that they set
not as high a price upon Him and his Doctrine, as she did upon Solomon and his
wisdom: Thou live under the Ministry of such or such a man, whom thou
confessest to be a powerful and soul-saving Teacher; thou hear him
constantly, and conceivest him to be one of the ablest Teachers in the Town,
City, Country; Is thy profiting answerable? God expects that thou shoulest be
richer in Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Patience, etc. than others that live
not under such excellent means as thou do, and thou have cause to blush for
shame, to see Daniel and his Companions to be fatter, and look better with
their pulse, then thou do with all thy Dainty fare, Dan. 1.12, 15.
Dan. 1.22.15.

Thirdly, Our profiting must be answerable to the Time that we have enjoyed the
means; The want of this St. Paul sharply reproves in the Hebrews, when for the
time ye ought to have bin Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, Heb.
5.12.
which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as
have need of Milk and not strong Meat; In regard of the Time that they had the
means, they ought to have bin so well grounded in the Truth, as that they
might have bin Instructers of others in the Mysteries of Salvation; and in that
they were not so, their fault was the greater, and the more they had to answer
for: Cicero expected an extraodinary measure of knowledge in his Son, for that
he had heard and conversed with Cratippus, so long a time as a whole year: What
think you, does God expect from you who have lived many years under a settled
Ministry? how well grounded ought you to be in your Religion? and yet Alas,
how weak and ignorant are we? very Children in understanding: 2 King. 4.10.
Had we enjoyed the means no otherwise then the Sunamite did, in transitu, as
the Proohet passed by her House, God would have looked for some return: But the
Ark of God amongst us has not dwelt in Tents, and under Curtains, but a House
is prepared for it, where it has abided and bin settled for many years, he
has given us means to be better and more skillful in the Mysteries of
Salvation every day then other, to day then yesterday; this year, then the
last; He cannot, nor will He take it well; if like Children we should be ever
learning and never come to the Knowledge of the Truth. 2 Timothy 3.7.
Thus you hear what a profiting it is that God expects of us that live under
the means; It must be answerable to the plenty of the means, to the
excellency off the means; and proportionable to the time that we have enjoyed
them.

Now that I may (if it be possible) settle this Doctrine upon your Consciences;
let me commend a few things unto your most serious thoughts.

First, Know that God keeps a strict account of all the means that he has
affoarded unto you for your good; He records the very time when He sent His
Servants unto a People, when they began to Preach, in what King's Reign, and
how long they continued preaching unto a People, Isa. 1.1. Hos. 1.1. Amos 1.1.
It is upon Record how many Sermons they have Preached, Isa. 1.1. Hos. 1.1.
Amos. 1.1. John 4.54. 2 Cor. 13.1.
as, John 4.54. This was the second miracle that Christ did when He was come
out of Judea into Galilee: So, 2. Cor. 13.1. This is the third time that I am
coming unto you: Account is kept of what good is done at a Sermon, and how many
profited thereby, Acts 2.41. and so likewise of how many Sermons are lost; Acts
2.41.
and not one converted (without all question.)

Secondly, God keeps account (and that strictly) as of the means; so of our
several provocations in despising of those means; Numb. 14.22. Genesis 31.41.
Lev. 26.26. Job 19.1.3. Ainsworth in loc. Exodus 14.11, 12 Exodus 15.23, 24. Exodus
16.2, and 16, 20, and 27, 28. Exodus 17.1, 2. Exodus 32.8. Numb. 11.1, and 11, 4,
Numb. 14, 1, 2.
They have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my Voice
(says God, Numb. 14.22.) which number of Ten sometimes is taken indefinitely,
in Scripture, for many; As when Jacob told Laban that he had deceived him ten
t^mes of his wages, that is, many times, and so elsewhere; But it is not to be
so taken here, for if we peruse the Scriptures, we shall find the several
provocations to be numbered. The first was at the Red Sea, Exodus 14.11, 12. The
second at Marah, Exodus 15. 23, 24. A third in the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus
16.2. A fourth about Mannah, in leaving it till the morning, contrary to God's
Command, Exodus 16.20. A fifth about the same thing, in going out to gather it
upon the Sabbath, Exodus 16.27, 28. A sixth at Rephidim, Exodus 17.1, 2. A
seventh at Horeb in making the golden Calf, Exodus 32.8. The eighth at Taberah,
Numb. 11.1. The ninth at Kibroth Hattaavah, Numb. 11.4. The tenth at that time
when God thus charged them by their rebellion in Pharon, Numb. 14.1, 2. Thus
exact God is in keeping an account of our provocations, and that to good
purpose; For,

God will produce the means to witness against us if we profit not thereby;
So, 1 King. 11.9. God was angry with Solomon on because his heart was turned
from the Lord God of Israel, 1 King 11.9.
which had appeared unto him twice, says the Text; So God will one day lay
this to thy charge, I have spoken unto thee twice, yea, many times, of the same
thing; I have wrote four Evangelists, that out of the mouth of those four
witnesses you might believe; I have sent unto you such a Servant of mine, and
such another, yet all to no purpose: There is not a Sermon that you have heard,
not an Example that you have seen, not a Cross that you have felt, not a
Blessing that you have received; but shall testify against you for your
unprofitablenesse. If a whole County shall come in against a man at the
Assizes, you may well think that it will go hard with him.

Thirdly, The not profiting by the means, causes God to deprive us of them,
and take them from us, Isa, 5.3, Isa. 5.3. Amos 6.9, 11. Rev. 2.5. Jer, 7.12.
Amos 8. 9, 11, This God threatened to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. I will
remove thy Candlestick from thee, and God made good his word. What God speaks,
Jer. 7.12. Go now to Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I
did to it for the wickedness of my People Israel; So may I say, Go to those
seven Churches of Asia, and tell me if their Candle be not out; their
Candlestick removed as God threatened? And when this comes to pass, Lo it
will come to pass (says God, Ezekiel. 33.33.) then shall they know that a
Prophet has bin amongst them whom they disrespected. Ezekiel. 33.33.
When Guests begin to play with their meat, and blow over it; the Master of the
Feast bids take away, and calls for a Voyder: When Servants, having a Candle
allowed then to light them to their Lodging, let it burn out in waste, sitting,
sleeping, or chatting by the fire, the Master comes and snarcheth away their
light, and leaves them to grope in the dark their way to bed. It was not for
nothing that God would not that the staves should be plucked out of the Ark
when it rested; 1 King. 8.8.
though they were thrust in and hid, yet there they were to remain to let his
People understand that if they did not walk worthy of that mercy, he could, yea
would call for his Potters to remove it, 1 King. 8.2.

Fourthly, The not-profiting by the means* puts a man into a worse condition
then if he never had enjoyed the means (as was showed you in the proof of the
Doctrine, by Corazim, Bethsaida and Capernaum). It had bin better for such that
they had bin Sodomites and Gomorrheans: And the time will come that such a one
will wish, I would that I had bin a Sodomite or a Gomorrhean, rather then a
Christian; I would that I had bin an Indian a Pagan, a Turk, an Infidel, rather
then an Englishman: Not that God shows less mercy to us then to them, but in
regard of our despising so great mercy: It will be worse with us then with
them, Heb. 2.2, 3. Dan. 9.11. 2 King. 1.19. Mat. 33.32.
Heb. 2.2, 3.

Fifthly, For this is a sin that hastens wrath, and increases vengeance, Dan.
9.11. It calls to Vengeance as the Captain did to Elisha, 2 King. 1.19. come
down quickly. It fills up our measure the sooner, Math. 23.32. The Old World
was very sinful, but it filled not up the measure, till it despised Noha's
warning; nor was the measure of the Sodimotes filled, till they came to despi^e
Lot. When once God's Prophets come to be scorned and derided, then the Vessel
becomes full, it can hold no more. Then the wrath of the Lord arose* up against
His People, so that there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.


Sixthly, Nor is God ever so terrible or fierce against any in wrath, as
against those who have had the best means, and obstinately despised them. The
sinners in Sion shall be afraid, Isa. 33.14. Isa. 33 14.
they must expect devouring burning; Tribulation and anguish upon every soul
that does evil upon the Jew first, and also upon the Gentile; Romans 2.9. And
how, on the Jew first? not only for order of time, Romans 2.9.
but for greatness of punishment. Who can read that threatening without
astonishment, Jer. 7.13, -- 13.
Jer. 7.13, -- 17 and again, verse. 25. -- 28. God sent his Servants, yea all
his Servants to forewarn that People; verse. 29. The Lord has rejected and
forsaken them: the Generation of his wrath, There is unsupportable horror in
wrath, but in the generation of his wrath it is infinitely aggravated; As if
they were a People upon whom God would exercise not some one act of his
indignation, but multiply acts of his wrath on them, and that continually. It
was a sad Complaint which in that respect the Church makes, Lament. 1.12. never
sorrow like unto Her sorrow. Oh! Lament. 1.12.
that it may never happen to this Church of England to make the like Complaint.
After the clearest flash of lightening, follows the terriblest clapp of
thunder; Me thinks if these things were thought seriously upon, and laid to
heart, they could not but work a greater care in us then formerly; to profit by
the means of our good. But I forbear any further application of the point, give
me only leave to acquaint you with what the Oracle foretold of the City Nyna;
that it should never be won till the River became an enemy unto it Nyna.
which afterward came to pass; for through abundance of rain the River so
increased that it overthrew the Walls thereof. I wish that what that Oracle
foretold of Nyna may not be verified in us, in respect of plenty of means
enjoyed; Plenty of means has caused (through our corruption) a Deluge of
Opinions, and that such an Inundation of Heresy and Schism, that (it is to be
feared) if no sluice be made to let out and draw those waters, not only the
City, but the Kingdom will be ruined; For if a Kingdom be divided against it
self, How can it stand? But of the Complaint enough: Come we now unto the
sentence denounced against this Tree, for its barrenness.

Cut it down, Why Cumbers it the ground? Text.


Herein take notice, first, of the Severity of the sentence, Cut it down:
Secondly, of the Equity thereof, Why Cumbers it the ground?

Abscinde came, Cut it down.

Could He not as easily have done it, as spoke it? Yes, without question; But,

It is God's usual manner to speak before He strikes, to pronounce Judgment,
before He Executes it:

He seldom comes to that quick dispatch, a word and a blow, but without a word
to a blow, to an execution without warning, never.

At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation (says God), and concerning
a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, Jer. 18.7, 9.
and to destroy it. Jer. 18.7 9. Now therefore go speak to the men of Judah,
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says the Lord, etc. verse.
11. So then, God will speak unto a Nation, before He strik^ tha^ Nation; and
send His Servants to warn them, before He utterly destroy them. The Lord will
roar from Zion before He tear, and utter His Voice from Jerusalem that the
Inhabitants may be afraid, Amos 1.2, and 3, 8. His roaring is the warning
given, Amos 1.2, and 3, 8.
before He come and seize upon the Prey; He will be heard threatening, before he
befelt in executing of His Judgments.

I might be large and long in the proof of this, and bring many Instances for
the confirmation of the Point, I shall trouble you only with a few.

Before God brought the flood on the Old World, He gave warning thereof, First,
He acquainted Noah with his purpose, Genesis 6.13, 14. Genesis 6.13, 14. Heb. 11.7.
Heb. 11.7. and by him he warned the World in the building of the Ark; every
blow that was given with Axe or Hammer in the making thereof, was a warning
piece before the murtkering-piece was Discharged: His pains taken in the
building of toat Ark to eschew wrath, condemned the security of the World which
would not be warned.

The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was very great, and their sins grievous; yet God
would not destroy them before warning given; He sends Lot amongst them, who
(without doubt) Preached daily to them; not only by his regular and examplary
life, but likewise by his persuasion to Repentance and Obedience: For that
righteous man (says St. Peter) dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hearing, 2
Per. 2.8.
vexed his righteous soul from Day to Day with their unlawful deeds, 2. Per.
2.8. And the very night before their ru^ne, he admonished them (as a Prophet);
and advised them, Genesis 19.14.
(as a Father); but both in vain, Genesis 19.14.

Pharaoh and his People (as unworthy as they were) yet they must have warning
by Moses and Aaron before the Land be Plagued, Exodus 6.29.
Exodus 6.29. Ten several warnings they had, one after another, before they were
utterly destroyed in the Red Sea.

In Corah's case, God seemed to be more quick, and to proceed a pace toward
execution, the Earth opened Her mouth and swallowed them up quick, Numb. 16.31,
32.
(says the Text, Numb. 16.31, 32.) But God began not there; He first opened
his mouth, and Moses and Aaron theirs, and the Elders theirs; They had a
Reprieve; Numb. 16.5, 14, 20, 24, 25, 32.
and after another Summons before Execution, (which followed upon their
contumacy), Numb. 16.5, 14, 20.24.25, 32.

Ninevie shall be sent unto, and have warning given them before their
overthrow, yet forty Days and Ninevie shall be destroyed, Jon. 3.4, and 4, 10.
And other Heathen Nations shall have all of them their warning, as Babylon, and
Moab, and Egypt, Jon. 3.4, and 4, 10. Isa. 13.1, and 15, 1, and 17, 1, and 19,
1, and 21, 1, 11, 13, and 23, 1, and 30 6. 2 King. 17.6.
and Damascus, and Ammon, and Edom; all must hear of their burden before it
come, Isaiah is sent to them with it, as we read, Isa. 13.1, and 15, 1, and 17,
1, and 17, 1, and 19, 1, and 21, 1, 11, 13, and 23, 1, and 30, 6.

As for Israel and Judah, how often were they premonished of that Captivity,
which afterward befell them under the Assyrians? 2 King. 17.6. God had
testified against them long before by all his Prophets, and by all the Seers,
as by Ahijah, Jehu Eliah, Michaja, El^sha, Obadiah, Hosea, Amos, Joel, etc. by
all these he foretold them what should befall them, albeit they would take no
warning, 2 King. 17.14, 15, 16. 2 King. 17.14, 15, 16.
And, before the Captivity of Judah, and destruction of Jerusalem by the
Babylonians, they were forewarned of it by Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel, Micha,
Zephanie, for the space of threescore years to gether, even unto the very day
that they were taken Captive, abeit they would not hearken, nor receive
correction, Zeph. 2.3, 5. Zach. 7.12.
nor draw near unto the Lord, Zeph. 2.3, 5. Zachar. 7.12.

And before the last and utter subversion of the Jewish Nation how many
warnings were given them? John Baptist tells them that the Axe was now laid to
the very Root of the Tree, Mat. 3.10. So as utterly to destroy them, Mat. 3.10.
and cut them off from being a People: Our Savior himself (even with tears in
his eyes) tells them what would betide them, Luke 19.42. Luke 19.42. Mat.
22.37, and 24, 2, 15, -- 36.
In plain terms, He acquaints them with the manner of their destruction, and
the grievousnesse of it: So, Math. 23.37. and 24, 2, 15, -- 26. Behold, (says
Christ) I have told you before, that being forewarned you may before-armed and
prepared.

It was a Law established in Israel, Israel, and serve them; but if in Case
they would make no Peace, then they should all be put to the Sword, Deuteronomy.
20.10. etc.
and none of the men be spared, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11, 12, 13. which Law is approved
of by the very Heathen, and has bin put in practice by most Nations: When
Alexander besiged any City, he would send his Herald to it with a burning
Torch, and caused it to be proclaimed in that City, that if any man would
repair and submit himselt unto him within the Compass of time, that the Torch
continuing burning he should be spared, and find mercy; otherwise, nothing but
Fire and Sword was to be expected. The like we read of Tamerlane the warlike
Scythian, when he came against any place, he first displayed a white Flagg, in
token of mercy, if they accepted it, the second day a red Flagg, threatening
blood; the third day he caused a black Flagg to be hung forth, the Ensign of
Death; intimating unto them that now there was no mercy to be expected. Turk.
Hist. p. 344.
And the Turks at this day are of opinion that God would not prosper them in
their assaults, except they first make some offer of Peace unto their enemies
(how unreasonable soever, it matters not): so they did at the last fatal siege
of Constantinople. Now the Lord by this his practice does give us to understand
how well be approves of the Law which he had given to Israel, and that he who
is the God of Nature, is not willing that the Course of Nature should be
perverted.

More particulary God does this, First, for his chosen People's sake, that they
being warned, may not be taken unprepared, but that their Faith and Obedience
might be manifested in their believing and fearing of the Lord, and the tokens
of his wrath, Heb. 11.7.
Heb. 11.7. and that by their prayers and humiliations they might turn away
God's wrath, from a Nation (if it be possible) (as Moses did many times from
Israel). Or, if not so, yet that they themselves may find rest in the day of
trouble, Hab. 3.16.
Hab. 3.16.

Secondly, In regard of the wicked, that if it be possible they may be brought
to Repentance, and amendment of Life; and by his warnings fly from the wrath to
come (as John the Baptist intimates to the Scribes and Pharisees (that
generation of Vipers), Math. 3.7. But if in case they will take no warning,
Math. 3.7.
then that the mouth of wickedness may be stopped, and sinners left without
excuse; who are apt enough to say, Had we known or had warning of the danger,
Psalm. 51.4.
we would have prevented it. Solomon thus stopped the mouth of Shimei, Did not
I protest unto thee, saying, Know for a certain that in the day that thou go
out, 2 King. 2.42.
and walk abroad any whither, that thou shall surely dye? Why have thou not
kept the Commandment that I charged thee? And so will God one day stop the
mouths of all obdurate and impenitent Sinners, when they fall into the pit of
destruction. Did not I warn you of this, long since? Did not I protest unto
you, that if you wilfully persisted in your disobedience, you should be
destroyed? wherefore thy destruction is from thy self, thy blood be upon thine
own head.

severity of God in this Sentence, Cut it down, (of which anon); Romans 11.22.
so the goodness of God in foretelling of it, that it may be prevented. His
warnings are not set like lime-twiggs to catch us; but they are intended, as
Jonathans arrows were to David, for the preventing of future mischief. An
enemy that seeks our ruin, keeps close his intentions, and is glad to take us
at any advantage, and will steal upon us before we be aware (as the Pocher does
upon the Hare, whilst she sits upon her form, and then knocks her on the head);
Satan never barks before he bites, never tells before he tempts; because he
desires and endeavors the ruin of mankind: So it is with his Servants; Thus
dealt Absolon with his Brother Ammon, he spoke neither good nor bad unto him, 2 Samuel 13.22.28.
but waited for an opportunity to slay him unawares, 2 Samuel 13.22, 28. And the
King of Syria was offended that his secret Plots against the King of Israel,
were discovered unto him, whom he desired suddenly to surprise, 2 King. 6.8.
2 King. 6.8. And such was the project of Sanballat and Tobiah with other
enemies of the Church, they shall not know, neither see (say they) till we come
in the midst amongst them, and slay them, Neh. 4.11. God proceeds not thus with
us, Neh. 4.11.
His Battails are always with the noise of Drum and Trumpet, He reveals his
intentions to cut down and destroy, that he may not destroy; He warns before he
strikes, that we may by taking warning prevent the blow, and not be stricken by
him. The Cannon first kills, and after that makes the Report; But the Cl^p of
Thunder comes not before a flash of Lightning; the Lightening first invades the
sense, albeit the Thunder first breaks the Clouds, and makes way for it.

This indeed God need not do. The curse denounced against all transgressors of
his righteous Law is warning enough; but yet, that he may declare unto us the
riches of his mercy, how slow he is to warth, Psalm. 103.
and ready to forgive, he does this. The Father of mercies, God is often called
in Scripture, because mercy naturally proceeds from him; but we find him not
styled the Father of Revenge, Bernard. Lament. 2.23. Isa. 28.21.
because that is unwillingly inflicted; So says Jeremiah, He does not afflict
us willingly, nor grieve the Children of men; shewing-Mercy is his proper work.
Judgment is his strange work, Isa. 28.21. Therefore when he comes in a way of
Judgment against a People, he is said to come forth out of his place, Mich.
1.3. then he is in the place that he delights in, Mich. 1.3. Mich. 7.18.
when he sits upon his mercy Seat, Mich. 7.18.

Some threaten what they will do, and indeed would do it had they Power; but
this is all they can do, to threaten that they will do it, 1 King. 19.2. 2
King. 18.
as did Jezabel, 1 King. 19.2. and Rabshekah, 2 King. 18. But it is otherwise
with God, he has Vengeance in store; the sword is always girded on his thigh;
Albeit it be not always drawn, yet it is not rivetted in; His hand can take
hold of it and draw it forth, and then he will render vengeance on his enemies,
Psalm. 45.3. Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42.
and his sword shall devour flesh, Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42. But before it does so, he
will whet it, and make it glitter, (as Moses there speaks,) we may hear him
whetting of that Sword, and see the glittering of it, before he smite with it;
Nor does he proceed so far, but in case that a People or Nation turn not from
their evil ways upon former warnings. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword*
says David, Psalm. 7.12.
Psalm. 7.12. Yea, he has bent his how, and made it ready, he has also
prepared for him the Instruments of Death: The Bow shall be used before the
Sword; other Judgments sent before the Sword be put in Commission to devour
flesh. Indeed an Arrow when it is let fly out of the Bow, comes so swiftly as
that it is hardly discernable; (except we discern it at the first loosing and
watch it all the while) but the bending of the bow does not hurt us; it only
forewarns us of the Arrow that is ready in the Quiver to be taken out and put
into the Bow, to be let fly upon us for our sins, which are the white that we
our selves have set up; no sooner do we take that down, but God unbends his
Bow, and puts his Arrows again into his Quiver. I will bless the Lord (said
David), who has given me Counsel; so may we say, Psalm. 16.7.
I will bless God who has given me warning: It is a great mercy, and deserves
all thankful acknowledgment, and is as much as our lives are worth, had we the
grace to make use of these warnings.

Solomon speaks of evil men, they unders^and not Judgment. God has plied us
with warnings; but what was said of Ephraim, Prove. 28.5.
may be said of England, It has a silly heart, Hos. 7.11. And the same
Arguments that are brought to prove the one, Hos. 7.11.
may confirm the other: Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows
it not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it not,
verse. 9. their strength failed them; the Prognostic signs of their
approaching end was upon them, yet they were dull and stupid; they knew it not,
they knew it not, their fault is redoubled. They knew it not, for that they
would not know, although they might, for it was easy enough to be seen and
known, had they not bin like a silly Dove without heart.

Never had any Nation more visible signs of approaching Vengeance then our
English Nation; nor was there ever any Nation that made less use of them then
this Nation has done. Vengeance was wrote on the wall before Belshazzar, Dan.
5.5.
but it was in an unknown Language, he could not read it; so are God's
notifications and premonitions of his anger and hot displeasure against us
written upon the walls of our Palaces, but they are as an unknown Language
unto us; we will not read them so, as to understand the meaning.

The Jews famous Antiquary (Josephus) tells us of seven several portentous
prodigies, Joseph. de Bello Ind. l. 7. c. 12.
whereby God warned Jerusalem of Her ruin a little before the destruction of
it by Vespasian; Give me leave to acquaint you, or (rather) put you in mind of
seven several ways, whereby God has given us warning of what has befallen
us, (and yet continues warning us of heavier Judgments that will certainly
befall us, if our timely Repentance prevent not.)

First, He has warned us by the mouths of his Ministers, whom he has sent
abroad into all parts of the Kingdom, with his Subpoena's to summon us in;
They have told us of our danger (both in Pulpit and Press,) and cried out with
that Jesus the Son of Ananus (of whom Josephus speaks,) who four years before
the Romans came against Jerusalem, went up and down the City, and especially in
the Temple, crying Woe, Woe, Woe, to Jerusalem. They foretold us of what we have
(in part) felt, and yet continue crying, One Woe is past, and two Woes more are
yet to come. Indeed, they have not that Prophetical Spirit which the Servants
of God in old time had, (for to them it was many times revealed what People
should be punished; what kind of Judgment should be inflicted; and at what time
upon a People (says Luther): Luther Praesat. in Hos. Proph.
yet they wisely comparing things present with things past; and diligently
observing what sins those are which usually provoke God to smite with Sword,
Famine, and Pestilence, etc. conclude, not only in general that some heavy
Plague will befall the Nation, but (in all probability) such or such a Plague as
the Sword, Famine, or Pestilence; forasmuch as those sins are most rise in the
Nation, which is usually punished with those particular Judgments.

The sins that bring the Sword upon a Nation are these, Ignorance of God and
his ways, Jer. 4.19, 20, 21, 22. Jer. 14.13, 17. 2 Chronicles. 36, 15, 16, 17. Jer.
9.23. -- 17. Jer. 34 18. Jer, 15, 1, 2, 6. Isa 3.16, 25. Lev. 26.26, -- 36.
Jer. 4.19, 20, 21, 22. Prophesying lies in the name of God and entertaining
them, Jer. 14.13, 17. mocking and misusing the Messengers of God, and despising
the Word that is brought us unto by them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. Idolatry,
Jer. 9.13, -- 17, and 16, 4, 11, 12. Breach of Covenant, Jer. 34.18.
Backsliding and forsaking of God, Jer. 15.1, 2, 6. Pride and haughtiness,
Isa. 3.16, 25. Incorrigiblenesse under God's Judgments, Levi^. 26.26, -- 36.
These amongst other sins (whereof we are deeply guilty) and are threatened to be
punished with the Sword, (in a peculiar manner), did cause them to conclude
that the Sword would be the Judgment that would fall upon us, which we have
found true, and them therein to be true Prophets: And now perceiving no
reformation to follow this heavy Judgment that has befaln us, but still those
sins remain amongst us, which the Sword was sent to punish; and that other sins
appear, which the Sword has brought with it that were not before (so rife)
amongst us, they must needs conclude that some heavier Judgment will betide us;
(for it is nor God's way to suffer himself to be overmastered otherwise than by
earnest prayer and serious humiliation): He is just and will over come in
Judgment.

Warnings of this kind, we have leightly set by: when we have told you what
would follow your-sinnful courses, we have seemed to you to mock, and to be in
jest, (as Lot seemed unto his Sons in Law to do); And you have bin ready to say
to us, as that fantastical Musician said unto his Neighbors, (who told him
that his House was on fire but he was so transported with his Raptures, as that
he returned no other answer but this), Either hold your tongues or sing in
tune. When we give you warning as God has strictly commanded us to do, Ezekiel.
3.17.
Ezekiel 3.17. and tell you that God's wrath is kindled against you, and will
break forth to your undoing, if it be not quenched, you are apt to imagine that
we know not what we say, and because those Judgments threatened do not presently
befall you, you are ready to conceive that we have but deluded and affrighted
you with needless fears.

It was thus with the ten Tribes, as we read, Jer. 23.33. God sent his Prophets
to them to forewarn them of those Judgments which afterward befell them; Jer.
23.33, -- 40. Ealightned and Explained.
whose predictions and prophesies, and denunciations were usually termed
Burdens, and because these Judgments denounced did not presently fall upon
them, they began to scoff and mock the Prophets when they came unto them, and
to say in scorn; Now, Prophet, What is the burden of the Lord, what is the
burden you now bring? Say unto them (says the Lord), This is the burden of the
Lord, I will even forsake you, that is, I will urterly cast you off, and that
you shall find to be burden enough. Would you have yet more weight upon you?
why then, (as it is elegantly and emphatically added, verse. 36.) every man's
word shall be his burden, that is, that which he says, shall be that which
shall be laid to his charge, his scorning, his idle questioning of the Prophet,
What burden now? What Sword? What Famine? What Pestilence? Is not all Quiet,
all at Peace, all well with us, for all your crying (out of tune, out of
season) Woe, Woe? Well (says God) your mocking and deriding of those
denunciations and forewarnings in the mouths of my Prophets shall be your
burden, and aggravate those Judgments that shall befall you, and seeing you
say this word, the burden of the Lord I have sent unto you my Prophets, and
charged them, saying, you shall not say any more unto them The burden of the
Lord, verse. 38. that is, they shall not bestow any more such care upon you, as
to tell you that the Lord threatens you; And this is a heavier burden then the
former. Gods presence in anger, His frowning and threatening, yea, smiting and
punishing is heavy, but God's absence and dereliction is a far heavier burden,
for mark what follows, verse. 39. Therefore Behold I even I will utterly forget
you, and I will forsake you and that City that I gave you and your Fathers, and
cast you out of my presence; and I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you,
and a perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten. Now the Lord look in mercy
upon us, and forgive us this sin in despising these warnings which he has
given us, and does daily yet give us by the mouths of his faithful Ministers.

Secondly, He has warned us by himself more immediately by wonders from
Heaven, Joel 2.30.
Blood and Fire and Pillars of Smoke; strange and fiery impressions in the
Air, our eyes have seen; Sometimes the Heavens have seemed to be of a light
fire, and to burn over our heads; Brin^^^y his third part of the true watch. c.
3. p. 16.
Sometimes has appeared (as it were) a fiery Tent spread directly over us,
with Pillars of horrible darkness, Pillars of fire, and Pillars of Blood:
Sundry prodigious Comets, and blazing Stars have appeared, (of which, albeit
some natural reason may be rendered, yet being extraordinary they do warn us of
God's anger, Anno. 1618. 1652.
and threaten Judgment.) By terrible Thunder and Lightning, the most High has
uttered his Voice, and that a Mighty Voice beating down, and consuming
therewith not only many Houses and Villages, Psalm. 18.14, 29, 3.
but some of his own Houses and Temples, wherein his name is called upon, and
even then whilst People have presented themselves before him to serve him, and
call upon his name; as if he would warn us to approach his presence with more
reverence and fear. And how often has he made our Heavens as Brass in
withholding the Clouds from watering the Earth, so that the grass withered,
and the fruits were parched by reason of extreme heat and drought? Serr. Fren.
Hist. l. 1. p. 521.
In the French History we read of a year which the French termed the year of
Roasted Vines: Such years we have had, which might be styled years of parched
corn.

Thirdly, As God has given us warning from Heaven above, so from the Earth
beneath, as by the quaking and shaking of it; Acts 2.29.
which however Philosophy imputes to the Air shut up in the bowels of the
Earth, yet we are taught to look higher, and apprehend it as a manifest sign
of God's fierce wrath and anger, Prove. 18.7, 8, 9. Zach. 14.15.
Psalm. 18.7, 8, 9. Zach. 14.15. Warnings of this nature, England has had many;
In the year 1579 our Chronicles make mention of such an Earthquake here in
England, as that it tolled the great Bell at Westminister, and threw down a
piece of Dover Castle, and a part of Sutton Church in Kent: In the year 1601
there was another great Earthquake that made St. Mary's Bell in Cambridge to
toll. And in the year 1626 March 27, there was another felt in some places very
terrible. The like has bin in some other places of latter years (as has bin
credibly reported). This quaking and shaking of the Earth, is to awaken and
shake the Inhabitants thereof out of their security (if it be possible); and
does commonly precede, and go before the alteration of Religion (as has bin by
some observed). Tops on Joel. p. 253.
Add hereunto the strange sinking of the ground in the year 1657 at Bickly in
Cheshire, (as not being able to bear the load of sin that is committed upon
it); And the monstrous births that have bin brought forth of late years, both
of Man and Beast; as warnings to repent of our monstrous sins. Luke 21.25.
Distress of Nations on Earth with perplexity, is made a prodigious sign of
God's anger, and of approaching vengeance by our Savior, Luke 21.25. And who
can say that this Nation has not bin thus warned?

Fourthly, As we have had extraordinary warnings from Heaven above, and from
the Earth beneath; So from the waters under the Earth. The Sea roaring and
swelling after an unwonted manner, (as if that sign were fulfilled,
(likewise,) which our Savior makes mention of in the former Text that we
quoted, Luke 21.25.) The Inundations and breaking in of that unruly Creature
into the firm Land, See the Reports of Englands floods. Anno. 1607.
in diverse parts of this Realm, to the overthrowing and breaking down of whole
Towns and Villages, (to the number of 26 Parishes in one Shire.) The unwonted
flux and reflux of it; The doubling of the Tides in the River of Thames (a
thing not ordinary) yet twice or thrice happening within these few years. And
not long before these bloody Wars began, and within a while after that Comet
which appeared 1618, there was a Book found in a Pike's belly, which was
brought to the University of Cambridge, (a little before the Commencement); The
fish being taken and opened, John Frith's Preparation to the Cross was in the
maw of it; This we find related by a Reverend Divine, and one of great Note,
Jer. Dyke his Sermon. preached before the House of Parliament Ap. 5. 1628. p. 22.
Trop. in Math. 17. Verse. 27. Mich. 6.9.
and that to the Commons House of Parliament, in a Sermon that he Preached
before them at a public Fast; And his Observation upon it is, That such a
Book should in such a manner, and to such a place, and at such a time be sent,
(when by reason of Peoples confluence out of all parts, notice might be given
to all places of the Land), can be construed for no less then a divine
warning, and to have this Voice with it, England prepare for the Cross. And
what may we think of the coming up of that fish of an extraordinary biggness
(almost to the City of London,) there taken and killed this year 1658. Surely
the sending of this fish so near the City, has a voice to the City; The Lord
give us wise hearts to hear it, and understand the meaning.

Fifthly, Our homebred divisions and distractions, civil Rents and garboyles;
factions and fractions in Church and State; are no other then warnings of God's
heavy displeasure: Lament. 4.16. 1 King. 12.
The anger of the Lord has divided them (says Jeremiah, Lament. 4.16). In
Rehoboams Reign division amongst Councillors, caused the rending of the Tribes
(ten from two,) and that rending ruined all. So whilst Israel was hot against
Judah, and Judah against Israel, the King of Syria came and smote both; whilst
the Frogg and the Mouse are fighting for the prey, the greedy Kite devours both
it and them.

In the Church who sees not, and seeing laments not (unless they be such as
cry, Raze it, raze it, even to the ground). The difference in Judgment and
Opinion that is amongst us, which is carried with such heat, that (like brinish
lights) we spit fire in the faces of one another, and so (it may be feared)
will continue, till we be extinct and go out in a stinch and smoke. In short,
not a City, not a Town of note, not a Village, scarce a Family (if any whitt
numerous) that is not divided; the Husband against the Wife, the Wife against
the Husband; Father against Child, and Child against Father, etc. and can we
look upon these divisions without great thought of heart? does is not cry aloud
in our cars that a Kingdom a Church, a Family, divided against it self cannot
stand? Division is a thick black Cloud that threatens ^estruction; what is
divisible is corruptible, Omne Divisible est corruptibile.
is a dictate in Nature; And Religion teaches that the Daughter of Division is
desolation, (says Nazianzene) and holds true in all States and Societies
whatsoever.

Sixthly; Innovation, alteration, and change of a good Government for a worse;
either in Church or State, Isa. 3.1. -- 9. Explained. Verse. 2.3.
is a Testimony of God's heavy displeasure; So we read, Isa. 3.1, -- 9. I will
take away from Jerusalem the stay and the staff; an^ what he means there by
stay and staff he shows, verse. 2.3. The m^ghty man, and the man of War, the
Judge and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, etc. (such as are as
stakes in the hedge, and keep it from reeling;) and shall substitute in their
room, Children and Babes to Rule, as you have it, verse. 4. that is, Oppression
and Sedition, one neighbor shall oppress another, every one his Brother, the
Child shall behave himself proudly-against the Ancient, and the Babe against
the Hunourable, verse. 6. the turbulencies and discontentments of the People
shall be such, as that none shall be found either fit or willing to take upon
them the administration of the Kingdom, and the Government of so headstrong
and seditions a people, verse. 7. when it is thus with a Nation (and Oh that it
were not so with ours! verse. 8.) Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen,
because their tongues and their doings are against the Lord to provoke the eyes
of his glory.

I may not say that it is thus with us, but this I may say; Our present
condition is as like it as if it were the same: God has taken from us our
chief staff and stays, our principal Go^ernours, gravest Judges, wisest
Counselors, ablest Divines, (and that within these few years,) a sad presage
that some great evil will befall us, Isa. 57.1.
Isa. 57.1. God seldom beheads a State, but it is for Treason; The Heart
Plotts it, the Hand Acts it, but it is the Head that pays for it. How weary
were we grown of a good Monarchical Government, under which we prospered, and
flourished for many years, (which indeed is the best form of Government under
Heaven). You weary (said Themistocles to the Athenians) of receiving so many
Benefits by one man? Indeed we were weary, and longed for a change; we had it,
and were as soon weary of that we longed for, as Ammon was of his Sister
Thamar, after he had enjoyed his longing (or lusting rather). And now as
Sampson did by the jaw bone of the Ass; Judge. 15.17, 19.
which he flung away after he had slain therewith many of the Philistines, (he
being a thirst and ready to dye for want of water, upon Gods command returns to
his jaw bone again, and thence has water to refresh him) we are returned to
that Government which we despised, from which, if ever we look for comfortable
refreshment, we must find it; and yet still we are a discontented people,
nothing will please us; and who can but look upon this as an evident token of
God's heavy wrath and displeasure against us? When Bees make a great humming
noise, it is likely they will forsake their Hives, and are about to take their
flight.

Seventhly and Lastly, God has warned us by many lesser and lighter Judgments
that have befallen us, 1 Samuel 20.20.
which are like to the lighting of Jonathan's arrows one beyond the other, and
call upon us to provide with all speed for our own safety. God deals with man
herein after the manner of men, he usually takes a distress by gentle and
fatherly corrections, before he takes out an Execution by greater Judgments.
God was unto Ephraim as a moth in the Garment, and unto the House of Judah as a
worm in the Tree, (which caused rottenness:) before he was to Ephraim as a
Lion, Hos. 5.12.14. Explained.
and as a young Lion to the House of Judah, to tear and go away with the prey,
Hos. 5.12, 14. The moth in the Garment; and the worm in the Timber are but
small Creatures, yet lingeringly, and by degrees they consume and eat; the moth
by eating now one thread, and then another in the Garment, prepares it (with
much ease) to be rend and torn in pieces; and the worm in the Tree soon eats
out the heart, it causes it to rot, and prepares it to the fire: God by
smaller and lesser Judgments would be as a moth and a worm to that people; but
when Ephraim shall see his sickness, and Judah his wound, that is, when they
shall perceive the weakness of their Kingdom and decay of their State, if they
make not the right use thereof, in repenting and returning to the Lord, but
will trust to their own Councels, and put their trust in their own
Confederacies, and go to Assyria, or King Jareb for succor; I will then be
(says God) to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the House of Judah, I
will tear and go away, I will take away, and none shall rescue; he will be
terrible in his future Judgments, for making no better use of the former. And
Amos to the same purpose, Amos 4.6, -- 12. Explained.
Cap. 4.6. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and want of
bread in all your Places, yet you have not returned unto me says the Lord:
that is, I have endeavored to reclaim you by afflictions, and therefore have
sent want and scarcity amongst you; yet that did not amend you, then I added to
your hunger, thirst: I have withholden the rain from you, -- so that two or
three Cities wandered unto one City to drink water, but they were not
satisfied, but yet you have not returned to me says the Lord, verse. 7.8. Then
I smot you with blasting and mildew, your Gardens, and your Vineyards, and your
Figg-Trees, and your Olive Trees did the Palmer worm devour. I punished you in
all these things wherein you took any delight, and might any way refresh you,
under that calamity which I laid upon you; and yet you have not returned unto
me says the Lord, verse. 9. I have sent among you the Pestilence, after the
manner of Aegygpt; a very noisome and deadly Pestilence, such a one as I
plagued the Land of Egypt withal, ver. 10. this was a soarer Judgment then
the former, yet they returned not to the Lord: God proceeds yet higher; I have
overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, that is, by the
fire of the Assyrians, as Sodom and Gomorrah were destoyed by fire from
Heaven; and those of them of Samaria that were left out of the common
destruction, were but as a brand snatched out of the fire, miserably burnt and
scorched; yet you returned not unto me says the Lord, verse. 11. All this doing
no good, therefore this will I do unto thee O Israel, verse. 12. that is, I am
resolved to do this, that I have foreto^d by my Prophets; I will take you away
with hooks, and your Posterity with fishhooks, (as it was said before, verse.
2.) I will execute upon thee the severest of all my Vengean^es, and by the
Assyrian snarch you out of your own Country, as the fish is caught up out of
the water by the hock of the Angler: And thus God proceeded by degrees from the
less to the greater, with the ten Tribes, by one Judgment warning them of
another.

And such warnings have we had from time to time; easier afflictions were
bittered amongst us, before extremity of mischief seized on us: The moth and
the Timber-worme were many years at work, before the Lion roared and the young
Lion seized upon the prey. This Nation has bin moth-eaten for diverse years,
Trading has much decayed, (whereof great complaint has bin a long time made)
illegal Taxes and Impositions we have groaned under; Monopolists and corrupt
Officers, (like moths and timber-worms) have eaten into our estates, etc. yet
all this did us no good: God has smote this Nation with scarcity and famine
within these few years (albeit in a moderate way): It has not bin like the
scarcity that was in Egypt, he has seemed only to pick those teeth that were
furred and sowled with excess: 2 King. 6.25.
we have not yet seen with our eyes an Asses head sold for 80 pieces of silver,
and a Cab of Dovesdung for 20 pieces; nor have we heard of any Mother amongst
us that has rewomb'd and reintomb'd, the fruit of her body for want of sood;
yet famine and scarcity has ^odd up and down this Kingdom upon her black Horse
with a pair of Balances in her hand, Revel. 6.5.
sometimes clad in a roab of immoderate rain and showers, drowning our Lands
provision; sometimes bearing on her shoulders Heavens of Brass, and treading
under her feet the Earth of Iron: sometimes attended with Catterpillars
innumerable, and other such like Creatures to eat up, and devour, the fruit
that the Earth brought forth for our sustenance; so that we have sowed much,
Rev. 6.6. Ealightened
and brought forth little, we have seen a measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny, Rev. 6.6. The penny was the Laborers
hire allowed for his days work, Math. 20.9.
Math. 20.9. and was as much as our twelve pence (as some think,) others
conceive it to be less; And the measure was so much as was allowed for a
Servant every day for his maintenance: now it must needs go very hard with the
poor Labourer, when, having wife and Children to maintain, the wages of his
days labor would do no more then provide Bread for his own mouth; when he
shall rise early to eat the Bread of carfulness, and yet at night, upon his
return from his soar labor, Stow Chro. of Eng. in the 5. year of the Conquer.
1069. and Hen. 3.18.1234. Edw. 2.9.1316. Hen. 6.18.1440. Hen. 8.18.1527. Rev.
6.8. Deuteronomy. 32.22, 23. Number. 16.46. 2 Samuel 24.1 1. Psalm. 78.50 Genesis 41.48, 56.
Ruth 1.1. Ps. 91.5, 6. B. B. Hall his Sermon of thanksgiving on Ps. 68.19, 20.
have Bread to care for: Of such a scarcety we have larely tasted; ye^, and
somewhat wor^e then so: (a^beit the extremi^y of Famine, which our Chronicles
mention England has been afflicted withal, we have not lately tasted, albeit
we have deserved it;) God has been very moderate therein, as if he had given
that charge unto Famine, The Wine and the Oil hurt thou not: And yet we have
not returned unto God.

We being nothing bettered by this scourge; Pestilence has issued forth upon
his Pale horse, killing with sicknesses and death, thousands and ten thousands
in the streets: A Judgment that always manifests God's wrath and heavy
indignation against a people, as appears, Deuteronomy. 32.22, 23. Numb. 16.46. 2 Samuel
24. 1. Psalm. 78.50. Storehouses may serve against Famine, Genesis 41.48, 56. or
another Country may preserve us from it, Ruth 1.1. But in this contagion of the
Pestilence, at home our houses stifle us; abroad, the air infects us: it
flies by night and kills at noon day, Psalm. 91.5, 6. It leaves the very
streets of our Cities empty: Therefore (as the learned have well observed) tha^
from that word in the Hebrew, which signifies the Plague, is derived another
which signifies a Desert, for that usually where it comes, it turns the most
populous City into a Desert; what slaughter? what lamentation? what horror was
there in the Mother-City of this Kingdom the last morrality (not so long since
but yet fresh in many of our memories)? More then twenty thousand Families
(says my reverend Author) ran from their houses, as if they had been on fire
over their heads, and sought shelter in Zoar, and the mountains: Then was
there a voice heard in Rama, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning; Mat.
3.18.
the Wise wringing her hand; the distracted Mother falling into a swound,
whilst she kissed the insensible cold lips of her breathless Infant; poor
desolate Orphans, mourning the untimely loss of their Pa^e^ts: In one place
Bells heavily tolling, and ringing out in another; nothing in a manner to be
heard but groaning, and crying, and dying, and burying; and instead of the
Tradesman asking you, What do you lack? The Vespillo calls, Who is here dead? I
shall need to say no more of this Subject, both City, and Country, know what
kind of Judgment it is: They have marble bosoms that will not be shaken with
these terrors, and yet it must be said of England, as well as of Israel and
Judah, For all this we returned not unto the Lord.

And now the Lord has lately sent forth another Pursivant, upon his redhorse,
Rev. 6.4.
(and he unbrideled) and has given power to him to take peace from the earth
and that they should kill one another: and there has been given to him a great
sword: And the Sword is the most deadly Arrow in all God's Quiver; Exek. 5.16
more terrible it is then either Famine, or Pestilence; It is as the last
billow or wave; when it comes, it overwhelmes all. There may be some help by
Physic against the Plague; by Plenty against Famine; by neither against the
Sword: Look what sorrows are in both the former, usually attends this one; nor
is either of the former, so great a devourer of humane flesh, 2 Samuel 24.15. 2
Chr. 13.17.
as the sword is: Seventy thousand men, the Pestilence did devour in three
days space, 2 Samuel 24.15. but the Sword devoured five hundred thousand chosen
men in one day, 2 Chronicles, 13.17. No Famine so great, nor pestilence so
contagious; but some escape: But the Sword is so greedy, that (if God restrain
it not) it will suffer not one to escape alive, as we read 2 Chronicles. 20.24. 2
Chr. 20.24. Isa. 34.5, 6 Explained.
When God sends this messenger abroad God is highly displeased indeed. Read
Isa. 34.5, 6, 7. My Sword shall be bathed in Heaven, it shall come down upon
the people of my curse to Judgment; that is, my Judgment decreed in heaven
shall be fearfully execured, upon my known and professed enemies, whom I have
accursed to an eternal condemnation; ye^, it shall be filled and made drunk
with blood; their land shall be so soaked with it, as that the dust of it shall
be made fat with fatness: A Slaughter, that si^ll be like an universal
Sacrifice, the matter of which Sacrifice shall be, not only Lambs and Goats,
which have no power to resist, but the Unicorns and Bulls, the most Great and
Potent Person^ges, they shall be exposed to this bloody Oblation; so that the
whole land shall be drenched in blood. This is an extraordinary warning of
Vastation and Rain, if it be not prevented; Ezekiel. 14.17. Isa. 9.18, 19, 20.
but especially if it be civil and intestine (the worst of wars). Intestine
it is truly termed, for that it is, as a burning in the bowels and intrals; and
Civil as unaptly, for of all wars they are most unnatural and uncivil: here
the Father fights against the Child, and the Child against the Father; Brother
against Brother, and one Friend against another. We read in History, that when
the Civil wars were betwixt the Romans themselves in the days of Vitellius,
(some being for him, others for Vespasian) that when the women brought the
Vitellians victuals by night into the Camp, they not only refreshed themselves,
but their adversaries, with meat and drink, and each man would call upon his
adversary by name, in a very friendly manner, and say Accipemi Commilito, ede,
etc. Come my fellow-Souldier, Dio. in vit. Vitel.
ear, I do not only offer thee my Sword, but bread; take again, and drink,
that whither thou slay me, or I thee, we may dye the easier, etc. Thus they
greeted over night, and the next day dispatched each the other; They gave
wounds, and took wounds (says the Historian); they slew, and were slain: No
wars so unfriendly, friendly, as these are.

Nor is there any war so cruel as war of this nature; the hatred of Brethren
is most bitter when they fall out. A Brother offended is harder to win than a
strong City (says Solomon), and their contentions are as the bar of a Castle,
Pro. 18.19 Explained.
Prove. 18.19. Kinsmen or Friends displeased, by any offense, or estranging
themselves upon injuries offered, resist all entreaties of peace, and means of
reconciliation, more stoutly and stiffly then a defenced town does the assaults
of the weapon, or the embassies which entreat for peace; and there is many
times as much yielding in the iron bars of a strong Castle, (when they are
thrust against.) as there is in the hearts of Brethren, when they are pressed
to peace, they are implacable; and when they come to join issue, most cruel
and Tyger-like: You have an example hereof in the Israelites against the
Benjaminites, Judge. 20.48. who, Jud. 20.48
when they had conquered them, did not only kill every man they met withal,
but they killed every Beast, and all that came to hand (says the Text), also
they set on fire all the Cities that they came to. The strife betwixt Brethren
concerning things of this World, is very fierce; but when it arises about
matters of Religion, then are their contentions most bitter and durable. The
Persians and Turks are both Mahometans, and yet disagreeing about some (...)
points, in the Interpretation of their Alchoran, the Persians burn whatsoever
Books they find of the Turkish Sect; and the Turks hold it more metitorious to
kill one Persian, Turk Hist.
than Seventy Christians. Theological hatteds (as one terms them) are most
bitter hatreds, and are carried on (for the most part) with Cain like rage and
bloody opposition: The higher the place is from whence a stone does fall, the
more dangerous is the b^ow; no wounds so mortal as that of a Thunder bolt: So
of all other those hatreds which make pretenses unto Heaven, and which arise
from Mo^ives of the highest nature, are ever most desperate. Men think their
Souls engaged in one Quarrel; their Fortunes only in another. Dr. Lawrence
Ser. o^. 1 Cor. 1.12.
He that draws for Religion, strikes with a Rasor; the other thrusts with a
foil: When a Battle is fought by the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, then it
ever proceeds with greatest cruelty. Insurrection and Rebellion never prove so
loud and dangerous as when Religion is pretended: Goodwins Annals p. 230.
The first noise is for the liberty of the People, when that is but as the
Outworks; but when the Soul is pretended, that is like the Maine fort. Thence
it is, that the cause of Religion is the constant pretense of all discontented
Persons; And then, In nomine Domini, the wheels of all their rebellious actions
are moved more forecibly; To the truth of this I suppose if you were called
unto it, you cannot but subscribe.

How happy had this Nation been, if we would have taken warning by those lesser
Judgments that did forerun this? so should we never have been able, by woeful
experience, to confess it to be true, (otherwise then by hearsay). But as
flies hovering about the Candle, will not be warned by the burning of one wing,
but must needs sacrifice their bodies in those flames. So it is with all
obdurate sinners; Pharaoh by one Plague, lost the fruit of the Earth; by
another, the fruit of his Cattle; by a third, the light of his eyes; by a
fourth, the fruit of his loins; even all the first borne of Egypt: yet he
would take no warning, but went on in his stubbornness, whilst his breath was
left in his body. God forbid that we should be like Pharaoh therein, Nah. 1.9.
for then Affliction shall not rise up a second time, Nah. 1.9. And thus we
have had seven remarkabe warnings, wherein we come but little short of the
warnings which Jerusalem had, before her overthrow. Woe, Woe, unto us if we
take none.

I shall spare to speak of those special and particular Notifications of God's
displeasure, against every particular Person of us; every loss, every cross,
that befalls us, is a warning, and has a voice with it, Job 33.14. Psalm. 2.5.
Mich. 6.9. the man of wisdom will hear the rod and who has appointed it; Job
33.14. Psalm. 2.5. Mich. 6.9.
the Lord give us that wisdom, that we may so do, and not rush on desperately
against the Angell's Sword, which stands in the way to stop us in our sinful
courses.

I shall end this Point, with putting you in mind of that which our Savior
speaks to the Pharisees; Mat. 16.3.
When the Sky is red and lowering, you say it will be foul weather to day: Ye
Hypocrites, you can discern the face of the Sky, but can you not discern the
Signs of the times? Mr. Hild on Psalm. 51. Lect. 5.
Our Sky is yet red and lowering, and he is a senseless and secure Hypocrite
(says a very judicious Divine) that does not expect some great storm and
tempest. And how can we expect other, considering how little good use we have
made of former warnings? God will not cease persuing men with his Judgments,
one in the neck of another, till the Traytor's head be thrown over the Wall:
nor can we imagine, 2 Samuel 20.22.
that the last blow will be lighter than the former: Heavier things will befall
us than yet we have felt, it may be justly feared.

But can a heavier Judgment betide us,

It is so, compared with any other, singly considered; Resp.
but yet it may so happen, that all those Horsemen, Famine, Pestilence, Sword,
may en er upon us altogether, as they did upon the City of Jerusalem; and will
not that be worse than what we have yet felt? This, this, is that Judgment that
we have great cause to fear; They being threatened to be inflicted together,
upon a people, Jer. 42.13, -- 18. and 14.10, 11, 12.
for those very provocations that we are guilty of in a very high degree; as
Disobedience to God. Jer. 42.13. -- 18. Wandering from God Jer. 14.10, 11, 12.
Not harkening to his Word, Jer. 29.17, 18, 19. and 29.17, 18, 19. Lev^^ 26.24,
^5, 26. 2 Samuel 24.2, 13. 1 C^^. 21.12.
Incorrigiblenesse. Levi^. 26.24, 25, 26. Confidence in the Arm of flesh, 2.
Sam. 24.2, 13. 1 Chronicles. 21.12. Now the Lord in mercy awaken us, that we may
prevent these miseries, and the Severity of the Sentence in my Text, which now
come to be spoken of.

Cut it down.]

A sour and severe Sentence! There is nothing more terrible (says Chrysostom)
than this manner of speaking. He threatens not that he will come with a Hook
to prune it, not that he will tred down the hedge that was about the Vineyard;
but he threatens the Axe, which is more terrible: Had the boughs been doomed
to have been rent, or lopped, and the leaves to be shaken off, and scattered,
so that it might yield no shelter, nor shadow, to the Fowls of Heaven, or
Beasts of the field, (which was the Sentence past upon the Tree which
Nebuchadnezar saw in his Vision, Dan. 4.10, 11.
Dan. 4.10, 11, 12.) the doom had not been so dreadful. The Tree that is
pruned and lopped may yet stand; and that which is rent and torn may yet
recover, and live to recompense its former deficiency, Job 14.7, 8, 9.
Job 14.7, 8, 9. But when it is stubbed, and cut up by the roots, down falls
all, both Boughs and Body: Of such a nature is the Judgment denounced against
this Fig Tree, [Cut it down.]

In which Sentence, take notice, First, of the Act; Secondly, of the Object.
The Act [ Abscinde, Cut down;] The Object [It] that is, the Fig Tree before
made mention of. From the Act observe we, that

Abscission, and cutting down, is the doom of an Hypocritical and barren
Profession.

And now also the Axe is laid to the root of the Trees, (says John the
Baptist,) therefore every Tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn
down, and cast into the fire, Math. 3.10. Which speech, Mat. 3.10.
albeit specially directed to the Sadduces and Pharisees, and concerned the
Jewish State, which was the Tree that should, be cut down by the Romans (as it
afterward was) by the very root; insomuch that their Temple, their Ceremonies,
their Laws, their Civil Power, their Common wealth, were utterly destroyed and
overthrown: yet it is not to be restrained unto them only; but communi ratione,
and in a general consideration, it is intended against all evil and
hypocritical Professors, all unfruitful Christi^ns (whatsoever), such as they
were.

And lest we might think that John the Baptist, whose Doctrine suited with the
Garments he wore (which were rough and hairy), meant this only against that
generation of Vipers which came unto his Ministry and were so severely reproved
by him, our blessed Savior himself uses the same denunciation, Every Tree
that brings not forth good fru^t is hewn down and cast into the fire Math.
7.19. [Every Tree,] without exception of any, Mat. 7.19.
[that brings not forth good fruit] not bad fruit only, [Is he wen down]
not, shall be; it is at certain, as if it were already done. This the mouth of
Truth it self has spoken. The Axe of God's vengeance shall do execution upon
every barren and fruitless Tree, standing in the Vineyard of the Lord, be it
never so high, Joh. 15.2. Heb. 6.8.
nor never so low, Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every Soul that lives
in an Hypocritical and barren profession, John 15.2. Heb. 6.8.

Something for Explication of the Point, before we come to the Application of
it: First, what is meant by this Cutting down, which the Text speaks of:
Secondly, what Instrument God uses in cutting down a barren Fig Tree:
Thirdly, the manner of God's proceeding in the cutting of it down, shall be
showed. For the First,

This Cutting is nothing else but the fitting and preparing of it for future
vengeance; As the Tree that is felled is fitted thereby and prepared for some
use, either for building or burning; Rotten Trees and barren Trees (especially
such as the Vine and Fig Tree), are not (we know) for building, but for the
fire; So Hypocritical and barren Professors are prepared for destruction, Romans
9.22. They are made meet and fitted before hand for it; Romans 9.22
which is done, par^ly in respect of their own sin; and so they are of
themselves apta, fit for it, through the corruption of their own nature, and
malice of Satan, soliciting them to sin, and inspiring into them sinful
motions; and partly by God, who in just judgment for that pravity which is in
them, rejects them, and justly hardens them for resisting of his Will, and so
they are aptata, fitted for future vengeance.

The Means or Instrument which God uses in cutting down a barren Tree, is of
two sorts; Corporal or Spiritual, the Outward and Corporal Instrument is, his
Judgments inflicted on men's Bodies or Estates. These are of a cutting nature,
as appears, Psalm. 75.10. Psalm. 75.10. 1 Samuel 2.31, 33. Isa. 9.14. Jer. 25.37.
Jer. 51.20.
The horns of the wicked (says the Prophet) shall be out off; And God
threatens Eli that he would cut off his arm* and the arm of his Fathers
House, 1 Samuel 2.31, 33. So, Isa. 9.14. And, Jer. 25.37, And in this respect
Babylon is said to be God's Axe yea, His batta^l-Axe, (which is sharp and
destructive) for tha^ he used them as his Instruments to punish his People.

The Inward and spiritual kind of cutting down, is by the Ministry of the
Word; Hos. 6 5.
of which we read, Hos. 6.5. etc. I have hewed them down by the Prophets, I
have slain them by the words of my mouth. The word of God in the mouths of his
Ministers, is sharp and cutting; It is a it were an Axe in Gods hand, as, Math.
3.10. Now is the Axe laid to the Root of the Tree. Where, by Axe is commonly
understood John's Ministry, Mat. 3.10.
whereby those who resorted to him were so cut, as that thereby their Salvation
or Damnation was furthered, (albeit some understand thereby not the Gospel, but
the Judgments that afterward did befall that People; but better (in my
opinion) they, who by Axe understood both); Paraeus Com. in Mat. 3.10. Ephesians.
6.17. Isa. 49.2. Rev. 1.16. Heb. 4.12.
So it is compared to a Sword, Ephesians. 6.17. to a sharp Sword, Isa. 49.2. to a
Sword with two edges, Rev. 1.16. in respect (says Austin) of the two
Testaments: and it is said to be sharper then any two edged Sword, Heb. 4.12.
it peirceth more speedily and thoroughly, and is of a more cutting nature, for
it peirceth even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, which
no other Sword can do. David said of Goliah's Sword None to it; 1 Samuel 21.9.
But, None to this may we truly say. What Sword under Heaven can cut like this?
That the word does cut is manifested by experience (as well as Scripture):
hence it is that whilst we are opening, and applying of the Scripture, some
rage and fret at it. So the chief Priests and Council, upon the Apostles
Preaching were cut to the heart, Acts 5.33.
Acts 5.33. And St. Stephens hearers are said to be cut to the heart, when they
heard those things which he taught, insomuch that they gnashed upon him with
their teeth, Acts 7.54. And we find daysie, how men of corrupt minds storm and
fret at that they hear delivered, Acts 7.54.
when they find it come to the quick: It cuts the Swearer, the Adulterer, the
Drunkard, the Oppresser, the Slanderer to the very heart, to bear their sins
discovered, and Gods Judgments denounced against them: And the good find it to
be sharp and cutting (as well as the bad); it hewes them, and squares them, 1
Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22.
frames and fashions them, that they may be made fit for God's Building, (which
is the Church) and so become true Parts and Members of it; So those that heard
Peter, were pricked in their hears upon the hearing of his Doctrine; they were
peirced as with so many Daggers, and not being able to endure the pain, the
cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do, Acts 2.37.
Acts. 2.37. This is the Spiritual or inward cutting of the Fig Tree. In this
Parabolical speech God cutteth down both ways; In referrence to the Estate and
Poli^ie of the Jews, he threatens the cutting of them down by his Judgments,
which afterward befel^ them: In reference to barren Christians, it has a more
spiritual meaning according to that, John 15.2, 6. Every Branch that bears
not fruit, John 15.2, 6.
He takes away, that is, He cutteth off from Christ and from the Benefits of
Christ, and so casts him forth as a branch that is withered.

And that is the third thing to be considered, the manner of God's proceeding
in the Abscission or cutting down of a barren Fig Tree, and that is Gradually
by Degrees. A Tree is not felled by one blow, bu^ by many blows it falls; So
did the Jewish Nation and Synagogue; First, Christ threatened them, and
denounced many woes against them for their Hypocrisy, Math. 23. Luke 19.41.
Mat. 21.18.
Math. 23. He foretold their ruin, and by whom it should be, Luke 19.41. Then
He cursed them, and manifested that curse that lay upon them, by the Fig Tree
which He spyed in the way, Math. 21.18. Then, at his Death, He smote them at
the Root, so that the Tree withered at the heart, as the Disciples observed in
the Fig Tree (before mentioned). After this the Apostles preached amongst
them; but being despised and persecuted, they returned to the Gentiles, Acts
13.46. here the Tree was laid; Acts 13.46.
And forty years after the Ascension the Romans came and destroyed the City,
and bu^nt the Temple, here the Tree was dragged to the fire. And thus by
Degrees was the Jewish Fig Tree our down and destroyed.

If we consider this Judgment in reference to all barren and unfruitful
Christians, now living under the Gospel; our Savior, John 15.6. does
excellently set it forth, Joh. 15.6.
If a man abide not in me, that is, if he be only professedly in me, and bears
not fruit, or else revolts from me; He is cast forth as a brauch and is
withered; and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they are burned:
Where, observe these degrees of a barren professors ruin: First, they are cast
out; Secondly, upon that they wither, Thirdly, upon their withering, they are
gathered, or bound up together; Fourthly, upon their gathering they are cast
into the fire; Fifthly, being cast into the fire they are burned up, and
consumed.

First, Heb. 6.8.
They are cast out and rejected; This is it St. Paul speaks of, Heb. 6.8. that
which bears Thorns and Briars is rejected; as the Husbandman gives over
laboring a piece of barren ground, that will take no mending. This casting
forth is either by God or Men, God casts such forth two ways, First,
Subtrahendo, by withholding the means that should do such a man good; Isa. 5.5,
6. Amos 8.11. Hos. 4.14. Isa. 1.5. Genesis 6.3.
whether Outward, as his Word and Ordinances, Isa. 5.5, 6. Amos 8.11. Hos.
4.14. He will prune them no more, bestow no more labor upon them; And, Isa.
1.5. Why should you be smitten any more? Or Inward withholding from them his
special grace and favor; His Spirit shall no longer strive with them, Genesis
6.3. that is, by those checks and knocks which in former times they had, and
which accompanied the preachings and pains of my Servants which I have sent
unto them: Isa 6.10. Math. 13.
So, Isa. 6.10. Math. 13. applied to them.

Secondly, Tradendo, by giving such a one up, so that he will own him no more;
Psalm. 81.12. Romans 1.24. 2 Cor 4.4. Rev. 22.11.
when God come to give a man up, either to himself (as, Psalm. 81.12. and, Romans
1.24) or to Satan to be farther blinded (as, 2 Cor. 4.4.) this is a Fearful
kind of casting forth; then God seems to say of such a one. Abeat, per^at,
profundant, perdat, let him go on and perish; He that is filthy let him be more
filthy; then it follows that a man will be filled with all manner of
unrighteousness, Romans 1.28, 29.
(as the beggar is with Vermin). So, Romans 1.28, 29. when the Fense is broken
down, all Beasts will come in, and every base lust will be a Commoner in that
^eart. Thus God casts forth such barren and unfruiful branches.

And as God casts them forth, so they come to be cast out by men, even by the
Church and Members of it; sometimes more publicly, as when a man falling into
some gross and vicious course of life, is cast out of the Visible Church and
delivered up to Satan by the censure of excommunication, as, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. This is a soar censure, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20.
and the soarest that the Church can inflict (as formerly has bin showed you).
Then man is left to be a lodge for Devils; Then lusts and all wastful sins
enter into the heart, till such a one be restored again by true Repentance.

Sometimes more secretly and privately, they are cast ou^ of the hearts of Gods
people; and that two ways, first, when they desire not the acquaintance of
such a fruitless and barren branch; They delight not in his company, but shun
it rather, (as St. John did the company of Cerinthus in the Bath, 1 Cor. 5.11.
2 These. 3.14.
or as one does the company of an infected person; With such a one eat not
(says the Apostle); have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; This is
a very sad and uncomfortable kind of casting forth (especially if it be
general).

Secondly When they are cast out of their prayers: God locking up the hearts of
his Children, so that they do not so much as remember them; or withdrawing the
spirit of prayer from his Children, so as that they cannot heartily solicit
God on their behalf, (albeit they are desired); God seeming to say to his
Children (as he says by his Prophet, Hos. 4.4. Let none reprove them, Hos. 4.4.
so) Let none pray for them. 1 Samuel 16.1. Jer. 7.16.
Thus God forbad Samuel to pray for Saul, 1 Samuel 16.1. and so Jeremiah for the
Jews, Jer. 7.16. We have not the like Inhibition, nor may we forbear to pray
for any particular person, (unless we are sure he has finned against the Holy
Ghost); yet God withholdeth the spirit of prayer many times; so that the godly
cannot pray heartily for a dissembling professor. And this is the first degree
of the barren Christian's doom, whereby it is executed; the casting of him
forth both by God and Man.

The second degree mentioned by our Savior is withering and this must needs
follow upon the former; for how can that branch but wither that receives no
Life, or Sap, from Him that gives the life of sap to all? So the stony ground,
Luke 8.6.
Luke 8.6. withered away because it lacked moisture. This withering is Three
fold.

First, They wither in their Judgments, whereas they had their minds in some
measure enlightened to see and acknowledge the Truth of Religion, distaste
Errors, discern, acknowledge, and approve that which is the Truth in Jesus
Christ; Heb. 6.4.
Now they fall away from that Truth they have professed, unto another Gospel,
as did the Galathians, Gal. 1.6. and, with Hymenaeus and Phile^us, err
concerning the Faith, Gal. 1.6. 2 Timothy 2.18.
1 Timothy 2.18. They held the Truth concerning the Resurrection; but they fell
from that Truth, saying, the Resurrection was past already, and so destroyed
the Faith of many.

Secondly, They wither in their Affections, falling away from their first love,
Rev. 2.4.
as did the Church of Ephesus. Rev. 2.4. and the Church of Galatia whom the
Apostle upbraideth for that strange coolness in their affections to his Person
and Ministry, whereas at the first their zeal was such; as that they were
willing to pull out their eyes to do Him service, Gal. 4 15, 18.
Gal. 4.15, 18, They withered in respect of that zeal and fervency of spirit,
for God and goodness, that formerly they had; As old men that are withering,
grow cold and chilly, and abate of their heat and vigor, which formerly they
had in their strength and youth; They have not that appetite to the word, nor
delight in the society of the Saints as in former times; They can well digest
what formerly they could not, and content themselves in an indifferent
neutrality; and frame themselves to such a formality, as will best comply with
the times, and no further.

Thirdly, They wither in their Practice, (as did the Galathians before
mentioned, Chap. 3.3. they began in the spirit, but did end in the flesh; Gal.
3.3.
they ran well for a time, but gave over obeying of the Truth, Gal. 5.7.
Chap. 5.7) So is it with these; Their obedience falls off, (like leave^ in
Autumn,) and whereas formerly they seemed watchful of their ways, cons^ionable
of their Duties, (Private and Pub^ique); now the Case is altered with them,
they are not like the men that formerly they seemed to be. Such is their
withering.

Thirdly, Being thus withered, they are collected and gathered together; men
gather them says our Savior: There is a Twofold gathering; One in this life,
the other afterward. In this life, these barr^n and unfruitful branches are
gathered; and that first, by Satan, Secondly, by his Instruments: so soon as
ever God leaves, Satan finds, and gathers such hypocritical and unsound
professors into his fold, by his temptations; As the Lord of the soil seazeth
on all wastes and strayes, and sets his brand up-off them; so does the God of
this World; Thus the Devil entered into Judas after his receiving and eating of
the sop, Joh. 13.27.
John 13.27. not as if he had not entered into him before, but (it may be) he
had not branded him before. Now he took a further and stronger possession of
him, entering in with seven spirits worse then himself.

And as they are gathered (immediately) by Satan's temptations, so likewise by
his Agents and Instruments. The Scribes and Pharisees compassed both Sea and
Land, Mat. 13.15.
Math. 23.15. to make one of their profession; As the Jesuits do at this day,
and Sectaries; who gather up all such as wither in their Judgments, and grow
cold in their Affections. There are many false Spirits gone abroad into the
World (says St. John, 1 John 4.1.
1 Epist. 4.1.) Seducing Teachers, and Sect-Masters; who privily bring in
damnable heresies (says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1.
2 Epist. 2.1.) These gather all withered branches into their snares and nets,
and by fair speech make Merchandise of their Souls, 2 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.6.
(as the Apostle shows, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.6.) Thus they are gathered up in
this life.

There is likewise a gathering of them up after this life; Both at the Day of
Death, and at the Day of Judgment. At the Day of Death, Gather not up my soul
(says David) amongst sinners, nor my life with bloody men, Psalm. 26.9. So,
Psalm. 26.9. Luke 16.28. Psalm. 9.17. Act. 5.6, 10.
that there is a Penn or Fold for the Souls of the wicked, after they are
delivered out of their Bodies, appears, Luke 16.28. Psalm. 9.17. And for their
Bodies; they shall be gathered together in the grave to their kindred, (worms
and corruption): men gather them, and carry them to it, as, Acts 5.6, 10.

At the Day of Judgment there shall be a General and an Universal gathering;
but that shall be made not by men, but by the Angels, Math. 13.30. The Tares
must be gathered together and bound up in bundles, or faggots; Not all knit
into One, Math. 13.30.
but several faggots (as Austin expounds it). The Adulterer and his
Adulte^esse shall make one faggot, the Thief and the Receiver another,
Drunkards shall be bound up with Drunkards, and Liars with Liars, etc. Which
binding up together is not only to assure them of all disability any way to
help themselves, but for the further increase of their torment; for as sticks
and straw, being bound together, serve but to set one the other on fire, and
increase the flame; so will it be in this case, for they are thus gathered and
bound not to be spared, but to be prepared for the fire; which is

The fourth degree of the barren Tree's misery, And cast them into the fire.
There is a gathering and binding up of the wheat, as well as of the tares; of
fruitful Professors, as well as of barren Christians; but for several ends: the
Wheat is gathered and bound to be Inned, and carried into the Barn; but the
Tares are for the flame and fire; the most terrible of all tortures, Math.
13.40. In this life they may be said to be cast into the fire, Math. 13.40.
Psalm. 18.7, 8. Heb. 12.39. Isa. 31.9. Lament. 2.4, and 4, 11. Nah. 1.10. Mat.
3.11.
when they are cast into the hot fire of affliction, or taken away by some
soar and heavy Judgment; and so God's wrath is often compared to fire, Isa.
31.9. Lament. 2.4, and 4, 11. and the wicked to stubble fully dry, which fire
does suddenly consume, Nah. 1.10. But this fire is but Temporal: There is fire
eternal and unquenchable, into which they shall be cast, Math. 3.12. All that
they suffer here is nothing to that which abides them at the last Day; in
comparison of which all other fires are but as painted fires, in respect of
Violence and Durance.

The fifth degree is burning, Men cast them into the fire, and they are burned.
St. Paul speaks of some that are cast into the fire and so saved, 1 Cor. 3.15.
1 Cor. 3.15. He shall be saved as it were through fire: And David of such, as
through fire and water were brought into a wealthy place, Psalm. 66.12.
Psalm. 66.12. But this fire is of another nature; and into this fire they are
cast for another end; to burn and fry for ever in those quenchlesse flames. And
this is the Catastrophe of the barren Figg-Tree's Tragedy, as you have it, Heb.
6.8. Heb. 6.8.
And thus you have heard by what degrees God is pleased to cut such Trees down,
and bring them to utter destruction: Now we come to make some Application to
our selves of what has bin delivered.

Zephaniah says of the Inhabitants of the Sea co^sts, and the Region of
Canaan, The word of the Lord is against you, Zeph. 2.5.
may be said to us; and that is more then if all the People of the World were
against us. Better it were that Emperor, Pope, Spain, France, were all
against us, then that the word of the Lord should be against us. And that it is
apparently against us, for our barrenness and sinful abominations, has bin
showed. 1 Cor. 10.4, 5.
There are certain spiritual weapons which God has put into the hands of his
Ministers of the word, not only for the Building up of the Church, but
likewise for the destroying and subverting of whatsoever, and whomsoever shall
oppose the Kingdom of Christ, according to that which God speaks to Jeremiah.
1.10. Jer. 1.10.
I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms to root out,
and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to Build, and to Plant;
that is, I have given thee a Commission to deliver my messages, concerning the
destroying and rooting out, the planting and establishing of the Dominions and
Soveraignties of the Nations on the Earth; And what his Prophets and Faithful
Servants do, by virtue of their Ministerial function, Hos. 6.5.
God will own as done by himself; their regular proceedings God will back and
make good in due time; And these weapons which God has put into the hands of
his Ministers, are in a readiness (says the Apostle) to revenge all
disobedience, that is, 1 Cor. 10.6. Enlightened.
to take just vengeance upon all such persons, as after they have professed the
Gospel of Christ, run out into flagitious courses, and bring not forth fruit
answerable to the profession which they make of Christ; Nor may we doubt, but
that Vengeance is every whitt as ready in God's hand, as in the Minister's
mouth. Acts 5.5, 10.
Now who sees not how busy Gods Ministers are in every Congregation with these
weapons? Who hears not the blows that are given with their Axes and Hammers?
the fearful denunciations and threatenings that are pronounced against this
Land and Nation, for her filthy abominations, her deadness, to tennesse, and
barrenness? Not a Minister that we hear but is chopping at the Root; 2 Cor.
14.24. Ezekiel. 22.2. Psalm. 36.2.
so that it may be truly said, we are judged of all, and condemned of all; and
so judged, as that we cannot choose but see our hollown^sse and rottenness;
yet we remain without remorse, and bless our selves in our wicked ways, till
our iniquity be found to be hateful; and found it will be, to be so, both by
God and Men; when the Tree is laid, then the unsoundn^^^e of it will be seen
(if not before) as was Jehoiakims doings, and that which was found in him: 2 Chronicles. 26.8.
that is, (say some) the marks and prints of his sorceries, which was found in
his Body after he was dead.

Nor has the Ministerial Axe only bin at work, (in hacking and hewing at the
Root of this English Fig Tree) for so long a time; But God himself has taken
the Axe into his own hand (as it is his usual manner when his Ministers can do
little good with their Axe, or grow weary at their work): he has hewed us with
his Outward and Temporal Judgments, (as has bin showed you in the former
doctrine); and needs must he be senseless, and secure, that is not sensible
hereof. For about whose ears do not the Chips fly? who has not in one kind or
other, felt them, and lain groaning under them, yet the Fig Tree stands, but
it reels and totters shrewdly; it is in a consuming, withering, and dying
condition (to every discerning eye,) both in Judgment, Affection, and Practice.

Our Savior foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the whole State,
amongst other signs forerunning their ruin, gives this for one, Many false
Prophets shall arise and shall deceive many, Math. 24.21.
Mat. 24.11.

The many Sects and errors that arise in our Church, the many new and strange
opinions which are held and maintained, (some of them fantastical, others
blasphemous; all contrary to sound Doctrine) is to be esteemed not only as a
just Judgment of God upon us for our contempt of the Gospel, 1 These. 2.11, 12.
Mr. Tho: Fuller in his Sermon. preached at Ex^^er, on ^evel. 2.5,
and our not retaining the Truth in Love, but as a fearful forerunner of a more
grievous Judgment approaching, even the removing of our Candlestick and taking
away the Gospel from us. God commonly (says a noted Divine) moves the Candle
before He removes it; the light seem; sick and faint, before it dies; As in
Mines before a damp comes, Candles begin to burn blew, (as by Instinct)
mourning their own Funeral before hand: And sure y, these fa^se Teachers
increasing as they do, will steal away from us the Truth of our Religion, (as
God speaks of false Prophets, Jer. 23.30.) before we are aware, unless we
lay faster hold on it then we do; Jer. 23.30.
for our eyes see that abundantly verified in a great number of Professors,
which was foretold of these latter times; they have departed from the Faith,
and given heed to seducing spirits and doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.
1 Timothy 4.1. they have fallen off from the grounds of sincerity and truth,
whereof they were once persuaded. This makes us more odious to God then many
foul corruptions in life and conversation would do, especially where the mind
has bin enlightened with the knowledge of the Truth: Hilders. com. on Psalm. 41.
Lect. 146. Levit. 13.44.
Leprosy in the head was of all other Leprosies most dangerous and
destructive. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean, (says the Lord)
his plague is in his head, Levit. 13.44. The Leper was unclean, if the Leprosy
was in his Hands or Feet; but if it were in the Head, then he was utterly
unclean; Many are of opinion, that if a man's life and conversation be honest
and fair, it is no great matter of what Judgment he be in matters of Religion,
but they are much mi^taken; B. B. Hall Obser. 51.
Errors of Judgment are more pernicious then errors of Practice, albeit less
regarded: The corruption of the mind is the highest degree of corruption that
can be, that does not only defile the Soul, and make it loathsome unto God, 2
Cor. 11.3. Tim. 1.15. Gal. 3.1. Romans 1.28.
2 Cor. 21.3. Tit. 1.15. but it bewitcheth the Soul, Gal. 3.1. and brings us
under a most heavy curse, Romans 1.28. which curse thousands in these days lie
under.

As there is an evident withering in Judgment, so is there in our Affections;
And this our Savior joins with the former, Mat. 24.12. The love of many shall
wax cold; And, Math. 24.12.
this withering is not to be seen in a few only, here one, and there another;
but it is Epidemical, the disease of the whole Nation, and every Cong^^ga^ion
in i^. If ever any Church might be charged as Ephesus was, with leaving and
forsaking her first Love, Rev. 2.4.
It is this Church in England which is fallen from that heat and zeal for God,
and his T^^th which once it had: Time was, when it burnt in Spirit against
superstition, profaneness, Blasphemy, Sabbath-breaking, Whoredom, etc. but now
the sway of the times, has bin as water cast upon the coals of Englands
affections: What flocking has here bin in former times unto the preaching of
the Word? What inciting and encouraging one another, Isa. 2.3.
Come let us go up to the House of the Lord, Isa. 2.3. How many miles would men
travail to hear a Sermon, how precious was the Gospel in men's esteem? But our
long enjoyment of it has made us esteem it lightly, and to grow weary of it
(as Israel did of Manna) insomuch that the Cucumbers, Numb. 12.5, 6.
and Garlic of Egypt, is preferred before it: Time was, when our greatest
delight seemed to be in the society of the Saints, now we affect it not; nay,
we rather disaffect them who are truly godly, and look asquint upon them.

Lastly, 2 Timothy 3.5.
For our practice; that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.5. is verified of our times,
we have a form of godliness, an outward profession we make of it, but the
power thereof is denied: Profaneness and Irreligion does every where increase;
Iniquity does abound, which is the cause that the love of many is waxen cold.
One complains thus against Romish transgression, Recessit hoc tempore Lex a
Sacerdotibus, etc. Change but the name, the Complaint lies against us,
Breidenb. decan. Mog. Eccles. in suae peregr. Hist.
The Law is departed from the Priest, Justice from the Princes, Counsel from
Senators; Fidelity from People, Piety from Parents, Duty from Subjects, Charity
from Prelates, Honesty from young men, Discipline from Clerks, Learning from
Teachers, and Study from Scholars; Equity from Judges, and Concord from
Citizens, Fear from Servants, Fellowship from the Country, Virtue from
Nobility, Truth from Merchants, Chastity from Virgins, Humility from Widows,
Love from the Married, and Patience from the Poor: Those ever honored, Moral
Virtues, Patience, Constancy, Fidelity, Chastity, and the rest, are all become
bare names amongst us: We have readd of them in Books, that once they were, but
we cannot see them now in practice amongst men; such is our withering.

And is not this an evident sign of our casting forth, and rejection (as being
a People of Gods curse, Isa. 34.5.)? David lamented the Churches condition,
when they saw not their signs, Psalm. 74.9. that is, Psalm. 74.9. Genesis 17.11.
Exodus 12.13, and 31, 13.
the Testimonies of God's presence and favor in his Ordinances, which were for
signs to Israel, Genesis 17.11. Exodus 12.13, and 31; 13. And have not we like
matter of complaint? The outward signs remain with us still, (blessed be his
name); The word is sincerely taught; Sacraments (in many places) duly
administered, (albeit therein is a great want) but His lively and powerly
presence in those Ordinances, to the converting of People unto God (which in
former times we have seen and heard of) is wanting. 1 Samuel 28.6.
It was sad with Saul, and a soar signeit was, that God was angry with him, and
was purposed to cast him off when in his extremity he answered him not; So it
is with that People, to whom God continues his outward Ordinances, but without
Power, Life, and Spirit.

Were there not a casting of us forth, it could not be, that there should be
such a collecting and gathering up of many through Satan's temptations; false
Prophets seducements; and the allurements of this sinful World; whereby it
comes to pass that men are drawn away from following of Christ, and bound up
into so many several bundles as there are societies o^ Sectaries.

All which being considered, we have great cause to lament our present
condition, and by our tears to endeavor to quench the fire which is kindled
against us; otherwise we must expect to be cast into it in the end, to our
eternal ruin; for that is a fire not to be quenched.

Doom, and may here read your Sentence, Cut it down.

It is true (that one says) Filius Populi has no Father, every Public
Reproof is looked upon as a Bastard, none will own it till it be brought home,
and laid at his own door: Let me therefore come nearer home, and persuade every
one partion larly to deal truly and impartially with his own soul, in examining
whether he be a fruitful, or a barren Fig Tree, (as ha^h bin before directed)
and if in case thou find thy self to be either barren or unfrui^ful in good
works, or fruitful in evil, delude (...) that thou shall do well enough in the
(...) there i^ a sharp Axe and a quick fire that God has al^^dy p^ep^^^d for
(...), and for al^ such unfruitful and barren ^^^^fo^s.

It is true that Solomon tells us Because sentence against an ev^l worker is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. Explained.
Eccles. 8.11. Which words I and (...) ways expounded; Actively thus, The
wicked hold on in d ing e^^l because their punishment is deferred; Passively
^^us, We see that such as go on in sin, go on unpunished, and ^e^eupon they
cease from doing well: but the Sentence is given ^ready against ^uch, the
Execution only is deferred; the senence is a sentence of condemnation;
published and declared; ^^encence not concealed, but made publiqu^ly known, (as
the Original has it) that none may plead ignorance of it, and that (if it be
possible) Repentance may prevent it; But in stead of making that Use of God's
patience and forbearance, the heart of the sons of men is fully set to do evil:
Of the sons of men; that is, Lyra.
(^aith one) Of them, who are nourished in carnal sensu^llity, and are the sons
of men, and not the sons of God (for they improve it better); but the heart of
the sons of men turns all to an increase of wickedness.

But let all such remember that the sentence is past already upon them, (as
has bin said) and it shall stand, unless repentance and amendment of life
revokei. And a^beit it be not fully executed; Yet it is put in execution by
Degrees, as was Adam's sentence executed on him; In dying he did dye, Genesis
2.17. So soon as ever he had sinned, Death began to wound his Body by Hunger,
Cold, Nakedness, loss of Beauty, etc. So here, the sentence has seized on
thee, and in being hacked thou art slain. It is not the last sand that does
exhaust the Glass, nor the last stroke that does fell the Oak; the Axe is at
work upon thee, not a Sermon that thou hear, but gives a Chop at thy Root;
every breathing, every denunciation of wrath and vengeance is a sa blow with
the Axe and after a while will lay thee flat; Yea, all things that do befall
thee, and happen unto thee; Every loss is as an Axe, every Cross, every
Affliction is as an Axe that shall work to thy ruin; The very Prosperity is an
Axe that will slay thee, Prove. 1.32. Prove. 1.32. Romans 8.28.
As all things work for the best to them that love God, and are fruitful in
good works; So all things work for the worst, and tend to the destruction of
them that love him not, and are barren and unfruitful in the works of holiness.

How God proceeds, and by what degrees he executes this sentence on a barren
Professor, you have bin showed. Now apply all unto thy self, and ^earch thy o^n
soul; whether or not in some degree, or other, thou art under this curse, at
least near unto it, if not under it.

It may be that thou art still a frequenter of the Ordinances, thou resortest
to God's House; Thou hear, prayest, communicatest with the Children of God.
But, Do those Ordinances speak any comfort and encouragement unto thee? Does
God look amiably upon thee, when thou come into his presence? Does he
vouchsafe to meet thee, and cause the light of his Countenance to shine upon
thee? Does he speak unto thee as he does unto his, Peace, Psalm. 85.8? Psalm.
85.8.
Does he not rather hide his face from thee, and wit^draw himself, his favor
and his loving kindness? insomuch that thou find no sweetness, no comfort
in the performance of holy Duties; no work of his blessed spirit in quickening,
strengthening, comforting of thee? If so, thou may justly fear that thou art
already cast forth, and spiritually excommunicated from having fellowship with
God from Christ, and from the blessed spirit of grace; and have great cause to
cry out with David, Psalm. 22.1. My God, My God, Psalm. 22.1.
Why have thou forsaken me?

Again, art thou not a withered Christian, strangely altered in thy Judgment
from what thou were? Thou formerly esteemedst the Church of England to be the
true Church of Christ; Her Ministers true Ministers, lawfully sent and called;
the Word by them taught thou receivedst as the Word of God himself; 1 These.
2.13.
Sacraments by them administered, as being of Divine institution, not of Humane
invention: but now it is otherwise with thee; Thy Mother (whose Womb bare thee,
and whose papps have given thee suck) thou now defamest, esteemest Her for a
strumpet, (albeit She be thy Mother); Her Servants the Ministers of the Word
and Sacraments are, in thy account, Antichristian; the Ordinances but Men's
traditions; and as much good may be got (thou think) by the hearing of a
Cobbler or Tinker in a Stable, as by hearing any of these Ministers in a Steeple
house (as thou termest it). Are not thy Affections to holy Duties, grown cold
and chill (like David in his old age) no heat in them? 2 King. 1.1. Luke 24.32.
Thou Hear, Read, Prayest, etc. but without a^^ Life or Spirit; In former
times thy spirit did even burn within thee, and was stirred up with indignation
against Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and open profaneness; Now thou art of
Gallio's temper, Act. 18.17.
and art come to a state of Neutrality, and can digest it well enough, to
hear and see these; yea, and greater abominations then these.

And is there not a manifest withering in thy life and whole conversation? Thou
seemed'st to be strict in thy ways, now art waxed loose and careless; Thou
were (seemingly) careful of sanctifying the Sabbath; now all care of that is
laid aside, as a matter merely ceremonial: Family Duties wholly omitted (if
not scorned and derided). Thy green leaves are withered, so that comparing what
thou art to what thou have bin, it may be said of thee what the Disciples said
of the Fig Tree that Christ had cursed, Mat. 21.20.
Mat. 21.20. Good Lord Master, how soon is it withered?

Lastly, Art thou not in the number of those that separatest they self from the
public Assembly, and joynest to the society of Seducers? Have thou not bin
carried away with Schism or Heresy, or some strange fantastical, opinion or
other? and so art bound up in the same bundle with Sectaries (as Anabaptists,
Quakers, Seekers, and such like); and joined with them as members of their
congregated Churches? If thou have not proceeded so far, yet expect that this
will follow as a just Judgment of God upon thy withering, (if thou repent not);
and after such a faggorting and binding up what can be expected but the fire?
and such withered and dried Trees will make the fiercest and hottest fire, Nah.
1.10.
because they are most seared, and as fuel fully dry, Nah. 1.10.

out of fear of this dreadful Sentence, (as the Apostle speaking of higher
Powers) then do that which is good, Romans 13.3.
and bring forth the Fruit of a godly Life: for this sentence is not a terror
to the good and fruitful Christian, but to the bad and barren.

Barrenness of the Womb was ever held amongst the Jews for a Curse, and a
Reproach. For a Curse; So Michol was punished for her scoffing as David's
devotion; and Abimilech was plagued for taking away Abraham's wife from him, 2 Samuel 6.23.
(so says the Text,) the Lord had fast closed up all the Wombs of Abimilechs
house, because of Sarah Abraham's wife: But upon Abraham's prayer God healed
Abimilech, and his Wife, Genesis 20.17, 18.
and his Mayd-Servants, and they bare Children, Genesis 20.17, 18. Give them O
Lord, what will thou give them? give them a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts,
Hos. 9.14. Explained. Paraeus in loc.
(says the Prophet concerning Ephraim, Hos. 9.14.) which words howbeit they
are uttered by way of Intercession, (and not of Imprecation) out of affection
to that People, and not out of indignation against them, (he preferring the
less evil before the greater, the miscarrying Womb and dry Breast, before the
bringing forth of Children, and nourishing of them up to Idolatry and
slaughter) yet it implies that it was a Judgment to be barren, albeit far less
then that which was foretold by the Prophet, that should befall Ephraim, that
he should bring forth Children unto the murderer; that is, they should fall
under the hand of a murdering Enemy. And as it was esteemed for a Curse
amongst them, so likewi^e it was a shame and a reproach as the Mother of the
Baptist intimates, in that saying of hers, Luke 1.25.
Luke 1.25. Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on
me, to take away my reproach from amongst men, (albeit since the coming of
Christ we have not the same opinion of it, nor the same reason). But the
barrenness of the Womb is nothing, being compared with the Curse and Plague of
a dry and barren heart, albeit by many less respected, who being barren, can
cry out with Rachel, Genesis 30.2.
Give me Children or else I dye: but thorgh the Heart be barren of grace, and
the life of good works, (upon which, death will inevitably follow,) there is
little or no complaint made of that. Hannah bitterly lamented the barrenness of
her body, 1 Samuel 1.7.
insomuch that she did neither eat nor drink, nor had she any heart to go up
unto the Temple to offer sacrifice; how then can any barren soul eat or drink
with a merry heart? being not only near unto Cursing (as the Apostle speaks)
but under it, as Damocles (one of Dionysius his Parasites) was under the
glittering Sword (which hung over his head only by a bristle of a Horse's upper
lip) as he sat in the midst of his choysest delicates. Heb. 6.8.


Solomon tells us that a barren Womb is one of the four things that cries out
Give, give, and is never satisfied; Prove. 30.15, 16.
I would we could add this as the fifth, the barren heart. Lord God, What will thou give me, seeing I go Childlesse? (said Abraham to God, Genesis 15.2.). Genesis
15.2.
The want of that did put his mouth so out of taste, that he could relish
nothing, not his Victory, (mentioned before) not his Riches; no, nor those
promises made unto him: all seemed to his palate but as the white of an Egg
without taste, Job 6.6.
wanting a Child: Come thou thus to God that have a barren soul; Lament thy
condition; say, Lord, Thou have given me the things of this life in a plentiful
and abundant measure, I have Health, Wealth, Plenty of outward things; But what
will all this do me good, whilst my heart is barren of grace; my life of
holiness? Never leave importunate craving, till thou find twinns of grace
striving in the Womb of thy Soul. Genesis 25.22.
And so we have done with the Act; we come now to the Object, (It).

Cut it down]. This Fig Tree of my own planting, set in my Vineyard, etc. The
People of the Jews were a mighty People, dearly beloved of God: And Jerusalem
was the place where he had chosen to dwell for ever; Psalm. 87.2, and 132, 13,
14, and 122, 3 4, and 48, 12, and 87, 3.
A strong City, it was well fortified with high Walls, and strong Towers, and
Castles; Amongst the Citizens were many wise heads, stout hearts, strong hands;
Glorious things are spoken of Jerusalem the City of God: Yet, all this could
not exempt them from the Axe of Vengeance, down they must: thence we are
taught, that

No outward Privilege can secure a sinful People from the stroke of
Vengeance.

Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit (says St. John) is h^wen down
and cast into the fire, Mat. 3.10.
Mat. 3.10. Let it be a Cedar of Lebanon; A goodly Cypress, A sweet Olive, A
Vine, A Fig Tree, (no matter what); if barren, hewn down it shall he as well
as the T^orne or B^amble: God respects neither greatness, nor goodness, not
excellency, nor beauty, nor any outward thing whatsoever. The Axe has no eyes,
it strikes as the hand guides it. God judges without respect of Persons; Read,
Isa. 2.10, -- 18.
Isa. 2.10, -- 18. there you find that there is no avoiding of his Judgments;
the Rocks cannot hide, nor can any shroud themselves within the Earth from his
Vengeance; His Judgments shall seize upon every one that is proud and lofty,
upon all Cedars, as well as Shrubbs; nor will high Towers and strong Forts any
whit avail to keep off the stroke of the Axe, they shall be laid to the
ground. Deuteronomy. 28, 59, 63. Isa. 1.24. Jer. 7.13, 14. Math. 23.38. Ezekiel. 21.26.
Explained.
Many such like threatenings we have, Deuteronomy. 28.59, 63. Isa. 1.24. Jer. 7.13,
14. Math. 23.38.

I might produce many Instances: hear what God says of Zedekiah, and of his
Kingdom, Ezekiel. 21.26. Remove the Diamond and take off the Crown, etc. that is,
take the Kingdom from that treacherous Prince, he shall not Rule any more;
Jechoniah who is now unregarded shall be exalted, and Zedekiah who is now
exalted, shall be brought low; and concerning the Kingdom of Israel and Judah,
I will utterly overturn it, so that it shall not be erected any more, until
the Messiah come, whose right it is, and to him I will spiritually give it: And
of Jechoniah the son of Jehojakim, King of Judah, God says, Though he were as
near and as precious to me as the signet on the right hand uses to be to him
that wears it; Jer. 22.24.
yet, says God, I would pluck him thence, and cast him away into Captivity,
Jer. 22.24. As if he should say, You may think his nearness to me, and my
affection to him, may preserve him in his place and power, but be not deceived;
for, as I live says the Lord, I will pluck him thence. God is as resolute as
Saul when he had bound the People, not to eat till night, As I live though it
be done by my son Jonathan, he shall dye, 1 Samuel 14.39.

I shall content my self with making some brief Use of this Point, and so pass
it. God has done much for this Nation, and graced it with high Privileges,
and rich Prerogatives, wherein we seem to outvie the felicity and pride of any
other Nation. Of all the Trees in the Garden, we seem to be the Vine: Of all
the Flowers in the Field, we are the Lilly and the Rose: And what Privilege
had Jerusalem, that we may not glory in the like, or in a better kind? Yet all
our Privileges will not exempt us from wrath in case we go on in our
wickedness; but aggravate it. Was Jerusalem not spared, that chosen City, and
Empress of the Nations; and can we imagine that we shall escape? Art thou
better then populus No? (says God to Ninevie) that was situate among the
Rivers, Nah. 3.8, 9, 10.
that had the Waters round about it, whose Rampart was the Sea, and Her Wall
was from the Sea; Aethiopia and Egypt were Her strength, and it was infinite:
Put and Lubim were Her helpers; Yet, She was carried away, She went into
Captivity, Nah. 3.8, 9, 10. Truly the same may be said to us; Is our State
safer, or more secure then Athens, or Sparta, or Babylon, or Troy, or Ninevie,
or Jerusalem? Or is our Church more glorious, or more renouned then were those
7 famous Churches of Asia; Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus Laodicea, Philadelphia,
Sardis, in the midst whereof God is said to have had his walk; yet, for their
sins, Rev. 2.5.
the Candlestick is now removed from them, and those glorious Churches are now
become a place for the Zum and the Ohim, Isa. 13.2, 1.
the Satyrs, and the Scretch-Owles to lodge in; They are become cages of
unclean and loathsome Birds, overspread with Turcism.

We are too prone to put our trust in some outward Privilege or other, as the
Jews did in the Temple, wherein they most gloried, Jer. 7.4, 5, 9.
Jer. 7.4. but this is to trust in lying words (as the Lord tells that People,
verse. 8.9.) whilst they lay in the guilt of manifold transgressions, and came
into his presence with wicked dispositions, and hollow hearts, (which God took
great notice of,) it was not the crying up of the Temple of the Lord, that
would profit them, when they had polluted it, and profaned it; And therefore
he sends them to Shiloh (where the Ark of God was for some time) and wills them
to look back to that place, and consider whether the presence of the Ark (which
indeed was it that made the Temple holy) did shelter it from sorrow and
desolation, verse 11. Nor should it shelter that Temple wherein they so much
gloryed; nor did it. O my Beloved, let us not delude our selves in trusting to
any outward privilege whatsoever, not to those spiritual privileges, (that we
have yet continued) that the Doors of the Temple yet stand open unto us, that
we have zealous and faithful Ministers yet amongst us, who stand on their
Watchtower, and give us warning: Indeed, God is not so wholly displeased with
a People, where these are continued; but that he may be pacified if we seek him
in time, before the decree comes forth. Zeph. 2.1.
We have yet the true Religion professed, and by Authority maintained; we have
his Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments continued; His favor has many ways
bin manifested in many great deliverances that we have had: We have strong
Walls about this Nation, a great Navy by Sea; Strong Forts by Land: Valiant
Soldiers, expert Commanders, etc. But it is in vain to rest upon any of these;
All these will be but as paper walls, whilst those sins are so common amongst
us, that provoke God's wrath against us. When Phocas had killed his Master
Mauritius the Emperor (like another Cain,) he labored to secure himself by
building a mighty Wall about his Palace, but he heard a voice by night that
told him, Albeit he built Walls as high as the Clouds, yet sin within those
Walls would undermine all. He was a Noble, and wise Captain (of whom I have
read,) who being moved to take upon him the defense of a strong City, and
encouraged thereunto from the strong Fortifications about it, inexpugnable
walls of it, and the plentiful Ammunition that was in it, demanded of them; If
there were any covering betwixt it and Heaven? if they had any defense against
God's Vengeance, (whom by sin they had provoked.) It is in vain to ask what
strenth we have by Sea or Land, but let us enquire on what terms we stand with
God; Let us draw our eyes from Walls and Towers, and make God our Tower and
Fortress, if we would be safe, Zach. 2.5. Yet to come a little nearer, Zach.
2.5.
let none of you content yourselves with the Privilege of Christians, unless
you live the life of Christians; nor flatter your selves with an outward
Profession, nor any other outward privilege; It will nothing avail you, that
you are chosen out of the rest of the World, Tim. 2.14.
to be a peculiar people unto God, unless you be purged from your iniquities,
and be zealous of good works; Nor that you have the Covenant, and the seals
thereof; the glorious Gospel of Christ, and the Sacraments; that you have bin
Baptized, and thereby admitted into the Family of God; and have eat and drunk
at His Table, if you live not as Children and Servants ought to live: for then
these will be to you, 1 Samuel 15.27, 28.
but as the lap of Samuel's Garment in the hand of Saul, the pledge of your
rejection. Nor are these temporal Blessings, which God has bestowed on you
(say it be greatness, or high place, or the like), sufficient Arguments of
God's Love, or pledges of your Salvation, unless withal you have the Grace to
employ them to the Glory of the Giver, and to use them to those holy ends for
whith they were bestowed. Where God has bestowed the Seed of his Mercies with
a liberal hand, He expects a fruitful harvest of righteousness, and true
holiness; But if we return no crop, or bring forth the Tares and Cockles of
sin and wickedness, we shall be but nearer the Curse, and his many benefits
shall serve but as so many arguments to aggravate your sins, and increase your
Punishments. And so much let s^ffice to be spoken of the Severity of the
Sentence denounced against this Fig Tree, Cut it down, We come now to the
Equity of the Sentence,

Why cumbereth it the ground?]

God need not give a Reason of his doings, Job. 9.12. Job 33.13 2 Samuel 16.10.
his Judgments (although not always manifest, yet they) are always just; yet
that he might be justified, and the mouth of wickedness stopped, he is pleased
to stoop so low, as to render a Reason of his severity, and to impart to us an
account of the ground of his proceedings; thus he deals with the Dresser, as if
he should say, Think it not strange that I deal thus severely with this
Fig Tree, I will give thee my Reason, Terram reddit otiosam. It is not only
barren in it self, but it cumbers the ground, Josh. 7.10, 11. Lam. 3.39, 40.
Isa. 42.25. and 57.17. Jer. 13.22. and 30.15. 2 These. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.3 (...)
and causes barrenness, drawing away nourishment from other Plants that would
bear fruit: In General then, let us pitch our thoughts awhile upon this Truth,

God's severest Judgments have always most equitable Reasons. When God
strikes, there is some Cause evermore, some Motive, for the inflicting of
evil, Josh. 7.10, 11. Lament. 3.39, 40. Isa. 42.25. and 57.17. Jer. 13.22. and
30.15. 2 These. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.30.

It is a natural Conclusion, (as well as Divine,) that when God is angry he
strikes and when he strikes he is angry. This Judgment (says Calvin, speaking
of the Barbarians censure of St. Paul) was common in all ages, that those who
were grivously punished, had grievously offended. For God (to the end, that he
might make the world without excuse) would have this deeply rooted in the minds
of all men, that calamity and adversity (and chiefly, notable destructions)
were testimonies and signs of his wrath, and just vengeance against Sin; and
there upon did the very Barbarians conclude against Paul, Act. 28.4.
that he was a Murderer, when they saw the Viper, hang upon his hand, that had
leaped out of the fire; whom, though he escaped the Sea, yet vengeance would
not suffer to live, Acts 28.4. That God strikes not in such anger, but with
relation to sin, is a Doctrine that a man need not to be catechized in; He
needs not read Fathers nor Councels, nor Schoolmen, nor Summists, nor Casuists,
(says one) no, nor the Bible it self, (out of which, we may bring multitudes
of proofs to strengthen it): The very natural man can so conclude, albeit he
may err when he comes to particulars; as those men of Malta did, who descended
hastily and inconsiderately to particular and personal Application. Had they
known Paul, or known him guilty of Murder, or any such heinous crime, there
had been some ground for their censure: For when the sins of any are
notoriously and manifestly known unto us (especially, if they be such as God
has threatened to punish with such Judgments;) in such a case it is not
unlawful to judge, That for those sins God has justly smitten them, Psalm.
52.6, 7. But when we judge a man guilty of some great sin, (albeit we know no
sin by him) only for the Affliction that he endures, and the Judgment of God
that is upon him, is great rashness; And for this, Job's friends were reproved
sharply: Thus the men of Malta failed, they judged that the Judgment upon this
man, St. Paul, was an evidence of his guiltiness in this offense of Murder;
(For there were many crimes, and those Capital, and such as would have induced
death, on this side of Murder,) but they stopped at none till they came to the
worst, and therein they transgressed the bounds of Charity, and were faulty.
But that God is angry when he strikes, and that he has just cause to strike
when he does, is an undeniable Conclusion, from the Dictare of Nature as well
as Scripture.

For God is a righteous God, Genesis 18, 25. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Job 8.3. and 34.10, 11
Romans 3.5, 6.

Secondly, He is gracious and slow to anger, Exodus 34. Favors are from God's
own bowels, but Judgments always are forced, as the Be stings not till it be
provoaked. Thus it is in the maine Point of a man's eternal estate; man's
Salvation is ex mero beneplacito, The gift of God is eternal life; but his
damnation is never without a cause in man. The Soul that sins shall die; so
is it in this case of lesser Good or Evil.

We may make good Use of this, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4. David indeed complained
justly of his enemies that they persecuted him without a cause, Psalm. 35.19.
that is, In respect of them, he had given them no cause so to do; but who can
charge God with this injustice, but he must charge God foolishly and impiously?
He never smites till he be provoked, nor always then: God, when he does smite,
exacteth less of us then our sins deserve, as Zophar said to Job 11.6. An
Ounce of Judgment was never without a Pound of Sin.

Yet when any Judgment lies upon us, we are too apt to think that God deals
therein over-severely with us; and are ready to cast a sullen frown upon God,
with Cur me coedis? Why do thou smite me? It is storied of Titus Vespasianus
the Emperor, that lying on his death bed, and looking up to heaven, he
complained of his Gods, saying, Immerenti sibi vitam eripi, That he deserved
not to die, having never committed any thing, in his whole life, whereof he
repented, but one; (surely he had so much the more cause to repent him now).
But why speak I of him? Job was a holy, godly man, and confessed his own
vileness and guiltiness before God, as appears Job 40.4. yet he had in
himself, a secret conceit that he was not so vile and sinful as to deserve
such heavy Afflictions, as God had laid upon him; which was the reason of God's
so speaking to him, Job 40 4. Ver. 8.
verse. 8. Will thou also disanull my Judgment? Will thou condemn me, that thou
may be righteous? The best of us are apt, under heavy afflictions, to
disanull God's proceedings with us, and question God's righteous proceedings
therein: but this may not be; we may not give liberty to tongue, or thought, to
murmur or repine under God's strokes: But

First, Learn Silence, Job. 4.4, 6. Psalm. 39 9.
and with Job to lay our hands upon our mouths, Job 40.4, 5. and with David,
Psalm. 39.9. to be dumb: nor only bind our Tongues to the good behavior, that
they do not speak impatiently against God; but our very Hearts must be kept
from inward repining and fretting against him, Psalm. 62.1.
Psalm. 62.1. Truly my Soul keeps silence unto God.

Secondly, Acknowledge God to be just, in all that has befallen us: I have
sinned (said holy Job), What shall I do to thee, Job. 7.20. Psalm. 119.75.
o thou Preserver of men? This David confessed, I know O Lord that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm.
119.75. Which saying of David, Mauntius the Emperor used, when his Children
were slain before his eyes, and after that, his own eyes put out, Righteous art
thou O Lord and just are thy Judgments. Thus it should be with us in all
Judgments that befall a Land or Nation (seem they never so severe and sharp):
Let us learn to justify God therein. As did the Princes of Israel, and the King
himself: When God punished them by Shishak, they said, The Lord is righteous, 2
Chr. 12.6. Lam. 1.18. Neh. 9.33. Dan. 9.14. Mich. 7.9.
2 Chronicles. 12.6. the like confession did the Church make, Lament. 1.18. So Neh.
9.33. and Dan. 9.14. and Mich. 7.9. They have not only confessed God's
righteousness therein, but his Goodness and Mercy; some mitigation of the
rigor of Justice; some cause of admiring rather his Indulgence toward them,
than of repining against him for his severe dealing with them, Lam. 3.22.
Lament. 3.22. It is the Lord's Mercy that we are not utterly consumed; that is
from being a People, because his compassions fail not.

Thirdly, Patiently bear the soarest correction that God is pleased to lay upon
us, out of this persuasion, that we have deserved more. Thus Ezra, speaking of
the extreme Judgment of God upon his People in the Babylonish Captivity, which
was the extremest and heaviest Judgment that ever God had inflicted upon any
people under Heaven, (as appears by that we read Lam. 1.12. and Dan. 9.12.):
yet he confesses, Lam. 1.12. Dan. 9.12 Ezr. 9. 13
Thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13.
When their uncircumcised heart is humbled (says God), then they shall accept
of the punishment of their Iniquity, Lev. 26.41 Mich. 7.9, 10.
Levit. 26.41. that is, they shall willingly bear them: Well may that Offender
bear a brand in the hand, who saves his neck Mich. 7.9, 10. Ransack thine own
heart, and thou shall find that thou have deserved that which thou suffer,
and more; 1 John 3.20
and if thy conscience condemn thee, God is greater.

Fourthly, If in case the Cause and Reason of God's severity be unknown unto
us, yet let us learn to justify God therein: resting assured, that there is
Cause enough, albeit (as yet) we have not found it out. His Judgments are,
sometimes secret, but always just; It is not possible, that he should do any
wrong to any of his Creatures; his Will is the Rule of Justice, and every thing
is right because it is his Will, to have it so; But besides this, there is some
particular Cause, or Reason, why God writes such bitter things against us. Job.
13.26. 1 Samuel 17.29. 2 Samuel 21.1. Jer. 8.6. Ezekiel. 16.43.
Therefore, as David answered his Brother, so answer thy repining Soul, 1 Samuel
17.29. What has God now done, is there not a Cause. Therefore,

Fifthly, Search out the Cause, (if it may be) as did David, 2 Samuel 21.1. God
blam^s the want of this, Jer. 8.6. Ezekiel. 16.43.

But how may we find out the particular Cause, for which God punishes us?

God does so order his Judgments (commonly), Resp.
that in the Punishment, we may see the Sin; and in the Sin foresee the
Punishment. Sometimes, the very Punishment, and Circumstances of it, shows us
the Cause. God (many times) punishes us in the like kind, Jud. 1.6, 7. 1 Samuel
15.33. Exodus 1.22 Talia quisque luat, qualia quisque facit. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 9.
Bodin l. 6. de Rep. Lin. Decad. 1. 1 King. 21.19. Jer. 7.32.
as in Adonibezeck's Case, Judge. 1.6, 7. And in Agag's Case, 1 Samuel 15.33. And
Pharaoh's Case, Exodus 1.22. He drowned the Children, and was drowned himself,
Exodus 14.28. and many others, wherewith History (both sacred and profane) does
abound. And for the better discovery, God is pleased many times to observe the
Circumstances of Place, as in Ahab, 1 King. 21.19. In the place where Dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick thy blood, even thine. In Tophet
where the Idolatrous Israelites sacrificed their Children, in the same place
shall they be slaughtered Jer. 7.32. So Aristotle tells us of a lewd Son, who
dragged his Father by the hair of his head to the threshold of the House; and
was himself dragged to the same place, by his Son, and in the same manner.

And sometimes God makes choice of that time to punish wherein the fault has
been commit ed: Ps. 78.30.
Whilst the meat was in the mouths of the lusting Israelites, the wrath of God
came upon them, (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.30.) Thus Titus began the siege
of Jerusalem, Caesar Baron.
(as some have exactly calculated) upon the same day, in which our Savior
suffered: And as the Jews put Christ to death at the Feast of the Passover;
So, at the same time of the year, when multitudes of Jews were met together at
Jerusalem, to celebrate that Feast, according to the Law, the Romans came upon
them, and destroyed both them and their City. Our own Chronicles tell us of a
great man, L. Hastings
in the days of Richard the third, who conspired the death of the Queen's
Kindred; and by indirect means, and illegal ways, without trial of Law, or
offense given, had fetched off the heads of the Ea^l Rivers and Gray, and others
(executed at Pomfret in the North). He, at the same time of the year, the same
day of the Month, the same hour of the Day, and if curiosity may go further,
(says one) the same minute of an hour (as near as could be guessed), after the
same lawless manner, had his head stricken off in the Tower of London.

Much may be gathered from the Part that is punished or afflicted. Jeroboam
stretched out his hand to strike the man of God, and God strikes that hand of
his, It was dried up, so that he could not pull it in again unto him, 1 King.
13.4. Genesis 19.11. Jud 6.16.21. Luke 16.24. Revel. 16.9, 10. Number. 5.21 Number. 25.8
The Sodomites had eyes full of Adultery and Uncleanness, and were stricken
with blindness, Genesis 19.11. So Sampson's eyes were first pulled out, which
first allured him unto sin, Judge. 16.21. That rich Epicure, mentioned in the
Gospel, offended most in his Taste, and is tormented in his Tongue, Luke 16.24.
So were those Blasphemers, mentioned Revel. 16.9, 10. they gnawed their Tongues
for pain. The Adulteresse's thigh did rott, and her Belly swell, Numb. 5.21.
Zimri and Cozbi were thrust through the Belly, Numb. 25.8, Jehoram was stricken
in his Bowels, until they fell out, for that he had no bowels of Compassion
toward his Brethren, but slew them all with the Sword, 2 Chronicles. 21.13, 15, 19.
Nichanor's head and right hand were stricken off, 2 Chr. 21.13, 15, 19.
which he had lift up against the Sanctuary, 1 Match, 7.47.
and wherewith he had blasphemed the God of the Sanctuary, 1 Machab. 7.47. The
Law was Eye for Eye, Levit. 24.
Tooth for Tooth, Levit. 24. God takes special notice of the offending Member.

Nor is the Measure of the Punishment to be disregarded; God often observes the
like measure, Mat. 7.2.
and proportion, in inflicting Punishment. Hear what Christ says, Math. 7.2.
As we mete to others, it shall be measured to us again: a Measure, pressed
down, shaken together, and running over. Reward her (says the Angel, of
Babylon) as she rewarded you; In the Cup which she has filled, Rev. 16.6.
fill to her double, Revel. 16.6. It is storied of Caesar, that he had undone
23 Countries, and he had 23 wounds given him, whereof he died. And for the
manner, Hear what the Prophet speaks Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest,
Isa. 33.1.
and thou wast not spoiled: When thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee. Exodus 22.22.24. Prove. 1.24, 28. 2 These. 1.6 Jam. 2.13.
1 Samuel 2.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
So Exodus 22.22, 24. Prove. 1.24, 28. 2 These. 1.6. Jam. 2.13. We might abound
in Examples. I shall trouble you only with one Instance more, and that is in
Eli; in every parcel of whose Punishment, his Fault, and God's Justice in
punishing of it, was made conspicuous, 1 Samuel 2.30. etc. First, His Sons
despise God, and God leightly esteems them. Secondly, Old Eli was indulgent,
therefore not an old man of his House shall be left, ver. 31. Thirdly, His Sons
were enemies to God in the profession, and therefore he should see an enemy in
God's Habitation, ver. 32. Fourthly, He punished not them, therefore they
should live to punish him, to consume his eyes, and grieve his heart, ver. 33.
Fifthly, He preferred their life to his Maker's honor, therefore they shall die
in ignominy, and with dishonor, ver. 34. Sixthly, He abused his Authority with
connivence, and therefore God would translate it to another, who should use it
better, ver. 35. Seventhly, Forasmuch as his Sons were so saucy as to take the
meat from off God's Trencher, therefore his Family shall be brought to beg a
morsel of Bread, ver. 36. Eighthly, and Lastly, For that he neglected to take
vengeance on their iniquities, therefore God would punish both him and them, 1 Samuel 3.11, -- 15.
and that severely, cap. 3.11, 12, 13, 14.

Thus, as God puisheth always de condigno, so sometimes de congruo and in
analogo; He always punishes Sin in some kind, and sometimes in its own kind,
according to that of the wise man, Prove. 14.14. Pro. 14.14
The Backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. And this he does,
that men's punishments may be as Glasses, wherein their sins may be seen more
clearly; if not for their Repentance, yet for the warning of others.

And sometimes, God is pleased to punish Sin with contrarieties: Simeon and
Levi were united and combined in the Sin of Murder, therefore they shall be
divided and scattered in the Land of Israel, Genesis 49.7.
Genesis 49.7. Thus God punished the Pride of the Daughters of Zion: In stead of
sweet smell, there shall be a stink; in stead of a Girdle, a Rent; and in stead
of well set hair, baldness; and in stead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sack
cloth; and Burning in stead of Beauty, Isa. 3.24. Jam. 5.2. Luke 15.13, 16.
Isa. 3.24. The covetous man's Riches shall be corrupt, and his Garments
moth-eaten, Jam. 5.2. The Prodigall's wastefulnesse is followed with want and
beggary, Luke 15. Drunkenness and Epicurism, he punishes with Famine and a
thin Vintage, Joel 1.9, 10.
Joel 1.5, 10. And thus we may find some proportion in the disproportion that
is betwixt the Sin and Punishment; and, in the Judgment inflicted, read the
abuse of the contrary Mercy. Has God cast Shame and Disgrace upon thee? then
the cause of it very likely was thy Pride: Is the Punishment Want? then the
cause may be, Abuse of Plenty and Abundance: Is it War, then Abuse of Peace,
etc. And thus from the Punishment may the Sin be read.

Secondly, If we hearken to the Upbraidings of our Consciences, they will tell
us (if they be well awakened) what the fault is, for which we are punished.
Genesis 42.21.
So Genesis 42.21. the Conscience of those Patriarchs brought their old sins to a
new reckoning; It was many years since that they had sold Joseph, so long agone
that Joseph was grown out of knowledge with them, ver. 8. All this while,
Conscience makes no noise, but follows them slily and silently through the
Wilderness, and home to their Father's House, and then into Egypt; but when it
found them to be cooped up three days in Pharoah's ward, now it bays at them,
and flies upon them, and tells them right, what was the reason that they were
so roughly used: There were other sins (questionless) whereof they stood
guilty, and which had bin committed by them; and some, long since that of
selling their Brother; but their accusing conscience tells them, that their
present trouble befell them, for their cruelty to their Brother, in that when
they saw the angu^sh of his Soul, Dr. Harris
and that he besought them, Good Brothers deal not so harshly with me, good
Brother Reuben, Brother Simion, Fuller Comment on 1 Cor. 11.30.
etc. but we would not hear (say they) therefore is this distress come upon
us. When we hunt after that sin which causes our Woe, and find our selves,
either to be at a loss, or cold S^nt; If once our conscience begins to spend
her open mouth, we may conclude, that that way went the game, (as one speaks
aptly).

Third^y, In short, if after all this done, thou can not find out the Cause,
why God is so displeased with thee, go to him and desire him (with Job) to show
thee wherefore he contendeth with thee, Job 10.2. and 13.23. Psalm 99.14
Job 10.2. and 13.23. Show me my Rebellion and my Sin. God is as willing to
teach his Children as to correct his Children, Psalm. 99.12. Blessed is the man
whom thou correctest and teach: Desire God to add teaching o correction,
that thou may know the meaning of the Rod, and what the Cause is; join Prayer
with the other means, and doubt not, but rest assured, in due time it shall be
discovered: In the mean time make sure work; repent of all thy sins in general,
and bewail that sin especially (if gross) in a more especial manner, that
thou have least sorrowed for. Pet. Mart. in 2 Samuel 24.
It is related of the Adulterous Mother, of those three Brothers, Gratian,
Lombard, and Comester, that being warned by her Confessor to be sorry for her
Fact; she told him, that considering what rare Scholars, and men of note her
Sons were, she could not be so sorry for her sin, as she should, because her
sault had so much profited the Church: His Answer unto her was, Dole quod non
doles, quod dolere non possis; be sorry for this, then, that thou can not be
sorry. So if thou have not truly humbled thy Soul, and deeply afflicted it for
that one Sin, (it being hid from thine eyes,) repent now, that thou have not
repented for it, and humble thy Soul before God, for that thou have been no
more grieved, and humbled. Indeed when we have repented the best we can for all
our sins; we shall have cause to repent us of our Impenitency, of a want of
Repentance and godly sorrow in us, albeit ignorant and impenitent Persons are
not thereof sensible. Thus much in general. Now, more particularly to the
Reason, Why cumbers it the Ground?

The Reason is rendered in an Interrogatory way, Why? There are diverse ends of
propounding Questions (as I have showed in my Exposition on some other
Parables; See my Friend at Midnight p. 32. Romans 6.1, 2.
) I shall not now trouble you therewith: It is usual with us when one would
express matter with greatest force, to propound it by way of Question and
Interrogation: So, Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid: How shall we that are dead in sin, live any longer therein?
We cannot do it, we dare not do it; So here, Why Cumbers it the ground? that
is, it must not do it, it shall not do it.

It Cumbers the ground, and takes up room in the Vineyard: It is not only
unfruitful in it self, but terram iuutilem reddit, Bez. Annot. in loc.
it makes the ground barren, and draws the heart of the Earth, and hinders the
fructifying of other Plants which would bear better, and bring forth fruit in
more abundance, (...).
were it not for it; and so much the word in this place imports. Thence we
infer that,

Barren Professors are cumbersom:

They are so (to speak in the Language of the School) both Formalitor and
Effective; Not only unfruitful in themselves (and so a burden to the Earth);
but also in their Effects, as causing barrenness to the soil, whereon they grow.

First, They are steril and barren in themselves, and in that respect
cumbersome and a burden to the Earth.

This the Psalmist sets forth most excellently Psalm. 14.1. They are corrupt,
Psalm. 14.1, 3.
they have done abominable Works, there is none that does good: And again,
verse 3. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy; there is
none that does good, no not one. It is spoken of the whole race of mankind, of
all Adam's Posterity in the stare of nature; and in that state are all wicked
Livers, and hypocritical Professors; and so aptly may it be to them applied, as
the Apostle does in applying it unto the Jews, who boasted very much of their
Privileges, Romans 3.10.
Romans 3.10. All such are unprofitable, and become as rotten and corrupt
Branches, and of no more use then rotten and nasty things, which men cast out
for their unprofitablenesse; and being unprofitable, needs must they be
burdensome; like a rotten tooth, which is not only unserviceable, but
dolorous and painful.

That which we read, Ezekiel. 15.1, 2, 3.
Ezekiel. 15.1, 2, 3. is worth our consideration, whereby the unfitness of the
Vine-branch for any work, the unusefulnesse and unprofitablenesse of the
Hypocritical Israelites, is set forth: The Vine is a noble Plant, in respect of
the Fruit it bears; but, being barren and fruitless, it is useless: The Ash
serves for Plough-boote and Cart-boote; The Oak for Gate-boote and
Stile-boote; Thorns and Bushes for Hedge-boote: Old doated Trees (as we say)
for Shinn-boote. But of all Trees, the wood of the Vine is unserviceable; It is
not fit to make so much as a Pegg to hang any Vessel thereon: Lo, such is
Israel (says God), if it bare good Fruit, it would be dear and precious unto
me; but being barren and unfruitful it is of no use, unfit for any service.

Many Comparisons and Resemblances are used in Scripture to set forth the
unprofitablenesse of a barren Professor. Psalm. 1.5. Jude v. 12.
They are resembled to Chaff, to Thorns, and Thistles; to Clouds without water;
Trees withered, without fruit; and such like. Amongst others, that of our
Savior is very pertinent, who resembles such to Salt that has lost its
savor, which is good for nothing, Mat. 5.13.
but to be cast out, and trodden under foot, Math. 5.13. Other things when they
have lost their savor, recover it by the virtue of salt applied unto them; but
if salt if self have lost its savor, nothing is able to fetch it again. There
is nothing in nature that can restore it to its former quality; Other things
(even after their corruption) may be useful for some purposes: Sour Wine makes
Vinegar, Rags Paper, Soil and Rubbish is good to fat the ground; but
savourlesse salt is good for nothing but the Dunghill; nor is it fit for that,
and therefore must necessarily be trodden under foot, as utterly unprofitable,
which is not only a thing Calamitous, but extremely Ignominious. Neither is
the dumb and unprofitable Minister only, this unsavouty salt (albeit Christ
directed that Speech to his Apostles); but every Professor of godliness that
has denied the power thereof, whose spirit is barren of the Fruit of good
Motions, 2 Timothy 3.5.
The Understanding barren of the Fruit of good Meditations. The Will barren of
the Fruit of good Resolutions, The Sensitive Appetite barren of the Fruit of
good Affections, The whole man barren of the Fruit of good Works; every such a
one is as this Figgless Fig Tree, burdensome to the Earth, and cumbersome to
the ground that bears them.

Secondly, As they do no good, and are cumbersome in that respect; so they do
much harm, and so become unprofitable burdens, and that many ways.

First, To the Soil whereon they grow, the very Earth is the worse for a
fruitless Fig Tree. It was the sin of man (at first) that caused God to curse
the Earth to Thorns and Thistles, Genesis 3.7.
and ever since he has turned a fruitful Land into barrenness, for the
wickedness of those that dwell therein. Psalm. 107.37. Jer. 23.10. Hos. 1. -- 4.
The sins of those within the pale, are they for which a Land does mourn, Hos.
1. -- 4. So is it in the Vineyard of the Lord: Let a barren and unprofitable
Fig Tree have his standing wheresoever, the ground shall be the worse, and not
the better for him: Let Rehoboam be rooted amongst the Kings in the Land of
Judah, 1 King. 14.37.
and the Sheilds he finds of Gold, he will leave of Brass: Let Balaam be
numbered amongst the Prophets, and Judas amongst the Apostles; and the Vineyard
of the Lord shall find cause enough to say of such a Fig Tree, that it cumbers
the ground: The Church suffers by the growth of such Trees; it loses her heart
and fatness; Her Beauty and Glory is much blemished by the growth of such
plants in it.

Secondly, Such barren Trees are cumbersome and burdensome to other Trees and
Plants, that grow (or might grow) in the Vineyard; and that diverse ways.

First, A barren Tree possesses the place of a better, and by its good will
would not suffer any to grow near it; The best Rooms at Feasts, the chief Seats
in Synagogues, Isa. 5.8. Luke 14.9.
proud Pharisees will take up; nor is there any place for better Guests, till
they be removed lower, and commanded to give place, and so room made (by their
removal) for others that are invited.

That passage which we have in Isa. 22.20. is worthy of serious consideration;
Isa. 22.20.
God promises to call Eliakim, the Son of Hilkiah, and to commit the
Government of his people in his Hand, and so fasten him as a nayl driven to the
Head, in a sure place, on whom they should hang all the glory of his Fathers
House, from the Vessels of the Cups, even to all the Vessels of the Flaggons;
with matters, both great and small, should he be trusted; but Eliakim's
substitution must be upon Shebna's deprivation; God will first drive him from
his Station, and pluck him down from his State, Verse. 19.
verse. 19. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, shall the Nayl that is fastened
in a sure place (meaning Shebna who then governed and thought himself sure) be
removed and be cut down and fall, Verse. 25.
and the burden that hangs upon it shall be cut off; In the same day that God
does this, Eliakim shall come in and be advanced, (but not before). Thus one
Nayl drives out another; What Solomon speaks of misery, The Righteous is
delivered out of trouble, Prove. 11.8
and the Wicked comes in his stead; the like may be said of a good man's
prosperity: when the wicked are turned off, better come in their room.

The like may be seen in David's case, who was anointed to be King over Israel
long before his Installment: Saul sat yet upon the Throne, and David must be
content to stay a while for that, till Saul be removed; and, that being done,
then he shall be planted and seated in his room, in Hebron: So whilst Judas
supplies the place of an Apostle, 2 Samuel 2.1.
honest Mathias shall be kept out; Acts 1.20.
his place must be Voyded, before another take his Bishopric, Acts 1.20. The
Jews they must be broken off before the Gentiles be grafted in, Romans 11.19.
Romans 11.19. And whilst those ungrateful Farmers of the Vineyard held their
Lease, it could not be taken by others, who would gladly have hired it, and
rendered the Fruit thereof in due season, Mat. 21.43.
Math. 21.43. So long as wicked Magistrates, Idle and Scandalous Ministers,
Bribing and corrupt Officers, and such like, are in place; others who might do,
and would do more good, cannot be admitted.

Secondly, Such as are barren and unprofitable in their places, devour not only
equal nutriment with him that bears, but many times starve other inferior
plants within their reach; drawing away the heart, and fat of the Soil with
their Succors and Feeders: What a breadth bears some great Ash or Oak? How
far do their Roots spread, albeit under ground, and unseen? Yet, it may be
perceived by their soaking of the ground, and drawing away nourishment from
Corn and Plants, that are near unto them: It is thus with many an unprofitable
and barren Christian, he is a Soaker, and that in respect both of things that
concern this Life and a better; and so, cumbersome. Such are to be found in the
Church.

That large and liberal maintenance allowed formerly by our Forefathers
charity, for pious uses (as toward the maintenance of the Ministry, succouring
of the poor and needy, etc.) a great part thereof was formerly devoured by idle
Moncks, who lived like droans, and minded nothing so much as their Bellies; and
(to mend the matter) was afterward taken from them, and given to others, who
spent that which was so charitably given, upon Hounds, and Whores, and such
like vicious practices. Comineus observed, upon a battle fought in France, some
lost their Livings by running away, and they were given to such as had out-ran
them ten miles; So it is in this Case, we have taken (says one) from Papists,
and given to Rapists: that which is due to Ministers for their maintenance, and
to the poor for their sustenance, is soaked away by some barren Impropriator,
and Sacrilegious Church-Robber; This many a Parish, in this Nation, can
testify.

How many are there in the Commonwealth which being in Office, and having Rule
and Government in their hands, by Oppression and extortion (or some other
indirect course) draw from those, whose back and bellyes pinch for it, they
having scarce bread to put into the mouths of themselves and Children? How many
Officers and Men in high place, have we known grown suddenly Rich, by the
spoil of the Subject, and by impoverishing others? In the days of Pliny,
tribute was paid by many Nations to the Romans, for the very shade of Planes
and Cedars. And unless it be for the shade of these, (which yet is a noisome
and pestilent shade) (as anon you shall hear) men cannot say, why they should
have such Pensions and Payments to the impoverishing of many? Who may say to
them, as sometimes a poor lean widow woman said to Baldwin an Archbishop, Acts
and Mon. 230.
who (boasting that he had not eaten flesh for a long time) was told by her
that he had eaten up her flesh in oppressing of her, and causing her, to sell
her Cow (which was her livelihood) to satisfy him. When you see small Officers
swell up to high estates (and you may often see it) you may easily smell
Bribery and Extortion in it.

In private Families likewise there are many such burdensome Plants to be
found; many a fair estate is consumed by Pride and Luxury, Voluptuousness and
Prodigality. Out of the painful and laborious Silke-worm, arises a painted
Butter-flye; Through the wasteful Prodigality of one Spend-thrift, many
under-Plants are undone, and drawn saplesse; the Wife is brought to misery,
Children to beggary, through the profuse expense of some ryotous Husband or
Parent, who in a short time consumes a fair Estate, and large Patrimony. There
is Treasure to be desired, Prove. 21.20. Explained.
and Oil in the dwelling of the Wise, (says Solomon,) but a foolish man
spends it up, Prove. 21.20. The meaning of which Proverb is, that is the care
of a wise man to keep that which is bestowed on him through God's bounty, and
his own endeavors; but an unthrifty person by his Prodigality, lavisheth out
his substance, and makes himself a pit, wherein his great Estate, yea, and
Family is swallowed up and devoured. Thus you see, how the under-Plants both in
Church, Commonwealth, and Private-Family, come to be soaked in matters that
concern this Life, by a barren and over-topping Fig Tree.

And the like might be showed you how good Plants are exceedingly hindered, in
their growth in things spiritual, by such barren professors that grow near
them. God complained of the iniquity and oppression of the Shepherds, (the
chief Rulers amongst the Jews) that they made sad the hearts of his People,
discouraging of them in pious courses, Ezekiel. 13.22.
Ez. 13.22. And how they did that, is showed afterward in that Prophecy; they
did beat and push them with their horus, they did eat up their pasture from
them, and trample the rest under their feet, Ezekiel. 34.19, 21.
Ezekiel. 34.19, 21. Sad is the case of those Sheep, who have such Shepherds set
over them to feed them; And the Scribes and Pharisees took away the key of
knowledge from the People, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men,
Mat. 23.13. Luke 11.52.
neither entering in themselves, nor suffering others to enter in, that would:
for which a We is denounced against them, Mat. 23.13. Luke 11.52. Thus they are
burdensome to other Plants that grow near them, by drawing away their sap and
nourishment.

Thirdly, They are troublesome and cumbersome to other Plants by their
unprofitable shade, over-topping and over-dripping them, and keeping the
influence of Heaven from them, so that they cannot enjoy the warm-beams of the
Sun, which brings healing with it under its wings. Pliny, Mal. 4.2.
speaking of the shade of the tall Cyprus Tree, says, that it is gravis umbra,
a shade noisome and pestilent; And Claudian in his invective against Eutropius,
says, It is not possible that any thing should thrive or prosper under the
shade of such a Consul. -- Quid fertile terris, Aut plenum sterili possit sub
consule casci? Prove. 29.2.
When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice (says Solomon); but
when the Wicked bear Rule, the People mourn, Prove. 29.2. Let a wicked man be in
place of Power or Command, either in Town, City, or Country, he employes his
Strength and Power to do mischief; (like the Ape or Monkey, which being got up
to the top of the House, flings down tiles upon the heads of Passingers, and
makes mouths and faces at them, or plays some unhappy trick or other): if not
so, yet by their Examples and Commands, they so over-drop the under Plants, and
keep them under check, that they cannot thrive and prosper under their shadow,
Joh. 7.48, and 9, 22.
Joh. 7.48, and 9.22.

Fourthly, They are cumbersome, in harboring under their Branches things
hurtful to other Plants; None shall be harbored under their shade, unless it
be a slinging Nettle, or some sullen Weed, or some venomous and poysonful
Crea^ure. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his Servants are wicked, Prove. 29.12.
Prove. 29.12. One seeks to please him, by slandering this honest man, another
by telling lie of that innocent person: Let Herod mock Christ, and his servants
will do the like; Let Pilate sit upon the seat of Judicature, and perjury shall
be approved, Luke 23.11. Math. 27. Luke 23.24. Isa. 24.2.
false Witnesses encouraged, Barrabbas delivered, and Christ (the innocent,)
condemned. That which Esaias speaks, we shall find most truie, Isa. 24.2. It
shall be as with the People, so with the Priest; as with the ^ervant, so with
the Master; as with the Maid, so with the Mistress, etc. Let the innocent
Lamb, and harmless Sheep run under their shade for Shelter; it is a wonder if
they meet not with some Bramble or other, that will soon entangle them in their
talk so that they are glad to fly, leaving their fleece behind; suffering in
their cause, and think themselves happy if they can but escape with a whole
skin. Thus are they burdensome to other Plants of the Vineyard.

Fifthly they are burdensome to the Lord of the Soil, and owner of the
Vineyard, who complains of such barren Plants, Isa. 1.14, Isa. 1.14, 24, and 7,
13, and 43, 24. Amos 2.13. Mich. 6.3.
24, and 7, 13, and 43, 24. Amos 2.13. God complains of their burden; they
are cumbersome unto him; he finds a pressure under them; he is dishonored by
them, and cannot long endure it.

Sixthly, The Dressers of the Vineyard are burdened and cumbered by them;
Christ the Principal Dresser laments the barrenness of Jerusalem, Luke 19.41.
Math. 23.34. Joh. 11.38. Luke 19.41. Math. 23.24. Joh. 11.38, Romans 9.1, 2, and
10, 16. Heb. 13.17
Christ groaned (as it seems) under the Jews malice.

And the under-Dressers the Ministers of the Gospel, they complain of it, Romans
9.1, 2 and 10, 16. Heb. 13.17. They are blamed* shamed, and discredited by
them. For as the thriving of the Flock is the glory of the Shepherd; and the
flourishing and fruitfulness of the Trees, the praise of the Gardener; so on
the contrary, when things thrive not under their hands, they suffer by it. The
Cynick spying a Boy unmannerly, did strike his Master that did teach him: So
the Scribes and Pharisees told Christ of his Disciples fault, as if it had
tended to his Disgrace: Thus do men of this Generation, they lay the blame of
barrenness upon the Dressers Back; as if it were only their fault, that the
Tree is unfruitful. And so much let serve for the explication and confirmation
of the Point; Application follows.

Court, City, and Country, that are the greatest troublers of Church and State;
and with whom the Vineyard of the Lord is most cumbred. In the Primitive times
the Christians were charged with all the troubles and calamities that did
befall the people: See my Exposition on the Parable of a Friend coming to his
Friend at Midnight. Page 239.
If Sword, Famine, or Pestilence were amongst them; or that Nilus did not keep
her wonted bounds, then, Christianos ad Leones, the Christians were the Cause
thereof, they must be cast unto the Lions. But this did not begin with them,
nor with them did it end. Let Pharaoh be asked the question, Who cumbers
Egypt? He will tell you, that it is this Moses and Aaron, the Messengers, and
Ministers of God; they are the Incendiaries, and Causes of all these Mutinies
and Murmurings in the Kingdom; Not Pharaoh nor his Sorcerers, they must be
over-looked. Let Ahab be asked who it was that troubled Israel? Exodus 5.4, 5.
and he will tell you strait, that it was (not Ahab nor the Prophets of Baal
but) banished Elijah, 1 King. 18.17.
that busy fellow that would be filling Peoples head's with needless fears,
he it was that troubled all. Let Amaziah the high Priest of Bethel be enquired
of, Who troubles the Court? and he will tell you, that it was (not Amaziah, nor
the flattering Sycophants of Court, but) Amos the Prophet, and such like, they
conspire against the King's Life, Amos 7.19, -- 16.
and will be prying into State-affaires; nor will the Court be quiet, till such
be benished the Kings presence, and forbid his Chapel: Let Haman be demanded
who it was that cumbered the Kings Provinces? and he shall tell you, that the
Jews are they; a People refractory to all good Laws Esth. 3.8.
they would not pay their Tax and Tribute; nor was it for the King's profit, to
suffer them to live: (but for himself and his Comrades, they aimed at the
filling of his Treasury.) Ask once more, Who troubles the City, and you shall
have some Rulers and others to wink at themselves, and point at Paul and Silas,
Act. 16.20.
and tell you, that they are the men that trouble the City; yea, that turn the
World upside down. Nor shall some Tertullus be wanting, Cap. 17.6
who with much Eloquence and Learning will charge Paul to be a pestilent fellow
(yea, a botch or pestilence it self, Acts 24.5. (...).
) and a mover of sedition amongst the Jews throughout the World, etc. And if
you enquire of the Jews concerning the point in hand, they will charge Christ
himself to be an enemy to Caesar, Luke 23.2.
forbidding paying of Tribute to him; and warn Pilate not to let him go, for
then he would show himself no friend to Caesar. Joh. 19.20.


As it has bin thus in all Ages, so it is now in this last Age of the World:
Who are most charged as the Authors of our Churches miseries, and Nations
calamities, but those who are most innocent? Serpents and Draggons, Woolves and
Dogs are past-by; and the Sheep and Lambs of the Flock, Holy and Religious
persons they are those that stand charged with England's troubles: Oh! that we
had more men of Elijah's spirit! then the ungodly Ahabs of the World should be
told to their faces, It is Thou and thy Fathers House that troubles Israel.
Then should you that are of wicked Religion, or of wicked Life, 1 King 13.18.
heart it with with both your ears, that it is for your Idolatryes, your
Witch-crafts, and Adulteries; your drunkenness, Whoredoms, and Blasphemies;
your mocking and deriding of godtinesse; your despising of God's Ministers, and
persecuting of his Messengers, etc. that has brought all these great evils
upon us: But, albeit there want these in this World that dare tell you this;
yet, there will not be wanting a Judge in another World, who shall tell it you?
and prove it to your consciences, that you were the Aehans that troubled
Israel; and for your so doing, God will trouble you, Jos. 7.25. 1 These. 1.6
and it is a righteous thing with him so to do, 2 These. 1.6.

Ecel. 9.18.
But it is otherwise, One Sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9. ult. Thou art
not only hurtful to thy self, (that is the least part of thy illness,) but
likewise hurtful to the Place, the Town, Country, City, Family, where thou
inhabitest: As Achan was to all Israel; For his Trespass (in the accursed
thing), wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel; That man perished not
alone in his Iniquity, Jos. 22.20
Jos. 22.20. He is an ill Member, for which all the Body fares the worse; All
fare the worse for thee, Isa. 14.20.
that are about thee. Read Isa. 14.20. Thou have destroyed thy Land and laid it
desolate; and apply it to thy self.

It is said of some, that they are kind men* harmless Souls; As they do no
good, so they do no harm to their neighbors, and that they are enemies to none
but themselves, etc. But how can this be? Indeed, those that are good, are
peaceable and harmless (as Hamor and Shechem confessed of Jacob and his Family
Genesis 34.21.) So it was foretold of times of the Gospel, Isa. 11.9. they shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; Ge^. 34.21 Isa. 11.9.
but this is not enough: That which God says of Abraham, is likewise true of
every Child of Abraham, Thou shall be a Blessing, Genesis 12.2. Genesis 12.2.
A Blessing to the soil on which thou growest, and place where thou live,
seeking the good thereof (as did Mordecai, Esth. 10.3. he sought the wealth of
the People). Esth. 10.3.
It Is contradictory, to speak thus of thee, that art a professed Christian,
that thou art a harmless man, but good for nothing; for if thou art not
profitable in thy place, harmless thou can not be, inasmuch as thou cumbrest
better Plants, and drawest away the nourishment from them, which would make to
their growth; and with the wan and withered Vine (in the Poet,) Uvaque liverem
conspecta ducit ab uva. Juve. Sat. 1.
) thou take away the fresh color and sapp from the Vine that grows by thee;
And when such as thou art are grubbed, and stubbed up; removed from their
station, rooted out of the Church and Nation; so little cause will there be of
grieving and mourning for it, as that there will be great cause given of Joy
and rejoicing: So Solomon tells us, when it goes well with the righteous the
City rejoices, Pro. 11.10.
and when the wicked perish there is a shouting, Prove. 11.10. And great cause
there is, why God's People should rejoice and sing thereat; For when a corrupt
Magistrate is removed, there is some hope that a better will be planted in his
room; when an ignorant or corrupt Minister is cut up, that one more laborious
and painful will succeed him; when Bastard Plants are stubbed up by the Roots,
there is hope, that the Lord of the Vineyard will replenish it with good Trees:
Seldom comes a better (says the old English Proverb, and it is a true one,)
but we do not say, that never comes a better: It sometimes (yea many times) so
happens, that a better succeeds in the room of a bad one; but whilst the room
is supplied by a bad one, a better comes not (as before was showed).

Not is it only a thing to be joyed in, but wished for; I would they were cut
off that trouble you (says the Apostle), Gal. 5.12.
Gal. 5.12. which Cutting off, some understand of the Censure of
Excommunication; but better they, who understand it of some temporal Judgment,
whereby the Church might be ridd of them: the like may be wished, to the end,
that the Church might flourish: Not that we ought simply, to wish the death and
destruction of any, but the removing of such corrupt Plants as poison the hopes
of Generations to come. And to this may all God's People give their assent, and
say Amen.

Wherefore, Let no man seek his own, 1 Cor. 10.24.
bus every man another's wealth (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.24.): There are a
company of Lubbers in the World, whose greatest care is to eat, drink, and live
at ease; and that not only of the rude Rabble, of the dreggs of the People,
but men of high Rank and Quality, who glitter in external Pomp, and flaunt it
out in Bravery, Ps. 104.26 Jer. 2.24.
spending their time as the Leviathan does in the Sea, in sport and pastime;
or, as the wild Ass does in the Wilderness, in snuffing up the wind,
employing their wits about nothing so much, Romans 23.
as in making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. They live
in such a sensual and unprofitable sort, as that we might well doubt, when her
they had any living Souls in their bodies at all, Dr. Sanderson 4 Ser. ad pop.
p. 367.
were it not barely for this one Argument (says one), That their bodies are a
degree sweeter than Carrion, (their Souls, like Salt, keeping their carkases
from stinking): Good they do none, they are but like a Cipher, and keep a
place, but are of no worth; Or like a Counter on the Table, staying in the
World to fill a Number, and when it falls down, there wants one, and so an end:
They pass out of the World, as the Hand passes out of the Basin of Water,
which may be somewhat the fouler for washing in it, but it retains no other
impression of its having been there; whose Epitaph may be that, which, as I
have read, was made of such another idle Spectatour of the World,

Here lies He, was born and cried,
Lived threescore years, fell sick, and died.
But the not you such, lest you cry out one day with Severus, Omnia fui, Carrion
in Cron.
and nihil profui; I have been all things, and yet have done no good at all.
David counted it a great Affliction, that in the time of his Banishment, Ps.
31.12.
he was like a broken Vessel Psalm. 31.12. that none could make any use of.
Without Question, the poorest Servant or Drudge that is, may have more comfort
in his estate, (being diligent and faithful in his place,) than the greatest
Gentleman, or learned Scholar, can have of theirs, in case they do no good
with those parts and abilities, which God has entrusted them with. I beseech
you therefore, as you tender your own good and comfort, both in life, and
death, and at the last day of Judgment, be useful and profitable, every one of
you in your Relations and Callings: Be as the Olive, and Fig Tree, delighting
God and Man with your Fruit: cumber not the Church with a barren life and
profession; forget not that a barren life administers matter of Reproach;
Against the Husbandman, whose care or skill comes hereby to be questioned;
Against the Root, whose life and power is hereby suspected; Against the
Branches, who are hereby scandalized: Nor is there any such stumbling block in
the World, as an unprofitable and fruitless Christian. When the Philistines
shoured against Sampson, it is said, that the Spirit of God came mightily upon
him, so that he brake the cords wherewith he was bound, Judge. 15.14. Jud. 15.14
To hear the clamor of the World, against barren and unfruitful Professors,
should stir us up to fruitfulness: Offenses will come, Mat. 28.7.
but woe be to those by whom they do come. But, if you be fruitful in your
Relations and Callings; you shall have the Prayers of many, in your health, in
your sickness; all the Town will pray for you, that God will bless you with
long life, and restore you to health; you shall live desired, and die lamented:
Jehojada was honored at his death, because he had done good in Israel, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. And this God will remember at the last day. 2 Chro. 24.16.
And so we have done with the Sentence denounced, now follows the Intercession
that was made for it.

And he Answering, said unto him, Text. Ver. 8.9.
Lord let it alone this year also, till I shall digg about it and dung it: And
if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that, thou shall cut it down.

Which words contain an humble Request, for the suspending of that heavy
Judgment before denounced, against that fruitless and unprofitable Fig Tree,
wherein we shall speak of the Persons, and then of the Petition it self.

But before I come to speak of either particularly, I shall commend unto you
one General (but not unprofitable) Note, from the Copulative or Connection; And

No sooner had the Lord of the Vineyard complained to the Dresser, of the
unprofitablenesse of this Fig Tree, (the Jewish Synagogue and Nation) and
threatened the destruction of it; but the Dresser steps in, and with humble
prayers and supplications, speaks in the behalf of it. Thence we gather,

When God falls to complaining and threatening, It is high time, for such as
have any Interest in God, to fall to praying: God's threatening times should be
our praying times.

When God complained to Moses of Israel's wickedness, and threatened their
destruction for their stiff neckednesse Exodus 32.7. Exodus 32.7, 11. Number. 14.12,
13. and 16.45, 46.
Moses presently fell to praying and interceding for them, ver. 11. etc. The
like we find, Numb. 14.12, 13. and 16.45, 46. Thus, that good King Josiah, when
he heard, from reading the Book of the Law, what great wrath was kindled
against the People for their sins, to make them a desolation and a curse, he
rent his clothes, 2 King. 22.19.
and his heart melted, and he humbled himself before the Lord, and wept
exceedingly, as we read, 2 King. 22.19. that God's wrath might be averted, and
turned away from the People, And when the destruction of Jerusalem was revealed
to Ezekiel by a Vision, his heart was so affected therewith, that he falls down
upon his face, cries unto the Lord for them, and expostulates with the Lord on
their behalf; Ezekiel. 9.8.
Ah! Lord God, will thou destroy all the residue of Israel, in pouring out all
thy fury upon Jerusalem? Ezekiel. 9.8.

God's threatenings are not causlesse, Amos 3.4. Explained.
Will a Lion roar in the Forest when he has no prey? will a young Lion cry
out of his denn, if he have taken nothing? (says the Prophet Amos. 3.4.) As if
he should say, that is not the usual manner of them; but when they have gotten
some prey, or are ready to take it, then they roar to their fellows, and call
them in to partake of it: No more will the Lord denounce his fearful Judgments
against a people, but where there is just matter of their sins, to be avenged.
Exodus 32.14. Deuteronomy. 9.19 2 King. 22.19, 20. Genesis 19.20. Genesis 18.31


Secondly, This course is neither fruitless nor succeslesse; Upon the earnest
Prayer of Moses, the Lord changed his mind, from the evil that he intended
against his People, Exodus 32.14. Deuteronomy. 9.19. The Prayer of Josiah God heard,
and spared the People a long time, 2 King. 22.19, 20. Lot prevailed by his
Prayer for one City, Genesis 19.20. And Abraham, for five, Genesis 18.32. Great
things have been obtained from God for a sinful People, upon the Prayers of his
Servants. This is farther declared in that excellent Prayer which Solomon made,
1 King. 1 King. 8.
8. and instance is brought in sundry particulars to confirm the truth of the
Point.

God never yet threatened any Judgment, against a Land, or Nation, or Particular
Person, but faithful and fervent Prayer has either averted it, or deferred
it; abated it, or sweerned it; and so far it has been successful, if not for
others, yet prayer has returned into the bosoms of those who have prayed, to
their comfort.

But are not God's threatenings and denunciations of absolute determination, and
sure accomplishment? Jer. 7.16. Ezekiel. 14.14. Number. 23.19. 1 Samuel 15.29. Resp.
Jer. 7.16. Ezekiel. 14.14. 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. Genesis 2.17.
If so, to what purpose is prayer, his Resolutions being unalterable? For
resolving this doubt, First, Know

The threatenings and denunciations of God's Judgments are either Absolute or
Conditional; If Absolute, then they are irrevocable, and must take effect; but
if Conditional, then they may be changed and altered.

That Denunciation that concerned the eating of the forbidden Fruit, In the day
that thou catest thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. was Absolute, and
not to be revoked; Had Adam prayed all his life time, that he might not die, but
return to his former condition, yet that Sentence from God had not been
reversed. And that threatening of God, Number. 20.12.
against Moses and Aaron that they should not enter into the Land of Canaan,
proved to be so, Numb. 20.12. It was Absolute, albeit Moses understood it
Conditionally, and therefore besough^ the Lord, that he might go over Jordan
into the good Land, but the Lord was wroth with him, and would not hear him;
Let it suffice thee (says God), and speak no more unto me of this matter,
Deuteronomy. 3.26. Deuteronomy. 3.26.
And as Absolute and peremptory was the threatening, by Nathan, from the Lord
unto David, concerning his Child, The Child shall surely die, 2 Samuel 2.14.
David's hope was, 2 Samuel 2.14.
that the threatening was but Conditional, and therefore with fasting, weeping,
and prayer, he besought the Lord for it, but the Sen^ence was not to be
reversed; the C^ild dyed. When the Creatour's Decree shall, either by
Revelation, or Event, be made certainly known unto the Creature, then must
there be a total recesse, and falling off, from the use of the means to effect
it, So was it with David, in forbearing to pray or mourn any more for the
Child, after that he saw that the denunciation was absolute: The like did
Jeremiah; for albeit we read, that he mourned for the People, after that God
had forbad him to pray for them; and prayed in other cases for them; yet he
obeyed God therein, not praying against their Captivity any more. But we have
no such Inhibition as Jeremiah had: and, the Lord's Absolute decree being hid
from us, so long as a Nation has Being, we ought not to cease praying.

Other threatenings and denunciations are Conditional, and not so Absolute, but
that they admit of an Intervention of Prayer, Repentance, and Amendment of
life. The Condition is sometimes Expressed as Jer. 18.7, 8. Such a Nation, Jer.
18.7, 8
such a Kingdom, I will pluck up, I will pull down, I will destroy: But say
that Nation turns from their evil ways; then God reverseth that Sentence, I
will not pull down, I will not destroy it.

The like we have Ezekiel. 33.14, 15. Ezekiel. 33.14, 15.
The wicked man shall surely die; But that wicked man repents of his sins, and
turns from evil; And then God reverseth his Sentence, He shall surely live and
not die.

Sometimes the Condition is not expressed, but is Included, and so to be
understood: Genesis 20.3.
So Genesis 20.3. Abimelech, thou art but a dead man, because of the Woman which
thou have taken: He conceives aright of this commination, restores Abraham
his wife untouched; Abraham prays for him, and Abimelech was spared, Ver. 17.
Jer. 26.18, 19. Lalightned.
and he and his Family were healed, ver. 17. In the days of Hezekiah, God
threatened that Zion should be as a plowed field, and Jerusalam be laid on
heaps, and the mountains of the House, the high places of a Forest, i.e. the
Temple should be ruinated; the City desolated; and the whole Kingdom utterly
overthrown: Here no Condition was expressed; but the King, and his People,
understood that threatening to be Conditional, and therefore they besought the
Lord, and the Lord repented him of that evil which he had denounced against
them, Jer. 26.18.19. The like we have, Isa. 38.1. Hezekiah was commanded to
make his Will, Isa. 38.1.
and put his House in order; For thou shall die and not live (says the
Prophet). The good King conceived aright of the message, (albeit no Condition
was expressed,) he turns his face to the Wall, prays and weeps; Ver. 5.
and then God sends a new message to him, and adds to his days fifteen
years, ver. 5. And such was that Jon. 3.4. Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be destroyed: Jon. 3.4.
The King (though a Heathen and Idolatrous, yet) conceiving aright of this
threat, fasted, prayed, and repented; and Nineveh stood 40 years, after that.

And thus are we to understand the threatenings (Generally) that are made
against Sins and Sinners. Comminations and Threatenings are the heaviest Texts
that we can light upon in the Scriptures, and they are the saddest and heaviest
Commentaries, (says a great Divine of our own,) that a man can make upon these
Texts. When God has awakened a man out of his Dream, Dr. Donn 2. Vol. p. 71
and rowsed him up out of the Bed of his security, he suffers him to read to
the Quia, but not to the Tamen: he comes to see a Reason of that Threatening, of
that Judgment, that shall befall him; but not to see the Remedy: His Eye is
carried to an hundred places of Commination, against such sins as the Land is
guilty of, or himself is guilty of, and there makes a Period, a full stop. But
he reads not with a Comma, he makes it not as an imperfect Sentence; he takes
not in what follows, either expressly, or implicitly; he takes not in the
Remedy, the Relief: Yet turn to God, by Humiliation, by Prayer, then God will
turn to you. How heavy soever God's threatenings are against a Nation, or any
Particular Person in that Nation, yet still there is room for David's Question,
Quis scit, Who knows whether God will be gracious or no? 2 Samuel 12.22. 2 Samuel
12.22.
There is no room for it, as it is a Question of diffidence and distrust; every
one of us must know it and believe it, that there are Conditions upon which the
Lord will be gracious: Be they spoken never so peremptory, and set down never
so absolutely, yet God has reserved to himself power of Revocation, in case he
be sought unto by Prayer and Repentance.

Secondly, Know, that God's eternal Decree, takes in the Means as well as the
End; so that, according to God's Decree, when his threatening of ruin and
desolation is gone out against a Land or Nation; Prayer, and other Means,
falling in to hinder Execution, Mutat sententiam, non decretum. Greg. Mar. l.
2. c. 24.
His decree stands, and the present sentence only falls. It alters not what God
has decreed to do, but effects it, and accomplisheth his purposes; Nor are his
threatenings made void, and of none effect, when by Prayer and Repentance the
execution of them are stayed; but then (rather) are they most effectual; for
then they do most of all accomplish their proper end, and the thing for which
they were principally intended.

But if God threaten one thing, and does another, two wills, or else his will
is changeable.

The Will of God is but One, Resp. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.
as he is One; but as there is one spirit, yet diversity of manifestations; So
this one will of God does exercise and extend it self diversely, and upon diverse
Objects; and so it may be said to be manifold, as His wisdom is said to be.
Ephesians. 3.10.
It is usually distinguished into Secret and Revealed, which Distinction is
grounded on that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. The Secret Will of God is of things hidden in Himself, and not
manifested in His Word. The revealed Will of God is of things made known in the
Scriptures, or by daily experience and event; The secret Will of God is
Absolute and peremptory without any condition, and always effected; no man can
hinder it, the Devils themselves are subject unto it: (but that is secret, and
not our rule to walk by); His Revealed Will is with condition, and (for the
most part) is joined with Exhortation, Admonition, Instruction, and
Reprehension; This is said to be fourfold; First, His Determining Will, What
shall become of us, Ephesians. 1.5. Secondly, His Prescribing Will, What he
requires of us? Ephesians. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.9. Math. 18.14. 1 Cor. 1.1. Romans 1.10.
(...). Act. 13.22.
Ephesians. 1.9. Thirdly, His Approving Will by which he graciously accepts, and
tenderly regards us, Math. 18.14. Fourthly his Disposing Will, which is the
Will of his Providence, 1 Cor. 1.1. Romans 1.10. It is said of David that he
should fulfiill, all Gods Wills (for so it runs in the Original); resigning
himself over to God's determining Will, as the highest cause of all things;
resting in his approving Will, as his chiefest happiness; obeying his
prescribing Will, as the most absolute form of holiness; and subjecting
himself to his disposing Will with all patience: but all this is spoken to our
Capacities, for the weakness of our understandings, Psalm. 39.9.
who cannot conceive how God does after a diverse manner Will, and not Will, the
same thing. His Will is still one and the same, and not two; Non est De Volunt
as d diversa; se loquutio, diversa est de voluntate. Mag. Sent. l. 1. Did.
45.46.
but rather two several parts of God's one and most simple Will, and are so far
from being repugnant or contrary the one to the other, as that they do most
fitly and subordinttely agree one with another. But we hasten to make some
Application of the Point.

If Gods threatening and complaining time should be our praying time, and his
complaints and threatenings bring us upon our knees; Then without question,
there was never more need to seek unto God by humble prayer and supplication
than now: Behold (says God)! and who can behold it with a dry eye, Psalm.
44.15, 16, 199, 1, 58, 136. Jer. 9.1, and 4, 19, and 13, 17. Phil. 3.18. Luke
19.41.
and merry heart? David could not, He beheld the transgressor, and was grieved;
Jeremiah could not; Day and Night he wept for the sins and abominations done in
Jerusalem; St. Paul could not, when he tells us of those who were the enemies
of the Cross of Christ, he could not forbear watering his Plants: Christ could
not, He no sooner came within the view of Jerusalem, but he wept over it; But
woe to us for our wretchedness, when God calls to weeping, and to mourning, and
to girding with sackcloath; there is joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, Isa.
22.12, 13.
and killing of Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine, Isa. 22.12, 13. Such is
the desperate carriage of many; they jeer when they should fear; laugh when
they should weep; sing care away, let us eat and drink merrily, sorrow comes
soon enough, to morrow we may dye; No other laying to heart of God's complaints
do we make: but read what follows, This sin (says the Prophet) was declared in
the ears of the Lord of Hoasts, as the top of all their sins, which caused the
Lord to enter into that determinate resolution; Surely, this iniquity shall not
be purged from you, till you dye.

But we hear not God complaining; When, Quaest.
and How does he complain against us?

The more stupid and blockish we, that we hear not: word of mouth he makes
complaint; Hear O my People, and I will testify against you, Psalm. 81.8. Psalm.
81.8.
But my People would not hearken, Verse 11. O that my People had hearkened,
Verse 13. So, Isa. 1.2, 3. Isa. 1.2, 3. Mich. 6.3, 5.
O peircing words! and yet again, Mich. 6.3, 5. (These only for a taste). Does
not the Lord thus expostulate with us, and complain of us at this day for our
unthankfulness and disobedience? Ah sinful Nation, testify against me,
wherein have I grieved thee? Remember how I brought thee out of the Romish
furnace, Remember how I have blessed thee with peace and plenty, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
etc. Do you thus requite me! Oh foolish People, and unkind! etc.

And is not the Voice of his Servants, (the Ministers of the Gospel) his Voice
likewise? Luke 16.16. Vox Turturis, Vox Gementis. Cant. 2.12
He that hears you, hears me (says Christ): Now, Is not the Voice of the
mourning Turtle heard in our Land? Do not the Jeremiahs of these days mourn
over you, and mourn for you? Do they not in God's name come in daily, with
their Bills of complaints against you, for your Pride, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Blasphemy, Sacrilege, and other Abominations (which would ask much time but to
name)? Insomuch, that God's Mercy-seat (I mean the Pulpit) seems to be no other
then a Tribunal, a seat of Judgment. And yet do you ask, When, or Where does
God complain?

If the complaints that God makes against us by word of mouth move not; Then
look upon the works of his hands: Open your eyes (you that have stopped your
ears) and you may see him actua^ly complaining. What are his Rods, his
Judgments, but real complaints against us, for our wicked and heinous
provocations? Famine is a complaint against us for our abuse of fullness; The
Sword for the abuse of our long and happy Peace; Scorn and Contempt of other
Nations, a complaint of our Pride; Sickness, of the abuse of our Health;
Sometimes the Heavens bring in God's complaint, Levit. 26.19.
when they are as Iron: Sometimes the Earth, when it is as Brass; when we fow
much, and receive but little: Sometimes the seasons of the year speak their
Maker's complaints: This last Spring and Summer has complained of us, in
coming cladd in the Roabs of Winter. These things (being thus,) if you veiw
well the Evidence that is brought, you cannot but find for the Plaintiff.

It being thus, is ready to give fire to all his Artillery that is charged
against us; It is time to step in, and every one to take his Censer in his
hand, Numb. 16.46.
(as Moses willed Aaron) and put in Incense, and make an atonement for the
Nation, that God's wrath may be pacified toward it; An humble heart touched
with a deep sense of Gods dishonor, and the Nation's misery, is the Censer;
your fervent prayers are your Incense; and there is no such way, nor means so
effectual, to appease the wrath of God, and stay him from executing of his
Judgments threatened, as that. Esther, Est. 4.8.
upon Mordecai's perswation, went to King Ahashuerosh (albeit with danger of
her Life) and made Petition and Supplication before him for themselves and the
Kingdom, Est. 4.8. Have not you as great cause as She? and as much
encouragement as She had, and far more? the Golden Scepter is held out unto
you, you need not be afraid. Consider,

First, God expects this of you, Ezekiel. 22.30. Ezekiel. 22.30. Isa. 59.16, and 63,
5.
I sought for a man amongst them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in
the gap before me (says God) and found none. And God wondereth at it, that it
should be so, Isa. 59.16, and 63, 5. that there should be so general a
barrenness of grace, as that there was not one man to interpose for his
People, and sue for them; It sets the God of all wonders a wondering: I doubt
not but we have many that do stand in the gap (blessed be God,) yet I would
there were more; for there is but few, or none that do interpose in comparison
of them that do not, (for so None is many times taken in Scripture): Be thou
One of this None.

Secondly, The neglect of this is a dangerous and fearful provocation, and is
made a great cause of the public calamity, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.
Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. I fought for a man to stand in the gap, and found none;
Therefore have I powered out my Indignation on them, I have consumed them with
the fire of my Wrath: Psalm. 9.16, 17.
Oh! pray for the Church, the State of this English Nation; and forget it not.

Thirdly, In all Ages, this has bin the practice of God's Saints, by prayers
and tears to seek God for the averting of his Judgments; Dan. 9.16, 17. Jer.
18.20. Isa. 62.1. Dan. 9.16, 17. (...) Jer. 18.20. Isa. 62.1.
When darkness of affliction overshadows Jerusalem, and Sion is under a Cloud
of trouble; the godly cannot rest, they cannot keep silence; they must
importune the Lord for a glorious deliverance. And it is God's usual manner
before he does any great work for his Church, to stir up the hearts of his, to
importune him by their prayer.

Fourthly, The practice of this Duty will bring much comfort to our selves; for
besides the public good, that may follow hereupon, (wherein we shall have our
share, Isa. 66.10.) there is a private benefit, Isa. 66.10.
that will redound unto you; you shall be marked for mourners in Jerusalem, and
so saved in the day of destruction, Ezekiel. 9.4. Ezekiel. 9.4. Zeph. 2.3.
Zeph. 2.3.

I shall conclude the point with that exhortation of the Prophet, Ye that make
mention of the Lord (Ministers, and others too, Isa. 62.6, 7.
) keep not silence, and give him no rest, till He establish and make Jerusalem
a praise in the Earth, Isa. 62.6 7. Every one help with your humble prayers and
tears, make no other answer to God's complaints, but humble Confessions and
Petitions, as did this Dresser of the Vineyard, who, in answering, made no
other answer but this; Lord, let it alone, etc. And so we come to the words
more particularly.

He answering said, Text.
]

The Person Interceding, was, the Dresser of the Vineyard; the Person
Interceded, was, the Lord of the Vineyard: He answering, said, Lord, let it
alone, etc.

Who this Dresser is, has bin before showed; The Head, and Principal Dresser,
is, Christ himself: The Under-Dressers are the Ministers of the Gospel, the
Servants of Christ, whose Office it is to digg about the roots of the Trees: We
shall speak somewhat of both.

In reference to Christ (the Head-Dresser) we may take notice, of the
Intercession which he makes unto his Father, in the behalf of sinners, (such as
the Jews, represented by this Fig Tree, were).

When God is offended, Christ steps in and mediates, and pats a stop to the
present proceedings of Justice.

Thus Zachary 1.12. we read, that the Angel of the Lord, even the great Angel
of the Covenant, Zach. 1.12.
Christ Jesus the Mediator of his Church, interceded for Jerusalem; saying, O
Lord of Hoasts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and
ten years? Seventy years God had showed his just in^ignation against that
People for their sins; and had afflicted them with a miserable Captivity under
the Babylonians: Christ intercedes for them, that God would proceed no further
in wrath against them; God heard him, good and comfortable words, verse 13.

And thus, Being upon the Earth, He made Intercession for sinners; So did the
Evangelical Prophet foretell, Isa. 53.12.
( Isa. 53.12.) speaking as Positively, as if he had stood by, when Christ made
that prayer upon the Cross, in the behalf of his enemies; Luke 23.34. Guevar.
de Mont. Calv. c. 3.4.5.6. Pendebat and tamen petebat. Aug.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.24. O sacred word! O
blessed speech (says one)! uttered upon the Cross, by the Son of God, the
Savior of the World; and that in the very Act of his crucifying, when the
blood did trickle down from his hands and feet, when his shoulders were rent
and torn with whipping, his face swelled with buffeting, and when the pains of
Hell had caught hold upon him; yet then, he prays, and is careful of his
enemies, for those who were then like so many bloody hounds tearing of him,
yea, breathing Devils, tormenting of him, crucifying of him, and bathing their
hands in his blood; yet then, for them he prays, and that not for any one in
particular, but for all, even the whole Nation of them: questionless, he saw
many amongst them, who belonged not unto him; August. tract. 31. in Johan.
but amongst that wretched and seduced multitude, He saw many that were his,
and for their sakes he makes intercession; and puts up this prayer unto his
Father, Forgive them. Fain would they pull upon themselves the guilt of his
blood, he deprecates it; They kill, He sues for remission and life; And now,
that the Elements are troubled, the Lights of Heaven darkened, the Earth
trembling, and all Creatures (in a sort) prepared to be revenged on so wicked a
Nation; He stops their course, and deterrs them from their intended purpose, by
Interceding unto his Father for them; Father, forgive them.

And what he did on Earth, He does still in Heaven, in the behalf of those, who
belong unto the Election of grace (but yet uncalled); I pray for them (says
Christ), I pray not for the World; John 17.19, 20.
but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine, Joh. 17.9, 10, And
for their sakes, Christ now makes Intercession unto his Father, that he would
deferr his wrath; and that the World may stand, till that the number of his
Elect be made up, (which otherwise had not stood to this day), and no sooner
shall that number be made up, but the world shall be consumed with fire.

Of this Intercession which Christ makes in Heaven for us now, that He sits at
the right hand of his Father; the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25.
Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25. And it contains diverse things in it: First, His
appearing for us in the sight of God, and presenting of his Person in our
Nature and his own, as a public person: Heb. 9.24.
So, Heb. 9.24. He is there said to appear now in the sight of God for us,
alluding to the manner of the High Priest under the Law, who used to go into
the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holyes, with the names of the Children of
Israel, written in precious stones, for a remembrance of them; that he might be
mindful of them all, Exodus 30.7.
in his prayers, Exodus 30.7. So Christ being now ascended up into Heaven, there
presents unto his Father the names of all his Chosen; doing the Office of a
Priest continually, remembering the Lord of that which he has done, in offering
himself a sacrifice for us; thereby (as it were) with strong and mighty voice,
craving for us mercy and grace; whose blood speaks louder and better then the
blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24
Heb. 12.24.

Secondly, His undertaking for us, before God; and passing his word, that we
(being mindful of Reconciliation through him) shall eschew sin, by his Grace,
and not provoke him any more, as formerly we have done: Look, as Judah was both
a Mediator to request, and a Surety to engage himself, to bear the blame for
ever with his Father, Genesis 43.8, 9.
for his Brother Benjamin Genesis 43.8, 9. And as Paul was for Onesimus a
Mediator, I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus; and a Sponsor, If he have wronged
thee, or owe thee ought, put it upon my account, I will repay it, Philem. 9.10,
18, 19. So is Christ both our Mediator and Surety, Heb. 7.22.

Thirdly, His pouring out of the Spirit of Intercession upon us, which causes
us, Romans 8.26. Gal. 4.6, 7.
by an unutterable manner, to make our moans and requests known unto God, Romans
8.26. Gal. 4.6, 7.

Fourthly, His offering up the Prayers and Praises of the Saints to God, Rev.
8.3, 4. That Angel is Christ the Lord; in, Rev. 8.3, 4
and through whom, our Prayers are heard and accepted.

Fifthly, The presenting of his Will and desires unto his Father that, for the
merit of that Sacrifice which he offered, God would be pleased to be reconciled
with us, and put to his Seal thereunto, for our farther assurance, Joh. 17.24.
Joh. 17.24


Sixthly, The Assent and Agreement of his Father, resting in this Will of his
Son, for us, Math. 17.5. Joh. 11.42. Mat. 17.5. Joh. 11.42
In short, the merit of Christ's death, coming between Man's Sin and God's
Justice, is the Intercession, that he now makes in Heaven on our behalf,

Some conceive that Christ does still, preces fundere, Ambrose, Orig: Greg:
Nazian: Tolet; Anselm: Pet: Martyr, Mayer.
power our Prayers unto God, as he is man, (though not now after the same
manner that he did it when he was upon the Earth; either by bowing of the Knee,
or falling down on the Face, or cum luctu and lachryma, with wailing and tears,
sighs and groans, (as he did in the Garden, and at the raising up of Lazarus,
which was Origen's Opinion): To make Intercession to his Father after such a
manner, were derogatory to him (as Calvin speaks), nor is it seemly for that
place of Glory where now he is:) but that Christ, by his own Prayers, should
not second the Cry of his Blood; and that he himself being alive should not
join with it; seems (to some Judicious) not probable: Let the learned judge.

The great and tender Compassion of our blessed Savior, Jerusalem, Luke
19.42.) but continues speaking to his Father, on our behalf; and is become our
Advocate to plead our Cause, and intercede for us, as St. John shows 1 John
2.1. yea, 1 John 2.1.
such a one as forgets us not, now that he is in Glory, and sitting at his
Father's right hand; and this very hour, whilst we are speaking of it, he is
doing of it; Entreating the Lord to spare us, and show mercy to us, and not to
stir up his wrath against us.

Should a man suffer all manner of wrongs and injuries, from the hand of his
enemies, and yet be content to pass by them, and not only so; but likewise to
grieve and mourn for the miseries that are likely to befall, or at any time have
befallen* the parties that so wronged him; and yet further to mediate and
intercede for them to the Prince, or higher Powers, whom he has a great
Interest in, (and who are incensed against them) and prevail for them: This
would argue a high degree of Love and Compassion in the Person that should so
do; But this Christ has done, and still does, and much more than this, for
poor sinners, Oh who is able to express the loving-kindnesse of the Lord?

Philem. 10, -- 19.
Look how Paul interceded to Philemon for Onesimus; so does Christ for every
penitent and believing Soul; (and much more powerfully.) I beseech thee ( said
Paul) for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds, which in time past
was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and me, whom I have sent
again; Do thou therefore receive him that is mine own Bowels. Perhaps he
therefore departed for a season that thou should receive him for ever; not as
a Servant, but above a Servant, a Brother beloved, especially to me. If thou
count me therefore a Partner, receive him as my self: If he have wronged thee,
or owe thee ought, put that on my account, I Paul have written it with my own
hand, I will repay it, Phil. 10. -- 19. Thus Pathetically does Paul play the
Orator for Onesimus: But Christ excells, Father, I beseech thee for this my
Child, whom I have begotten again of Water and the Spirit, not only in my
bonds but in my blood, once a rebellious enemy, but now I have made him useful
for thy Glory; Whom I have brought back again to thee, that thou may receive
him for ever into favor: Good Father receive him, shut him not out, but open
the everlasting doors of Mercy to him; he is as near me as my own Bowels, let
him be so to thee; he is not only a Servant, but a Brother, a beloved Brother
to me especially: The Glory which thou have given me, I have given him: If thou
countest me a Partner with thee in thy Glory, receive him as my self, admit him
into thine own Blessedness. As thou art in me and I in thee, so let him be one
in Us; if he has wronged thee, or owe ought to divine Justice, put that on my
account, I will pay it, take my reckoning on the Cross for it. I Jesus have
written it on the Cross with mine own blood, the Pen being a spear's Point; I
will pay thee all.

There are but few such Paul's alive, as he was; he dyed long since, and left
not his like upon the Earth: But our comfort is, that our Jesus is yet alive;
He lives, and will ever live, thus to intercede his Father on our behalf, Heb.
7.25. When thou offendest God, and provokest him to wrath, then he steps in,
Heb. 7.25.
between his Father's wrath and thee, that it cannot break forth upon thee. And
as Moses held the hands of God, so does Christ the hands of his Father: whilst
his hands are up, Exodus 17.12.
God cannot destroy, and his hands are up continually on thy behalf. He is
daily and continually exercised, in making Intercession by the merit of his
death and Passion, not only for all God's Elect and chosen ones (in general),
but for every particular Person, and that particularly; He lives on purpose to
perform this work; It is the end of his business, Heb. 7.25.
the business of his life now in Heaven; as the Apostle there intimates, Heb.
7.25.

Oh! but thou will say, my sins are great and heinous, long layen in, often
renewed, and many ways aggravated.

Remember what the Apostle says (in the former place), He is able to save to
the utmost, those that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them: That word, to the utmost, (says one) is a reaching
word, Tho: Goodwin.
and extends it self so far, as that thou can not look beyond it; nor do
beyond it: Should thou climb up to Mount Ararat, to the highest Mountain on
the Earth, yet thou can not look beyond the Heavens; the higher thou
climbest, the more of the Heavens does appear unto thee: Let thy Soul be
carried (as Christ's body was) by Satan to an exceeding high Mountain, Mat.
4.8.
and have a view from thence presented to it, of all the sins that ever were
committed by thee, or of any whatsoever (as Christ had of all the Kingdoms of
the World in a moment): Let all the difficulties of being saved, that ever yet
any poor humbled Soul did meet withal, or can possibly imagine or cast within
it self; and join to these, all the Objections and hindrances of thy
salvation, that thy heart can suppose or invent; yet Christ by his Intercession
is able to save thee to the utmost, beyond the farthest compass of thy
thoughts: Do but remember this same word, to the utmost, and then put in what
exception thou can: The sacrificing part is done and ended, the price
all-sufficient for all the sins that were ever committed in the World: His
Intercession has now the place, and by it we get the merit of his death and
Passion applied, and not by any new Oblation.

come unto God by him, or through him; the former comfort appertains only to
such as do so, Heb. 7.25.
Heb. 7.25. He is the Door, and the way, through which only access is gotten
to God; by Saints and Angels we have not this access, but by Christ only.

They, of the Church of Rome, would persuade us otherwise; they tell us that
Christ indeed is the only Mediator betwixt God and us, touching Redemption;
but there be other Mediators of Intercession, namely, Saints and Angels, who,
albeit they be not the Redeemers of the World, yet they are as the Courtiers of
Heaven, and speak a good word for us, and so may be come unto, by us.

But what warrant have they for this distinction in the word? That Saints
living on Earth, may intercede for us; (and How, we shall show you anon,) but
that the Saints departed do it for any particular Person, we utterly deny.

Secondly, 1 John 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.4.
The Scripture tells us expressly, that there is but one Advocate, 1 John 2.1.
and one Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.4. and no more; and (which is to
be observed) that in the same place, where the Apostle St. Paul tells us of one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Subject that then he entreats of, is Prayer;
so that, even in Prayer, he would not that we should acknowledge any other
Mediator of Intercession, but Christ alone.

Thirdly, The High Priest under the Law was typically Mediator, both of
Remission by Sacrifice* and of Intercession by Prayer; and to deny Christ this,
is to rob him of the honor of his Priesthood, whose Priesthood is everlasting.

Fourthly, To communicate Christ's Priest hood, or any part thereof, with any
other besides his own Person, or use any other Mediator for Intercession,
besides him; is (in effect) to deny (that which Scripture speaks,) that Christ
is able to the utmost to save those that come unto God through him.

But (to follow this chase no farther) let us not partake with them in their
error, but cleave close to the Intercession and Mediation, which God has
ordained for us, in the Person of Jesus Christ; resting assured, that he is
both willing to step between God and us, and able to procure us favor, in the
sight of God his Father, and bring us into a state of Grace and Reconciliation
with him: He is our only Master of Requests, let us know no other if we would
speed in our Suits: He is a Savior in solidum, a thorough Savior, and needs
not any to come after him to finish what he has begun; he does not his work by
halves. We are taught to conclude all our Prayers and Requests, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Dan. 9.17.
in and through his Mediation, as did Daniel, cap. 9.17.

Chemnitius tells us of a Man, who, having used the help of some of the Nobles
at Court to prefer a Petition to the King, and being marvellously delayed;
hearing a Bishop preach of going to God by Saints and Mediators, said, If it
were in the Court of Heaven, as it was in the Courts of Earthly Princes, they
were like to have but a cold Suit of it. But (blessed be God) it is not so:
here by Christ we have access unto the Father, who will lead thee by the hand
unto him, as it were, (...). Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12.
(for so much the word signifies, Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12.) and he will speak
for thee: Cou^dst thou be assured, that thou had all the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, and all the Saints on Earth, jointly concurring at this instant in
Prayer and Request to God on thy behalf, entreating for God's love and favor
toward thee: How would thou be comforted and encouraged? But I dare assure
thee, that one word out of Christ's mouth will do more with his Father, than
all in Heaven and Earth can do; In him the Father is well pleased, Mat. 17.5.
he will not, cannot, Mat. 17.5. Joh. 11.42 1 King. 2.19. Psalm. 2.
deny him any thing that he asks of him: Say on my Mother ( said Solomon to
Bathsheba,) I will not say thee Nay: So says God, Ask of me my Son, and I will
give thee; nor did he ever deny him the hearing: Wherefore stay your hearts,
and comfort your selves, with these things. Come we now to speak of the words,
as they have reference to the Under-dressers.

He said]

That this is to be understood (secondarily) of the Vnder-dressers of the
Vineyard, is evident enough, in that they are those who are appointed to dress
it and dung it, and be serviceable unto it; so long as God has a Vineyard upon
the Earth. To these the head-Husbandman has committed the charge of his
Vineyard, (as before has been showed): Whence it follows, That

Faithful Ministers may not be wanting, (neither are they wanting) in
Interceding and Praying unto God, in the behalf of that unprofitable people
which is committed to their charge. This was enjoined the Priest under the Law,
Number. 6.24, 25. 1 Samuel 12.23. Isa. 37.4. Deuteronomy. 33.40.
Numb. 6.24, 25. and practiced conscienciously, 1 Samuel 12.23. Isa. 37.4. the
Prophet is sent for, and willed by King Hezekiah to lift up his Prayer for the
People. So Deuteronomy. 33.10. they shall put Incense before thee, i. e. pray for thy
People as well as preach to them, etc.

In which regard, they are counted and styled Intercessors, as appears by that
we read, Jer. 7.16. Enlightened
Jer. 7.16. Pray not thou for this People, neither lift up a Cry nor Prayer for
them, neither make Intercession unto me; for I will not hear. It was his Office
and Duty to pray for them, and make Intercession on their behalf; But God was
so offended with them at that time, that he forbids the Prophet to execute his
Office, in that particular, as concerning the Captivity. Had he omitted
(altogether) the Duty of Prayer for that People, he had sinned in that
omission; but God having so absolutely and peremptorily inhibited him, (even
thrice with one breath,) Pray not, Cry not, Intercede not; (showing thereby the
Immutability of his Counsel, and that the Captivity of that People was decreed
and established of God,) He had sinned if he had prayed for them any more in
that respect: This grieved him to the heart, Jer. 14.11, 13. ver. 20, 21, 23.
Jer. 14.11, 13. yet he goes as far as he might, ver. 20, 21, 22. He might and
ought (and did as he ought) to pray for other Blessings of God, in their
behalf; As that He would give them Repentance, Remission of Sins, Redemption
from eternal Captivity; Comfort and Patience in that Captivity threatened, and
deliverance out of it in due time, according to Promise: He might, and ought
(and did as he ought) in praying for deliverance from other Judgments, as
Famine, Pestilence, etc. At that time there was a great Famine in the Land by
reason of drought; and for the removing of that Judgment, and the blessing of
Rain he prayed, (albeit he might not pray for the State of the Kingdom, that
it might stand and flourish, and the Enemy not prevail against it, Piscator in
loc.
and that they might not be carried away into Captivity) for after God had so
charged him not to do it, he never Interceded and prayed for them (as before
was showed.)

And that this is the duty of all faithful Ministers, thus to make Intercession
for their People, (unless there be such a special Interdiction which we in
these days have not); appears by that we read, Jer. 27, 18. If they be
Prophets, Jer. 27.18. Explained.
and the word of the Lord be with them; Let them now make Intercession to the
Lord of Hoasts, that the Vessels which are left in the house of the King of
Judah and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon: As if the Prophet should say, If
these men amongst you that say they are Prophets, and would dissuade you from
serving of Nebuchadnezzar (whom God has determined you shall serve); Verse 14.
if they be Prophets indeed, let them do the work of a Prophet, in entreating
the Lord for you, and making Intercession on your behalf, that his Judgments
may be averted from you, or at least mitigated, and sweetened unto you; and let
them not any longer delude you, in saying, You shall not serve the King of
Babylon: for in so saying, they Prophecy a lie unto you. And so under the
Gospel, Ministers are to intercede: so did Paul, Romans 10.1 John 17.
Romans 10.1. Christ has given us an example, Joh. 17.

But if these Intercede,

Intercede, is properly a Latin word, and signifies to come betwixt, and so
to Let, Hinder, Withstand, Inter et cedo. Cameron? de p. 122. Eccles. 1 Timothy
2.1.
or Prohibit the doing of a thing. It has sometimes a more large
signification: so the prayers which the godly make in the name of Christ, to
turn away God's Judgments from their Brethren in this World, are termed
Intercessions, 2 Timothy 2.1. And these are Intercessions of Charity.

But usually and more strictly, it signifies that part of the Mediation of
Christ, in which he appears before God to prevent, or pacify his displeasure
toward his Elect (of which we spoke before); And this is out of Justice or
Authority. To be such an Intercessor, belongs to Christ alone, because
Intercession as it is a public and authoritative Act, is founded upon the
satisfactory merits of the Person interceding: 1 John 2.2.
He cannot be a right Advocate, who is not a Propitiation also; Therefore the
Papists are forced to venture so far, as to affirm that the Intercession of the
Saints in Heaven with God for us, is grounded upon the virtue of their own
merits: But thus, Christ only is our Intercessor, and no other; neither in
Earth nor Heaven. The things we pray for (either for our selves or others) are
unmerited of us, and undeserved by us; therefore, we put them up in His name,
we expect them, ex vi promissi, out of Gods gracious promise and not ex vi
pretii, out of any price or purchase by us paid or made; such meritorious
Mediators, God's Ministers are not: they are but Ministerial Mediators and
Intercessors under Christ, 2 Cor. 4.20.
wherein (indeed) they are preferred before others in nearness to Christ; and
have (as Nazianzen speaks) (...), a Mediation between God and Man.

For the further Explication and Confirmation of the Point, Let me show you:
First, wherein this Intercession of God's Ministers does consist, and then the
Grounds and Reasons of it.

The intercession of God's Ministers for their People, stands in two things;
First, In speaking betwixt both, interpreting the mind of one unto another,
from God to Man; and from Man again to God; Secondly, In interposing betwixt
both, when God is offended and displeased with Man.

They speak from God to Man, and so they are His Voice to Us, Luke 1.70. Him we
cannot hear in His own Voice and live: Luke 1.70.
Speak thou with us (said the People of Israel to Moses) and we will hear,
Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28.
but let not God speak any more with us, lest we dye; which desire of theirs
was well approved of by the Lord: In like manner, God having respect to our
Infirmities, is graciously pleased to acquaint us with his good pleasure, by
men like our selves: Math. 10.20. 2 Cor. 5.20.
It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you,
(as Christ spoke to his Disciples, Math. 10.20.) we pray you in Christ's stead
(says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20.)

They speak from Men, and for Men, to God; and so they are Man's Voice to Him;
presenting their Persons and Causes before him, when they come into his
presence. Thus Aaron was enjoined to bear the names of the Children of Israel,
upon his Pectoral, when he came before the Lord to minister, for a memorial
before the Lord for ever, Exodus 28, 29. Exodus 28.29.
So every Faithful Pastor is mindful of his Flock, and carries it upon his
heart, not only to his Pulpit, but to his Study: When he studyes, he remembers
them, and prays for them; when he meditates on them, he prays for them: In
Public he prays for them; in Private he neglects not that Duty. St. Paul
mentioned the Romans, always in his prayers, Romans 1.9.
Romans 1.9. In every prayer of his (Public or Private) he had the Philippians
in remembrance, making request for them all, with Joy, Philip. 1.4, Phil. 1.4, 5
5. Look as the tender hearted Mother prays for her Babe, when she suckles it,
when she dresseth it; takes it up, or lays it down (which prayers are usually
wanting, when she puts it forth to Nurse): So is it with a Faithful Pastor;
though it be otherwise with those, who turn over their Flocks unto another
man's care.

Secondly, They Intercede by Interposing in time of danger betwixt God and the
People, when the Almighty is incensed against them, through their manifold
provocations. This is enjoined, Joel 2.17. Thus did Moses, Exodus 32.10, 11. and
Numb. 14.12, Joel 2.17. Exodus 32.10, 11. Numb. 14.12, 13. Psalm. 106.23.
Explained.
13. Hear what the Psalmist speaks of him, Psalm. 106.23. He said he would
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen Minister stood before him in the Breach,
to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them; Where Moses is compared to
a Valiant Captain, Who, when the besieging Enemy has made a breach in the
wall, and the City is like to be lost suddenly, steps into the Breach, and
makes it good, keeping the Enemy from entering: Thus likewise did Aaron, Numb.
16.47, Numb. 16.47, 38.
48. A Plague being begun amongst the People, for their murmuring (whereof
14000 and 700 dyed), he by the appointment of Moses runs unto his Censer, takes
fire from the Altar, and puts Incense therein, and so (with It in his hand)
stands betwixt the Living and the Dead, whereupon the Plague was stayed: Of
which passage, Wisdom gives us an excellent Paraphrase. Wisd. 18.21.
The blameless man made haste and defended them, and took the weapons of his
Ministration, even Prayer; and the Reconciliation by the Perfume, and set
himself against the wrath, and so brought the misery to an end: For he overcame
not with multitude, with bodily Power, nor with force of Weapons; Non vi, sed
precibus armatus; non ferro, sed fide and votis.
but with the Word he subdued him that punished, or overcome the Destroyer.

More particularly, Three manner of ways they Interpose betwixt God's wrath,
and a sinful People.

First, By consessing of their People's guiltiness, humbly craving pardon in
the name and media^ion of Jesus Christ of all their sins, urging God with his
Covenant and Promise, and putting him in mind of his ancient mercies, Exodus
32.11, 12, 13. Ezra. 9. Neh. 9. Dan. 9. Levit. 5.6.
as we may read at large, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. Ezra. 9. Neh. 9. and Dan. 9.
This was enjoined the Priest under the Law, Levit. 5.6.

Secondly, By excusing their People, what may be: Sometimes imputing their sins
to their ignorance and weakness, as our Savior did the fact of the Jews, in
crucifying of him: Father forgive them, Luke 23.34. 2 Samuel 24.17.
for they know not what they do; Luke 23. Sometimes by laying the blame on
others; David to excuse the People, took all the f^ult upon himself: Lo I have
sinned, and done wickedly; but these Sheep what have they done? 2 Samuel 24.17.
Albeit the Text tells us plainly that it was their sins, that gave occasion of
their Princes fall, and was the cause of their own punishment, verse. 1. And
Jeremiah imputes the disobedience of the People to their seducing Teachers; Ah
Lord God, Behold, the Prophets say unto them, You shall not see the Sword,
neither shall you have Famine, Jer. 14.13.
but I will give you assured Peace in this Place, Jer. 14.13. As if he should
have said, Lord thy People are misled by their blind and wicked guides; they
would be better, and had done better, had they bin better taught.

Thirdly, By engaging themselves for their People, and undertaking for their
future amendment; Thus did the Dresser mentioned in my Text, He undertakes for
this Fig Tree; I will digg about it, and dung it, and if it bear fruit, well:
As if he should have said, Thou shall then well see, that thou shall have no
cause to repent thee of thy patience and forbearance (of which words more in
due place). And thus you have heard, how God's Faithful Ministers Intercede for
their People, and wherein their Intercession (principally) consists: Let me now
show you briefly the Grounds or Reasons of the Point.

First, They are hereunto called, and appointed by God: The Priest was taken
from amongst men (says the Apostle), Heb. 5.1.
and Ordained for men in things appertaining to God, that he may offer both
Gifts and Sacrifice for sin, Heb. 5.1. In like manner all Ministers of the
Gospel are taken from amongst men, and ordained for the good of men, not in
matters of this Life, but in the business betwixt God and them, that they may
offer up (not an external propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, as they of the Roman
Church would have it, but) those Spiritual Sacrifices and Prayers and
Intercessions unto God, on their People's behalf. Genesis 20.7.
He is a Prophet, and He shall pray for thee, was the Language of Elder times.
To this they are called, and cannot but make conscience of their Duty, if they
be faithful.

Secondly, Ministers, (if Faithful) dearly affect their People and esteem them
(as Cornelia did her Gracchi) for their chiefest Ornaments: What is our Hope,
our Joy, 1 These. 2.19, 20.
our Crown of Rejoicing (says the Apostle)? 1 These. 2.19, 20. Are not even ye
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming: ye are our Glory and
our Joy. Now whom we affect, we pray for, plead for, and excuse what may be;
The Child is oftentimes wayward and froward, the tender Mother rocks it, sings
it, excuses it; It does not use to be thus, it has the frett, or some pin
pricks it, or it is breeding teeth; it shall be any thing, but what it is
indeed, frowardness: This affection carried St. Paul to so high a pitch, as
that he could wish himself accursed for his Brethrens sake, Romans 9.3. and
caused him (with the rest of the Apostles) to be so desirous of their Peoples
good, Romans 9.3.
as that they were willing not only to impart the Gospel to them, but also
their own souls, 1. These. 2.8.

Thirdly, 1 These. 2.8.
Faithful Ministers are conscious to them selves of their own faylings; None so
careful, but have cause to smite upon their thighs for some neglects in their
Ministerial service: This Dresser fears his own faylings, and however the
Owner charged the Fig Tree only for its barrenness, yet the Dresser (in the
answer which he makes) seems to charge himself with some omission of Duty; I
will digg about it, and dung it; as if he should have said, something has bin
wanting on my part, in not husbanding of it as I ought; Let it alone one year
more, and I will redouble my pains and diligence, and amend my fault. In this
respect, he might Intercede for it: Thus much of the reasons of a faithful
Minister's Intercession, for a barren and unprofitable People.

There is yet one Scruple that would be removed, Elijah, Romans 11.2.
who made Intercession against the People, as we read, Romans 11.2.

Two ways may Intercession be said to be made against a People; Resp.
First, When a simple and bare Relation is made to God of the sin committed:
Secondly, When punishment is craved, and called for to be inflicted on them, as
they have deserved. The Intercession made by the Prophet against Israel, Peter
Martyr. Beza. Paraeus.
seems to be of the former, not latter kind; He acquainted God with the Impiety
of that People, lamented it in God's hearing, was sorry for it, and grieved at
it; but he called not for vengeance to fall upon their heads, he desired not
their ruin: for (questionless) he was better acquainted with Samuel's Rule
(if he had not too much (through passion) forgot himself), 1 Samuel 12.23.
1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to
pray for you.

If (besides the complaint made by the Prophet unto God) there be likewise a
secret imprecation (as some conceive there is), Calvin. Grynaeus.
and that he did imprecari interitum, wish their destruction and ruin; then it
was spiritu prophetantium, by way of Prophecy, he knew by Revelation from God,
that Judgments were intended against that People for their Idolatry, and bloody
cruelty; and so he framed his desires according to God's appointments: The like
did Jeremiah, Deliver up their Children (says he); and let them drop away by
the Sword; Jer. 18.21, 21, 23.
forgive not their iniquity, put not out their sin, but deal with them in
anger, Jer. 18.21, 22, 23. And, it was usual with the Prophets thus to do. We
come to make use of the Point.

Stephen made when he was stoned, Acts 7.60. Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge, Acts 7.60.
was heard when his Sermon wrought but little on them, to whom it was Preached;
and so heard, as that it was (as we may religiously conceive) an effectual
means of the conversion of One of his greatest Persecutors, Saul, at whose Feet
the Witnesses laid down their Clothes, as we read, ver. 58. Augustine speaks
confidently, Si Stephanus non sic orasset, Paulum hodie Ecclesia non haberet.
that if Paul had not bin enwrapped in those Prayers which Stephen made for his
Persecutors, the Church had lost the benefit of all St. Paul's labors; and if
God had not bind so entreated by a praying Stephen, the Church had not bin so
blessed with a preaching Paul. The like saying has Fulgentius; Great pity it
had bin that the Church should have wanted, either the Person of the one, or
the Prayers of the other. However, admirable was St. Stephen's patience and
piety; others at such a time would have forgotten their Friends, he remembers
his Enemies, and prayers for them; yea, at that very instant, when they were
stoning of him, and (which is yet more) he kneeled down and prayed for them,
albeit the stood when he prayed for himself, intimating thereby, as the
greatness of their impiety, which could not easily be forgiven; so the
greatness of his own charity, in being more grieved for their sin, then for
his own suffering; Luke 23.24.
imitating therein his Lord and Master, Jesus Christ; Who hanging on the
Cross, yet prayed for his Persecutors, Luke 23.24.

Is this the condition of any of us who are Ministers of Christ? Are we
traduced, reviled, persecuted by those from whom better things are expected by
us? Look we (then) upon the practice of our Lord and Masters, and upon his
suffering Servants, who are gone before; and learn to bless them who curse us,
and pray for them, who desptiefully use us; as we are enjoined, Luke 6.27.30,
33.
Luke 6.27, 32, 33. This is Heroical revenge, and such was that which the
Martyrs have taken. We read of Mr. Saunders in the Reign of Queen Mary, who
being sent to Prison by that B. B. of Winchester, Stephen Gardener; he gave God
thanks, that had given him at the last a place of rest and quietness, where he
might pray for the Bishop's conversion. Oh! let us not be wanting in this Duty
for them, Who yet are wanting in Love and Duty to God and Us: The Calf pusheth
the Cow, yet the Cow Lowes after it, and is content to let down her Milk to
nourish it; Be we a Sanctuary to them, who wickedly seek to drive us out of the
Sanctuary of God; and (if it be possible) pray we them into Inheritance of
Heaven, who (it may be) would swear us out of our maintenance on Earth; so
shall we manifest to the World that we are the true Disciples of Christ, who
had Gall and Vinegar given him by the Jews, for the sweet Wine which he gave
them to drink; and for the feeding of Men's Bodies, healing their diseases, etc.
was (by way of requital) slandered, scourged, buffetted, spit upon, and at last
crucified: Yet He stood in the gap (as you have heard) betwixt the revenging
wrath of God, and those wicked ones; He catched the blow in his own Body,
purchased an eternal Redemption for them, by shedding of his blood, that,
believing in Him, they might not perish, but have eternal life. Joh. 3.16. Luke
6.40.
The Disciple is not above his Master; if any man will be perfect, let him be
as his Master: If we that are sent to dress the Vineyard, and to Husband it,
are under contempt, or under persecution; If the Sword of the Tongue, or the
Sword of the Tyrant be drawn against us; against all these, Arma nostra, preces
and lachrymae, we must defend with no other Shield, return no other Sword, but
tears and prayers, blessing them that curse us: And such weapons we may well
have leave to use. Thus, as the Point concerns Us: Now let me show, how it
concerns you that heart us.

you take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi. Numb. 16.3.


It is very true, the Lord has respect to the prayers of the meanest of his
Saints, but yet he has respect to the prayers of his Prophets and Ministers
more then to any other; and their prayers are more effectual and prevayling, as
appears by that speech of God to Abimelech, Genesis 20.7. For he is a Prophet,
Genesis 20.7.
and shall pray for thee; And as sick Abimelech was sent to Abraham a Prophet
for prayers, so are others in time of their sickness, by St. James, Jam. 5.14.
Jam. 5.14.
Why should People have recourse to them, rather then to other, if their
prayers were not more potent and prevalent with God then the prayers of others?
Moses and Aaron were amongst his Priests, and Samuel amongst such as call upon
his Name; these called upon the Lord, and he heard them (says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 99.6.) Others called upon God as well as they, and God had gracious
respect likewise to their prayers; Psalm. 99.6.
But to none so much as to these, who were the prime Peers of the Church, and
Intercessors for the People: O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and
the Horsemen thereof, 2 King. 2.12. 2 King. 13.14.
said Elisha to Elijah, Who was so powerful with God by his prayers, that it
was said of him, He could bridle Heaven with his Tongue: And Elisha for his
powerful prayers, was so flyted by King Joash, as if all the safety and
strength of Israel lay in their frequent prayers. This difference may be put
between the prayers of God's Ministers, and the prayers of private Person^;
Lay-devotions or the prayers of private persons, are the Infantry, or the Foot
of the Army; but the prayers of God's Faithful Ministers are as the Chariots
and Horse, the very strength of the Battle. And therefore to say that there is
no need of these, is considerately said: for, so long as there is a Warrfare on
Earth, sins to be pardoned, a God to be pacified, Souls to be saved; there will
be need of these: And those only have no use of these Leigeirs, that desire no
correspondence or Intercourse with Heaven.

Others there are, who (albeit not so inconsiderate and wretched as the former,
yet they) regard not these Intercessors as they ought; taking no notice of
their Labors, Trials, Sufferings; Their Persons, Work, Wages, is no part of
their care; They leave them to themselves to stand or fall, sink or swim; as if
they were nothing interessed in their welfare and happy estate. O tempora, o
mores!

The People of Millain were so affected to Ambrose in his time, as that mallent
amittere animas quam Episcopum, they had rather lose their lives, then their
Bishop; In those times the saying was, Moriamur cum Episcopo, we will dye with
our Bishop; Now the saying is, Moriantur Episcopi, Let them dye, there is a
good riddance of them: but the fall of the Minister (commonly) is the ruin of
the People; Can the Shepherd be smitten, Math. 26.31. Prove. 29.18.
and the Sheep not be scattered? Can Vision fail, and the Prophet not perish?

We read in History, that when Philip besieged Athens, He sent unto the
Citizens, and told them, that if they would deliver up their Orators (the
troublers of their Peace), He would raise his Siege and depart; But Demosthenes
smelling out the Plot, sent him this answer, That the Wolves on a time came to
treat with the Shepherds about a League, and willed them to deliver up their
Dogs, from whom (said they) all the discord that is betwixt us does arise, and
we will be Friends: The Dogs were delivered up; Shepherds secure; Peace made;
but the Lambs in short time after were all devoured: I shall not need to apply
it; could Satan but get these ridd out of the way, could he drive the Watchmen
out of the Tower, turn the Dresser out of the Vineyerd, stop the mouths of
these Intercessors, and cause them to be silent; you may imagine what will
follow; if you cannot, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.
read Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. and that will inform you:

There is yet another sort worse then either of the former, to be reproved; of
whom these Intercessors may say, as David did of his Enemies, Psalm. 36.13.
Psalm. 35.13. As for me, when they were sick I Clothed my self with
Sack-loath, and But in my adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves
together; yea, the objects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew
it not; they did tear me, and ceased not, verse 15. Whilst these Intercessors
have bin bowing their knees to God on their behalf, they have bin beating their
brains in devising mischief, and finding out matter whereof to accuse them,
Jer. 18.18.
that they may be compelled to leave both their Places and Callings, whose
worth they have not seen till they were gone, and then (as it is with some
Stuffs which have the best gloss a good way off) they have wished for them
again, As the Florentines did for Benedict Albertus, whom they banished from
amongst them, but after his death, they confessed their error; fetched home his
bones, and buried them with solemn pomp, bewayling their loss.

And have we not yet amongst us, such, as spare not to revile and slander them:
and cast about, which way to defraud them of that maintenance, which both Law
and Conscience has allotted to them, and laid out for the maintenance of them
and theirs, as wages for their honest Labor? Is it not enough that (like him
who went from Jerusalem to Jericho) they be wounded by Thieves, Luke 10.30.
but that they must suffer Violence at the hands of their Neighbors and
Familiars? But herein I spare you, ^t present.

I cannot but take up a Lamentation, for thee ungrateful England, and bewail
thy misery; who make them the subject of thy hatred and derision who for many
years together have bin the means of thy preservation; and castest no other Eye
upon them, than the Eye of scorn and envy, whose Eyes and Hearts have bin so
often lifted up to Haven for thy welfare; 1 Cor. 4.13. Philem.19
To account them no other them the scum and offscouring of all things, to whom
thou owe thy self, for thy long enjoyed happiness; Had not these stood in
the gap for thee, long ere this, God's wrath had entered in, as a mighty breach
of water, and like an overflowing deluge. What David said to Abigail, 1 Samuel
25.34.
(when by her wisdom she had turned away wrath and destruction from Nabal)
thou have cause to say of these: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent
thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou who
have prevented the shedding of much blood; for in every deed, as the Lord God
of Israel lives, (who has bin kept from destroying of us) unless thou had
hasted, and gone out to meet the Lord, there had not bin left unto us (long ere
this) any (no not so much as a Dog) that pisseth against the Wall; we had bin
wiped as a man wipeth a Dish, and utterly bin destroyed from being a People or
Nation upon the Earth. 2 King. 21.13.


Yet we are like to the Dog in the water, who bites him by the hands, who
would save him from drowning; yea, like cruel Nero, who after his Mother showed
him her Womb, to move him to compassion, unnaturally caused her to be ripped up,
that he might see the place where he had lain: Whilst we show our Breasts and
Bowels unto you, and discover the affections we b^ar you; and the good offices
we do, and have done, for you; Do not you pierce us, wound us, unbowel us? How
will you answer God for such tyranny and cruelty? Balaam would not deal hardly
with his Ass, after he perceived that God spoke by him; and shall we deal
cruelly and unworthily with those in whom God is, 1 Cor. 14.25. 2 Cor. 5.18
and to whom he has given the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor, 5.18. who
deal with God on your behalf, intercede for you, pray for you, promise, and
undertake for you? The very Geese of the Capitol were respected, and
maintained, by the Romans, for saving them, in the days of Camillus, by their
cackling: Though the Ministers of God be not respected by you for Conscience
sake, yet methinks they should, for Policy's fake; If not for God's sake, yet
for the World's sake; If not for the Soul, yet for the Body's sake; If not for
the Churches, yet for the sake of the Commonwealth, let them have more respect
than hitherto they have found from you; Piety is as the Body of Christ, Policy
is as the hemm of Christ's Garment: Well were it, if these Intercessors, who
can have little help by the Piety of these times, Mat. 9.20.
may (with the Woman in the Gospel) have these bloody Issues cured by touching
the hemm of Christ's Garment. As for these Indignities offered, we have learned
to say, as Mauritius did to Phocas murdering his Children, Videat Dominus and
judicet: So let God judge betwixt you and us.

Exhortation, which I beseech you suffer; Beloved, it is our Savior's Rule,
Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use you, Luke 6.28.
etc. Much more then, Bless them that bless you, and deal not despitefully
with them, who make Intercession to Heaven for you; Heb. 13.18 1 These. 5.25.
Pray for us, (says the Apostle), Heb. 13.18. and again, Brethren, pray for
us, 1 These. 5.25. and again, and again too; It is his closure in many of his
Epistles. He does not only pray for them, but prays them to pray for him; and
this he desires, not as a Complement in his Valedictions, but he desires it to
be done heartily and earn^stly, Romans 15.30. He desired not the People to pry
into him; Romans 15.30. Gal. 2.4.
that should not need, enough would do that without desiring (as appears, Gal.
2.4.). Nor does he say, Prate of us; People are ready enough to do that; they
can make Ministers their Tabletalk; Diotrephes was such a Prater, 3 John 10.
whom St. John mentions, 3 Epist. ver. 10. Nor does he say, Prey upon us; had
he so said, he should have had a number of such Preyers, 2 Per. 2.3.
2 Pet. 2.3. but, Pray for us, as we do for you, as you tender the Glory of
God; desire the peace of Jerusaleus; and love your own Souls; Pray for us.

Oh that this English Nation had either more Grace or Wit, then would they not
(with Saul) fling their Darts and Javelins at David, whilst he is seeking with
his well-tuned Harp, 1 Samuel 18.10, 11.
to drive out the evil Spirits from them, but make much of such who are the
hostages of her peace, and the earnest of her tranquillity. Thou art yet happy,
o Nation, not worthy to be beloved, Zeph. 2.1.
that thou have some in thee, who cease not to intercede night and day for
thee: Oh that thou knew thy happiness, Luke 19.41
at least in this thy day, by honoring their persons, procuring their peace
and welfare; in putting up thy Prayers for them, that cease not, day and night,
to solicit thy cause, in the Name and Mediation of Christ, at the Throne of
Grace.

If you would know the particulars, that you should crave from God on their
behalf; I shall only commend unto you, that excellent Prayer which Moses the
Servant of God made on the behalf of Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.8, -- 12. Deur. 33.8.12.
Explained.
There we have the specialties laid down; some respect their Office, other
their Persons, and other their Substance.

Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy Holy One, ver. 8. What the Vrim and
the Thummim was, is not easy to determine; Illumination and Perfection is that
they signify (as is commonly conjectured). Questionless; Moses hereby
signified the Graces that belonged to the Priesthood, which was committed to
Aaron and his Seed, that they might be enabled to teach Jacob God's Judgment,
and Israel Gods Law, as he afterward expresses it, ver. 10. And we may
understand him thus; Thou Lord have separated the Tribe of Levi to minister
before thee, in the behalf of thy People; Oh furnish thou them whom thou have
thus chosen, with those excellent Graces which are requisite for their Calling;
that they may be Guides to the blind, Lights to them that sit in darkness,
Instructors of the Ignorant, Examples to their flocks, over which thou have
made them Overseers: Many complain of the dullness, deadness, coldness, of
their Ministers; but when did these put up one Prayer to Heaven in the behalf
of them? If we did but consider the weightinesse of the work of the Ministry, 2
Cor. 2.16 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
2 Cor. 2.16. Their own inability to discharge their Function, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
The mischief that follows, and befalls the Church of God through the ignorance
and profaneness of the Minister, Hos. 5.1. and 4.6. Hos. 4.6. and 5.1. Romans
10.17.
The great good that comes to us by a painful and conscionable Ministry, Romans
10.17. We cannot but confess, that there is great need that every one of you
should pray earnestly to God, for all such gracious endowments and enablements,
as may fit them for the work of the Ministry.

Something, in the second place, is prayed for by Moses which respects their
Substance, Bless Lord his Substance, and accept the work of his hands, Levi
had no Inheritance amongst the Tribes, but they had the Lord, and his
First Fruits, Tithes, and Ofterings, for their Inheritance and Livelihood,
Numb. 6.18, 20, 21. and God was therein very bountiful unto them, Numb. 6.18,
20, 21.
more than to any other of the Tribes; For albeit that Tribe was the least of
all the Tribes for Number, (as may appear by comparing Numb. 1.46. with Numb.
3.39.) The other Tribes were numbered from twenty years old and upward, Number.
1.46 compared with Number. 3.39.
all that were able to bear Arms, (which was to the Age of 50 years, for at
that Age they were supposed to be unserviceable for War): The Levites were
numbered from one Month old and upward* and yet the whole sum of them amounted
but to twenty two thousand; Now, if we should conceive the number of those in
the other Tribes, who were nor numbered, (being under twenty and above 50 years
of Age) to be but half as many as the rest; the whole number of the Tribes,
reckoned from their Infancy and upward, will amount at least to nine hundred
and two thousand men; of which number, the Levites is just the one and fortyeth
part: And yet, though the Levites were but few in number, (being compared with
the rest,) God provided for them a larger portion than ^e did for the rest;
They had the tenth part of the increase of the Land, of Seed, and Fruit, of
great and small Cattle, Levit. 27.30. Besides, Lev. 27.30 Lev. 27.26, 27. Exodus
13.13.
they had the Firstborn of all sorts of C^rtle (as of Sheep, Beevs, and
Goats), and the price of the rest, which were to be redeemed according to the
Priests estimation, Levit. 27.26, 27. and more plainly expressed Exodus 13.13.
Numb. 18.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Neh. 10.36. Number. 18.13. etc. Neh. 10.36. Lev.
32.10. Lev. 23.17 Numb. 15.20. Numb. 18.12. Numb. 18.18. Deuteronomy. 18.3. Number.b
18.9, 10, 11. Numb. 18.8, 9.
And the First Fruits of four other kinds, as of the Sheaf, Levit. 32.10.
Secondly, Of their Bread, two wave-Loaves at the Feast of Pentecost, Lev.
23.17. Thirdly, The First Fruits of their Dough, Numb. 15.20. Fourthly, The
First fruits in general, of all things which the Earth brought forth, then
payable, when men had gathered in their Fruits, Numb. 18.12.

They had certain portions appointed them out of all kind of Sacrifices, either
the Shoulder, Breast, or Skin, Numb. 18.18. Deuteronomy. 18.3. etc. The
Meat Offerings, the Sin Offerings, the Trespass Offerings, the
Heave-Offerings, and the Wave-Offerings, were all theirs, Numb. 18.9, 10, 11.
All Votive and Vo^untary Ob^^tions, and Consecrations, and every hallowed thing
was theirs, Number. 18.8, 9.

In case of Restitution to be made, upon a fraudulent Act committed; If neither
the Party wronged were living, nor any Kinsman known of his, Number. 5.2, 8.
the Restitution was performed to the Priest, Number. 5.7, 8.

They had 48 Cities for their Habitation, and two thousand Cubits of ground
from the Wall, on every side, for the Suburbs, for Gardens, and for a gleib for
their Cattle, Number. 35.2.
Numb. 35.2. (which Cities were next to the best, and in many places the very
best of all;) when the greatest of the other Tribes had but 19 Cities.

Add unto all this, that whereas the Tribes were to appear thrice every year
before the Lord, they were not to come empty handed, Exodus 23.15, 17. Now, if
we consider the Tithes, Exodus 23.15, 17.
Offerings, and Oblations; the Cities, and other constant revenues that were
coming in to the Levites, and put all together, it will appear, that, though
they were but about a quarter as many as one Tribe, yet they had about three
times the revenues of one Tribe. All which was paid them very freely and
willingly by the People, Philo lib. de Sacerd. honor. Ezekiel. 44.30. Mal. 3.10.
as Philo the Jew (who was well acquainted with the Customs of his Nation)
tells us, being confident that it was the only way to be rich, to tithe well;
and that the blessing of God would follow such as did so, according to that
Ezekiel. 44.30. Mal. 3.10.

This Substance was theirs, which Moses prays for, and desires that God would
bless unto him and increase: he did not grudge it him, and say, It is too much
for Levi, a less portion by far would serve his turn; It will make him proud.

How comes it then to pass, that the Ministers of the Gospel are grudged that
maintenance, which both the Law of God, and the Land, has allotted them for
their painful labors? Is their Ministry less glorious? That it is not, (if
the Scriptures may be judge in that case) 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. Mar.
11.11
And does not our Savior prefer the Ministers of the Gospel before the other,
when he tells us, that they are greater than John the Baptist, Math. 11.11.
And yet nothing is more enviously grudged, than the Livings of the Clergy. The
Gentry has got into their hands already near upon three parts of the Ministers
maintenance, and have left the Church but one Quarter, and yet there are those
that would eat her heart with Salt (as we say) because she has so much.

Many Edomites there are amongst us, that say of the Church, as they did of
Jerusalem; Raze it, Raze it, even to the ground, Psalm. 137.7. Psalm. 137.7 Ps.
83.3, 4.
Geball and Ammon and Amalek conspire against it, and consult how they may
destroy it, Psalm. 83.3, 4. But how shall this be effected? Why, Let us take the
houses of God into our possession, they say in their hearts, Let us make havoc
of them; Psalm. 74.9.
And to lay a foundation for that, Let us burn all the Houses of God in the
Land: The Honey cannot be had but by burning of the Bees; nor Church-means, but
by destroying of Churchmen, and smoking them out of their Hives. This (God be
praised) we are not yet come unto; All the Houses and Synagogues of God, in the
Land, are not burnt up, and consumed with fire; yet, but few of our Churches
and Temples, which have not been robbed, plundered, and profaned, in a very
high degree: With God's House men began, before they went unto their
Neighbors; And the desires of many look still that way, hoping to see, no, not
one stone left upon another, nor one sheaf left for the maintenance of the
Ministry: Such is the praying we make, for Levi's Substance.

But, take away his Substance and maintenance, you overthrow his Calling; and
take away his Calling, what becomes of Religion? The free passage of the Gospel
is to be prayed for, 2 These. 3.1.
2 These. 3.1. Now, the passage of the Gospel must needs be hindered, when Levi's
maintenance is withheld, and he thereof defrauded. In this respect it was,
that the Persecution which the Church suffered under Julian was esteemed
greater than that under Dioclesian; Dioclesian's Persecution was against
Presbyters, intending thereby to root out all Religion (as Eusebius speaks);
But Julian's was worse, in that it was against the Presbytery, their whole race
and revenew, livelihood and maintenance; He took away their Inheritances, and
dissipated them into so many hands, as that without a miracle they might never
return again to their right owners; as if he had vowed (says a Worthy of our
times), B.B. King.
to sow Church Lands with Salt, so that it might ever after remain barren, and
never bear any more fruit to Prophets, or Prophets Children. But I shall not
strike any longer upon this string.

Lastly, Their Persons are prayed for by Moses; Smite through the loins of them
that rise against him, and of them that hurt him, that they rise not again;
Protection and deliverance is to be craved of God on their behalf, Romans 15.30,
31. Romans 15.30, 31. 2 These. 3.2
I beseech you Brethren, strive with me, that I may be delivered from them that
do not believe: And again, Brethren, pray for us (says the same Apostle, 2
These. 3.2.) that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, or, as
the words may be rendered, (...)
from absurd fellows, and from their malice and treachery; from such men, whose
Industry and labor is spent in bringing labor, molestation, and vexation,
upon those who are the Ministers of the Gospel; nor do they care how gross,
vile, and absurd, they show themselves, so they may compass their own wicked
Wills, and overthrow the Truth. The malice of Satan, and his Seed, is not
carried with more eagerness against any, than against God's Ministers, 1 Cor.
16.9.
whom he knows God has made the chief Instruments of ruining his Kingdom;
thence it is, that the hottest Persecutions have been raised against them, and
soarest temptations have been directed to them: We must, and will, say* with
Jeremiah, This is our Portion, and we will bear it; yet it is your parts to
pray for us, that we may be enabled to bear it; Jer. 10.19.
considering the Infirmity of our Persons, Act. 14.15.
subject to humane frailties as you your selves are.

Wherefore, think it not enough, that you give us Audience, or Reverence, or
Maintenance, but, Pray for us, that we may stand fast amidst the many Assaults
of Satan, and vexations from absurd and unreasonable men; Remembering always,
that the good and welfare of the Ministers, is the benefit of the People: In
praying for them, you pray for your selves, and own safety: And it is the
Tribute of thankfulness which is owing from you to them, who stand in the gap
for you, and, by their Prayers and Intercessions, avert those Judgments from
you, which otherwise would assuredly befall you; Judge. 16.15.
How can thou say that thou love me, when thy heart is not with me, said
Dali^^^ to Sampson? So may God's Ministers say to their People who pretend much
love, but do not once remember them i^ (...) prayers; Say not, you love me,
then this duty is wa^^^g ^o^^ you. And so we have said of the Person
interceding^ now to the Person interceded.

Lord, Text.
]

It properly signifies one that has Authority, or one on whose Authority
something depends; yet it has diverse acceptations in Scripture; It has both
a religious and a civil sense; It is a name of Civility, and given, not only
to Princes, and Personages in high places, Genesis 31.6. and 42.30. and 43.16. 2 Samuel 26.15. 1 Samuel 19.26. Judge. 3.3. Genesis 24.18 Act. 16.30.
as Genesis 31.6. and 42.30. and 43.16. 1 Samuel 26.15. and 2 Samuel 19.26. Judge. 3.3.
but it is likewise sometimes, given to Persons of meaner Rank and Quality; It
descends (as one observes) from the Scepter to the Spade, and implies not any
distinction of Rank or Degree amongst men: Rebeceah gave the Title Lord to
Abraham's Servant, Genesis 24.18. Paul and Silas (poor Prisoners) are called
(...), Domini, Lords by the Jailer, Act. 16.30. And when Mary Magdelen spoke of
Christ, to the Gardener (as she supposed), she uses one and the same word
(even the word used in my Text, (...), Lord) to both, Joh. 20.13, 15.
Joh. 20.13, 15. when she said, they have taken away my Lord, (meaning Christ,)
and when she said to the Gardener, Sir, If thou have taken him hence; It is the
same word too; and, in that respect, the word is englished diversely, according
to the different condition of the Persons; Sometimes Lord, sometimes Master,
sometimes Sir: but this reaches not to the style in my Text, which is to be
taken in a religious and Theological sense, being given unto the Lord of the
Vineyard, who (as you have heard) is God himself; and to him, this style of
Lord primarily, properly, and principally, belongs. And so it is attributed to
the whole Trinity, or to the second Person only, in the Trinity, (as Romans
14.9.) So our Lord, as to protect and save, Romans 14.9, 29. Psalm. 110.1
ver. 29. And it sets forth his absolute power, and sovereignty over all
Creatures, Psalm. 110.1. Indeed it is a Problematicall and disputable thing,
Whether God could be called Lord before there were any Creatures. Tertullian
denies absolutely, that he could be called Lord, till then: St. Augustine is
more modest, Non audeo dicere, I dare not say that he was not, but he does not
affirm that he was: However, as the name (...) answers to Jehovah in Hebrew, It
is not only the name of Relation, but the name of Essence and Eternity; and so
it is a Name too great to be clasped in the narrow Palm of our Apprehensions.
The name here is a name of Relation, and in that respect, the Dresser terms Him
Lord.]

From the Letter of the Parable someting may be profitably noted; This Servant
gives his Master this style, Lord: So then,

Reverend Names and Titles should be given to our Superiors: Number. 11.28. 2
King. 5.3 Ver. 23. Genesis 37.35 Mat. 21.30 1 Pet. 3.6. Genesis 18.12.
as Numb. 11.28. 2 King. 5.3. and Naaman's other Servants styled him Father,
ver, 23. Children have used the like to Parents, Genesis 31.35. Let it not
displease my Lord (said Rachel) that I rise not before him: So Math. 21.30. I
go Sir; the same word is there, that is in my Text: So Wives to their Husbands,
have given the same Title of Honor; 1 Pet. 3.6. and the Apostle found it so,
as we may see Genesis 18.12. And she is therein propounded as an example for all
good Women to follow; In other Relations I might show this, but that it is not
the point I intend to insist upon; albeit it is a Point that might very
profitably be pressed in this unmannerly Age, wherein matter enough is
administered unto us to cause us all to turn Quakers; (I mean not, to be of the
Opinion of that rule and unmannerly Sect, who will know, neither Father, nor
Mother, Master, nor Mistress, nor any Superior; so as to give them civil
Reverence; but) for the growth and toleration of such rudeness, it is enough
to make our hearts to quake, considering what it does presage, Isa. 3.5, 6, 7,
8. But we come to the sense spiritual: Isa. 3.5, 6, 7, 8.
And so we learn, that

The Lord of the Vineyard is Lord Paramount:

I am the Lord, Isa. 4.2.8. Gerherd. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Timothy 6.15 Reason.
Act. 4.24. Ps. 100.3.
this is my name, and my Glory I will not give unto another, Isa. 4.2.8. It is
a Title, that is attributed unto God, more than a thousand times (says one),
nor is there need to stand long on the proof of this, See 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians.
4.5. where he is called (...), the one or Only Lord, 1 Timothy 6.15. Lord of Lords.

He is the only Lord in respect of Creation, so he is the Lord our King, Act.
4.24. he made all his Subjects, yea, the Subjects of all other Lords; yea, he
made all other Lords, and that our of nothing: Psalm. 100.3. It is he that has
made us, and not we our selves; yea, he made every part of us, and we are not
any part nor piece of our selves. Romans 9.21
The Potter has power and dominion over that Pot because he made it; but his
dominion over the Pot of Clay which he made, is not so Absolute as God's
dominion over Man. The Potter's Dominion is a Dominion of Art not of Creation;
for although he made the Pot, yet he made not the Clay whereof the Pot was
made; he has power over the Clay to annihilate the work of his hands, that is,
to destroy the form and shape that he did put upon that Pot, but he cannot
annihilate the Clay as God can do; that is the work of his hands.

Secondly, As God is the Lord Creator, so he is the Lord Protector, the general
Preserver, of all that he has made, Psalm. 36.6. Thou preservest man and beast;
Psalm. 36.6. Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3.
Col. 1.17. He is before all things, and in him all things subsist; and Heb.
1.3. He bears up all things by his mighty power. Should this great Supporter
withdraw (but for a moment) his protecting and preserving power, the whole
World would in the twinkling of an Eye come to nothing. It is true, that in a
building one stone upholds another, but it is the Foundation that upholds all:
So all the parts of a Commonwealth uphold (as they ought) one another in
Policy; All the Members of the Church uphold one another in Charity; The
Members uphold the Body, the Body the Members; But it is thou, O Lord, that
upholdest us all in Mercy.

Thirdly, He is the only Lord, in regard of his Judiciary Office and Power,
which makes him Lord, chief Justice through the whole World, Psalm. 9.7. The
Lord has prepared his Throne for Judgment, for He shall Judge the World with
Righteosnesse, Psalm. 9.7.
and the People with Equity; St. Paul appealed from Felix and Festus to Caesar
Augustus, Acts 25.10. Yea, and from them, Act. 15.10. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. 1 Samuel
24.22, 16. 1 Pet. 2.23.
and all other men he appealed to God, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. He that Judges me is the
Lord: So David appealed from King Saul to this Judge, who is the Lord of all, 1 Samuel 24.13, 16. and Christ himself committed his Cause to Him, 1 Pet. 2.23. But
there is no appeal from: In His sentence all must rest, as being the supreme
Judge of all, and by whom all Judges shall be Judged. All these three you have
in one verse, Isa. 33.22.
Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King, and He will save us.

Princes and Potentates upon Earth, Lord of all Lords and King of all Kings;
and cause them to cast their Crowns down at the feet of their Supreme: Rev.
17.14, and 19, 16. Eccles. 5.8. Psalm. 145.3 2 King. 18.19. Dan. 4.30.
for be they never so high, yet he is higher then they; Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be extolled, and his greatness is incomprehensible ( says David,
Psalm. 145.3.) and so is not theirs, their greatness may be declared (so
Rabshakeh did his Master's, 2 King. 18.19. etc.) and Nebuchadnezzar his own,
Dan. 4.30. But in speaking of the greatness of this Lord, here is Magnus,
Magnus, Magnus nimis, (says Augustine) Great, August. in Psalm. 144.
and Great, and Great: he would fain (if he could) have told us how great, but
had he said Great, and Great, all day long, what great matter had the prophet
said? But saying his Greatness is Incomprehensible, he gave over speaking, and
left us to conceive what he could not utter.

Let man's Greatness, and Power, and Dominion, be what it will be, or can be;
yet it is not Independent: Domini sunt et Dominum habent, Lords they are, and a
Lord they have; still one above them, on whom they depend: As our life is
beholding to the Fruits, the Fruit to the Trees, the Trees to the Earth, the
Earth to the Rain, the Rain to the Sun, the Sun and All to the Lord, Hos. 2.21.
So it is here: Hos. 2.21.
The Child depends on his Father, the Father lives by the Peace of the Country,
the Country enjoyes Peace by the wisdom of the Magistrate, the Magistrate is
countenanced and waranted by his Prince, and the Prince himself is Ruled by
God, Prove. 21.1. Prove. 8.15, 16. Psalm. 75.7.
in whose hand the hearts of Princes are; still one looks unto another, but the
eyes of all look up unto the Lord: He gives to all, and receives from none,
nor depends he upon any one whatsoever, Prove. 8.15, 16. Psalm. 75.7.

Secondly, The Greatness and Dominion of man, is not absolute. He may not do
what he list without control, nor can he; he must look to be called to an
account for his actions (be he never so great), but the Dominion of the Lord is
absolute; It is lawful for Him to do what He will with His own; Math. 20.15.
A Sovereign Dominion He has over the Salvation and Damnation of men, Romans
9.21. None can call Him to an account, or examination with, Romans 9.21.
Curita facis? Why do thou so?

Thirdly, The Greatness and Dominion of man is not Universal and boundless; It
is listed and limited to some parts and corners of the Earth only, Act. 17.27.
Psalm. 104.9.
Acts 17.27. which bounds and limits they cannot pass, no more then the Sea can
pass hers without permission: Nor is man able to command the Host of Heaven,
nor the Sea, to obey their will: But the Dominion of the Lord of Heaven is
without bounds; He is a great King over all the Earth, Psalm. 47.2. Psalm. 47.2.
Not Lord of such a Country, Barrony, Signiory, Country, but in abstracto, most
absolute; His Lordship is Universal, over All. He is Lord of Heaven, the Owner
of those glorious Mansions; Lord of Earth, Disposer of all Kingdoms and
Principalities; Lord of Hell, to lock up that old Dragon, and his Crew in the
bottomless pit. Yea, whatsoever He wills in Heaven. Psalm. 135.6
Earth, Seas, and all deep Places, that does He, Psalm. 135. 6. He binds the
influences of Pleiades, and loses the bonds of Orion, Job 38.31.
Job 38.31. He can press an Army in the Clouds, and raise up an Host in the
Heavens. Judge. 5.20. He can blow His Trumpet, Judge. 5.20.
and cry to the dust of the Earth; To Arms! and an Host of Caterpillars or
Cankerworms will presently arise to kill and to destroy, Joel 2.6. He has an
Host in the Waters, every Wave is a Soldier, Joel 2.6.
every Fish in pay to this great Lord, and ready to execute his pleasure; Hell
it self is at His command, He raised up an Army thence, which He sent to the
firstborn of Egypt, Psalm. 78.49. Thus, his Dominion is without bounds. Psalm.
78, 49


Fourthly and Lastly, His Dominion is Endless; other Lords dye, and their
Dominions can have no further, nor longer extent then this present Life. Those
four mighty Monarchies had their times, and their turns, and their ruin, and
their fall, as well as their rise: But this Lord is Eternal, and of his
Dominion there is no end, Dan. 4.34. Psalm. 102.27. Dan. 4.34 Psalm. 102.27.
Psalm. 90.2.
From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God, Psalm. 90.2. Let not any one
(then) how great soever, Tyrannize over their Subjects and Inferiors; that
Caveat St. Paul gives to Masters, would be of good use to all others that have
Dominion; Ephesians. 6.9.
Ephesians. 6.9. Abuse it not, but remember you also have a Lord and Master in
Heaven, to whom you are to be accountable.

And from hence let us be stirred up, Exodus 20.1.
Exodus 20.1. I am the Lord thy God, and because I am so, see that thou obey me:
As for Inferior and Subordinate Authorities of men under Him, we must for His
sake submit our selves unto them, but not absolutely, only in the Lord, and no
further, 1 Pet. 2.13.
1 Pet. 2.23. This is so cleara Case, as that the Apostles made their very
enemies Judges therein, Acts 4.19, and 5.29. To deny obedience in that Case, is
not to resist Authority; Act. 4.19, and 5.29.
but to resist the corrupt Wills and Lusts of those that abuse, and exceed
their Authority: Power they may have over the Body, and outward Estate; but no
power have they over the Conscience; That, is not absolutely subject unto any,
but to God, and to other Superiors for His sake; It is not mentioned in their
Lordship, but in God's alone. Nor are we our own men, we are not at liberty to
live as we list, Liberinon sumus, Dominum habemus (says Chrysostom), We have
a Lord and Master who is over us, and whom we must serve, both in Life and
Death, in Living to Him, and Dying to Him, Romans 14.8, 9. And they are blessed
that do both, Romans 14.8, 9. Revel. 14.
Revel. 14.

Lastly, It may refresh the hearts of the godly, that their God is the Lord of
all; The Majesty and Soveraignity of the Father, King (said a Heathen) who
himself has no King: So let Him be my Lord, who himself has no Lord. Hear
what David says to his point, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that People that is in
such a Case, Psalm. 144.15.
yea, happy is that People, whose God is the Lord. It is a great happiness to
be blessed with temporal blessings, (such as the Prophet had before mentioned,)
happy are they that are in such a Case: but the chiefest happiness of all, the
perfect, the consummatory blessedness is in this, and only in this, that our
God is the Lord. Upon this our Sovereign Lord, we may rely; Him we may trust;
He has all Power in His hand, all is at His dispose, fear not; Psalm. 46.8.
The Lord of Hoasts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah, Psalm.
46.11. And so much of the Style that is given to the Owner of this Fig Tree.
Now in that the Dresser seeks unto Him, and to no other, it may teach us that,

The Lord alone is to be sought unto in our prayers, and by our prayers,

This course is warranted both by Precept and Example; By Precept, Psalm. 50.15
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in time of trouble (says God), Come unto me (says
Christ), and no otherwise to me than as to God, Math. 11.28.
who am both able and willing to ease you: Math. 11.28. And to this he directs
us by a form, Math. 6.9. And every one that is godly must do thus, Psalm. 32.6.
Math. 6.9. Psalm. 32.6. Psalm. 34.6. Psalm. 116.2, 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.


By Practice, Thus you shall find the godly have done, Psalm. 34.6. The poor man
cried, and the Lord (to whom he cried) heard him. Jehosophat's eyes, and with
him the chief of Judah their eyes, were up to God only, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
Throughout the whole Book of the Psalms we might show you (from David's
practice) the truth of it: So Ezra, Nehmiah, Daniel, all have done so; no
Instance can be brought to the contrary.

But we read of one in the Gospel that cried out to Father Abraham, Luke 16.24.
Luke 16.24

But what a One he was, and Whither he was gone, you likewise there may read,
Resp.
verse. 23.

Shall I need to render you any reason of this? If so, then thus: Invocation is
the highest branch of Divine Worship. Enosh men began to call on the name of
the Lord, Genesis 4.26.
that is, they began to be Religious, and Worship God, by calling on His Name,
(that being put for the whole worship of God). And Christ in one of His answers
to the Tempter tells him, that God only is to be worshipped with divine
worship, Math. 4.10. Math. 4.10.


Again, the Object of our Faith must be the Object of our Prayers, Romans 10.14.
that is, to him only we must pray, in whom only we believe; but this is no
other then God, we must believe in, I believe in God --. Romans 10.14.


Lastly, None can help as God can, Who is present in all Places to hear; ready
at all hours to help, and is privy to the secrets of all hearts; which he must
be that we pray unto. Nor can any help, where he will not, (as we have showed
you on that Parable, Luke 11. verse. 7.) No Child is up when He is a-bed: If the
Creator helps not, no Creature in Heaven nor Earth is able to succor us. So
then, None may be prayed unto, but such as can both hear and grant the thing we
crave; but none but God can do that; therefore He only is to be called upon.

This confuteth Pagans, Who cry to their Baal from Morning to Evening; Papists
who direct us to this He-Saint or She Saint in the time of trouble and danger,
1 King. 18.26.
and solicit them upon every special occasion; As in a common Plague, when
Sword, Famine, Pestilence, is upon us; In perils by Sea, in perils by Land, in
perils of Childbirth, in time of sickness, in time of all danger; for safety
of our Beasts and Castle, etc. as appears by Popish Liturgies, and forms of
prayers prescribed in their Manuels and Service-Books. But if we should ask
them where we should find many of these He-Saints and She-Saints that they
commend us unto, in the time of our need; See Parah. Fast. Friend p. 119.
would it not pose them? How many imaginary Saints have they in their Calender,
which are so far from hearing us in Heaven, that they are not there? and so far
from being there, as that they were never here. So far from being Saints, as
they they were never Men; but are either Fabulous Illusions, or (at least) but
Symbolical, and Allegorical Allusions. And put case they had a being on Earth,
and have now a being in Heaven: Is it not best to go where we may be sure to
speed? It is a strange thing (says Justin Martyr) to pray to Aesculapius or
Apollo for health, as gods thereof, when they were, and must needs be beholding
to others for all their medicines: or why should I pray to St. Nicholas for a
fair passage at Sea, when he that rebuked the Storm is nearer to me then St.
Nicholas? Or call upon St. Anthony for my Hoggs, when he that gave the Devil
Power to go into the whole herd of Hoggs, did not do it by St. Anthonic's
leave, etc.

But say they of the Roman Church,

And that is our comfort that we have such a one in Heaven, Who is Christ,
Resp. Acts 4.12. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John 2.1. Object.
our Mediator; and that not only of Redemption, Acts 4.12. but of Intercession,
1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John 2.1.

But it is a presumption (say they) in a mean Person, to come either to the
King, or to the King's Eldest son, without some other Intercessor.

It may be so (and want of good manners too), if we speak of Earthly Princes
and Suites; My thoughts are not as your thoughts, Isa. 55.8.
neither are your ways my ways.

Secondly, Admit the Proportion should hold betwixt the King of Heaven, and
Princes upon Earth; yet the Reason holds not; for we are invited to come to
Christ boldly, and by Him to His Father: The King of Heaven has commanded that
we should mediate only by the Prince his Son: Now, what presumption is it to do
as we are commanded? Nay, it is audacious presumption to go contrary to that
course that is enjoined. Has God commanded us to offer our prayers to Him by
Christ alone, and appointed him to take all Supplications, and exhibit all
Petitions unto Him, and will He take it well (think you), that we set up other
new Masters of Request of our own devising, or seek a way to the way, or use
Mediators to our Mediator? This God will not endure; For it is not only
needless and fruitless, but superstitious, and most sacrilegious; for it
robs God of a special part of his Honor, and wrongeth Christ in his Office
of Mediatorship.

Wherefore, the mediation of his Son: He only is Ominiscient, and knows our
hearts; Omnipresent, ever at hand, in all places, at all times; and Omnipotent,
only able to help us, and most willing likewise to do it. O blessed, and thrice
blessed be His Name, that has graciously invited us, and called upon us, to
call upon Him; and has not put us over to any such, as Papists fancy to be
Favorites: He is that Friend (spoken of, Luke 11.) who, when His Children were
in bed, Saints and Angels asleep, ye^, has His bed so near the Door, that no
sooner do we knock, but He hears; and, albeit He may delay us for a while, yet
He will not deny us; but will supply our wants, if we call heartily unto Him.
Let us therefore say as Jer. 3.22. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the
Lord our God. Jer. 3.22.
Thus much of the Persons Interceding and Interceded. Now we come to the
Request it self: Wherein (as we have showed) we have considerable, The thing
Requested, and the Terms or Conditions on which it is desired.

The Boon is, First, Specified [Let it alone], Secondly, Amplyfied from the
Circumstance of Time [This year also].

Let it alone, this year also. Text.
]

But why, Let it alone] Is this a favor? Israel, that He would Let them alone,
Hos. 4.17? And was it not in Judgment that Christ said of the Scribes and
Pharisees, (...), Let them alone, Math. 15.14? What means the Dresser (then) in
putting up this Request, (...), Let it alone? Math. 15.14.


Indeed, there is no greater Plague (out of the place of torment) then to be so
l^talone: God seems to say of such a one, as the Father in the Comedy of His
lewd Son, abeat, profundat, perdat, pereat; In which respect (says a Reverend
Divine), Dr. Sclater in Romans 1. verse. 26. p. 135.
If God should give me my Option, to choose the torments of Hell, with hope to
recover his gracious favor, or thus utterly to forsake me of His grace, and
leave me to my self; I would wish rather Hell torments with expectation of
deliverance, then thus to be left alone, and given up to the lusts of mine
heart. This (then) cannot be the meaning; Let it alone, leave it to it self:
But let it alone, that is, hurt it not, destroy it not, suffer it a while
longer to stand; suspend the sentence denounced against it, spare it, 2 King.
4.27. Judge. 11.37. Job 7.19, and 10.20.^
and so we find the word used often, as 2 King. 4.27. Judge. 11.37. Job 7.19,
and 10, 20.

In that this Dresser does not crave a reversing of the Sentence, nor does He
absolutely sue for pardons; He only desires a Reprieve, are spit of execution,
and that upon Composition; [ Let it alone this year also, till I shall digg
about it and dung i^, etc.] From thence we obse^ve that,

It is as great a favor as can be expected or defired for a sinner, to be a
while longer spared: Or,

To be let alone, and spared a while longer, is as great a mercy as can be
desired on a sinner's b^half.

This is all that the Dresser did desire, or could have any hope to obtain from
the hands of the Owner: that, now after three years fruitless standing in the
Vineyard, and Sentence passed against it for its barrenness; a reprieve may be
granted for it, and one year more cast in, ex abundanti.

For the further Confirmation of this Doctrine, take notice. First, that the
godly themselves have craved this at the hands of God, Job 10.20
and begged it earnestly as a high favor and mercy Job 10.20. Let me alone
(says Job) that I may take comfort a little. O spare me (says David, Psalm.
39.13.
Psalm. 39.13.) that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no more.
And this was that which Hezekiah with prayers and tears b^gged at the hand of
God, Isa. 38.3.
Isa. 38.3. and having obtained it of God, blessed God for it, verse. 20.

And this was all that the unmerciful Debtor did desire from his Creditor, as
you find in that Parable, Math. 18.26. Have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all.

Secondly, God's mercy in bearing and sparing an unprofitable People, ha^h
always bin acknowledged for a special mercy, Psalm. 103.8, 9, 10. Neh. 9.17.
Rev. 2.21. Reas. 1.
Psalm. 103.8, 9, 10. Neh. 9.17. And God himself aggravates Jesabel's sin, in
not profiting by so great a mercy, Revel. 2.21.

This may be further evidenced unto us, if we consider; First, Who it is that
spares; Secondly, Who they are that are spared; Thirdly, the Fruit and effect
of such a patient forbearance (if the right use be thereof made). For the First:

It is God that spares, Who is infinitely Holy, and hates sin with a perfect
hatred; and (being so) it cannot but disquiet His Soul, and vex Him to see it,
Isa 63.10. He is fretted with it, Hab. 1.13. Isa. 63.10. Ezekiel. 16.43. 2 King.
19.27.
as we read, Ezekiel. 16.43. Nor does He spare, through want of Information, 2
King. 19.27. The like may be said of every sinner. He is every where within the
hearing and the seeing of it; He sees all the abomination that is committed
under the Sun, hears all the Oaths, and Blasphemies, of those who set their
mouths against Heaven, Psalm. 73.9. Nor is He without Power to punish, Nahum
1.3. It is not for want of that, that He spares, Psalm. 73.9. Nah. 1.3. 2 Samuel
3.39. Isa. 40.15.
as David did the Sons of Zerviah: They were too strong for him; but we are not
so for God. All Nations of the Earth are but as the dust on the balance; but
as drops of dew hanging on a bough, the least touch of His hand will cause them
to drop into the b^ttomlesse pit, Job 36.18. And withal, He is just and true;
Job 36.18.
His Justice must be satisfied, His Truth magnified, as well as His Mercy.
Truth, That pleads; What is God but his Word? And his Word is, In the Day that
thou eatest, thou shall dye the Death; Genesis 2.17. Ezekiel. 18.26.
and again, The Soul that sins shall dye for it, Ezekiel. 18.20. Justice, that
ba^ks Truth, and urges, that, as God is true in his Word, so righteous in his
Works; And, shall not the Judge of all the World do right, Genesis 18.25? Now what
can be expected? Genesis 18.15.
can we think God should deny Himself, and eat His Word? Indeed, God is
merciful, bu^ what can mercy do, but step in, and confess that all that Truth
and Justice speaks, is right, Only it desires that the hand of Justice may a
while be stayed, and not strike the stroke; perhaps the poor sinner may find
out a way to satisfy both Truth and Justice, and so escape Death by means of a
Savior. Thus Patience and forbearance is as much as can be expected from God,
Who is Pure, Powerful, Just, Merciful, etc.

Secondly, If we take notice of the State and Condition of the Person spared,
It will appear to be a mercy: for what is a Sinner, but a condemned Creature?
Eccles. 8.11. Sentenced he is already, and that openly, (for it is Enarrata
sententia, Eccles. 8.11.
a published, a declared Sentence) only Execution is deferred; condemned he is
by the Law, which passed sentence on him, so soon as ever he was born, before
he ever saw the Light of the Sun, Gal. 3.10.
Gal. 3.10. Romans 5.12.14. And condemned by the Gospel too, for not believing,
Romans 5.12.14. Mar. 16.15 Joh. 3.18.
Mark 16.16. Joh. 3.18. (from which Sentence there is no Appeal to any higher
Court). Now what favor can a condemned man expect, or any Friend desire on his
behalf, more then a Reprieve? Great men could not obtain it from the hands of
their Inferiors; and if it be obtained upon much suite, that Execution may be
deferred for a few days, it has bin acknowledged for a high favor: We read
that in the days of Edward the sixth, in the Lord Protector's Expedition into
Scotland, of a Castle, which when they understood they were not able to hold
Out, and that their Obstinacy had excluded all hope of Pardon, they Peti^ioned
that they might not presently be slain, but have some time to recommend their
Souls to God; and then afterward be hanged: Life of Ed. 6. by Sir John Heywood.
This Respire being first obtained, their Pardon did the more easily ensure
(says the Historian).

And that is the third consideration, the Fruit and Effect of such a patient
forbearance, which is Salvation, as St. Peter shows, 2 Pet. 3.15. that is, 2
Pet. 3.15.
it makes to Salvation; It is the way to it, the means of it, and Argument for
it. Should God strike so soon as wickedness is committed, Who should come to
Heaven? Not one of us here present, Si statim puniret Peccatores, non haberet
Confessores. Aug. in Psalm. 102.
but long since we should have bin in Hell; (Had God bin hasty, to mark what is
done amiss, and have called us to an account in the days of our vanity).
Thousands have bin saved through God's patient forbearance: Not a Penitent
amongst us, but must acknowledge, that he owes his Salvation (in a great
measure) to God's forbearance and patience: And the great Clock of Time is
still kept going for this very end and purpose, that Salvation may be had, and
the number of God's Elect made up; A time of Reprieval is therefore granted,
(albeit Sentence be denounced) that, by using the means, a Pardon may be
obtained, (which God is ready to grant, being humbly and sincerely sought
unto); To which end he gives us his Word to direct us in the way; (The Church
is the place where Salvation is to be found, of it we must be made true
members, if ever we be saved). His Works he affoards for helps; His Ministers
are our Intercessors; All these accompany God's Patience, whereby Salvation in
the end comes to be attained. And thus you have some good grounds for the Truth
delivered, viz. It is a great mercy for a sinner to be spared a while longer.

O! then, Therefore has the Lord waited, that He may be gracious, and
therefore will He be exalted, that he may have mercy, (says the Prophet, Isa.
30.18.
Isa. 30.18.) where the Prophet gives the Jews an account, why the Lord
suspended his Judgments, and stayed his hand in not execu^ing those Judgments
presently upon them, Isa. 36.3, 13, 14, 16, 17.
which had bin long before threatened, and foretold (by Esaias and others) that
should befall them; and why, He yet a while longer spared them; the main reason
was, that he would be exalted in mercy, in his appearing to be gracious to that
People. This (then) is the Duty that God expects from us, and it concerns us as
much as any People under Heaven, with whom God has born not only three years,
but more then so many score of years (as has bin before showed you),
notwithstanding our manifold provocations.

The Prophet Ezekiel does notably describe the Patience of God by his laying,
first, on the one side, then on the other a long time together, Ezekiel 4.4.
First, Ezekiel. 4.4. Explained.
he was commanded (in Vision) to lie on his left side 390 days, with the in
quity of the House of Israel, portrayed upon a Tyle. repre enting God's
patience under the iniquity of the ten Tribes for 390 years (answerable to so
many days) ever since their defection under Jeroboam. Then, when that was done
(a Figure what God had done for Israel) he must turn him another while, and lie
upon his right side for 40 days, representing thereby God's bearing with the
iniquity of the House of Judah 40 years, verse. 6. Needs must this be very
troublesome; we cannot lie one night upon one side without turning of us; but,
O the Infinite goodness and patience of an Almightly God! who has lain so
long under the load of our Iniquities, and we so far from easing him by our
Repentance, that he is enforced (as it were) to ease himself by turning from
side to side; from Mercies to Judgments; from Judgments to Mercies; 1 Timothy 2.
proving if at any time, or by any means we would ease him of the load of our
sins (under which he complains that he is pressed) by our Repentance and
Amendment of Life: And albeit he has shaked this Land soar, Amos 2.13
with his turning from side to side; yet still he bears, so that we are not
utterly consumed, albeit still he is wearyed with our abominations: Who could
endure with patience, to be reviled to his face? boldly denied, horribly
blasphemed, but the Lord? Who would abide to see his Bed defiled, his Image
defaced, Children butchered, Goods spoiled, Word despised; but this patient
God? Let us then exalt him for his patience, and bless his name.

Yea, let every Soul of us take notice of God's Patience toward him in
particular, and magnify his name for this mercy; Think seriously with thy self
what thou were, when thou first came into the World; no sooner did thou
peep forth into the Light, but God might have sent thee into Hell: And how long
thou livedst without God in the World; yet God's patience has forbore thee to
this hour. How many provocations God has had from thee all this time? how many
Lies Oaths, Blasphemies, has he heard from thy foul mouth? how much
wickedness seen by thee, how many abominations seen in thee? yet he has gone
away (as if he saw not), and seemed to take no notice of what thou have said
and done, Psalm. 50.21. He has held his peace, Psalm. 50.21. Isa. 42.14.
and bin still, and refrained himself, Isa. 42.14. Yea he has hid thy sins
from the eyes of the World, and had a care of thy credit; for should he
discover what he knows by thee, thou could not but blush to look any
neighbor in the face; they would shun thy company.

Consider further, that when thou have gone on in thy sinful and impenitent
course of Life, so that his hand has bin up to smite, (his patience being even
weary with bearing, Jer. 5.7.) his long suffering has stepped in, Jer. 5.7.
and laid hold on the Sword of Justice, (as the Angel did on Abraham's) and
pleaded for thee; Lord remember that he is but dust; Genesis 22.11
It has pleaded for thee (as Judah did for Benjamin to his Brother Joseph,
Genesis 44.18.) and has prevailed so far, Genesis 44.18
as that God layes-by his Sword, and bears yet longer with thee: so that God
seems to say (as. Hos. 6.4.) What shall I do? Hos. 6.4. Hos 11.8.
what shall I do? and, Hes. 11.8. How shall I give up? how shall I entreat?
Mercy having got the Victory, causes God thus to speak, What and What; How and
How?

Thus God has borne with thee, not three years only, but 30, 40 years, or
more: he might have blasted thee in thy spring, but he has spared thee to thy
Autumn, let not thy loo^enesse bring thee to the Fall of the leaf. What is this
year but the time of thy Reprieve; and not barely so, but in mercy affoarded
unto thee, that thou may get thy pardon, which (if thou be not wanting to
thy self) may be obtained. Say then (as, Mich. 7.18.) Who is a God like unto
thee, Mich. 7.18
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he deligheth in
mercy. And confess with the Church, Lament. 3.22. Lament. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fayl not.

But how few are there, that do make use of God's Patience? Some, instead of
magnifying Him for it, make bold to question His Justice, in bearing so long
with evil Doers: This was Jeremiah's fault, Jer. 12.10. and David's, Psalm.
73.12, 13. Jer. 12.10. Psalm. 73.12, 13.
and from thence he concluded (very rashly) as if he had cleansed his heart in
vain, etc. But this is a great wickedness so to accuse God: Put case a State
should deferr the Execution of a great offender, apprehended and condemned,
Would it be well taken, if any of us should condemn that State, or that Council
of Justice, for so do doing? There may be just cause, as of Reprival of a
condemned Person, so of sparing a condemned sinner.

Sometimes an Offender is spared in regard of some use that is to be made of
him; It may be, to be the Executioner of some other; so God may spare the
wicked for this end, that they may be as wisps or rods to scour and chastise
his own. Thus Ashur was spared for a time, and was sent against a dissembling
Nation, Isa. 10.5, 6. God used him as the rod of his ange^, Isa. 10.5, 6.
and staff of his indignation. Sometimes God has some good work to do by them
for his Church and People: Cyrus was an ambitious man, a very Pagan, one that
knew not God, and yet he is termed God's anointed, and God does promise to
assist him in that work he set him about for the good of his People, Isa.
45.1.2. Isa. 45.1, 2.


Sometimes, Offenders are spared in respect of the Birth that they travel with;
so a Woman with child (that is condem^ed) is Reprieved till she be delivered;
(for however she be wicked, yet the Child in her womb may prove a profitable
member to the Commonwealth). So many a wicked man is with child with some sin,
and in travel with mischief, and the Lord spares him, till he be delivered of
it. Herod, Pontius Pilate, and Judas were in travel till they had put Christ to
Death, and God spares them till they had brought forth, Acts 4.27, 28.
Acts 4.27, 28. And then the Law is executed on them.

Sometimes an Offender is spared upon the Petition and desire of some other
made on their behalf; so God spared the wicked for some good men's sake who
lived amongst them, Genesis 18.32 Exodus 32.24. Act. 27.24.
(as, Genesis 18.32. and Exodus 32.14. Acts 27.24.) So here in my Text, the
Fig Tree is spared upon the Interssion of the Dresser.

Sometimes an Offender is put off from the Session to the Assizes; God Almighty
suspendeth and deferreth the just, and deserved punishment of the wicked, to
inflict it upon them in time, and place, more convenient for his Glory, their
confusion, and the example of others: Thus the blasphemous miscreant,
Senacherib was not destroyed in the night when his army was, 2 King. 19.37.
he is suffered to return to the place from whence he came, and there he shall
be slain in the Temple of their false god Nisroch, by the Sword of his two
Sons, Adramelech and Sharezer, whom God used as his Instruments, to make his
punishment the more notorious, for his Idolatry and blasphemy, 2 King. 19.37.
And some men are put off to the great Assizes, 1 Timothy 5.24. Some men's sins are
open before hand, 1 Timothy 5.24.
going before to Judgment, and some men's they follow after.

And sometimes an Offender may be Reprived upon his Repentance, hoping that he
will become a new man, and serviceable to Church or State: So God spares a
wicked man upon his Repentance and Humiliation, as he did Ahab, 1 King. 21.29.
but (more especially) he spared his own Elect, 1 King. 21.29.
that they may have time actually to repent, and be brought into the State of
grace. Thus you see that there are many reasons of God's patient forbearance,
so that it does no way impeach his Truth and Justice: Therefore take heed, lest
any of you charge God foolishly, whom you ought to magnify, for his rich
patience, and great mercy in sparing.

As these sin against God's Justice (in respect of his Patience), so others
highly offend against the richness of his goodness, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness? Romans 2.4.
Many such unthankful and dissolute sinners there are in the World; so far are
they from prizing of this mercy of God, in bearing with them, that they despise
it, making the patience of God but as a fair day to ramble in, after lascivious
vanities; and grow more wanton by God's forbearance. The more patient God is
toward them, the more bold they are to offend Him; so we read, Eccles. 8.11.
Eccles. 8.11. Because Sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil, or
(as some read it) their heart is full to do evil; full of evil purposes, full
of evil imaginations, full of devices, for the producing of evil works; Their
hearts are so full, that there is no room for the fear of God's wrath, no room
for the consideration of their own danger, their sinful and naughty hearts
turns God's infinite elemency, to an increase of wickedness.

Should a Malefactor, after Sentence given, be Reprieved through the Clemency
of his Judge, and suffered to go abroad, and, upon his good carriage and
behavior, have his Pardon promised from his Prince; fall to his former
outrages of Robbing, and the like, is it not just that he should be caught
again, and executed without mercy? Such is thy Case, who thus abusest the
patience of thy God. Wherefore,

Be persuaded to make the right use of the patience and long-sufferance of the
Lord, as the Apostle directs, Romans 2.4. and let it lead thee (as it were by the
hand) to true Repentance: Romans 2.4.
Remembering,

First, How long God has trusted thee with his Patience, and given thee time
to make thy Peace, and sue out thy Pardon. Should a Traitor that is condemned
(as thou art) have a Reprieve granted him, for half so many years as thou have
lived (albeit he had no promise granted of a final pardon) upon his good
carriage and behavior; how thankful would he be, and how happy would he think
himself in that? Thou have a promise, that upon thy Repentance and turning unto
God, thou shall be pardoned and forgiven. The means are prescribed, the way
showed how to obtain it; and it thou be not wan^ing to thy self, God will
not be wanting to thee. Would the Lord have showed all these things unto us,
(said the wife of Manoah if he were pleased to kill us), Judge. 13.23. Judge.
13.23.
So say to thy sinful Soul, God has spared thee thus long, exercised great
Patience toward thee; called upon thee, both by his Word and Rod, to repent
and turn: Would He have done all this, if He willed not thy Salvation, but
resolved thy destruction and perdition?

Secondly, Forget not how many have suffered for those sins that thou art
guilty of, long since; who had not that Patience showed unto them that thou
have had but were taken away, and carried to Execution, upon the very act of
their sinning, (as Zimri and Co^b^, who were smitten in the act of their Lust;
Ananias and Saphira in the very act of lying, etc.) and that, for any thing we
can say to the contrary, the first time that they acted that wickedness; when
thou have committed the same sin, and that of en^ and wi h as high an hand as
ever they did; yet thou live this d^y to hear thy self called upon, to amend
thy sinful life. Behold severity, (yet Justice) unto them; but patience and
long sufferance unto thee, Rom; 11.22.
Romans 11.22. Let that lead thee to Repentance.

Thirdly, In not making the right use of God's patience, and profiting by it,
thou despisest it; and in despising it, thou despisest Goodness: A nature of
such beauty and sweetness, that every one is in love with it: and, in
despising that, thou show thy self to be evil in a very high degree, and so
much the more evil, by how much he is the more good unto thee: Hear what the
Scripture speaks of God's patience and forbearance, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou
the riches of his forbearance and long-suffering? Where observe, First, This
(...), this Patience, and forbearance in bearing with sinners, is (...)
Goodness; A stream issuing from that native Goodness which is in God; or
rather from him, who is Goodness it self.

Consider then, in the second place; the Degree of this goodness of God; It is
not common but extraordinary Goodness, not penurious but bountiful, the
Riches of his Goodness; Riches in respect of the abundance of them, the stock
and store that you spend upon; and in regard of the usefullnesse it is riches;
which is the gaining of Souls, which is the Riches that God desires, Act.
13.41.
and labors for. Hear this you Despisers, and wonder; nay, hear it, and be
confounded, all ye that despise these Riches of God's Patience.

Lastly, In not making this use of God's Patience, thou do but farther harden
thy heart in Impenitency, and treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath,
Romans 2.5. that is, Romans 2.5.
thou bring a heavier weight of wrath upon thine own Soul: Look, as men of
this World are daily adding to their Treasure, so do such as despise God's
Patience, daily add to their Treasure, Wrath and Vengeance, which shall be
revealed in the day of God's wrath, and just revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God.

If, notwithstanding all that has been said, thou will go on in a sinful
course, and still sin against the Riches of God's Patience, thou may conclude
that thou have a hard heart (as the Apostle does of those), for if there be any
ingenuity, any remorse, in thee, these serious thoughts cannot but work upon
thee, and be an effectual means to bring thee to Repentance; and that, to
Salvation. Cruel Saul, plotting and practicing David's death, when he
perceived what an advantage David had him at, and how (more then once) he had
both power and opportunity to have slain him and taken his life from him, (but
did not do it, 1 Samuel 24.
albeit he was instigated unto it by Abishai,) was so overcome with this
kindness, that he with tears breaks forth into this passionate speech, Oh my
Son David! I will no more do thee harm because my Soul was precious in thine
eyes this day, 1 Samuel 26.21. 1 Samuel 26.
But God's patience and loving kindness toward thee, has exceeded all that
ever David did, or could do, toward Saul; He has often had thee at an
advantage (and so still has,) his Justice eggs him on to smite thee, at home,
abroad, sleeping, waking, etc. and yet he spares thee: Now, if Saul (a
Reprobate) was so overcome with David's kindness, as that he promised to do
David no more harm; much more should this great patience in God toward thee,
(notwithstanding thy daily provocations,) cause thee to relent, and so work
upon thee, as to humble thy Soul before God, and bring thee upon thy knees, and
cause thee to say with a broken heart, Oh my God! I see that the Salvation of
my Soul is precious unto thee; I will no more dishonor thee; I will no more
sin against thee, as I have done: Do this, and do it quickly; for know, that
albeit Mercy has bayled thee from the hand of Justice, yet withal, it has
undertaken, that if thou neglectest to sue out thy pardon, within a time
prescribed, it will deliver thee again into the hand of Justice. Thou can not
expect always to be born withal; It was but for a year that this D^esser
desired the Owner's Patience, in the behalf of this barren Fig Tree, and that
will soon come about. And of that, ( the Time desired, on the behalf of the
Fig Tree, whereby this Request is amplified) we are now to speak.

This year also]

As if he should have said; Text.
Thou have been pleased Lord, of thine own Goodness, to bear a long time with
this Barren-Tree, three years already; I know, that thou can not always
bear, yet upon my humble suit, spare it one year more; I^ is no long time I
crave, in the behalf of it; It is but one year, which will soon come about, and
have an end: respite it that time; It may be, upon better husbanding of it, it
will bear fruit, etc. That we may collect from hence, is this,

God's Patience has a Period;

For Proof, Amos 8.2.
read Amos 8.2. The end is come, I will not pass by them any more; that is, I
will have no more Patience toward them; Jer. 1.11, ^2.
So Jer. 1.11, 12. I will hasten my word to perform it, that is, to make good
the Judgments that I have denounced: And that Text should still be sounding in
our Ears, Ezekiel. 7.5, -- 16. An end is come, Ezekiel. 7.5, -- 16.
an end is come; Behold it watches for thee, Behold, it is come, it is come.

Shall I show you this in some Examples? We begin with the old World; A long
time God did bear with the wickedness of it, but it had a Period; an hundred
and twenty years were set it for Repentance, beyond which time it should not be
spared, Genesis 6.3. Gen ^.3.
Four hundred years shall the Amorites, and other wicked Nations, be spared,
till the measure of their sins was filled up, but those years being expired,
longer they should not be born withal, Genesis 15.26. Isa. 34.8.
Genesis 15.16. And there is a day of recompense, and a year of vengeance for the
controversies of Zion, Isa. 34.8. that is, the set time, wherein God will give
a full satisfaction, and retribution of the wrongs, that have been done to his
Church, in the destruction of their enemies: Nor is the year only, but the day
of Vengeance set. Mag. ^.18.
What God says of Blessings, the like may be said of Curses, from the 24th day
of the 9th Month; So from such a day of such a Month I will not spare you; yea,
to less than a day, to a Morning is the bounds set, Hos. 10.15
Hos. 10.15. and there is an appointed time, the year, the month, the day,
wherein he will judge the whole World in righteousness, Act. 17.31. Act. 17.31.


Should God always beat with Sinners, Exodus 34.7. Jer. 44.2. -- Exodus 20.5
Deuteronomy. 4.26 Psalm. 50.21 Mal. 3.15.
which by no means will endure, that the wicked should be held as Innocent,
Exodus 34 7. Jer. 44.2, --

He is a Jealous God, Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 4.26. Now, should God perpetually bear
with sinners, it would be a disgrace unto him, His Jealousy will not endure,
that sin should ever go unpunished, Psalm. 50.21. Mal. 3.15.

He is a most wise God; God only wise 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 1.17. Jer. 51.9.
Isa. 1.5.
Albeit he bears, and spares, and shows mercy to sinners, it is ever moderated
with Wisdom; He forbears as long as there is Hope, Jer. 51.9. but when men
become incurable, his Wisdom will not suffer him to bear any longer, Isa. 1.5.

He is a Good God; and being good, he must needs love goodness, and hate Iniqu
ty, Psalm. 45.7. Now, Psalm. 45.7.
God should not be good, if he should be ever Good to those that will never be
Good: His Goodness will not suffer him ever to spare those that hate and
despise Goodness; So we might show of his other Attributes.

Secondly, All the Liberty that God has given to man, is finite; yea, life it
self, Job. 7.1. Is there not an appointed time for man upon Earth, and are not
his days the days of an Hireling? Job. 7.1.
As his Days, so his Sins (likewise) are limited and bounded; They have their
measure to fill up, beyond which they shall not pass^, Mat. 23.32. 1 These.
2.16. Mat. 23.32


You may see by this, how vain the hopes are of such as think always to
escape, because they have been, and are, a long time spared: Forbearance of
Punishment is no Argument of Impunity; God's Judgments are sure though they be
late, and though he bear long, yet he will not always forbear. Sometimes his
Patience allows Iniquity a shorter breathing, sometimes a longer; yet, be it
longer or shorter, the end will come, he will spare no more. Nor does God allow
so long a time ^o sinners under the Gospel, as he did under the Law: The Fruit
that enjoyes the warm beams of the Sun, and has the reflection of them, from
the Wall whereto the Tree is fastened, is sooner ripened than that which grows
in the shade; so is Virtue and Vice, now under the warm Sunshine of the
Gospel; and when thy Fruit is come to its ripeness, Amos 8.2.
it shall be plucked for the Market, Amos 8.2. God will not suffer it to shead
and drop down without plucking. You do not read, that the sins of Israel and
Judah (for which they were at any time plagued with Captivity) were so long in
ripening as the Sins of the Canaanites, upon whom there did no light shine. And
now, that the Grace of God has appeared, (as we read Tit. 2.11.) the Lord is
far more quick and peremptory, Tir. 2.11.
in rejecting and casting off a wicked People, than he was formerly (says a
Reverend Divine); Dr. Preston
He will not wait so long as he was wont: but, be it longer or shorter, there
will be an end of his waiting, and he will wait no more upon thee, and the end
is near; and then the Sentence of Mercy failing, the Sentence of Judgment shall
take place. Therefore be persuaded to make good use of the present time, you
not knowing how short the time may be, before the end comes: You would think
that Malefactor desperate, that would swear, and swagger, and revell it, at the
foot of the Gallows, because there are some few Rounds of a Ladder betwixt his
Neck and the Rope: So desperate art thou, that wilt go on in a sinful course,
knowing the end will come, but because the end is not yet come, thou runnest on
in a sinful course, to the increasing of thy future condemnation: And so much
of the Circumstance of Time. Now for the End or A^me of the Dresser in making
this Request, in general,

Till I shall digg about it, Text.
and dung it,]

Had the Dresser of the Vineyard aimed at himself, or his own ease, he would
not have made this Request, in the behalf of the Fig Tree; he might have
thought, that if in case it were cut down, or stubbed up, his pains would be
the less; that care of digging, and dunging it, had been over, and that then
he might take his ease: But it was the good of it that he desired, more than
his own gain; so that it might stand one year longer, he would renew his pains,
and double his diligence about it, in hope of future fruitfulness. Thence
observe (in general),

Faithful Ministers seek not themselves, but the good of those committed to
their charge.

What an opportunity had Moses to desert and leave the People which God
committed to his charge; Let me alone (says God) that my wrath may wax hot
against them, Exodus 32.10.
and that I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation, Exodus
32.10. but he would not be hired, nor biased; no, not by God himself, to give
up that People, and forsake them; (albeit they were very stubborn, and
rebellious, and ungrateful, to God and him,) but desires God to pardon them,
and either blot the Peoples sins out of his Book, or his name out of it, ver.
32.

St. Paul was such another; he sought more his People's good than his own
profit or Salvation: I seek not yours but you, (says he 2 Cor. 12.14) not your
Gold, but your Souls; 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. Animas pro opibus, salutem pro auro
quaerebat Apostolus: Sarcerius in loc. Hinc discant universi Pastores quid
Eccl^ siis suis d^beant. Calv. 1 Cor. 10.33. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 27. 1 These. 2.8
Romans 9.3. 1 Cor. 11. 1 John 8.50, Romans 15.3
and I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, ver. 15. I will spend the
Talent which God has betrusted me withal, and be speat in the spending of it,
that I may further your Salvation; So again 1 Cor. 10.33. I please all men,
that is, by applying himself to the good of all in all things, that is, such as
are lawful and indifferent; and so was content to make himself a Servant to
all, though free, (as he had said before,) that he might gain some, and save
the more, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 27. Nor did he aim at his own profit in so doing,
but theirs, even the profit of many that they might be saved: So careful was
he, that he seems to prefer their good before his own life, 1 These. 2.8. yea,
Soul's Salvation* Romans 9.3.

To the like practice he exhorts others, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye therefore
followers of me, as I am of Christ. He followed the example of his Lord and
Master, in that he did; for he sought not his own Glory, Joh. 8.50. Nor did he
please himself (says the Apostle, Romans 15.3.); that is, he sought not his own
ease and content, and satisfaction of the inclination of Nature (which
abhors pain, and the destruction of it self); but took such a course, which
demonstrated, that he sought our good more than his own.

You may from hence learn, to put a difference betwixt the faithful Minister,
not his own, but the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.4, 21*
and endeavors not to promote his own but his Master's Glory. They preach not
their own parts, passions, nor design; seek not preferment, wealth, case. This
conscience (said Melancthon) I carry about me, whithersoever I go: But do the
Unfaithfulse? nay, hear what the Apostle St. Paul speaks, Romans 16.17. They
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellyes. Romans 16.17.
And St. Peter tells us of some, who, through covetousness with feigned words,
make merchandise of their people, 2 Pet. 2.3. The Merchants were false
Teachers, such as he speaks of to the Philippians, 2 Pet* 2.2. Phil 3.18, 29.
cap. 3.18, 19. But these come to sell what He bought at so dear a Rate; and so
to cross his proceedings. They sell you; and that might be done, either by
Silence, in not giving warning when danger is near, and ringing the Alarm Bell
at the Approach of the Enemy, (so the City may be betrayed;) or by
Schismatic and unsound Doctrine, which poisons the Soul: O^ else by
flattering and feigned words (as the Apo^tle there speaks) crying Peace, Peace,
all shall be well; And so they fell you into the hands of Satan. And the
ground of all this is, their Covetousness; A Sin that is hateful in all men,
but most odious in such men, and sharply reproved Mich. 2.3, 5, 12. Ezekiel.
13.18, 19. Tit. 1.11. Such as these are, all unsound and unfaithful Ministers.
Much. 2.3, 5.12* ^^^k. 13.18, 19. Ti^* 1.11.
But it is otherwise with such as are Faithful; Merchants they are, and Wise
Merchants too, and they desire not to sell you from Christ, but to buy you, and
that for Christ; not with feigned words, but with their labors vigilancies,
painfulness, prayers; This is the price they willingly pay for you; and such a
Covetousness they have after your good, and Soul's Salvation.

Paul himself could not escape that censure, as appea^^ by that which he sp^^ks
2 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17. And therefore be ^^lls God to witness the truth of that
which he said, ^ Co^. 12.^ (...) 1^*25.
for their better assuranc^, which, ha^ it not been needful, (questionless) he
would not have done, ver. 19. Much less can God's Ministers in these days. If
we command, exhort, rebuke, Tim. 4.2. Tit. 2.15. then we seek to lord it over
God's Heritage, and take too much upon us, 2 Timothy 4 2. Tit. 2.15.
and would bring all in subjection under us: If we tell you of that Honor
which is due to Ministers, 1 Timothy 5.17. both of Countenance and Maintenance;
then, It is in our cause that we speak, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 9.7.
and Who will believe us? If they urge that Text 1 Cor. 9.7. etc. then they are
covetous, and seek yours and not you: If they call for their own, and that in
the most peaceable manner that they can, and for this end, that they may be
able to follow their studies, and provide for your Souls; then they are
contentious and covetous (when yet it is no Covetousness in you, to ask for
six pence that is owing; nor Covetousness in you, to ask for six pence that is
owing; nor Covetousness in any, be his Calling never so mean, (Tapster,
Tinker, or Cobbler,) to live of his labor). And shall the Minister be worldly,
covetous, or troublesome, in desiring to live upon his Calling? Something we
have said before of this, (and such Coleworts twice sodd will not be easily
disgested:) We pass now from the General to the Particular Terms, on which he
desires this Favor, Text.


I shall digg about it and dung it,]

By digging and dunging, some understand the Use of the Keys of the Church;
Doctrine and Discipline; both Manna and Virga must be in the Ark: If either of
these be wanting in the Church, one of the Principal Pillars will be wanting
that should support it; An Interpretation that needs not be rejected.

Others, by digging, understand the preaching of the Law, and by dunging, the
Gospel. By the Law, the Roots of the Tree are laid bare and open, the cursed
estate and condition of a Sinner is discovered and made known; and by the glad
tidings of the Gospel we are dunged and manured, our Roots are cherished, and
the Tree becomes more fruitful; which Interpretation is preferred: For (as I
conceive) the meaning of the Dresser, is, that he would take more pains in the
husbanding of that Tree than formerly, and leave nothing undone that belonged
to his Calling, neither in the Legal nor Evangelicall part of his Office: In
case there had been any neglect in him, which hindered the fruitfulness of that
Fig Tree, he would now amend that fault, renew his pains, and do any thing
within his power, that might further the fructifying thereof: And upon these
terms, on his part, to be performed, he makes that Request, that the Fig Tree
might be spared.

From this, (that the Dresser of the Vineyard promises to digg and dung about
the Fig Tree,) it may easily be gathered; that

Good Ministers are great Pains-tokers.

Their Calling is no Calling of Ease and Idlen^sse; It is no easy Profession,

There are four Beasts mentioned Revel. 4.6. which stood about the Throne; Rev.
4.6.
the first was like a Lion, the second like an Ox or Calf, the third had a
Face like a Man, and the fourth Beast was like a flying Eagle. These four
Creatures are interpreted by the Ancients, to be, First and principally, the
four Evangelists; and consequently, or by a just and fair accommodation,
enlarged to all the Ministers of the Gospel: Quatuor, Animalia, sunt Ecclesiae
Doctores (says Ambrose). All the Qualities of these Creatures must concur to
the Qualification of a faithful Minister; He must have the Courage of the Lion,
In Leone, vis indomabilis; such a courage must be in him, that neither fears
nor hopes should shake his constancy: In Bove, vis salutaris; He is to be an
Ox for labor, he may not be so overgrown or stall-fed, as that he becomes
thereby lazy; he must labout at the Plough, and plough the right furrow;
preaching for the saving of Souls, and not for the sharpning of Wits: In
Aquila, vis speculatrix, He must have, like the Eagle, both an open Eye, not
winking at the sins of his People, and a piercing Eye, being able to look on
the Sun; to the constant truth of God revealed in the Scriptures: In Homine,
vis rationatrix; A gen^e and persuasive disposition must be in him, 2 Cor. ^.20
2 Cor. 5.20. Such a holy gentleness and appliablenesse is to be in a
Minister; Such Qualifications and Endowments must be in him, which show that
his Calling is no idle Calling.

Those many Resemblances, that the Spirit of God uses in Scripture, to set
forth their Office and Calling, (...) 2 Cor. 2 9. (...) 2. (...) 6
testifyeth no less. They are termed Watchmen Ez^k. 3.17. Laborers. 1 Cor.
3.9. Shepherds. John 10.2. Husbandmen, 2 Timothy 2.6. Harvest m^n. Mat. 9.38.
Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.5. Fishermen, Mat. 4.19. Builders, Mat. 9.38. 2 Timothy 2.5.
Mat. 4.19. 1 Cor. 3.11
1 Cor. 3.11. (and other such like.) Now, none of these are Callings of Ease
and Idleness, but of great Labor and Toil; the Minister's is no less
laborious, nay, it exceeds: In which respect, St. Paul questions, Ad haec Quis
idoneus? Who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2.16
2 Cor. 2.16.

Let us cast our eyes a little upon the pains of the Dresser, mentioned in my
Text; and it will appear that it is no idle man's Occupation, nor easy
Vocation, whatever the World thinks.

First, He is a Digger, and so no Loyterer; there is labor and pains in that:
And is there no labor (think you) in the work of the Ministry? St. Paul speaks
of his labors abundant, 2 Cor. 11.23.
not so much in traveling from place to place, as in teaching the People; So
Gal. 4.11. I am afraid of you, Gal. 4.11. 1 Timothy 3.1.
lest I have bestowed on you my labor in vain: So 1 Timothy 31. If any desire the
Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. A work it is then without all
question, and no sport nor play; And 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 5.17.
The Elders which rule well are worthy of double honor, especially those, Qui
laborant Verbo and Doctrina, Which labor in Word and Doctrine.

Secondly, From the Text, we may gather what kind of Labor the Minister's
labor is; you shall find it to be no leight nor easy labor; For

It is Labor renovatus, A renewed Labor. This Dresser had dug about this
Fig Tree, and dunged it, before now (without all question); but that is not
enough, he must over with his work again; Such is the Labor of the Minister.
In which respect, his Toil and Travel is paralleled with the Husbandman's,
who has no vacation: He is always doing; either plowing, or sowing, or
harrowing, or weeding, or reaping; Every Season of the Year brings with it a
several Task: And when he has gone his Round, and may be thought to have
finished his work, he is then to begin again, Redit Agricolis labor actus in
orbem.
and fall afresh to his plowing, etc. And so from year to year he renews his
Labor.

And in some case it is worse than the Husbandman's, and more toylsome; For the
Plowman, as he leaves his Ridge, so he is like to find it at his Return; where
he pitched his Plough, upon the same Furrow he shall have it the next day: But
we seldom find our work, upon our return, in so good a forwardness as we left
it. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 13.
Hear St. Chrysostom to this Point, Non sicut reliquae Arts, ita est Docendi
vis, etc. The Art of Teaching is not like other Arts; for the Godsmith, what
work soever he he frames, and casts in a mold, and lays aside; the next
day when he returns to his work, he shall find it as he left it: So, the
Blacksmith, and the Mason, and every other Artificer whatsoever, all shall
find their work in the same state as it was, when it was put out of hand: But
it is not so with us, for after we have taken great pains to reform you, to
wean you from the World, and to make you more zealous of good works; you are
scarce out of sight, but the Evil One comes, and, with the multitude of
business and cares of this World, or the wanton delights and pleasures of the
flesh, he choaketh that good Seed which we have sown in you, and makes the
Word which you have heard to become altogether unprofitable; so perverting and
corrupting you, as that our work is more difficult to us, then, than it was
before. And elsewhere he bewaileth this unto his Hearers; The Letters (says he)
that I inscribe every Lord's day, Hom. 11* in Mat.
you suffer to be blotted out again: And what excuse will you have that you are
not fruitful?

Over then we must with our work, again and again. A second, yea, a third time
we must come unto you, and stir you up by way of remembrance; Phil. 3.1. 2
Pet. 3.1. 2 Cor. 13.1. 1 Samuel 26.8.
Sin is not so easily killed, that we should say of it, as Abishai said of
Saul, Let me smite it but this once unto the Earth, I will not smite it a
second time. This Hagar will endure many blows before she be turned out of
doors: 2 Samuel 20.10. Josh. 6. 2 King. 13.
Nor are we so cunning as Joah was, in hitting Amasa under the fifth ribb, so
that we need to strike no more. We must compassed the Walls of Jericho many
days together; and smite the Earth with the same Arrows, five or six times,
before that Syrian, Sin, will be consumed and destroyed.

Again, The Work of this Dresser was Labor Duplicatus. a duplicated, or double,
Labor: Here is both digging and dunging of the Fig Tree; One without the
other was not sufficient. Christ's threefold Pasce, enjoined Peter (as some
conceive) to a threefold Duty; feed by Doctrine, John 21.15, 16. Pase. Verbo.
Exemple Scripto.
feed by Life and Example, feed by Writing. It is hard to say, that such was
Christ's meaning, but it is credible enough that the triple Pasce, given him in
charge, enjoynes at least a double diligence, Pray and Preach, or rather
Preach and Catechize: for Sheep and Lambs, must be fed. I magnify mine Office,
(says the Apostle) (...), if by any means I might save some, no pains must be
spared, no means neglected; Romans 11.13, 14.
more ways then one must be used to gain Souls to God; In so doing, we
magnify our Office as we ought to do.

Both these considered, it must needs follow in the third place, that this
Dresser's Labor, was, Labor cum sudore, a soar sweating Labor: Who sweats
more then they, who Digg and Delve, and Till the Earth? God imposes it on
Adam, Genesis 3 9.
and all his sons, that they should eat their bread in the sweat of their
brows; And surely, if Ministers eat not their bread with the sweat of their
brow, yet they eat their bread with the sweat of their brain. Ye remember
(says the Apostle) our labor and travel, 1 These. 2. -- 9. (...).
1 These 2.9. or our labor and sweat (as some read), Two soar words are joined
together; Nor does the sweat of the Brain come short of the sweat of the Brow.

etc.

As many in the World use that Calling, it may (indeed) be thought to be a
Calling of excessive idleness: But if we consider the Calling in its own
nature, and as it ought to be performed and discharged, it will appear to be no
Calling of laziness, but of greatest pains and labor. Melancthon was wont to
say, that the three soarest labors of all, were the labors of the Magistrate
Minister, and Woman in travail. Sudor Oeconomicus est magnus, Politicus major,
Ecclesiasticus maximus, Docentis. Imperantis. Paturientis.
faith Luther. The care and burden of the Governor of the Family is much; of
a Magistrate, more; but of a Minister, most of all. All Government is
burdensome, tam onus, quam honos. All Government is laid upon their shoulders,
they must help to bear the Church (as the Levit under the Law did help to bear
the Ark, ^ Chron. 15.2.) ^ Chron. ^^^^.
And that is load sufficient to make the back of (...) Angel stoop. Father
Latymer when he had laid down his Bishopric; skipt, and leaped, for that (as
he said) he was discharged of such a heavy load. Acts and Mon. Fol. 1578.


The Calling of a Minister indeed, is Spiritual, but no whit the less
laborious in that respect. The sufferings of the Soul exceed the sufferings of
the Body, (as appears by that which Solomon speaks, Prove. 18.14. and by what we
read of our Savior's sufferings, Prove. 18.14. Luke 22.44.
Luke 22.44.) So does the labor of the Soul, exceed all other bodily labor
whatsoever, which (although it be great yet it) maintains strength, preserves
the stomach, increases appetite, and adds vigor to every part; But it is
otherwise in the labors of the mind, they weaken the natural Powers, waste
viral Spirit, decay the health of Body, and shorten Life.

We read, John 8.57. that the Jews told Christ, he was not yet 50 years of Age;
true, he wanted al most 20 years of it, (being not much above 30), John. 5.57.
and yet (as it seems) by their speech they judged him to be much Elder: The
care and pains that he took to save Souls (think some) brought on him that show
of old Age: Sure enough it is, that the care and pains of this Calling hastens
Old Age on them, who, by natural temper, are framed to greatest vigor, and
fitted to extend Life to the utmost term of nature: And thence it is, that
(usually) such Ministers as are painful in their Callings, are weak in Body;
feeble in strength; sparing in Diet; and more subject to Diseases then men of
other Callings and Professions; So that (as Synesius sometimes complained) they
may truly say, they carry nothing away with them; but, bonam Conscientiam and
malam Valetudinem; A good Conscience, and a weak and crazed Body.

Inform others; First, of the right which a Minister has to receive
maintenance from his People, amongst whom he labors; Secondly, of the wrong
that is offered to the Minister, in withholding from him that wages which is
due unto him for his Labors. Of both, something shall be said, with all
convenient brevity.

That there is a maintenance due to them, who labor in the Word and Doctrine;
I think no rational man that does acknowledge their Calling, can deny; The
Workman (says Christ) is worthy of his meat, Math. 10.10. and the Labourer of
his hire, Math. 10.10. Luke 10.7.
Luke 10.7. And this is but equity; and this equity is illustrated by St. Paul
with many Similitudes, and multiplicity of Arguments, 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a
Warfare at any time at his own Charges? 1 Cor. 9.7.
Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not the Fruit thereof? or who feeds a
Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? Now, God's Ministers are he
Captains of his Flock: So then, as Soldiers have deservedly, their due
stipends; Husbandmen reap their answerable Fruits; And Shepherds receive their
Pastoral profits; So must God's Ministers have a recompense for their Labors,
answerable or agreeable to the work that is in their hands.

It may be, some may object against these similitudes, taken from worldly
things; because of the difference of humane matters, from divine. This
objection the Apostle prevents, and confirms the dictate of natural Reason,
with the determination of the Law of God, verse 8.9. Say I these things as a
Man, or says not the Law this same thing also? Verse 8.9.
For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the
Ox that treads out the Corn. The Argument is drawn from the lesser to the
greater; The mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4.
is not to be muzled; therefore, (by greater consequence) the Servants of God,
His Ministers, (the Oxen of his Spiritual Husbandry, who labor in the Field of
his Church) must not be muzled from enjoying just maintenance in their painful
places; That this was God's principal aim and drift in giving that Law, 1 Timothy
5.17, 18.
he there shows; and so else where, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.

Again, The Apostle evinceth this his Assertion, by an Argument taken from the
greater to the less, verse 11. 1 Cor. 9. Verse. 11.
If we have sown to you Spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall
reap your carnal things? as if he should say, The Minister lays our Spiritual
things to his People, and provides for their Souls, wherefore things temporal
are a tribute unto them, and may not be withheld from them: Such is the
Apostle's reasoning, Romans 15.27. If the Gentiles have bin made pertakers of
their Spiritual things, Romans 25.37.
their Duty is also to Minister unto them carnal things.

Lastly, The Apostle fortifieth the Truth of what he had delivered, concerning
the maintenance of the Minister with an Argument drawn from God's Ordinance,
verse 13.14. Do you not know that they which Minister about holy things, live
of the things of the Temple, 1 Cor. 2.13, 14.
etc. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. The comparison lies betwixt the Ministers of both
Testaments; The Levites and Priests, merely in liew of their Labors in their
Callings, were well and plentifully provided for, by God's Ordinance; wherefore
it is an uncontrolled consequence, that the Ministers of the new Testament
(which is of the Spirit, and not of the Letter) should have liberal allowance
for their Labors.

Here steps in the Quaker, and others of the Anabaptistical crew, to interrupt
us, crying out of such Ministers as expect recompense for their Labors, that
they are Baal's Priests, Balaamitish Prophets, Preaching for gain, imagining
(as it seems) that God who has promised to reward his Servants in Heaven, is
not willing to allow unto them any repast in the way to Heaven, to support
frayl nature.

But freely you have received, freely give, is the command of Christ Math.
10.8. Mat. 10.8. Resp.


That is to be limited to miraculous cures, as appears evidently by the
Circumstances.

Secondly, Should it be extended further, the affection only is ordered, The
Labourer is worthy of his hire, verse 10.

Thirdly, Receiving freely and giving freely, are joined together by our
Savior; the former is made the cause of the latter? Therefore, they ought to
give freely, because they had received freely; Now, they received freely two
ways; First, without their own desert; Secondly, without their own pains and
labor, having their gifts by immediate Revelation, as appears, Gal. 1. 16, 17.
Gal. 1.16, 17.
We receive our abilities without our own desert, but not without our own
labor and industry; being brought up by our Parents to Learning, with great
cost and charge, etc. and in that sense we receive not freely; that talent
which we have received, is in part by our pains, and therefore we may receive
in part for our pains.

But St. Paul preached to the Corinthians and Thessalonians, 1 Cor. 9.15. 1
These. 2.6, 7. Acts 18.3. 1 These. 2. 2 These 3.8. Resp.
without receiving wages, 1 Cor. 9.15. 1 These. 2.6, 7. Nay, he labored with
his hands, that he might not be chargeable to the Church, Acts 18.3. 1 These.
2.9. 2 These. 2.8.

Many things are lawful in themselves, which are not expedient: It was lawful
for the Apostle in those times, to have taken maintenance of the Churches,
where he Preached; he had Power to do it (as he says, 1 Cor. 9.6, 12. 2. These.
3.9.): but in regard of the Churches poverty, and appearance of Scandal, he
forbore, 1 Cor. 9.6, 12. 2 These. 3.9. 1 Cor. 9.16, 18. 2 Cor. 11.9, 12.
1 Cor. 9.16, 18. 2 Cor. 11, 9, 12. But it is not with the Church in these
days, as it was with the Church then. Were exacting a due maintenance, a
burden indeed unto the Church, (in respect of the poverty thereof) Ministers
should do well to yield of their Right, and supply their necessities by Art,
Industry, or out of their own Possessions; but, we are seated in another
Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, (where we are not only sated, but
in a manner surferted with God's blessings), so that there is no fear of being
burdensome to the Church, in that respect.

Secondly, Yet even in these times of the Churches poverty, he received wages
and maintenance from other Churches, to do Service to them that stood in most
need, 2 Cor. 11.8. Phil. 4.16. But I shall forbear to spend any more in the
confutation of these brainsick Sectaries; 2 Cor. 11.8. Phil. 4.16.
who had more need of Physic to purge their brains, than Arguments to confute
their follyes.

There are others amongst us, who, albeit not possessed with an Anabaptistical
Spirit, as the former, (for they gran^ that a competent maintenance is due to
God's Ministers in equity and justice for their Labors), yet they are not
satisfied concerning the Quantity and Quality thereof: Or, of the Proportion
and Law, whereby it should be raised. For the satisfaction of both, I shall
speak somewhat. And first for the Quantity.

The Apostle speaks of double honor that is due unto him that labors in the
Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. And, 1 Timothy 5.17.
Who doubts, that the Apostle has respect to the maintenance of the Minister
therein? and that it ought to be liberal and subtable to that honorable
Calling, that the Minister is called unto? A beggarly maintenance is no honor,
but contempt to an Ambassador. He that Preaches the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 7, 13.
1 Cor. 9.7, 13. which cannot be understood, as if a bare sustentation, so much
as may preserve from extreme want, and keep Life and Soul together, were
suffi^ient; but, according to the Dignity and Convenience of the Ministerial
Calling, he ought to Live, and be maintained both with Meat, Drink, Clothing,
and other Necessaries. As the Minister is a Man, so something is to be allowed
him above mere necessity; something for delight: As he is a Believer, so his
maintenance must extend to Wife, Children, Servan^s, for present, and some
provision to be made for the future; else he is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5.8. And then they must live as Ministers, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and men of God ought to live, so as to be an example to others in works of
Charity, and be furnished to every good wo^k that belongs unto his Calling, 1 Timothy 3.2.
1 Timothy 3.2. Now all this cannot be done by a niggardly and pinching
maintenance. A competency must be allowed to do all this; But who shall Judge
of this Competency, is the Question.

Shall Ministers be made Judges in that Case? Shall they design a Competency,
and so be their own carvers? that is not fi^ting, nor will tha^ be granted: Who
then shall do it? Shall the People? Now good Lord (says a Raverend and Grave
Divine), Dr. Herrys Ser^on Hezekiah's Recovery. Page 35. and 27. Judge 15.
keep his Clergy from the Vulgars Competency; should this Competency be such,
as every worldly and niggardly mind will Judge convenient, Micha's wages ten
shekels of Silver, a suit of apparel, and meat and drink would be esteemed
sufficient for him, (let his charge be what it will be). Shall the Civil
Magistrate Judge thereof? and it wholly be left to his Discretion? But what if
he be not Religious? Alas, how often are they defective, either in Uprightness,
or in Wisdom, or specially in Religion? If ye look back to former times, and
peruse Church History, you shall not find it very usual to have Emperors,
Princes, Potentates, Roberts Revenew of the Gospel. p. 132.
and the great Men of this World, to be so sincerely Religious in performing
the parts of nursing Fathers as that the Ministers of the Gospel may expect
such honorable maintenance as is due to their Calling from their hands: How
then shall it be determined? Surely, the best determiner of this matter is the
Scripture. That part which God at first commanded, and was of his own
Institution for the Minister's maintenance; and which Custom in all Ages has
commended for the maintenance of the Minister, is to be preferred to any other
of humane Invention, and that is the T^nth part of the Hearer's increase, of
their Fruits of the Earth; I mean of theirs, who are committed to his charge.
This proportion has bin thought fittest by Him, whose Wisdom could best Judge;
and therefore should be submitted unto.

The other scruple that arises in the minds of men, concerns the Raising of
this maintenance, How, and which way it may be most fittingly effected? That it
must be raised out of the goods of All, and every one of the People that are
instructed, is evident enough from that of the Apostle, Gal. 6.6. Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that has taught him pertaker of
all his goods. But the manner of it, is questionable.

Some are altogether for Private Contributions, and Benevolencies, disclaiming
all right that any Minister may have in the goods of any man, further than he
himself shall be pleased to extend his charity unto him; nothing may be
claimed, ex debito justiciae; all must be of good will from the Hearer. 1 Cor.
9.7.


But St. Paul does challenge it as a due and just reward, I Cor. 9.7. The
Labourer's wages is not of Devotion, but of Duty. The Minister's maintenance is
wages for his work (and so no Alms), and that which of Duty belongs unto them
(and so not of Courtesy); Alms show the Liberality and Bounty of the Giver,
not any worth in the Receiver; They do always exceed the desert of him that
takes the Alms; But it is not so here, for Temporal 01 gifts hold no
comparison with the travailes of the Minister, 1 Cor. 9.11. Phil. 19. Dr.
Sclater Com. in 2 These. 1.3. Verse. 9. Quis enim vircutem amplectuur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas?
and that which he communicates unto his People, 1 Cor. 9.11. Is it a great
matter if we shall reap your carnal things? And the Apostle is bold to tell
Philemon that he did owe even himself unto him, ( Philem. verse. 19.) Base above
measure, (says one) and unbeseeming Christians, is this conceit, That the
Ministers maintaince is from Benevolence only, and ad placitum, to be measured
out by our Auditors; As if it had no foundation in Justice, but merely in
Charity. Those that would have Ministers to live on Alms, are no Friends to
Learning nor Religion; but seek the overthrow of both. The Ministers mouth
thereby is muzled; he may not tell his People of their sins, nor Judah of her
transgression, lest such Voluntaries become Malcontents, and tu n their
Benevolence into Malevolence, (as one truly speaketo). The good Benefactor may
not be reproved, Bern. on Ministers maintenance. p. 39.
lest he be displeased, and so that maintenance lost, whereof the Minister has
no other assurance than their well-pleasing: Many great M^n's Chaplains are
able to tell you, how miserable a thing it is to live at another man's
trencher. And, Who would g^^e themselves to the Study of Divinity, -- Miserum
est aliena vivere qu^^^^.
if no better provision were made for them than is for Fid ers, who play at
men's Doors and Windows for your good will, Sir.

Others, who think it unfit and dangerous for Ministers to depend upon private
Contributions, in regard of these manifold mischiefs and inconveniences which
must necessarily follow; do yet conceive it most expedient, that Ministers be
maintained by Competent stipends, which are to be made certain unto them, by
Authority of the Magistrate. But, What certainty can be in that, for which upon
every new Change of the Magistrate, the Ministry may be to seek? New Kings,
new Laws. The Magistrate, who should establish such Stipends, may be wicked;
They by whom it should be paid, very inconstant; They who should collect and
gather it, very worldly and covetous; which inconveniences such as live upon
set-Stipends (as in many of our great Towns and Corporations) find
experimentally to be too true; by reason of which uncertainty of maintenance,
God's Ministers can conclude certainly, nothing with themselves for their
continuance in any place.

Bendes, where such sett-Stipends are appointed unto Ministers, the^e is not
that due regard had to the prices of things, which continually rise and fall,
as Markets do. This year the price of Corn and Grains, and other Commodities
may be double, to that it was two or three years before: And when the
Husbandman, Tradesman, or Artificer, raise their prices (as occasion requires),
The Stipendary Minister is at his stint, and that Stipend which in a more
plentiful year would comfortably maintain him, cannot now find him and his
Family, with Food and Raymen.

Lastly, Whereas the ^ormer way of maintaining the Minister by Voluntary
Contribution, has some color from the practice of Christians in the Primitive
times; This of maintaining them in a Stipendary way, has neither warrant from
Scripture, nor any Precedent in all the practice o^ the Primitive Church,
either before, or under the be^ Emperors; and therefore is disclaimed as being
none of God's Ordinance.

There is a third way of ray^ing the Minister's maintenance, and that is, by
Tithes, or setti g out the Tenth part of all the Hearers increase; whether
Personal of mere industry, and negotiation; or Praedial as of grounds, etc. or
mixed, as of Cattle; And to this way ^he Apostle seems to have an Eye, in that
Speech of his, Gal 6.6.
Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, etc.

My meaning is not to dispute the Point, Whether Tithes be due primarily, Jure
Divino, by Divine right: B. B. Andrews Carlton. Montague. Dr. Reynolds on Obad
Willet. Fulke. Gardener. Sclater. Tusley. Sir. James Simple. Henry Spilman. Mr.
Eburne Elton. Roberts. Fenton. etc.
Enough has bin said, and written by diverse man of great Note in our Church,
concerning that Argument, (to whose learned Treatises I referr you). But this
know, that the Wisdom of God and His Church, both before the Law, and under the
Law, and now under the Gospel, has judged Tithes to be the fittest means to
maintain the Ministry; Many hundred of years has the custom of paying Tithes
bin practiced in the Church; yea, in this Church of England; and still orders
and appoints the same maintenance for the Ministry (till some better way be
found out, which for any thing yet appears cannot be, nor in all likelihood
ever will be).

It is the Speediest, Surest, Easiest, and Safest, manner of payment that may
be, (as very reason teaches us); and of all courses it is the least Subject to
alteration: for howsoever the prizes of things do Rise and Fall, and daily
Change; yet the things themselves change not; the Ministers Estate by this
means does always hold correspondency, and proportion with the Estates of
their People, in Cheap and Dear years, which makes his Living constantly
answerable unto the times, so that he comes to have a fellow-feeling of his
Parishoners prosperity and adversity; and is thereby occasioned to pray and
praise God with them, and for them.

But, albeit Tithes have bin ancient, and of long standing, and now grown gray
with age, yet it happens (as to the aged and decrepit) they are clean grown
out of credit, and lightly set by: And much is objected against them.

Where do we read that Christ or his Apostles ever took Tithes, or challenged
them (say some)?

To this it is answered, that a facto ad jus non valet consequentia, It was not
done thus or thus, Israel paid no Tithe all the while they were in the
Wilderness; nor did they for that time circumcize their Children, is it
therefore sound to say, they ought not to do it after?

Secondly, When Christ and his Apostles Preached the Gospel in Jury, all Tithes
were in the hands of the Pharisees, and could not by any color of Law be taken
from them; To them they were paid: And many years after the Apostles time,
Persecution and Scandal enforced the Intermission of Paymen, but the Right was
not infringed; For afterward, when God was pleased to grant a little rest, and
breathing time to the Church, presently came Tithes again to the Minister's
portion.

But does not our Savior task the Pharisees for Tything of Mint and Cummin,
Math. 23.23.
and brands them for Hypocrites for so doing, Math. 23.23?

For Tything Mint and Cummin, they were neither blamed not branded, These
things you ought to have done: whereby Christ signifies (not obscurely) that
this manner of Tything in kind, and without Diminution, (even for these small
things, and much more for greater), was in use even until that time, and was
Just and Lawful; It was their Hypocrisy that our Savior reproves, in standing
so strictly upon the doing of outward Duties (which were only a little costly
to them), but more weighty matters they were careless of; They were exact, in
that which concerned the Tenth part of their Estare, and no more; But they were
remiss in general, for just dealing with all other men, and in other matters
of the Law.

But we have heard (from you) before,

In requiring Ty hes, they seek not yours, but their own, more Ancient; and
Secondly, by a firmer Charter; for besides the divine primary Right which is by
assignation from God himself, they have a Secondary Right thereunto by Donation
and Grants for many hundrees of years, (and long before the Conquest) confirmed
by Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, and others, throughout all
Christendom, ever since the Christian Faith flourished.

Secondly, Nor may he justly be esteemed covetous, who asks his own; but he
is covetous (and injurious both) who deteineth the good from the Owner. Pro.
3.27. Genesis 28.
Judah exclaimeth against the Incontinency of Thamar but who was most faulty?

Thirdly, In calling for that which is devoted to God and his Worship, they
seek not your Riches, but your Righteousness; not your wealth, but your
well-doing; as Augustine ^peaketh in this very case, they seek the wealth and
happiness of your Persons; of your Estates; of your Posterity; and of the
whole Church of God: for all are endangered by deteining and keeping back the
Minister's maintenance, and he himself is thereby much wronged; which is the
second Particular that I promised to inform you of.

Needs must it be a wrong (and a great wrong too,) to withhold their dues; for
as much as they are part of the wages, which God has allotted them, for their
work. Hear what St. James, says to the Point, Jam. 5.4. The hire of the
Labourer, Jam. 5.4.
which is kept back by fraud, cries in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, which
Phrase is used in heinous and horrible sins; No sin but comes before the Lord,
etc. yet, to note the horror and hey nousnesse of some sins, above other, the
holy Ghost is pleased to use this expression, that they cry unto the Lord, (as
did Cain's blood Genesis 4.) And God hears the Cry of this sin, and has denounced
a heavy Woe against it Jer. 22.13. Jer. 22.13.
Woe unto him that uses his neighbor's Service without Wages, and gives him
not for his work. That Woe is a Millstone (as small a word as it is) hung about
the Neck of him that is guilty of it; yea, better a Mistone were about his Neck
than that. Now, (to reason from the less to the greater) then, If it be such a
crying sin, to with hold the wages of such as reap down the Corn in your
fields; and, if it lay us open to so heavy Judgments, to use our Neighbor's
service without wages, and not giving him for his work: What is it then (think
you) to defraud these spiritual Harvest-men of their wages, and to withold
from them, that which you are commanded, both by God and Man, to pay them?

There are three sorts of Persons that this concerns, most especially; by whom
the Minister sustaineth much damage in his wages: The First, are our Lay
Impropriators; The Second, Corrupt Patrons; The Third, Unconscionable
Parishioners, and Tythers.

The A^lenation of Church Livings, by Impropriations, is a great and crying
sin, the bane of the People, and the blemish of out Church (as one speaks
truly); for, whereas the whole number of Parish Churches in England and Wales,
Camd d. Brit. p. 162
at this day, is 9248; of them 3895. are impropriated says Camden.

I will not spend time about this, having spoken more fully of that sin
elsewhere. See my Exposition on Luke 10.15 p. 168.
I shall only at present acquaint you, with a passage or two, concerning them,
which we find in that Bill of Complaint which was put up to the Parliament, in
the days of Edward the VI. by on Roderich Mors, who bewailing the want of
Preaching in this Kingdom especially in such Parishes where the Tithes are
impropriated, has this Passage; If a man say to the Farmer, Why have the
People no Preacher, seeing you receive the Tithes and Offerings? They will
answer, We have hired the Tithes, of this or that Lord, who is the Parson, or
Vicar, and him we pay for them: Well then, I say unto thee, my Lord Parson, or
Vicar; Thou do* wrong to have Parsonages and Vicarages, to have the
tenth-Pigg, Lamb, Goose, Fleece, and so of all other things, seeing thou art no
Minister, nor Priest, of Christ's Church; nor do any office of a Parson or
Vicar, but poll and pill: What can thou say of thy self, my Lord Parson or
Vicar? Thou will say peradventure, The King gave me the Abbey, and all that
b^longs thereunto which was given him by the Parliament; therefore if thou
speak against my being a Parson or Vicar, (though I neither preach nor
teach, nor yet procure any to do it for me,) thou art a Traitor; ( For this is
the 13 Article of our Creed, added of late, that, Whatsoever the Parliament
does must needs be well done:) But how can you, my Lord Parson, defend your
self, if a man should bring this Argument against you, and prove you all
Thieves (that have Parsonages and Vicarages in your hands, and cannot preach)?
Christ says, John 10.1. Joh. 10.1.
He that enters not into the sheepfold by the door, is a Thief and a
Murderer; but you entered in another way, and not by the Door: Christ is the
Door; but you say that you entered in by an Act of Parliament, and that is not
Christ; therefore you are Thieves and Murderers. If this Argument be not
strong enough, What say you by this, All they that come before me (says
Christ) are Thieves and Robbers? But you came into the Sheepfold before
Christ; therefore you are Thieves and Robbers: To come in before Christ, is to
be a Parson or Vicar before Christ sends him; and you come in before Christ
sends you, (for he sends none to be Shep herds, but such as he knows to be
able to feed his Flock;) therefore he never sent you: for he knows you to be
unable to do that Office. And thus, to conclude, you are Thieves and Robbers;
For a Thief comes not but to steal and kill: Wherefore give over the
Parsonages unto learned men, and enter not into other men's Vocations, to rob
the Minister, both of his Office and Living, that you be not punished of God:
But if ye will needs be Parsons and Vicars, and carry away the profits, you
must have also the pains that belong to such Parsons as you be; Hear what
Almighty God says to you, my Lords who will be Pastors and Parsons, Ezekiel. 33.
It I say unto the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.
Thou shall die the death; and thou speak not unto him to keep the wicked from
his way, the wicked his own self shall die in his wickedness, but his blood
will I require at thine hands: Mark well Lord Parson, for this is spoken to all
them that are Parsons, and take wages for feeding of God's People and neglect
them. And so much of these: He has said enough; we need say no more.

Corrupt Patrons are the next that defraud the Minister of his wages; These
have consecrated things committed to them upon trust, and unto them is referred
the Nomination and Presentation of an able, and godly, and religious Clerk, for
the receiving and employing of those consecrated things which they are
betrusted with: Now, when they shall either, by secret Symonaical Compact, or
by pretense of Law, or by Force and Fraud, one way or other, be nibling, and
paring away, of the Revenues of the Minister; and reserve (either before, or
after, Presentation,) some part of that maintenance to them due; it is
sacrilegious wrong. If it were Sacrilege in Ananias and Saphyra to keep away
part of what they themselves had consecrated unto God, Act. 5.
when as (not consecrated) all was in their power; Is it less than Sacrilege
in these, to take from God what (not by them, but) many Ages since was given
and consecrated to God by devout men, for his Worship and Service, and
wherewith they are but entrusted? Were a man but put in trust with another
man's goods (by Word or Will), to see them employed to such or such Uses;
should he falsily ^h trust, Would not all condemn him for a godless and
graceless man? What may we think then of those, who turn their Patranage into
Pillage; Trust, into Treachery; defrauding God spoiling his Church, and
wronging his Servants, by seeking, in their Presentations, their own filthy
gain and lucre? I know there are those (who are Patrons,) so incorrupt, so
upright, and religious, that (I do verily believe) they would not for a World
have the guilt of this sacrilegious sin to ly upon their consciences; But these
are Black Swans, rare Birds; let all such as are so, be had in high account for
their Integrity. Corrupt Patrons are those I blame.

Such a one was he (of whom (diverse years since) I heard a very godly Divine
make this Relation) who having a good Living in his gift, and then vacant, (and
where he himself did dwell) had conference with a friend of his about it, and
desired him to think of some poor knave, that would be content to take a, set
stipend of 50 or 60 l. per annum, and that the Tithes (which were worth as much
more at least,) should be left to him to dispose of, at his pleasure: This
Friend being acquainted with one that used to read, here and there, Service on
the Lord's day (as he was desired) in the City; acquaints him with the motion,
which is very thankfully embraced by him. But to avoid the danger of the Oath,
(which was in those days given to such as were admitted into Livings,) against
Symony: The Patron must not be spoken withal, by his Clerk that he did
present; All was done; the Possession given; and Harvest being come, the
Minister (that poor Knave) understanding the worth of the Living, demands his
Tithes of the Patron: How (said the Patron)? Did not my Friend and yours
acquaint you with my mind? Yea, said the other, He told me that you desired to
hear of some poor Knave, that would accept of your Living; and that I was poor
all London knows; and whether I am a Knave or no, judge you: For I will not
stand to that agreement which I made with him. I justify neither, in what they
did; but yet I think that Patron was met withal in his kind; It was a just
punishment of his corrupt dealing.

In a word, the Unconscionable Parishioner or Tyther, who, either by mere
fraud, or open injury, without color of Law, or by pretended Customs,
Compositions, Prescriptions, Exemptions, or any other sacrilegious practice,
under color of Law, defrauds the Minister of his due, or keeps back any part
of his portion, cannot, in so doing, shield himself from the Woe denounced
against him, for so doing. We have a Custom (said the Jews to Pilate), Thou
must let Barabbas loose, Joh. 18.39
albeit he be a Thief and a Murderer; So, many (in many places) plead, we have
a Custom to pay little or nothing in stead of Tithes; and this Custom we will
hold, albeit you preach your Lungs out; (as if a Custom, that men have got to
robb God, would excuse them before God:) Be not deceived for God is not mocked.
Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 11.16.
If any man list to be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches
of God; So, if any list to robb God and his Ministers, we have not (at least
ought not to have) any such Custom, to robb our Father and deceive our Mother.

But are all Customs and Compositions for Tithes unwarrantable?

I say not so; but all unjust and unequal Customs are; As that,

First, It must be with the free and unconstrained consent of the present
Incumbent, and not enforced.

Secondly, That the Composition be reasonable and equitable; that is,
answerable (at least) to the present worth of what is redeemed or compounded
for.

Thirdly, That it be but for a time, and, at the utmost, that it determines
with the present Incumbent; who is but the Usufructuary, and not the
Proprietary, of Tithes, he has but the Use for a time, the Inheritance is
God's alone; Wherefore care must be had, that nothing be done by any Minister
which may be prejudicial to God's Inheritance, nor to the Rights and Liberties
of his Church: If care be not taken, within few Ages God shall have no Tithes
in kind to maintain his Church and Ministers, but all will be turned into
Customs and Prescriptions; For when the finger of Covetousness is once gotten
into that which is God's, upon a little continuance (if allowed), Covetousness
will think it has hold fast enough to pluck it wholly from the Church, nor
will it let go its hold without much rapping: To this purpose I have heard a
Scottish Lord should speak to one of their Divines, who condoled the base
maintenance of their Ministry, and pleaded for Tithes; You (said the Lord unto
him) have preached Tithes into our Purses, and now that they are in, you shall
never, with all your Preaching, pull them out again.

Within these few years, the general desire of this, and some other Counties,
was for a Composition with the Minister, concerning Tithes, under a pretense of
Peace and Quiet, both of the one and other; Minister and People: And what
should this Composition be? Why, for so much as the Soil would naturally
yield, and bring forth of it self, without the charge of Tillage or Manuring;
which is that you call the tenth of the Rent, or two Shillings in the Pound;
and that the Landlord allows: for in letting of his Lands, he so lets them,
as to pay that burden which lies on them; so does the seller, in making sale
of his, at any time, (for if that burden were taken off, the Purchase or Rent
should be raised accordingly.) This was generally desired; Petitions, with many
hands thereto, preferred; much money, in some parts of this our County, gathered
to prosecute the business: Non ignota cano.
And in all likelihood, that Petition had passed, had not diverse Impropriators,
then present in Parliament (in respect of their own interest say some) made
stop of it: Notwithstanding this, many Ministers (especially in this part of
our County, Ad faciendum populum,) willing to accomodate their People in their
desires, (as they had need, coming into their Livings upon a tickle Title,)
condiscended to their People's request, who now groan under the mischief of it,
finding it experimentally true, that the taking of their maintenance in that
way which is allowed and appointed by the Magistrate, for those who labor in
the Word and Doctrine, is the safest, surest, easiest, and speediest way (as
before was said): But still the covetous desires of many are unsatiable, and
think they are not low enough; they deal by their Minister, in their
Compositions, as we do by an Onyon, take off Pill after Pill, so long till they
leave nothing but tears in the Eye; Or else, if they promise payment (for what
they have compounded), they are so long about it (like the Schoolboy who is
about to receive his payment from his Master, so long in fumbling about his
Hole) that the Minister (like the Master), weary with long stay, had rather
forgive them, than to wait so long upon them, or send so often to them for it.

But, be it known unto you, that these and the like unjust practices, are not
only Injury to men, but Impiety against God. The style of all ancient Deeds
and Grants, belonging to the Church, run in this form, We have given unto God,
Mag. Chart c. 1. Capit. Car. l. 6. c. 28:
both for us and for our heirs for ever: To the Lord our God we offer and
dedicate whatsoever we deliver unto his Church (said Charles the Great). Now,
can you think it any other than what is said, to rob the Minister of his due?
It is Robbery, and that in a high degree; and such a Thievery that very
Heathens, and Pagans, are ashamed of: Methinks, if men did but seriously think
of the Curse denounced against the House of the Thief; Zach. 5.2.3. Mal. 3.3.
and more especially against the House of that Thief, the Church-Robber, that
sacrilegious Thief, Mal. 3.9. And of the soar and severe Judgments which have
been inflicted in all Ages, visibly, and apparently, on such Thievs; It should
cause their mouths to leave watering after Church-morsells. But (I dare say)
you think that I have been too long already upon this Subject, which in your
Judgments does not so well become a Pulpit; but if Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles have wrote so much, and spoke so often of this matter; it may very
well beseem the mouth of the Minister to speak in the cause of God, his Church,
and Gospel. But is there nothing to be inferred from hence which concerns the
Minister? Yes without doubt, and I will show you.

Peter's Chair is not to sit and sleep in; Qui Episcopatum desiderat, 1 Timothy 3,
13.
etc. (says the Apostle) He that desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a
worthy Work. Opus, non dignitas; labor, non deliciae (says Jerome). It is a
Work, not dignity; a labor, not a delicacy: And to Preach the Gospel truly, is
(as Luther sometimes spoke) little less then to raise up the rage and sury of
all the Country; and therefore, when one defined the Ministerial function to be
Artem Artium, and Scientiam Scientiarum, The Art of Arts, and Science of
Sciences; Melancthon said, If he had defined it to be Miseriam Miseriarum, the
Misery of Miseries, he had hitt it right.

And being entered into this painful Calling; let them see that they take pains
in it: We Preach against idleness in other Callings, and shall we our selves
be addicted to so base a sin? In so doing, what do we other then give place to
that reproof; Thou that teach another, Romans 2.21
do thou not teach thy self; Thou that preachest against idleness, art thou
an idler? In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, I have read that one
Preaching in Christs-Church Canterbury, (when men indeed were very backward in
Preaching) he spoke by a Prosopopeia to the Pulpit, after this manner. Oh good
Pulpit! how have thou offended the Cannons of Christ's Church? If thou were an
ambling Nagg, they would ride thee; if a Bed of down, they would sleep on thee;
if a good Garment, they would wear thee: Alas, good Pulpit, what have thou
done, that none would come near thee to Preach in thee? Shall any Pulpit in
these days complain against any Pulpit-man after that manner: when we have
more abilities, more knowledge then they in those Days? Our Pulpits in these
Days, are better supplied then formerly; Yet by the like Prosopopeia, we may
speak to the Table of the Lord, Oh! Holy Table, wherein have thou offended,
that thou art so little regarded; were thou furnished with delicates, for the
Body to pamper that, thou should be resorted unto, etc. But what is thy
offense? How, and with what conscience can such receive the wages, that do not
the Work? and require maintenance from the Altar, that work not at the Altar? A
sad Woe is cenounced against such, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.
Woe unto the Shepherds of Israel that feed themselves: should not the
Shepherds feed the Flocks? ye eat the Fat, and Cloth you with the Wool, ye
kill them that are fed, but you feed not the Sheep; Therefore, woe unto you for
your idleness and greediness.

St. Paul speaking in his own commendation, mentions his abundant labors, 2
Cor. 11.23. 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.23. Aug. Confess. l. 6. c. 3.
And indeed this is one of the greatest commendations that belongs unto a
Minister, that he is laborious, and painful in his Calling: This was that, for
which the Bishops and Martyrs in former times were so highly extolled and
commended. St. Austine tells us of St. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, that he
heard him preaching the Word of Truth unto the People, Omni Dominico, Every
Lord's Day: And Possidonius writes of St. Austin, Bishop of Hippo, that he
taught and preached privately and publicly in the House and in the Church,
after the practice of St. Paul, by the space of three years, not ceasing to
warn every one Night and Day with tears. And by the Homilies or Sermons of the
Fathers it appears, that they did often Preach Daily without intermission unto
the People: Chrysostom begins many of his Sermons with his (...), Yesterday,
this and this I taught you. See Mr. Boltons sure and perpetual guide. page 205.
Bernard concludes with his Cras, To morrow I will show you, etc. They preached
in the afternoon, as well as in the forenoon, as appears in Basill's second
Homily upon the six days work: and sometime by Candlelight, as appears by the
note which Chrysostom has on 1 These. 5.17. where he fetches a Similitude
from the L^mp that he was preaching by. I might add to these the indefatigable
pains of the men of God of latter times, as of Luther, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, Bucer, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Jewel, with diverse others; all
which are very diligent and laborious in their Ministerial employment, to their
eternal praise: But as we read of the Duke of Urbin's Painter, who being
commanded to dr^w the shape of Paul and Peter, he drew the faces of them
somewhat redd: And being asked the reason of it, answered, that they indeed
were somewhat pale with preaching often; but were they now alive, they would
blush to see the laziness of their Successors: So it may be said of those
Worthes abovementioned, (whom some so often have made mention of in their
monthly and quarterly Sermons), Were they alive, they would blush to hear their
names mentioned by such, as yet condemn their Practice by their idleness and
sloth. Let the shame lie upon the Romish Clergy, but let us of the Reformation
(as we are called), give attendance to Reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 4.2.
to Exhortation, and Doctrine, and Preach the Word in season, and out of
season, as we are required, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 4.2.

Chrysostom's refreshment, his Auditors gain so refreshed him, Chrysostom. ad pop.
Hom. 9.
as to take away all sense of pain in Preaching; But, on the other side, then
is our Ministry a toylsome work indeed, when after a great deal of soar
labor, our People remain still stubborn and obstinate: The hardness of our
labor is not so grievous to us, as the hardness of your hearts; Let us
therefore be refreshed by your obedience, this is that which puts Life and
Spirit in us. And so we pass from this, and come to the Particulars promised
by the Dresser.

I shall Digg about it. Text.
]

By this Digging, may be safely understood the Legal part of his Ministerial
function, which stands in the discovery of man's cursed Estate by Nature: Look
as the Spade being rightly used, discovers the Root that is within the Ground;
and by taking away the Earth that is about it, lays it open and bare, and fits
and prepares the Earth to receive moisture for its nourishment; So by the
Preaching of the Law, comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 7.7, 9.
The naughty heart of man is discovered, all Pleas for sin are removed, and the
Soul thereby becomes fitted and prepared to receive the moisture of Grace. Thus
understanding the meaning; let the Observation be this.

Digging is one part of the Ministerial function; An effectual discovery of
sin, and laying open of man's natural estate is a principal part of the
Minister's Office.

Cry aloud (says God to Isaiah), spare not, Isa. 58.1.
lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People their transgressions, and
the House of Jacob their sins, Isa. 58.1. Cry aloud, let it be done feelingly,
and with affection, spare not; Let it be without any partiality, Lift up thy
Voice like a Trumpet; Let it be done Zealously and Vehemently. Show my People
their transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins, and that plainly and
particularly. In this manner God has commanded his Servants to reprove sin,
and lay it open. Affectionately, Impartially, Zealously and Particularly; The
like Charge is given to Ezekiel, Cap. 16.2. Son of Man, cause Jerusalem to know
her abominations. Ezekiel. 16.2.
And that we may not think that this was required only of those who lived
under the Law; you shall find the like enjoined to Ministers under the Gospel:
I Charge thee before God, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, Who shall Judge the quick and the dead at His
appearing, and in His Kingdom: Preach the Word; be instant in season, and out
of season, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort with all longsuffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy
4.1, 2. Where observe, that this Duty of our Ministry is twice pressed upon
us, Reprove, Rebuke; and then we must be Instant in it, or (as the word
signifies) stand much upon it, or closse to it; (...).
And this is imposed with a sad and dreadful adjuration; I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou do this, etc. as if he should say,
Thou can never answer it to God, and to Jesus Christ at the Day of Judgment
if thou do it not. And thus, for our Example, did the Prophets, Apostles, and
Christ himself, 1 King. 18.18. Hos. 5.1. Luke 3.19. Math. 3.7.
the Lord of all, discover and lay open unto sinners their wicked ways, as
will evidently appear, if you peruse these Texts amongst many others, 1 King.
18.18. Hos. 5.1. Luke 3.19. Math. 3.7. Acts 2.23, Acts 2.23, and 24.25. Math.
23.13, 33.
and 24, 25. Math. 23.13, 33.

This is so necessary a Duty, and so usual in the Ministry of God's Faithful
Servants, as that it is made a note of difference betwixt true Prophets and
false; and renders a Minister Faithful in his function. The Prophets make my
People to err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace, etc. But truly, I am
full of Power by the Spirit of the Lord ( says Michah), Mic. 3.5, 8.
and of Judgment, and of Might to declare unto Jacob his transgressions, Mich.
3.5, 8. as if he should say, I am none of those smoothing Prophets, who, so
they may be fed up with the largesses of the People, cry Peace and Happiness;
but, by the Spirit of the Lord, I am filled with courage, and undaunted zeal,
with true Judgment, and bold resolution, to declare unto Jacob their
transgressions, wherewith they have transgressed. And the neglect of this
discovery of sin, is made the proper mark of a false Prophet, Lament. 2.14. Thy
Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not
discovered thine Iniquity, Lament. 2.14.
to turn away thy Captivity, but have seen for thee false burdens, and causes
of banishment.

This is not only a part of the will of God which we are commanded to make
known unto our People, Joh. 16.8.
as appears, John 16.8. The Will follows the Understanding; and, till that be
enlightened, Pleas and Excuses for sin will not be removed: How boldly and
malepartly did the Woman of Samaria discourse with Christ, before her foul sin
that she lived in, Joh. 4.18, 19.
was discovered unto her, John 4.18. and all things told her, that ever she
did, verse 29? and then she begin to have her conscience awakened, and to
reverence Christ as a Prophet, verse 19. and to acknowledge Him to be the
Savior of the World, verse. 29. this kind of Preaching is it, which makes m^n
feel, Verse 29.
and acknowledge the mighty Power of God in His Ordinances: When the Hearer
feels himself to be convicted of all, and judged of all, and that the secrets
of his heart are manifested to him, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
then he falls down and worships God, and is enforced to say, God is in you of
a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.

Again, till men's sins are are effectually discovered unto them in the gl^sse
of the Law, they can never attain to any soundness of Faith, nor any other
saving grace. H^nce it is, that St. Paul wills T^itus to rebuke the Grecians,
sharply, or, to the quick, Tit. 1.13. (...).
that they may be sound in the Faith, Tit. 1.13. Nor is there any other
ordinary way to attain true comfort. When God appeared to Eliah, there was
first a mighty strong wind, that did rend the Rock, and then an Earthquake,
and after that, a terrible fire; 1 King. 19.11.
and then came a still Voice, full of Comfort: So when God's Ministers, by the
Tempest of the Law, have rent the rocky hearts of men, and made them in a
manner at their wits end, so that they come trembling and crying with the
Jailer, Act. 16.30.
What shall I do to be saved? then is the season for the Voice of Peace and
Comfort, and not before: And this is the course that the Spirit of God it self
takes (who is the Comforter) in bringing God's Elect to true Comfort, John
16.8. God's Spirit never comforted any, Joh. 16.8.
before he had reproved him, and convinced him of his sinful and damnable
estate. The Spirit of bondage must always go before the Spirit of Adoption,
Romans 8.15. In his first operation, Romans 8.15
he rebukes them of sin, in whom he works, and lets them see that bondage and
slavery under which they lie, which works fear in them; but in his second
operation he is a Spirit of Adoption, comforting them with a sight of God's
mercy in Christ Jesus.

Law of God (the sum whereof we have in the ten Commandments), by which we
attain to the Knowledge of sin, Romans 7.7. without the knowledge of that,
corruption of nature lies as it were dead in us, Romans 7.8. Romans 7.7, 8.
It yes hid, and is not discovered; men have no sense of inward corruption, no
touch of conscience in respect of it, (as the Apostle speaks in his own
particular case) verse 9. But when the Law comes, Verse 9.
then sin appears to be sin; the very Root of sin (Original corruption) is laid
open, and appears to be sin.

This is a Doctrine much opposed by the Familists, Anabaptists, Antinomists,
and other Libertines; who, under pretense of Christian Liberty, cry down the
Law, as no hing at all belonging to Christians, affirming, that they that are
in Christ, have nothing to do with it, but are out of the reach of it: A
pestilent error, and of dangerous consequence! For, from hen^e they infer.

First, That God can see no sin in his Children, for as much as he c^n see no
Law tran^gressed; contrary to that we read, Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in
secret places, Jer. 23.24. Psalm. 69.5. Heb. 4.13.
that I shall not see him? Psalm. 69.5. My sins are not hid from thee ( says
David), Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open unto the eyes of Him with,
whom we have to do.

Secondly, That a man being in Christ cannot sin if he would, for where there
is no Law, there is no transgression; So that, Be in Christ (say they), and sin
if thou can: Yet we read otherwise in Scripture, Jam. 3.2. 1 John 1.8.
Jam. 3.2. In many things we sin all, 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin, the
truth is not in us.

Thirdly, That the Gospel takes away all obedience to the Commandments, and
that Faith has nothing to do with, Doing and Working: and yet (says the
Apostle) Faith without Works is dead, Jam. 2.17, 18, 20. Jam. 2.17. 18, 20.
Joh. 14.23 1 John 2.17, and 3.7. Rev. 2.5, 16. Mat, 6.12.
and the Scripture calls for Doing, John 14.23. 1 John 2.17, and 3.7.

Fourthly, That justified persons have nothing to do with Repen tance; Albeit,
we read that the Church of Ephesus and Pergamus are called upon to repent;
Revel. 2.5, 16. Nor is any Believer (say some of these) to pray for pardon of
sin, albeit Christ has taught every one that calls God Father, to pray daily
for forgiveness, Math. 6.12.

Fifthly, They each, that such as call upon us for good works, and press
obedience to the Law, are Legal Preachers, and that the Preach Popery, and have
Popes in their Bellyes: Albei^ we have for our pattern herein both Christ and
his Apostles who pressed on believers obedience to the Law, Mat. 5.17, 19. Tit.
3.14.
Math. 5.17, 19, -- Tit. 3.14.

These, and many such like inferences (which a good heart cannot but tremble
at) are daily broached by these Sectaries, all tending to licentiousness, and
grounded upon this erroneous Tenent, That the Law is not (now under the Gospel)
to be taught, nor pressed by Minister on their Hearers; for that we are not now
under the Law, Romans 6.14.
but under Grace, (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.14.)

But these have not learned that distinction, Zanch. in Ephesians. 2. loc. 5 de Leg.
Mos. abrogatione Sect. 9.
which learned Zanchy makes: The Law is two ways to be considered (says he);
First, in the Substance of it; Secondly, in the Accidents or Circumstances
belonging to it: If we consider the Substance of it, as it is the sum of
Doctrine, concerning piety, showing what is good, and what is evil; so
Believers are still under it, and stand fast bound both for the performance of
all holy Du^ies of it, and for the avoiding and forbearance of all evils
therein prohibited: But, if we consider the Accidents or Appendices of it, as
it is a rigorous Exactor of perfect and personal obedience upon pain of Death
etc. so Believers are not under it, for as many as are under it, are under the
Curse, Gal. 3.10. Gal. 3.10. Verse 13. Romans 10.4 Rom 6.7. Romans 7.4. Gal. 2.19.
Romans 7.14 Gal. 5.28.
But Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, by being made a Curse
for us, Gal. 3.13. Thence it is that Christ is said to be the end of the Law to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4. and that the Faithful are said to be free
from the Law, Romans 6.7. delivered from the Law, dead to the Law, Romans 7.4. Gal.
2.19. And to be no longer under the Law, Romans 6.14. Gal. 5.18.

The same distinction for Substance does another excellent Casuist of our times
make, (but far more clear and perspicuous). Dr. Saunderson 7 Ser. ad pop. on 1
Pet. 2.16.
The Law (says he) may be considered, either as a Rule, or as a Covenant.
Christ has freed all Believers from the Rigor and Curse of the Law,
considered as a Covenant; but he has not freed them from the Obedience of the
Law, confidered as a Rule. The Law considered as a Covenant, is Rigorous, and
exacteth punctual and personal performance of every thing that is therein
contained, with a condition annexed of God's acceptance, and of blessing if we
perform it; but of his Curse and Wrath to fall upon us, if we fayl in any point
or tittle thereof: Now by reason of transgression, this Covenant is broken so,
as by it no flesh living can be saved. Gal. 3.11.
From the Law (thus considered) we are freed by Christ, He subjecting himself
for our sakes unto it; In his own person he fulfilled the conditions of it,
Heb. 8.6.
(as our surety) and so disanulled it; and, instead thereof, established a
better Covenant for us, even the Covenant of Grace, under which all believers
are, Heb. 8.6.

But if you consider the Law, as a Rule of Life, Mich. 6.8.
which shows us only what is good, and what is bad, Mich. 6.8. without any
condition annexed, either of Reward, if we observe it; or of Punishment, if we
transgress it; So Believers are still under it, and not freed from it: for the
Law, thus considered, can no more be abolished, and changed, than can the
nature of good and evil: Thus (hen) we are to understand, that all those
Scriptures which speak of the Law, as abrogated or annulled, do consider it as
a Covenant: Those again that speak of the Law, as still in force, understand it
as a Rule. This one distinction heeded and applied rightly, is sufficient to
clear the whole point, concerning the abrogation and obligation of the Moral
Law, under the New Testament; and cut off many needless curiosities which lead
men into error (says my Author). D^. Tailor, his Regula Vitae.
If any desire to have a fuller satisfaction concerning this controversy, I
referr him to that excellent Tract, written by Dr. Tailor concerning it: where
the Objections of Sectaries, and the Answers thereto, are fully and plainly
declared, and laid down.

Defense or Apology, for such Ministers as are Faithful in the Legal part of
their Ministry, in discovering sin to be sin: It is a part of the Will of God,
and (if they would be counted Faithful) they must deliver the whole counsel of
God unto their People, 1 Cor. 4.2. Acts 20.
and keep nothing back. Yea, it is that part of the Word, which is the portion
of the greatest part of the World. Are not most men under the Curse of he Law,
and wrapped up in that great condemnation, pronounced by Christ upon the World,
Joh. 3.19.
John 3.19? No natural man, no impenitent person has any part in any other
part of the Word but this: Math. 7.6.
Childrens Bread may not be cast to Dogs, nor pretions Pearls to Swine; To the
Horse belongs a Whip, Prove. 26.3.
and a Rod for the Fool's back, Prove. 26.3.

But you (say some) are Preachers of the Gospel of Peace, Go preach the Law,
but Go ye and preach the Gospel, Mark. 16.15. Resp.
Mark. 16.15.

We are (indeed) to Preach Peace, and to this we are called; But when, and to
whom must these glad tidings be Preached? Shall we Preach Peace before men see
the want of Peace; or God's Grace and Mercy to a graceless heart that sins
presumptuously: we would gladly, at every Sermon, say nothing but, Peace be to
this Audience: But our God says, Isa. 57.21.
There is no Peace to the Wicked; and bids defyance to such, Isa. 57.21. and
not a word of Comfort in the Scripture to such as regard wickedness in their
hearts, Psalm. 66.18. Psalm. 66.18 Psalm. 137.4
And how then shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange Land? Say that one be
desperately sick, and at the point of Death; should another come and tell him
of Lordships, Manors, great Purchases, etc. would not this be unseasonably
spoken? would he not (at least, might he not) answer, Read me sanum, tum Fac
me divitem; first restore me to health, then tell me of Purchases: Most men's
Souls are sick of sin, and at Death's door; Never tell them of Heaven, and an
Immortal Kingdom, till they be first recovered from the jaws of Hell, and
delivered out of the snares of the Devil. It is unseasonable to apply the Oil
of consolation, till your wounds are scoured with the sharp wine of
reprehension: when we behold your Cheeks blubbered with tears; your hands
beating your Breasts; when we hear your loud cries at the throne of Grace for
mercy; Then is the time to say, Peace be unto you, Your sins be pardoned.

Secondly, We are deceived in thinking that by virtue of our Commission, we
have not to meddle with Legal comminations or threatenings, or are not thereby
called to denounce damnation against impenitent ones; He that believes, Mark
16.16.
shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned; That is the sum of
our Commission, Mark 16.16. So that it appears evidently that the Preaching of
the Gospel is a Preaching both of Salvation and Damnation. upon the several
conditions: when we Preach the Law, we Preach Salvation to them, whose heart
melts, as did Josiah's upon the hearing of it. 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
and the Lord showed him mercy, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. And when we Preach the Gospel,
we Preach damnation to them that despise it. How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great Salvation, (says the Apostle, Heb. 2.2, 3
Heb. 2.2, 3.) And so the Apostle, in denouncing Gods judgments against the
Gentiles, for the breach of the Law of nature, and pressing the Doctrine of the
Day of Judgment, counts of it, Romans 1.16.
as Preaching of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. And so,

Thirdly, Intentionally we Preach nothing but Salvation we never Preach the Law
but with reference, and manuduction unto Christ; and so we manage the
dispensation of it, that it still appears to be an Appendant on the Gospel.

And yet these are the Legal Preachers, that are so much cried out upon, and
complained of in these days for being tart and sower, and preaching nothing
but Hell and Damnation: these Boanerges, sons of thunder cannot be endured by
many; some sweet-tongued Zedkiah, that would speak pleasing things unto them,
are the only men that they delight to hear: But let me tell you, that that
Minister that lays not open sin before the eyes of the conscience, so as to
convince the sinner of his guiltiness, and take away all cavils and carnal
shifts, and enforces the Soul to say, This is the very Word of God (albeit he
will nor entertain it), he shall never find his work to prosper in his hand,
nor his Ministry to be successeful: It was John's rough preaching that made
way for Christ; The Axe to the Root, the Fann to the Floor, B. B. Hall. Cont.
in Nov. Test. Lib 2. on Christ's Baptism.
the Chaff to the Fire; Plausibility (says one) is no fit Preface to
Regeneration; never will Christ come into that Soul where the Herald of
Repentance has not bin before him: Nor will that Ministry which works no
smart, ever work any cure; there is no profit, nor cure in skinning festers
unsearched; and there can be no searching of a wound without smart and pain.
Whilst we are no further then the dead flesh, you can be quiet; but when you
once come to the quick, then we shall be sure to hear of you.

Math. 9.12, 13.
Math. 9.12, 13. and we do no other in speaking of Grace and Christ to those,
that as yet are insensible of their misery. No kind of Preaching finds more
opposition, than this manner of plain Preaching; and the reason is, for that by
it the eye of the Soul comes to be opened, and a man's sins and abominations
are better discovered thereby, then otherwise they would. It is in this case as
it was with Tully, who pleading against Verres for his bribery; omitted his
usual Oratory, and Rhetorical Oration; and put the Case in plain terms,
produced the Witnesses, saying, This is the Crime and the Accusation, who can
gainsay it? Hortensius, the other Advocate, considering the clearness of the
Case, and manifest eviction, refused to plead one word in the defense thereof;
and Verres, his Client, yielded himself thereupon to a voluntary Banishment.

But men, in these days, have not the Honesty of that Verres, nor the
Bashfulnesse of that Heathen Hortensius; they will support a shameful Sin
against the very Letter of the Law, and such a Tully as goes thus plainly to
work with them, shall have his Tongue pricked with a Needle. The Widow of
Sarepta complained of the Prophet, when her Child was dead, 1 King. 17.18.
What have I to do with thee, thou man of God? Art thou come unto me to bring
my sins to remembrance? 1 King. 17.18. But if you have not to do with us, we
must have to do with you; Our business is not to slay your Souls, but to
awaken your consciences, Jer. 6.14.
which will not be with sweet words, Jer. 6.14.

And put case that thou see the need of a Physician, and have thy cursed
Estate by nature discovered unto thee, so that thou art already converted by
the Gospel; yet the menaces and terrors of the Law are not altogether needless
for thee to hear: For, albeit the Law is not to be urged against the Person of
a Believer, yet it is to be urged against the sin remaining, and the Corruption
of a Believer; the best, being but sanctified in part, may sometimes abuse the
Grace of God to wantonness, and have need to be daily humbled under a sight
and sense of their Corruptions; the best may slack their pace, and have need of
spurs, and goads, to hasten them in the way of well doing; so that the hearing
of the Law (in that respect) is not altogether unprofitable for such: Even in
the state of Innocence, there was use of a threatening to keep our sinful
Parents from transgressing; much more have the best of us need of the lash of
the Law, sometimes, in this lapsed estate, wherein we now are, to work us to
Repentance and Humility for our failings, which are many and daily.

Now, To induce you, patiently to submit to this Legal part of our Office; I
shall desire you to take these things into consideration.

First, There is not a more certain note of a wicked heart than to shun the
Ministry; that discovers sin plainly, and lays it open before the eyes of the
Conscience: Joh 3 20 2 King 21.20. and 22.8. Mark 4.17, 18. Act. 24.26.
He that does evil hareth the Light (says Christ), neither comes he to the
Light, lest his deeds should be reproved, John 3.20. And by this was the
Hypocrisy of Ahab discovered, 1 King. 21.20. and 22.8. and of Herod, Mark 4.17,
18. and of Foelix, Acts 24.26. He that cannot endure to have his Conscience
touched, is, without all doubt, festered and galled; or that would not see his
face, is conscious of the deformity, or foulness of it.

Secondly, That it is the Property of a good heart, to delight in the Law of
God, Romans 7.22
in the inner man, Romans 7.22. he found much pleasu^e and sweetness in it (as
the word signifies), so far as he was regenerated and renewed by Grace. The
Joy of a godly Soul is to be searched and anatomized by the Word: Search me O
God, Psalm. 139.25.24.
and try me, and see if there be any wicked way in me, was David's Prayer,
Psalm. 139.23, 24. Questionless, the Prophet knew much by himself; but he knew
that his heart was deceitful, and his desire was to have the secret corners of
his heart discovered, and that God would take the pains with him, to discover
unto him what was lurking close and unespied: The like desire has an upright
heart, in coming to the Word. Oh that God would discover, this day, unto me
some of my secret lusts and corruptions! that he would direct the tongue of his
Minister, so that he may come home unto me, and speak to my Conscience to
awaken it! that he would prick me in the right vein, that I might bleed kindly!
And whilst God's Minister is carving and distributing to one, Reproof; to
another, Exhortation; to another, Comfort; etc. a good heart will be lifted to
God, and say, Good God, let me have something spoken home to my Conscience; and
will be thinking (as sometimes those do that sit at the lower end of the Table
at some Feast,) what, will that dish never come down? I keep my stomach for it:
Will not God's Minister meet with my Sin, my Corruption? Oh that he would! I
look for it, long for it: and when thou art carved unto, and have thy portion,
(if thy heart be good,) then thou will not rise without giving thanks; Thou will say with Ely, The Word that God has spoken is good (albeit it be sharp),
and blessed be his Name for his good Word, which is brought this day to me by
his Servant, whereby I see my sins and failings more clearly than formerly I
did.

Thirdly, He is far from having his sins pardoned, that is not willing to have
them discovered, without which, the heart will never be pricked with godly
sorrow for them; and, without that, Psalm. 32.1, -- 6.
no remission can be hoped for, Psalm. 32.1, -- 6.

Fourthly, In shunning and avoiding this part of our Ministry, for fear of
having thy heart troubled, by having thy sins discorered thereby, thou dealest
therein very foolishly; for as much as the same Ministry, which casts down a
Sinner, is sanctified by God to lift him up again; the same hand that
launcheth, commonly heals: The Story tells us, (if we may believe it,) that
those who were wounded by the darts of Achilles, could no otherwise be cured
than with his Salves and Plasters: We find in sacred Scripture (and that we
are bound to believe), that those who were wounded by the darts of Achilles,
could no otherwise be cured than with his Salves and Plasters: We find in
sacred Scripture (and that we are bound to believe), that those who are wounded
by the Reprehensions of God's Ministers, are soonest cured by Their receipts;
and that it is God's usual manner, to heal by that very hand wherewith the
wound was made: The same Nathan that condemns David, absolves him; 2 Samuel
12.13. Isa. 38.1, 3, 4.5. Act. 2.37, 38, 41.
By Isaiah's Ministry was Hezekiah humbled, and by his Ministry likewise be
shall be comforted; By St. Peter's sharp Doctrine the Jews hearts were pricked,
and by the same Person, and Ministry, their hearts shall be revived, etc. Thou
must expect one time or other, that thy Conscience will be awaked, and thy sins
discovered unto thee (as God has said Psalm. 30.21.); Psalm. 30.21
and when God shall wound thy Conscience, by any other means than by the
Ministry of the Word, thou can not have any such comfortable assurance, to
have thy heart quiered again, as thou may in those troubles that arise in
thee by the Ministry of God's Servants, which thou shall find shall cure thee
as well as wound thee, if thou cleave constantly unto i^: For it is our Office
whereunto we are called, not only to digg about the Fig Tree, but to dung it
likewise, as you find in the Text. I will digg about it [and dung it.]

And dung it. Text.
]

So does the good Husbandman, after he has opened the Roots of his Trees, and
laid them bare; he cherishes nem with good dung, and compost, that they may
become fruitful; the former is to little purpose, if the latter be wanting.
This course does the Dresser of the Vineyard promise to take with this barren
Fig Tree; he will not only digg about it, but dung it likewise, and so
perform the Evangelicall part of his Office, in speaking comfortable things to
the Soul that is cast down and humbled. You see then,

God's Ministers are to dung as well as digg.

They are not only to discover sin, and convince the Conscience thereof, by
laying of it open; but they are likewise, by applying of the Comforts and
Promises of the Gospel, to work the heart to Godly Sorrow, and true remorse for
it.

He that prophesies (says the Apostle) speaks to Edification, to
Exhortation, 1 Cor. 14.3
and to Comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. as if he should say, No man preaches, or
divides, the Word aright, if he omits this, and does not apply his Doctrine to
the comfort of such as stand in need thereof.

This was the practice of God himself; for no sooner had man transgressed, but
God calls him to an account, examines him concerning that he had done, passes
Sentence against him for it, Gen, 2.9, 27. Ver. 15.
Genesis 3.9, 17. Here was the digging about him: But He leaves not Man in that
condition, but makes a Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should break the
Serpent's head, ver. 15. and that was as laying compost to the Root, to keep it
from withering.

And this Method has God prescribed to all his Servants; It was given in
charge to Christ, the Head-Dresser of the Vineyard, that he should bind up the
broken heart, Isa. 61.1, 2.
and comfort all that mourned in Zion, Isa. 61.1, 2. which Text Christ applies
unto himself (so we cannot doubt, but of him it is to be understood, Luke 4.18,
19. Luk, 4.18, 19.
): And his whole life was a Comment upon that Text; He was that good Samaritan,
that powered in both Wine and Oil into the wounds of him that was spoiled by
Thieves, Luke 10.34. Luke 10.34 Mat. 12.20
he never brake any bruised Reed, but strengthened it; nor quenched any smoking
Wick, but enkindled it, Mat. 12.20. And this Charge was given to the Inferior
Dressers; As to the Prophets before the coming of Christ. Isaiah prophesying
unto Hezekiah, that all that was in his House, his Sons, and his Children, Isa.
39.6.
should be carried away captive into Babylon, Isa. 39.6. was presently
commanded to speak comfortably to God's People (notwithstanding that), Isa.
40.1. Comfort ye, comfort ye, Isa. 40.1.
my People, etc. Which Charge is likewise to be extended to the Ministers of
the Gospel (for of the Ministry of the Gospel, the Prophet begins there to
speak).

Examples, both in the Old and New Testament, are very many, that might be
produced for confirmation of the Point; Moses having dug about the
Israe^itish Fig Tree, by repeating and applying the Law unto them, in the
first 17 Chapters of Deuteronomy, comes in the 18 Chapter of the same Book,
Deuteronomy. 18.15.
and there tells them, that God would raise them up a Prophet from amongst
their Brethren; and so goes on in the delivery of the Gospel, laying Dung, and
Manure (as it were), at the Root of that Tree which he had before opened. Thus
Samuel proceeded with the People: he first discovers unto them their
wickedness; convinces them of the greatness of their Sin of Ingratitude;
works their hearts to a mourning for it, 1 Samuel 12.17, 18, 19. that was his
digging about their Root; 1 Samuel 12.17, 18, 19, 20.
and that being done, he proceeds to dung it; Fear not (says he), you have
done all this great wickedness, yet turn not aside from following of the Lord,
ver. 20. And such was Nathan's proceedings with David, 2 Samuel 12.7,-12. he
first shows him his Sin, 2 Samuel 12.7,-12.
and upon his humiliation, did not only assure him of h s Remission, ver. 12.
but brings him comfortable Tidings, for the farther reviving of his sad Soul,
that the other Son, which Bathsheba bare unto him, should be called Jedidiah,
Beloved of the Lord, ver. 25. Ver. 25. Neh. 8.10. Isa. 1.11, 18.
Thus dealt Nehemiah with the People, Neh. 8-10, And so Isa. 1.11, 18. After
the digging, and laying bare the Roots, they laid on mending.

As the Prophets, so likewise the Apostles have observed the same Method, as
appears by that Text (before mentioned in the former Doctrine), Act. 2.36. Let
the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus, whom you
have crucified, Act. 2.36.
both Lord and Christ: when the Apostle had thus discovered their Sin unto
them, so that they were pricked in their hearts with that dagger; then he comes
with Repent, and be Baptized, every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
for the remission of Sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost:
for the promise is unto you, Ver. 38, 39, 40. Romans 7. Romans 8.
and to your Children etc. ver. 38, 39, 40. There was the dunging of them: So
St. Paul in his Epistles, as Romans 7. there he dug, and Chap. 8. He laid on
dung to enrich them. And such was his dealing with the Corinthians; his first
Epistle to them, is spent in digging, but his second, in dunging and mending:
Many other Texts might be produced, Heb. 6, 4, 9 Heb. 10.29. Reas. 2 Cor. 2.7.
as Heb. 6.4. compared with ver. 9. Heb. 10.39. etc. The Ground or Reason of
this, is

Sorrow is a Gulf, as the Apostle shows, 2 Cor. 2.7. and swallows up for
want of Comfort, as it did Cain, Esau, Judas, etc. whose sorrows, not being
assuaged with some hope, disposed them to desperation: Yea, the Godly
themselves may be swallowed up with too much heaviness, 1 Samuel 1.17. Exodus 6.9.
as was Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.17. and the Israelites, Exodus 6.9. Some Godly men,
thinking they could never be humbled low enough for sin, have desired to see
their sins in the most ugly shape and color, Dr. Sibbs Souls Conflict. p. 472
and God has therein heard them; but to their cost (says a Reverend Divine).

Jer. 23.1, 2 Exek. 34.2, 4.
and by the Prophets: As Jer. 23.1, 2. Ezekiel. 34.2, 4. Indeed the Minister must
break, but he must bind again; wound, but he must heal again; cast down, but he
must raise up again: They may not always be renting and tearing the hearts of
their People, with terrors and threatenings; nor take pleasure and delight in
Cutting and launcing, in wounding and afflicting of the poor Conscience, but
reveal withal those mercies which belong unto the Penitent. Thunder without
Rain (we say) is a sign of much wind: To be always thundering down of
Judgments, and never shower down Mercies, gives too just occasion to them who
watch for advantages, that the Ministry is evil spoken of, and traduced for a
Legal and windy Ministry.

What would we think of such a Surgeon, that does only cut and lance men's
soars, and never bind them up? that only applies Corrosives, but no
Lenitives? Would we not think him to be rather a Butcher than a Surgeon? The
like may we think of that Minister, that does only beat down men with the
Terrors of the Law; and being cast down thereby, labors not to raise them
up again, and revive them, with the Comforts of the Gospel. Surely such may be
esteemed Hangmen and Executioners, rather than Ministers.

We are Spiritual Persons; so called, in a different and singular respect from
other men; as appears, 1 Cor. 14.37. (where the Prophet and Spiritual man is
made all one, 1 Cor. 14.37 i
) but if we be wanting in this duty of refreshing and reviving the sad and
dejected Spirits of our Hearers, Where is that Spirit we have our denomination
from? The Spirit is the Comforter; but when we say nothing, to the comfort of
those that are distressed in Conscience, we may well ask (as Elisha did, when
he struck the Waters of Jordan with Elijah's Cloak,) where is the Spirit of
God? Where is the Comforter? who, in all that proceeding with the World, in
reproving and convincing it of Sin, (men^ioned, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11.) yet
never devests the nature of a Comforter: In that capacity he is sent, Joh.
16.8-12.
and in that he comes and works.

The Times indeed are such, and the Age so profane and loose; Act. 4.36.
that most Congregations stand in more need of a Boanerges than a Barnabas; the
Spirit of James and John, the Sons of Thunder, is fitter for them than the Sons
of Consolation. The Fat, of the strong amongst God's Sheep, are to be fed with
Judgment, Ezekiel. 34.16. Notwithstanding, Ezekiel. 34.16.
there are those (albeit they are the least part of those) that hear us, that
mourn in Zion, and tremble at the Word, and are indeed cast down under a sight
and sense of their Sins and Failings; and to these few, that are of a broken
and tender heart, we are bound to have most respect, in our Ministry. Say there
be but one, or two, in a Congregation, that stand in need of Comfort; yet, it
is better, that all the rest should go away without that Portion which belongs
unto them, than that those one or two, who are of a dejected Spirit, should go
away without theirs. The first and chiefest Charge that Christ gave to Peter,
concerned his Lambs (the weakest and tenderest of the Flock); If thou love
me, feed my Lambs, Joh. 21.15
John 21.15.

But, for as much as our Congregations are mixed of good and bad, care must be
taken, and had, by us that are Ministers of the Gospel, in our Ministerial
Office, that we neither Preach the Law without the Gospel, nor the Gospel
without the Law; both must be preached, and that in the right order: To preach
the Law alone by it self, is to pervert the use of it; neither have we any
Power or Commission so to do: (for Power is given us for the Edification, not
Destruction of the Hearer). It was published as an Appendant to the Gospel, and
so it must be preached; It was published in the Hand of a Mediator, and in the
Hand of a Mediator it must be taught and delivered, that thereby no man might
be exasperated, but put in mind of the Sanctuary, whereunto they must fly: And,
as it is a Rule in Physic, still to maintain Nature; Insomuch, that when that
shall be in danger to be destroyed, the wise Physician leaves giving of purging
Physic, and gives Cordials: So should God's Ministers, the Physicians of Souls
deal with their Patients; Albeit with the purging Physic of the Law, they
bring the spirits of men very low, yet they must with great care uphold and
maintain the spirits, so as that they do not fayl, or be extinguished, but, with
the Comforts of the Gospel be upheld, and revived.

That passage which we have Acts 8. may be made good use of by us: Simon Magus
having offered to buy the gifts of the Holy Ghost with money, Act. 8.20, 21.
gave just occasion to Peter to denounce that heavy Sentence against him; Thy
money perish with thee, thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy
heart is not right in the sight of God, verse 20.21. Yet he affoards him a
little Comfort to uphold Nature (as it were), but very warily administered;
Verse 22.
Yet, go and pray; perhaps, (or it may be) the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee, verse 22. With good words, we ought to stay the hearts of the
most desperate, and endeavor to wan the frowardest (if it be possible); Job
13.4.
If we do not thus, we shall prove our selves to be Physicians of no value, Job
13.4.

Wherefore, let us that are Ministers apply our selves to this Comforting part
of our Office: Isa. 50.4.
It should be a great part of our study to be able to speak a word in season to
those that are weary; we should study Arguments of Comfort, and be ready to
administer them, as need shall require.

And let us remember, that as God himself will not always be Chiding, Psalm.
103.9.
neither keeps He his anger for ever (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
103.9.): No more must the Minister of God be always reproving, but must do as
those, who give their Children wormwood, or some bitter potion; they sweeten
the brim of the Cup with Honey, or mix their Aloes with Milk, and then give
Sugar to sweeten their mouths again. There shall not come from me (says God) a
double tribulation: Psalm. 69.24, 26, 27.
Take we heed that there comes not so from us, If we add affliction these whom
God has wounded, we give them Gall for Meat, and Vinegar to quench their
thirst. Let us reveal those merices which the Word affoards, and offers even to
the worst: mild Lenitives may be as profitable to some, as biting Corrosives;
However, let us with David sing both of Mercy and of Judgment, Psalm. 101.1. The
heart of man is broken as a flint, with hard and soft together; Psalm. 101.1
A Hammer and a Pillow does it; a Prison, and a Pardon; a Curse, and a Savior,
is the only way to reclaim and bring home an Offender.

Direction, I have for you (before I part with this Point); For if the Dressers
Office be to Dung as well as Digg, then if you want Comfort, or are dejected in
Spirit by reason of your sins, you may be directed from hence what to do, and
whom to make use of, in that your perplexed condition: God's People should make
use of God's Ministers, not only in Public, but in private also, and have
their advice and counsel for resolving doubts of conscience, (if need so
require) God himself has directed us unto this course: Ask now the Priests (
says the Lord of Hoasts, Hag. 2.11.) And Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should
preserve Knowledge, Hag. 2.11. Mal. 2.7.
and they (that is the People) should seek the Law at his mouth: God has
furnished His Servants the Ministers with gifts and abilities (to this purpose,
Isa. 50.4.) And they have received a special Commission from God, and promise
likewise, Isa. 50.4.
that they shall yield comfort to his People in such a Case, 2 Cor. 5.19. John
20.23. Nor may we think that the word of any private man shall be so
efficacious for settling the conscience in solid Peace, 2 Cor. 5.19. Joh. 20.23
as the word of a Faithful Minister shall be. David could not have so much
Comfort from the mouth of all his Courtiers about him, as he had from the mouth
of Nathan, telling him that his sin was forgiven him.

And this course have the godly still taken: So Josiah being in a perplexity
upon the finding of the Book of the Law, considering that it had bin so grossly
transgressed, sends for advice to Huldah the Prophetess, 2 King. 22. Hezekiah
sends to Isaiah in the time of his trouble, 2 King. 22.14. 2 King. 19.2. 1 Samuel 23.9. Math. 3.6. Act, 2.37.
2 King. 19. David to Abiathar, 1 Samuel 23.9. John Baptist's Hearers unto him,
Math. 3.6. And those, who were much perplexed upon the hearing of Peter's
Sermon, come to him and the rest of the Apostles for direction and
satisfaction; saying, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. This (you
have heard) is a special part of their Office, to Dung as well as Digg; nor
will those that are Faithful be wanting in it, in due time and order. And thus
much of what the Dresser promised should be done on his part, if the Tree might
one year more be spared; It follows, that we take notice of what is expected
should be performed on the part of the Fig Tree.

And if it bear fruit, Text. Verse 9.
well; and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.

(...) and si quidem fecerit fructum. It is, Oration defectiva, says Euthymius,
a speech somewhat imperfect, for [Well] is not in the Original. [And if it bear
Fruit] what then? why then (it is to be conceived) all will be well.

I adore, says Tertullian, the fullness of the Scriptures, speaking of their
perfection; Tertul. advers. Hermog. c. 22.
and, in another sense, we may say that the deficiences, and seeming vacuities
in Scripture are to be adored, and kissed (as Constantine kissed the empty
holes where Paphnutius's eyes were pulled out): for, the omission of something
is many times more significant then the supply (if the Speech had bin filled
up) would have bin; As where the room left for words is anticipated by passion,
and filled up with sighs and groans: Such an imperfect Speech was that, which
Moses used to God in the behalf of Israel, Yet now, if thou will forgive their
sin, Exodus 32.32.
and if not, etc. Exodus 32.32. Such Speeches are often used in Scripture
through passion of mind, which cause h the tongue like a cracked Pipe or broken
Bell, to give a harsh and uncertain sound, as did the Dresser in my Text; Who
seems to faulter in the midst of a Period; but, the more imperfect his Speech
is, the more perfectly it expresses his Passion and Affection to the
Fig Tree; he laid the condition of it to his heart, and was exceedingly filled
with grief and sorrow, in the behalf of it, which swallowed up words: And that
affoardeth us this Observation,

A Faithful Minister cannot but be deeply affected with grief, in the behalf of
such as remain unfruitful under his Ministerial labors.

Thus Isaiah having exhorted Moab to yield obedience to God, and submit to the
Government of Christ, ( Isa. 16.3.) refusing through the pride of her heart to
do it, Isal. 16.3.
the Prophet bitterly bewayls her condition, verse. 9.11. The like he does for
other Countries, to whom he Prophesied, Verse. 9.11.
but especially for Jerusalem, Look away from me, says he, I will weep
bitterly; labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the Daughter of
my People, Isa. 22.4. As if he should have said, Isa. 22.4.
extremity of sorrow beseems not the face of Prophet; yet I am full* and must
weep, and take up a bitter lamentation for Jerusalem's distress; Therefore
look not upon me, whilst I give my sorrow vent at my eyes. And thus was
Jeremiah affected with the Churches miseries, as appears, Jer. 4.19, and 9, 1.
St. Paul had great grief for the rejection of the Jews, Romans 9.2. His pains and
sorrows were like the pains of a Woman in travail (for so much the word
expresses): It was a sharp and dangerous sorrow, Jer. 4.19, and 9, 1. Romans 9.2.
as coming from the heart, and being in the heart; and lastly, it was not for a
brunt, as the pains in travail, but continual, and without intermission. And
such was the affection which our blessed Savior bore toward Jerusalem, Luke
19.41. when He beheld it, Luke 19.41.
and considered the miseries that were likely very shortly to fall upon it, He
breaks out into a Passion; First, shedding tears, for when He beheld, He wept
over it; then speaking sobbs, If thou had known, there is one sobb, and there
he pawseth; Even thou -- there is another, At least in this thy Day -- there he
stops again; The things that belong to thy Peace -- again a stop. At last,
another sobb comes out, But now they are hidden from thy eyes. If words be
nothing else but the expression of our thoughts, then, of necessity, those must
needs be the best words, which come nearest to the true expression of the
heart. As that Picture is esteemed best, which comes nearest to the life of
that it represents, and not that which looks with the smoothest countenance;
So these broken Sentences, used by our Savior, express to the very life that
great sorrow, whith he had for Jerusalem's misery, which would certainly befall
it for contempt of the Gospel.

A Faithful Pastor does love his People, David loved Absalom exceedingly, and
so grieved for him exceedingly. Other Reasons I might render, but mind not to
insist upon this point: yet a word or two of Use, before I dismiss it.

How can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my People ( said
Esther), Esth. 8.6.
or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred? How can we endure to
see that Tree which we have spent so much pains about, to be hewn down for
Fuel? That Flock, that People, which we have so often studied for, prayed for,
sweatt for, preached unto; etc. to be rent and torn in pieces by Devils? Hagar
could not endure to see the Death of her Child; Genesis 21.16.
can we endure to see the Death of ours without tears? Oh where (then) is that
tender-heartednesse that should be in us?

Exhortation with you that are committed to our charge; make no longer sad the
hearts and spirits of your Dressers. Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submitt your selves; for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Your Fruitfulness
and Obedience does make us to laugh with Sarah. Genesis 21.6.
For none with more comfort shall present themselves before the face of their
Judge, then that Minister that can say, Here am I, and the Children that thou
have given me, Isa. 8.18. But on the other side, Isa. 8.18.
when we behold our People to cast off the Regiment of Christ, to be led by the
Devil and their own Lusts, to despise the means of Grace affoarded, etc. this
must needs make us sigh and weep, in regard of inevitable ruin and destruction
that does attend you: And in sadding our Spirits thus by your willful
disobedience, you greatly wrong your selves: The less comfortable you are unto
us, the less profit you will get by our Ministry. It is unprofitable for you,
that we are grieved (says the Apostle): we cannot discharge our Ministry so
comfortably as we ought; Grief (you know) hinders much, if it overthrows not
the work; we cannot study well, pray well, preach well, with grieved Spirits;
wherefore, grieve us not, seeing it makes not for your profit. But we hasten to
Particulars.

If it bear fruit, well: And if not, Text.
then after that shall cut it down].

This that concerns the Fig Tree to be performed on its part, is laid down
Hypothetically, and not so Positively as was that which the Dresser undertook
for himself: I shall digg about it and dung it (said he): but in regard of the
success of his pains bestowed on the Fig Tree, that was more contingent, and
he speaks of it in a doubtful manner. If it bear fruit, well; if not, etc.

There are two parts or branches of this Hypothetical Assertion; First,
Affirmative. If it bear fruit, well: Secondly, Negative. If not, then after
that thou shall cut it down.

In the Affirmative part, we have first a Supposition expressed. It if bear
fruit, for that may be supposed, and it is very probable that it will;
Secondly, A Position or Determination of the business; employed, [Well].

In the Negative, we have an Addubitation or jealous suspicion of it, If not:
He feared the worst; Secondly. A Resolution to give way to the stroke of
Justice, Then after that thou shall cut it down.

If it bear fruit, well].

[If] is commonly spoken of things questionable, yet not always; For sometimes
it is said of things impossible, as, Gal. 4.8. If an Angel from Heaven, etc.
Sometimes things indubitable and certain are propounded and expressed with an
If, Gal. 4.8.
as, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, without doubt, all do: Sometimes, of things
improbable, 1 John 2.1.
if not impossible, as, Math. 16.26. If he shall gain the whole World, Math.
16.26.
a thing very unlikely: But here it is spoken Doubtfully, yet supposing a
Possibility.

If it bear fruit, well.

Suppositio nihil ponit in esse, He comes with an If, and does not absolutely
conclude it; yet he hopes the best: It is possible it may be so, and probably
it will be so; after his farther pains taken with it, and God's patience in for
bearing it, it may bear fruit. So then,

Where the Dresser's diligence accompanies the Owner's Patience, there is hope
even of the most barren Fig Tree.

Such as have lived a long time unprofitably and unfruitfully, are not
hopeless, so long as God is patient, and the Minister diligent in doing of his
Duty. Three years this Fig Tree had stood in the Vineyard, and no show, nor
sign, of Fruit in all that time, yet the fourth year there is some hope, if God
would be pleased to let it stand, and the Dresser take pains in Husbanding of
it, (else to what purpose did the Dresser make Intercession for it)?

Many of those Jews, who heard Christ preach frequently, and saw the Miracles
which he wrought; yet continued barren all the time, the whole three years of
Christ's Ministration: yet their case was not desperate, for the fourth year,
through God's patience and the Apostles diligence, many of them were converted:
upon two Sermons that St. Peter preached many of them that heard the word
believed, and the number of them was about five thousand, Acts. 4.4.
Acts 4.4. It cannot be imagined but that many of these (if not most) had heard
the powerful Sermons of Christ many times before, which may be gathered by that
we read, Luke 19.48, Luke 19.48, and 21, 38.
and 21, 38. All the People, that is, great multitudes, (in a manner all) says
the Evangelist, came to the Temple to hear him, and were very attentive.

St. Paul had long lived a Pharisee, before his Calling; all which time, he was
not without the means; for he had heard St. Stephen disputing against the
Libertines and Cyrenians, Act. 6.9. and 7.58. Act. 8.1, 3.
Acts 6.9. and that excellent Sermon which he preached Chap. 7. he was present
at, as appears by that we read, ver. 58. and yet he remained still a Pharisee,
and a bloody Persecutor of the Church, Act. 8.1, 3. Yet after this, he was
deeply humbled, and converted; and, of a persecuting Saul, became a preaching
Paul, and was so richly laden with the fruits of Holiness, as that he came not
behind the best and fruitfullest Fig Tree in the Vineyard of the Lord. And
that Parable which we have Mat. 20.6. may make for the Confirmation of the
Point delivered; Mat. 20.6.
At the eleventh hour of the day, some were found standing idle in the Market,
and were called as well as others at the third, the sixth, and 9th hour.

There is a saying, Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi, The Wind blows where it
lists; Such is the Work of the Spirit, Joh. 3.8.
John 3.8. Conversion depends wholly upon God's good Will and Pleasure; Of his
own Will he begets us by the Word of Truth, James 1.18. The Word is the
Instrument of our Regeneration, not ( Physical but Moral, Jam. 1.18.
) as if the power to regenerate were included in the Word, read, or preached;
as virtue to heal, is in a Medicine; (therefore all are not regenerated, that
are partakers of the means). But it is a Moral Instrument; for it pleases God
to use it in this Work, and to join the powerful working of his Spirit with it,
(as in the next Point shall be more fully declared). And it is a good sign that
God has some to call, and bring home to himself, in that place that he gives
or continues, the means unto, Acts 18.9, Act. 18.9, 10.
13. But, that it may appear that the Blessing is from him, he is pleased to
take his own time, for making the means effectual: Should all God's Elect
profit by the means so soon as ever they enjoy them, the Glory of the Work
would either be ascribed to the means, or to some good inclination that is in
our selves, and not unto the Lord.

Aug. in ^sal. 55.
Augustine speaks excellently to this purpose, Noli dicere, Do not say, What,
will God ever mend such a man, so wicked, so perver^e? Noli desperare, Do not
despair; look to Him to whom thou prayest; thou see the greatness of the
Disease, thou see not the power of the Physician; still let us go on with our
work, and follow that diligently. In all labor (says Solomon) there is
profit, Pro. 14.23
Prove. 14.23. It is a Plant that will prosper in any soil, a Seed that takes
in any ground; for God has given labor (and our Labor more especially,) this
Blessing, to increase and multiply: Our labor in the work of the Ministry
shall not be lost; a Blessing, first, or last, will certainly attend it.

This, the Sons of that Husbandman found true, who being told by their Father,
lying on his deathbed, that he had left store of Gold buried under ground in
his Vineyard, fell (after his death) to digging and delving about the Vines, in
hope to find out the Treasure; and albeit they found not what they looked for,
yet by stirring the Earth about the Roots of the Vines, they gained a great
Vintage that year, beyond expectation: Thus it falls out in the labors and
travels of our Calling. Albeit (always) we meet not with that profit which we
expect; yet, by our constant pains and diligence, we shall so manure the hearts
of some of our hearers, as that in the end we shall find a fruitful Crop to our
endless comfort, both in the Salvation of their and our own Souls. 1 Timothy 4.16.
In so doing, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy
4.16.

Wherefore, Harken we to the Counsel that Solomon gives, In the Morning sow thy
Seed, Eccl. 11.6.
and in the Evening withold not thy hand: for thou know not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, or whether both shall be alike good, Eccles.
11.6. Preach we in our young Age, preach in old; we know not in what Age of our
life we shall do most good, nor which is the Sermon that God will make most
profitable to them that hear us. Put we on the Resolution of Chrysostom: Chry^
in Joh. 3.
Albeit I am not ignorant (says he) that I speak in vain; yet I will not give
over, for in so doing, I shall be excused before God; albeit no body will hear
me. Instruct the worst still with meekness, proving if at any time God will
give them Repentance. Let us do our duty, and then say as Joab, 2 Samuel 10.12.
2 Samuel 10.12. The Lord do what seems him good.

Non-proficiency; living a long time under very profitable and powerful means;
so long as God is pleased to spare, and continue the means, so long there is
hope: It was not at the first hour, nor the third, nor sixth, nor ninth hour of
the day, Mat. 20.
that all were called; some stayed till the eleventh, and yet they received
their Penny: It was not the first crowing of the Cock, no nor the second, that
did awaken Peter; the third crowing of the Cock did it. Questionless, many
more heard St. Peter, when he preached that powerful Sermon, Act. 2.
Acts 2. than were converted by it; diverse of them (undoubtedly) went away for
that time unwrought upon, which were upon his second Sermon converted; for it
cannot be thought, that none of those two thousand which were added to the
Church, Act. 4.4.
Act. 4.4. were of the number of those who had heard St. Peter preach the
former Sermon, whereat three thousand had been converted. None so wretched, so
unprofitable, so sinful, but, having the means continued unto them, may be
eff^ctually wrought upon, so as to become fruitful in the end. Behold this
Fig Tree, that this Dresser had some hopes of; It was a barren Fig Tree, A
sentenced Fig Tree, a Fig Tree already doomed to the fire; yet upon the
sparing of it, and farther pains taken with it, there is some hope, that it
will become fruitful, and then all will be well. Wherefore, pass not a final
sentence upon any, in respect of their present condition; for albeit we may say
that the estate of such a one as has lived long under the powerful means of
Grace barrenly and unprofitably, is very dangerous for the present; yet no man
can certainly conclude, or peremptorily say, as the Prophet did unto Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.6.
I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have not
hearkened to my Counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25.6.

We read of the over-officious Friends of Scotus (that great Schoolman) who
coming to visit him, Cambd. B^it. in Northumberland.
and finding him fallen into an Apoplexy, buried him before he was dead: And we
blame those who make such haste of burying their Friends, that they suffer them
not to be thoroughly cold, before they put them in the Grave: Deal not you so
cruelly with your Friends, Children, etc. Count not them Reprobates, nor
Cast-awaies, in whom you perceive no life of Grace at present; Although the
leaves and boughs seem dead, yet there may be life in the Root albeit thou
discernest it not. There are many that profess great skill in spiritual
Palmestry, and upon very small experience, they can see the Life-line in the
hands of men's Souls, and tell you strait, whether they be Elect or Reprobate;
but they (for all their professed Skill) may mistake the hands of Esau for the
hands of Jacob. Let it be your care to see, that those you wish well unto,
attend unto the means, whilst God affoards them. Cornelius gathered his whole
Household together, with his Kinsmen, and special Friends, whom he wished well
unto, that they might hear Peter preach, Act. 10.24.
Acts 10.24. So, bring thy Friends, Children, Servants, (and them, whose good
and welfare thou wishest and desire,) to be dug about, and dunged, by the
Dressers of God's Vineyard, and hope the best; Take it for a good Omen, for a
good Sign, if they be tractable this way, and do still attend to the Word,
albeit as yet they have no good wrought in them thereby. Thus John the Baptist,
when he saw the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his Ministry, although he knew
them to be a Generation of Vipers, yet he notes this for a good Sign in them, A
Sign that some body had warned them, and that they were willing, Man 3.7.
to fly from the wrath to come, Math. 3.7.

If in it, and it is very Questionable, whether it will ever be: It is a
well-grounded Observation of a grave and judicious Divine, that the Lord has
been wont, Hilders. on Joh. 4. ver. 41. Lect. 70.
when he has given the means of Grace unto a People, to make them effectual to
those he means to save, within a very short time after they first enjoyed them;
and he instanceth in Cornelius, and those that were assembled with him to hear
Peter: Even whilst he was preaching unto them, the Holy Ghost fell upon them,
Act, 10.44. And in the Philippians, Act. 10.44
who, from the first day that St. Paul preached the Gospel amongst them,
received it, and joined together in fellowship with the Saints, Phil. 1.5. The
like in the Galathians, Phil. 1.5. Gal. 4.13, 14, 15.
amongst whom his Ministry was successful, upon his first coming unto them,
Gal. 4.13, 14, 15. And amongst the Thessalonians, his very entrance unto them
was not in vain, but God so blessed his labors, that they proved very
powerful to their Conversion, 1 These. 1.9. and 2.1.
1 These. 1.9. and 2.1. The Word, preached in any place, does usually work best
at first: And such Ministers as God has made most fruitful in their Ministry,
have found it experimentally true, that God has converted more to himself, by
their labors, upon their first coming amongst a People, than afterward; and
that their labors afterward have served, rather to confirm and build up, than
to convert and turn to God.

Secondly, It would be remembered, that to whom God has given the means of
Grace, and they long enjoyed them, but are never the better for them (but the
worse rather), albeit others have got much good, and profited thereby; To such
it is a fearful Sign of Induration, and future Destruction, as these Texts
evidence, Prove. 1.24, 28. 1 Samuel 3.16. 1 Chronicles. 25.6. Jer. 6.28, 30. Ezekiel.
24.13. Mat. 11.25. Mark 11.13, 14. Joh. 8.47. 2 Cor. 4.4. and 13.5.

Yet, thirdly, None may conclude from hence, that all such are Reprobates, and
shall certainly perish, that have long enjoyed the means without profit: For
albeit it may be said of such men, their estate is very dangerous for the
present, and that if they die in that estate, they carry with them to their
Grave as fearful a mark and note of Reprobation, as any we can find in the
whole Book of God (says my former Author); yet, Mr. Hilder.
while the Gospel is preached, and the means continued still, there is some
hope that some good may be wrought in them at the last.

Wherefore, If any of you have lived long under the means, and yet got no good
thereby, despair not of your selves (and yet presume not). Attend still upon
the means, repair to God's House, hear the Word, (for if that convert thee
not, What hope can thou have, that any thing else will?) Do as those poor
impotent Persons did, John 5.3.
Joh. 5.3. come to the Pool, and there lay waiting for the moving of the
Waters, (although it be 38 years, yea longer;) use the means, and wait the good
hour, never was any so unfrui^full and unprofitable, but if he would submit
himself to the Dresser's Husbandry, call upon God for mercy, and hold out in
his endeavors; God has heard him in the end, and so at last all has proved
well, as follows to be she wed you in the behalf of this Fig Tree:

Well]

Albeit the words have a suppositive Form, yet they carry withal a Positive
Force: If it bear Fruit, after thy Patience in bearing, and my pains in digging
and dunging, What then? Why, then all shall be well. Therefore our Translators
add that word (albeit it be not in the Original), not with any Jesuiticall or
Rhemisticall intention to darken or corrupt the Text, but to enlighten it;
[Well] being put in, like an Artificial Tooth in the Mandible, to help the
sound, which would not be so well without it; It makes up the flaw or crack
which (as before was showed) is in the Sentence, and must ncessarily be employed
had it not been expressed: So then, this may be inferred,

All will be well if we bear fruit, though it be late first; Fruitfulness at
last, will make amends for all.

Before this, all is naught, stark naught, betwixt God and Us; but if, after
God's long Patience, and the Dresser's diligence, we become fruitful, and
obedient; It will be well on all sides.

We read 2 Chronicles. 12.2, 2 Chronicles. 12.2, 3.
3. of a great Army that came up against Jerusalem, because they had
transgressed against the Lord, and despised his Messengers; the Prophet
Shemaiah tells the Princes of Israel and Judah, that God would deliver them
into the hands of their Enemies, because they had forsaken Him; Hereupon, the
Princes of Israel, with their King, humbled themselves before the Lord, and
confessed his righteousness; thereupon God was pacified, his wrath was turned
away; and then in Judah all things went well, (says the Text, verse 12.).
Verse 12.
Frequently does God call upon his People to be obedient, and to return unto
their Duty upon this very ground, Deuteronomy. 12.25, 26. Jer. 7.23, and 22, 15, 16,
and 38, 20. Jer. 42.6.
that it might be well with them, Deuteronomy. 12, 25, 26. Jer. 7.23, and 22.15, 16,
and. 38, 20. And this has the testimony, even of the most rebellious, as we
find, Jer. 42.6. We will do what God requires, that it may be well with us.

And needs it must be so, because, all is well, that ends well.

There are many good Ends that meet in that one Center: The Ultimate End that
God aims at in all his Actions, is the glory of his Name. Thus he Elected us
from before the Foundation of the World, to the praise of his Glory, Ephesians.
1.5, 6, 12. Prove. 16.4. Isa. 43.7. 1 Co, 6.20. Romans 11.30.
Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 12. He Created us to the same End, Prove. 16.4. Isa. 43.7. and
Redeemed us for that purpose, 1 Cor. 6.20. He preserves and feeds us, that his
Glory may be set forth by us, etc. Romans 11.30. Now by our conversion, and
turning unto him; by our bringing forth fruit, beseeming Repentance, great
glory redounds unto his name, John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, Joh,
15.8. 1 Timothy 1.13, 16.
his mercy is magnified, 1 Timothy 1.13, 16. Power seen; Truth, Wisdom, Patience,
Goodness, all, exalted in the raising up Children to Abraham of stones, in
healing old soars, raising up the Dead to life, etc. All is well (then) in
respect of the Owner, he has his End.

Secondly, In respect of the Dresser of the Vineyard, all will be well. Christ
is the chief and principal Dresser, and he now sees the travail of his Soul,
the effect of his Sufferings, Isa. 43.11.
the fruit of his Blood which was shed to purge us, to be a peculiar People
unto himself, zealous of good Works. Tit. 1.14.
When he sees a Soul begotten to him, a Branch engrafted in him, he rests
abundantly satisfied, and contented therewith, Isa. 53.11. He counts his Blood
well bestowed; And that blood which before spoke Vengeance, now no more speaks
such things against any such Soul, but mercy.

In reference to the Vnder-Dressers God's Ministers, all will be well; Their
pains in Digging, Dunging, Pruning, Preaching, Praying, Sweating; is well
recompensed. Our Labor indeed is a soar sweating labor (as has bin before
showed), when nothing but Sweat comes of our Labor: But when a Tree that is
ready to dye, recovers it self upon the travail and pains of the Dresser; this
makes for his credit and honor, and puts (as it were) a new life into him, and
it will enable him to make a comfortable account to the Lord of the Vineyard,
when he shall be called thereunto, of that wherewith he was betrusted. And that
is well for him, Dan. 12.3.
Dan. 12.9.

Thirdly, Whereas before, the Ground was cumbered with a barren Tree (as before
you heard), and other Trees hindered by it, etc. Now in bearing and bringing
forth of Fruit, the Vineyard is credited, the Soil much enriched, other Trees
graced and revived. Great joy was in the Church upon Paul's Conversion and
Preaching of the Gospel, which before he had persecuted, Acts 9.31. and so for
the Gentiles calling, Acts 9.31, and 11.18, and 15.3.
Acts 11.18, and 15.3.

Lastly, It will be well for the Tree it self. Now upon it is fructifying, it is
out of danger of felling and fyring; The Pruning hook, may come to some of the
Branches of it, to make it more fruitful; Joh. 15.2.
but the Axe shall never be laid to the Root: no Beast shall browze it, Canker
eat into it, Danger come nigh it; It is under the Eye, and care of the Lord of
the Vineyard; And that is well for him also. Thus you see, how the Ends of all
these lines meet in this one Center, Well. All must needs be well, that ends so
well.

Let me now apply my self to you, who hitherto have lived an unfruitful and
unprofitable life; Take away Hope, and take away all endeavor; Nay, take away
all Desire too, (as one truly says) which is more; For what is out of a man's
hope, he desires not, or very rarely. It is possible for him to waste and pine
away in empty Velleities, and imaginary wishes; but, Who will ever put forth
his abilities or address his endeavovrs toward an impossible good? Many an
old man may be heard to wish himself young again, yet, I think, never was any
old man so besotted as to endeavor it. There is great difference betwixt
vanishing wishes, and serious desires; True desires are active and industrious,
and such address themselves to the prosecution of that only, which they
apprehend as feizable and probable: Now there is hope concerning this thing,
that upon our Fruitfulness, all will be well. Ezra. 10.2
The Valley of Achor was given for a door of Hope to Israel, Hos. 2.15. God
has given assurance to us, both in his Word, Hos. 2.15.
and by his Works, that all shall be well upon our Repentance and Amendment,
Ezekiel. 18.22, 22.
Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. And this unto us is a Door of hope, as the Valley of Achor;
and the possession of these borders of the Land of Canaan, which God gave to
Israel, was a Door of Hope, and Pledge to them, that they should enjoy the
whole Land of promise: wherefore,

As the Angel of Heaven came to Hagar, Genesis 21.17
so this Doctrine comes to thee, and wills thee not to fear, but to open thine
eyes, and see saving relief near at hand, if now at last thou will reform thy
life.

But I am a dry, and dead Tree; yea, twice dead,

Let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry Tree, says God, Resp. Isa. 56.3, 4, 5.
Enlightened
Isa. 56.3, 4. Let none say that is sensible of his own defects and
unworthiness, Behold, I am not meet to receive grace from God: For thus says
the Lord to such Eunuchs, to such self dejected Souls, who yet desire to be
approved of Me, in doing what I require of them in simplicity and sincerity of
heart; Even to them will I give in my House, and within my Walls, a place and a
name better than of Sons and Daughters; that is, I will honor them in my
Vineyard, the Church; take away their reproach, and supply them with those
blessings, the want whereof they so much bewayl; and I will be gracious to
them, above their desire and expectation. And has not God made good his
promise, in all Ages to others? why then should thou be out of Hope?

What People more barren, and further gone (in all likelihood) then the men of
Ephraim, who willingly followed the Commandment of Jeroboam? Their Idolatrous
and Wicked Governors were not so forward in Commanding, Hos. 5.11.
as Ephraim was in Obeying. And when God showed them their sickness, and
willed them to come to him that he might cure them; then Ephraim went to Ashur,
Verse 13. Hos. 6.2. Ezekiel. 16.51. Tantum peccavit ut ei Sodoma comparata justa
videatur. Aug. Cont. Faust. Manich. Haer. Lib. 22. c. 61. Math. 23.37. 2 Chronicles.
33.6. Ver. 12.13
and sent unto Jareb, the King of Assyria; yet if there be a Come and let us
return, then after two days they shall be revived, and the third day they
shall live, Hos. 6.2. Or what City so far gore as Jerusalem? She justified
Sodom and Samaria, Ezekiel. 16.51. and sinned so much, that Sodom, compared with
Her, might seem righteous (says Augustine); yet if She would return, all
should be Well: God would then gather Her under the wings of mercy and
protection, as the Hen gathers her Chickens, Math. 23.37.

What man so far gone as Manasses? did not he build Altars to strange gods,
sacrifice his sons to Moloch; give himself to witchcraft and sorcery, and cause
the Streets of Jerusalem to run with innocent blood? yet, upon his Repentance,
all was well; for when, in his tribulation, he prayed, and humbled himself
greatly, the Lord heard him, and was entreated, and then he knew that the Lord
he was God, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13.

A man could hardly run a more wicked race then the Thief upon the Cross; he
maintained his wantonness and riot by Robbery and Murder; yet, coming to our
blessed Savior by Faith, Luke 23.48.
repenting of his former wicked Life, he received not only Pardon, but a grant
of Paradise, Luke 23.43.

What a large room had the Devil taken up in Marie's heart? and how good
entertainment (think you) found he, when he and six other unclean Spirits (as
Inmates which he takes with him) there dwell, Luke 8.2. Mat 16.9.
and lodge together? Yet she coming unto Christ, with shame and true sorrow
(which she manifested by abundance of tears), seeking for mercy, she has
mercy showed her, her sins forgiven her. and all seven Devils together ejected,
and cast out of her, Mark 16.6. Luke 8.2.

What shall we need to say more? Hear once for all, Ez. 18.17. O homo qui illam
attendes peccatorum multitudinem, cur non attendes Omnipotentiam Coelestis
Medici, etc? Aug. de Temp. Ser. 58. Si impius es, cogita Publicanum; si
immundus, attend Meretricem; Si Homicida, prospice Latronem, etc. Chrysostom. Hom.
2. in Psalm. 50. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. etc. Mich. 7.19 Psalm. 103.12, and 32, 1, 2.
Hos 14.4. Act^ 9.1, 3. Acts 9.15. 2 Cor. 12.4, 7. Luke 15.22. etc. Peccanti
filio dat Osculanon Flagella. Chrysol. Ser. 3.
what God says to this purpose; Though a man have defiled his Neighbor's
wife, oppressed, taken by violence, lift up his eyes to Idols, given to usury,
etc. yet if that man return from his wickedness all shall be well, for he
shall save his own Soul alive, Ezekiel. 18.17. Let me say then to thee with
Austin, O man that considerest the multitude of thy sins; why considerest thou
not the Omnipotency of the Heavenly Physician? seeing that God will because He
is good, and can because He is Omnipotent. He shuts the Gate of God's love
against himself, who believes that either God cannot, or will not have mercy on
him. If thou be wicked, think on the Publican, says Chrysostom; if
unclean, consider the Harlot; if a Manslayer, look on the Thief; Have thou
sinned? Repent. Have thou sinned a thousandtimes? Repent a thousand times, hold
up, and despair not; all shall be well: Never shall Heaven Gates be kept shut,
when any true Penitent knocks at them with the hand of Faith.

Obj. But, God may reserve Anger, upbraid me with my former barrenness; Though
I may be suffered to stand, yet not be regarded; If he forgive me, yet (it may
be) he will not forget me.

Resp. Nay, all will be well in that respect too: Read Jer. 31, 18, 19, 20, 33,
34. Hos. 14.4. He will not reserve Anger, but so forgive thy sins, as to
remember them no more. Nor will he think the worse of thee for what thou have
bin: Was not Paul once a persecutor, a Blasphemer, breathing out nothing but
threatenings, delighting in nothing more then in the blood of God's Saints and
Children? yet being converted by a light from Heaven, God takes him near unto
himself, appoints him to be a chosen Vessel to bear his Name, takes him up into
the third Heavens, fills him with abundance of Revelations, (testimonies of
favor to him above the rest): Call to mind what thou rea^st, Luke 15. of the
Father's entertaining of his Prodig^ll son, upon his return home: No sooner had
he any thoughts of returning, and set foot forward, but the Father runs to meet
him, he kisseth and embraces him, etc. He gives kisses, not stripes (says
Chrysologus); the force of love sees no faults. He so heals his Sons wounds,
as that he might not leave a scarr, nor a freckle in his face. Remember Matthew
the Publican, Peter, Mary Magdalen, with others; and how they have bin
entertained, and you must be enforced to confess that Christ did never show so
much kindness unto any, as to those who have fell fowlest, and bin most
notorious Offenders, upon their Repentance. Nor did their former sins disable
them from their Callings; Joh. 3.1. Dan. 4.39. Joh. 21.15.
Jonah upon his Repentance shall be restored to his Prophetical function:
Nebuchadnezzar to his Kingdom; Peter to his Apostleship, etc. Thus whatsoever
thou do within the compass of thy Calling, shall be accepted, as if thou
never had offended. All will be well.

Tell me now, what resolvest thou to do? will thou pass over what thou have
now heard, as slightly as thou have passed over other Doctrines, and depart as
fruitless from this Sermon, as thou have done from many? If so, I might tell
thee, it will not be well: Or if in case thou resolvest to amend, but art
encouraged from what has now bin delivered, to deferr and put off, because if
it be done at last, all will be well. Then you must farther know, that if it be
so, that will be all; It will be but well, your Writ will be returned, though
not, Non est inventus, yet Tarde venit, and that will be uncomfortable; But it
is to be feared, that if thou hardenest thy heart, to persist in evil, upon a
presumptuous hope of repenting when thou please (as has bin before
declared), thou will not find it so well in the end: And it will be one day
unto thee a Hell in Hell to remember what God has offered, and how near thou
were to Heaven, but did thrust Salvation from thee, even with both hands (as
it were). By how much the greater the mercy of God has bin toward thee, which
thou neglectest; by so much the soarer will vengeance be at the last.

All is well, what ever was before; It may direct us in our Carriage and
behavior toward Converted-ones, such as have lived long in sin, yet reclaimed
in the end. Think not the worse of them, for what they have bin, but judge of
them as they are; Object not to David his Adultery, to Manasses his Idolatry,
to Peter his Apostasy, to Matthew his Extortion, to Mary Magdalen her unclean
Life; They have Repented, God has Forgiven and Forgotten; All is now well. Say
thou no more; magnify God for them; think well, and speak well of them: Thou
sinnest in doing otherwise. A new Life, and a new Course, should not be
disgraced with rehearsal of a man's old sins, 2 Cor. 2.7.
2 Cor. 2.6, 7.

comfort to every true Penitent, seeing (whatever has bin) now All is well
betwixt God and Them, Christ and Them, Angels and Them the Ordinances and Them,
the Creatures and Them; yea, betwixt Them and Themselves: Should the World,
Flesh, Devil, accuse (as accusing they will be ever and anon) for thy former
vicious life, and tell thee how thou have lived, how thou have sinned, what
thou have bin; etc. Answer, It is true, thus it was, but it is now otherwise.
Now all is well. Eat thy meat with a cheerful heart; Go on comfortably in thy
Calling, for God now accepts of thy Labor. Eccles. 9.7
I shall conclude this point with Remembering you of the Contract made betwixt
Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 20.20. If the Arrow fall on this side of thee, all
is well, etc. So if this Admonition, this threatening be on this side; 2 Samuel
20, 20.
that thou turnest thy face to it to embrace it, all is well: but if this
Arrow, this Admonition be beyond thee, if thou cast it at thy back, in a
contempt or forgetfulness, thy case is very ill, as in the next place is to be
showed.

And if not, then after that thou shall cut it down]. Text.


This is the Negative Branch of the Hypothetical Proposition; And therein we
have; First, An Addubitation or Suspicion [If not]; Secondly, A Concession or
Resolution. After that thou shall cut it down.

(...) And if not.]

The Speech is Doubtful and Suspicious, He has the Fig Tree in some
jealousy: notwithstanding another years pains with it and about it, yet it
might continue as barren as it had bin the three years before; And yet he will
try, what it will do. Hence we gather, That

Barrenness may be found under the best and powerfullest means.

Noah preached to the old World full six score years, Genesis 6.3.
all the while the Ark was a preparing, yet with little profit, for they
continued disobedient, and are now in Prison for it, eight Souls only were
saved in that Deluge, 1 Pet. 3.20.
1 Pet. 3*19, 20.

Hear what Moses speaks to Israel, Ye have seen all that the Lord did before
your eyes in the Land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his Servants Deuteronomy.
29.2, -- 5.
and unto all his Land. The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the
signs and those great Miracles* yet the Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this Day, Deuteronomy. 29.2, -- 5.
Hear again what God did for his Jewish Vineyard, He planted it in a very
fruitful Hill, He fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted
it with the choysest Vine, Isa. 5.4, -- 8.
He built a Tower in the midst thereof, and also made a Wine press therein
etc. Nothing could be done more for it than was done. And what was the
Success? When He looked for Grapes, Behold, wild Grapes, Isa. 5.4* -- 8. Romans
11.2, 3.
Wot you not (says the Apostle), what the Scripture says of Elias, how he
makes Intercession to God against Israel; saying, Lord, they have killed thy
Prophets, and Dug down thine Altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life also, Romans 11.2, 3. Eliah was a famous Prophet, and had in account amongst
the Jews, next to Moses, who had such Power with God as that they said of him,
he could Bridle Heaven with his Tongue; yet this mighty and powerful Prophet
could not with his preaching, prevail with that stubborn and rebellious People;
but ten Tribes would revolt from God; Jeroboam's Idols were followed; God's
Prophets murdered, His Altars (in despite of true Religion) demolished; and
not one open Professor to be seen in his time; and his own life sought after;
which to preserve and save, 1 King. 19.4.
he is enforced to fly into the Wilderness, as we read, 1 King. 19.4. And
considering the ill success he had in the discharge of his Prophetical
function, he sits under a Juniper Tree and complains to God of the People's
stubbornness and rebellion; wishing rather to dye, then to live to be so
hardly used by such a People.

The Prophet Esaias, that incomparable Prophet, (to whose Elegancies (says one)
the rowlings of Demosthenes do no more answer, then the confused noise of
Waters in one age, Revel. 1.4.
to those sweet Voice of Harps in another, mentioned in the Revelation), who
was able to make the heart melt in the Body of the most obdurate sinner, with
his Oratory; yet, you may hear him complaining that he had labored in vain,
and spent his strength for naught, Isa. 49.4. His Report would not be believed,
Isa. 49.4, and 53, 1.
Cap. 53.1. And his Ministry (for the most part) was spent in making the
hearts of his People fat against the day of slaughter, Isa. 6.10.
Chap. 6.10.

Jeremiah found no better fruit of his Labors; His Hearers refused to receive
Instruction; They hardened their Faces like a Rock, and refused to return, Jer.
5.3, -- 6. Cap. 6.29.
Jer. 5.3, -- 6. His Bellows were burnt, his Lungs consumed, but the Founder
melted in vain, for the wicked were not plucked away, Chap. 6.29.

Hear once more, what complaint the Prophet Micha makes, Woe is me, Mich. 7.1.
for I am (says he) as when they have gathered the Summer fruits; as the
Grape-gleanings of the Vintage; there is no Cluster to eat, my Soul desired the
first ripe fruit, Mich. 7.1. as who would say, I can find so small comfort of
my Labors, that it is with me, as with one, who after the Vintage is past,
seeks for a Cluster of Grapes to eat, but can find none; So, after all my
Preaching, my Soul desires to find some godly man, which would have bin to me
no less pleasing, then the first ripe Grape to the Palate; but there is none
to be found.

But, Was it not better with the Ministers of the New Testament, then with
those of the Old? If we examine the matter, Math. 3.5.
we shall find it little or nothing amended; John the Baptist (who was indeed
greater then any Prophet, and was for Spirit and Power a second Eliah), he had
a multitude of followers, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Regions round
about Jordan followed after him, Math. 3.5. and yet few or none received his
Testimony, John 3.32. And what Isaiah foretold, Joh. 3.32.
Isa. 53.1. the Servants of Christ (who were sent out by him to Preach the
Gospel) found most true; so that they wese put to the Application of that
Exclamation, which the Prophet before them had made; Lord, Who has believed
our Report, Romans 10.16.
Romans 10.16. for all that God sent, and his Servants preached, and the People
heard, yet all obeyed not the Gospel; Nay, the least part of all, so that it
might be questioned Who did? And yet we need not wonder that the Ministry of
Christ's Servants under the Gospel sped no better; when Christ himself, the
chief Doctor of the Church (who spoke as never man spoke,) laments the
hard-heartednesse of his Auditory, Joh. 7.46. Mat. 11.20 Luke 19.41, 42.
as we find he did (more then once), Math. 11.20. Luke 19.42, 43. He had
preached many Sermons unto them, and wrought many Miracles amongst them; but
the most that heard the one, and saw the other, accounted his Preaching no
other then Sedition, and his Miracles conjuring: But enough has been said for
the Proof of the Point; Now, let me give you some Reason for it.

First, Means are but means; So called, for that they hold a middle place
between the Causes Efficient and Final; serving, the one for the furthering
and obtaining of the other: Much indeed is ascribed to the Word, and other
means of our Salvation, as Jer. 23.29. Psalm. 19.7. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 4.15. Heb
4.12. but it may not be imagined, Jer. 23.29. Psalm. 19.7. Rom* 1.16 1 Cor.
4.15. H^b. 4.12.
that these means have that virtue inherent in them, which proceeds from them,
(as there is in the fire, to warm us; or in food, to nourish us; or in a
medicinable herb, to heal us; or in the Seed, to bring forth Fruit.) The
Ministry of the Word is as a Tool, or voluntary Instrument, which God is
pleased to use in the work of our Conversion, that can do nothing without the
hand that moves it, the Spirit of God going along with it, (which is an
Assistant to it, but not included in it) Isa. 48.17. That water of Jealousy
which we read of, Isa. 48.17. Number. 5.14. Act. 5.15. and 19.12.
had not that power of it self to distinguish betwixt the chaste and unchaste
Wife; nor did the Shadow of St. Peter; nor the Handkerchief from St. Paul's
body, differ from other men's shadows, nor from other Linen of the same kind,
but only in that virtue of healing, which God for a time did give; so the
power of the means to convert and fructify, lies not in the excellency of the
Teacher, nor in the Word it self; but in the Spirit of God only, which works
by these means: As in sowing Seed, be the Husbandman never so skilful, or
laborious, the ground never so rich and fertile; 1 Cor. 15.38. Genesis 26.12 2
Cor. 10.4. 2 King. 2.14.
yet it is God that gives to every Seed its own body, 1 Cor. 15.38. No Cropp
can be without his blessing; It is through God that the weapons of our warfare
are mighty, 2 Cor. 10.4. What can Elijah's Cloak do if the God of Elijah be
absent?

should ascribe too much to means, and too little to Him (which we are too too
apt to do). Hence it is, that he oftentimes makes choice of weak means, to
effect great matters; as when Gideon went against the Midianites with an Army
of two and thirty thousand, Judge. 7.2.
God tells him, that the People were too many for him to give the Midianites
into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against him, saying, Mine own
hand has saved me, Judge. 7.2, Thus, in taking of Jericho, it must be by the
blast of Trumpets made of Ratns horn, Josh. 6.3, Josh. 6.3, 5.
5. Diverse Instances might be brought of this.

And, as he makes choice of weak means, so he gives many times the greatest
Blessing to the weakest and unlikeliest means: Twelve baskets full of fragments
shall remain, after the feeding of five thousand, with five Loavs and two
Fishes, Mat. 14.17, Mat. 14.17, 21. Mat. 15.34, 37, 38. Josh. 23.8.
21. And but seven Baskets full shall remain after the feeding of four thousand
with seven Leaves and more Fishes, mat. 15.34, 37, 38. Where there was less
Company, and more Food, there is the less remainder. Joshua could say to
Israel, what Moses could not, Cleave unto the Lord your God, as you have unto
this day, Josh. 23.8. Under Moses Government, that People was a rebellious
People, and forsook the Lord that made them, and had done much for them: and
yet in Joshua's days (who was far inferior in gifts to Moses,) they were
obedient; so that his Government was blessed above the Government of Moses. Nor
do we read, that Christ ever converted so many by his three years Ministry,
Act. 2.41. and 4.4.
as St. Peter did by two Sermons Act. 4.4. That preaching which is most
contemptible in the world, has been usually found to be most profitable and
successful, 1 Cor. 1.4. 1 Cor. 1.4.


There is a Story which is pertinent to the business, 1 Samuel 30.11. David in
the pursuit of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.11.
where he had no kind of Intelligence, nor no ground to settle a conjecture
upon, which way he must pusue them, (yet pursue them he must;) in the way, he
finds a poor young fellow, a famished sick man, one that was derelicted of his
Master, and left for dead in the march; and, by the means and conduct of this
Wretch, David recovers the Enemy, recovers the Spoil, and the Love of his
People, and his own honor; So in the Ministry. And it is God's good pleasure
that it should be thus, that He may especially be looked unto, 2 Cor. 4.7.
2 Cor. 4.7. So much weakness shall appear in the Instruments, as that their
strength shall not be thought their own.

utterly a fault amongst our selves, (as the Apostle speaks in another Case), 1
Cor. 6.7. Mat. 23.37. Joh. 5.40.
I would, says Christ, and you would not, Mat. 23.37. You will not come unto
me that you might believe, Joh. 5.40. Man's wilfulness is a cause of his
Unbelief and Barrenness, under the means; And this we may affirm (without any
danger of falling into Popery): For three things there are, that concur in a
Sinner's Coversion; First, the Word persuading: Secondly, God's Spirit
prevailing: Thirdly, the Will of Man consenting. Now, God works not upon us as
upon stocks and stones, but as upon reasonable Creatures; and if we would be
saved, we must co-work with God in the work of our Salvation: We must hear,
read, confer, resort unto the Church, etc. and do what lies in us, that the
means may become profitable; For He that made us without our selves, will not
save us without our selves. Aug.
The Father begets a Child without the Will of the Child, (for then it was not,
and it had none); But when the Child is born, he cannot bring it up to any Art
or Science against his Will: So we are created without our selves, but not
regenerated without our selves. Now, herein we are wanting; we do not what lies
in us, that the means may be profitable, we are wanting in our Attendance,
Preparation, etc. we come not at all, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2
or with prejudicate opinions when we do come; or else bring Malice, Guile,
Hypocrisy, in our hearts, and regard not what is said: Were we not wanting to
our selves in using of the means, God would not be wanting unto Us in blessing
our endeavors; for, though we merit not from God in that we do, nor can
challenge any thing from Him as due debt, for our best performance, yet God
would not leave Himself without witness, did we our best endeavors to profit
by the means.

Judge. 17.19.
I know the Lord will do me good ( said Micah), seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest, Judge. 17.19. As if that must of necessity follow; So say some, We have
got amongst us a learned man, a powerful Preacher; now we shall profit, and
get good by such a man's Ministry. 1 Samuel: 16.6.
But God sees not as Man sees, (as God told Samuel,) who being sent to anoint
one of the Sons of Ishai ^o be King, (without any more paaticular Instruction,)
and Eliab being presented, Surely (said Samuel, noting the goodlinesse of his
Person) this is the Lord's anointed. But look not on his countenance, nor the
height of his stature (says God), for I have refused him; and David, in
appearance less likely to be chosen, was the man, 1 Samuel 16.6. It is indeed a
mercy to enjoy the outward means of profiting; And the better and abler the
means are, the greater ought the Blessing to be esteemed, (for ordinarily, in
course of Nature, the best food yields best nourishment, and breeds best
blood;) but yet we may not rest in this. There is a staff of Bread, Lev. 26.25
Mat. 4.4.
Levit. 26.25. which is the Word of God, Mat. 4.4. And so, the Word it self
has a staff too, which is God's Spirit; if that be wanting, no man living can
live or profit by it. Be the Preacher never so excellent, or his gifts never so
rare, were he one of a thousand (as Job speaks), or as prompt a Scribe in the
Law as ever Ezra was; Job 33.23. Ezr. 7.6. 1 Cor. 13.2
were his Learning never so profound, that he knew all secrets, and all
knowledge which the World can afford; or were he as mighty and well-instructed
in the Scriptures as ever was Apollo; Act. 18.24
be he that good Scribe, well taught unto the Kingdom of Heaven, able to bring
forth of his Treasure, at all times, things both new and old; Mat, 13.25
or be he endued with never so good dexterity in opening and dividing the word
aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. 1 Cor. 13.1 2 Timothy 4.2. Nisi D^us in ^riori g^at^a m^^^^
(...)
like a good Workman that needs not to be ashamed; yea, though he could speak
with the tongue of men and Angels, and were instant in his labors, preaching
both in season and out of season, upon occasions offered: Nay, if Christ
himself should be again upon the Earth, and preach in our Temples every Sabbath
day; should he heal the diseased; restore the blind to sight; cast out Devils;
turn Water into Wi^e; feed thousands with a few Loavs and Fishes; work as many
wonders in our sight and presence, as ever he did whilst he wa^ upon the Earth;
All this would be nothing; no good fru^^ could be expected without the
operation of God's blessed Spi^^^ Cain heard God, Judas heard Christ, often:
But what were these the better for what they heard?

It is in the Ministry of the Word, as it is in the Procreation of Children;
though the natural means thereof be by ordinary Generation, yet all Man's
endeavor is in vain, unless the Lord be pleased, by his Almighty power, to
fashion us, and give us a form, Psalm. 139.12, 16.
and cover all our Members in our Mother's womb; and in that Embrio to infuse a
Soul. And how often does he deny Children to some of sound complexion, strong
constitution; and gives them to others, far more unlikely: So, though the
Ministers of the Word be our spiritual Fathers to beget us in Christ Jesus, 1
Cor. 4.15
through the Gospel, by the Seed, by which we are begotten; yet all the Fruit
of our Ministry is his Gift; and he is pleased to make the Ministry of some
one, of very weak parts and abilities, more availeable for this end (many
times), than the pains and labors of men more deep and eminent. It is plain
and simple preaching (as the World terms it,) that makes men wise unto
Salvation: 1 Cor. 1.
Not so much Doctorly preaching, as Doctrinall preaching, that converts Souls
to God.

Let us beware (then) that we ascribe not that to the Instrument, which is
only proper to the Efficient; 1 Cor. 3.5. Nullus Doctor est Dator boni quod
docurit. Bern. 1 Pet. 5.10.
that to the Minister, which is only due to the Lord. The Preacher is said to
be the Minister of Grace, 1 Cor. 3.5. but he is not said to be the Giver of
Grace; We may be Doctores Gratiae, but not Datores: That a is Prerogative which
God has reserved to Himself, 1 Pet. 5.10. We are but as Instruments in the
hand of God; it is he that strikes the stroke, and works the effect, making
our Labors effectual in the hearts of our Hearers.

The means are to be used by us, but let them not be set above their place,
Robins. ^. Essays Obs. 25. p. 246.
nor beneath their place: To abuse the means, argues Want of Wisdom, or of
Conscience. To neglect them, argues either Desperateness (as when a man is
without hope of getting good by them) or Presumption (as when he expects good
without them), or Sloth (when he will not trouble himself about them); with
all which, Unthankfulness to the Lord is joined, who provides them as helps
against our Infirmities, but we will none: And to contemn the means which we
have, so as to long and lust after such as we have not, argues profane
sauciness; As the Israelites did in the Wilderness, in loathing Manua, and
lusting after Flesh; and the Jews, in despising Christ's Miracles upon Earth,
and desiring to see a Sign from Heaven of him: And Dives, Mat. 16.
in desiring to send one from the dead, to teach his Brethren, when they had
Moses and the Prophets with them; (All which is joined with great
Unthankfulness to God, who has graciously provided the means to help our
Infirmities). But to set the means above their place, and to trust to the
means, is Idolatry, which is a Sin that provokes God more than either of the
other: See therefore, that in the Use of the means, we be neither farther from
them, nor nearer to them, than is fitting.

Caveat or Caution to us, that we judge not of a Minister's Calling or
Faithfulness, by the success of his labors; Seeing (as you have heard), the
Word may be sincerely taught, where it is unprofitably or unfruitfully
received, 2 Cor. 4.4. Musculus, in one place of his Comments, 2 Cor. 4.4.
having said, that no places were more profane and irreligious than those,
where the Gospel was most abundantly preached; Contzen.
a Jesuit lays hold upon it, and presently cries, Hi sunt Evangelici
Doctores, See the fruit of Gospel-preaching! Many are of his mind, who seeing
so little fruit of Preaching in many places, cry out of the Gospel, and
Ministers thereof: But God has given his Prophets a Charge and Commission, to
preach to that People whom he has before hand told them would not hear them,
Jer. 7.27. Ezekiel. 2.3, 4, 7.
Jer. 7.27. Ezekiel. 2.3, 4, 7. Nor is it their Case alone, but the Lot of the
dearest of God's Servants (as before has been showed). It was observed of Mr.
Greenham (a painful and zealous Preacher of the Gospel), that, albeit he were
very industrious in his Calling, yet his People still remained ignorant; and
that he had Pastures green, but Sheep full Lean, (as one says of him).

Let us lay the blame where it should be laid, which is not ever in the
Minister, but in the Unfitness and Indisposition of the Hearer. The Potion
that was prepared for the cure of a Patient, may be so far from doing of him
good, as that it may hasten his end through his own Indisposednesse, but then
the Physician is not to be blamed for it: For (as it has been said of old)
three things there are, materially considerable in every cure; First the
Disease: Secondly, The Physician: Thirdly, The Patient. When any two of these
join they have the Victory, the third cannot prevail; If the Physician and the
Disease join, (as sometimes it happens that the cure is mistaken, and the very
Medicine advances the Malady,) then down goes the Patient: If the Patient and
the Disease join (which usually falls out), so that the Patient will not be
ruled not ordered, then down goes the Physician; he is discredited, though he
cannot help it. But if the Physician and the Patient join; the one prescribing
aright, and the other following his directions; down goes the Disease, the
Patient recovers: Sin is the Sickness of the Soul, whereof every man is a
Patient; God is the Physician, who heals us by the hands of his Ministers; Now
if the Physician, for the Patient's frowardness and obstinacy, join with the
Disease, justly punishing Sin with Sin (as he often does), then the Soul is
lost: If the Patient joins with his Disease, The Sinner makes much of his Sin,
and will not forgo it, nor follow the Rules prescribed for the mortifying and
subduing of it; here the Physician is discredited, not because the Physician is
unskilful, but the Patient wilful: But if the Physician and the Patient join;
If Christ preach, and Mary repents; If Christ promises, and the Sinner
believes, then out goes the Disease, though it were as strong as seven Devils;
so that much lies in the Patient. If we take our Sin's part against God and his
Word, we perish; If we take God's part against our Sins, we are saved. Thus, if
the means prevail not, the defect is neither in God, nor in his Word, nor
Spirit, nor Minister; but in those, who oppose and will not be reclaimed. That
a man cannot write in Water, is not for want of skill in a Penman, but in the
Unfitness and Indisposition of that Element: Lay the fault (then) where it
should be laid; Thy heart is rotten (like a fear block), and will not endure
the Engraver's or Carver's Tool. The Spirit of God may say, and God's Ministers
may say, 2 Cor. 6.12
with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.12. Thou have not been straintned in me, but thou
have been straightened in thy own bowels; I have not been wanting unto thee, thou
have been wanting to thine own Soul: It is possible for a man to have a goood
Game dealt him, yet he may lose it by his own bad play, as many of you too well
know.

But has not God promised good success to the Labors of his Servants; to
give a blessing to his own Ordinance? Jer. 23.22. and 55.9, 11.
Jer. 23.22. Had they stood in my Counsel, they should have turned the People
from their evil way: So 55.9, 11. Besides, Christ has promised his presence,
and the Spirit's Assistance, to work with us in the faithful discharge of our
Ministry, Mat. 28.20.
Math. 28.20.

All this is true, and yet the Point delivered stands firm; return in vain, but
do that for which it was sent; but it is not always sent to convert, but
sometimes to harden, Isa. 6.9. Mat. 13.14. 2 Cor. 2.16 Heb. 4.12.
Isa. 6.9. Math. 13.14. The Gospel has a double Savor with it, a Savor of
Life, and a Savor of Death; A double Edge with it; it cuts both ways; it
kills Corruption, or slayes the Soul: There is both Thunder and Lightning in
it, it will break or blast: Like the beams of the Sun, it ripens that which
hangs, but it withers that which falls; Wax it melts, Clay it hardens; and it
is one and the same power that melts one, and hardens the other.

Secondly, Albeit the labor and pains of faithful Ministers may be
unprofitable to some, yet not to all; only to such as are lost, (as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 4.4. Act. 13.48.
) To them that are elected, it is profitable, (as Acts 13.48.) and that one way
or other. Isay his Ministry wrought nothing, in the Multitude, but blindness
and obstinacy; yet, Isa. 6.13. Romans 10.16. Act. 17.4. and 13.48. 1 Cor. 3.6, 10.
there was a Tenth that should return, Isa. 6.13. And the like upon the
Apostles Preaching; All believe not, Romans 10.16. yet some did, Act. 17.4. and
13.48. And thus Christ makes good his Promise, He will be with his to the end
of the World; to bless their labors to some or other, and one way or other;
either for Conversion, or Confirmation, 1 Cor. 3.6, 10. And whose Ministry is
not, in one kind or other, effectual, may question their sending, or fidelity
in dispensing.

exhorted and persuaded, in using of the means, to seek to God for a Blessing
upon the means; I will hear the Heavens (says God), Hos. 2.21.
and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth Jezreel. The Earth is the
means to bring forth fruit to us, the Heavens to make the Earth fruitful by
their Influences; but yet they must be Petitioners to God, before they can
exercise that virtue God has given them, for the helping of the Earth: 1 Cor.
3.6.
So is it in this Case; Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is only
God that must give the increase, for which he will be sought unto, both by
Heaven and Earth, People and Pastor. It was not for nothing that Christ, being
to send forth his Disciples, spent a whole Night in Prayer. Luke 6.12. Luke
6.12.
It was for God's Blessing to go along with their Ministry, without which it
could not be effectual to Conversion: As in sailing, the hand must be to the
Stern, and the eye to the Starr; so in Preaching and in Hearing, use the means,
but withal, look up to God for a Blessing on the means. Whatsoever step we set
forward upon Jacob's Ladder (which conducteth our Souls to bliss), Genesis 28.12,
13. Aug. Sermon. de Temp. Pro. 2.3, 5.
still Dominus super scalam (as St. Austin speaks) remember, The Lord is above
the Ladder; above all means whatever; let Him be sought unto. If thou cryest
after Knowledge (says Solomon) and liftest up thy Voice, that is, prayest
earnestly and heartily for Understanding, then thou shall understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God, Prove. 2.3.5.

Melancthon, when he was a young man, and being himself newly converted,
thought it impossible for his Hearers to withstand the evidence of the Gospel;
but after he had been a Preacher awhile, ('it is said of him, that) he
complained. Old Adam was too hard for Young Melancthon: It is true, 1 Cor. 9,
10.
Every one that sowes, sowes in hope; and he that plants plants in hope; gladly
would they eat of the labor of their hands, but if in case they do not; yet
they may not faint, nor give over their Calling: Let every faithful Minister
do his endeavor, and leave the success to God; Not forgetting,

First, That although we have Virtutem vocis, yet God reserves un^o himself
Vocem virtutis; we may speak unto the Ear, but it is God that speaks unto the
heart; Teach we may, Give we cannot: If Rachel be barren, Jacob is not God to
give her Children; Genesis 30.2.
Where God has shut up the Womb, and made barren, it is not in Man to make
fruitful.

Secondly, There is Cura Officii and Cura Eventus, the former belongs to us,
and not (so much) the latter; as that Parable shows, Mark. 4.26, 27. Mark 4.26,
27. August. Isa. 49.4. 2 Cor. 2.15.
Whether our People profit by us or not, we shall have our Fee; (As the Barber
has, who washes a Black more). Though Israel be not gathered, yet we shall be
glorious, Isa. 49.4. and be a sweet Savor unto God in them that perish,
(though our pains be not savoury unto them,) as well as unto them that are
saved, 2 Cor. 2.15.

Thirdly, Let what has been delivered a little stay our hearts; It is not our
case alone, but the case of God's best Servants; which of God's Prophets have
not deplored the barrenness of their Ministry? It is some comfort, to have
fellows in this misery.

Comfort to those that do profit by the means, and get some good by our
Ministry: These have great cause to fall down and worship with that Convert, 1
Cor. 14.25. for you have heard, that it is not every ones portion; 1 Cor.
24.25. Mat. 11.27
Lord I thank thee (says our Savior) that thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent of the World, and revealed them unto Babes, Mat. 11.25. Say so
in thy own behalf; Lord, I bless thee for the means, but more for blessing the
means to me; I bless God for that man, but more, for that I have got good by
that man; I admire the gifts of the man, but more the gifts of thy Grace,
wrought in me by the means of the man; glad I am that ever I heard him, but
more glad that I have heard God spe^king in him. Thus give God the Praise, who
has blessed the means unto thee; and take it as a pledge of God's everlasting
Love, Jer. 31.3. Act. 13.48. The Resolution follows. Jer. 31.3. Act. 13.48.
Text.


Then after that, thou shall cut it down.]

That is, after I have dunged it, and bestowed my pains about it, if then it
remain barren and fruitless, I will speak no more for it, but shall give way
to the stroke of Vengeance, and be ready to execute thy Command.

[Then after that], (...) in futurum; The time is not definitely set down; he
does not say, so soon as the year is ended, nor immediately upon the
exspitation of that term of time, it shall be felled; but after that; no way
hastening of the Execution.

The Lawyer has a Rule, that Laws of Grace and Favor, are to be extended as
large as may be; but odious Laws (as they speak) are to be straightned, and
confined within the narrowest bounds of Interpretation; And it may be made good
use of, in Divinity. These Articles and Conditions are drawn up by the
Dresser, with all favor to the Fig Tree, and may be expounded in the largest
sense that they can bear. But being a Parable, we will not press them too far:
this only we may note from hence,

The Dresser's of God's Vineyard should be inclined to Acts of Mercy, and not
too forward in provoaking God to Acts of Justice.

To the Acts of Mercy we should importune him with strong prayers and cries;
But, to the Acts of Justice, should we instigate and provoke him, Who were able
to stand before him?

This was Jonah's fault, he was very much grieved, that Ninevie should be
spared; his reputation (he conceived) lay upon the destruction of it, for that
he had spoken it definitely, in the name of the Lord; Yet forty Days and
Ninevie shall be destroyed; and now that the City stood in Majesty, Jon. 3.4,
and 4, 1.
as before, untouched; and that the People therein were spared (forty Days
being expired), he might be esteemed for no other, then a false and lying
Prophet: This was that which vexed and grieved him; All this while he rann on a
wrong ground, exacting overmuch the Rigor of the Letter, in his preaching;
forgetting, that inclusively, this condition was to be understood; Ninevie
should be destroyed, [unlesse they repented]: for this his preposterous zeal,
God himself reproves him, and convinces him of his rashness, Verse 7.8.
by the smiting of the Gourd, which he took great delight in, and was much
grieved for; Thou have had pity (says God) on the Gourd, for the which thou
have neither labored nor made it grow, Verse 10.11.
which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I spare
Ninevie that great City, wherein are sixscore thousand Persons, that cannot
discern betwixt their right hand and their left? Jon. 4.10, 11. As if he should
have said, All these are better then that senseless plant of the Earth; they
are the work of my hands, and have cost me much time and regard, and such as
require much time and leisure for their perfection; bethink thy self therefore,
how just reason I have to be angry at thy unmercifulness, which art angry at
my patience and forbearance?

And this was the fault of James and John in making that fiery motion to Christ
against the Samaritans: Lord, will thou that we Command fire to come down from
Heaven, and consume them, Luke 9.54, 55. Enlightened.
as Elias did, Luke 9.54? As if they should have said, We have a Precedent for
it, it is a Book case, Elias did so, let us do the like; these men deserve it,
as well as those with whom he had to do, for this their base discourtesie, in
not entertaining thee: Our Savior sharply reproves them, for that their
furious motion, You know not (says he) of what Spirit ye are, verse 55. As if
he should have said, Verse 55.
You do not well consider from what spirit this so uncharitable a motion comes;
It is not from the spirit of meekness (which would best become you), but from
a fiery and furious Spirit, which thus transporteth you: Elias was a Minister
of Indignation, you of Consolation; he had a Legal Spirit, you an Evangelical,
The Spirit of the Law required Severity, the Spirit of the Gospel requires
meekness and Mercy, and the Spirit of the Law Suites not with the lenity of
the Gospel.

He gives the Reason, Verse 56.
for the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, verse
56. And Elias is no sit Pattern for you to follow, who are my Disciples; I am
your Master, learn by my example, to seek after the Salvation and Preservation
of men, rather then their destruction.

Wherefore, Math. 11.29.
to be meek and humble, pitiful and merciful. If we look into those sacred
Acts of his, those miracles and wonders which he did; You shall find them all
to be Beneficial, or no way hurtful or destructive to the life of man. The most
terrible wonders that our Savior did whilst he was upon the Earth, were those
two; The blasting of the barren Fig Tree, Math. 21.29. Math. 8.30, 31.
and the drowning of the herd of Swine in the Lake; but neither of these were
any way prejudicial to the Person, or life of Man, Woman, or Child; the former
being but Symbolical, not done in any spleen to the Tree, but a Real Emblem of
his severity to the unfruitful; The latter being only Permissive; It was the
Devils doing, Christ only gave way to those evil Spirits (which seek the
destruction both of Man and Beast) upon their earnest suit, (being cast out of
Man) to enter into the Swine, and to this end was their suite granted that
those Gardarens might take notice from what a multitude of Devils they were
delivered; and how easy it had bin for the same Power, to have allowed those
Spirits to have seized upon their Persons, as well as upon their Swine. Still
Christ made good that Style of his, Job 7.20.
The Preserver of men: To Man he was evermore most favorable, and indulgent,
insomuch that when one of his Enemies, who came to apprehend him, lost but an
Ear in that ill quarrel, he restored it again unto him, albeit he came to take
away his Life. Some indeed, Christ did correct and scourge, Luke 22.51. Joh.
2.15.
as we read, John 2.15. But whom did he slay or kill?

This saving and beneficent disposition that was in Christ, we ought to
imitate; the more we can help to save, the more like we are to Him that came to
save all; B. B. Hall. Con. in Nov. Test.
the more destructive we are, the more we resemble him who is Abaddon, a
Murderer from the beginning. It becomes not the mouth of a Minister of the
Gospel to be breathing out little else then Fire and Sword, pitched Fields,
Sieges, and slaughter of Brethren; We are Shepherds to feed, and preserve as
much as may be; not Roaring Lions, nor Hungry Bears to rend and tear in pieces;
we should incline rather to mercy, then to Justice; if we err, it is safest to
err on that hand.

It is observed by some, (and that, not impertinently, nor unprofitably), how
that Amen under the Law was answered to the Curses, Hugo. Card. Deuteronomy. 27.15, --
26.
but not to the Blessings; as we read, Deuteronomy. 27.15, -- 26. Every particular
Curse must have a several Amen: But in the next Chapter, where the Blessings
follow, there is no Amen affixed, nor commanded to be affixed to them, Deuteronomy,
28.2, -- 12. But it is otherwise in the Gospel; Deuteronomy. 28.2. -- 12.
To the Blessings there is an Amen, but not to the Curses. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
16.22.) A fearful Curse, but there is no Amen to that: Grace be with all them
that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, 1 Cor. 16.22. Ephesians. 6.24.
Ephesians. 6.24. there is Amen to that; and thence we may infer, that that Spirit
which was suitable to the time of the Law, suits not so well with the times of
the Gospel. I shall leave this note to your own private meditations, and now
proceed with the Sentence.

Thou shall cut it down.]

We shall take leave to make some little stop, Text.
and pawse a while upon the manner of Speech; it implying somewhat that may be
useful for us. Bernard upon the Canticles has this passage, Ligatum habent
sancti Deum, ut non puniat, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 30.
nisi permiserint ipsi. The Saints of God have him so bound, that he cannot
punish without their permission and leave: And so it seems by this manner of
speaking which the Dresser uses, Then after that thou [shalt] do it: as if
till then he should not; He would stay his hand a while longer, but in case
that Tree should continue barren, after further pains had bin bestowed on it,
he would then contentedly give way to the stroke of Justice. You see then,

By fervent prayer God is so ^ver powered, as that he cannot presently destroy.

And so much the Scripture intimates, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls
upon thy Name, Isa. 64.7. Quasi manu facta Deum ambiunt orantes. Tertul. Apol.
Genesis 19.22, and 32, 26.
that stirs up himself to take hold Thee. By zealous prayer the Saints are
said to take hold on God; they manycle (as it were) his hands, lay hold on the
Axe, and will not suffer him to strike; so that he cannot do any thing, till
they let go. As the Angel said to Lot, I cannot do any thing till thou art
gone, Genesis 19.22. So, Genesis 32.26. etc. Let me go (says God to Jacob). Behold,
the great God petitioning to sinful man (says Gregory,) and that which is yet
more, Man denying the great God's Petition; I will not let thee go (says
Jacob:) he holds him fast, and gives not over, till he had what he sought. The
like we find in Exodus 32.10. Let me alone (says God to Moses). Why Lord, Who
lets thee? Exodus 32.10.
My hands are tied from executing wrath, whilst thy hands, Moses, are up for
mercy; His prayers were as it were bands to tie God's hands, so that he could
not strike. O infinite goodness, of the invincible God, to suffer himself to
be as conquered, by the zealous and fervent prayers of his poor Servants.

for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17. In Christ's Name they ask. Dan. 9.17.
Themistocles treated with King Admetus holding the young Prince (the Father's
darling) in his bosom, and thereby prevailed: So do the Faithful, they bring
Christ with them when they come into the Fathers presence, (who is dearer to
him then the young Prince was to King Admetus,) and for his sake he will deny
them nothing, Joh. 14.14, 14, and 15.16, and 16, 23, 24. R v. 2. Zach. 4.6.
R^m. 8.15, 26. 2 Samuel 14.19. Ab ipso accipiunt ut contra impetum percussionis
ejus opponantur, atque ut ita dixerim ab ipsa Deo se erigunt contra ipsum.
Greg. Mor. lib. 9. c. 12. Jam. 5.16. Math. 15.23. Enlightened.
John 14.13, 14, and 15, 16, and 16, 23, 24. Yea his own Name and Glory
pleads for them, For thy Names sake (says David); and God cannot forget his
own Name.

Reas. 2. Secondly, They are assisted by a powerful and prevayling Spirit,
Zach. 4.6. Romans 8.15, 26. And this Spirit is God's own Spirit, which he gives
us to pray with; Is not the hand of Joab in all this (said David?) So, is not
my Spirit in this, says God? The Saints receive from God (says Gregory), what
they oppose to his blows, and (as I may say) From him it is whereby they lift
up themselves against him, and whereby they are enabled to resist him; So that
in wresting with his Saints, he wrestles with himself, and should deny himself,
in denying of his Spirit which calls upon him: In this respect the Prayer of a
Righteous man is said to have great strength, Jam. 5.16. as the words may be
interpreted.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, They have a strong Hand or Arm, wherewith they do lay hold
on God, and that is Faith. Thus that poor Woman of Canaan wrestled, and
overcame, Mat. 15.23. Many checks and snibs she suffered, yet would not be
staved off; still she cries, Lord help. The Disciples reprove her, Christ rates
her, bids her be gone; tells her, she is little better then a Dog or Whelp,
she thanks him for it; picks comfort out of that, and resolves to play the
Dogg's part, so that he will be pleased to be the Master; If he beats her out
at one Door, she will come in at the other, that she may at least eat the
crumms that fall under his Table; a Crum of bread should serve her turn, let
her be a Whelp, or any thing, so she may find mercy: Thus her Faith holds out,
and gets the Day, she goes away with this praise: O Woman, great is thy Faith,
and has what she would; Be it unto thee even as thou will. Faith is a stout
and strong grace, it conquers Kingdoms, Heb. 11. removes Mountains, Heb.
11.33. Math. 16.20. 1 John 5.4. Jam. 5.17. Mr. Sam. Ward in his Life of Faith.
Genesis 32.9, -- 13.
Math. 17.20. overcomes the World, 1 John 5.4. Yea, and Heaven too, Jam. 5.17.
What is it that God can do, that Faith cannot do within the Sphere of its own
activity? says a Judicious Divine.

4. Fourthly, They bring with them strong Arguments, and press the Lord with
strong Motives; as with his Truth, Promise, Covenant; So, Genesis 32.9, -- 13.
Jacob urges God, 1. with the Covenant made between him and his Fathers: O God
of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac. 2. From God's commandment
and his obedience thereunto, Thou art the Lord that saydst unto me, Return into
thy Country, and to thy Kindred: 3ly, From his Promise made unto him, Thou
saydst I will be with thee. 4ly, From his acknowledgement of God's Mercy, and
his own Unworthiness; I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies which
thou have showed: 5ly, From the Relation he had to God, I am thy Servant. 6ly,
From the condition of his Adversary, he being his enraged Brother Esau. Deliver
me, I pray thee from the hand of my Brother, from the hand of Esau. 7ly, From
the extreme danger that He, his Wives, and Children were all in; for I fear
least he will come and smite Me, and the Mother with the Children. 8ly, From a
Promise that God made to him, in respect of his Posterity; And thou saydst I
will do thee good, and make thy seed as the sands of the Sea: All these are
brought by Jacob to urge God to be gracious: The like might be showed in the
prayer that Moses made for the People, Exodus 32. and in Solomon's prayer, 1
King. 8.23, -- 27. Exodus 32.11, 12.13.23, -- 27. 1 King. 8. Dan. 9.
And in Daniels, Chap. 9. And in David's, frequently, in the Psalms. That
Covenant which God has made with his, and sealed unto, which was founded in
Blood; even that Covenant casts it self open before God in prayer, and
entreats God as he is Holy, Just, and true of his Word, that he would give a
being to his Promises. Now God cannot deny Himself; being thus pressed he must
needs yield.

Lastly, Prayer is an Engine, 5. See my Friend at Midnight. Page 307. Isa.
45.21.
ordained by God himself to be overcome withal; It is a strength that he has
promised to yield unto; an Authority that he has promised to obey: It is a
Speech that commands admiration from us, Isa. 45.11. Ask of me things to come,
concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me. He is
graciously pleased to be overpowred (as it were), not only that we should have
power with Him, Hos. 12.3, 4.
by our Prayers, as Jacob had, Hos. 12.3, 4. but power over Him, so as to
command him, and require of him, what concerns the good of his Church and
People.

But whence comes it then, Ps. 80.14.
That God's Church and Vineyard is such a Sufferer? How comes it to pass, that
the Boar out of the Wood does waste it, and the Fox of the Field does spoil it?

The Sins of God's People are sometimes like Summer Fruit, Amos 8.1, 2.
so that the Lord will not pass by them any more. They are so great in
themselves, and admit of so many, and grievous aggravations, as that he is
weary of repenting, insomuch that he is resolved, if Daniel, Jer. 15.6. Ezekiel.
14.14.
Noah, and Job, those Worthies of the World, should entreat for them, yet they
should save but their own Souls by their Righteousness; Now, in such a case he
commonly makes way for his Judgments.

First, By removing out of the way, those who stand in the way to hinder him;
He houses them who stood in the gapp to turn away his wrath. It is observed,
that Methusalem, the longest liver amongst men, Hierom de Haebraicis trad. in
Genesis 16. 2 Chro. 34.28.
dyed that year, when the all-destroying Flood came; and Enoch (styled a God
amongst the People) was first taken up into Heaven: Good King Josiah was taken
away by death, that God might bring upon the Land, that Evil which he had
threatened and intended; and in that Grave wherein he was interred, the Liberty,
Glory, and Peace of Jewry lay also buried. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Jerusalem shall be destroyed, but not till they who were marked were fled to
Pella, whither they are no sooner gathered, but, by Titus and Vespasian, the
City was besieged, and soon after ruined: All Italy shall be grievously
troubled, but holy Ambrose must be first at rest: Africa shall be spoiled, and
the City Hippo besieged by the Vandals, but not till Austin's decease: Germany
was distracted, but Luther must first be peaceably and honorably buried. It is
a sad presage of Judgment, when God takes away those that should stand in the
breach to turn away his wrath, Isa. 3.2, 3. and 57.1.
Isa. 3.2, 3. and 57.1. When the fairest Flowers in the Garden are plucked up,
it is very probable that God intends to lay it waste, and turn it into a
Wilderness. No Church nor State can long stand, when the main Pillars are
undermined; The Heart Strings hold not long, after the Eye-strings are broken.

Secondly, If in case that He remove not such out of the way, but suffers such
to live, and be Eyewitnesses of those miseries that befall the Land or Nation;
then God makes way for Judgment, Donn's Sermon. 1628 Jer. 7.14, 15. Enlightened
by restraining them from praying for such a People, sometimes inhibiting them,
as He did Jeremiah, cap. 7.14, 15, 16. Pray not for this People, for I will not
hear thee. God would not that such precious breath, as that of Prayer, should
be in vain, or without success; and therefore He acquaints him with his
Resolution and irrevocable Decree and Purpose, which He before had affirmed
with many words of most earnest and vehement Asseveration, cap. 4.28. Jer.
4.28. cap. 22.5.
and afterward did ratify and confirm by Oath, cap. 22.5. whereby the Prophet
did evidently perceive, that it was an absolute Interdiction, and not like that
Inhibition given to Moses, Exodus 32.10.
Exodus 32.10. whith carried with it the force of a mild Instruction, and
intimated, that it was in Moses power to give way to God's wrath or not, so as
Moses thereby received encouragement to pray for them. Non debuit pro statu
Regni orare. Calv.
But should Jeremiah have gone about to hinder or cross God, by his Prayer,
from doing that which he was so absolutely resolved to do, he had highly
offended therein: But this Prohibition given him, was by Revelation from
Heaven, and Extraordinary, Est speciale Interdictu^. Piscat. in loc.
in respect of us, from whom His Decree (in that respect) is hidden: For so
long as a Church, or State, has being, we ought not to cease praying for it
(as formerly has been said). Nor are we commanded to cast any out of our
Prayers, but those who have sinned against the Holy Ghost, (which is no easy
matter to discern.)

There is another more ordinary way, whereby he restrains the Godly from this
duty in the behalf of others; and that is, by suffering them to be asleep, as
Jonas was under Hatches, when the Ship is in greatest danger; or else by
withdrawing the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, and denying assistance to
pray for such: Their hearts are marvellously taken off from them, so as they
scarce remember them in their devotions; and when they do, Isa. 64.7.
it is but very coldly and faintly, they stir not up themselves to lay hold
upon the Lord on their behalf. And when it falls out thus, it is a woeful sign
that God makes way for Judgment. To apply this briefly,

If f^equent and faithful Prayer be so prevalent with the God of Heaven, Moses
divided the red Sea, and caused it to run back, Exodus 14.15.
so that God's Israel walked upon firm ground in the midst of it? This was done
by the power of his Prayer, Exodus 14.15.

Do we not read of the Sun's standing still in the midst of Heaven, Josh.
10.13, 14.
not hasting to go down a whole day together, so that there was no day like
that before or after it? This was done upon Joshuah's Prayer. 2 King. 20.11.
And have you not read, at another time, of the Sun's going back in the
Firmament, ten Degrees, according to the shado^ on Ahaz his Dyall? This was
also done upon the Prayer of Isaiah.

Have we not heard of the stopping of the mouths of greedy Lions, and closing
of their gnashing chapps, being almost famished for want of prey? Dan. 6. and 3.
And of quenching the violence of raging fire, so that it could not sindge a
hair of the Head, nor leave the smell of it on the Garments? Why, These things
have been effected by the Prayers of Daniel, and the three Children,

Have we not read of Fire that was brought from Heaven three times together; 1
King. 18.38. Jam. 5.17.
and how the Heavens were shut up three years, so that they gave no rain, and
then opened again, so that the clouds powered down in abundance? These things
were brought to pass by the Prayers of Elijah.

Have we not read or heard of the Earth's opening her mouth and swallowing up
of Korah, Mumb. 16.
Dathan, and Abiram with all their Goods and Families, and closing again upon
them? This was done upon the Complaint and Prayer of Moses unto God against
them for their Rebellion.

It were infinite to recount all the noble Acts of Prayer recorded in the
Scripture; as of the raising of the dead; 1 King. 17.21. Act. 12.5. Mat. 17.21
Oration fidelis omnipotens. Luth. Est quaeda^ Omnipotentia Precum Alsted. Syst.
Theol. lib. 4. c. 2. See my Friend at Midnight. p. 432. Psalm. 34.15 Exodus 3.7,
9. 2 Samuel 24. Exodus 8,13
opening of Prison doors, and loosing the Prisoners bands; healing diseases,
that have seemed incurable to flesh and blood; casting out of Devils: It is a
kind of Omnipotent thing, it can command Heaven, Earth, and Hell, (as I have
showed you upon another Parable.) Nothing, under God, Omnipotent, but it.
Luther was wont to call it the great Ordnance; and indeed, with that we make
our battery at the walls of Heaven; In a moment it pierces the Clouds, and
procures a Victory; sometimes before the Report be heard on Earth; or We
imagine that it is gone out of our lips: It bows God's Ear, and causes Him to
hear, Psalm. 34.15. It opens his Eyes, and causes Him to see, Exodus 3.7, 9. It
plck^s out his Sword, and causes Him to smite; and, on the other side, it
causes Him to put it up again, and smite no more 2 Samuel 24. It overrules God
in any thing that may be for the Church's good. The Lord did according to the
word of Moses (says the Text, Exodus 8.13.) That Moses did according to the
Word of the Lord, is evident enough, and no wonder at that: but that God should
do according to the Word of Moses, and obey the voice of man, that is strange
indeed, yet, So it is. In humane History we have many very memorable Examples
of the prevailing power of Prayer with God.

By Prayer the good Constantius was said to strengthen his Family; but
Constantine his Son, did hereby fortify all his Empire. Eusebius. de Vit. Constable.
2.4. and 4.15.
When his Enemy Licinius began his War with Exorcisms and Charms, he undertook
all with Prayer and holy Meditations, and therefore the Lord of Heaven made him
to be Lord of the Field; Such comfort did he find in Prayer, that he stamped
upon the Coin, the Image or Effigies of himself, kneeling unto his God; as
ascribing all his Victories to Prayer especially, rather than to the Sword.

When Marcus Aurelius Verus the Emperor was in Germany, and in the Field
against 970000 Enemies, E^seb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
( Germans and Sarmatians) and in great distress for want of Water, the Legion
called Melitina, afterward Julineae, being Christians, fell down on their knees
in the open field, Tertul. in Apolog. Xiphilinus de Marc. Anton. Cum ipsa
affuit oratione Deus. Just. Mart. Apol. z. Ambros. de obit. Theod. Ruffinus.
Socrat. Socr. Scol. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 22. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 23.
and relieved him; for so soon as they had prayed, God was with them, and sent
Thunderbolts on the heads of their Enemies, and a cooling shower to refresh
their own wants: so that the Prayers of the Church were received as a garrison
into the Empire.

Afterward, In the time of that good Emperor Theodosius, in a fought field
against Eugenius, (when he had almost lost the day,) he alighted from his
Horse, and stepping before his Army in the face of his Enemy, he kneeled down
and cried to God, Ubi est Deus Theodosii, Where is Theodosius his God? And God
gave him the day; he won the field: And upon another occasion, at another time,
upon earnest Prayer to Christ, made by the whole City, being assembled
together; A grievous Tempest was suddenly turned into calmness, and their
former dearth and scarcity into abundance of plenty.

When Rhadogesius, King of the Goths, with a puissant Army recovered Rome, and
by reason of the small preparations in the City, no hope could be expected from
man, then they cried to the Lord, and he fought for them, in that their
extremity, and so discomfited the Enemies, that in one day an Army of 100000
was utterly defeated; not a man of the Roman side slain, no not so much as
wounded.

The power of Prayer is so well known and ratified by experience, that there
was never any State (Christian or Gentile) but they have acknowledged it; Plut.
in vit. Numae. O admirabilem plarum Precu^ vim, quibus coelestia cedunt. Hosts
terret manus illa, quae V^ctoriae suae trophaea in ipsis coeli orbibus figit.
Bucholcerus.
Insomuch, that Infidels in their Idolatry, and Heretics in their Schism, have
had recourse unto it: Yea, Turks and Barbarians, at this day, enjoin Prayer and
religious Service to their Idols, before they go out to War, and for the
security of their State: (...), said Numa Pompilius, a Heathen King of the
Romans, to one that brought him news that his Enemies were at hand to surprise
him: What tell you me of Enemies? I am about sacrificing to God; no danger
could make them forbear superstitious Rites. Oh! the admirable power of godly
Prayer (says one), to which, heavenly things give place; That hand terrifyeth
the Enemy, which fastneth the tokens of its Victory in the Celestial Orbs.
Plutarch, in the life of Pyrrhus, says of Cyneas, a Thessalian Orator, that
he overcame more by words and Speeches, than Pyrrhus by the Sword: One Prayer
is more powerful to obtain a Victory than ten Swords. In that famous battle of
Israel against the Amalekites, Exodus 17.11.
the Prayer of Moses gave a sensible advantage to Israel's side, and, indeed,
the Victory. For when his hands were up, then Israel prevailed; but when they
were down, then Amalek prevailed: 1 Chr. 5.20
And again, we read, that when some of the Israelites warred with the
Hagarites, in the midst of the battle, they cried unto the Lord, and he heard
them, and gave their enemies into their hands, and all that were with them,
because they put their trust in Him, (says the Text, 1 Chronicles. 5.20.) An Army
of Prayers, is as strong as an Army of men; yea, one man praying, may do more
than many fighting. Jer. 17.5.


But cursed is he who makes Flesh his Arm, and trusts not in the Lord his
God. To the truth of which Verdict, the greatest Potentates of the World have
subscribed with their own blood: Nebuchadnezar trusted in his City Babel, and
it was his Confusion: Xerxes trusted in the multitude of his men, and his
multitude encombred him; Darius in his wealth; and that sold him; Ps. 28.7, 8.
Rehoboam in his young Counselors, and his young Counselors lost him: Casar
in his old Senators, and his Senators conspired against him. Hi curruum, and
illi equorum, etc. these trust in Charriots, and those in Horses: But let us
remember the Name of the Lord our God; So, when they are brought down and
fallen, we shall rise and stand upright.

And, as this should bring Prayer into greater request with us; so it should
cause praying Christians to be more respected by us, (especially God's
Ministers, the Dressers of God's Vineyard) for these are the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel. Nux ego juncta viae quae sum sine crimine vitae, A populo
sa^is praetereun^e petor. Ovid. Exodus 8, 9. Explained.


But men (commonly) deal by these, as Boys do by Wall-nut Trees; in fair
weather they cudgel them, but in foul weather they are enforced to run to them
for shelter: So Themistocles said of himself, that the People dealt with him as
they dealt with the Plane-Tree, in fair weather every passenger did crop him,
but in a Tempest, in Thundering, and Lightning, they got under his boughs: Thus
Pharaoh sends to Moses, when God's Judgments were on him, and desires his
Prayers; Glory over me (said Moses to him) that is, jear me, reject me yet thou
must be beholding to me for my Prayers, or thou art like to lie under that
plague, for all that thy wizards can do to thy relief and help. So did Jeroboam
when his hand was withered, he was glad to submit, and desire the Prophet to
entreat the Lord for him, 1 King. 13.6.
that his hand might be restored, 1 King. 13.6. Plagues and Judgments bring
Prophets and praying Saints into request and favor. The drowning man will
reach out his hand to that bough which he contemned whilst he stood safe on
shore: When the Sword, Famine, or Pestilence, is amongst us; or the snares of
death do compass us about; when the wrath of God falls upon the naked Soul,
and the conscience is wounded within, as the body is pained without; Oh then,
send for that good man, that Godly Minister! desire his earnest Prayers on my
behalf: Now these are in request and credit with us, whom before, in the days
of our prosperity and peace, we passed over as superfluous Creatures, of whom
there was little Use: But if you desire that they should pray for you in your
extremity, do not slight them, nor wrong them in the days of your prosperity.
Hearken to that advice which God gave Ab^melech, Genesis 20.7.
and follow it, Go to Abraham (says God), and restore him his wife, that he
may pray for thee, for he is a Prophet of the Lord: So, go to God's Ministers
and faithful Servants, make your peace with them, in time; satisfy them for the
wrongs and injuries done unto them, that they may pray for you, Job. 40.8.
and prevail with God on your behalf. And remember what God said to Job's
friends, Go to my Servant Job and submit your selves, and my Servant Job shall
pray for you, for him I will accept; otherwise, I will deal with you after your
folly.

weapons: lay hold on God, let him not go till his Indignation be over past;
give him no rest, till he establish peace, and make our English Nation once
more a praise upon the Earth.

The Prayer of one Dresser may do much with God, Coit coeius. Tertul. Apolog.
c. 19.
How much more the Prayers of many? yea, of the whole Church of God, were they
united? What Judgment cannot many hands together (if in time lifted up) bear
off? What Blessings are they not able to pull down from Heaven on us? If one
Prisoner in a J^y^e cries out for bread, we pity him; if the whole Jayle beg
of us, we cannot deny them: When all our Children come about us, we cannot so
easily shake them off, as one. How mightily might we prevail with God, if we
conjoined our forces? Vis unita fortior.
Many drops make a great flood: O! join Prayers to Prayers; Tears to Tears;
Sighs to Sighs; then shall you find, that the face of our Church and State
would be quickly changed: God will not only wipe off blood from our bodies,
but tears from the eyes of this his sad and disconsolate Spouse: Grata and haec
Vis, God is well pleased when such violence is offered Him.

Thou shall cut it down. Text.


He says not, I will cut it down; but, Thou shall; and why not He, as he was
willed? Alas! It could not but be an unpleasing Office for him, who had
bestowed so much pains and labor about that Tree, now to fell it: If the
fatal stroke must be given, and that there be no remedy, let it be done by
thine own hand, spare mine: (So some Interpret it.)

Or rather thus; Thou shall cut it down, not I, in that it is by thy Command
that I do it; Done it shall be, I will submit and yield obedience to thy Will,
for I am but thy Servant, and therein execute thy Will and pleasure. And thence
observe we,

Whatever be the Instrument, or Whoever be the Agent, God is the Principal
Efficient of those Judgments which befall a People.

Let the Axe be what it will; or the Dresser who he will; It is the Lord of the
Vineyard that cuts down the Fig Tree.

Sometimes, God does make the Unreasonable Creature his Axe or Instrument, in
hewing and cutting down; and sometimes the Reasonable; but whether these, or
those, all are but as the Axe in his hand.

In all the Ten Plagues of Egypt, it was God that did smite Exodus 7.17. Exodus
7.17. Levit. 26. Number. 21.6. Amos 4.6, 9, 10, 11. Exodus 9.3. 1 Chr. 21.12. Psalm.
91.5.
All those Judgments threatened against the disobedient, Levit. 26. I will send
(says God). He sent fiery Serpents amongst the People, Numb. 21.6. he smites
with blasting and mildew; sends Famine, Plague, and Pestilence, Amos 4.6, 9,
10, 11. Murrain of Cattle is called his Hand, Exodus 9.3. Pestilence, his Sword,
1 Chronicles. 21.12. Sickness, his Arrows, Psalm. 91.5. He it is that does hurt,
and shoot; wound, spoil, and overturn; be the Instrument what it will be.

Sometimes the Reasonable Creature is used as his Agent, in the Execution of
his Judgments: Angels and Men, both Good and Bad are used as the Instruments of
his wrath.

Good men are sometimes made use of for that purpose; So God's Prophets and
Ministers are said to hew and slay, Hos. 6.5.
Hos. 6.5. But whom they cut down, by virtue of their place and Office, God
cuts down: I hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the Word of my
mouth; I have done it, I have done it (says the Lord).

Sometimes the Civil Magistrate is employed in that Service; he lifts up the
Axe, and inflicts temporal Punishments on Delinquents: Ps. 101.5, 8.
David will cut off all wicked Doers from the City of God, Psalm. 101.5, 8. And
yet, in so doing, he is but the Minister of God, Romans 13.4 2 Chro. 19.5, 6.
A Revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil, Romans 13.4. The Judgment is
God's, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6. God does own it as his. The Soul that turns after
such as have familiar Spirits, and after Wizards, I will even set my face
against that Soul, Lev. 20.6.
and will cut him off from amongst his People (says God, Levit. 20.6.) God
says, He will do it; and yet this Cutting off was by the hand of the
Magistrate, Exodus 22.18.
who was not to suffer a Witch to live. Exodus 22.18.

And as God makes use of Good men; so, oftentimes of Bad, in the Execution of
his Judgments: The King of Babylon was God's Sword to cut down, and spoil the
Egyptians: God did put the Sword into his hand, and strengthen his Arms; and
in so doing, Ezekiel. 30.24.
it was God Himself that brake the Arms of Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 30.24. The proud
Assyrian was the Rod of his Anger, and the staff of his Indignation: He sent
him to punish his own People, Isa. 10.5, 6. Isa. 10.5, 6.
He was but the Axe in God's hand to hew down Judah, His Saw to divide it, His
Rod to scourge it, His Staff to beat it; And when that Axe, that Saw, that Rod,
that Staff did magnify it self against the hand that used it; God upbraids it
for so doing, as if the Instrument could do ought without the Arm that moved it
verse 15. Verse 25.


The Angels both Good and Bad are made use of, in the Execution of God's
Judgments. It was a good Angel that smote the Isralites with Plague and
Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. 2 Samuel 24.
But it was the Lord that sent that Pestilence upon Israel, verse 15. Verse 15.
And it was the Angel of the Lord that slew all the first born of Aegppt but
that Angel was no other then God's Instrument, Exodus 12.29.
for it was God that smote them, Exodus 12.29.

The Bad Angels, the Devils are likewise God's Agents and Instruments of his
wrath; An evil spirit it was that vexed Saul, but that spirit was sent from God
to do it; 1 Samuel 16.14. 1 Samuel 16.14.
A lying spirit was in the mouth of Ahab's Prophets, to seduce him, but it was
God that put that lying spirit into their mouths; He sent it forth, and gave it
a Commission to do what it did, 1 King. 22.22, 23.
1 King. 22.22, 23. And thus God used Satan as his Instrument, in afflicting
Job for the trial of his graces, (of which more anon).

This Truth delivered has strong Confirmation from Scripture, 2 King. 21.12,
13, 14. 2 Corn. 15.6. Isa. 28.21, and 45, 6, 7. Jer. 18.11. Amos 3.6. Ruth
1.20. Job 1.21, and 6, 4, and 16, 12. Lament. 1, 12, 17. Hos. 6.1. Exodus 8.19 2
King. 6.33. Jon. 1.14.
the mouth of God has said it, 2 King. 21.12, 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 5.6. Isa.
28.21, and 45, 6, 7. Jor. 18.11. Amos 3.6. The godly have acknowledged this,
Ruth 1.20. Job 1.21, and 6.4, and 16, 12. Lament. 1.12, 17. Hos. 6.1. Yea, the
wicked cannot but confess it, Exodus 8.19. 2 King. 6.33. Jon. 1.14. So Tiberius
was wont to say, that Thunder was the power of God. Homer, that the Plague was
the Arrow of God; and Hippocrates, that it was sent, as a punishment from God:
Superstitious Heathens have subscribed to the truth of what is now delivered.

Obj. There are two or three Objections might be made against this, which we
shall briesly say somewhat unto, for the farther clearing of the point.

If the Devil and his Agents have a hand in many of these Judgments which are
inflicted on a Nation and People:

In three respects it may be safely said: purpose and ordination; for they do
nothing but what God purposed before hand to have done, as the Church
acknowledges in the Case of Christ, Act. 4.27, 28.
Acts 4.27, 28. Of a truth, against thy Holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of
Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel
determined before to be done. All these Enemies of Christ (notwithstanding all
their plotting and maliciousness) did nothing, nor could they do any thing
against him, but that which God in his eternal Counsel had both foreseen and
decreed, to permit for the Salvation of his Church. Thus, St. Paul (preventing
that temptation which might arise from his sufferings) puts the Thessalonians
in mind of this, that God had appointed them thereunto, 1 These. 3.3. Dr. Sclat.
in loc.
1 These. 3.3. where the Argument lies not so much in the inevitable necessity
(says a Learned Expositor), as in the conformity that should be in us, to
every will and appointment of God.

Secondly, In respect of the Executing of that his Decree, according to his
purpose; and therein is God's hand evident (as we have showed you in the proof
of the point). It is Ambrose his Observation, that in all Afflictions, God's
hand and the Devil's hand are but one hand: Stretch out thy hand (says Satan
to God concerning Job) and touch all that he has, Job 1.11, 12.
Job 1.11. Behold, all that he has is in thy hand or power, (replied God to
Satan, verse 12.) Put forth thy hand now, and touch his bo^es and his flesh
(says Satan to God, Job 2.5, 6.
Job 2.5.) Behold, he is in thine hand (says God), but touch not his Life,
verse 6. And that holy man Job, in all his trials and temptations, saw Gods
hand therein, Job 1.21.
Job. 1.21.

Thirdly, In his ordering and disposing of all his Judgments that are
inflicted, with all Circumstances that belong unto them, by his most wise and
powerful providence. You thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good
(said Joseph to his Brethren, Genesis 51.20
Genesis 51.20.) and God turned it to good; not only good to Joseph, who was no
partaker in the evil, but good even to them, who meant nothing but evil: they
shot at him with their arrows of envy and hatred, and sorely grieved him, Genesis
49.23 2 King. 13.17.
Genesis 49.23. But as we read in that Story, 2 King. 13.17. (when Joash shot, the
Prophet's hand was upon the King's hand so) God's hand was upon the hand of
those Archers that shot at Joseph. From what hand soever Affliction comes, from
whose Bow soever that Arrow flies, yet God's hand is upon that hand that shoots
it; and, albeit it may hitt the mark, according to their purpose that shot the
arrow; yet, it has the effect and working (both on good and bad) according to
his hand that orders all for his glory, and his Churches good.



The secret will of God, is not the Rule for us to be guided by, revealed to
us; neither the Devil nor damned can cross that; they must do it whether they
will or no: but running against the revealed will of God, their condemnation is
just; and this they do most usually.

Secondly, Put case the Act be enjoined by God, and they do therein what God
enjoined them to do, yet they do it not in that manner that they should, nor do
they aim at the right end in doing of it. Instance in Jehu, who was commanded
by God to smite the House of Ahab his Master, and to avenge the blood of his
Servants the Prophets, at the hand of Jezabel, 2 King. 9, 6, 7, 8. which he did
accordingly, 2 King. 9.6, 7, 8. 2 King. 10.30.
and was commended by God for so doing, 2 King. 10.30. But in that he did not
this in the sincerity and uprightness of his heart; but with a corrupt mind,
poisoned with ambition, as appears, Verse 31.
2 King. 10.31. God threatens to avenge the blood of Jezreel (that is, the
blood of Ahab's posterity, which he in his cruelty and ambition shed in the
Valley of Jezreel) upon the House of Jehu, Hos. 1.4. Hos. 1.4.
The like we read of the King of Ashur, whom God sent against his People to
afflict them for their Hypocrisy and Idolatry, but he had other ends and aims;
He means not so (says Go^) neither does he think so, but it is in his heart
to destroy, and cut off Nations not a few, Isa. 10.7. And for that God
threatens to punish him. Isa. 10.7.


Omne Agent, agit sibi simile.
God being absolutely good, both in se, and extra se (good in himself, and good
to all his Creatures) cannot but produce a like Act: Now punishments and
afflictions are evil, and so termed, Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6. How then can God be
the Author of them? Isa. 75.7. Amos 2.6. Resp.


Revengements and Punishments are called Evil in Scripture, Non quod per se
mala sunt, not because they are of themselves Evil, sed quod patientibus mala
esse videantur: but because they seem evil to those that suffer them (says one
of the Ancient). Heir. lib. 4. Com. in Jer. Irenaeus ad Haeres. lib. 4. c. 77.
Nay, the very ^orments of Hell (says another) are not indeed, and of their
nature evil; but mala sunt his, qui incidunt in ea, they are evil to such as
fall into them, but bona ex Justitia Dei, good they are, as they proceed from
God's Justice, and tend to his Glory. And Augustine, being demanded by the
Manichees, Vnde Malum; If there were not an ill God, as well as a good God;
from whence proceeded all that ill which was in the World replied, Vnde malum?
quid malum? From whence comes evil? Why, what is there in the World that you
can call evil? I know no such thing.

But the ordinary (and safer) answer to this Objection, is, That evil (as
Scripture styleth them,) being the punishments of sin, the fruits of God's just
displeasure, and flashes of hellish torments: Yet, not so simply and absolutely
evil, but that there is some respect of good in them. As they proceed from God,
the chief good, they are good; whether they are inflicted as punishments by a
righteous Judge, or as Chastisements from the hand of a merciful Father. As He
wills them, they must be good, for that His will is the chief Rule of all
good; yea, the evil of sin is so far good, as it is willed by God, and as it is
a punishment of former sins. And as they are overruled by God's Wisdom and
Power, they are good through his blessing; becoming means to draw his Elect
nearer to the chiefest good; yea, let God's Judgments go as high as they can in
this World, in Plaguing of the wicked, Etsi novum videtur, quod dicere volo,
(says Origin,) dicam tamen, Though it be-strange, that I will say, I will say
it, Etiam bonitas Dei est, qui dicitur furor ejus, that which we call the anger
of God, the wrath of God, the Fury of God, is the goodness of God. Luther goes
yet higher, Hell it self is full of God, and the chief good, no less then
Heaven; for the Justice of God which shines forth in the damnation of the
wicked, is God himself; and God is the chiefest good: And thus much of the
Objections made against the Doctrine delivered. Let me now show you the Grounds
of it.

I will hear the Heavens (says God), and the Heavens shall hear the Earth,
Hos. 2.21, 22.
and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall
hear Jezreel. Man stands in need of food; food is not provided without the
help of the Earth; the Earth is not fruitful without the Dew of Heaven; the
Heavens cannot send their rain without God's appointment: So that he is the
principal Cause, and first Mover, who sets all inferior means on Work; one
Creature stands in need of another, and depends upon one another help; none of
them can help, or work without the next cause, to which it is subordinate: but
all depends upon God he hears them all; and by that virtue which they receive
from him the first and chief Cause, they have all their virtue and efficacy,
without which they could do nothing: In regard whereof, all the Effects and
Actions of secundary causes are not so properly the effects of them, as of that
cause which is first and principal: As the Scribe is more properly said to
write, than the pen which he writes with; and the Workman to do the work,
rather then the tools which he uses as his Instruments in doing of the Work:
So the Lord, Who is the chief Agent, and first Mover in all Actions, may more
fitly and properly be said to effect, and bring things to pass, then any
inferior or subordinate Cause, they being but his Instruments that he works
by. Who ever (then) may have a hand in afflicting and punishing of us, they are
but Instruments, as the Rod, or Axe in his hand, to effect his good will and
pleasure, he it is that works by them.

glory of Works and Actions, the Judgment of Secrets, and the Revenge of
Injuries (says one): And he says no more then what the Scripture says, in so
saying. For it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord,
Romans 12.19. Where we see, Romans 12.19.
1st. God's Challenge, Vengeance is mine: 2ly, His Execution of it, I will
Repay: 3ly, His Subscription of his great name thereunto, says the Lord. And
that this is the Lords true Act and Deed, and a Faithful Copy out of the
Original, St. Paul, the Register of God's Holy Spirit gives witness, with
Scriptum est, It is written: And so we find it, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
God sometimes may send us our payment by the hand of the Ministers of the
Word, Who have Vengeance in a readiness against all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6.
which Vengeance is spiritual (says the Apostle), 2 Cor. 10.6.
and mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, verse 6. And is
to be understood especially of the threatenings and denunciations of God's
Judgments against offenders; but the Execution is left to God, for that we know
He will repay, and in his own time fulfill: And sometimes that Vengeance is
Corporal, reaching but the Body: which is partly inflicted by his substitutes
the Magistrate, or other Messengers of his wrath, Romans 13.4.
Romans 13.4. And partly referred to the Lords own hand, immediately to inflict;
Particularly in this Life; and Generally at the last great Day of Vengeance; 2
These. 1.8. Whether Vengeance taken, 2 These. 1.8.
be mediate, or immediate, upon Body or Soul, or both; We know him that has
said, Vengeance is mine, Heb. 10.13.
and I will recompense, says the Lord, Heb. 10.13.

Every good thing is of God; so teaches St. James 1.17. Jam. 1.17.
Now if every punishment be a good thing (though not simply in it self and in
its own nature, but) as it is a just work, and having a good end (as before
has bin showed), we must needs conclude, that it has God for the Author,
whoever be the Instrument. But this is a Point that needs not so much evident
Demonstration, as serious Consideration, and right and seasonable Application,
which now we fall upon.

Rome would make the World believe, that we of the Reformed Church, make God to
be the Author of sin, and that the Adultery of David, Treason of Judas, etc. by
our Doctrine were the proper work of God, which is a Devilish slander that they
cast upon us: This we say that in a sinful Action there are two things, Actio
and Actionis irrectitudo: there is an Entity, Being, or Action; and there is of
that Entity, Being or Action, a crookedness obliquity, or naughtiness which
is Actionis Malitia (as they call it,) unlawfulness, transgression, pravity,
that in every such action is contained: Prim. Secun. Quest. 71. Art. 6.
Conclus. Quest. 79. Art. 2. Conclus. Act. 17.28.
And so Aquinas himself does teach us to distinguish, and illustrates the same
in a lame leg, wherein are two qualities, ability to go, but inability to go
upright; the going and stirring, that it has, is from the virtue that moves
it, from God Almighty, in whom we live, move, and have our being; But the
lamenesse and debility of the leg, belongs to another Cause; Distortion,
Crookedness, or some other Impotency in the leg it self: So the action, or
motion it self in every evil action, is from a good Author, but the evil in the
action from a bad Author; even from the impure fountain of man's corrupt heart,
whose imaginations are evil, and only evil continually. But our Church has
bin justified by her Children, sufficiently in this point. I pass it.

etc. They do (they say) but the will of God, and who can resist that? The will
of God indeed cannot be resisted; Romans 9.
ungratious Instruments in all their outrages, shall do that service to God,
which they dream not of: God says, Kill not, Rob not; they contradict Him, and
will Rob and Kill. Even then, though they violate the Law of God; Yet, His will
is accomplished, and in the same action some other way performed than they
intended: But this is another will than that they should walk by; a secret will
(which the very Devils in Hell cannot but observe, and give obedience unto). It
is the revealed will, recorded in Scripture; published, and proclaimed by
Prophets, Promises, Threatenings; that should be our Rule, which not conforming
unto, (albeit you do the other, yet) woeful will be the wages which you will
receive for so doing.

see his affliction, that is, feel it; but we must see it so, as that we see
through it; and that we do not, unless we see the hand of God therein
ordaining, inflicting, and ordering of it: Belshazzar saw the fingers of a man's
handwriting upon the Wall, Dan. 5.5.
yet that was God's hand, albeit he could not read the writing: We must see our
affliction so, as we must see it to be the hand of God, albeit we see not
presently what will be the issue of it; and till we see that, we see nothing,
as we should see.

When God speaks by his Prophet Zachary of breaking his two Staves, Beauty, and
Bands, wherewith he fed the Flock; that is, Zach. 11.7 Enlightened
the staff of his gracious Protection and fatherly Correction; signifying
thereby, that he would no more take charge of so refractory a People,
whatsoever calamity befell them, He would not put to his hand to help them or
redress them, Zach. 11.9. That which dies, let it dye, and that that is to be
cut off, let it be cut off: Upon this cutting off of the stiff-necked and
rebellious, the poor of the Flock that waited upon God, knew that it was the
World of the Lord, Verse 11.
verse 11. Those humble and meek Servants of God which waited upon him
conscionably, in that sinful and wicked Generation, well knew that it was the
just will and pleasure of God to deal so severely with so Rebellious a People:
They acknowledged God's hand to be therein, and that He was the inflicter of
those Judgments on them. It is not every man's Case to see God, and acknowledge
the hand of God in his Judgments; only the poor of the Sheep, such as discern
their own poverty and unworthiness, can make that use of Gods Judgments, so as
to find Gods hand, and then Gods purpose in it.

This did Joseph; You sent me not hither (says he unto his Brethren,) but God
sent me hither before you, to preserve you, Genesis 45.5, 7.
Genesis 45.5, 7. So Ely, when he heard that the Philistines should kill his two
sons, and take away the Ark, It is the Lord (said he), 1 Samuel 3.18. 1 Samuel 3.18.
And David had learned thus to look on all his Enemies, as on God's Instrments;
Deliver my Soul from the Wicked, which is thy Sword, from men which are thy
hand O God, Psalm. 17.13, 15. Psalm. 17.13, 14.
But it is otherwise with worldly and carnal men. In all Judgments that fall
out, with Balaam, they see the Ass, but not the Angel, and so extend their
rage against the dumb Beast (which it may be deserves no blame), and slander,
sometimes the Air, sometimes the Wind and Weather, sometimes the Stars,
sometimes the Fire, sometimes the Water; attributing all their Sufferings to
things in nature, rather then unto God (as though there were an opposition, and
not a subordination betwixt God and his Creatures in their operations), and in
so doing, they do but resemble the Dog that snarls at the stone, not regarding
the hand that cast it: Or as if a Traitor, sentenced to dye, should quarrel
with the Axe, or fall foul upon his Executioner.

I speak not this, as if the Inferior causes of our miseries, and Instruments
of God's vengeance, were altogether to be neglected: (for, albeit in diverse
Judgments that are infflicted on us, we are to look wholly upon the hand of God
therein; As when he uses such means and Instruments to correct us by, as have
in themselves no malignity against us, nor will to hurt us; as Fire; Water,
Air; which are God's bare Instruments for effecting of his Will): Yet when he
uses the reasonable Creature, as his Agent, we are to have some respect to
him, in regard of that maglinity and sin which is in him, whereby they desire
our destruction and hurt, rather then the executing of God's good will and
pleasure; whose malice and rage, iniquity and cruelty, we are no way to
justify and excuse, but hare and shun by all good means; endeavoring to
cross them in their wicked purposes, and free our selves (what may be) from
their violence. But it is this we drive at, that we would learn to acknowledge
God's hand to be the Principal in all, and have our eyes fixed especially upon
him; knowing, as Christ said to Pilate, they could have no power at all against
us, Joh. 19.10, 11.
unless it were given them from above, Joh. 19.10, 11.

It is one degree of good Husbandry, in ill Husbands (says one), Dr. Donn.
to bring all their debts into one hand: So shall that man husband his
Afflictions well, that puts them all upon his debts to God, and leaves out the
consideration of the Instrument: For in so doing we shall be the better enabled.

First, To bear them patiently, which is very hard for Flesh and Blood to do: I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth (said David Psalm. 39.9.) because thou did
it: Psalm. 39.9.
As if he should have said, I should have spoke again, and spoken, it may be,
very passionately, when Shimei cursed me, 2 Samuel 16.6. Explained.
rayled on me, and cast stones at me; I should not have born it but that I saw
thy hand therein; Thou have said unto him, Curse David; otherwise, that Dog
should not have wagged his Tongue against me, Sam. 15.10. This kept him from
venting fretfull speeches. Gregory Nyssen calls Basil, Ambidextrum; (but in a
good sense,) for that he took every thing that came, by the right handle; and
with the right hand, because he saw it to come from God: Afflictions are the
more welcome, when we see them to be His; And experience teaches, that in all
those Afflictions which come immedi^tely from God, we are ordinarily more
patient, than in those that come Iustrumentally from others. What Laban and
Bethuel said, let us say in every Judgment that we ly under; This thing is
proceeded of the Lord, I cannot therefore say either good or evil, Genesis 24.5.
Nay, Genesis 24.5.
Let us (as better instructed,) alter the words a little, saying; This thing is
proceeded from the Lord; this Judgment, this Affliction, this Cross is sent
from Him, I cannot therefore but speak good of it, and not evil.

Secondly, We shall (by this consideration) be better enabled to bear our
Afflictions profitably and fruitfully; It will humble us, and cause us to throw
our selves low, before the Throne of Grace. 1 Per. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God (says Peter, 1 Epist. 5.6.)
that He may exalt you in due time. When we see God's holy hand in them, and
that it is He that smites, we cannot (unless our hearts be very obdurate) but
be stirred up to go to Him, and humble our selves in his sight: We shall
confess his Righteousness, and our own Unworthiness, and with Mauritius
(that good Emperor), who having his two Sons, and three Daughters, and then
his godly Wife Constantina, slain before his eyes, by Phocas (whom the
Soldiers had proclaimed Emperor in his room), uttered that memorable saying
of the Prophet, Righteous art thou, O Lord, Hos. 6.1.
and just are all thy Judgments. It will cause us to fly to him for help alone;
Come, let us return unto the Lord, for it is He that has wounded us, etc. Hos.
6.1. Our Peace is to be made, not with the Jailer, but with the Judge; not with
the Baily, but with the Creditor; all our work under Affliction lies in Heaven:
1 King. 20.31.
Like Benhadad's best Counsellour's, who sent him with a Coard about his Neck,
to the merciful King of Israel; so do our Afflictions (when we once see that
the hand of God is in them) send us to the God of Heaven for mercy: many a Soul
has Affliction whipped to Heaven, which otherwise (in all likelihood) would
never have come thither.

Thirdly, This will be a means whereby we shall be enabled to bear those
Tribulations and Afflictions which shall lie upon us, more comfortably and
cheerfully. Hab. 1.12. Explained.
The Prophet Habakkuk speaking of those sad and heavy calamities which the
Church then lay under, by reason of the Chaldaans; gathered much comfort from
this consideration, We shall not die, (says he Hab. 1.12.) O Lord, thou have or
dained them for Judgment, and, O mighty God thou have established them for
Correction; As if he should have said; Thou, O Lord my God, have ordained these
Chaldees most justly for our Punishment, and set them on work for our
Correction, not for our destruction; and, they being but as the Rod in thy
hand, we rest assured, that thou have not designed us to utter extirpation; we
shall not die, albeit thou fetchest blood from us, and causest us to smart soar.
A merciful Father, albeit he takes a swindging Rod into his hand, to correct
his Child, yet he intends not to kill his Child with that Rod, nor will he
spend it wholly upon the back of his tender Infant: When we see bloody Tyrants,
and Oppressors, let loose upon us, this may terrify us very much; but when we
consider, that they are but as Rods in the hand of a gracious God, and
tenderhearted Father, who has the ruling and ordering of them, it must needs
be a great chearing to our Spirits. And thus God comfort his Church, Jer.
30.11.
Jer. 30.11. I am with thee (says the Lord) to save thee: though I make a full
end of all Nations whither I have scattered thee; yet will I not make a full
end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee
altogether unpunished. God will certainly correct those whom he loves; but the
Rods that he uses about his own, as they are in his hand, so they are bound
about with Mercy, as God intimates to David, in that promise which He made to
him concerning Solomon; 2 Samuel 7.14.
If he commit Iniquity, I will chasten him with the Rod of men, and with the
stripes of the Children of men; that is, gently and favorably, as loving
Parents use to correct the Children that they love; but my Mercy shall not
depart away from him; still the Rod shall be bound up with Mercy; And so are
all God's Rods wherewith he scourges His. And when he has made use of that
Rod in scourging of his own, at last he will cast that Rod away into the fire,
as God speaks concerning the Assyrian, that Rod of his Anger, and Staff of
his Indignation. Isa. 10.24, 25.
The Assyrian shall smite thee with a Rod, and shall lift up his staff against
thee after the manner of Egypt: for yet a very little while, and the
Indignation shall cease, and mine Anger in their destruction, Isa. 10.24.25.

With this consideration, that God's hand is in all, our blessed Savior
sustained himself in his Sufferings, Joh. 18.11 Explained.
Shall I not drink of the Cup my Father has given me to drink, Joh. 18.11. It
is a Cup, not a Sea, of wrath; our Afflictions are all measured by a wise God;
Satan cannot put in more than God knows medicinable, Rev. 2.20.
Rev. 2.10.

It is a Cup in a Father's hand, when he reaches it unto us, we should
willingly receive it; the stubbornest Child from a Father receives Correction,
although he will not from a Stranger, Heb. 12.9. Heb. 12.9.


It is given us to drink; a Potion it is, that must be taken; Heb. 12.11
bitter indeed at the top, but sweet at the bottom, Heb. 12.11. If it be too
much for one draught, we shall take it at two; one draught now, another anon;
we may not spill it, drink it we must.

And shall I not drink it, seeing the Physician is experienced; the Physic is
allayed and tempered; and by the hand of a Father tendered to us? Let us
comfortably bear, what cross soever God shall be pleased to lay upon us.

To conclude all in a word, Let us remember, that when God's Rod, in Moses
hand, wasturned into a Serpent, Exodus 7.10, 12.
it did no harm; it did but devour up other Serpents; it stung no body, and it
quickly turned into a Rod again: When God's Rods lie heaviest upon us, if they
devour up other Rods, that is, enable us to put off the consideration of the
malice of other men, and all displeasure toward them, and see all, as coming
from the most High, for sin; then these Rods have wrought a good effect indeed,
then we shall find, in due time, that these Rods will be comfortable; And thou
shall have just cause given thee to say with David, It is good for me that I
have been corrected, Ps. 119.71.
Psalm. 119. And so, we have done with this. Now we come to what is principally
intended in the words.

Then, after that, thou shall cut it down.]

That is, after thou have born with it, and I taken pains about it, Text.
if no Fruit follow, the Axe shall. Our Inference is,

Greatest Severity attends upon despised Mecrcy.]

If, after all God's pains and patience,

Hear what is threatened against all such as shall abuse God's goodness;
contemn his Mercy; slight his threatening; flattering themselves in their
wicked ways, saying; Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.
I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, adding
drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord,
(even his fierce Anger,) and his Jealousy (which, as Solomon says, is the rage
of a man, and causes him not to spare in the day of revenge, Prove. 6.34.)
shall smoke against that man, Pro. 6.34.
which is a Sign of hot displeasure, and soar Indignation, (as we read, Psalm.
18.9. and 741. Isa. 42.13. Enligh^^ed
Psalm. 18.9. and 74.1.) The Prophet Isay illustrates this by two excellent
Similitudes.

The Lord shall go forth (says the Prophet, Isa. 42.13.) as a mighty man, he
shall stir up Himself; like a man of War, He shall cry, yea, roar against his
Enemies: That Similitude is taken from Military affairs, or the practice of
Soldiers in the day of Battle, who, to manifest the alacrity of their Spirits,
and for the terror of their Enemies, set upon them with a great Cry and shout;
So will God, when he comes against those who contemn and reject that gracious
offer of Christ, (there prophesies of, Ver. 9, 10.
and before held forth in beauty and glory,) He will stir up his wrath against
them, and come upon them like a Giant, or Mighty man, (which word is used to
set forth the Might wherewith God comes to revenge; he will put all his
strength to it, as it were) that shouteth by reason of Wine: as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 78.65. Ps. 78.65.
He will smite his Enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual
reproach.

The Prophet goes on, and further illustrates this soar Severity which shall be
used toward the despisers of his Mercy, by a Similitude of a Woman in
Childbirth, ver. 14. I have a long time holden my peace, I have been still,
and refrained my self; now will I cry like a traveling Woman, I will destroy
and devour at once. The Woman in travel, when her pains come first upon her,
bites them in, what may be; but when her last throws of Childbirth are come,
she can no longer hide them: So, although I have long refrained my self (says
God) from taking revenge upon these Enemies of mine; yet, now I can forbear no
longer, my heavy wrath shall break out upon them to their utter destruction:
Those mine Enemies that will not have me to reign over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them and slay them here before my face, Luke 19.27. A soar and severe
Sentence!

I might heap up proofs for the Confirmation of the Point in hand; Ps. 86.21.
Amos 3.1, 2. Mat. 11.23 Romans 2.4, ^.
but I shall only apply my self to the Instance in my Text: This Jewish
Fig Tree, (that State and Nation of the Jews,) whereof the Apostle speaking to
the Gentiles, wills them to behold God's severe dealing with them, that by them
they might be warned not to abuse the goodness of God. Behold therefore (says
he) the Goodness and Severity of God on them which fell, Severity; but toward
thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise, thou also shall
be cut off, Romans 11.22.
Romans 11.22. They that fell were the Jews; and they were severely dealt withal,
for abusing of God's goodness, they were broken off from the Root: but
Goodness toward the Gentiles, provided that they continue in that goodness,
(for upon that condition it is, that they hold it,) otherwise, if they forsake
and lose the Gospel, and abuse Goodness, they must look to be also cut off,
which is more than to be broken off, (as Origin does observe, and thence
infers, that the Judgment of the Gentiles shall be greater than that of the
Jews, in case they fall away.) And forasmuch as we are willed to Behold this
Severity of God toward them (that is, to note it, and mark it well;) Give me
leave to stop a little, and acquaint you with the passages of God's Severity,
in the cutting down that Nation; and give you a brief Relation of the
destruct^on and final ruin of it, as History records it.

Never was Nation more beloved of God, nor any People on Earth higher in God's
favor; No People graced with so many privileges, nor blessed with so many
pledges of his favor, as the Apostle shows, Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4, 5. But,
Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4, 5.
despising the riches of God's Grace, in rejecting the Gospel, persecuting of
the Truth, murdering of God's Prophets, and putting of the Lord of Life
himself to death; God cut them down with the greatest Severity that ever befell
any Nation under Heaven.

The days came upon them, that Christ (when he preached amongst them)
foretold; Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, Luke 19.43, 44.
and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side; And shall lay thee
eeven with the ground, and thy Children within thee, and they shall not leav
thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation* Luke 19.43, 44. And all this happened unto them, about 70 years after
the Nativity of our Savior, and about 38 years after his Ascension, when as
the Emperor Vespasian, and his son Titus came against Jerusalem, with a very
great Army, laying siege against it, and within 3 days space, made a firm wall
about it, and upon that set Towers and Castles, lest any of the Jews should fly
to save themselves; Jerusalem being then full of People: For (besides the
Inhabitants of the City,) about three hundred thousand Jews were come unto
Jerusalem, to celebrate the Feast of the Passover, which at that time fell
out). These the enemy gave way unto to enter, and then upon the sudden, drew
up their forces; and straightly beleaguered them, so as that all this huge
multitude were imprisoned within the Walls of the City, where also they were
partakers of no small misery.

For, besides the enemy without, there were three great Factions at this time
that swayed in Jerusalem (which Vespasian took advantage of): One of Eleazer
the Priest, the son of Simon; the second of Zelotas the chief Prince, which
held the Temple; The third of Johannes Giscalenus, a bloody and cruel fellow,
Quis furor hic, Cives?
which had the command of the inferior City: These weakened themselves much
more by their civil and intestine Wars, and continued-slaughters, then the
Enemy by his invasion; They turned their Swords upon themselves, as if their
own hands had bin ordained to be their Executioners; Insomuch as that the whole
City and Temple were filled with dead Bodies, and the Kennels rann with the
blood of the slain; Besides, the common insolences, and public rapins that
were amongst them, They fired the City, and dispoyled the Temple, killed the
Priests; and, without any regard at all of their future defense, set fire on
the storehouse, wherein their provision lay, for the sustentation of their
City.

Hence arose a great Famine amongst them, such as no History can parallel; For
their ordinary sustenance being consumed and spent, Pedro Mexia in vitis
Imperat. in Vespasian. p. 126.
the flesh of Horses, Asses, Dogs, Rats, Snakes, Adders, seemed good and
pleasant unto their tastes; when such food failed them, they were driven to eat
(that which unreasonable Creatures would not); of their leather bridles, of
their leather girdles, of their leather shoes they made them meat; some would
feed upon Snails and Worms, others upon old Hay chopped small; Pontan.
Pibliothec. Conc. Tom. 4. ad Dom. 10. Trinic. Egesippus de ex^idio Hierosolym.
l. 5. c. 17, 18.
The shreddings of Pot Herbs cast out, trodden under foot and withered, were
taken up again for nourishment. Doves dung, Ox dung, and M^ns dung, they were
constrained to feed upon: Miserabilis cibus, escalachrymabilis, miserable meat,
lamentable food; yet would the Child snatch it from the Parent, and the Parent
from the jaws of the Child; nearest and dearest Friends would kill one another
for a crust of Bread, and cut one another throats for the morsels they had in
their Bellies. The fairest Lady would commit open Adultery for a little
sustetenance; Et plerisque alioru^ vomitus esca fuit.
some to prolong their miserable lives, would after the manner of Dogs, eat up
that which others had vomited; yea, feed on the dead bodies of those, who a
little before had dyed and perished: Mothers stuck not to eat their own
Children, and those Wombs that gave them harbor, were now become the places
for their Sepulture and burial.

Amongst many other accidents in this unheard of Famine, one is very memorable,
Joseph. de bello Judai. lib. 7. c. 18. Egesip. de Excid. Hier. lib. 5. c. 40.
Nicephor. Chrysostom.
mentioned by Egesippus and Josephus (who was an eyewitness of this their
misery), of an outrage which a Mother committed upon her own Son: her name was
Mary, of the stock of Eleazer, and of the Town Bethezor; she was of a Noble and
Rich Family, and went to Jerusalem in hope of safety; thither she carried her
Riches and all her Substance, but the Seditions soon spoiled her of all, took
away her Substance and Sustenance, and utterly deprived her of all means of
livelihood; upon her knees she desired but some little part of that she had,
for the preservation of her life and sucking Infant, but the Seditious gave
little ear to her entreaties; when she saw that nothing would prevail, and that
through the whole City not one morsel was to be found, and being pressed partly
by extreme necessity, and partly with furious rage; she-took her tender Babe as
it was sucking, from her Breast, and thus spoke to it, Miserum te, Infans,
inbello and fame and seditione, cui te servavero? etc. Little Infant, poor
Wretch, in War, in Famine, in Sedition; for whom shall I preserve thee? Redi,
fili, in illud natural secretum. In quo domicilio sumpsisti spiritum, in eo
tibi tumulus defuncto paratur.
for whom shall I save thee alive? If thou live, thou must be a slave to the
Romans, but Famine prevents thy servitude; yea, and the mutinous Jews are more
cruel then either the Romans or the Famine; Be thou therefore mihi cibus,
seditiosis furia, humanae vitae fabula* Meat to me, a fury to the Mutinous, and
even a mock of the life of Man: Return, Oh my Child, into nature's secret
closet, for in that Chamber where thou receivedst breath, there is a Tomb
prepared for thee; What would thou do, my Boy, if thou had a Son? Why, I
have done hitherto what piety commanded; Now let me do what Famine enforces.
When she had thus spoken (says my Author) she swallowed down her grief, and
fell into a fit of frenzy, and imbrued her hands in the blood of that
harmless, sucking and silly Infant, the fruit of her own Womb: The body of it
she boiled or roasted, and eatt the one half, the remainder she reserved for
another repast.

Contaminatissimi nidoris odore capti.
The mutinous Soldiers of the Town (drawn by the scent and savor of this meat)
brake into this Woman's house, threatened to slay her, unless she would discover
where that meat was hid; She told them, she had meat indeed, and had reserved
it for her self; notwithstanding, since they so urged her, she would bring it
to them, which she did, and so brought them to the relics of her son, which
she uncovered, showing them the head and feet, and offered it unto them;
saying, Look, here is just half, here is your proportion, Ecce pueri manus una,
ecce pes unus, ecce dimidium reliqui corporis! Lo, here is one of my boy's
hands, here is one of his feet, and here is half the rest of his body! And
think not that it was another's, I tell you, it was my own sweet Child's;
Nunquam mihi fuisti dulcior fili: Thou were never sweeter to me, O my Son, thy
sweetness has upheld my life: And when the seditious (through horror) started
back, she cried unto them, Why eat you not? I am not hungry now, my Child has
satiated me, Gustate et videte quia suavis filius meus est, Taste ye, and see
how sweet my Son is; make not your selves more tender then a Mother, more
faint-hearted then a Woman; If you will not eat, it shall remain for me his
Mother; The Soldiers departing, related that execrable fact, at which every one
that heard it, trembled, as though himself had done the deed.

When the Famine had thus played his part, then came the Pestilence; procured,
partly through the stench of the bodies, that lay unburyed, and partly by the
multitude of massacres that daily happened; The Contagion of which disease,
was so violent, as that it took away the senses of many, and they became mad;
It laid along whole herds of them grovelling upon the Ground, nor was there any
Room or Time to bury them; For, as Wives and Kindred were putting the dead into
the grave, they also dyed. Within the compass of eleven weeks, says
Egesippus, there were carried out by one gate of the City 111000 dead bodies,
yet could not the City be emptyed, but Houses were filled with the dead
Carcasses of Infants and Children; And multitudes cast over the Walls into the
Ditches of the City, for that the Earth could not contain their Dead. Which
when Titus saw, and that the putrefaction swamm upon the brim of the Ditch, he
lifted up his eyes and hands to Heaven, and with a deep sigh he called God to
witness, that it was not his cruelty, but the Judgment of God upon them for
their Impiety.

Jerusalem being brought thus low with Sedition, Famine, and Pestilence; was
now ready to become a prey unto the Enemy: who perceiving that the Jews did not
appear upon the Walls as in former times, caused his Engines of battery to be
brought, and at length with great difficulty won one Wall, and then another, at
last a third; He took the Tower of Antonia, and there placed a Garrison; And
the North-Gate, which they burnt down with fire: They made a breach into the
Temple, and first fired the Gate of it (which was all covered over with Gold
and Silver), Then the Soldiers three Days after fired the Temple it self, which
was seven years a Building; and which Titus would fain have saved for the
sumptuousness of it, but could not.

After this, he won the lower City, whereof Johannes Giscalenus had the
Command, to whom he before had made a speech gently entreating him to leave off
his Rebellion, and the City should be spared, and no more outrages committed;
but it little prevailed: whereupon in a rage he gave the signal to his
Soldiers, who with Fire and Sword consumed it, and within a short space after
took Giscalenus alive, whom he reserved for a more cruel death.

The inferior City being thus taken and destroyed, he began to batter the
Walls of the upper City, which, within the space of eighteen days after, with
great labor and skill he laid flat to the Ground, wasting all with Fire and
Sword; sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child; not leaving one stone upon
another: Only, the three Towers which were built by Herod, viz. Hippicus,
Phaselus, and Mariamxe (which were all of shining marble) were left standing,
that future Ages seeing the stateliness of those Buildings, might judge of the
rest: But these were also destroyed afterward by Adricanus Caesar.

Thus the Land of Jury with the famous City Jerusalem, which was the glory of
the World, Joseph de bello Jud. lib. 7. c. 17. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c.
7. See Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib 3. cap. 6.
dead in sin and trespasses, became a Carcass, or smelling Carrion; and so fit
to be a prey for the ravening Eagle. An innumerable company dyed by Famine and
Pestilence by Fire and Sword, ten hundred thousand; And besides those dead,
Fame, Morbo, Ferro; by Famine, Sickness, Sword; there were to the number of
7900 taken Captive (others said many more), 7000 were sent into Egypt; the
properest, and most able were reserved for Triumph; many were distributed
through the Provinces; some were slain by the Sword, and by wild Beasts for
public Spectacles; and those that were 16 years of Age and under (with many
others), Caesar sold, thirty for a penny.

Seven times before had Jerusalem bin besieged, as in the Old Testament we may
read; First, by Shishak King of Egypt, 1 King. 14. 1 King. 14. 2 King. 4. 2
King. 18. 2 K ng. 19. 2 Chronicles. 33.11. 2 King. 24. 2 King. 25.
Secondly, by Joas King of Israel, 2 King. 4. Thirdly, by Reshim King of Aram,
2 King. 18. Fourthly, by Senacherib King of Ashur, 2 King. 19. Fifthly, by the
Assyrian, in the time of Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Sixthly, by Pharaoh Necho,
in the time of Jehojakim, 2 King. 24. Seventhly, in the time of Zedechiah by
Nebuchadnezzar, 2 King. 25. That desolation was fatal, but not final: Diverse
times the Axe has bin laid to it, but never to the Root of this Fig Tree till
now, so, as to be utterly cut down, and cast off, and made a Reproach and Curse
amongst all Nations, as they are at this Day; wandering like Vagabonds in all
Countries, and made slaves to all Nations, even to the Mores, Barbarians, and
Turks; bringing upon their heads that imprecation of theirs, His blood be upon
us, Mat. 27.25
and upon our Children, which has lain on them for 1600 years, and yet lies
upon them; Insomuch that some Jewish Rabbis entering into a serious
consideration of this their last and greatest Calamity that ever befell them,
together with the continuance of it, and casting wi^h themselves what sin
might countervail so heavy a Judgment, have in the end concluded, that it can
be no other then the rejecting of the Messiah, and shedding of his blood, which
cries to Heaven for this Vengeance on them; and certainly, if all
Circumstances be observed, it will appear evidently, that Divine Justice did
not only make eaven reckonings with them in every particular of our Savior's
sufferings, but also kept the precise Day, and place of payment; beginning
first with Galilee (Christ's own Country), the place where Christ first
preached the Gospel of the Kingdom, and declared the Power of his Deity by
many Signs and Wonders: but because his Countrymen showed least respect unto
his Person, and gave least credit unto his Doctrine; it so fell out by the just
Judgment of God, that the Galileans first smarted for their unbelief, the whole
Country being spoiled and wasted by Vespatian.

Then for the time that he besieged Jerusalem, which was at the Feast of the
Passover, at which Feast Christ was Crucified; Baronius.
yea, even on the same Day that our Savior did suffer, did the Siege begin in
the same Place, for from mount Olivet did Titus view the City, whence our
Savior had viewed it, and wept over it; There the Authors of Christ's Death
suffered a most just revenge, where he but eight and thirty years before had
suffered.

And whereas his Blood was sold for money, the Blood of many of them was shed
for money. Diverse of them flying for their safety, being taken by the Romans,
had Gold found in their Excrements, which for madness they had swallowed down,
that the Enemy might not have it; which the Soldiers hearing, (and supposing
all the Jews had bin full of Gold) through covetousness of that gain, in one
Night killed 2000 of them, ripping up their Bellyes, and searching their
intrals for it.

Thirty pence Christ was sold for; so thirty of them were sold for one piece of
Silver, who bought his life for thirty pieces of Silver.

The Death which they put Christ unto, was the Death of the Cross, they hang
him on a Tree. And that was repayed in kind, and with advantage; for so many of
the Jews were crucified on, the Walls, every day by the Romans (whom they took
as they issued forth), that they wanted in the end Crosses for men's bodies,
and Trees to hang up any more upon.

Thus we find it true that the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.16.
1 These. 2.16. Wrath is come upon this Nation, (...), to the utmost, even to
perfection (as it were): for, despising God's greatest mercy, they were plagued
with greatest severity; A sufficient proof to clear the point, That greatest
severity attends upon desp^sed mercy.

The use that we should put this unto, is this, in short; Take heed how we
despise God's grace and goodness, that should lead us to repentance.
Plentitudo Gratiae, so there is Plentitudo irae, Plenty of mercy, and Plenty of
wrath too: As God is a God of Mercy, so he is a God of Vengeance. And it is for
his honor sometimes to magnify himself in that respect; Nahum. 1.
These titles given to himself, and appertaining to justice, could not belong
to Him, if he should for ever suffer his goodness to be despised. The Lord is
known by executing Judgment, and will be known that way by all despisers, Psalm.
9.16.
as well as the other way by showing mercy, Psalm. 9.16.

And let our own Fig Tree (this Land and Nation), look about it, yet in time:
with us God has born long, to the Admiration of all Neigbour-Nations; many a
time the Axe has bin up, yet laid down again: As in 88, the Powder plot, etc.
Yet a longer time has bin granted us for fruitfulness, but we are grown
rotten at heart, and doted; dying, if not dead: what can be now expected but to
be hewn down, and made fuel of? that the Axe should be so laid to the Root,
that we should be felled, so, as never to rise more? A miserable deceit it is,
to think, We may despise God's bounty, yet partake of mercy in the End:
Judgment and Mercy with God are like Jacob and Esau in their Mother's Womb:
when Judgment like roughhair'd Esau, strives to issue out first, Mercy takes it
by the heel, and with Jacob endeavors to pull it back; but Esau at length will
out, though Jacob have fast hold on his heel; Judgment will follow, although
mercy struggle mightily to stay it. Oh! think of what has bin related of
Jerusalem's misery; And make the Case our own. It may be our own, and is like
to be our own, if speedy Repentance prevent not: either Ficus, or Focus; Fruit,
or Fuel; no remedy: the chipps fly, let our Tears flow, before the Tree be
down. We are burnt in the Hand already; what Psalm of mercy shall we call for?
yet, mercy may be had: whilst the Fig Tree stands, there is hope. If,
notwithstanding all that has bin said, we will go on in our wickedness, we
shall but inhaunce and improve God's wrath; And who can but pity us, when
God's soarest and severest Judgments do befall us? So far will those that have
Interceded for us, be from speaking any more in our behalf, as that they will
stand out of the gap, and give way to the stroke; take hold on the hand of
Vengeance no more, but rest contented with God's proceedings: As the Dresser
here promises to do.

After that thou shall cut it down].

From the practice of this Dresser, Text.
we may learn our Duty.

To rest satisfied and contented in the just and deserved condemnation of
those, who remain unfruitful, under the means; albeit they are such as we
dearly affect.

When we have done our Duty, to bring a People to Repentance, and it will not
be; we must rest satisfied in their cutting down, and stubbing up after the
example of this Dresser; Who, albeit he did much respect this Fig Tree, and
bear a great and good affection to it, yet if, after all his pains bestowed on
it, it remains fruitless, he sits down, and intercedes no more in the behalf of
it; but gives way to the Execution of that severe sentence before denounced
against it, Cut it down.

When Israel was carried into Babylon, and became Captives to them, God
commands them to seek the Peace of the City, Jer. 29.7.
and pray for it, Jer. 29.7. which accordingly they did, both by Instruction,
laying open their errors, and discovering their impietyes; Dan. 4.24, and 6, 10.
and by their Example, practicing their own Religion, even before their faces;
and likewise by their prayers, as they were commanded; They were not wanting in
bringing Balm to cure her desperate wounds, but they found her to be incurable.
We would have healed Babylon, but She is not healed, Jer. 51.9.
says the Church, Jer. 51.9. Why, how so? She would not be healed; She
contemned the means, scorned their Religion, as appears, Psalm. 137.3. and did
cast away the good counsel which the Israelites gave them. Or, She could not be
healed (as some read), Psalm. 137.3
in regard of the wound, which God's wrath had inflicted on Her: they saw, and
knew that the device of the Lord was against Babylon to destroy it* because it
is the Vengeance of the Lord, the Vengeance of his Temple, verse 11. Now, what
does the Church in this Case? Upon the consideration of her obstinacy and
incurableness, they abandon Her, and leave Her to the Revenge of the Almighty,
and will lose no more labor upon Her: Let us forsake Her (say they one to
another), and go every man to his own Country.

The Prophet Amos, speaking of the woeful fall of the Virgin of Israel, Amos
5.2. Amos. 5.2.
that is, of the Israelitish Commonwealth, for whose mighty sins God had cut
them down with his mighty Judgments and Executions, of Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence, whereby he had wasted their multitade, from thousands to hunderds
from Hundreds to Tens: but they being no whit^ bettered hereby, the Prophet
foretells them of worser times, and more evil that shall befall them, but what
shall the godly do when they see those foretold Calamities befall Israel? Amos
5.13. Explained.
Why, The Prudent man shall keep silence in that time, verse 13. As if he
should say, Those that are prudent and wise, shall as that time lay their hands
upon their mouths in an humble silence, and acknowledgment of God's justice in
those events, and rest therewith contented and satisfied.

And such a prudent man was Aaron, whose two sons, Nadab and Abihu, being
consumed with fire from the Lord, for that they offered Incense with strange
fire (fire not taken from the Altar), Levit. 10.3
whereat Aaron could not but be much perplexed (and, it may be, show some
passion), but when Moses came un^o him, and put him in mind of what the Lord
had said, I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me, and before the People
I will be glorified; then Aaron held his Peace, Levit. 10.3. that is, he
troubled himself no further, for there is more in that word, than mere silence
of Speech; it implies the silence of the heart, and a staying of the Motions
thereof: His Children were dear un^o him, but the Glory of God was dearer, and
in that respect he did rest satisfied.

Yet, lest he and his sons might forget themselves, and prefer carnal
respects to God's glory; Moses gives them a further Charge. Uncover not your
Heads, neither rend your Clothes, lest you Dye, Verse 6.
verse 6. The meaning is, that they should not give any testimony of a repining
grief and coffeehouse at this just Judgment of God, lest in his displeasure
he consume them also.

And this is that which God required of Samuel in the behalf of Saul, who
mourned exceedingly for him, 1 Samuel 15.35.
being grieved that that goodly plant, which was so lately set in Israel should
be so soon withered, 1 Samuel 15.35. But God wills him to leave off his mourning,
How long will thou mourn for Saul, 1 Samuel 16.1.
seeing I have rejected him from Reigning over Israel? 1 Samuel 16.1. As if he
should have said, Thou know it is my doing, rest thou therefore satisfied,
and trouble thy self no further. Thus a good heart should forget earthly
respects, and look up to Heaven when God executes his severest Judgments on
sinners, here upon Earth.

Is God unrighteous (says the Apostle), who takes Vengeance? God forbid, Romans
3.5. He abhorrs the very thought of it, Romans 3.5.
as if he should say, Be it far from me, or any other man, to have so vile and
blasphemous a conceit of God, as to imagine that God is unrighteous in
punishing; The absurdity of such an opinion, he proves by an Argument taken
from the Office of God, which is to Judge the World, verse 6. For then, Verse 6.
How shall God judge the World? And shall not the Judge of all the World do
right (said Abraham, Genesis 18.25. Genesis 18.25
) He Governs the present World in equity, and in the World to come, He will
give to every one according to his doings; therefore, every punishment
inflicted upon sinners, how severe soever, either here, or here after, cannot
be other, then most just, seeing that Judge who is justice it self does it; He
is a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Just and Right is He, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Does God prevent Judgment? or does the
Almighty prevent Justice (says Bildad, Job 8.3.
Job. 8.3.) which Interrogation is a vehement Negation; No, he does not; let
that satisfy us.

Moses intirnates in that speech of his to Aaron, before mentioned; Levit 10.3
I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me; and, before all People, I will
be glorified. God, in his just Judgments inflicted upon Sinners, shows
Himself to be holy and just; and looks to be sanctified of his People, in the
acknowledgment of his Holiness and Justice. When He sanctifies himself in the
ways of Judgment upon the wicked, then He sanctifies himself in them, Exek.
28.12, and 38, 16, 23.
Ezekiel. 28.22. and 38.16, 23. And when his Holiness and Justice is acknowledged
in their just and deserved Punishment, then He is sanctified of or by his
People. Now, God having fully purposed to glorify himself, by all his
Creatures, finds no other way left, of reaping any honor from the Wicked, (who
will not be reclaimed,) but only by magnifying Himself in the Judgments that
He execute^^ on them; they make themselves incapable of being Active Instruments
of His Glory, Prove. 16.4
by performing that which is good in His sight, therefore they shall be Passive
Instruments, serving to decla^e His infinite Justice in their destruction: And,
when we acknowledge God's Justice and Righteousness in those Judgments
inflicted on them; when we justify His sayings, (let Him speak never so
sharply,) and clear him in his Judgments (let him deal never so severely, Psalm.
51.4. Psalm. 119.75. Neh. 9.39. Dan. 9.12.
Psalm. 51.4.); then He is Actively sanctified by us, as He was by David, Psalm.
119.75. by Nehemiah, cap. 9.33. Daniel, 9.12. and others; Let us so do, and
rest satisfied and contented.

Mat. 6.18.
That God's Will may be done, in Earth as it is in Heaven, Mat. 6.10. and
accordingly, we ought to endeavor to conform our Wills to the Wills of the
blessed Saints and Angels that are in Heaven, (otherwise our hearts and tongues
are strangers in our Petitions:) Now, those in Heaven know no man according to
the Flesh; they will and like, whatsoever God wills and likes, and rejoice
in that which makes for His Glory: They sing, when, in this World, the hearts
of obdurate Sinners are made fat against the day of Slaughter, Isa. 6.3, 10.
Rev. 15. and 18.
Isa. 6.3, 10. and when Vengeance is executed on Sinners, Revel. 15. and 16.
They approve even of the damnation of all Impenitent Sinners, were they, in
this life, their dear friends, and intimate acquaintance. Indeed, whilst we are
in this life we are not perfect, so as to be purged from all dross and
corruption; not so perfected as we shall be, when our Wills are thoroughly
complete; yet we ought to strive unto Perfection, as the Apostle did, Phil.
3.14.
Phil. 3.14. And what we cannot here reach, we are to approve of, and that
should content us.

There is an Objection, or two, that would be spoke withal. Let us hear what
they have to say, before we come to the Use.

If we ought thus to conform our Wills to the Will of God,

As the Will of God is made known unto us, David fasted and prayed for his
Child that was begotten in Adultery, notwithstanding the prediction of Nathan;
for that he understood conditionally, (as other threatenings, of like nature,
were to be understood,) but when he certainly understood, by the event, that
God had determined the Child should not live; he then rises from the Earth,
whereon he lay, he washes himself, and changes his apparel, he goes into
the House of God, and worshippeth; then home to his own House to eat meat, and
now refuses no comfort, (who before would take none,) to the admiration of his
Servants; and being demanded the reason of this strange Change and Alteration;
He tells them, Whilst the Child was yet alive, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23.
I fasted and wept; for I said, Who can tell, whether the Lord will be gracious
unto me, that the Child may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast,
Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. Upon which passage, a very learned and religious Bishop of our
Church has this Annotation; Till we know the determination of the Almighty, B.
B. Hall. Cont.
it is free for us to strive, by our Prayers, with Him (not against him); when
once we know them, it is out Duty to sit down in a silent contentation.

Whilst there is any hope of converting a Sinner, or doing any good unto his
Soul, all means are to be used; all ways are to be tried, all Patience to be
practiced, and all Wisdom to be exercised, all occasions to be taken, that
probably may prevail to do him good; still a wicked man is to be pityed, still
to be loved, still to be mourned for, and wished well unto; and whosoever is
wanting in his duty herein, has much to answer for before God: None may give
over using the means of a Sinner's reclaiming, till there be no hope at all;
And there is hope whilst there is life: Should God, in deed, reveal unto the
Church the Reprobation of any Sinner (says Augustine), Aug. lib. 22. de civ.
Dei. c. 24.
the Church ought no more to pray, that such a man might be saved, than they
are to pray for the Salvation of Devils, and of damned Spirits, (to whom our
charity extends not, as being incapable of beatifical Vision;) But that God
has not done of any one, save only of them that sin against the Holy Ghost,
(which no private man, but only the whole Church of God, is fit to judge of.)
Yet, by the Event, God reveals His Justice, and cut off all hope of amendment
by death; And in such a Case, we should rest contented, and bless His Name for
their ruin.

But this Doctrine makes against Christian Charity, which teaches us to lament
for the misery of Sinners, Esth. 8.6.
Can I endure (said Esther) to see the evil that shall come unto my People, or
how can I endure to see the destruction of my Kindred? Esther 8.6.

We must look upon the Judgments that fall upon Sinners, the fire, both weeps
and burns; it weeps at the ends, and burns in the middle: A deep Valley is clear
on the one side, yet cloudy on the other; so may a Christian mourn in one
respect, and grieve in another: When Joseph fell upon his Brother Benjamin's
neck, his Eyes were full of tears, when his heart was full of Joy. These works
of Justice are like to those double-faced pictures; look upon them one way, and
you may behold an ugly shape and visage; change your posture, and look upon
them another way, and you shall see a fair and beautiful Person: Look up to
God, and we have cause to rejoice; Look upon a Sinner, and there is great cause
to mourn (says Luther). Luther Tom. 1. fol. 39.
In short, we are to be affected in all Judgments that are inflicted on
Sinners, as the Author of them is; who delights not in them as they make the
Creature miserable, but as they make His Justice glorious: Now let us apply the
Point.

David did his Absalom (albeit we rest satisfied with the righteous Judgment of
God therein); yet, at the last day, there will not be the least sorrow for it;
we shall as well rejoice in their Damnation, as in the Salvation of others. Oh!
What woeful Lamentation will wretched Sinners make at that day? when there
shall be found not any Friend to pity them, to send forth one Sigh for them,
nor show any Compassion unto them? M^serable Creature, to whom will thou turn
thee? Not amongst all the Celestial Company, shall you find one Comforter, in
that day of Vengeance; Not one to speak a word for you; No Dresser of the
Vineyard, no Minister, no Intercessor, to be heard making such a suit for an
unprofitable Fig Tree; Lord, spare it one year more. Children may call upon
their Parents, beg their Prayers, desire some tender Compassion from them; but
to little purpose. Parents may desire their Children to speak one word for
them, and in their behalf; they may adjure them by the Womb that bare them, and
Papps that gave them suck, to think on their misery, and solicit on their
behalf; but all labor is lost; No Compassion, no natural Affection will be
left; no regard will be had of Kindred, Friends, Alliance, etc. God's Glory
only shall be regarded by the Godly; They will not only be satisfied and
contented with the just Judgments of God upon you, but bless God for it, and
rejoice in it.

Romans 3.5.
as the Apostle intimates Romans 3.5. Is God unrighteous, that takes Vengeance?
I speak as a man; As if he should say, I make not this Objection of my self,
but every natural man is apt to speak and think so, and judge amiss of God's
Justice, and charge Him of cruelty and hardness, (as I might show you in
particular, about the Point of Election and Reprobation:) How apt are men to
call the Equity of God's Decrees into question, and peremptorily to conclude,
that the ways of God are not equal, in rejecting the greatest part of
Mankind, and damning them for their Sins, whom He had beforehand pre-ordained
to destruction? But why speak I of vain and wicked men? We shall find, that the
very best of us are to seek in this Lesson: we are too too apt to murmur and
repine at his corrections, and be discontented with His Judgments, as if they
were too rigorous and severe; and so we judge, not only of such as are
inflicted on our selves, (as did Job and Jeremiah,) but oftentimes, of those
which are inflicted upon others. David was greatly displeased, because the Lord
smore Vzzah with death for so small a fault, as he imagined that to be, 2 Samuel
6.6, 7, 8.
in staying of the Ark with his hand, when it was ready to fall out of the
Cart, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7, 8.

But let us now take forth a new Lesson, and learn to praise God for showing
Himself severe, as well as gentle; for his Acts of Justice, as well as for His
Acts of Mercy: The good Husbandman is commended for his good Husbandry, in the
cutting away dry and withered branches, as well as in pruning those which are
fruitful; It is one of God's glorious works, to cut up, and root out, such
Trees as hurt and annoy His Vineyard, as it is to plant and set his Vineyard
with the choicest Plants; and it is as great a fault to robb Him in the one, as
in the other. You know how we extol Princes, when they declare themselves to
be wholly devoted to right, so that if their nearest Favorites do things
worthy of death, they deliver them up to the hands of Justice: Mahomet the
Great, in slaying his Minion Irene, whom he dearly loved, with his own hand,
and in the sight of his People, was highly magnified by them for that Act: Let
the King of Kings enjoy the Praise of his just and severe Executions: He looks
for Praise, not only from Heaven, but from Hell; As Heaven is for the Praise
of his Mercy, so is Hell for the Praise of his Justice. The Righteous shall
rejoice (says David, Ps. 58.10.
Psalm. 58.10,) when he sees the Vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood
of the Wicked: that is, when he shall see Judgment executed upon the wicked and
Ungodly, he shall not only be glad for the overthrow of the wicked, and praise
God for it; but in that blood of theirs which is shed, they shall wash their
feet, and make a comfortable Use to themselves thereof: Joh. 13.10
The Feet are the Affections of the Soul, in Scripture Language, ( and he that
is washed, needs not save to wash his Feet, says Christ). In this Sanguine
Bath of the blood of the Wicked, we wash our Feet, when we put off our carnal
Affections, and learn to fear God more, love Him the better, etc. and honor
Him for His just and righteous Judgments; singing upon such occasions, the Song
of Moses, the Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb, Rev. 15.3, 4.
saying; Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints; Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? For thou only art Holy; For all Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest.

Even so, Rev. 16.7.
Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy Judgments. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
The Table Alphabetical, directing the Reader, to the ready finding out, of the
most material things contained in this Book.
A.
AFflictions, how to bear them. Page 488 Afflictions, come all from God. Page
473 How God can be said to be Author of them. Page 472 How Afflictions are
said to be evil, they coming from God, who is good. Page 474 In all
Afflictions, see God's hand. Page 478 Inferior Causes are not to be neglected
in them. Page 479 Age, is Venerable, not for number of years, but for desert.
Page 233 Old Age should be fruitful. Page 232 It is an unfit time for
Repentance. Page 246 It is like a decaying, or doated Tree. Page 72 Amen, under
the Law answered to the Curse; but under the Gospel to the Blessing. Page 458
Angels God imployes not, in dressing of the Vineyard; and why. Page 154 Angry,
God is, when he smites. Page 305 Axe Ministerial, what it is. Page 291 God has
many Axes. Page 469 Every thing becomes an Axe to the wicked. Page 296 Author
of Sin God is not. Page 477 Humane Authors may be made use of by Ministers in
Preaching. Page 95
B.
BAptism, but one, and yet many. Page 66 Barrenness, is dangerous. Page 58
Barrenness of the heart a greater Judgment then barrenness of the Womb. Page
299 A barren Professor is unprofitable. Page 314 He is cast forth of the
Vineyard. Page 286 None to despair because of barrenness. Page 439 Beastly
heart is under mans-shape. Page 38 Behold, what it intimates. Page 202 It Is
work, within Doors and without. Page 203 Bishop, one is no more then another,
and in what sense true. Page 172 Brethren should hate discord. Page 67
Burdens, to the Vineyard; who are, Page 320 Unfruitful Professors are many
ways burdensome. Page 315
C.
CAsting out, what is thereby meant. Page 286 Casting into the fire, what that
is. Page 290 Childhood, God regards. Page 228 How Childhood is spent. Page
227 Christ, both King, Priest, and Prophet. Page 24 He is best worthy to be
heard. Page 23 He is the Head of the Church. Page 59 He is our Intercessor and
Advocate, Vid. Intercession. He seeks not the destruction of any. Page 457
Church, is but one. Page 59 What constitutes a true Visible Church. Page 97 The
Church of England is a true Church. Page 94 The true Marks of a Church. Page 93
All corruptions in a Church do not unchurch Her. Page 95 A man may be a member
of the invisible Church, who yet is not of the Church-Visible, Page 98 The
Church sometimes lies fallow. Page 43 No Church is perfect at first. Page 45
The Church is more excellent then other Places. Page 48 It shall never be
forsaken. Page 70 The Church is a Vineyard, Vid. Vineyard. It is the best soil
for Fruit. Page 90 The welfare of it, is to be sought. Page 57 Enemies of the
Church warned. Page 69 Circumstances aggravate sin. Page 218 Complaints of God,
should bring us on our knees. Page 326, 333 When, and how, God complains. Page
331 One complains of another, God of all. Page 209 Comfort belongs to broken
hearts. Page 423 Such as want it, must go to God's Ministers for it. Page 425
Compositions for Tithes, how far warrantable. Page 403 How People deal with
Ministers therein. Page 405 Contentions in the Church, whence they arise. Page
187 How to avoid them. Page 181 Not to take offense at them. Page 191
Conversation of a Christian should be convincing. Page 53 It should be
answerable to our Profession. Page 88 Corruptions in a Church, warrant not a
Separation from it. Page 51 They are often esteemed for corruptions which are
none. Page 95 Cutting down, what is meant thereby. Page 283 It is the doom of
Barrenness. Page 282 How God proceeds therein. Page 286 God's Judgments are of
a cutting nature. Page 284 So is his Word. Page 285
D.
Days of the wicked are empty days. Page 236 D^crees of God, take in the
means as well as the end. Page 329 Delay is dangerous. Page 249 Despisers of
Christ, who are. Page 27 Differences amongst God's Ministers, are not
fundamental. Page 192 Discipline, no essential note of the Church. Page 97
Digging and Dunging, what meant thereby. Page 385, 408 Division in the Church
dangerous. Page 61 Divisions and Distractions a forerunner of ruin. Page 272
Dressers of Gods Vineyard, who are. Page 154 They are of four sorts. Page 165
Three Virtues requisite in Dressers. Page 162 Why God appoints Men, rather then
Angels, to Dress his Vineyard. Page 156 Dominion of God, is absolute,
universal, and endless. Page 364 Dumb, Christ was not. Page 19 We may not be
dumb, in the Cause of Christ. Page 20 Dumbness in a Minister, is of dangerous
consequence. Page 21 The causes of a Ministers dumness. Page 22 The dumb Devil
is every where. Page 21
E.
ENvy, is the Daughter of Pride. Page 139 Error in the Church, a Judgment. Page
292 Errors of Judgment more pernicious then errors of practice. Page 293 No
Church without some error. Page 52 Estate, the mean is safest. Page 73
Excommunication, what it is, and how to be proceeded in. Page 99 How far it
extends. Page 100 The use and end of it. Page 101
F.
FAther, God is to us all. Page 67 Famine, a sore Judgment. Page 275 Famine
grievous in Je^^^a^em^ Page 486 Favor of great Men not to be trusted. Page 75
Faith is One and the same, in all the Elect. Page 65 Fruit, what it signifies.
Page 106 What fruit is expected from a Christian. Page 107 Why good works are
termed Fruit. Page 107 Christians should be fruitful. Page 55 How their Fruit
must be qualified. Page 111, 113 Means to become fruitful. Page 116 Motives to
fruitfulness. Page 119 Fruitfulness preferred to greenness or taleness. Page
81 The fruit of a Christian is delicious. Page 78 Fruitful Christians have many
prayers. Page 325 Fruitfulness after long barrenness makes all to be well. Page
436 To be fruitful in evil, is fearful. Page 217 The Church Visible is a
fruitful soil. Page 90 Fig Tree, the Jewish Nation is resembled unto. Page 77
So is the Christian Church, in many respects. Page 78 Man by his Fall is a Wild
Fig Tree. Page 83 Why the Fig Tree by the way-side was cursed. Page 222 The
Jewish Figg Tree was cut down by degrees. Page 285 Forwardness to good Duties
is in the godly. Page 78
G.
GAli^aeans, who they were. Page 1 Gathering twofold. Page 289 God resembled to
Man in Scripture. Page 8 The Parts of Man's body ascribed to Him. Page 37 He
takes on Him all shapes to win us. Page 41 God's Gifts, how said to be free.
Page 206 God's dishonor should affect us. Ibid. The Godly have a special
Interest in God. Page 70 Good no natural Man can do. Page 85 In what sense
they are said to do good. Page 86 Who do no good, do much hurt. Page 322 Gospel
to be preached as well as the Law. Page 420, 424 Government often changed, a
sign of God's displeasure. Page 273 Gratitude, the good of it. Page 148 See
Thankfulness. Great is the Lord. Page 363 Great men lay open to all weathers.
Page 73 Grieve we ought, because we cannot grieve. Page 312 A People's
Barrenness is the Minister's Grief with the Reasons of it. Page 427, 428
H.
HArmless life is not enough. Page 212 Hatred Theological, the most bitter
hatred of any other. Page 280 Head of the Church Christ only is. Page 59 Heads
distinguished of. Page 60 Hearers are to be awakned. Page 204 They owe a double
honor to their Pastors, Page 163 They may not engage their Affections too far
to one Minister more than to another. Page 191 They may not sad the hearts of
their Teachers. Page 428 How they may sweeten the Ministers Labors. Page 408
Help comes from God only. Page 367 Pagans and Papists seek for help elsewhere.
Ibid. Honor of God is to be preferred to all Relations. Page 495 Hope taken
away, takes away endeavor Page 439 Husbandry has three parts. Page 40 The
Honor of the Husbandman. Page 42 God's Husbandry to be submitted unto. Page 41
I.
JEws resembled to a Fig Tree. Page 77 They were severely punished for
despising Mercy offered. Page 485 God made an eeven reckoning with them in
sundry particulars. Page 492 Jerusalem's final destruction. Page 489 Seven
times besieged before its final overthrow. Page 490 If, How the Word is used.
Page 430 Impropriators, a lesson for them. Page 400 Independent, God only is.
Page 363 Intercede, what it signifies. Page 343 Intercession, Christ makes for
us. Page 335 What it contains in it. Page 336 How Christ now does it. Page 337
He Intercedes for particular Persons. Page 339 No other Intercessor but He.
Page 340, 344 We need no other but Christ. Page 368 How Ministers are styled
Intercessours. Page 344 Wherein the Intercession of God's Ministers stands.
Page 344 Intercession made against a People two ways. Page 348 Ingrafting into
Christ twofold. Page 84 Ingratitude, Vid. Unthankfulness. Judgments never sent
without a Cause. Page 304 They are sent from God. Page 469 God is the Author
of them, yet the Devil may be an Agent in them. Page 472 Other Instruments God
may use therein. Page 470 How God makes way for them. Page 462 Lighter
Judgments are warnings. Page 274 Heavy Judgments may be expected. Page 281
Sins down the Noise of Judgments. Page 1 Judgments on Sinners be two ways
looked upon. Page 498 We may not charge God with severity and rigor, when he
Inflicts them. Page 306, 307 We should find out the Cause of them: and how it
may be done. Page 308 Judgments from God, hurt not the godly Page 79 Justice of
God is not to be questioned. Page 500 In all his Works of Justice, he is to be
glorified, as well as in works of Mercy. Page 501
K.
KIngly Government is in it self the best form of Government. Page 274 Yet
unthankful hearts are weary of it. Ibid Knowledge requisite in Ministers. Page
162
L.
LAw, necessary to be taught and preached, Page 410 The Pestilent errors of
those who hold the contrary. Page 412 The Law is two ways to be considered,
Page 413 How far forth the Law is abolished. Page 414 It makes way for the
Gospel. Page 416 Motives to hear it. Page 418 The Gospel must be taught with
it. Page 422 Life profitable, is only commendable. Page 342 Long life not
always a Blessing. Page 226 Lord, what it signifies. Page 360 God is our
Lord, as our King, Protector, and chief Justice. Page 362 That God is our Lord,
may comfort us. Page 365 Absolute obedience is to be given him, for that he is
our Lord. Page 362 Whether God could be called Lord before there was any
Creature. Page 361 Love is the Christian's Livery. Page 65 It is the preserver
of Unity. Page 62
M.
MAgistrates are Ministers. Page 159 Wherein Magistrates and Ministers agree,
and wherein they differ. Ibid. They both should be as One. Page 177
Maintenance was large, of the Ministers under the Law. Page 356 They are to be
liberally maintained under the Gospel. Page 391, 394 Objections against it,
answered. Page 392 How their Maintenance should be raised. Page 395 Their
maintenance should not be grudged. Page 168 Malice of Satan most against
Ministers. Page 352, 359 Means, why so called. Page 446 Means are to be used.
Page 453 But not be rested in. Page 446, 448 To sin against the means is
fearful. Page 243, 435, 492 To abuse the means argues want of Wisdom, to
neglect them desperateness. Page 450 God keeps account of the means affoarded
us for our good. Page 258 Our profitting should be answerable to the means.
Page 255 Otherwise God will deprive us of them. Page 259 Contempt of the means
hastens wrath. Page 260 By weak means, God effects great matters. Page 447
Success is not always answerable to the means. Page 446 Comfort to those that
profit by the means. Page 455 Means continued, gives hope. Page 430, 432
Mediator, Christ only is, Vid. Intercessor. Mercy despised* is provoking. Page
484 To acts of mercy, Ministers should incline. Page 456 Ministers Calling,
excels. Page 161 It is no Idle man's Calling. Page 386 It is no whit less
laborious, because spiritual. Page 390 Their Calling is distinguished from all
other Callings. Page 170 They speak from God to Man, and from Man to God. Page
344 Why God makes choice of Man, rather then of Angels, for that Work. Page 154
God speaks to us by his Ministers. Page 9 Ministers are of God's Council. Page
195 Why God makes more of His mind known to them than others. Page 197
Ministers should walk worthy of that Honor. Ibid. Ministers must be Skillful,
Faithful, and Watchful. Page 162 The qualifications of Ministers showed by four
Creatures. Page 386 In ministerial function, all Ministers art equal. Page 172
Yet, a parity in the Ministry is dangerous. Page 171 Minister should be One in
their Work. Page 172 The Reasons of it. Page 174 Three ways they should
manifest it. Page 173 Motives to it. Page 178 Means to effect it. Page 181
Difference amongst Ministers, is of sad consequence. Page 175 Ministers are to
be consulted with. Page 200 They foretell dangers, and upon what ground they do
it. Page 201 Their silence is dangerous. Page 202 They must awaken their
Hearers. Page 204 And pray for their People. Page 342 They Interpose in time of
danger betwixt God and People, and that three ways. Page 346 Why they do so.
Page 347 They ought to make conscience of that Duty. Page 349 Ministers are to
be prayed for by their People. Page 354 What is to be prayed for on their
behalf. Page 355 Ministers must buckle to their work. Page 407 And have no
self-respects in the discharge of their Duties. Page 383 Best Ministers lament
the bad success of their Labors. Page 444 The Faithfulness of a Minister is
not to be judged of by the fruit in the Hearers. Page 451 Ministers may not be
discouraged, though at present they see no fruit of their Labors. Page 454
They must continue constant in their Labors, though no fruit appear at
present. Page 432 Bad Ministers are bad Merchants; they sell the Souls of their
People. Page 384
N.
NAture is wrought upon by grace. Page 83 No natural man can do good, Vid.
Good. Negative Divinity brings no soul to Heaven. Page 212
O.
Offense is as well dangerous to take, as to give. Page 191 Officers, when they
grow suddenly rich, it is an ill sign. Page 317 Omissions, God complains of.
Page 210 They are breaches of a Positive Law. Page 211 They are the fruits of
Original sin. Page 212 They are to be confessed and lamented. Page 213 Whey
they are looked upon with a regardless eye. Page 214 They exceedingly grieve
the Spirit. Page 215 Opinion of other men, we may not captivate our Judgment
unto. Page 185 Order is to be observed by Christians. Page 55 Many walk
disorderly, and who they are that do so. Page 55
P.
PArable, what is it? Page 28 The difference betwixt a Similitude and a
Parable. Ibid The kinds of them. Page 29 Three things to be considered in them.
Page 7 Why Christ taught by Parables. Page 29 Parables are Powerful. Ibid They
are not lies. Page 31 They are spoke in Judgment to the wicked* but in Mercy to
the godly. Page 34 Parabolical expressions may lawfully be used by God's
Ministers, in their Sermons. Page 31 Cautions in using them. Page 32 Patience
of God is Salvation; and how, Page 372 Gods patience is great, and how
described. Page 373 His patience is much abused. Page 377 Good use is to be
made of it. Ibid. We may not be offended with it. Page 224, 375 God's patience,
is the riches of his goodness. Page 378 It has a Period. Page 380 It allows
Iniquity a shorter time under the Gospel, then it did under the Law. Page 381
Patrons corrupt reproved. Page 401 Palmestry spiritual, many pretend to have
skill in. Page 434 Perfection twofold. Page 52 Absolute perfection, not here to
be had. Page 52 What kind of Perfection is attainable in this Life. Ibid
Pestilence, a sore Judgment. Page 277 Jerusalem punished with it, before the
final destruction of it. Page 488 Plantation twofold. Page 84 External
Plantation not sufficient. Page 87 Plants if barren, are hurtful to others.
Page 316 Prayer fervent, prevents wrath. Page 327 It binds Gods hands. Page 459
The Reasons showed. Page 460 The power of it seen in sundry Examples. Page 464
By Prayer, we should seek to prevent Judgments. Page 333 Such as have the
spirit of Prayer should improve it that way. Page 468 Praying Christians should
be regarded. Page 467 The Prayers of faithful Ministers are more powerful with
God, then the Prayers of others. Page 351 God is only to be prayed unto. Page
366 It is the highest part of Divine worship. Ibid. Preaching (if faithful) is
some way successeful. Page 453 The word Preached, does usually work best at the
first. Page 435 Hearers may out-preach their Ministers, and how. Pride causes
unthankfulness. Page 139 Pride in Churchmen, how begot. Page 188 It is the
Mother of Schism. Page 62 Privledges out ward, will not serve us. Page 301
Punishments many times show what the sin was. Page 308 Sometimes God punished
by contraries. Page 311 Why some are here punished, and others spared. Page 3
The wicked are justly punished in doing that which God willed to have done.
Page 473
Q.
QUestions are of great force, both in Affirmations and Negations. Page 313
R.
REpentance is an excellent grace. Page 17 It makes all well. Page 441 It is
dangerous to deferr it. Page 244 Repetitions, what they import. Page 17 They
are sometimes necessary. Page 12 Care must be had in using them. Page 13 A
right use is to be made of them. Page 16 Reproof, not always to be used. Page
425 Root on which we grow, is Christ. Page 78
S.
SCripture to be adored for its fullness. Page 426 Secrets of God made known to
his Ministers. Page 195 God reveals not all his secrets to any one, nor to all
alike. Page 196 Why God makes known his secrets to his Ministers, rather than
to others. Page 197 Seeking, what it imports. Page 120 Separation may not be
made from a true Church, for some defects. Page 50 Schism in a Church, as
dangerous as Heresy. Page 61 Shows, Hypocrites exceed in. Page 79 Shadow,
Governors should be to those under their charge. Page 54 Silence, why Christ
stood sometimes silent. Page 19 There is a time to be silent. Page 22
Similitudes, to be drawn from things familiar. Page 32 Sin should cause sorrow.
Page 207 Sundry Reasons for it. Ibid. Some sins are greater then others. Page
253 Sinners are already sentenced, the execution is only deferred. Page 296,
371 Society is twofold. Page 49 What society with Sinners is warrantable? Page
49 Sorrow, is a gulf. Page 422 Sparing of us, a great Mercy. Page 370 The
Reasons of it. Page 371 Why God spares Sinners long before he punish. Page 375
To be let alone (and so spared) is a great Judgment. Page 369 Speech, of three
sorts. Page 19 Spirit of God, is the Spirit of Union. Page 64 Strength of our
own, trust not unto. Page 56 Strength is taken away by sin. Page 232 Sword,
what sins bring it? Page 268 The Sword is a deadly Arrow. Page 278
T.
THankfulness, wherein it lies, Page 148 The k nds of it. Page 149 Three ways
to manifest it. Page 150 The good of it. Page 146 It is a Rent that must be
paid. Page 151 Threatenings, of two sorts. Page 327 How they are to be
understood. Page 329 They are the heaviest Texts. Ibid. They are prevented by
Prayer. Page 330 In the State of Innocence there was good use to be made of
Threatenings. Page 418 Time, what it is? Page 234 Time sufficient allowed for
Duties. Page 221 No time is allowed for sin. Page 223 Time neglected,
aggravates sin. Page 224 Motives to make good use of Time. Page 234 Time is but
short. Page 235 It is swift. Page 237 It is irrecoverable. Page 235, 238 A
twofold Eternity depends upon it. Page 236 Time will be denied to them who
abuse it. Page 239 Account must be made of it. Page 240 Time will bring in her
Evidence. Page 241 It is an honor to improve it. Page 242 They are Fools that
mispend it. Page 243 Titles reverend to be given to Superiors by Inferiors.
Page 361 Tongue of Man, his glory. Page 20 Trees of several sorts. Page 73 Man
resembled to a Tree in many respects. Page 72 He is by nature of a bearing
kind. Page 82 The Church compared to fruitful Trees. Page 80 Trees are subject
to diseases. Page 74 Trials to be expected. Page 57 Tithes are of long
standing. Page 169 They are the fittest means for the Ministers maintenance.
Page 397 Objections against Tithes answered. Page 398 The right that a Minister
has to them, is as good as to any State of Land. Page 399 It is a crying sin
to withhold them from the Minister. Page 399 Such as defraud the Minister of
them are sacrilegious. Page 403, 405
V.
VIneyard, the Church is compared unto, and in many respects like to it. Page
44 God has done much for this his Vineyard. Page 130 Every private Christian
has a Vineyard of his own to tend. Page 160 Vine has two sorts of branches in
it. Page 58 The Vine has a Winter-season. Page 58 Visitation must be expected.
Page 104 It is of two sorts. Page 103 Three ways God visits us in this life.
Page 104 It is God's love to visit us. Page 105 Unity of the Church is to be
sought. Page 62 Their sin great, who break the unity of it. Page 61 A
sevenfold Obligation to unity. Page 63 Unity should be endeavored. Page 177
Vine fruitless is useless. Page 314 Unthankfulness grows not all without the
pale of the Church. Page 128 The vileness of that sin. Page 138 The whole
Creation condemns it. Page 140 An unthankful man is a naughty man. Page 147 Our
unthankfulness to God is great. Page 135 Unprofitable, many are in the whole
Course of their Lives. Page 324
W.
War intestine, is the worst War. Page 279 Warning, God gives, before he
smites. Page 261 Why God gives warning. Page 264 Many ways God giver warning.
Page 267 It is fearful to despise warnings. Page 269 Weapons put into the
Ministers hand, and what they are. Page 291 Well, all is that ends well. Page
437 Will, of God is but one. Page 330 Yet it is said to be manifold. Ibid. His
will cannot be resisted. Page 477 As God's Will is made known unto us so ought
we to conform unto it. Page 497 Pray that Gods will may be done. Page 496 Will,
the more of it is in any sin the greater the sin is. Page 252 Man's w^llfulness
a cause of his unfruitfulness. Page 448 Wishes differ from sound desires.
Withering threefold. Page 288 The withering of many Professors is evident.
Page 297 Word, Christ is, and what kind of Word? Page 19 The Word ought to be
heard as God's, and not Man's. Page 10 Works of sinners, how good? and how not?
Page 83 What is required to the doing of a good Work. Page 86 Christianity
calls to work. Page 79 Writing, All that the Penn-men of Scripture wrote, was
not written by divine Inspiration. Page 10 Wrong, God can do to none. Page 495
The Word is the Instrument of our Regeneration, and of what sort. Page 431
Y.
THe three years that Christ expected Fruit, what to understand thereby. Page
219 Youth resembled to a Tree. Page 72 God expects Fruit from that Age. Page
228 Satan seeks to seduce Youth. Page 229 Lusts of youth what? Ibid. The
strength of youth should be spent in God's service. Page 231
REader, The faults that have escaped the Press, are more than I wished, yet
fewer than I feared; still we find some work to exercise, both thy Pen and
Patience: Be not a Censor, but a Corrector of these ensuing Errata's (which
hinder or corrupt the sense): other literal or punctual mistakes, I leave to
thy humanity for a pardon.

ERRATA.
Page. Line. Error. Correction. 1 3 Ensign, Engine. 82 3 codds, todds. 111 31
it not, it is not. 132 11 house the Lord, house of the Lord. 45 35 Inspect.
Respect. 161 8 Vzzah, Vzziah. 174 15 to there, to other. 212 9 shaken, shapen.
301 13 Diamond, Diadem. 402 30 500 60, 50 or 60. 460 Margent, ipsa, ipso. 474
Marg. Agent, Agens. 405 17 Hoe, Hose. 494 15 as that. at that.


