PAPERS FROM SCOTLAND OF Transactions of the Scots Commissioners, concerning
the KING And the Parliament of England.

Delivered at the Convention of Estates at Edinburgh.

ALSO A Conference by the Marquis of Arguile, the Earl Louderdaile, and the
Lord Lothean, with the English Commissioners.

AND The proceedings of the Grand Committee of Estates, and the Commissioners
of the Kirk of Scotland.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648. 1647

Feb. 23:
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.



PAPERS FROM SCOTLAND OF Transactions of the Scots Commissioners, concerning
the KING, and the Parliament of England.
Right Honorable,
THe Grand Committee of Estates for the kingdom of Scotland, Conveened at
Edinburgh on Tuesday February 8. On which day, both the English Commissioners,
Mr. Ashurst, and Collonell Birch, came to Edinburgh, with Mr. Marshall, and
also the Scots Commissioners that night; But their Grand Convention of Estates
had only some Speeches made by diverse Lords, viz. the Marquis of Arguile, the
Lord Lothean, Mr. Hamilton and others, to congratulate their meeting, but it
being moved that (in regard the Scots Commissioners were not there ready with
their Reports) they might adjourne until Thursday Februa. 10. which the
Committee of Estates, accordingly Ordered.

On Wednesday the 9 of February, the Committee of the Kirk of Scotland sat,
and proceeded in some debates, which they had been upon the day before,
concerning some non-conformists in Scotland, there being much disturbance in
diverse of the Kirkes, by some who stand for liberty of Conscience in
Churchworship.

The Marquis of Arguile, the Earl Lauderdaile, and the Lord Lothean, (not Lord
Loudoun the Lord Chancellor) gave our Commissioners a visit at their lodging,
which is at an Inn, there being no house provided for them, (and I can assure
you that there are not Innes here like the London ones) a sorry place, yet such
as are in Edinburgh. These three Lords were very courteous to our
Commissioners, and the Scots in general are civil to them.

On Thursday the 10 of Februa. The Grand Committee of Estates met again. And
the Earl of Loudoun Lord Chancellor, and the Earl Lauderdaile, (with the
rest of the Scots Commissioners, from London, began to make their Reports,
concerning transactions of overtures by them in England, since last they went
from Edinburgh, And declared to the Committee what they had offered to the
Parliament of England, and what engagements they had tendered to the King, as
also what they had done to satisfy his Majesty.

Particularly, what was transacted by them with his Majesty at Hampton Court,
and so other Overtures until the time that his Majesty was removed from
Hampton Court.

Diverse of the Lords and the rest of the Estates (in particular) gave them
thanks for their fidelity, and for their pains, after the Estates were risen,
but the business is not yet debated what shall be done in a body by the whole
Committee of Estates by order: because when they sit again they are to go on in
their reports until they have finished all, which will hardly be this week,
and then perhaps a week or more in debate afterward.

They then ordered to fit this present Thursday, being the 15 of February, and
are to fit by and by: And did Order February 10 last past that the English
Commissioners should make their addresses to the Lord Chancellor Loudoune, who
is president to the Committee of Estates. And the reason of the last
adjournment until this day was because he is not well. And for ought I see,
they will so adjourn, that time will spin out to a full length before they come
to the period: So I hope there will be no great fear of raising Forces in
Scotland this year, And before Winter we may all learn wit to be friends.
Here is a muttering of Sir Lewis Dives being in this Kingdom, but I see him
not, nor hear of him where he is. Some rumor here that the Earl of Leven is
gone away in a discontent saying, that he would loose his life but he would set
the Crown on the Kings head, but this is false, and therefore if any
Malignants from hence shall writ any such thing into England believe it not,
for it is utterly false.

On Friday the 11 of February the Commissioners of the Kirk sat and had
reports made concerning the substance of the Committee of Estates the day
before something was moved about drawing up a paper to present to the Committee
of Estates at their sitting, but it was at last resolved that nothing should be
done in that particular until the Commissioners had made a full report of the
English negotiation.

On Saturday the 12 of February, came news hither of the Disbanding of the
supernumerary Forces in the North of England, which gives much content to
diverse of the Commissioners of Estates here, (as themselves express). We had
here some talk of Prince Charles his coming hither, as some said, was
expected from France, others said, it was the Duke of York to come from London.
But the Scots are so far from agitating, or liking any such design, that
they generally say, they will have neither King, Queen, nor any of the Kings
Children to be there to charge them; they cannot spare moneys neither for
War, nor Honor, they will labor to maintain what they have, and to keep
their own kingdom quiet, if they can, and let others shift for themselves.

On the Lords day Febru. 13. the Ministers here which we heard, did pray
zealously for peace, and preached very honestly, though we have heard that some
others have been a little too bitter else where, there were very few that day
with our Commissioners.

Yesterday being Monday the 14 of Febru^^^ many Lords and other Gentlemen came
to Town from other parts, so that this City of Edinburgh, is very full, things
are exceeding dear, and accommodation bad, better in many Villages in England.
But, which is worse than all the former, the Plague breaks out here very
violently, and many dye, every day more then other, so that we begin to fear
danger in residing here, except some place be assigned for the Commissioners
out of Edinburgh, and the Scots Estates adjourn to some other place, or there
sitting until the Parliament meet to adjourn.

This day being the 15 of Februa. the Convention of Estate, are to meet: And
the Scots Commissioners are to proceed upon their reports, concerning the
English Negotiation, from the time that his Majesty came last to Hampton Court,
what transacted there, and so on until their return: As also what papers they
delivered into the Parl of England, and what answers they received, as also
concerning some passages about the English Army, which will take up so much
time, that I believe the English Commissioners (for ought I hear this day)
cannot make their addresses to them before March. The Marquess of Arguile, and
diverse of the Committee of Estates, yea, and many of the Scots Ministers
protest that they will labor for a right understanding between the two
Nations, and for settlement of a firm and inviolable Peace, for the Soldiery,
money, I Will warrant you, will stop their mouths, and there is none visible to
them any where, but hopes of the English Arrears, And the Inhabitants of
Scotland long to hear of all things to be united and settled between the
Kingdoms. For which he prays, who is,

My Lord, Your Lordships humble servant WILL. ROSSE
Edenburge the 15 of Feb. 1647.
FINIS.

