The Royal Nursing-Father;

Discoursed in a SERMON Preached at the Cathedral in NORWICH, On the 29th of
May.

^eing the Day of His Majesty's Birth, and Happy Return to His Kingdoms.

By Charles Robotham, Batchelour of Divinity, in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for W. Oliver in Norwich. M DC LXXX.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Christopher Calthorpe, Knight of the BATH.
Honored and Right Worshipful.
IT will not (I hope) be thought strange, but Duty, if (amongst the many that
are cordially affected toward you) I also bring my Mite into your Treasury;
unto which all that know you, and can distinguish true worth and goodness from
a seeming show, or a mere popular gloss, cannot but pay the Tribute of their
due respects.

As for this present address here made unto you; your singular integrity and
fidelity to the public, your true affection to solid and undissembled Piety,
your untainted Loyalty to the Prince, your Love and Nobleness to the Church,
(so well known) and lastly, your many favors and countenance, not only to
those of my Function in general, but to my self in particular, are all such as
justly entitle you to the subject of this following Discourse; you being that
in your lesser Sphere, which our Gracious Sovereign is, in his higher and
larger, A true Nursing Father. God of his goodness increase the Gifts and
Graces of your mind, and the number of your Imitators.

May the Virtues of your Soul (in despite of that Veil that would hide them)
prove more and more conspicuous, like the Statues of those two Romans of old,
which the more they were concealed and covered from the public sight, were but
the more taken notice of.

May the fatness of the Earth be your lot, and may the Dews and Blessings of
Heaven fall here and ever upon you and yours, so as to redound to Gods Glory,
to the public good, and to your own inward comfort and eternal reward. So
prays your unfeigned Orator at the Throne of Grace, and faithful Servant to his
power,

Charles Robotham.

Isaiah xlix. 23. And Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy
Nursing Mothers. They shall bow down to thee with their Faces toward the
Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.
THE current of Religion in the world seems much to resemble those Waters of
Ezekiel, that Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4.
rose first to the Ankles, then to the Knees and Loins, and so to an unpassable
depth. Such was the rise and progress of Religion in the World. The beginnings
of it were but small, only in the Families of the Patriarchs; the Channel of it
for a long time scant and narrow, only in the bounds and limits of the Land of
Canaan: In Jury only was God known, and his Name great in Israel. But at the
length it overflowed the Banks, and according to the prediction, Isa. 11 9. The
whole Earth was filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea. But this it was a work especially reserved for the days and coming of the
Messia; and is commonly joined with the mention and promise of the Messia. Thus
in Genesis 22. 18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Thus
in Genesis 49. 10. (Till Shilo come) And to him shall the gathering of the people
be. And the very same thing we meet with at large in this very Chapter of
Isaiah, beginning at the 6th Verse: I will give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation, to the ends of the earth.

In pursuance of which subject he goes on to set forth the care of God, not
only for the perpetuating of the Church, (Verse the 16th, I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me;) but also for
the replenishing and enlarging the Church; and that to such a flow of fullness,
that they shall complain, (as in the 20th Verse) The place is too strait for
me, give me room that I may dwell. Augustus est mihi locus in Synagogis, fac
mihi spatium in Ecclesiis; as St. Hierom glosses upon the place.

Now, if any shall ask, (with the Church in the 21st Verse) who has begotten
me these? who has brought up these? As much as to say, By what means shall
there come in such a throng and multitude of Proselytes to fill the Church? The
Answer follows in the next words, That it should be by a double means; first,
by the power and preaching of the Gospel, (Verse 22. I will lift up my hand
unto the Gentiles, and set my Standard to the People; i. e. Vexillam crucis,
(says St. Hierom) The Word and Standard of the Cross and Gospel of Christ. And
then secondly, It should be done by the after-assistance of Kings and Princes
that should embrace and profess the Gospel; as it follows in the Text, Verse
23. And Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing
Mothers, they shall bow down to thee, etc.

The words then are a signal Prophecy, touching the enlargement of the Church,
as by the accession of the Gentiles in the general, so of the Secular Powers
and Governors in particular. In the words I shall consider two main
remarkables: First, the Persons here instanced in, (Kings and Queens.)
Secondly, the things spoken of these Persons; i. e. Their Conversion, their
Devotion, their furtherance and assistance.

First then, let us consider, Eminentiam Instantiae, the Persons here instanced
in; we shall find them to be none of the (...), of the lower and middle rank;
but of the (...), Persons of the greatest height and eminency, and that in
each of the Sexes, Kings for the one, and Queens for the other. He could not
have gone higher, if he would, here amongst Men. And truly Kings and Princes
must needs be the highest upon Earth, because they are immediately next unto
him, who is the most highest both in Heaven and Earth, that is, to God himself.
For this was the Divinity of the ancient Fathers, Tertul. C. 2. A quo secundi,
post quem primi; ante omnes, and super omnes Deos. Tert. Apol. c. 30. Lib. 3.
adversus Parmen.
ad Scap. Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem, a Deo secundum -- Et solo Deo
minorem; i. e. We reverence the Emperor, as a Man second to God, and inferior
to none but God. So that of Optatus, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus,
qui fecit Imperatorem. There is none above the Emperor, saving God, who made
the Emperor. And so also that of Arnobius. Rex sub nullo alio, nisi sub Deo.
The King is under none In Psalmos.
but God; and if only under him, then doubtless the highest, next and immediate
to him: yea so near unto God, that they partake of the very name (...). Justin.
M. quaest. and resp. ad Orthod. Qu. 142.
of God, Psalm. 82. 6. I said ye are Gods. Gods for their place and Office, as
being in Gods room and stead, his Vicegerents upon Earth. And Gods for their
Power and Height, and Supremacy, as having a Divine impress of Majesty and
Sovereignty sealed and engraved upon their Persons. For what is that that we
call (Majestas Principis,) the Majesty of a King or Prince? I say, What is it,
but something of Divinity, something of God, put upon a mortal Man? And
therefore the Christians of old (as Vegetius relates, in their Military
Vegetins, de re militari l. 2. c. 5.
Oath) were wont to be sworn, without scruple, Per Majestatem Imperatoris, By
the Majesty of the Emperor, as being Sacrum quiddam and Divinum, something of
God put upon Man, and exalting him to an immediate nextness unto God.

Ye see then the height and eminency of the Persons; yea but may some say, Why
is it that the Instance here runs in Kings only, and single Persons? were
Monarchs only to be the Nursing Fathers to the Church of God? To this I answer.
No doubt but under Kings are here included all other Secular Powers and
Governors whatsoever; yet Kings only are named, and that for a double reason.

1st, In respect to the Event, they being primogeniti Ecclesiae, The first that
began to exercise the power of Nursing-fathers. The Prophecy it self, in the
execution of it, was firstly, yea, and mostly fulfilled all along in Kings and
Monarchs. And then secondly, In respect to the very Species of Government,
Kings are here named, for diverse reasons.

1st, As being the chiefest and Principale per se positum stat pro caeteris.
Aristot. polit. l. 3. c. 11, 12.
principal of Governments, as having in it (...), absolutum imperium, the
entire and absolute command and power united and centered in one person; and
therefore the more effectual for the aid and assistance of the Church.

2ly, As being the most known, the most famous, usual, and universal;
especially in those Eastern Nations: according to that in Tacitus, Suetum
Regibus Orientem.

3dly, As being the most ancient, Arist. Eth. l. 8. c. 11. (...) etc. Natutura
commenta est Regem. Sen. de clem. l. 1. c. 19.
natural, and primitive of Governments. Initio Reges: Id primum in terris fuit
Imperii nomen, says Salust Cited by Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 3. c. 10. To whom
Vives adds Herodotus and Pliny.
(in Catilin.) Kingship or single Empire was the first of Governments. Omnes
antiquae gentes, regibus quondam paruere, Secunda in Catilinam. Item de Legibus
l. 3.
says Tully. Principio Rerum, Gentium nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat,
says Justin. Cited also by Aug. de C. D. l: 4. c. 6.
l. 1. All Kindreds and Nations at the first were under Kings. To which we may
add that of the Philosopher, Politic. 1. c. 1. (...). Cities at the first were
governed by Kings, and so even to this day are Nations also.

Yea, and if we look yet higher into the very Rise and Origin of Government,
as it is recorded in Scripture; we shall find it was first vested in a single
person. Adam, who was the Father of Mankind, was by his Creation, and for his
time, Monarch of Mankind; according to that of Cedrenus, (...).

The first Government in the Bertram. de rep. jud. c. 2. p. 38.
world was that of Fathers, and Kingship is nothing else but the Apex, or
Supremacy of fatherly Power, devolved into the hands of the present Monarch.
(...), says the Philosopher, who also plainly Ethic. l. 8. c. 12.
draws the first pedigree of Monarchs, from the Rights of Fathers; as any may
see in the first Chapter of his Politicae.

But enough of this first remarkable in the Text, that is, of the Persons or
particularity of the Instance (Kings or Princes.) I pass unto the second
Considerable, and that is, The things that are foretold and spoken of these
Persons. They may be reduced to these following Heads. 1. Their Call and
Conversion. 2. Their Piety and Devotion. 3. Their Beneficial Influence upon the
Church, and assistance to it. From all which follows in the last place, the
prosperity and enlargement of the Church by their means, (the thing designed
and intended in the whole Contest.)

First then, ye have their Call and Conversion; their conjunction with the
Church, and relation to the Church, as Members; intimated in the Possessive
(Tui,) Kings shall be Thy Nursing Fathers. Thine, first, as Members, and then
as Fathers. So that here are two things promised to the Church, as touching
Kings, 1st, That they shall be her Converts, and then her Patrons; first
Embracers and Believers of the Gospel, and then Maintainers and Promoters of
the Gospel. They shall become professores fidei, and so defensores, first
Professers of the Faith, and then Defenders.

To begin with the first, Their Conversion. The Church of Christ, it is a Nest
for Eagles, as well as Doves. It Is a Grove for Oaks and Cedars to grow in, as
well as Shrubs and Coppice: That is, it is a Place and Receptacle for Kings and
Caesar's, as well as meaner Persons; for rich Abraham, (the mighty Abraham,
(...) dicitur Nicolao Damasceno. Rex vocatur Justino. Lib. 36. Vnctus Dei.
Psalm. 105. 15. says Grotius in Genesis 23. 12.
Prince, as he is called, Genesis 23. 6.) as well as poor Lazarus. It Is a Flock,
wherein the Lions lie down with the Lambs in the same Fold, the Prince with the
People.

The Grace of God, and the Faith of Christ, and the Power of Conversion, was
never meant to be confined, merely to the Commonalty, never to go higher. The
Apostle expressly declared the contrary from the beginning, 1 Timothy 2. where he
does enjoin it as a Canon to all Christians, That Prayers, and Supplications,
and Thanksgivings be made for all Men, Verse 1. and for Kings in particular,
Verse 2. Giving this as the Ground and reason of the duty, (Verse 4.) because
God will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth;
that is, doubtless, at the least, Men of all sorts and ranks, Kings as well as
others. This the Apostle then knew; and knew it by the Writings of the
Prophets. 'Twas a thing foretold long before, That Kings should see and arise,
and Princes should worship the holy one of Israel, Isa. 49. 7. That the
Gentiles should come to the Churches light, and Kings to the brightness of her
rising. Isa. 60. 3. And so Psalm 22. 30. Pingues terrae adorabunt, all they
that be fat upon Earth shall eat and worship. And Psalm 47. and the last Verse.
The Princes of the People are gathered unto the People of the God of Abraham,
(so it is in the Hebrew) For the Shields of the Earth ((...),) the Mighty upon
Earth) belong unto God; that is, they shall join themselves to the God and
People of Abraham, by communion of the same Faith.

These Promises or Prophecies it is clear they belonged to the times of the
Gospel. And though they were not presently fulfilled at the first planting of
the Gospel, because God was resolved to bring in and carry on the Religion of
Christ at first in the world, not by the countenance of the Grandees and
Princes of this world, but only by the sufferings of Martyrs, by Signs and
Miracles, by the sole and single force and efficacy of the Word Preached; that
so the Doctrine might appear to be of God, and not of Man; yet,
notwithstanding, after some few Centuries of years, in due time those Oracles
began to be fulfilled; first in the Conversion of Lucius a British King of
this Isle; and then of Constantine and Theodosius; and so all along of many
other Princes, as it is at this day. So that the Religion of Christ, which at
first began at the lower end, and dwelt in Cottages, is now got into the
Palaces of Nobles, yea, and into the Courts of Kings and Princes, and I doubt
not, of some of them, into their Hearts too. Christ, who is Lord over all,
(Romans 10. 12.) has shown himself rich unto all, even unto Kings; rich in Grace
by calling them out of darkness into his mavelous light; hereby testifying
both the freeness of his Grace, that he is the God of the Hills as well as of
the Valleys; and likewise the Power of his Grace, that he has a Throne in
Hearts of Kings, and can conquer Crowns and Scepters to a willing professing of
him. And that the Net of the Gospel, (spoken of Mat. 23. 47.) is large and
strong enough to catch and take the great Whales and Leviathans of the Water,
as well as the smaller Fishes. Lastly, hereby he has testified his honorable
regard and respect unto the Robes of Earthly Majesty, to the Thrones of Kings,
by baptizing them into the Faith of Christ; thereby showing them the way unto a
better Kingdom, that of Heaven, and to a brighter Crown, that of Righteousness.

And that is the first thing here intimated touching Kings and Princes, their
Call and Conversion. The next follows, and that is, their Piety and Devotion.
For this I take to be the meaning of those words, (They shall bow down to thee
with their face to the Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.) It Is an
allusion to that gesture of lowly Reverence and Incurvation of Body to the
Ground, that was in use, both in Religious and Civil Worship. As ye may see
both at once, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. All the So 1 Samuel 24. 20. Adoraverunt Jehovam
and Regen Pagn.
Congregation blessed the Lord, and bowed down their Heads, and worshipped the
Lord and the King. ((...). lxx.) The like was practiced by all your Eastern
Nations, to their Sovereigns; as appears by that of Martial. -- Pictorum sola
basiate regum. Epigr. L. 10. Ep. 72.

As also by that (...)* without which Themistocles himself could not have
access unto the Persian King; though he disguised it as well as he might, by
the letting fall of his Ring.

But to return; in allusion (I say) unto this custom of deep and low
veneration, is it here said even of Kings and Queens, that they shall kiss or
lick the dust, that they shall bow down with their faces toward the Earth: Yea
but unto whom? Answ. To whom but Christ. To him alone is all this reverence and
obeisance of Kings and Queens directed and intended. For though the Person here
spoken to (as the words sound) seem to be the Church; yet the Worship here
spoken of is meant only Christ. Christi proprius and peculiaris, (says See
Psalm. 72. 9. Isa. 49. 7. De Imperio summarum potestatum. c. 4.
Grotius.) Tibi incurvabunt; id est, Christo in te habitanti, says Tremellivus.
(They shall bow down to thee, i. e. To Christ dwelling in thee. Sic ad
Ecclesiam transfertur hic honos, ut penes unum Christum integer maneat, says
Calvin. Lingent pedunt pulverem tuorum, O Ecclesia, primitiva, in persona
capitis tui, Jesu Christi. Glossa ordinaria in locum.
As much as to say, The Church is here considered in conjunction with Christ
the Head; so that what is spoken of the Body, strictly and properly pertains
only to the Head. Si enim Caput Ecclesiae est Christus, Caput hic adoratur in
corpore, says St. Hierom upon the Place. In the Honor of the Body is
understood the Worship of the Head. And to the like purpose (yet more plainly)
is that of St. Basil, (upon Psalm. 45. Ver. 12.) (...). It Is not the Church to
whom this Honor or Worship is given, but unto Christ, who is the Head of the
Church.

In vain therefore do the Parasites of Rome go about to draw this Text to the
maintenance or countenance either of the Papal Chair, or of the Vide Librum
Caeremoniarum, Sect. 3. C. 3.
Honor and Subjection claimed as due thereunto. For besides the falseness of
the Hypothesis, the thing it self is very wide from the purpose of the Text.
The Honor here spoken of (as to be done by Kings and Queens) is not that of
external Subjection, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, but that of Religious
Adoration. It Is no other than subjection unto Christ himself. To the Person of
Christ, to the Laws of Christ and Christianity, to the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, to the Word, Will, and Worship of Christ. This is that, that is
fore-promised in the behalf of Kings; that they should render unto Christ the
subjection of Piety and Devotion, i e- Reverence to his Name, observance to his
Worship, obedience to his Will, submission to his Yoke and Scepter, walking in
his Truth, rejoicing in his Light; counting it their highest Honor to do him
Service, and the best and biggest of their Titles to be his Subjects. As it is
recorded of the Emperor Theodosius, That he professed he rejoiced Theodoret.
l. 5. c. 25.
more in his Christianity, than in his Regal Dignity; and, that upon his
Deathbed he thanked God more, that he was Membrum Ecclesiae, (a Member of the
Church) than that he was Caput Imperii, (the Head of the Roman Empire) And
another Passage I have read of one of the Lewis's, King of France; who, though
he had got many Victories, and won many Towns from the Saracens, yet would he
not be styled from any of them, but only from the Place of his Baptism would be
called Lewis of Poissy. Why? Because there (said he) I first overcame the
Devil, and was made a Christian. Many the like Instances might be given of the
signal Piety of Christian Kings and Princes, both in Word and Deed: But my
business is not a History, but a Sermon. I shall therefore pass by what might
be more largely spoken of this second Head, and hasten to the third and main
Particular designed in the Text, and that is the special and beneficial
Influences of Kings upon the Church for its good and flourishing, (They shall
be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing Mothers.

In the opening of which I shall consider two Particulars; 1st, The Thing it
self, to be done by Kings and Princes; and that is, the cherishing, the
spreading and furtherance of the Church, and of Religion in the Church. 2ly,
The means and manner of performing: They shall do it, as (...), as Nursing
Fathers.

For the first of these, It Is very evident God has always made use of Kings and
Princes, for the furtherance and maintenance of Religion, from first to last.
The first settlement of it among the Israelites was by the Hands of Moses, who
was King in Jesurun. (Deuteronomy. 33. 5.) or as the Targum and Syriack reads it, King
in Israel. The retriving of it, when lapsed, from Impieties and Idolatries,
'twas by the means of Judges; whom Cunaeus de republ. l. 1. c. 12. Bertramus de
rep. jud. c. 9. p. 109.
Josephus calls (...), no other than Monarchs; Dictators, for their time, that
is, in effect, Kings.

In a word, the fullest and the utmost growth, and (...) of that Church, and
the highest and brightest Sunshine of Religion amongst them, was not, till it
came under the warm Beams and Influence of the Royal Scepter. Their Religion
was never culminant, never rose unto its height and splendor, till the
Kingship was settled amongst them, first in the Family of David, and then in
the Line of Solomon. Then was the 1 Chronicles. 23. 6. 24. 3.
Sacred Militia, the courses of the Priests and Levites, ordered: Then was the
stately Fabric of the Temple erected, and the Service furnished: Then was the
God of Israel worshipped in the beauty of Holiness. And so downward in the
sequel of the Story, still ye shall find, Kings were the maintainers of
Religions, as in Abija, Asa, and Jehosaphat: Kings were reformers of Religion,
as in Hezekia and Josia: yea, and Kings were the Restorers of Religion,
together with their Liberties, as in the days of Ezra and Nehemia. Both which
acted in all they did by Commission from the Kings of Persia, Ezra 7. 25, 26.
Neh. 5. 14.

This Blessing of Pious, and of Gracious Kings, so behooful and advantageous to
the Church of the Jews, God was pleased to afford and make promise of, to the
Church of the Gentiles.

Besides the Proofs already named, I shall add three more, pertinent to the
purpose. The first is that of the Text; where the nursing and nourishing
influence of the secular Powers, is clearly mentioned, as one signal and
special means of the furtherance and enlargement of the Gospel Church, as is
evident from the whole drift and scope of the context. The second is that of
Isaiah. Chapter 60. where having spoken of the Abundance of the Sea that should be
converted, Verse the 5th; It follows in the tenth Verse, The Sons of Strangers
shall build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee. And Verse
the 16th, Thou shall also suck the Milk of the Gentiles, and the Breast of
Kings. Before ye had the Nurse, and here ye have the Milk and Breast; assuring
us, they should not be mere Dry-nurses, but such who as it were from their own
Bowels, shall minister strength and growth unto the Gospel Church.

There is one place more, which some not improbably draw to this purpose; and
that is in the four and twentieth Psalm. where having spoken of the large and
universal Dominion of Christ, Verse 1. And of the conditions of Communion with
the Church of Christ, Ver. 3. to the 6th. he then closes with an exhortation
(as many do interpret it) to the secular Powers, for their favorable
furtherance of the Church and Gospel of Christ, Verse the 7th. Lift up your
Heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory
may come in. The Septuagint, with Symmachus and Theodotio, expound it, as
spoken to Principalities and Powers; and accordingly render it, Lift up your
Heads, O ye Rulers, ((...)) and so the vulgar Latin, (O Principes) So the
Arabic and Aethiopick Versions.
O ye Princes, and be ye lift up, ye Fores saeculi, (as Arias Montanus renders
it, Ye everlasting Doors.) And why must they be lift up? All to this end, (says
Psalmist) That the King of Glory may come in, i. e. To make way and room in the
World, for the Kingdom of God and of Christ. The entrance into the City was by
the Gates; the strength of the City was in the Gates, (Psalm. 147. 13. He has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates.) And the Place of Magistracy, Power and
Judicature was in the Gates, (Ruth 4. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 25. 7.) And therefore by the
lifting up of the Gates may well be understood the concurrence, the utmost aid,
countenance and assistance of the Ruler, to the promoting and propagating of
Religion, as being entrusted with a Power to make way for the King of Glory.

So much for the Thing it self, The spreading and enlarging of the Church, by
Kings and Princes. I come now unto the last Particular, and that is, The means
and manner of effecting it; They shall do it, as Nursing Fathers; that is,
first, as Leaders, and then as Governors: First, by the strong attractive of
their Example, and then by the use and exercise of their Authority; first, by
the very countenance of their personal Example, which always is of great
influence and efficacy in the World. Haggai 2. 23. (says God unto the Prince
Zorobabel) I will make thee as a Signet, Tanquam Annulum Signatorium. Good
Princes, they are Gods Seal, Gods Signet, that make impression upon the World,
and help to shape, and print, and fashion it into Truth and Goodness. -- Ad
exemplum Regis componitur Orbis. The Religion of the Prince is the Mould into
which the People commonly are cast. Such as sit in the Gate, such as are
highest and uppermost in the World, are eyed as the Rule and Copy to those that
are under. The younger naturally follow and tread in steps of the elder;
Servants imitate their Masters, Children their Parents; but of all Presidents,
that of the Prince or Ruler is the most prevailing, to engage the practice of
the People. -- Et in vulgus manant exempla Regentum. The Ways and Deeds of such
great ones, as they draw the Eyes of all after them, so also their Imitation.
Virtue in a King, Religion in a Prince, seldom goes alone without a numerous
train of Followers and Imitators. When the King of Ninive put on Sackcloth,
(Jona 3. 6.) how suddenly did it become the wear and fashion as it were of the
whole Court and City. When Constantine embraced the Faith, and set up the Cross
for his Standard, what a shake did the very Pattern of his Example give unto
the Kingdom of Darkness through the whole Empire? How soon did Heathenism
vanish out of Towns and Cities, and betook it self ad pagos and paganos? (from
whence the Name of Pagans, says Vossius.) Christianity being seated in the
Prince, it ran down amain, as the Ointment from the Head of Aaron, to the
Skirts and Borders of his Garment.

That Is the first way wherein or whereby Kings do become Nursing Fathers to the
Church, by the mere influence of their Example.

The next and second (which is the main) follows; and that is, by the use and
exercise of their Power and Authority. That is, when they do employ the utmost
of their Princely Power, for the defense and protection of the Church, for the
support and maintenance of the Church, for the conservation of the rights and
properties of the Church, for the due and well management of the Affairs of the
Church. When Laws are made, and Acts passed by Authority in the behalf of the
Church, when public and effectual care is taken for the great concerns of the
Church, for the soundness of its Faith, for the purity, beauty, and comeliness
of its Worship, for the order and regularity of its Government, for the
efficacy of its Discipline, for the preservation of its Peace, Unity and
Tranquillity, in and through the Communion of the whole. This, this is the
Benefit of Nursing-fathers; this is the Milk that comes out of the Breast of
Kings, the establishing of Religion by the Sovereign Power, in all the public
concerns of it. When Christianity is (by their means) engrafted into the State,
and is made the Religion of the State; when the profession of it is not only
owned, but ratified with the Seal of Authority, fenced and strengthened with the
provision of Laws, guarded with Penalties, encouraged and advanced with
Privileges. This is that Singular quiddam a regibus requisitum, says Calvin
upon the Text, That special and singular Service expected, yea and bespoken
from the Hands of Kings, for Christ, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Be wise O ye Kings, be
instructed ye Rulers of the Earth, Serve the Lord with fear. What Lord? why the
Lord Christ, as Acts 4. 25.
appears by the 2d and 7th Ver. And how are they to serve him? not only in
their Hearts and Lives, but in their Power and Place, with their Crowns and
Scepters; serve him as Kings. Excellently St. Augustine Epist. ad Bonifacium
to this purpose. Aliter servit qua homo, aliter qua Rex. Kings serve the Lord
Christ, as they are Men, one way, as they are Kings, another. As Men, they
serve him, vivendo fideliter, by living up to the Faith and Precepts of Christ;
but, In quantum reges, as Kings, they serve him, Leges sanciendo, Leges ferendo
pro Christo, by making Laws for Christ; Cum ea faciunt ad serviendum Epist. 48.
ad Vincentium. Epist. ad Bonifacium
illi, quae non possunt facere nisi reges; when they do those things for
Christ, (by the advantage of their Power) which none but Kings can do. And
again, Cum Aug. contra Cresconium, l. 3. cap. 51.
in regno suo bona jubeant, mala prohibeant; when in their respective
Dominions, they command what is good, and forbid what is evil; not only in
relation, ad Societatem Humanam, to Humane and Civil Peace and Society, but
also (says he) in things pertaining ad Religionem Divinam, to matters of
Religion, and Divine concerns. All which may serve as a fit Comment upon the
Text, plainly showing us, what is that Regia Ecclesiae nutricatio, (as Grotius
speaks) L. de Imperio summarum potestatum.
That Blessing of Nursing-fathers; That it is no other than the maintenance and
cherishing of Religion by the nurture of wholesome Laws, by the public
interposal of Kings and Princes in its behalf, as of Pious Guardians, and as of
tender Governors encharged and betrusted with the care and oversight of the
Church. And this indeed is the proper import of the word (...), or
Nursing-father in the Text, and in the Hebrew. It comes from the word (...) or
(...), that signifies, Truth, Trust, or Faithfulness. So that the prime and
proper meaning of the word (as Schinler notes) is to signify Tutorem,
Curatorem (Fiduciarium) Rad. (...)
qui in fidem suam recipit alterius puerum: That is, one that is a Guardian, a
Trustee, one that has the care, maintenance and disposal of a Person committed
to his trust. This (I say) is its first and primigenial signification; and then
by consequence it is rendered sometimes a Nurse, ((...), Ruth. 4. 6.) sometimes a
bringer-up, ((...)) even as here in the Text, and in Esther 2. 7. where
Mordecai is said to be (...), the nourisher or bringer up of Esther; or (as
Schinler renders it, out of some Copy of the Septuagint) (...), Praeses and
Rector, her Guardian and Governor, (for so does (...) signify, Curam and
Praefecturam.

So that, all things considered, the style and attribute of Kings here in the
Text could not possibly be better rendered, than, as in our Translation, by the
phrase of Nursing-fathers. Fathers for their Power, Trust and Authority; and
then both Fathers and Nurses for their care and tenderness. So that the word it
does at once instruct us in two things concerning Christian Princes. First, In
the Interest of their Power in reference to the Church. Secondly, In the nature
and quality of their Power.

1st, Here is the Interest of their Power, in, or toward the Church. The
Church, as a Minor, committed to their Eorum potestati suam Ecclesiam credidit.
Isidor. Hisp. in sent. c. 51. Cujus fid^i creditur ipsa Fides. Sacerdotes meos,
tuae manui commisi. Greg. Epist. ad Mauritium. L. 3. c. 10.
charge; and themselves made of God, the (...), the Mordecaies to this Esther,
the Guardians, and Governors of it. And that under a double capacity; first,
as Sovereigns; and so they have the power of stopping or suppressing all
violence, rage and fury intended against the outward Being, Peace and Welfare
of the Church. And then secondly, as Christian Sovereigns. And so they have the
right of doing all Acts pertaining to Christian Sovereignty in Church Matters;
that is, a supreme inspection in and over all Causes and Persons that do relate
to the Church; a Power of settling and establishing the true Faith and Communion
of the Church; yea, and of ordering the Affairs of the Church, of reforming
corruptions, of redressing abuses, of regulating, and retrenching excesses and
innovations. In a word, A Power of super-vising all Offices and qualities in
the Church, to see and provide, that such as act in the behalf of the Church,
do their Duties, and keep their Bounds, that nothing be done to the prejudice,
not only of the common Peace, but of the common Faith, Order and Christianity;
but all unto the furtherance and edification of the whole.

This Is that Power which Kings of old for their part exercised in the
Government of the Synagogue, (as you may see at large in the Chronicles) in the
reforming of Religion, 2 Chr. 29. 15. Ver. 3. and 5. Verse 21, 24, 25, 30. Chapter
30. 2, 5, Ci. 31. 2, 4.
in purging the Temple, in re-inforcing the Passover, in commanding and
ordering the Priests and Levites, in reducing and re-engaging the People unto
the Law, and to the Covenant, causing all that were found in Israel, and
Benjamin to stand to it, (2 Chronicles. 34. 32.) And again, making all that were
present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. The like Power we
find, without scruple, practiced by the first Christian Monarchs and
Sovereigns, within the Limits of the Gospel Church of their Dominions. After
that the Empire was cast into the Lap of the Church, and Christianity advanced
to sit at the Helm and Stern of Government; it is sufficiently known, how far
even the first Christian Emperors interposed their Authority in
Church Matters; In hearing Complaints, in receiving Appeals, in taking
cognizance of Causes, (etiam post duplex Judicium Episcopale) in redressing of
Ecclesiastical disorders, in electing of Bishops, in convening of Councels, in
examining and ratifying of Canons, in passing and setting forth Laws and
Edicts, for the establishing of Truth, Order, and unity, and for the healing or
extinguishing of Schism and Heresy. As may be seen at large by any that will
read both in the Eastern and Western Records, in the Acts of Constantine and
Theodosius, in the Code and Novels of Justinian, and in the Capitulars of
Charles the Great. So true was that of Socrates, in his Preface to the fifth
Book of his Ancient-Church-History, (...), (ever since that Kings and Emperors
became Christians) (...) (...) (the affairs or matters of the Church have hung,
the whole weight of them hung and depended upon them, i. e. upon their
authority, concurrence and interposal; for of that he speaks in the next words.

And thus have I shown the first thing that is implied in the Phrase of
Nursing-fathers, the Power and Interest of the Prince in and over the Church as
Guardian, as Governor.

There is but one thing more to be considered in the Text, and I shall then
draw toward a Conclusion; and that is, The nature and quality of this Power,
or, if I may so speak, (and I crave humble leave to speak it) The Bounds and
Limits of it. Princes, they have indeed Power and Authority in Church Matters,
but it is as Fathers still, not as Masters. They are not styled Domini, but
Nutritii; not Lords of our Faith, but Nurses, Protectors, Defenders of the
Faith.

The whole Right of Secular Powers in matters Ecclesiastical is not
Destructive, but Cumulative. Mr. Thorndikes Right of the Church. c. 4.
It Is not to change or abolish, but to establish what they find the Church, by
the Act of God, possessed of, and vested in, from the beginning. We may not
therefore so far extend the Phylacteries of the Princes Power, as to think or
say, That he may devise new Recte illud dicitur, non esse principum aut
civilium Magistratuum, Leges novas de cultu Dei conscientiis far aut propria
Sacerdotum munia obire. Casaub. exercitationes Epist. dedicat.
Articles of Faith, or appoint new Sacraments, (new Instruments of Grace) or
introduce or enjoin new parts of Worship. No, these are Christi Regalia, (the
Royalties of Christ.) In things of this nature we call no Man Master upon
Earth, for one is our Master, even Christ, Mat. 23. 10. There are (as the
Apostle speaks) (...), The things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. And there are (...),
The things that are Gods, evidently distinguished by our Savior from the
things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22. 21. As being things of Divine, Immediate and
absolute appointment. And though the Christian Magistrate has Imperium circa
Sacra, a Power of ordering even about these things, as to Time and Place, and
matter of form, and whatsoever else relates to the due and decent, and regular
performance of these things; yet he has no power super haec, over the substance
of the things themselves, either to add to them, or diminish from them.

In a word, we must know, there are in the Church of God, Immota quaedam and
Divina, certain sacred and unchangeable Points; as namely, The common Faith and
Christianity, the Rule and Sum of Christian Faith, the Parts and Duties of
Christian Worship, the Offices of Christianity wherewith God will be served, in
the Communion of his Church, the Means and Instruments of Grace, (the Word and
Sacraments;) together with the Power of Orders, and the Keys of Doctrine and
Discipline. These and the like, they are Res Dei, the Things of God; that is,
of his immediate, absolute, perpetual appointment and constitution. They are
Dona Christi, the Donatives of Christ and of his Spirit. They are Dos and jura
Ecclesiae, the Dowry and Birthright of the Church, as it is a Society of Gods
immmediate founding, subsisting not by Man's Law, but by Gods Charter, (not to
be nulled, or altered by Man.)

In these things, as St. L. 5. Orat. contra Auxentium.
Ambrose said of old, Bonus Imperator est intra Ecclesiam, non supra. And
again, Ambr. Ep. 33. Item L. 5. c. 33.
Noli te gravare Imperator, ut putes te in ea quae Divina sunt, imperiale
aliquod jus habere. Think not, O Emperor, thou have any Power Imperial over
things Divine; i. e. over things which God and Christ have settled in the Church
by their own immediate Act.

The Christian Church, it is and was from its beginning a Religious
Corporation, founded by the Act of God for the Communion of its Members in the
Faith, Worship and Service of God. By virtue of which Foundation from God, it
has its proper and internal Rights and Powers distinct from the Civil, though
limitable in the exercise of them by the Civil. These Rights were vested in the
Church long before any State became Christian, and are so to remain after; as
standing upon a distinct Ground, Gift and Original. And therefore the Prince or
State, in becoming Christian, gains no Power, no Sovereignty over these things,
(so as to innovate or alter them;) but rather an obligation to uphold and
maintain them, according to the prime intent of their institution. This being
the declared Will of God, That Christian Monarchs or Sovereigns, by entering
into the Church, act as Nursing-fathers; Mr. Thorndikes Right of the Church, c.
4. P. 167, 168.
and, that by virtue of their Christianity they hold themselves obliged to the
maintenance of all the several parts of Christianity; i. e. of whatsoever is of
Divine Right, in the profession and exercise of Christianity.

And thus have I at length passed through the several Particulars of the Text.
The Persons here specified (Kings and Queens;) the things here spoken of these
Persons; i. e. their conversion to the Church, their devotion in the Church,
their assistance to, and enlargement of the Church, by the Interest of their
Power, as Nursing-fathers.

I shall now only draw some few Inferences, and make some practical
Reflections; and so conclude.

First then. Are Kings promised as a Blessing to the Church? Hence we infer,
The continuance and allowance of their Function, of their Place and Office,
under Christianity. Some (as it See Mr. Parkers Polity, second Piece, P. 114.
seems) have been so foolish or perverse, as to say, That Kingly Government was
a figure and shadow, a part of the Jewish Pedagogy and Bondage; and so
abolished by the coming of the Messia. The Text here, and the Scripture
elsewhere, is evidence to the contrary. For how could they be Nursing-fathers
to the Church, if they did not remain as Kings? The exercise of their
Authority, in the behalf of the Church, plainly infers the continuance of their
Function in the Church? The Temple of Ezechiel (which, by the large dimensions
of it, Chapter 42. must needs pertain to the Gospel) makes mention of the Princes,
and the Princes Portion, Chapter 45. 7. -- 48. 21.

And so, in the City of the new Jerusalem, it is said, The Kings of the Earth
should bring their Glory and their Honor to it, (Revel. 21. 24.) They should
not leave it behind them, but bring it with them.

Christianity does not extinguish Monarchy; they may be Christians, and yet
Kings. It Is no part of the Baptismal Vow, that they should forego or renounce
their Scepters. Non eripit terrestria, qui regna dat Coelestia, as Sedulius of
old. They may be Christ's Servants, and yet reign over Subjects. For Christ's
Scepter is not, like the Rod of Moses, to devour and swallow up the Rods and
Rights of Princes, as his did the Magicians. He came not to null the Titles, or
disturb the Claims of Earthly Sovereigns, but rather Mat. 22. 21.
to secure and establish them in their continuance statu quo. 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let
every man abide in the same Calling wherein he was called; is a fundamental
Rule and Principle of the Gospel, in all civil Cases and Callings. Christianity
supposes the lawful state of the World, and of Civil Government, and alters no
Man's condition in it, but maintains every Man in that Estate, Calling, and
Condition of Life, wherein it finds him.

In vain therefore was Herod troubled at the news of Christ's Birth, as if he
came to disseiz him of his Temporalities, Mat. 2. 3. In vain was Pilate jealous
of the Kingship of Christ, as Enemy to Caesar. Christ frees him of that fear,
and tells him plainly, My Kingdom is not of this World, Joh. 18. 26. upon which
words St. Austin makes a loud Proclamari in Tractatus in Joann. 119.
the Name of Christ, Audite Judaei and Gentes, -- Audite Regna Terrena, (Hear O
ye Jews and Gentiles, hear O ye Earthly Princes;) non impedio Dominationem
vestram in hoc mundo. (I come not to hinder or prejudice your Rule or Dominion
in this World.) Nolite timere, etc. Be not frighted with vain and groundless
fears, for my Kingdom is not of this World, neither does it come to supplant or
unhinge the Kingdoms in this world. Kings indeed are called unto Christ, and by
Christ, (Psalm. 2. 10.) not to part with their Power, or to lose their Place,
but only to do him service with their Power, and in their Place. They are not
to throw away their Crowns, but only (with the 24 Elders, Rev. 4. 10.) to lay
them at the feet of Christ, as acknowledging their subjection to him, and
dependancy upon him, and derivation from him. For so says the Word and Wisdom
of the Father, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign; by me Princes Rule, i. e. by
appointment from him, and subordination to him. For the which reason,
Tertullian sticks not to say unto the Pagans, Noster Apolog. c. 33.
est magis Caesar, utpote a nostro Deo constitutus. The Emperor, says he, is
ours, more than yours, as being set up and appointed by our God; yea by our
Savior, whose Name and Style it is, to be Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
Rev. 1. 5. To be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16.

So much for the Office and Function; the next Inference I shall make is in
behalf of their Right and Power. If Kings be appointed of God, and entrusted by
him, as Nursing Fathers to the Church; then hence it follows against all
opposers, that the Christian Sovereign has to do in matters of the Church. For
sure, look what the Prophet here says, That Princes shall do as
Nursing-fathers, Bilson, of Subjection.
that, I conclude, they may and must do. For God would not promise, that they
should usurp a strange Office, but discharge their own. And therefore the Fact
in this case proves the Right, and the Exercise, the Power. Only mistake not
the Point intended. By this Right or Power of Princes I do not mean, that they
either have in themselves the Power Ecclesiastic strictly and properly so
called; or that they give it unto others, unless by giving we understand only
Copiam utendi, Leave and liberty to use and apply it. I intend not to say, that
Princes by their Sovereignty are to be the sole and supreme Judges of Faith, or
Deciders of Controversies, or Interpreters of Scripture, or Dispensers of Word,
Censures, or Sacraments; or that they may take upon them, in their own Persons,
(as the Leviathan speaks) to consecrate Churches, to propagate Holy Orders, to
celebrate the Eucharist, nor to bind and loose in the Name of Christ. I deny
not, but in these things the Magistrate has no power to act, either per
defectum facultatis, because he has not that skill and faculty that is
requisite to the doing of these things; or per defectum Juris, because the
Right of ministering such things is by the Act of God reserved to others. As the
Priests of old made answer to Vzzia the King, Regis erat, non adolere, sed
facere ut Sacerdotes adolerent. Grot. in locum.
Non est Officii tui, It pertains not unto thee to burn Incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.
18.

But yet notwithstanding, all this being granted, there is still in the
Nursing-father of the Church, a Sovereign Power over Churchmen, and in
reference to Church Matters. He has Imperium circa Sacra, though not
Ministerium in Sacris. He has the Right of Supreme Inspection, though not of
immediate Administration, (for it is one thing to do these things, and another
to Vide Grotium de Imperio, etc. C. 2. p. 24.
see, or cause them to be done.)

In a word, all that I intend is, that the Sovereign, as Christian, has a
Super-eminent Power of commanding and ordering the Matters of the Church, so
far as they are of public and general concern, not only to Peace and
Tranquillity, but to Religion and Piety, to the due and regular profession of
the common Christianity.

I know indeed, there want not those who would oppose this, either in whole or
in part.

First, some, with the Donatists of old, quite shut out the Magistrate from
these matters. According to the Sayings related by Optatus. Quid Christianis
cum Optatus C. Parmen. L. 1.
Regibus? aut, Quid Episcopis cum Palatio? What have the Church to do with
Kings? or Bishops with the Court or Palace? And again, Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? L. 3.
What has the Emperor to do with the Church? This was the Language of the
first Fathers of Schism; and too much of the like do we find in those Imitators
of them, who will not have the Ruler to interpose at all in matters of
Religion. They Will allow him perhaps a Place in the Church, as a Member; but not
as a Governor, or Nursing-father, no Laws to be made, no Edicts to be passed,
for the settling of Faith and Order, in opposition to error and distraction.
But is this to be a Nursing-father to the Church? or rather a mere Gallio, only
as an idle and careless Spectator, to stand by, and tamely to look on
unconcerned, upon the miseries and confusions of the Christian Body, without
stretching forth a Finger to heal, help, or prevent them? How can they be said
to discharge their Trust, (their (...)?) Or what account can they give unto God
of their Power, who do not use it to the best advantage, not only for the
outward safeguard, but also for the inward soundness, purity, peace, and order
of the Church. Never any Classick Author, whether Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8.
Ezra 7. 16.
sacred or Aristot. polit. 3. c. 10, and 11. Tullius de legibus 2. Plato de
leg. Dion. L. 52.
profane, (that touched upon this Subject) but mentions Religion, as in the
Magistrates charge. Never any State that professed Religion, but did exercise
an Interest in disposing matters of Religion. Never any Instance to be given,
where Men were permitted (in Point of Religion) to do every one what was right
in their own Eyes, except in times of Anarchy, i. e. Judges 17. 5, 6.
when there was no King in Israel, no Tutor, no Governor, no Nursing-father to
interpose and regulate things in Church and State.

But then secondly, others there are, neither small nor few, who, with the
Church of Rome, will allow the Prince, defensionem Religionis, Bellarm. L. 3.
de Laicis c. 17. -- Et alibi.
but not Judicium, no power of judging, but only a Power, or Obligation rather,
of receiving and defending whatsoever the Church determines. They Will grant you,
that Princes are the proper bearers of the Secular Ibid. c. 18.
Sword; but then it must be, Gladius sub Gladio, the Temporal Sword under the
Spiritual; for though it rest in the Scabbard of Kings, yet must it not be
drawn or used by them, Nisi ad nutum and patientiam Sacerdotis. (So Boniface
the 8th. in his Extravagant Tit. 8. de Majorit. and Obed. c. 1.)

This sure is not to make Kings Nursing-fathers, but Vassals to the Church;
mere Butchers, as it were, to execute, while their Prelates only are the Judges
to hear and determine. And all this against the grain, both of Scripture,
Antiquity, and Reason.

Princes indeed are bid to serve Christ, (Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with
fear) but not with an implicit Faith, or blind Obedience; but praeeunte
judicio, with judgment and understanding: For so runs the tenth Verse, Sapite
and erudimini, Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, (and
then follows) Serve the Lord with fear. It Is (...), it is a rational, reasonable
Service that is required at their hands: First understand, and then serve. It Is
the Service of a right judgment, the thing which the Church prays for, Psalm. 72
1. Give thy Judgments to the King, and thy Righteousness to the Kings Son. God,
who would have Kings, among others, to come unto the knowledge of the Truth, (1 Timothy 2. 4.) no doubt but he allows them (exercitium Judicii) a Judgment to
discern what is truth and what is error, (that they may refuse and suppress the
one, and embrace and establish the other, as shall be thought fit, for the
public good and welfare of the Church.)

The ancient Councels and Synods of the Church, (as Grotius Grotius de Imperio
summarum potestat. c. 7. p. 174, 175, 176.
proves) did ever tender both their definitions (i. e. of Faith,) and Canons,
(i. e. of Government) (...), to the judgment of the Christian Emperor to be
examined, the one by the Laws of Faith, the other by the Rules of Prudence and
Expedience. And sure it is all the reason in the world, that Kings be satisfied
as Men and as Christians, in the matters of the Church, before they ratify
them as Sovereigns. For (as a Learned Man says) Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. L. 3. Of
the Laws of the Church c. 32. p. 385.
Kings having a Right to make the Acts of the Church, to become the Laws of the
State, (by declaring to concur with the execution of them) doubtless they must
needs have a Right to judge, whether they be indeed such Acts, as Christian
Powers may and ought to concur in, and accordingly to bound and limit the
exercise of them.

But then again thirdly, There is yet a third sort behind, that do oppose, or
at least much debase and diminish the Power of the Christian Sovereign; that
is, such as would have them deal with matters of Religion, only at the second
hand, in a remote consideration, sub ratione boni civilis, so far as the civil
good and interest is concerned in them. So that, as Bellarmine would bring
Bell. de Pontifice. L. 5. c. 6.
Princes under the Popes girdle, Indirecte and ordine ad Spiritualia; so would
these have Kings and Princes to meddle with Causes and Matters of Religion,
Indirecte and in ordine ad politica; only in reference to the civil Good, Weal,
and Peace of the State.

But on the contrary; seeing Kings and Princes are by God directly entrusted
with the Church as Nursing Fathers, to do him that Service in and for the
Church by their Authority, which none but Kings and Princes can do: Since they
have been always accounted, Custodes and Vindices utriusque Tabule, the
Guardians of both Tables; since they are ordained, (says the Apostle) for the
punishment Romans 13. 3, 4.
of evil Works, (i. e. of all sorts, none excepted;) since the Law of the Ruler
or Magistrate is made and set for the punishing (...).
not only of what is opposite to sound Reason and Polity, but of what is
contrary to sound Doctrine. (1 Timothy 1. 9.) Lastly, since the end of their Place
and Function, (even of all that are (...)) is not only Peace and Honesty, but
(...), the due and right Service of God, (1 Timothy 2. 2.)

I say, from all these Premises we may well infer, that for any to confine the
Cognizance of Princes to profane Trials, and to set the faults or matters of
the first Table, as it were, beyond the reach of the Secular Arm; or to yield
them only, as the secondary Object of their Power; is, both to abase their
Authority, and to abridge them of their Right.

And so much shall suffice for the Inferences: I shall now only add few
Reflections from the Text upon our selves and duties; and I have done.

First then, Is this the Right and Title of Christian Kings? Are they indeed
set up by God as Nursing-fathers to the Church? Then let them be so owned by us
both in word and deed. That is, let them have the dues of Nursing-fathers.

As first, That of Honor and Reverence to their Names and Persons, Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? The Christian Sovereign, by his Place
and Station, he is Pater Patriae, the public Father of his Country; and a
Nursing-father to the Church: Justly therefore does he claim the Tribute of our
special reverence, and that in a degree next to God. So the Scripture places
him, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King. As having imaginem Dei, sicut
Episcopus Christi, (says St. Austin) as Augustine. quaest. est veteri te.
stamento, Qu. 35.
having the Print and Image of God. And therefore Contempt here, though but in
words, in the Language of Scripture, is called Blaspheming of Glories, Jude
Verse 8. ((...).)

Asecond Due (owing to these Nursing-fathers) is, that of Submission; Sujection
to their Authority. Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject unto
Principalities and Powers. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves -- unto the King, 1 Chronicles. 26. 30, 32. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 12.
as Supreme. Supreme without any exception, either of Causes or Persons. The
Romanists would fain exempt their Clergy, or at least the Miter, from this
Subjection. But what says the Scripture? Romans 13. 1. (speaking of those Powers
that bore the Sword, Verse 4. And to whom Tribute Si Tributum petit, non
negamus. Agri Ecclesiae solvunt tributum. Ambros. Ep. 32.
was paid, Ver. 6, and 7.) he says, Let every Soul be subject to the higher (or
to the Supreme) Powers. This he wrote unto the Church of Rome, and at such a
time, in such an Age, when Souls were at the best, and Powers at the worst. And
yet must every Soul be subject; (...), (as St. Chrysostom glosses upon the
Place.) Be thou an Apostle, be thou an Evangelist, or Prophet, be thou
whosoever, thou must be subject. The Command is general, the Injunction
universal. And so St. Bernard (writing to an Epist. 4^. ad Archiepisc. Senon.
Archbishop) descants upon the word Omnis. Si omnis, etiam vestra. Quis vos
excepit ab universitate? etc. If every Soul, then yours too; he that goes about
to exempt you, goes about to deceive you. And surely, they that Vide Gregorium
Epist. ad Mauritium, L. 4. c. 76. and 78.
must admonish others to be subject, (Tit. 3. 1.) much more must they be so
themselves.

Thirdly, a third Due, owing to these Nursing-fathers, is that of Obedience.
Obedience to their Orders and Commands: That is, a ready and willing
performance of what is prescribed by their Authority; and that in Josh. 1. 16,
17. Obedientiam promittit populus in omnibus. Grot.
all things, except where obedience to Man, is rebellion or transgression
against God. Coloss. 3. 10. Children obey your Parents (your Fathers) in all
things; much more our Nursing-fathers, whose Authority is higher than that of
the Parent, and whose Power is Supreme. This is that the Apostle joins and
couples with Subjection, Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities, to obey Magistrates. And indeed the prime and principal part of
our Subjection to Governors is Positive Obedience, Conformity of Practice, to
the Orders and Establishments of Authority. It Is that, that all Laws, and
Power, and Government asks and looks for, aims and drives at, in the first
place, the obedience of the Subject; and as for Penalties, they are only for
the terrifying of Disobedience. The latter is but the Sanction that guards the
Law; the former is that alone that satisfies the demands of the Law.

And so much shall suffice for the Rights and Dues owing unto Nursing-fathers:
Unto which, in the next place, we must also remember to subjoyn the Dues owing
unto God in their behalf; the Dues of Joy and Praise, Prayer and Thankfulness,
for the Gift and Blessing of these Nursing-fathers; which brings me to that
special Duty that is reflected on us at this time, not only from the Text, but
from the Day.

The Day that we now celebrate, it is a Day pregnant with Mercies, even the
Mercies of the Text. In which respect, it is more than a single Festivity. Like
St- Simon and Jude, or St. Philip and James, it comes with Twins in the Womb of
it. A double, or rather a triple Holy Day, as being the Memorial of a Triple
Blessing.

First, as it is Natalitium Regis, the Birthday of our Christian Sovereign;
and therefore to be celebrated by us. Mos ille, vetustus, per se improbari non
potest, says Calvin, of Herod's keeping of his Birthday. 'Twas an ancient
Custom, and of it self not to be condemned. For its Antiquity, we find mention
of it in the Kings of Egypt, Genesis 40. 20. The Birthday of Pharaoh solemnized
with a Feast to all his Subjects. In the Kings of Israel, Hos. 7. 5. we read of
(...), Dies Regis, the Kings Day, i. e. of his Birth, (says Arias Montanus.
Dies natalis ejus.) In the Kings of Persia, their Nativity was a yearly
Festival, even as far as throughout all Asia. So Vide Brisson. de Regno
Perfico. L. 1. p. 27.
Plato in his Alcibiades, (...).

In the Roman and Christian Emperors we read an intimation of the like
Festival. Et si in nostrum Ortum aut Natalem celebrandum solemnitas inciderit,
differatur. Says the constitution of Leo and Anthemius, de die dominico.

Yea and amongst private Christians we find the like practiced, even by
Christian Bishops, in reference to themselves. It Is evident, (from the Epistle
of St. Ambrose unto Bishop Foelix) they L. 1. Ep. 5.
were wont to keep the Days both of their particular Nativity, and of their
particular Installment.

Much more then may the Birthday of our Sovereign and Nursing-father claim this
celebration at our hands.

Especially, if we consider it in the next place, as it was also Natalitium
Regni. 'Twas not only Dies Regis, but Dies Regni, the Dan. 4. 36. (Requisierunt
me) Scl. pertaesi (...), and inde sequentis (...). Grotius.
Kings and the Kingdoms Day, the Day of His Return and Royal Restoration; the
Solemn Day that put a Blessed Period to the long and sad confusions of a Civil
and Intestine War, and to the manifold and multiplied calamities, violences,
oppressings, tossings, and distractions of a Twelve-years unsettlement and
usurpation. O let the remembrance of those days Stobaei Sermon. 42. verba Selini.
endear the enjoyment and celebration of this.

It was the Custom among the Persians, (says Brissonius) that Brisson. de Regno
Persi^n. L. 1. p. 27.
when ever their King died, they had (...), Justitium quinque dierum, a certain
vacation or ceasing of all Laws, Order and Government for five days together.
And all to this end, ((...), etc.) that they might be the more sensible of the
benefit of a King and Laws, returning after such a time of disorder and
licentiousness.

God was pleased to exercise us of these Nations with a longer (...), a sad and
disorderly Vacation; not of five days, but of more than twice five years, (as
the Israelites of old; without a King, without a Prince, etc. Hos. 3. 4.)

Let us at least make this use of it, as to prize the worth of these things by
the past want of them; and to value our returned Enjoyments by the experience
of our former miseries.

But then again, thirdly, There is a third Consideration, that adds to the
Solemnity of this Day, in reference to the Church, as well as to the State, i.
e. As it was (in a sense) Natalitium Religionis, the Birthday of our Religion
too, i. e. of the public reviving and restoration of it, as to the public
Rights, form and settlement of it. The Wounds of the Church in our late
confusions, were as deep as those of the State; and as many convulsions in the
one, as of distraction and dislocation in the other. Nothing but In and Out,
was the Game played in Matters of Religion; nothing acted upon the Stage, but
the strife or struggling of Rebeccaes Twins; Jacob supplanting Esau; the
younger Religion catching at the heel of the elder, and striving to come into
its Place and Birthright. In a word, as there was Jus vagum and incertum in the
State, so there was little else but Fides menstrua in the Church; one way of
Government and Religion thrusting and shoving out the other; nothing but
Overturning, overturning, overturning, till he came whose Right it was to be
our Nursing-father. But now, blessed Ezekiel. 21. 27.
be God, there is some Fixation. The Staves of Bands and of Beauty (Zech. 11.
7.) that were broken begin to piece up again. The Wall and Tower of the
Vineyard that were trodden down, begin to rise again. The Ark, that had been
either Captive or Ambulatory, fetched home again, and set up within its own
proper Tabernacle. In a word, all things brought to such a degree of
settlement, that we may now once more say unto the Men of Rome, (that shall ask
us) Ecce Ecclesiam, Lo, this is our Church, this the Doctrine of it, this the
Order of it, this the Service and Liturgy of it.

All which, since we owe it (next under God) to the Return of our
Nursing-father; this is that, that should enhance the memory of this Day, as
bringing with it (together with our Laws and Liberties) the re-settlement and
re-establishment of Religion too.

The finishing of the second Temple rebuilt by Herod the great (says Josephus)
fell upon the Kings Birthday; which made both the Joy and Day the greater. The
like may be said of this our day. Our Temple was concerned in the Mercy, as
well as our King; the Ark and the Order of Levi, as well as the Tribe and
Scepter of Juda. And therefore, where so many signal and eminent Causes meet,
as in one constellation, it should render the Festivity of the Day the greater.

What remains then, but that we summon up our Hearts, and pour out our Souls
before God, in such Sacrifices of Joy, Thankfulness and Prayer, as may testify
our due resentment of so great a Mercy.

First, Let Us Rejoice in this Mercy. Let Us meet the memory of this Day with the
same thoughts, relish, and warm affections, as we did the first and freshest
News of it. Remember we the greatness of our then miseries and dangers, the
smallness of our hopes, the sadness of our fears; and after all, the
seasonableness, the suddenness, the fullness and remarkableness of our
deliverance. And then, if we be not blind, we shall see reason to break forth
with the Church and say, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad, Psalm. 126. 3.

And then secondly, Let our Joy and Gladness proceed and beget Praise and
Thankfulness in Word and Deed. God has ever showed a special care of this our
Land and Nation. We may say, as St. Peter in the Vision unto Brightwood Monk of
Glascowe, Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei. We have Polydor. L. 8.
been Gods Hephzibah, Gods Darling, a Crown of Glory, a Royal Diadem in the
Hand of God; a Isa. 62. 3. 4.
Land and Stage of Mercy, especially of this Mercy and Benefit promised in the
Text, (Kings to be our Nursing-fathers, and Queens our Nursing-mothers.) A
Happiness which we enjoyed with the first and earliest in the World. The first
King that ever embraced the Faith of Christ was a King in this Island. His Name
Lucius (from light or brightness;) as if God in him meant to fulfill the
Prophecy in the very sound of the Letter, Isa. 60. 3. The Gentiles shall come
to the Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy Rising.

The first Emperor that ever became Christian was, by Birth, a Britain;
Constantine the great, born at York.

The first Kingdom that cast off the Romish Yoke and usurpations; and by Law
settled the Reformation, was this of England. First in Henry the Eighth, and so
down successively (excepting the bloody Parenthesis of the Marian days) down to
the present Monarch.

And blessed be the God of Heaven, that the English Scepter is still joined to
the Faith of Christ, the Royal Branch married to the Vine of Christ; the Rose
and Lillies of the Crown still subject to the Cross of Christ; that we have
still a Prince, not only of the ancient Blood, but of the true and ancient
Faith; one who has been tried (in his time) in the Fire of Affliction, in the
Foreign Furnace of Temptation; and yet himself abides, not only a firm
Professor, but a gracious Defender of the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith.

Which that he may so long continue, let us in the third and Sacrificamus pro
salute Imperatoris -- pura prece. Tertull. ad Scapulam.
last place add unto all, the Sacrifice of our Prayers and Supplications at the
Holy Table: That God, who has the Hearts of Kings in his Hands, would so guide
his Heart, by the Princely Spirit of Grace and Wisdom; that He may be now and
ever still and more a Nursing-father to this our Israel; that so, He living and
ruling in the fear of God, and commanding for the Truth and Honor of God, and
procuring the good and welfare of the Church of God; after a long and happy
Reign here upon Earth, He may be finally possessed with a Crown of Glory, and
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven,
hereafter.

The END.

