A Catalogue of Chemical Medicines sold by R. Rotheram at the Golden Ball in
Sweetings Alley in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, London.
1. An Elixir of Saffron.
THis Medicine powerfully corrects and expels poison, cures Feavors,
Consumptions, Coughs, Spitting of Blood and Matter, Strengthens weak Stomachs:
It wonderfully inlivens Nature, and drives out all offensive diseasie matter by
Sweat and Urine: It eases Pains, and causes quiet Rest: Its an excellent
Medicine to prevent (and cure) the Smallpox, M^asles, and all Pestilential
Diseases, and is a great Cordials.

Price of this Elixir of Saffron is Half a Crown the quarter Glass, Five
Shillings the half Glass, and Ten Shillings the whole Glass.

The manner of Taking it, is from 10 to 40. Drops, in a Glass of Sack, or dropped
upon Loaf Sugar until the Sugar be wet wi^h it. Times to take it, in the
Morning fasting, an hour after Dinner, and last at Night.

2. An Elixir of Balm and Mint.
THis Elixir is a wonderful renovating Medicine, it quickens, strengthens, and
inlivens all the Faculties of Nature; making a cheerful Heart and lively
Countenance, prevents and cures Diseases; and did the world know the many
Virtues that are in the Volaule Salts and Sulphurs of Mints and Balm (when
separated from superfluities) they would esteem them beyond all Vegetables in
the World; as by Experience will be found in the Use of them, etc.

Price of this Elixir of Balm and Mint, is 3 s. the half Glass, 6 s. the whole
Glass.

The manner of taking it is from 20 to 40 Drops, four or five times a day in
Sack; or dropped upon Sugar, as aforesaid.

3. An Elixir of Marjoram.
Marjoram is an Excellent Medicine in all Diseases of the Brain and Nerves: As
Convulsions, Palsies, Falling Sickness, Deafness, Pains in the Head, etc.

Price of this Elixir of Marjoram is 3 shillings the Glass.

Dose from 10 to 20 Drops in Sack, or dropped upon Sugar.

4. Elixir of Horseradish.
Horseradish far exceeds Scurvey grass in curing the Scurvey, Dropsy, Stone,
or Gravel, or any other Disease appropriated to Scurvey grass, or the Spirit
thereof; by reason it abounds more with Volatile Salt, and by partaking more of
the bitter property; which makes it a greater Opener of Obstructions and
Allayer of Sharpness: and being prepared as this (...) Elixir is, exceeds any
Distilled Spirits; for in such preparations no Glass is able to contain its
^olatile Mercurial Salt, when agitated by that force of Fire which must be used
in Common Distillation: for indeed all Vegetable Bodies so prepared, lose their
Natural Gifts, and are no more the Medicine they were when at Unity in the
Concrete. Therefore the better to inform the Reader touching the Difference
between such a Spirit and an Elixir of a Plant or Herb; know that an Elixir is
an Essential seminal balsamic Liquor (by some called the Crasis of a Plant)
raised to a new or regenerate life, after putrefaction in a proper Dissolvent;
and this separated purity I call Elixir, and such preparations as these are
fitted for Natures Reception; that she may dispose of them for those great Uses
and Ends they were ordained, etc.

Take half a spoonful of this Elixir of Horseradish Morning and Night in a
little White Wine, or with Sugar, etc. Note, Any may take these Elixirs in
Spring Water, or Water and Sugar, Sider, Tee or Thee, Coffee or Ale; but Canary
that is neat and clean is the best to take it in; but Water is better than bad
Wine, etc.

Price of this Elixir of Horseradish is One shilling a Glass.

Those that have occasion to make use of any ^f the beforementioned Elixirs,
may be furnished with them at the place aforesaid, and in no other place, till
farther notice be given by me of other Sellers.

Each Glass is sealed with the Bleeding Pelican.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas James at the Printing-press in Mincing Lane. 16^8.


