THREE SERMONS Preached upon Extraordinary Occasions.

BY CHARLES ROBOTHAM, B. D. Rector, of Reifam in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for William Oliver Bookseller in Norwich. 1680.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Christopher Calthorpe, Knight of the BATH.
Honored and Right Worshipful.
IT will not (I hope) be thought strange, but Duty, if (amongst the many that
are cordially affected toward you) I also bring my Mite into your Treasury;
unto which all that know you, and can distinguish true worth and goodness from
a seeming show, or a mere popular gloss, cannot but pay the Tribute of their
due respects.

As for this present addres^ here made unto you; your singular integrity and
fidelity to the public, your true affection to soli^ and undissembled Piety,
your untainted Loyalty to the Prince, your Love and Nobleness to the Church,
(so well known) and lastly, your many favors and countenance, not only to
those of my Function in general, but to my self in particular, are all such as
justly entitle you to the subject of this following Discourse; you being that
in your lesser Sphere, which our Gracious Sovereign is, in his higher and
larger, A true Nursing Father. God of his goodness increase the Gifts and
Graces of your mind, and the number of your Imitators.

May the Virtues of your Soul (in despite of that Veil that would hide them)
prove more and more conspicuous, like the Statues of those two Romans of old,
which the more they were concealed and covered from the public sight, were but
the more taken notice of.

May the fatness of the Earth be your lot, and may the Dews and Blessings of
Heaven fall here and ever upon you and yours, so as to redound to Gods Glory,
to the public good, and to your own inward comfort and eternal reward. So
prays your unfeigned Orator at the Throne of Grace, and faithful Servant to his
power,

Charles Robotham.

Isaiah xlix. 23. And kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy
Nursing Mothers. They shall bow down to thee with their Faces toward the
Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.
THE current of Religion in the world seems much to resemble those Waters of
Ezekiel, that Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4.
rose first to the Ankles, then to the Knees and Loins, and so to an unpassable
depth. Such was the rise and progress of Religion in the World. The beginnings
of it were but small, only in the Families of the Patriarchs; the Channel of it
for a long time scant and narrow, only in the bounds and limits of the Land of
Canaan: In Jury only was God known, and his Name great in Israel. But at the
length it overflowed the Banks, and according to the prediction, Isa. 11. 9.
The whole Earth was filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover
the Sea. But this it was a work especially reserved for the days and coming of
the Messia; and is commonly joined with the mention and promise of the Messia.
Thus in Genesis 22. 18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.
Thus in Genesis 49. 10. (Till Shilo come) And to him shall the gathering of the
people be. And the very same thing we meet with at large in this very Chapter
of Isaiah, beginning at the 6th Verse: I will give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation, to the ends of the earth.

In pursuance of which subject he goes on to set forth the care of God, not
only for the perpetuating of the Church, (Verse the 16th, I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me;) but also for
the replenishing and enlarging the Church; and that to such a flow of fullness,
that they shall complain, (as in the 20th Verse) The place is too strait for
me, give me room that I may dwell. Augustus est mihi locus in Synagogis, fac
mihi spatium in Ecclesiis; as St. Hierom glosses upon the place.

Now, if any shall ask, (with the Church in the 21st Verse) who has begotten
me these? who has brought up these? As much as to say, By what means shall
there come in such a throng and multitude of Proselytes to fill the Church? The
Answer follows in the next words, That it should be by a double means; first,
by the power and preaching of the Gospel, (Verse 22. I will lift up my hand
unto the Gentiles, and set my Standard to the People; i. e. Vexillum crucis,
(says St. Hi^rom) The Word and Standard of the Cross and Gospel of Christ. An
then secondly, It should be don by the after-assistance of King and Princes
that should embrac^ and profess the Gospel; as it follows in the Text, Verse
23. An^ Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers and their Queens thy Nursing
Mothers, they shall how down to the^ etc.

The words then are a signa^ Prophecy, touching the enlargement of the Church,
as by the accession of the Gentiles in the general, so of the Secular Power and
Governors in particular. I^ the words I shall consider tw^ main remarkables:
First, the Persons here instanced in, ( King^ and Queens.) Secondly, the things
spoken of these Persons; i. ^ Their Conversion, their Devotion, their
furtherance and assistance.

First then, let us consider, Eminentiam Instantiae, the Persons here instanced
in; we shall find them to be none of the (...), of the lower and middle rank;
but of the (...), Persons of the greatest height and eminency, and that in
each of the Sexes, Kings for the one, and Queens for the other. He could not
have gone higher, if he would, here amongst Men. And truly Kings and Princes
must needs be the highest upon Earth, because they are immediately next unto
him, who is the most highest both in Heaven and Earth, that is, to God himself.
For this was the Divinity of the ancient Fathers, Tertul. c. 2. A quo secundi,
post quem primi; ante omnes, and super omnes Deos. Tert. Apol. c. 30. Lib. 3.
adversus Parmen.
ad Scap. Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem, a Deo secundum -- Et solo Deo
minorem; i. e. We reverence the Emperor, as a Man second to God, and inferior
to none but God. So that of Optatus, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus,
qui fecit Imperatorem. There is none above the Emperor, saving God, who made
the Emperor. And so also that o^ Arnobius. Rex sub nullo alio, ni^ In Psalmos.
sub Deo. The King is under non^ but God; and if only under him then doubtless
the highest, nex^ and immediate to him: yea so near unto God, that they partake
of the very name (...). Justin. M. quaest. and resp. ad Orthod. Qu. 142.
of God, Psalm 82. 6. I said ye are Gods. Gods for their place and Office, as
being in Gods room and stead, his Vicegerents upon Earth. And Gods for their
Power and Height* and Supremacy, as having a Divine impress of Majesty and
Sovereignty sealed and engraved upon their Persons. For what is that that we
call ( Majest as Principis,) the Majesty of a King or Prince? I say, What is
it, but something of Divinity, something of God, put upon a mortal Man? And
therefore the Christians of old (as Vegetius relates, in their Military
Vegetins. de re militari l. 2. ^. 5.
Oath) were wont to be sworn, without scruple, Per Majestatem Imperatoris, By
the Majesty of the Emperor, as being Sacrum quiddam and Divinum, something of
God put upon Man, and exalting him to an immediate nextness unto God.

Ye see then the height and eminency of the Persons; yea but may some say, Why
is it that the Instance here runs in Kings only, and single Persons? were
Monarchs only to be the Nursing Fathers to the Church of God? To this I answer.
No doubt but under Kings are here included all other Secular Powers and
Governors whatsoever; yet Kings only are named, and that for a double reason.

1st, In respect to the Event, they being primogeniti Ecclesiae, The first that
began to exercise the power of Nursing-fathers. The Prophecy it self, in the
execution of it, was firstly, yea, and mostly fulfilled all along in Kings and
Monarchs. And then secondly, In respect to the very Species of Government,
Kings are her named, for diverse reasons.

1st, As being the chiefest an^ Principale per se positum stat pro caeteris.
Aristot. polit. l. 3. c. 11, 12.
principal of Governments, a having in it (...), absolutu^ imperium, the entire
and absolut^ command and power united an^ centered in one person; and there
fore the more effectual for the ai^ and assistance of the Church.

2ly, As being the most know^ the most famous, usual, and un^versal; especially
in those Eastern Nations: according to tha^ in Tacitus, Suetum Regibus Orientem.

3dly, As being the most ancient, Arist. Eth. l. 8. c. 11. (...) etc. Natutura
commenta est Regem. Sen. de clem. l. 1. c. 19.
natural, and primitive o^ Governments. Initio Reges: I^ primum in terris fuit
Imperii n^ men, says Salust Cited by Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 3. c. 10. To whom
Vives adds Herodotus and Pliny.
(in Catilin. Kingship or single Empire was the first of Governments. Omnes an^
tiquae gentes, regibus quondam p^ruere, Secunda in Catilimam. Item de Legibus
^. 3.
says Tully. Princip^^ Rerum, Gentium nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat,
says Justin. Cited also by Aug. de C. D. l. 4. c. 6.
l. 1. All Kindreds and Nations at the first were under Kings. To which we may
add that of the Philosopher, Politic. 1. c. 1. (...). Cities at the first were
governed by Kings, and so even to this day are Nations also.

Yea, and if we look yet higher into the very Rise and Origin of Government,
as it is recorded in Scripture; we shall find it was first vested in a single
person. Adam, who was the Father of Mankind, was by his Creation, and for his
time, Monarch of Mankind; according to that of Cedrenus, (...).

The first Government in the Bertram. de rep. jud. c. 2. p. 38.
world was that of Fathers, and Kingship is nothing else but the Apex, or
Supremacy of fatherly Power, devolved into the hands of the present Monarch.
(...), says the Philosopher, who also plainly Ethic. l. ^. c. 12.
draws the first pedigree of Monarchs, from the Rights of Fathers; as any may
see in the first Chapter of his Politicae.

But enough of this first rema^kable in the Text, that is, of the Persons or
particularity of the Instance ( Kings or Princes.) pass unto the second
Considerble, and that is, The things tha^ are foretold and spoken of these
Persons. They may be reduce^ to these following Heads. 1. Their Call and
Conversion. 2. Their Piety and Devotion. 3. Their Beneficial Influence upon the
Church, and assistance to it. From all which follows in the last place the
prosperity and enlargement o^ the Church by their means, (the thing designed
and intended in the whole Contest.)

First then, ye have their Cal^ and Conversion; their conjunction on with the
Church, and relation to the Church, as Members; intimated in the Possessive (
Tui,) Kings shall be Thy Nursing Fathers. Thine, first, as Members, and then as
Fathers. So that here are two things promised to the Church, as touching Kings,
1st, That they shall be her Converts, and then her Patrons; first Embracers and
Believers of the Gospel, and then Maintainers and Promoters of the Gospel. They
shall become professores fidei, and so defensores, first Professers of the
Faith, and then Defenders.

To begin with the first, Their Conversion. The Church of Christ, it is a Nest
for Eagles, as well as Doves. It Is a Grove for Oaks and Cedars to grow in, as
well as Shrubs and Coppice: That is, it is a Place and Receptacle for Kings and
Caesar's, as well as meaner Persons; for rich Abraham, (the mighty) ( Abraham,
(...) dicitur Nicolao Damasceno. Rex vocatur Justino. Lib. 36. Vnctus Dei.
Psalm. 105. 15. says Grotius in Genesis 23. 12.
Prince, as he is called, Genesis 23. 6.) as well as poor Lazarus. It Is a Flock,
wherein the Lions lie down with the Lambs in the same Fold, the Prince with the
People.

The Grace of God, and the Faith of Christ, and the Power of Conversion, was
never meant to be confined, merely to the Commonalty, never to go higher. The
Apostle expressly declared the contrary from the beginning 1 Timothy 2. where he
does enjoin it as a Canon to all Christians, That Prayers, and Supplications,
and Thanksgivings be made for all Men, Verse 1. and for Kings in particular,
Verse 2. Giving this as the Ground and reason of the duty, ( Verse 4.) because
God will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth;
that is, doubtless, at the least, Men of all sorts and ranks, Kings as well as
others. This the Apostle then knew; and knew it by the Writings of the
Prophets. 'Twas a thing foretold long before, That Kings should see and arise,
and Princes should worship the holy one of Israel, Isa. 49. 7. That the
Gentiles should come to the Churches light, and Kings to the brightness of her
rising. Isa. 60. 3. And so Psalm 22. 30. Pingues terrae adorabunt, all they
that be fat upon Earth shall eat and worship. And Psalm 47. and the last Verse.
The Princes of the People are gathered unto the People of the God of Abraham,
(so it is in the Hebrew) For the Shields of the Earth ((...),) the Mighty upon
Earth) belong unto God; that is, they shall join themselves to the God and
People of Abraham, by communion of the same Faith.

These Promises or Prophecies it is clear they belonged to the times of the
Gospel. And though they were not presently fulfilled at the first planting of
the Gospel, because God was resolved to bring in and carry on the Religion of
Christ at first in the world, not by the countenance of the Grandees and
Princes of this world, but only by the sufferings of Martyrs by Signs and
Miracles, by the sole and single force and efficacy of the Word Preached; that
so the Doctrine might appear to be of God, and not of Man; yet, not
withstanding, after some few Centuries of years, in due time those Oracles
began to be fulfilled; first in the Conversion of Lucius a British King of
this Isle: and then of Constantine and Theodosius; and so all along of many
other Princes, as it is at this day. So that the Religion of Christ, which at
first began at the lower end, and dwelt in Cottages, is now got into the
Palaces of Nobles, yea, and into the Courts of Kings and Princes, and I doubt
not, of some of them, into their Hearts too. Christ, who is Lord over all, (
Romans 10. 12.) has shown himself rich unto all, even unto Kings; rich in Grace
by calling them out of darkness into his mavelous light; hereby testifying
both the freeness of his Grace, that he is the God of the Hills as well as of
the Valleys; and likewise the Power of his Grace, that he has a Throne in
Hearts of Kings, and can conquer Crowns and Scepters to a willing professing of
him. And that the Net of the Gospel, (spoken of Mat. 23. 47.) is large and
strong enough to catch and take the great Whales and Leviathans of the Water,
as well as the smaller Fishes. Lastly, hereby he has testified his honorable
regard and respect unto the Robes of Earthly Majesty, to the Thrones of Kings,
by baptizing them into the Faith of Christ; thereby showing them the way unto a
better Kingdom, that of Heaven, and to a brighter Crown, that of Righteousness.

And that is the first thing here intimated touching Kings and Princes, their
Call and Conversion. The next follows, and that is, their Piety and Devotion.
For this I take to be the meaning o^ those words, ( They shall bow down to thee
with their face to the Earth and lick up the dust of thy feet. It Is an allusion
to that gesture o^ lowly Reverence and Incurvation of Body to the Ground, that
was in use, both in Religious and Civil Worship. As ye may see both at once, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. All the So 1 Samuel 24. 20. Adoraverunt Jehovam and Regen Pagn.
Congregation blessed the Lord, and bowed down their Heads, and worshipped the
Lord and the King (...) lxx.) The like was practiced by all your Eastern
Nations, to their Sove reigns; as appears by that of Martial. -- Pictorum sola
basiate regum. Epigr. L. 10. Ep. 72.

As also by that (...) without which Themistocles himself could not have access
unto the Persian King; though he disguised it as well as he might, by the
letting fall of his Ring.

But to return; in allusion (I say) unto this custom of deep and low
veneration, is it here said even of Kings and Queens, that they shall kiss or
lick the dust, that they shall bow down with their faces toward the Earth: Yea
but unto whom? Answ. To whom but Christ. To him alone is all this reverence and
obeisance of Kings and Queens directed and intended. For though the Person here
spoken to (as the words sound) seem to be the Church; yet the Worship here
spoken of is meant only Christ. Christi proprius and peculiaris, (says See
Psalm. 72. 9. Isa. 49. 7. De Imperio summarum potestatum. c. 4.
Grotius.) Tibi incurvabunt; id est, Christo in te habitanti, says Tremellivus.
(They shall bow down to thee, i. e. To Christ dwelling in thee. Sic ad
Ecclesiam transfertur hic honos, ut penes unum Christum integer maneat, says
Calvin. Lingent pedum pulverem tuorum, O Ecclesia, primitiva, in persona
capitis tui, Jesu christi. Glossa ordinaria in locum.
As much as to say, The Church is here considered in conjunction with Christ
the Head; so that what is spoken of the Body, strictly and properly pertains
only to the Head. Si enim Caput Ecclesiae es^ Christus, Caput hic adoratur in
corpore, says St. Hierom upon the Place. In the Honor of the Body is
understood the Worship of the Head. And to the like purpose (yet more plainly)
is that of St. Basil, (upon Psalm. 45. Ver. 12.) (...). It Is not the Church to
whom this Honor or Worship is given, but unto Christ, who is the Head of the
Church.

In vain therefore do the Parasites of Rome go about to draw this Text to the
maintenance or countenance either of the Papal Chair, or of the Vide Librum
Caeremoniarum, Sect. 3. C. 3.
Honor and Subjection claimed as due thereunto. For besides the falseness of
the Hypothesis, the thing it self is very wide from the purpose of the Text.
The Honor here spoken of (as to be done by Kings and Queens) is not that of
external Subjection, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, but that of Religious
Adoration. It Is no other than subjection unto Christ himself. To the Person of
Christ, to the Laws of Christ and Christianity, to the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, to the Word, Will, and Worship of Christ. This is that, that is
fore-promised in the behalf of Kings; that they should render unto Christ the
subjection of Piety and Devotion, ie. Reverence to his Name, observance to his
Worship, obedience to his Will, submission to his Yoke and Scepter, walking in
his Truth, rejoicing in his Light; counting it their highest Honor to do him
Service, and the best and biggest of their Titles to be his Subjects. As it is
recorded of the Emperor Theodosius, That he professed he rejoiced Theodoret.
l. 5. c. 25.
more in his Christianity, than in his Regal Dignity; and, tha^ upon his
Deathbed he thank'^ God more, that he was Membru^ Ecclesiae, (a Member of the
Church) than that he was Caput Imperi^^ (the Head of the Roman Empire And
another Passage I have rea^ of one of the Lewis's, King o^ France; who, though
he had go^ many Victories, and won man^ Towns from the Saracens, ye^ would he
not be styled from an^ of them, but only from the Place of his Baptism would be
called Lewis of Poissy. Why? Because there (said he) I first overcame the
Devil, and was made a Christian. Many the like Instances might be given of the
signal Piety of Christian Kings and Princes both in Word and Deed: But my
business is not a History, but a Sermon. I shall therefore pass by what might
be more largely spoken of this second Head, and hasten to the third and main
Particular designed in the Text, and that is the special and beneficial
Influences of Kings upon the Church for its good and flourishing, ( They shall
be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing Mothers.

In the opening of which I shall consider two Particulars; 1st, The Thing it
self, to be done by Kings and Princes; and that is, the cherishing, the
spreading and furtherance of the Church, and of Religion in the Church. 2ly,
The means and manner of performing: They shall do it, as (...), as Nursing
Fathers.

For the first of these, It Is very evident God has always made use of Kings and
Princes, for the furtherance and maintenance of Religion, from first to last.
The first settlement of it among the Israelites was by the Hands of Moses, who
was King in Jesurun. (Deuteronomy. 33. 5.) or as the Targum and Syriack reads it, King
in Israel. The retriving of it, when lapsed, from Impieties and Idolatries,
'twas by the means of Judges; who Cunaeus de republ. l. 1. c. 12. Bertramus de
rep. jud. c. 9. P. 109.
Josephus calls (...), no ^ther than Monarchs; Dictaton for their time, that
is, in effect Kings.

In a word, the fullest and the utmost growth, and (...) of tha^ Church, and
the highest an^ brightest Sunshine of Religion amongst them, was not, till
(...) came under the warm Beams an^ Influence of the Royal Scepter Their
Religion was never culminant, never rose unto its height and splendor, till
the Kingshi^ was settled amongst them, first in the Family of David, and then
in the Line of Solomon. Then was the 1. Chron. 23. 6. 24. 3.
Sacred Militia, the courses of the Priests and Levites, ordered: There was the
stately Fabric of the Temple erected, and the Service furnished: Then was the
God o^ Israel worshipped in the beauty of Holiness. And so downward in the
sequel of the Story, still y^ shall find, Kings were the maintainers of
Religions, as in Abija, Asa, and Jehosaphat: Kings were reformers of Religion,
as in Hezekia and Josia: yea, and Kings were the Restorers of Religion,
together with their Liberties, as in the days of Ezra and Nehemia. Both which
acted in all they did by Commission from the Kings of Persia, Ezra 7. 25, 26.
Neh. 5. 14.

This Blessing of Pious, and of Gracious Kings, so behooful and advantageous to
the Church of the Jews, God was pleased to afford and make promise of, to the
Church of the Gentiles.

Besides the Proofs already named, I shall add three more, pertinent to the
purpose. The first is that of the Text; where the nursing and nourishing
influence of the secular Powers, is clearly mentioned, as one signal and
special means of the furtherance and enlargement of the Gospel Church, as is
evident from the whole drift and scope of the context. T^^ second is that of
Isaiah. Chapter 6^ where having spoken of the Abundance of the Sea that shou^^ be
converted, Verse the 5th; follows in the tenth Verse, (...) Sons of Strangers
shall build up t^^ Walls, and their Kings shall min^ster unto thee. And Verse
the 16^^ Thou shall also suck the Milk of (...) Gentiles, and the Breast of
King Before ye had the Nurse, and her^ ye have the Milk and Breast; a suring
us, they should not b^ mere Dry-nurses, but such wh^^ as it were from their own
Bowel^ shall minister strength and growt^ unto the Gospel Church.

There is one place more, which some not improbably draw to this purpose; and
that is in the four an^ twentieth Psalm. where having spoken of the large and
univers^^ Dominion of Christ, Verse 1. An^ of the conditions of Communion with
the Church of Christ, Ver. 3 to the 6th. he then closes with a^ exhortation (as
many do interpret it) to the secular Powers, for their favorable furtherance
of the Church and Gospel of Christ, Verse the 7th. Lift up your Heads O ye
Gates, and be ye lift ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in.
The Septuagint, with Symmachus and Theodotio, expound it, as spoken to
Principalities and Powers; and accordingly render it, Lift up your Heads, O ye
Rulers, ((...)) and so the vulgar Latin, (O Principes) So the Arabic and
Aethiopick Versions.
O ye Princes, and be ye lift up, ye Fores soeculi, (as Arias Montanus renders
it, Ye everlasting Doors.) And why must they be lift up? All to this end, (says
Psalmist) That the King of Glory may come in, i. e. To make way and room in the
World, for the Kingdom of God and of Christ. The entrance into the City was by
the Gates; the strength of the City was in the Gates, ( Psalm. 147. 13. He has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gate^ And the Place of Magistracy, Pow^^ and
Judicature was in the Gat^ ( Ruth 4. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 25. 7.) (...) therefore by the
lifting up of (...) Gates may well be understood (...) concurrence, the utmost
(...) countenance and assistance (...) the Ruler, to the promoti^^ and
propagating of Religion as being entrusted with a Po^er to make way for the
Ki^^ of Glory.

So much for the Thing it se^ The spreading and enlarging (...) the Church, by
Kings and Princes. I come now unto the (...) Particular, and that is, The mea^
and manner of effecting it; Th^^ shall do it, as Nursing Father that is, first
as Leaders, and the as Governors: First, by t^^ strong attractive of their
Example, and then by the use and exercise of their Authority; fir^^ by the very
countenance of the personal Example, which alwa^^ of great influence and
efficacy ^n the World. Haggai 2. 23. (says God unto the Prince Zorobabel) I
will make thee as a Signet, Tanquam Annulum Signatorium. Good Princes, they are
Gods Seal, Gods Signet, that make impression upon the World, and help to shape,
and print, and fashion it into Truth and Goodness. -- Ad exemplum Regis
componitur Orbis. The Religion of the Prince is the Mould into which the People
commonly are cast. Such as sit in the Gate, such as are highest and uppermost
in the World, are eyed as the Rule and Copy to those that are under. The
younger naturally follow and tread in steps of the elder; Servants imitate
their Masters, Children their Parents; but of all Presidents, that of the
Prince or Ruler is the most prevailing, to engage the practice of the People.
-- Et in vulgus manant exempla Regentum. The Ways and Deeds of such great ones,
as they draw the (...) of all after them, so also the Imitation. Virtue in a
King, ^^ligion in a Prince, seldom goes lone without a numerous trai^ Followers
and Imitators. Wh^ the King of Ninive put on Sa^ cloth, ( Jona 3. 6.) how
suddenly did it become the wear ^ fashion as it were of the wh^ Court and City.
When Const^^tine embraced the Faith, and ^ up the Cross for his Standa^^ what a
shake did the very Patte^ of his Example give unto (...) Kingdom of Darkness
throu^^ the whole Empire? How so did Heathenism vanish out Towns and Cities,
and betook self ad pagos and paganos? (fr^^ whence the Name of Pagans, sa^
Vossius.) Christianity being se^^ed in the Prince, it ran dow^ amain, as the
Ointment from (...) Head of Aaron, to the Skirts (...) Borders of his Garment.

That Is the first way wherein or whereby Kings do become Nursing Fathers to the
Church, by the mere influence of their Example.

The next and second (which ^s the main) follows; and that ^s, by the use and
exercise of their Power and Authority. That is, when they do employ the utmost
of their Princely Power, for the defense and protection of the Church, for the
support and maintenance of the Church, for the conservation of the rights and
properties of the Church, for the due and well management of the Affairs of the
Church. When Laws are made, and Acts passed by Authority in the behalf of the
Church, when public and effectual care is taken for the great concerns of the
Church, for the soundness of its Faith, for the purity, beauty, and comeliness
of its Worship, for the order and regularity of its Government, for the
efficacy of its Discipline, f^^ the preservation of its Peace, Unity and
Tranquillity, in a^ through the Communion of the whole. This, this is the
Benef^^ of Nursing-fathers; this is the Milk that comes out of the Brea^^ of
Kings, the establishing of Religion by the Sovereign Power, i^ all the public
concerns of (...) When Christianity is (by the means) engrafted into the Stat^
and is made the Religion of the State; when the profession of is not only
owned, but ratifie^ with the Seal of Authority, fe^ced and strengthened with the
provision of Laws, guarded with Penalties, encouraged and advance^ with
Privileges. This is tha^ Singular quiddam a regibus requis tum, says Calvin
upon the Text That special and singular Service expected, yea and bespoken from
the Hands of Kings, for Christ Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Be wise O ye Kings be
instructed ye Rulers of the Earth Serve the Lord with fear. What Acts 4. 25.
Lord? why the Lord Christ, as appears by the 2d and 7th Ver. And how are they
to serve him? not only in their Hearts and Lives, but in their Power and Place,
with their Crowns and Scepters; serve him as Kings. Excellently St. Augustine
Epist. ad Bonifacium
to this purpose. Aliter servit qua homo, aliter qua Rex. Kings serve the Lord
Christ, as they are Men, one way, as they are Kings, another. As Men, they
serve him, vivendo fideliter, by living up to the Faith and Precepts of Christ;
but, In quantum reges, as Kings, they serve him, Leges sanciendo, Leges ferendo
pro Christo, by making Laws for Christ; Cum ea faciunt ad serviendum Epist. 48.
ad Vincentium. Epist. ad Bonifacium
illi, quae non possunt facere nisi reges; when they do those things for
Christ, (by the advantage of their Power) which none but Kings can do. And
again, Cum Aug. contra Cresconium, l. 3. cap. 51.
in regno suo bona jubeant, mala prohibeant; when in their respective
Dominions, they command wha^ good, and forbid what is evil; (...) only in
relation, ad Societatem H^manam, to Humane and (...) Peace and Society, but
also (sa^ he) in things pertaining ad Re^^gionem Divinam, to matters Religion,
and Divine concer^ All which may serve as a fit Comment upon the Text, plainly
she^ing us, what is that Regia Ecc^^siae nutricatio, (as Grotius speak^ L. de
Imperio summarum potestatum.
That Blessing of Nursing father That it is no other than the maintenance and
cherishing of Relig^on by the nurture of wholes^^ Laws, by the public
interposal^ Kings and Princes in its behalf, (...) of Pious Guardians, and as
(...) tender Governors encharged a^^ betrusted with the care and ove^ sight of
the Church. And the indeed is the proper import of the word (...), or
Nursing-father i^ the Text, and in the Hebrew. comes from the word (...) or
(...) that signifies, Truth, Trust, (...) Faithfulness. So that the prime and
proper meaning of the word (as Schinler notes) is to signify Tutorem,
Curatorem (Fiduciarium) Rad. (...)
qui in sidem suam recipit alterius puerum: That is, one that is a Guardian, a
Trustee, one that has the care, maintenance and disposal of a Person committed
to his trust. This (I say) is its first and primigenial signification; and then
by consequence it is rendered sometimes a Nurse, (...), Ruth. 4. 6.) sometimes a
bringer-up, ((...)) even as here in the Text, and in Esther 2. 7. where
Mordecai is said to be (...), the nourisher or bringer up of Esther; or (as
Schinler renders it, out of some Copy of the Septuagint) (...), Praeses and
Rector, her Guardian and Governor, (for so does (...) signify, Curam and
Praefecturam.

So that, all things considered, the style and attribute of Kings here in the
Text could not possibly be better rendered, than, as i^ our Translation, by the
phrase (...) Nursing-fathers. Fathers for the Power, Trust and Authority; an^
then both Fathers and Nurses for their care and tenderness. So tha^ the word it
does at once instruct us in two things concerning Christian Princes. First, In
the Interest (...) their Power in reference to the Church. Secondly, In the
nature and quality of their Power.

1st, Here is the Interest of their Power, in, or toward the Church. The
Church, as a Minor, committed to their Eorum potestati suam Eccl^siam crediit.
Isi^or-^^isp. in ^^nt. c. 51. Cujus fid^i credit^r ipsa Fides. Sacerdates m^^s,
tuae manui commisi. Greg. Epist. ad Mauritium. L. 3. c. 10.
charge; an^ themselves made of God, the (...), the Mordecaies to the Esther,
the Guardians, and Governors of it. And that under a double capacity; first,
as Sovereigns; and so they have the power of stopping or suppressing all
violence, rage and fury intended against the outward Being Peace and Welfare
of the Church. And then secondly, a^ Christian Sovereigns. And so they have the
right of doing all Acts pertaining to Christian Sovereignty in Church Matters;
that is, a supreme inspection in and over all Causes and Persons that do relate
to the Church; a Power of settling and establishing the true Faith and Communion
of the Church; yea, and of ordering the Affairs of the Church, of reforming
corruptions, of redressing abuses, of regulating, and retrenching excesses and
innovations. In a word, A Power of super-vising all Offices and qualities in
the Church, to see and provide, that such as act in the behalf of the Church,
do their Duties, and keep their Bounds, that nothing be done to the prejudice,
not only of the common Peace, but of the common Faith* Order and Christianity;
but all unto the furtherance and edification of the whole.

This Is that Power which Kin^ of old for their part exercised the Government
of the Synagogu^ (as you may see at large in the Chronicles) in the reforming
of Religion, 2 Chr. 29. 15. Ver. 3. and 5. Verse 21, 24, 25, 30. Chapter 30. 2, 5.
Ci. 31. 2, 4.
in purging the Temple, i^ re-inforcing the Passover, in commanding and
ordering the Pries^ and Levites, in reducing and re-e^gaging the People unto
the La^ and to the Covenant, causing (...) that were found in Israel, and
Be^jamin to stand to it, (2 Chro^ 34. 32.) And again, making a^ that were
present in Israel (...) serve, even to serve the Lord the^^ God. The like Power
we fin^ without scruple, practiced by t^^ first Christian Monarchs and
S^vereigns, within the Limits (...) the Gospel Church of their D^minions. After
that the Empi^^ was cast into the Lap of the Church, and Christianity advance
to sit at the Helm and Stern of G^vernment; it is sufficiently know^ how far
even the first Christian Emperors interposed their Authority in
Church Matters; In hearing Complaints, in receiving Appeals, in taking
cognizance of Causes, ( etiam post duplex Judicium Episcopale) in redressing of
Ecclesiastical disorders, in electing of Bishops, in convening of Councels, in
examining and ratifying of Canons, in passing and setting forth Laws and
Edicts, for the establishing of Truth, Order, and unity, and for the healing or
extinguishing of Schism and Heresy. As may be seen at large by any that will
read both in the Eastern and Western Records, in the Acts of Constantine and
Theodosius, in the Code and Novels of Justinian, and in the Capitulars of
Charles the Great. So true was that of Socrates, in his Preface to the fifth
Book of his Ancient-Church-History, (...), (ever since that Kings and Emperors
became Christians) (...) (...) (the affairs or matters of the Church have hung,
the whole weight of them hung and depended upon them, i. e. upon their
authority, concurrence and interposal; for of that he speak^ in the next words.

And thus have I shown the first thing that is implied in the Phras^ of
Nursing-fathers, the Power and Interest of the Prince in an^ over the Church as
Guardian, (...) Governor.

There is but one thing more (...) be considered in the Text, and shall then
draw toward a Conclusion; and that is, The nature and quality of this Power,
or, i^ I may so speak, (and I crave humble leave to speak it) The Bound^^ and
Limits of it. Princes, they have indeed Power and Authority in Church Matters,
but it is as Fathers still, not as Masters. They are not styled Domini, but
Nutritii; no^ Lords of our Faith, but Nurses Protectors, Defenders of the Faith

The whole Right of Secular Powers in matters Ecclesiastical is not
Destructive, but Cumulative. Mr. Thorndikes Right of the Church, c. 4.
It Is not to change or abolish, but to establish what they find the Church, by
the Act of God, possessed of, and vested in, from the beginning. We may not
therefore so far extend the Phylacteries of the Princes Power, as to think or
say, That he may devise new Recte illud dicitur, non esse principum aut
civilium Magistratuum, Leges novas de culitu Dei conscientiis far aut propria
Sacerdotum munia obire. Casaub. exercitationes Epist, dedicat.
Articles of Faith, or appoint new Sacraments, (new Instruments of Grace) or
introduce or enjoin new parts of Worship. No, these are Christi Regalia, (the
Royalties of Christ.) In things of this nature we call no Man Master upon
Earth, for one is our Master, even Christ, Mat. 23. 10. There are (as the
Apostle speaks) (...), The things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. And there are (...),
The things that are Gods, evidently distinguished by our Savior from the
things that are Coesars, Mat. 22. 21. As being things of Divine, Immediate an^
absolute appointment. And thoug^ the Christian Magistrate has I^Perium circa
Sacra, a Power of ordering even about these things, (...) to Time and Place,
and matter (...) form, and whatsoever else relat^ to the due and decent, and
regular performance of these things yet he has no power super (...) over the
substance of the thing themselves, either to add to them or diminish from them.

In a word, we must know there are in the Church (...) God, Immota quoedam and
Devin^ certain sacred and unchangeabl^ Points; as namely, The common Faith and
Christianity, the Rul^ and Sum of Christian Faith, the Parts and Duties of
Christian Worship, the Offices of Christianity wherewith God will be served, in
the Communion of hi^ Church, the Means and Instruments of Grace, (the Word an^
Sacraments;) together with the Power of Orders, and the Keys of Doctrine and
Discipline. These and the like, they are Res Dei, the Things of God; that is,
of his immediate, absolute, perpetual appointment and constitution. They are
Dona Christi, the Donatives of Christ and of his Spirit. They are Dos and jura
Ecclesioe, the Dowry and Birthright of the Church, as it is a Society of Gods
immediate founding, subsisting not by Man's Law, but by Gods Charter, (not to be
nulled, or altered by Man.)

In these things, as St. L. 5. Orat. contra Auxentium.
Ambrose said of old, Bonus Imperator est intra Ecclesiam, non supra. And
again, Ambr. Ep. 33. Item 1. 5. c. 33.
Noli te gravare Imperator, ut putes te in ea quoe Divina sunt, imperiale
aliquod jus habere. Think not, O Emperor, thou have any Power Imperial over
things Divine; i. e. over things which God and Christ have settled in the Church
by their own immediate Act.

The Christian Church, it is a^ was from its beginning a Relig^ous Corporation,
founded by t^^ Act of God for the Communi^^ of its Members in the Faith,
W^^ship and Service of God. (...) virtue of which Foundation from God, it has
its proper and int^^nal Rights and Powers distin^^ from the Civil, though
limitab^^ in the exercise of them by t^^ Civil. These Rights were ve^^ed in the
Church long before (...) State became Christian, and a^ so to remain after; as
standi^^ upon a distinct Ground, Gift (...) Original. And therefore the Prin^
or State, in becoming Christian gains no Power, no Sovereign^ over these
things, (so as to inn^vate or alter them;) but rath^^ an obligation to uphold
and mai^tain them, according to the pri^ intent of their institution. The being
the declared Will of Go^ That Christian Monarchs or Sovereigns, by entering into
the Church, act as Nursing-fathers; Mr. Thorndik^s Right of the Church, c. 4.
P. 167, 168.
and, that by virtue of their Christianity they hold themselves obliged to the
maintenance of all the several parts of Christianity; i. e. of whatsoever is of
Divine Right, in the profession and exercise of Christianity.

And thus have I at length passed through the several Particulars of ^he Text.
The Persons here spe^ified ( Kings and Queens;) the things here spoken of these
Persons; i. e. their conversion to the Church, their devotion in the Church,
their assistance to, and enlargement of the Church, by the Interest of their
Power, as Nursing-fathers.

I shall now only draw some few Inferences, and make some practical
Reflections; and so conclude.

First then. Are Kings promised as a Blessing to the Church? Hence we infer,
The continuance and allowance of their Function of their Place and Office,
und^^ Christianity. Some (as it See Mr. Parkers Polity, second Piece, P. 114.
seem^ have been so foolish or pervers^ as to say, That Kingly Government was a
figure and shadow, part of the Jewish Pedagogy an^ Bondage; and so abolished by
the coming of the Messia. The Te^ here, and the Scripture elsewher^ is evidence
to the contrary. F^^ how could they be Nursing-f^thers to the Church, if they
di^ not remain as Kings? The exe^cise of their Authority, in the behalf of the
Church, plainly i^fers the continuance of their Function in the Church? The
Temple of Ezechiel (which, by the large dimensions of it, Chapter 4^ must needs
pertain to the Gospel makes mention of the Princes and the Princes Portion, Chapter
45. ^. -- 48. 21.

And so, in the City of the ne^ Jerusalem, it is said, The Kings (...) the Earth
should bring their Glor^ and their Honor to it, (Revel. 21. 24.) They should
not leave it behind them, but bring it with them.

Christianity does not extinguish Monarchy; they may be Christians, and yet
Kings. It Is no part of the Baptismal Vow, that they should forego or renounce
their Scepters. Non eripit terrestria, qui regna dat Caelestia, as Sedulius of
old. They may be Christ's Servants, and yet reign over Subjects. For Christ's
Scepter is not, like the Rod of Moses, to devour and swallow up the Rods and
Rights of Princes, as his did the Magicians. He came not to null the Titles, or
disturb the Claims of Earthly Sovereigns, but rather Mat. 22. 21.
to secure and establish them in their continuance statu quo. 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let
every man abide in the same Calling wherein he was called; is a fundamental
Rule and Principle of the Gospel, in all civil Cases and Callings. Christianity
suppose^ the lawful state of the World and of Civil Government, and ^^ters no
Man's condition in it, b^ maintains every Man in that (...) state, Calling, and
Condition Life, wherein it finds him.

In vain therefore was Her^ troubled at the news of Christ Birth, as if he came
to disseiz (...) of his Temporalities, Mat. 2. In vain was Pilate jealous of
t^^ Kingship of Christ, as Enemy Caesar. Christ frees him of the fear, and
tells him plainly, (...) Kingdom is not of this World, Jo^ 18. 26. upon which
words (...) Anstin makes a loud Proclamari^ Tractatus in Joann. 119.
the Name of Christ, Audite J^daei and Gentes, -- Audite Reg^ Terrena, (Hear O
ye Jews a^^ Gentiles, hear O ye Earthly Princes;) non impedio Dominatione
vestram in hoc mando. (I com not to hinder or prejudice you Rule or Dominion in
this World Nolite timere, etc. Be not frighte with vain and groundless fears,
or my Kingdom is not of this World, neither does it come to supplant or unhinge
the Kingdoms ^n this world. Kings indeed are called unto Christ, and by Christ,
( Psalm. 2. 10.) not to part with their Power, or to lose their Place, but only
to do him service with their Power, and in their Place. They are not to throw
away their Crowns, but only (with the 24 Elders, Rev. 4. 10.) to lay them at
the feet of Christ, as acknowledging their subjection to him, and dependancy
upon him, and derivation from him. For so says the Word and Wisdom of the
Father, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign; by me Princes Rule, i. e. by
appointment from him, and subordination to him. For the which reason,
Tertullian sticks Apolog. c. 33.
not to say unto the Pagans, Noster est magis Caesar, utpote a nostro Deo
constitutus. The Emperor, says he, is ours, more than yours, as being set up
and appointed our God; yea by our Savio^^ whose Name and Style it is, to Prince
of the Kings of the Ear^^ Rev. 1. 5. To be King of Kin^ and Lord of Lords, Rev.
19. 16.

So much for the Office an^ Function; the next Inference shall make is in
behalf of the Right and Power. If Kings (...) appointed of God, and entrust by
him, as Nursing Fathers to the Church; then hence it follows against all
opposers, that the Ch^^stian Sovereign has to do in matters of the Church. For
(...) look what the Prophet here say^ That Princes shall do as Nursin Bilson,
of Subjection.
fathers, that, I conclude, th^^ may and must do. For God would not promise,
that they should surp a strange Office, but di^ charge their own. And therefore
the Fact in this case prove the Right, and the Exercise, the Power. Only
mistake not the Point intended, By this Righ^ or Power of Princes I do not
mean, that they either have in themselves the Power Ecclesiastic strictly and
properly so called; or that they give it unto others, unless by giving we
understand only Copiam utendi, Leave and liberty to use and apply it. I intend
not to say, that Princes by their Sovereignty are to be the sole and supreme
Judges of Faith, or Deciders of Controversies, or Interpreters of Scripture, or
Dispensers of Word, Censures, or Sacraments; or that they may take upon them,
in their own Persons, (as the Leviathan speaks) to consecrate Churches, to
propagate Holy Orders, to celebrate the Eucharist, nor to bind and loose in the
Name of Christ. I deny not, but in these things the Magistrate has no power to
act, either per defectum facultatis, because he has not that skill and faculty
that is requisite to the doing of these things; or per defectum Juris, because
the Right of ministri^ such things is by the Act of Go^ reserved to others. As
the Priest of old made answer to Vzzia the King, Regis erat, non adalere, sed
facere ut Sacerdotes adolerent. Great. in locum.
Non est Officii tui, (...) pertains not unto thee to burn I^cense, 2 Chronicles.
26. 18.

But yet notwithstanding, a^^ this being granted, there is sti^^ in the
Nursing-father of the Church, a Sovereign Power ove^ Churchmen, and in
reference to Church Matters. He has Imperium circa Sacra, though not
Ministerium in Sacris. He has the Right of Supreme Inspection though not of
immediate Administration, (for it is one thing to Vide Grotium de Imperio, etc.
c. 2. p. 24.
do these things, and another to see, or cause them to be done.)

In a word, all that I intend is that the Sovereign, as Christian has a
Super-eminent Power of commanding and ordering the Matters of the Church, so
far as they are of public and general concern, not only to Peace and
Tranquillity, but to Religion and Piety, to the due and regular profession of
the common Christianity.

I know indeed, there want not those who would oppose this, either in whole or
in part.

First, some, with the Donatists of old, quite shut out the Magistrate from
these matters. According to the Sayings related by Optatus. Quid Christianis
cum Optatus C. Parmen. L. 1.
Regibus? aut, Quid Episcopis cum Palatio? What have the Church to do with
Kings? or Bishops with the Court or Palace? And again, Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? L. 3.
What has the Emperor to do with the Church? This was the Language of the
first Fathers of Schism; and too much of the like do we find in those Imitators
of them, who will not have the Ruler to interpose at all in matters of
Religion. They Will allow him perhaps a Place in the Church, as a Member; but not
as a Governor, or Nursing-^^ther, no Laws to be made, Edicts to be passed, for
the s^^ling of Faith and Order, in opposition to error and distraction But is
this to be a Nursing-father to the Church? or rather a me^ Gallio, only as an
idle and carele^ Spectator, to stand by, and tam^ly to look on unconcerned,
upon the miseries and confusions of t^^ Christian Body, without stretching
forth a Finger to heal, help, (...) prevent them? How can they (...) said to
discharge their Trus^ (their (...)?) Or what accou^ can they give unto God of
the Power, who do not use it to the best advantage, not only for the outward
safeguard, but also (...) the inward soundness, purity peace, and order of the
Church Never any Classick Author, whither Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8. Ezra 7.
16.
sacred or Aristot. polit. 3. c. 10, and 11. Tullius de legibus 2. Plato de
leg. Dion. L. 52.
profane (that touched upon this Subject but mentions Religion, as in the
Magistrates charge. Never (...) State that professed Religion, but did exercise
an Interest in disposing matters of Religion. Never any Instance to be given,
where Men were permitted (in Point of Religion) to do every one what was right
in their own Eyes, except in times of Anarchy, i. e. Judges 17. 5, 6.
when there was no King in Israel, no Tutor, no Governor, no Nursing-father to
interpose and regulate things in Church and State.

But then secondly, others there are, neither small nor few, who, with the
Church of Rome, will Bellarm. L. 3. de Laicis c. 17. -- Et alibi.
allow the Prince, defensionem Religionis, but not Judicium, no power of
judging, but only a Power, or Obligation rather, of receiving and defending
whatsoever the Church determines. They Will grant you, that Princes Ibid. c. 18.
are the proper bearers of the Secular Sword; but then it must be, Gladius sub
Gladio, the Temporal Sword under the Spiritual; for though it rest in the
Scabbard of Kings, yet must it not be draw^ or used by them, Nisi ad nutum and
Patientiam Sacerdotis. (So Boniface the 8th. in his Extravagan^ Tit. 8. de
Majorit. and Obed. c. I.)

This sure is not to make King Nursing-fathers, but Vassals to the Church; mere
Butchers, as i^ were, to execute, while their Prelates only are the Judges
(...) hear and determine. And all thi^ against the grain, both of Scripture,
Antiquity, and Reason.

Princes indeed are bid to ser^^ Christ, ( Psalm. 2. 11. Serve t^^ Lord with
fear) but not with a^ implicit Faith, or blind Obed^ence; but Proeeunte
judicio, wi^^ judgment and understanding: F^^ so runs the tenth Verse, Sapite
o^ erudimini, Be wise O ye Kings, instructed ye Judges of the Ear^^ (and then
follows) Serve t^^ Lord with fear. It Is (...) it is a rational, reasonable
Servi^^ that is required at their hand^ First understand, and then serv^ It Is
the Service of a right judgment, the thing which the Church prays for, Psalm. 72
1. Give thy Judgments to the King, and thy Righteousness to the Kings Son. God,
who would have Kings, among others, to come unto the knowledge of the Truth, (1 Timothy 2. 4.) no doubt but he allows them ( exercitium Judicii) a Judgment to
discern what is truth and what is error, (that they may refuse and suppress the
one, and embrace and establish the other, as shall be thought fit, for the
public good and welfare of the Church.)

The ancient Councels and Synods of the Church, (as Grotius Grotius de Imperio
summarum potestat. c. 7. p. 174, 175, 176.
proves) did ever tender both their definitions ( i. e. of Faith,) and Canons,
( i. e. Government) (...), to the judgment of the Christian Emperor to be
examined, the one by the Laws of Faith, the other by the Rules of Prudence and
Expedience. And sure it is all the reason in the world, that Kings be satisfied
Men and as Christians, in t^^ matters of the Church, before they ratify them
as Sovereig^ For (as a Learned Man says Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. L. 3. Of the
Laws of the Church c. 32. p. 385.
Kings having a Right to ma^^ the Acts of the Church, to be come the Laws of
the Stat^ (by declaring to concur wi^^ the execution of them) doubtless they
must needs have Right to judge, whether the be indeed such Acts, as Christian
Powers may and ought (...) concur in, and accordingly (...) bound and limit the
exercise o^ them.

But then again thirdly, The^^ is yet a third sort behind, that (...) oppose,
or at least much deba^^ and diminish the Power of the Christian Sovereign; that
is such as would have them de^^ with matters of Religion, only the second hand,
in a remote consideration, sub ratione boni civil^^ far as the civil good and
inteest is concerned in them. So that, as Bellarmine would bring Bell. de
Pontifice. L. 5. c. 6.
^^inces under the Popes girdle, ^^directe and ordine ad Spiritualia; so ^ould
these have Kings and Prin^es to meddle with Causes and ^atters of Religion,
Indirecte ^ in ordine ad politica; only in ^^serence to the civil Good, Weal,
and Peace of the State.

But on the contrary; seeing Kings and Princes are by God di^ectly entrusted
with the Church (...) Nursing Fathers, to do him that Service in and for the
Church (...) their Authority, which none ^ut Kings and Princes can do: Since
they have been always accounted, Custodes and Vindices utri^sque Tabulae, the
Guardians of both ^ables; since they are ordained, (says the Apostle) for the
pu^ishment Romans 13. 3, 4
of evil Works, ( i. e. of all sorts, none excepted;) since ^he Law of the
Ruler or Magistrate is made and set for the punishing, (...)
not only of what is opposite to sound Reason and Polit^ but of what is
contrary to sou^ Doctrine. (1 Timothy 1. 9.) Lastly since the end of their Place
an^ Function, (even of all that (...) (...)) is not only Peace an^ Honesty, but
(...), the due an^ right Service of God, (1 Timothy 2. 2^

I say, from all these Premis^ we may well infer, that for an^ to confine the
Cognizance (...) Princes to profane Trials, an^ to set the faults or matters
of the first Table, as it were, beyon^ the reach of the Secular Ar^ or to yield
them only, as the ^^condary Object of their Power is, both to abase their
Authori^^ and to abridge them of the Right.

And so much shall suffice (...) the Inferences: I shall now on add few
Reflections from the (...) upon our selves and duties; and have done.

First then, Is this the Right and ^itle of Christian Kings? Are ^hey indeed
set up by God as Nursing-fathers to the Church? Then ^et them be so owned by us
both ^n word and deed. That is, let them have the dues of Nursing-fathers.

As first, That of Honor and Reverence to their Names and Persons, Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? The Christian Sovereign, by his Place
and Station, he is Pater Patriae, the public Father of his Country; and a
Nursing-father to the Church: Justly therefore does ^he claim the Tribute of
our special reverence, and that in a degree next to God. So the Scripture
places him, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King. As having imaginem Dei,
sicut Episcopus Christi, (says St. Austin) as Augustinquoest. est veteri
testamento, Qu. 35.
having the Print and Image of God. And therefore Contempt here, though but in
words, in the Language of Scripture, called Blaspheming of Glorius Jude Verse
8. (...).)

A second Due (owing to the Nursing-fathers) is, that of Submission; Sujection
to their Authority. Tit. 3. 1. Put them (...) mind to be subject unto
Principa^ties and Powers. 1 Pet. 2. 13. (...) your selves -- unto the king 1 Chronicles. 26. 30, 32. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 12.
as Supreme. Supreme without any exception, either of Caus^ or Persons. The
Romanists wou^^ fain exempt their Clergy, or ^^ least the Miter, from this
Subj^ction. But what says the Sc^^pture? Romans 13. 1. (speaking of those Powers
that bore the Sword, Verse 4. And to who^ Tribute Si Tributum petit, non
negamus. Agri Ecclesiae solvunt tributum. Ambros. Ep. 32.
was paid, Ver. 6, and ^ he says, Let every Soul be subje^^ to the higher (or
to the Suprem^ Powers. This he wrote unto Church of Rome, and at such time, in
such an Age, when Sou^ were at the best, and Powers the worst. And yet must
every Soul be subject; (...) (as St. Chrysostom glosses upon the Place.) Be
thou an Apostle, be thou an Evangelist, or Prophet, be thou whosoever, thou
must be subject. The Command is general, the Injunction universal. And so St.
Bernard (writing to an Epist. 42 ad Archiepist. Senon.
Archbishop) descants upon the word Omnis. Si omnis, etiam vestra. Quis vos
excepit ab universitate? etc. If every Soul, then yours too; he that goes about
to exempt you, goes about to deceive you. And surely, they that Vide Gregorium
Epist. ad Mauritium, L. 4. c. 76. and 78.
must admonish others to be subject, ( Tit. 3. 1.) much more must they be so
themselves.

Thirdly, a third Due, owing to these Nursing-fathers, is that of Obedience.
Obedience to their Orders and Commands: That is, a ready and willing
performance of what is prescribed by their Authority; and that in Josh. 1. 16,
17. Obedientiam promittit populus in omnibus. Grot
all things, except where obedience to Man, is rebellion transgression against
God. Colo^ 3. 10. Children obey your Parent (your Fathers) in all things much
more our Nursing-father whose Authority is higher than that of the Parent, and
who^^ Power is Supreme. This is the the Apostle joins and couple with
Subjection, Tit. 3. 1. (...) them in mind to be subject to Pri^cipalities, to
obey Magistrates. An^ indeed the prime and principle part of our Subjection to
Gove^nours is Positive Obedience, Co^formity of Practice, to the Oders and
Establishments of Authority. It Is that, that all Law and Power, and Government
asks and looks for, aims an^ drives at, in the first place, the obedience of
the Subject; and for Penalties, they are only (...) the terrifying of
Disobedien^^ The latter is but the Sanctio^ that guards the Law; the (...) is
that alone that satisfies the demands of the Law.

And so much shall suffice for the Rights and Dues owing unto Nursing-fathers:
Unto which, in the next place, we must also remember to subjoyn the Dues owing
unto God in their behalf; the Dues of Joy and Praise, Prayer and Thankfulness,
for the Gift and Blessing of these Nursing-fathers; which brings me to that
special Duty that is reflected on us at this time, not only from the Text, but
from the Day.

The Day that we now celebrate, it is a Day pregnant with Mercies, even the
Mercies of the Text. In which respect, it is more than a single Festivity. Like
St- Simon and Jude, or St. Philip and James, it comes with Twins in the Womb of
it. A double, or rather a triple Holy Day, as being the Memorial of a Triple
Blessing.

First, as it is Natalitium (...) the Birthday of our Christi^^ Sovereign; and
therefore to b^ celebrated by us. Mos ille, ve^^stus, per se improhari non
pote^ says Calvin, of Herod's keeping of his Birthday. 'Twas an ancient
Custom, and of it self n^^ to be condemned. For its Antiquity, we find mention
of it i^ the Kings of Egypt, Genesis 40. 20 The Birthday of Pharaoh solemnized
with a Feast to all his Subjects. In the Kings of Israe^ Hos. 7. 5. we read of
(...) Dies Regis, the Kings Day, i. ^ of his Birth, (says Arias Montsnus. Dies
natalis ejus.) In the Kings of Persia, their Nativity was a yearly Festival,
even as far as throughout all Asia. So Vide Brissor. de Regno Persico. L. 1. p.
27.
Plato in his Alcibiades, (...)

In the Roman and Christian Emperors we read an intimation of the like
Festival. Et si in nostrum Ortum aut Natalem celebrandum, solemnit as
inciderit, differa^ur. Says the constitution of Leo and Anthemius, de die
dominico.

Yea and amongst private Christians we find the like practiced, even by
Christian Bishops, in reference to themselves. It Is evident, (from the Epistle
of St. Ambrose unto Bishop Foelix) they L. 1. Ep. s.
were wont to keep the Days both of their particular Nativity, and of their
particular Nativity, and of their particular Installment.

Much more then may the Birthday of our Sovereign and Nursing-father claim this
celebration at our hands.

Especially, if we consider it in the next place, as it was also Natalitium
Regni. 'Twas not only Dies Regis, but Dies Regni, the Dan. 4. 36. (Requisierunt
me) Scl. pertoesi (...) inde sequentis (...) Grotius.
Kings and the Kingdoms Day, the Day of His Return and Royal Restoration; the
Solemn Day that put a Blessed Period to the long and sad confusions of a Civil
and Intestine War, and to the manifold and multiplied calamities, violences,
oppressings, tossing^ and distractions of a Twelve-year unsettlement and
usurpation. (...) let the remembrance of those day Stobaei Sermon. 42. verba
Selini.
endear the enjoyment and celebration of this.

It was the Custom among the Persians, (says Brissonius) the Brisson. de Regno
Persico. L. 1. p. 27.
when ever their King died, the^ had (...), Justiti^^ quinque dierum, a certain
vacatio^ or ceasing of all Laws, Order an^ Government for five days together.
And all to this end, ((...), etc.) that they might be the more sensible of the
benefit o^ a King and Laws, returning afte^ such a time of disorder and
licentiousness.

God was pleased to exercise (...) of these Nations with a long (...), a sad
and disorderly Vac^tion; not of five days, but (...) more than twice five
years, ((...) the Israelites of old; without King, without a Prince, etc. (...)
3. 4.)

Let us at least make this use of ^t, as to prize the worth of these things by
the past want of them; and to value our returned Enjoyments by the experience
of our former miseries.

But then again, thirdly, There is a third Consideration, that adds to the
Solemnity of this Day, in reference to the Church, as well as to the State, i.
e. As it was (in a sense) Natalitium Religionis, the Birthday of our Religion
too, i. e. of the public reviving and restoration of it, as to the public
Rights, form and settlement of it. The Wounds of the Church in our late
confusions, were as deep as those of the State; and as many convulsions in the
one, as of distraction and dislocation in the other. Nothing but In and Out,
was the Game played in Matters of Religion; nothing acted upon the Stage, but
the strife or struggling of Rebeccaes Twins; Jacob supplanting Esau; the
younger Religion catching at the heel of the elder, and striving to come into
its Place and Birth right. In a word, as there was Jus vagum and incertum in
the State, so there was little else bu^ Fides menstrua in the Church; one way
of Government and Religious thrusting and shoving out the other; nothing but
Overturning, overturning, overturning, till ^^ came whose Right it was to be
ou^ Ezekiel. 21. 27.
Nursing-father. But now, blessed be God, there is some Fixation. The Staves of
Bands and of Beauty ( Zech. 11. 7.) that were broken begin to piece up again.
The Wall and Tower of the Vineyard that were trodden down, begin to rise again.
The Ark, that has been either Captive or Ambulatory, fetched home again, and
se^ up within its own proper Tabernacle. In a word, all things brought to such
a degree of se^tlement, that we may now onc^ more say unto the Men of Rom^.
(that shall ask us) Ecce Ecclesiam, Lo, this is our Church, this the Doctrine
of it, this the Order of it, this the Service and Liturgy of it.

All which, since we owe it (next under God) to the Return of our
Nursing-father; this is that, that should enhance the memory of this Day, as
bringing with it (together with our Laws and Liberties) the re-settlement and
reestablishment of Religion too.

The finishing of the second Temple rebuilt by Herod the great (says Josephus)
fell upon the Kings Birthday; which made both the Joy and Day the greater. The
like may be said of this our day. Our Temple was concerned in the Mercy, as
well as our King; the Ark and the Order of Levi, as well as the Tribe and
Scepter of Juda. And therefore, where so many signal and eminent Causes meet,
as in one constellation, it should render the Festivity of the Day the greater.

What remains then, but th^^ we summon up our Hearts, an^ pour out our Souls
before God, i^ such Sacrifices of Joy, Thankfulness and Prayer, as may testi^ie
our due resentment of so great ^ Mercy.

First, Let Us Rejoice in this Mercy. Let Us meet the memory o^ this Day with the
same thought^ relish, and warm affections, as w^ did the first and freshest
News o^ it. Remember we the greatness of our then-miseries and dangers, the
smallness of our hopes, the sadness of our fears; and afte^ all, the
seasonableness, the suddenness, the fullness and remarkableness of our
deliverance. An^ then, if we be not blind, we sha^^ see reason to break forth
with the Church and say, The Lord h^^ done great things for us, where we are
glad, Psalm. 126. 3.

And then secondly, Let our (...) and Gladness proceed and (...) Praise and
Thankfulness in (...) and Deed. God has ever showed a special care of this our
Land and Nation. We may say, as St. Peter in the Vision unto Brightwood Monk of
Glascowe, Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei. We have Polydor. L. 8.
been Gods Hephzibah, Gods Darling, a Crown of Glory, a Royal Isa. 62. 3. 4.
Diadem in the Hand of God; a Land and Stage of Mercy, especially of this Mercy
and Benefit promised in the Text, (Kings to be our Nursing-fathers, and Queens
our Nursing-mothers.) A Happiness which we enjoyed with the first and earliest
in the World. The first King that ever embraced the Faith of Christ was a King
in this Island. His Name Lucius (from light or brightness;) as if God in him
meant to fulfill the Prophecy in the very sound of the Letter, Isa. 60. 3. The
Gentiles shall come to the Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy Rising.

The first Emperor that eve^ became Christian was, by Birt^ a Britain;
Constantine the great born at York.

The first Kingdom that cast o^ the Romish Yoke and usurpat^ons; and by Law
settled the Reformation, was this of Englan^ First in Henry the Eighth, and s^
down successively (excepting the bloody Parenthesis of the Mari^ days) down to
the present M^narch.

And blessed be the God of He^ven, that the English Scepter i^ still joined to
the Faith of Christ the Royal Branch married to the Vine of Christ; the Rose
and Lilies of the Crown still subject t^ the Cross of Christ; that w^ have
still a Prince, not only of the ancient Blood, but of the true an^ ancient
Faith; one who has bee^ tried (in his time) in the Fire o^ Affliction, in the
Foreign Funace of Temptation; and ye^ himself abides, not only a (...)

Professor, but a gracious Defender of the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith.

Which that he may so long Sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris -- pura prece.
Tertull. ad Scapulam.
continue, let us in the third and last place add unto all, the Sacrifice of
our Prayers and Supplications at the Holy Table: That God, who has the Hearts
of Kings in his Hands, would so guide his Heart, by the Princely Spirit of
Grace and Wisdom; that He may be now and ever still and more a Nursing-father
to this our Israel; that so, He living and ruling in the fear of God, and
commanding for the Truth and Honor of God, and procuring the good and
welfare of the Church of God; after a long and happy Reign here upon Earth,
He may be finally possessed with a Crown of Glory, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven, hereafter.

The END.
The Obedience of Faith: Delivered in a SERMON Preached at the Cathedral in
NORWICH, October. 26. 1679.

To which is added a SERMON of Charity Preached the same day, at St. Andrews in
the same City.

By Charles Robotham, Batchelour of Divinity.

Gal. 5. 6. Faith, which works by Love. Vera autem Fides, christum non potest
apprehendere in juiliam, quin simul apprehendat in Sanctificationem. Calvin*
^sutatio Serveti (in opusculis, Page 606.) Haec conditio (Scl. obedire christo)
toto Evangelio requi^tur in salvandis. -- Vniversalis gratia, ad solos
obedi^t^s pertinet. Paraeus in Hebr. 5. 9. LONDON, Printed for William Oliver
in Norwich M DC LXXX.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL HENRY CROW Esquire Mayor of NORWICH, With the Worshipful
the Aldermen of the same City.
YOur cheerful Audience afforded to these following Discourses, together with
the intimation of your earnest desire to have them made more common, will, I
hope, be my sufficient Apology both for the Publication and Dedication of these
ensuing Papers. I shall add unto these Considerations the great and many
Civilities receive on several occasions from thos^ of your Body. Neither can
forget, either that part of Education I once had in you^ School, and within
your Walls or that encouragement afforde^ me, as a Student, from the
Benefactions disposed by your Corporation, in the College of St. Benedict.
Upon all which score^ it is but right and Reason, th^^ these my first Fruits
from the Press make some return and acknowledgment to the Soil, that once gave
them Sap and Nourishment. Having therefore so just a Title to my Studies,
accept, I beseech you, this Essay of my poor Labors. Which, if they may but
contribute something to the clearness of your Judgment, and more to your Life
and Practice; is the utmost Design and intent of him, who desires, to his
ability, on all occasions to approve himself,

Yours unfeignedly in all Offices of Christian Love and Service, Charles
Robotham.

TO THE READER
Courteous Reader,
IF the Margent of the Sermon seem to be ^ver-laden with Quotation let it be
considered, that the former part of it relates matter of Fact, and therefore
naturally leads me vouch it by Historical T^stimonies. And as for the latter
Part, it touches u^ on a Point, wherein div^ are diversely minded, each standing
upon their own Way and Mode of Expression. And therefore living in a very
tetchy and captious Age, wherein clamours are raised, and exceptions soon
taken, right or wrong, I thought it fit and necessary for prevention, to
fortify what I have delivered, first with the Authorities of Scripture, and
the sense of Antiquity: and secondly, with the consent of the Homilies; and
lastly, with the concurrent Suffrages of our Modern and Protestant Divines,
both here and beyond Sea. This (I presume in all reason) may and will suffice,
for the satisfying of sober, and well-minded Persons; and as for such as are
other wise, I shall not much trouble my self.

Farewell.
Romans xvi. 26. Made known unto all Nations, for the obedience of Faith.
THese last Verses of the Epistle to the Romans, though rejected of old by
Marcion the Here^ick, Estius in locum.
as spurious and apocryphal; ^et I shall look upon them as de^ervedly
Canonical. Partly upon ^he Testimony of Origin among the Greeks, and St.
Ambrose among the Latins, who own them for genuine. Yea and Estius thinks them
added by the Apostles own ^and, the other being penned by ^is Scribe: And then
partly for ^he Divinity of the Matter it ^elf, being no other than a high
Encomium of the rich and precious Gospel of Christ. For this is that Mystery
mentioned Ver^ 25. The Mystery that was kept s^cret from the beginning of the
World; that is, (as it is els^ where called) the Mystery (...) Faith. 1 Timothy 3.
9. The Myster^ of Piety or Godliness. 1 Timothy (...) 16. The Mystery of God and
(...) Christ. Colos. 2. 2. The Myster^ of his Will. Ephesians. 1. 9. In a wor^ the
Mystery of the Gospel; th^^ is, the Contents of the Gospe^ the great and Holy
Truths of the Gospel, the whole Counsel (...) God, touching the Salvation (...)
Man. This is the present Subjec^ Acts 20. 27. Non de sola vocatione Gentium,
sed de tota Christi Doctrina bic agi. Grot. in locum.
both of the Text and Contex^ concerning which Mystery or Go^spel, here are
several things a^serted. As first, The (...) the Revelation of this Myster^
Verse 25. It Is no longer a Secre^ a hidden Arcanum; but now 'ti^ fully revealed
and discovered, r^vealed to some for the good (...) others; and in particular,
reve^led to the Holy Apostles and Pr^phets, ( Ephesians. 3. 5) for the good and
benefit of all Mankind.

Secondly, here is the (...), the Manifesting or Publishing of this Gospel.
What was revealed to some, was, by their means, made manifest, (says the
Apostle in the beginning of the 26th Verse) and that in such a full and
condescending manner to the capacities of all, that the Apostle doubts not to
say, (2 Cor. 4. 3.) If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

But these things I can but touch upon. And therefore passing them by, as also
the middle of the Verse, where ye have the standing Means of this
Manifestation, viz. The Holy Scriptures, I hasten to the latter end of the
Verse, in those words of the Text first read, -- Made known unto all Nations,
for the obedience of Faith. In the which words we have two further grand
Remarkables touching the Gospel. First, here is the Extent of i^^
Manifestation, Iu being mad^ known unto all Nations. Secondly, here is the
Total and Fina^ Scope and End, both of its Revelation and Manifestation; an^
that is, The Obedience of Faith In the former of these ye have the Obligation
laid upon all to receive the Gospel; even because it was promulged and made
known unto all. In the latter ye have the whole Sum of our Duty owing to the
Gospel; that is, The Obedience of Faith. I shall, by Gods assistance, and your
Patience, speak something of the first, though mostly and chiefly of the last.

And first, for the large Extent of the Gospel, In being made known unto all
Nations; it is to be considered, That it never was the intent of God, utterly
to confine the saving Knowledge of himself, either to a few Persons, or to a
single Nation. He, who was of old, Amator Populorum, (...)
the Lover of Peoples, in the Old Testament, ( Deuteronomy. 33. 3.) and (...), in the
New, The Lover of Men, ( Tit. 3. 4.) resolved at last to be known and owned, as
the God of all Flesh, the God, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles,
Romans 3. 29.

And therefore, whereas the ^aws of Moses were mostly Local or Topical, that
is, fitted on-^y to the Jewish People and Po^^ty; and many of them did not
^^nd, out of the Land of Canaan: The Law of Christ was given as ^er
Vniversalis, and calculated (...) the Meridian of all Nati^^s.

And, whereas the Levites and ^abbies and Doctors of the Old ^estament were
only Masters in ^srael, (as Nicodemus is called, ^ohn 3. 10.) They shall teach
Ja^^b thy Judgments, and Israel thy ^^w. Deuteronomy. 33. 10.

The Apostles of the New Testament Destinati Nationibus Magistri. Tertull. L.
de praescript. c. 20.
were sent forth to b^ Doctores humani generis, (as Tertullian speaks) to be
Teachers (...) whole Mankind.

And accordingly, when Christ gives them their last and greate^^ Commission, he
bids them, (...) Preach the Gospel unto every Cre^ture, Mark 16. 15,
i. e. to all Mankind; or, (...) it is in Matthew, Go ye, and (...) Mat. 28.
19.
all Nations.

This general and universal Man date, (for Preaching unto all N^tions) as the
Apostles receiv^ from the Mouth of Christ, so (...) doubt but they did as
faithful^ and punctually discharge it; (...) that the execution reached as
(...) as the Injunction; as will appe^^ from these following Testi^^nies.

St. Peter, when he preached (...) first Sermon, Acts 2. It Is said, Ver^ That
there were then sojourni^ at Jerusalem, (i. e. as Expecta^ of the Messia)
devout Jews o^ of every Nation under Heaven. So that Preaching unto these that
came out of all Nations (and in all likelihood were to return thither) was in
effect a Preaching unto all Nations.

St. Paul, Acts 17. 29, 30. testifies to the Athenians, That the time of former
ignorance God winked at, ( i. e. by suffering all Nations to walk in their own
ways, Acts 14. 16.) but now (says he) (...), omnibus ubique annuntiat; now he
proclaims or commands all Men every where to repent, i. e. by the promulgation
of the Gospel, every where made known unto all, (testifying both to Jew and
Gentile repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus, Acts 20. 21.)

The Apostle to the Romans, Chap. 10. having showed, that Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; he then asks a Question, touching them
that believed not the Gospel, Verse 18. Have they not hear^ Yes verily, (says
the Answer) for their sound went into all the Earth and their words unto the
ends of the World. Where, by way of all^sion to the beginning of the 19th
Psalm, he makes the preaching and publishing of the Gospel to run parallel with
the very course of the Sun, with the very motion of the Heavenly Bodies,
(through all Places, People and Languages) Psalm. 19. 3.

Lastly, and most fully, to the same purpose is that of the Apostle to the
Colossians, Chapter 1. -- The word of the Truth of the Gospel, which is come unto
you as it is in all the World: Unto which add but the 23d Verse, and I know not
what can be said mo^^ in the case; The Gospel (says he) which ye have heard,
and which was preached to every Creature that is under Heaven. Where we see the
perfect and punctual performance of what was at first given in charge to the
Apostles, ( Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature.)

This large and universal spread of the Faith and Gospel through all Nations
was to be effected within forty years after Christ's ^scension, and before the
fatal and final ruin of the Jewish Nation; as is conceived from that Passage of
our Savior, Mat. 24. 14. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all
the world for a Testimony to all Nations, and then shall the End be. What end?
not that of the World, but that End which Ezekiel spoke of, ( Ezekiel. 7. 2. An
End, the End is come upon the four Corners of the Land) i. e. The End of the
Temple and City of Jerusalem, the End of the Jewish Polity, Model and
Government.

And that it happened even within this compass we may reasonably gather from
the Labors of St. Paul. For (as St. Chrysostom argues) if one single Apostle,
(as St. Paul testifies himself, Romans 15. 19.) I say, he alone fully Preached
the Gospel from Jerusalem, and rou^^ about unto Illyricum, i. e. In Arabi^ in
Phoenice, in Syria and Antioch, (...) the lesser Asia, in Greece and (...)
chaia, in Macedonia and Dalmati^ and, as others add, afterward (...) Rome and
Italy, in Spain, ye^ and (says Theodoret. L. 9. de curandis Groecorum
assectionibus; Item Sophronius Patriarcha Hierosolymitant^^ in Sermon de
natali Apostolorum.
Theodoret) in o^ Britain too. I say if this sing Apostle, by his own personal
Pai^ and Preaching, made known the Gospel to so large a Tract of the World;
what shall we think do by the rest of the Twelve, (...) at the same time spread
the Lig^^ and Fame of it far and wide in the rest of the World? As St. Phi^^
and Gall and Phrygia; Thadde^s Mesopotamia; Simon Zelotes in frick and
Mauritania; St. M^^thew in Aethiopia; St. Mark Egypt and Alexandria; St.
B^^tholomew (otherwise Nathaniel) in Armenia and India; and lastly St. Thomas
in that and Media, Persia and Parthia, Bactria and Germania.

St. Clement, who is mentioned ( Philip. 4. 3.) and lived in the Apostles time,
in his Epistle to the Corinthians has these words, (...), etc. i. e. The great
Ocean Page 28, 29.
^npassable to Men, and the Worlds that are beyond it, are now governed by the
Laws and Precepts ( i. e. by the Faith and Gospel) of Christ.

Justin Martyr (who lived next) testifies of his time; that ((...)) that there
was not any one sort (...) kind of Men (whether Barbarians or Greeks, or any
other name) among whom Prayer and Thanksgiving were not made unto God the
Creator of all, through the Name of the crucified Jesus, Ju^^in. M. Dial. cum
Tryph. page 345.

Irenaeus, (who bordered upon Lib. 1. c. 3.
Justin) speaking of the univ^^sal consent of Christians in the same Faith,
reckons up the Chu^ches in Germany, in Iberia, th^^^ among the Celtae, those in
the East, those in Egypt and Lybi^^ and those in the middle, or M^diterranean
Parts of the Worl^ and then he adds, (...), etc. As the Sun (...) one and the
same through all the World, so the Preaching of the Truth shines every where,
an^ enlightens all Men that have mind to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth.

Unto these I might join the Testimonies both of Tertullia^ Tert. adversus
Judaeos. Hyeronym. Tom. 1. Epist. ^d Heliodorum, Epitaphium Ne^otiani. P. 8. E,
F.
that followed in the third Ce^tury, and of St. Hierom in the fourth, who says
of his days, (...) India usque ad Britanniam, etc. T^^tius Mundi, una vox
Christus (...) From the utmost Indies on the one side, as far as Britain (...)
the other side, Christ is the Speech and Language of the ^hole World.

I shall only add something ^ouching the remoter and more ^^sputable Parts of
the World. To. 1. Thesauri Rerum Indicarum. L. 11. c. 17.
Petrus Jarricus testifies of the ^^st Indies, that the Portugals, ^hen they
first discovered them, ^ound manifest Tokens and Re^ainders of Christianity;
yea, and some that were professed Christians; (whom he calls Tho^^an
Christians.)

The very same he says of the Tom. 2. L* 2. c. 20. Tom. 3. L. 1. c. 54. Lib. 3.
c. 7. and 12.
Chinoys, of the Brasilians, of ^e Region of the Sinites. Among whom (says
Benzo L. 3. p. 396. 403.
and Page 223, and 225.
Lae^^^s) the Natives confessed, that ^ great many Moons or Years ago, ^here
came Strangers who preach^^ to them the very same things (...) they now heard
from the Christians.

But so much shall suffice for ^he Proof and Truth of the Point (...) hand,
That the Mystery of the Gospel was made manifest, was made known even to all
Nations Some few Inferences, and I pa^^ unto the next Particular.

Catholica vocatur, quia per universum sit Orbem terrarum dissusa, a finibus
terroe, usque ad extrema. Et quia docet Catholice, etc. Cyrelli Catech. 17.
First then, see here wh^^ reason we have to Inde dicta est Catholica Ecclesia,
quod sit rationabilis, and ubique diffusa. Optat. L. 2. P. 18.
believe (a^ we do in the Creed) a Cath^lick Church; for what is it that makes
the Catholic Church, (...) the Catholic Faith? The comm^^ Faith, (as the
Apostle calls in Tit. 1. 4.) that Faith that (...) spread through all Nations;
the Faith that was held and owned by all that in every place called upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus, I Co^. 1. 2. In a word, That Myster^ of Godliness that
was preache^ to the Gentiles, and believed (...) in the World, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

Catholica Electorum omni^m multitud^ per omnia, and Mundi loca and tempora
saeculi, Deo Patri subjecta. Beda (super Cantic. 6. 6.
This Catholic Faith, ((...) being one and the same with tha^ which was
diffused from the beginning through the several Places and first Ages of the
Christian World) is that which makes that Church Catholic.

Let no Man therefore go about to lessen the Catholic Church, by engrossing
the Name, or by contracting the Faith or Presence of Christ, to a Way, to a
Party; as the Donatists of old did, ad partem Donati. Let no Man own such
Principles as go about to Uncatholick; i. e. To shrink and diminish the Church
of God, and of Christ, under the Gospel, from its just and due Latitude.

Let no man say, (that is, exclusively) Christ is here only, or Christ is
there, behold him in the Closets, behold him in the Deserts; but rather behold
him, as the Son of Man lifted from the Earth, and drawing all Men after him,
John 12. 32.

The Donatist of old, he limited the Church to the Southern Part of the World,
(under pretense of that Scripture, Cantic. 1. 7. Dic, ubi cubas in meridie.)
The Romanist would fain tie it to the Western. And others there are, that are
ready to confine it, (as the Montanists of old) each to their petty Pepuzium.

But let us (my Brethren) stich and stand unto that Faith that was commanded to
be preached unto all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. Let us
cleave unto that Church which indifferently respects all Quarters, even that
which Christ owns, ( Luke 13. 29.) when he says, They shall come fron the East,
and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down
in the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, Were the Secrets of God and of his Gospel made known unto all
Nations, see here the difference of the Law and Gospel, yea the eminence of
Christianity above Judaism. The Mosaic Law was but as that Pillar of Fire, (
Number. 14. 14.) that served only for the particular guidance of the Israelites to
the Land of Promise. But the Gospel is as the Sun in the Firmament, set up for
the sight and good of all; it stretches out its Beams of Light and Life over
the whole universe. John 9. 5. I am the Light of the World; non Vrbis sed
Orbis; an Universal Luminary; the whole World is made the Stage and Sphere of
his Illumination. Tit. 2. 11. The Grace of God (i. e. the Word of his Grace)
that brings Salvation has appeared into all Men. Isa. 49. 6. I will give
thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the Ends
of the Earth.

Thirdly, See here a solid Proof against the Jews, of the Messiah's coming as
past and gone. It Is evident in two grand Effects that followed the Publication
of the Gospel. The first was the general diffusion of the Knowledge of God over
the World. The second was the Conversion of the Gentiles to the Faith and
Worship of the True God.

For the first of these, Is it not made the Character of the days and times of
the Messiah? (Isa. 11. 1. -- 10.) That there shall be a Root of Jesse, which
shall stand for an Ensig^^ of the People, and to it shall the Gentiles Romans 15.
12.
seek. (Verse 10.) And (Verse 9.) That the Earth sha^^ be full of the Knowledge
of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. As if he should say, Those great and
concerning Truths, (touching the one True God, and the way to please and enjoy
him; touching the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body
unto future Judgment.) These and the like Points, where in the World was either
wholly at a loss, or much in the dark shall be brought into the open view and
sight of all, shall become the Faith of Nations, shall be vulgarly known and
received, and believed in the Christian World. Or, in Poetic^ Sibylls Phrase,
-- Assyrium Vulg^^ nascetur amomum, They shall grow Vergil. Eclog. 4. Videtur
innuere, Pherecydis dogma, de animarum immortalitate, tritum fore and vulgar.
Hornbecki Historia philosophica, P. 181. Pherecydes Pythagorae Praeceptor quem
Cicero tradidit primum de eternitate animarum disputasse. Lactant. L. 7. c. 8.
Hic Pherecydes, ortus est e Syria. Eus^b. L. 10. (...). c. 2. suumque dogma
hausit ex Phoenicum Philosuphid. Thales etiam, non fuit Milesius, sed ex
Phoenicia. Eusebius. ibid.
They shall grow in every Man's Garden, in every Man's Creed. (...) Et Lac
Immortalitatis manabit omnibus justis. Sibylla Erythraea. (In Lactantio, Lib.
7.) Cap. 24.

And thus we find that verified that was fore-promised and foreprophesied of
old, Malach. 1. 11. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same,
my Name, says God, ( i. e. the knowledge of my Name) shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place, Incence and a pure Offering shall be offered to
my Name, for my Name shall be great among the Heathen.

Excellently does St. Chrysostom (Orat. secunda contra Judaeos) urge this
Place against the Jews. It is not said, (says he) my Name shall be great in
Israel, (as Psalm. 76. 1. In Juda is God known; his Name is great in Israel) but
great among the Gojim, among the Heathen or Gentiles. And again, not in one,
two, or three Cities or Countries, but in every place; yea, and from the rising
of the Sun, to the going down of the same. Thereby showing, (says he) that as
far as the light and course of the Sun reaches over the Earth, so far should be
the course and compass of the Gospel.

But then secondly, another grand Effect that followed the promulgation of the
Gospel, was the Conversion of the Nations of the Gentiles, to the Faith and
Worship* of the True God: And is not this from first to last frequently
mentioned with, and as it were limited to, the coming of the Messia.

Genesis 22. 18. In thy Seed (i. e. Christ, Gal. 3. 16.) shall all the Nations of
the Earth be blessed.

Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, -- till Shilo (till
Christ the Peacemaker) come. And presently he adds, And to him shall the
gathering of the People be. Aggregatio, or Obedientia populorum erit ei; as it
is in Arias Montanus.

So in Psalm. 2. 8. (says God to his Christ) Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thy Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy
Possession; i. e. for thy Church and People. A Psalm, which even the Rabbis
themselves expound of the Messia, says Solomon Jaerchi.

To these I shall add but one more, that in Isa. 2. Verse 2, -- 4. where it is
said, That in the last Verse 2.
days, (i. e. in the days of the Messiah, says the same Rabbi Solomon) the
Mountain of the Lords House (that is, the Religion of the Messia) shall be
established on the top of the Mountains, (shall be advanced above all others)
and all Nations shall flow unto it, (that is, to be enriched with the knowledge
of Gods Will and Ways; as it follows in the third Verse;) For out of Zion shall
go Verse 3.
forth the Law, (The Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27.) and the Word of the Lord out of
Jerusalem, (for so was it commanded, To be preached unto all Nations, beginning
at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47.) And then it follows; And he (that is, Verse 4.
the Lord) shall judge among the Nations; i. e. shall rule and govern them by
the Scepter of his Word and Gospel.

From all which Places, nothing more evident than the predicting of the calling
and conversion of the Gentiles, as to be at the appearing of the Messia. And it
is as evident that these Prophecies have been accomplished in the preaching and
progress of the Gospel; the Event has verified the Prediction. For, no sooner
was the Sun of Righteousness fully risen, but the Idolatry of the Pagan World
began to fall, as Dagon before the Ark, till at length the Worship of their
false Gods was destroyed, their According to the Prophecies. Isa. 2. 19, 20.
Jer. 10. 11. Isa. 25, 6, 7.
Temples demolished, their famous Oracles (long) ceased and gone; and the
Knowledge of the One True God, and his Son Jesus Christ, set up and advanced in
the room of them. And this was that same Shaking of the Heavens Movit Coelum
Angelorum and Syderum testimonio, quando incarnatus est Christus: movit terram
ingenti miraculo, de ipso Virginis partu; movit Mare and Aridum, ^am and in
Insulis and in Or^e tuto Christus annuntiaretur. Ita mov^ri omnes Centes
vid^mus ad Fidem. Aug. de Civ. Dei. L. 18. C. 35.
and the Earth, yea, and of all Nations, spoken of Hag. 2. 6, 7. that is, The
universal Change and Mutation that was to come over the Face of the Earth, as
to the Matter of Religion.

But so much shall suffice to be spoken of the first Remarkable in the Text; i.
e. The large spread and extent of the Gospel, In being made known unto all
Nations.

I shall now pass unto the second (...) Justin. M. P. 265. The same is
mentioned, Romans 1. 5. Romans 16. 19. 2 Cor. 10. 5. St. Austin calls it.
Obedientiam credendi. Aug. in Jo^n. tract. 29.
Considerable in the Text, which is more practical; and that is, to the main
Scope, End and Drift of the Gospel, in being thus made known, and that is (...)
(says the Apostle) For the Obedience of Faith. This, (as ye see) is here
mentioned, as the whole design and intent of the Gospel, to frame us to
Obedience, to the Obedience of Faith. For, as the Sum of the Gospel on Gods
part are the Mercies and Benefits therein tendered and promised; so the Sum and
Substance of all that it requires on our parts, to whom it comes, is, To
believe and obey it.

This then being the Total of what is expected at our Hands, in order unto Life
here, and Salvation hereafter, namely the practice of Evangelical Obedience, it
will highly concern us in the first place to enquire into the nature of this
Obedience, and in the next vigorously to pursue it.

And that we may understand it the better, we should here consider three
things. First, The parts and Branches of this Obedience. Secondly, The
Principles and Properties of it. Thirdly, The Assistances and Encouragements
given thereunto.

The first of these (I fear) will take up our time at present.

First then, This Evangelical Obedience, or the Obedience of Faith, it consists
in three main Branches or Particulars.

The first is, Obedience to the Truths of the Gospel, by receiving and
retaining them.

The second is, Obedience to the Call of the Gospel, bidding us to Repent and
Believe, and return unto God.

The third is, Obedience to the more special Rules of the Gospel, appointing us
in every kind, how to live and walk in our Converstions.

First then, The prime and leading part of our Obedience, (...) lies in
yielding the assent of our Minds and Judgments unto the Truths of the Gospel.
When we captivate our Reasons to the plainness and simplicity of the 2 Cor. 11.
3. 2 Cor. 10. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 6.
Gospel; for there is Obsequium Fidei, as well as obsequium Vi^^* When we give
up our apprehe^sions to be shaped, and our Judgments to be filed, as it were,
and framed according to theat form sound words, (2 Timothy 1. 13. according to
that Mould of Doctrine ( Romans 6 17.) delivere to us in the Gospel.

Now, that our assenting (...) and embracing of the Truths (...) the Gospel, is
a piece and part (...) our Obedience, will appear from these few Considerations.

First, It Is a thing under command. Mark 1. 15. Believe the Gospel. John 12.
36. Believe in the Light. John 14. 11. Believe me, that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me. With many the like Passages. Now where there is a command on
Gods part, the Thing commanded to be done, must needs be an Obedience on our
part.

Secondly, Faith is an assent upon Authority, yea upon the highest and greatest
Authority. In believing of the Positive Truths of the Gospel, Faith goes not
upon the sight and evidence of the things in themselves, but upon the
Revelation, Testimony and Authority of Gods Word. 1 These. 2. 13. Ye received
the Word, not ^s the Word of Man, but, as it is in Truth, the Word of God. This
is it that Commands and captivates the understanding into a compliant
persuasion, Sic dicit Dominus, Thus and thus says the Lord. Since then
Authority is the Ground and Basis of Faith in persuading, Obedience must needs
be the Act of Faith, in assenting, in submitting to that Authority.

Again thirdly, Faith or Assent, it comes from, or depends upon, an imperate
Act of the Will; and upon that score puts on the Nature of Obedience. True
indeed, we do not believe with ou^ Wills, See Dr. Stillingfleets Rational
Account. P. 137, 138. against T. C.
(as some of the Pontificians seem to teach.) For no Man really believes as he
list, o^ merely because he please; but upon evidence of Grounds and Reasons.
But yet, since those Evidences will never produce Faith, unless we bend and
hold our Minds to a due and serious attention to them, (as it is said of Lydia,
(...). Chrysostom. in locum.
God opened her Heart to attend, and so to believe, Acts 16. 14.) And since it
is the Heart or Will, Recte Tho. Anglus, in Sono Buccinae, p. 197. Voluntas
applicat intellectum ad cogitanda motiva, cum sollicitudine, and desiderio
veritatis.
that under God commands and fixes the Attention both unto the Matters and
Motives of Faith; it evidently follows, that though we do not formally believe
by our Wills, yet, ^ot Non potest intellectus credere quando vult, and si
absque eo quod velit, nunquam credat. White, Sonus Buccinae, P. 201. See Dr.
Stillingfleets Rational Account, Page 138.
without our Wills; and that the assent of Faith, though it be not the
immediate Act of the Will, yet it is undoubtedly (under God) the Effect of the
Will, enforcing the Attention against all carnal fears or interests that would
divert us from the Faith. Upon which score the infidelity of Men seems to be
resolved into their unwillingness. John 5. 40. (...), Ye will not come unto me;
i. e. you will not believe, or become my Proselytes by Faith.

Again, fourthly and lastly, Consider, that our assenting to the Doctrine of
Faith, it is expressly called by the Name of Obedience in Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.
22. Ye have purified your Souls in obeying the Truth; i. e. in a firm believing
it.

Gal. 3. 1. Who has bewitch^^ you, that ye should not obey the Truth; i. e. in
not sticking to* right Belief of the Gospel in the Article of Justification.

And so Romans 10. 16. The Apostle having said, They have not ^^ obeyed the
Gospel, expounds it ^^ the very next words, by believing (for Esaias says, Who
has believ^^ our report?) So that it is evident, ou^ very believing, receiving,
embracing, retaining of the Truths of the Gospel, it is a part and piece of our
Evangelical Obedience.

All that I shall draw from this* Head is only two short Inferences. First is
our assenting to the Matters of Faith, a piece of Obedience? then surely there
is more of Disobedience in the World tha^ some are aware of. Even the forsaking
or rejecting of Gospel* Truths, is a piece of Disobedience. For Gods Truth
comes with Authority, comes in Gods Name, and lays an obligation upon all that
hear it, (or can hear it) to attend and believe: And therefore he that either
shuts or casts it out of his belief, he thereby refuses to be subject and
obedient to God. Who hindered you that ye should not obey the Truth, (says the
Apostle to the erring Galatians.) This persuasion comes not of him that calls
you, Gal. 5. 7, 8. So that whosoever withholds or with-draws his assent or
persuasion from such Divine and Evangelical Truths, he therein with-draws his
Obedience or Subjection. Whatsoever Points of this nature we hear from the
Gospel, we must one day give an account of, how we received, or why we refused
them: For where God has a Mouth to speak, we must have an Ear to hear, and a
Mind to attend, and a Heart to believe, or answer for the neglect of it.

Secondly, Is this a part, yea the first part of our obedience? our assenting
to Gods Truth, ou^ receiving and retaining it, in opposition to Error, and
corruption of Doctrine? Then sure it is a thing of great consequence, of what
Faith and Belief (or persuasion) we are, in matters of Religion, that we
mistake not 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. 2 These. 2. 10, 11. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Darkness for Light, Error for Truth; that we embrace not Deceits and
Delusions, in stead of sound Doctrine; the bold Fantasies and Novelties of
corrupt Minds, in stead of the Verities and Mysteries of Christ, in stead of
the Words and Truth of Soberness.

I say it is a thing of some concern, what we shut out or take in into our
Minds, as Matter of Faith; because accordingly we shall be counted of the
number either of the Obedient or Disobedient. According to the soundness or
rottenness of our Principles and Persuasions, as to the main, accordingly shall
we be so John 8. 32. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
far found, either the Subjects of Christ, or the Slaves of Satan, of error and
darkness. Would we therefore be true, that is, obedient Servants unto God? Here
we must begin, and hold on our course. Labor for a sound establishment in the
main Truths of the Gospel. Read and meditate on the Scriptures of Truth, (as
they are called, Dan. 10. 21.) Attend unto the guidance of those, whose Office
it is to divide unto you the Word of Truth. Pray for the Spirit of Truth, to 2 Timothy 2. 15. John 16. 13.
^ead you into all necessary Truth. ^n a word, (as it is, Prove. 23. 23.) Buy
the Truth, and sell it ^ot; that is, spare no cost, no ^ains in the getting of
it: And being gotten, part with it upon ^^ terms: barter not away the plain and
precious Truths of God, for the mere fancies and bold presumptions of Men.

Let the Word of Christ dwell Col. 3. 16.
richly in you, in all wisdom, that ye may be strong and grounded Christians.
Not Children in understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Heb. 5. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 3 9.
but Men; skilful in the Word of Righteousness; and holding the Mystery of
Faith in ^^ pure Conscience, (the best and easiest Depository for Divine Truth)
Quia facile male creditur, ubi n^^ recte vivitur.

But I have done with the first Branch of the Obedience of Faith; i. e. In
obeying the Truths of God, by embracing them in our Minds, and submitting to
them in our Judgments.

But this, though it be the leading part of our Obedience, (for indeed without
it it is not, as the Text speaks, The Obedience Omnis infidelium vita peccatum
est, and nihil est bonum sine summo bono; ubi enim deest agnitio oeternoe
veritatis falsa virtus est etiam in optimis moribus. Aug. L. sentent. C. 206.
of Faith) yet is it not either the only or the principal. There were some in
St. Augustines time, who held nothing was necessary to Salvation, but a right
Faith. B^ their Lives never so bad, yet if their Faith were good, if their
belief were sound and orthodox, that then they should be saved, (though tanquam
per ignem.) This occasioned his writing of Tom. 4. Page 13. Litera H. I. Froben.
that Treatise, De Fide and Operibus.

But (my Brethren) we have not so learned Christ, if we have been taught by
him, as the Truth is in Jesus.

For though I will not say, (with Theologo-politicus) that nothing is to be
counted de Fide, but Cap. 4. Page 232,
what is absolutely necessary, and directly influential in order to practice:
Yet this I Will say, that the prime and grand Design of the whole Doctrine and
discoveries of the Gospel, was not barely or (...) Clem. Alex. in Poedog.
ultimately to inform the Mind, or enforce the Assent, but to transform the
Soul into real Righteousness. For nothing more evident in Scripture, than that
the Gopel, in the main end and intent of it, came not to sill the Head with new
Notions, though never so true; nor to instruct the Judgment so much, as to
change the Heart, and new-mould the Life, and to form and frame the whole Man
to a thorough and universal Obedience. And therefore, unless to the Faith and
Belief of the Gospel, we add the Obedience of the Heart, and (where time and
space are afforded) the Fruits of the Life, we shall never be partakers of the
full and saving Benefits of the Gospel.

I shall therefore proceed unto the next Branch of Evangelical Obedience,
(without which the former is but little worth;) and that is, Obedience to the
Call of the Gospel.

This Call of God, it is every where made mention of in Scripture both New and
Old. I have called, and ye refused, it is the Voice of Wisdom, Prove. 1. 24. When
I called, ye did not answer, it is the So Jer. 7. 13.
complaint of God. Isa. 65. 12. 66. 4.

He who has called you is Holy, (says St. Peter) 1 Pet. 1. 15. And Chapter 2.
9. Who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. I came not to
call the Righteous, (says our Savior) but Sinners to repentance, Mark 2. 17.
And lastly, that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight the good Fight of Faith,
to which also thou art called.

But to explicate it yet a little further; first, by the Call of the Gospel, I
mean all those ways, means, and methods, whereby God urges fallen and
apostatized Man to return unto God, and to his Duty. Whether it be by the
Commands and Injunctions of the Gospel. Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out. 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, That
ye believe on the Name of his Son Jesus. Acts 17. 30. He now cammandeth all Men
every where to repent.

Or 2dly, by the earnest and gracious invitations of the Gospel* Rev. 22. 17.
Every one that is a* thirst, come ye. Mat. 11. 28. (...). Basil. ad Virginem
lapsam Epist. p. 755.
Come unto me all ye that travel an^ are heavy laden, take my Yoke upon you.

Or 3dly, by the pressing exho^tations of the Gospel. Ezekiel. 33* 11. 18. 32.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways.

Heb. 3. 15. To day if you wi^^ hear his Voice, harden not yo^^ Hearts.

Or 4ly, by the lively solicitations in the Ministry of the Gospel, Beseeching
you in Christ's stead* be ye reconciled unto God. 2 Cor. ^. 19, 20.

Or lastly, by the secret Injections of Good and Holy Motions, (accompanying
the ministration Rev. 3. 20. Deus undique nos ^ocat ad poenitentiam, vocat
beneficiis Creaturarum, vocat i^ pertiendo tempus vivendi, vocat per lectorem,
vocat per tract torem, vocat per intimam cogitationem, vocat per ^lageth^^
corr^ptionis, vocat per miscricordiam consolationis. Augusti^^ in Psalm*
of the Gospel) the good Spirit, mingling it self with our thoughts, and
striving with our Hearts. For even these are a part of Gods Call, they are of
his sending, they come upon his errand, i. e. to becken us unto God, and to our
Duty.

I say by all these ways and means does God call us, as ye see, out of Darkness
into his mavelous Light, out of Bondage into true Liberty; call us to
believe, to repent, to return, to be reconciled unto God and Goodness.

By all which you may easily understand, in the second place, what I mean by
our obedience to this Call, and wherein it stands; i. e. Then are we said to
obey Gods Call, when we come up to it in Heart and Deed; when we really do what
he calls upon us to do: When we yield up our 2 Cor. 8. 5. Romans 6. 13. Yield
you^ selves unto God.
selves to his Will, and obey it from the Heart. Romans 6. 17. When we accept of
his Invitations, close with his Exhortations, and are prevailed upon by his
Motions and Solicitations; so as firmly and sincerely to resolve for God and
return unto God.

So that (as ye may plainly see) this Obedience to the Call of God stands not
in a complying with any of the more single and particular Commands; but in a
passing over of our whole Souls and selves unto God and his Per viclimas abiena
caro, per obedientiam vero propria voluntas mactatur. Gregor. ^lt. m^ralium.
Will; saying with the Apostle, Acts 9. 6. Lord* what will thou have me to do?
H^ Will was melted into Gods Will; he was now ready to be any thing and to do
any thing that God would have him.

So that this Obedience we now treat of, it is a radical Act, foundation Act,
it is the habitua^ Such a returning of the whole Man unto God, whereby Men
forsaking utterly their Idolatry and wickedness, do with a lively Faith
embrace, love, and worship the true living God only, and give up themselves to
all manner good Works, which by Gods Word they know acceptabl^ to him. Homily
of R^pentance 1st and 2d part, Page 326, 33 The condition which the Gospel
requires is no less tha^ total change of a Man's Intentions from seeking the
Wor^^ to seek and serve God in all things for the future. Thorndike, Epilogue
L. 2. C. 30, and 31.
turning of the very bent an^ b^as of the Soul from all evil, un^all good, (at
least in true heart and affection) as it is described, Ezekiel. 18. 21.

It Is the pitching of our choice (our resolved choice and electi^n) upon God
and his ways, Psalm. 19. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have
I laid ^^fore me. It Is a taking of Christ's ^oke at once and universally upon
us. It Is a stated, professed, re^^ved, concluded subjecting our ^^^ves to the
Word and Ways of Christ, as Lord and Savior.

In a word, This Obedience un^^ Gods Call, it is not so much an ^ct of
particular (By repentance) I do not mean conversion from any particular sin,
but the ^^ge of the whole Man, of his Intentions, and by conse^^ce of his
Actions, to seek God in stead of himself and World. Mr. Thornd. Epilog. L. 2.
C. 30. See also Dr. Stoughton, Righteous Man's Plea, Sermon 6, ^^ 32: Sermon 7.
P. 51.
observance ^^to God in some few specialties ^^mmanded; but it is an entire and
^^iversal resignment of our selves the rule and governance of (...) Word, Grace
and Spirit.

Even as on the contrary, Disobedience to Gods Call (as we now mean and speak
of it) stands not in every single or particular failour of Duty, or going
against our Duty; but in the more general averseness of the Mind, and obstinacy
of the Will, standing out, or setting up it self, and the pleasing of it self
against the Government of God in the Soul.

For, as it is one thing to offen^ or go against the Laws of the King in some
few Particularities and another thing to reject an^ cast off his Government, to
have a Picque against it, so as to brea^^ out into rebellion against H^^ Crown
and Scepter. Even so 'ti^ one thing to come short in our bedience to the Law or
Will God, in some Particulars, and another thing to cast off his Will or to set
up our own in direct opposition to his; so as to say effect with them in the
Parable, ( Luke 19. 14.) Nolum^^ (...) regnare, We will not have this Man, this
God and Man, this Lord and Christ, to rule over us. As much as to say, We will
not please him, but our selves; we will not leave our sins for his Laws or
Commands; we will not own or set up his Word for our Rule and Guide, but our
own worldly Interests, our own carnal and corrupt humors, customs and
affections; we will not listen to his Voice, nor hearken to his Counsel, nor
turn at his Reproof, but rather go on and persist in the ways of our own
choosing, and in the pursuance of our own desires and imaginations. This is the
real Language of all such as remain disobedient to Gods Call. The bent of their
Hearts and the course of their Lives in effect speaks thus much, ( Nolumus hunc
regnare, We will not have this Man reign over us;) though they do not say so
much with their Mouths, yea though they say and profess the contrary. For the
Apostle has told us, That Men may profess God in their words, and yet in Works
deny him, being ^bominablc, disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate, Tit.
1. 16.

The consideration of this Head serves to a double purpose.

First, it shows us the great weight and moment, the high concern of this
Obedience; Is It, in that it is the main, the principal thing that God looks for
and requires at our Hands. Without which all outward conformity to the bare
Letter of the Commands is but little worth. The bent of the Heart and Soul,
broken off from the love of sin, and given up unto God and Christ, in the love
of Righteousness, is the Root and Spring of all after-well-pleasing Obedience.
Therefore are we every where called upon to begin here. Prove. 23. 26. My Son,
give me thy Heart. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31. Repent and turn ye from all your
transgressions, -- Make ye ^ new Heart, and a new Spirit. Jer. 4. 4. Circumcise
your selves into the Lord, break up your Fallow Ground, and sow not among
Thorns. And Verse 14. O Jerusalem, wash thy Heart from wick^dness, that thou
may be saved; and Mat. 23. 26. Thou blind Pha^isee, first cleanse that that
is within, that the outside may be clean also. As much as to say: First, It Is
evident, that Obedience is the principal Virtue, and indeed the very root of
all Virtues, and the cause of all felicity. Homily of Obedience, 1st Part, Page
343.
obey the main Call of God; ^art with thy own self-pleasing-will; yield up the
strong holds, the main powers and faculties of thy Soul, as an entire Sacrifice
to God; and then, outward and more particular Obedience will easily and
naturally follow.

And secondly, The concern of this Obedience (to the Call of God) it is herein
seen, in that it is a thing altogether indispensable. God absolutely stands
upon it, That we should by Faith and Repentance render up our selves to an
inward and through subjection of Heart and Soul to his Service in the general.
God (as it were in course) dispenses with particular failings, and
imperfections in duty; but as for the general and sincere bent of the Heart,
seconded by an answerable endeavor of the Life; there is no dispensation, no
abatement or allowance for the want of this, but it is a thing that must be
found in us first or last.

But then again; the due consideration of what has been said touching this
second branch of Obedience; i. e. Obedience to the main Call of the Gospel; it
serves to instruct us in a very weighty and concerning Point, and that is in
the nature of a right saving and justifying Faith. True indeed we are justified
by Faith, Rom 5. 1. But it is a praying and See Dr. Field, L. 3. c. 44. P. 170.
Also his Appendix, Page 862.
Petitioning Faith, Acts 8. 22. Ch^ 9. 11. It Is a confessing and professing
Faith, Romans 10. 9. 1 Job. 1. 4. It Is a Faith hungering and thirsting after
Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. It Is a walking Faith, 1 Job. 1. 6, 7. The walking in
the Light, as he is in the Light, is that qualification whereby we become
immediately capable of Christ's Righteousness, or actual Participants of his
propitiation. Mr. Ball of the covenants, Page 21.
It Is an operating or working Faith, Gal. 5. 6. Faith that Fides per
dilectionem operatur in Cord, etiamsi foris ^on exit in opere. Sedulius in ad
Romans 3. 28.
works by Love. In a word, it must be such a Faith, as the Apostle describes,
to be the unfailing Principle of universal Goodness and Holiness, through the
whole Eleventh Chapter This Faith (as the Apostle describes it, Heb. 11.) is
the sure ground and foundation of the benefits we ought to look for. Homily of
Faith, first Part, circa medium.
to the Hebrews.

Again, most true it is, that we are justified without Works, Gal. 2. 16. That
is, without the Works of the Law, wholly without the Sea Homily of Salvation,
second and third Part.
merit of the best Works; yea, Si quis cum crediderit mox de vita discesserit,
justificatio Fidei manet cum illo; non praesentibus bonis operibus, quia non
merito ad illum sed gratia pervenit; nec consequentibus, quia in hac vita esse
non sinitur. Aug. Libro quaestionum 83. qu. 76. See Mr. Thornd. Epil. l. 2. c.
30. p. 26. 5
and without the (absolutelynecessary) presence of outward good Works, where
See the Homily of Good Works, the first Part, at the latter end. See also
Augustini Sermon. de tempore 71. And oecumenius in Epist. Jacobi, C. 2. 14.
life and time to do them is not afforded. But not without the Inward Davenant
de Justitia actuali, P. 386. Facile est bujus modi opera multa (praesertim
interna) commemor are, sine quil^^ justificatio nunquam fuit ab ullo mortalium
obtenta, nunquam ^^tinebitur. Item P. 387. Hoec and bujusmodi opera Cordis
inter^^, sunt omnibus justificatis necessaria: non quod contineant in
saefficaciam sen meritum justificationis; sed quod juxta ordinationem divinam,
vel requiruntur ut Conditiones proevioe seu Concurrentes, sicuti poenitere and
credere, vel ut effecta, a fide justificante manantia, ut amare Deum, diligere
proximum and co^similia. Videtis igitur necessitatem quorundum Operum
internorum, ad, statum justificationis ab ipso initio obtinendum. Eadem habet
Cap. 31. Page 403. Ubi recenset (Dolere de peccato, detestari peccatum,
humiliter Deo se subjicere, ad, Dei misericordiam confugere, in Christo
mediatore spem figere, Novoe vitapropositum inire) inter opera necessaria ad
justificationem, ut conditiones concurrentes, vel proecursorias. See also the
Homily of Salvation, second Part ( circa finem.) And Homily of Faith, first
Part, ( circa medium and finem) asserting these Conditions.
acts of repentance and conversion unto God; not without such a true Love,
Devotion, A true Faith cannot be kept secret, but when occasion is offered, it
will break out and show it self in good Works. Homily of Faith, first Part, P.
21. And about the end of it. This true Faith will show forth it self, and
cannot be long Idle, for it is written, The Just shall live by his Faith. Dr.
Jackson of Saving Faith, Sect. 2. C. 6. P. 207. Justifying Faith necessarily
includes in it such Works as James requires, at least a preparation or
immediate promptness of mind to them. Mr. John Ball. Treatise of the Covenant
of Grace, Chapter 3. P. 20. ^ disposition to good Works is necessary to
Justification, being the qualification of an active and lively Faith.
to good Works, as wants nothing but an opportunity to exert them.

When therefore the Scripture says, That we are justified by Faith, (Romans 5.
1.) Saved through Faith, (Ephesians. 2. 8.) or, That the Gospel is the Power of God
unto Salvation to every one that believes; I say, ^hen so much is ascribed unto
^aith; we must beware that we (...) not take up with too scanty a ^^tion of
Faith, so as to divide it from it self, i. e. from this Obedience of Faith. For
if we would truly speak, and impartially judge with Scripture, no Faith can be
looked ^on as actually justifying, but at which naturally, Homily of Salvation,
third Part, (...) beginning. Some other thing is required for our Salvation
than the Law, and that is a true and a lively Faith, ^^ging forth good works,
and a Life according to God. Family os Faith, second Part, (circa medium.) By
all Declaration of St. Paul it is evident, that the true, lively and Christian
Faith is no dead, vain, or unfruitful thing but a thing of perfect virtue, of
wonderful operati^^ o^ working, and strength, bringing forth all good (...) and
good Works. Also Homily of Faith, first part ( circa medium.) -- we trust in
him, and commit our selves to him, hang of upon him, and call upon him, ready
to obey and serve (...). This is the true, lively, and unfeigned Faith, and is
not the Mouth and Profession only, but it lives and stirs wardly in the
Heart. See also the Quotations of the p^^ceding Page.
as it here, and essentially contains in it the Seeds and Principles of new
Life; i. e. That which involves in it self Obedience That a justifying Faith
includes in it this Obedience, is no new thing with Protestant Divines, eith^^
foreign or English, as will appear by these following T^stimonies, (most of
them collected by Mr. Baxter, in Confession of his Faith.) Mr. Wotton, de
reconciliatione, Page 138. Fides in ch^^stum est Justitia quoedam; est enim
obedientia quoedam; enim obedientia and quasi conformitas mandato Dei. Joh. 3.
3. 1 Jo. 3. 23. Conradus, Bergius, in Praxi Cathol. Divin. Canon. P. 973. Fides
est obedientia, quatenus ejus Actus proprius spondet praecepto Evangelii, creed
in Dominum Jesum. sic, Fides est obedientia erga Evangelium inquit Apologia
gust. Confessions, Page 125. (To which he adds) Sit therus soepe per sidem
proecipue quidem and formaliter intellig^^^^ apprehensionem promissionis in
Christo, and abnegationem m^^ proprii, includit simul totam Obedientiam and
Inclination voluntatis, and charitatem adeo, Evangelio consentaneam: per opera
contra intelligit, actiones factas cum opinione (...) and cum expectatione
justificationis and vitae aeternae, tanq^^ mercedis debitoe, (citing many
places of Luther to this (...) Ludovicus Crocius. Syntagm. L. 4. C. 7. Page
1223. Fides (...) sola justificat, quatenus notat Obedientiam quandam,
^^pectantem promissionem ut Donum gratuitum. -- unde plu^virtutes and actus cum
antecedentes tum consequentes canno^^; and opponitur illi obedientioe quoe non
expectat promissionem (...) donum omnino gratuitum. Mr. Ball of the Covenants,
Page 73. A purpose to walk with God justifies as the passive qualification of
the Subject (...) of Justification, or as the qualification of that Faith (...)
justifies. Mr. Throgmorton, of Faith, Page 29. He that turns from upon such
suggestions, promises, persuasions as Christ makes to him, he receives Christ
by Faith. (And Page 91, 92. that obeys not the Son, to follow and to be led
and ^^ided by him, shall not see Life, but the wrath of God ^ideth on him, but
he that believes on the Son, to follow him as his Shepherd, and his Voice and
Doctrine, (...) 10. has Everlasting Life. My Sheep hear my voice, and (...)
them, and I will give unto them Eternal Life. Dr. Stoughton, Right. Man's Plea,
Sermon. 6. P. 32. Faith imprehendeth not only the Act of the Understanding, but
(...) Act of the Will too. (And Page 41.) Faith has (...) Acts, and Faith in
Christ contains loving of Christ, as (...) of its principal Acts. Dr.
Preston, Treatise of Faith, P. 44, 45, etc. If I would sine justifying Faith,
it may be thus described; It is a ^^ace or Habit infused into the Soul, whereby
we are enaled to believe, not only that the Messia is offered to us, ^t also to
take and receive him as a Lord and Savior, that both to be saved by him, and
to obey him. (And Page (...).) If a Man will take Christ as a Savior only,
that will (...) serve thy turn; Christ gives not himself to any upon at
condition, only to save him; but we must take him a Lord too, to be subject to
him, to obey him. Mr. Scudder, Christians daily walk, P. 119. When a Man
reiveth Christ thus offered, together with the whole covenant in every branch
of it, resolving to rest on that part the Covenant made and promised on Gods
part, and to stand to every Branch of the Covenant, to be performed on his
part. Thus to embrace the Covenant of Grace, (...) to receive Christ in whom it
is confirmed, is to Believe. Mr. Mead, Diatribe on Math. 7. 21. A true Faith is
to believe Salvation is to be attained, through obedience ^^ God in Christ
Jesus. Page 267, 268. It Is an applying ^^ the Will to Christ. P. 268. And Page
267. A true Faith is to believe Salvation is to be attained through obedience
^^ God in Jesus Christ. A saving and justifying Faith is to believe this so as
to embrace and lay hold upon Christ, (...) that end, -- namely, to perform
those Works of Obedience which God has promised to reward. Mr. Baxter against
Mr. Blak^, P. 82. If by Regeneration you mean -- our repenting and believing,
then it ^^ our keeping of Gods Covenant, by performing the Condition, i. e. our
obeying him in entering his Covenant. Mr. Baxters Directions for a settled peace
of Conscience, Direction 8. P. 52, The Vital Act of Faith (as justifying) is
consent, or willing, or accepting Christ as offered. (And Page 54*) in this
willingness or acceptance, Repentance* Love, Thankfulness, Resolution to obey
are all contained, ^^ nearly implied. The Sum and Substance of what is here
delivered by these Divines amounts to this, namely, That a Justifying Faith
(considered in its vital, proper, and strict formlity) is it self (in the first
place) an Act of Obedience ^^ the Call and Command of God in the Gospel. And
secondly, that it contains in it a Cordial Purpose and Profession (...)
Obedience in the Life for the future.
the Call of God, to the prime (...) and fundamental Call of the Gospel, by a
sincere embracing the Terms of it, and undertaking the conditions of it. For
unto this alone are all the Promises made and due, both of remission and
righteousness here, and of Salva^ion hereafter. St. Paul, who in ^he Epistle to
the Romans (Chapter ^* 16. 3. 21.) does appropriate ^alvation to all them that
believe; (...) the Epistle to the Hebrews, (Chapter ^* 9.) does as as expressly
limit (...) to all them that obey. Does (...) not thereby plainly show, that
(...) Believing he includes Obeying. and therefore when he would ^escribe the
Change and Conver^^^^ of the Romans, from Infide^^, ( Romans 6. 17.) and does it
(...) these words, ( Thanks be to God, (...) ye have obeyed from the Heart
(...) form of Doctrine that was de^^red to you;) What is this but Periphrasis
of their believing? ^^en as elsewhere in the same ^pistle, that which he calls
(Their ^^ith, spoken of through all the World, Romans 1. 8.) in another ^hapter
he calls it (their Obe^^^nce that is come abroad unto all ^en, Romans 16. 19.

Faith, (says Clemens of Alexandria) it is (...) 1. (...). 2. Page 362
(...), it is a voluntary and resolved assent unto Piety. And more plainly in
his seventh Book L. (...). 7. Page 710. So Acts 16. 15. If ye have judged me
(...) faithful to the Lord; i. e. a true and sincere Believer.
(...) He is the faithful or believing person, who upon due and just
consideration receives the Commandments (of Christ) and keeps the^* But what
need I insist upon an^ single Father, for the true notio^ of Faith? I appeal
rather to the general Judgment of the whol^ Church in its Purest and Pr^mitive
times. Amongst who^ it is well known, (by them th^^ know any thing of their
o^der and discipline) that no^ were ever looked upon in the Churches Eye; none
were ^ver by them counted or call^^ by the Name of Fideles, that (...)
Faithful, or Believers, till the^ had actually and solemnly ded^cated
themselves (if adult) ^^ the strict profession and practice ^f Christianity.
Nothing more known in the ancient Church, than the destinction of Missa
Catechumenorum, and Missa Fidelium. ^ A^g. Sermon. de tempore 237. Post Sermonem
sit Missa (i. e. ^^issio vel dimissio) Catechumenis, manebunt Fideles.
Ter^^llian* de praescript. C. 41. (speaking of the confusion in ^his Point
among the Gnostics, says he) Quis Catechumenus, ^^is Fidelis, incertum est.
St. Basil de Spiritu Sancto, C. 13. P. 170. (...). Infants also were reckoned
among the Fideles, (Augu^^^^ Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium) by reason of their being
dedicated unto Christ in Baptism. Wherein (says our old Church-Catechism) ye
are Members of Christ, Children ^f God, etc.
Till this was done, though otherwise never so ^^owing in the Principles of
^aith, or persuaded of the truth of them, they were only called, either
Audientes, mere Hearers* or ^andidati, Probationers for the

^aith; or Catechumeni, Persons under Catechism; or Compteten^es, Petitioners
to be made Christians; but never Fideles, never actual or full, or faithful
Believers, till they took upon them the Yoke of Christ, till they gave
themselves up to Christ, ( The confessing with the Mouth, Romans 10. 9. The
Profession made before many Witnesses to keep the Commandment blameless, 1 Timothy
6. 12, 13. The Answer, the Contract or Engagement of a goo^ Conscience, 1 Pet.
3. 21. (...) est vox Juris, (...) glossario, (...) stipulor, sed per
Metonymiam, respons^ vel promissio; (...), pro, (...), ( suhaudito (...)
Sponsio, Deo facta, de pura conscientia. Grotius. Or (...) by an Hebraism, or
exchange of Significations. As (...) rendered by the LXX, (...) but in Ezekiel. 14.
3. 20. 3. it is rendered by (...). Ambros. L. de iis qui mist. init. c. 2. Repete
quod interr^gatus sis; recognosce quod spoponderis, renunciasti Diabolo and
operibus ejus, mundo and luxuriae ejus and voluptatibus. Videatur Josephus
Vicecomes de antiquis ritibus Baptism* L. 2. Cap. 16. usque ad Caput 27.
) ( i. e. by the Baptismal Vow) by the solemn consecrating o^ themselves to his
Faith and Service. This was that which they called and counted Faith; an^ unto
this Faith it was that they ascribed and entitled all the Privileges of
Believers, and Benefits of the Gospel; that is, no to a mere assenting Faith;
no^ nor to a bare Trusting, or Confiding Faith, but to a Professing Engaging,
Contracting, Covenanting Faith; whereby the person passed himself over, gave
him^^^^ ( a) See Mr. Scudder quoted, P. 35. Thus to embrace Covenant of Grace,
and to receive Christ in whom it ^^^firmed, is to Believe. ^^. Preston,
Treatise of effectual Faith, P. 92. If Men (...) Faith, as it is in it self, a
Marriage of our selves to (...) with all our heart and affections, (when he
has gi^^ himself to us in Marriage, and we are given to him;) ^^ing this we
should never be deceived. (...) Brinsley, Treatise of christ's Mediatorship, P.
141. (...) ( i. e. Faith and Obedience) without any just of^^, I may call the
conditions of this Covenant. Faith, ^^^eby the Covenant is accepted upon the
Terms on which it ^^dered, and Christ the Mediator of it received: Obe^^^^ce,
whereby it is kept, viz. in an Evangelical way, in (...) of desire and
endeavor. (...) Faith, is it self, in the life and reality of it, A (...) and
undertaking of such works as are due to Christ, Believing received for Lord,
Savior and King. And ^^fore he that does not deport himself toward Christ,
(...) manner as is due upon such his Offices, does deny Faith (1 Timothy 5. 8.) i.
e. falsify and relinquish his (...). For, the Faith that is accepted, is not
speculative, practical and pactional (They are the words of a ^^umous
Manuscript, left by a Judicious Divine.
up to Christ, as to his Lord Master, as to his Head, Hope, Savior.

I would not here be misconstru^^^^^ when I derogate from a bare ^^usting. Far
is it from me to ^ight that precious Act of Faith (...) Trust or Affiance, much
less to deride those expressions, which even Scripture seems to set it forth
by. (As a laying or lea^^ing on our Beloved, Cantic. 8. 5. A staying of our
selves upon God Isa. 50. 10. Or, if we will, casting, ( Psalm. 55. 22. 37. 5.
) rolling, or restin^ of our selves upon him who i^ able to save unto the utter
most.

For surely there can be no greater, no sweeter repose unto the Soul, than a
Trusting in its Savior, a Resting on the Bosom o^ his Love, on the fullness of
hi^ Merit, Righteousness, Satisfact^on and Redemption. ( Isa. 26. 3^ Thou shall
keep him in perfect pea^^ whose mind is stayed on thee, becau^^ he trusts in
thee.

Always provided, that this Tr^sting be well and rightly groun^ed, that it
proceed upon the Terms and Conditions ( That is, Such Conditions as are joined
with it, Isa. 50. 10. (fearing of the Lord, a^ obeying the voice of his
Servants.) Such as the Book Homilies adds to it. Homily of Salvation, second
(...) (circa finem.) A Trusting in Gods Mercy to obtain there ^ods Grace and
remission, as well of our original sin in ^ptism, as of all Actual sin
committed by us after our ^ptism, if we truly repent and turn unfeignedly to
him (...). And so, Homily of Faith, first part, ( circa mediural) we return
again unto him by true repentance. (And a^^^ the end of it) We trust that our
offenses be continuly washed and purged, whenever we ( repenting truly)
return to him, steadfastly determining with our selves ^rough his Grace to obey
and serve him. -- Such is the (...) Faith, that the Scripture does so much
commend.
of the ^ospel, and that in all other things it answer the Call of the ^ospel.
Otherwise there may (...) (as the Prophet speaks, Mic. (...) 11.) a leaning
upon God; a ^aying of our selves upon the God (...) Israel, (mentioning his
Name) (...). 48. 2. but not in Truth, (Verse ^e first) not warranted by the
lord of Truth, not coming from ^e Grounds of Truth, but meer^ springing from
wrong and false and mis apprehensions of God, and of his Covenant.

And therefore, (as an ( Dr. Stillingfleets Sermon upon Romans 1. 16. Page 165.
circa finem.
) able and learned Defender of the Protestant Religion says) great care should
be taken, lest by misunderstanding the notion of believing, (so much spoken of,
as the condition of our Salvation) Men live in the neglect of wha^ the Gospel
requires, and so believe themselves into eternal mi^sery.

Affiance or Confidence in God ( i. e. in him as reconciled) abstracting from
the Grace of Repentance, or not-supposing conversion from sin unto God, is no^
2 Timothy 2. 19. Psalm. 25. 1, 2. (Where trusting in God, and wilful transgressing
against God, (1. without a cause) are put as terms i^compatible, as things
inconsistent. And that no wicked or impenitent person can have a sur^ trust, or
a true confidence in God or in Christ, is fully evidenced from what is
delivered, in the Homily of Salv^tion, Part the third, Page 18. And more fully
in the Ho^i^ of Faith, Part the third, ( per totam.)
Christian-confidence, but ca^nal presumption. Neither will i^ ever hold when
it comes to trial but sink and succumb, notwithstanding all the Artifices to
shor^ and prop it up. The real guilt an^ conscience of sin (in the Hear^ and
Life) will easily recoil, an^ beat down all such fond, force^ and ill-founded
confidences or per^asions. And it will be found a ^^^tain truth, that nothing
will lord a vivid or lasting hope to^ards God, or trust in God, save ^^ly the
consciousness of our since^^y, in obeying the Call of the Go^^^l. According to
what is hint^^ 1 John 3. 21. If our Hearts ^^demn us not, (i. e. of prevari^ing
with God and with the Go^^el, by impenitency or hypocri^^) then (says he, and
then (...)) 2 Cor. 1. 12.
have we confidence toward (...).

And thus have I done with the ^^cond Branch of Evangelical O^^dience; i. e.
Obedience to the ^ll of the Gospel.

There is yet a third Branch be^^nd, to be added to the former, make it full
and complete, and ^^at is, Obedience to the special ^^les, to the more
particular Pre^^pts of the Gospel, directing (...) appointing us how to live
and ^alk in our conversations. As for this Branch of Obedience, y^ may know it
by the Names of i^ in Scripture. It Is called a Doin^ of Righteousness, 1 John
3. 7, 10 An Obedience unto Righteousness Romans 6. 16. A (...), a keeping o^
observing of the Commandments 1 Cor. 7. 19. John 15. 10. An^ lastly, a walking
(...), by the Rule or Canon of the Gospel Phil 3. 16. Let us walk by the sam^
Rule. Gal. 6. 16. As many as wal^ according to this Rule, Peace be o^ them, and
Mercy; i. e. the Rule o^ the New Creature, Verse 19. The Rule and Measure of a
Gospel life. For this we must know an^ remember, that the Gospel is no^ only a
Rule of right believing, bu^ a Rule of holy living; as it is the Power of God
for our Salvation so it is the Will of God for our instruction in righteousness.

For there are not only the Cr^denda, the Truths of the Gospe^ (in matters of
Faith) but all the Agenda, the Precepts, the Directions and Injunctions of the
Gospel in matters of Life and Practice.

Titus 2. 11. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all,
teaching them, and what does it teach them? not only to know and believe, but
teaching to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; and to live righteously,
soberly, and godly in this present world; and so to look for the blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ. (Verse
12.)

So that, as we see, the Gospel is not a mere revelation of supernatural
Truths, but a practical direction of Life, and injunction of Duty in every
kind; even a Rule of guidance and government to the whole Man. In so much that
St. James tell us, That if any one James 1. 26.
seem to be religious, and governs not his Tongue, that Man's Religion is in
vain. And St. Paul tells us, He that provides not for his 1 Timothy 5. 8.
own, has denied the Faith; i. e. contradicts his Christianity, or Evangelical
Profession.

Yea, and so comprehensive is the Canon of the Gospel in this kind, that even
all, that is the matter of our duty in any sort, is taken in, and adopted into
the preceptive part of the Gospel. The Gospel taken in its latitude, inculcates
and charges upon us, all the Principles of Conscience; all 1 Tin. 1. 5. 9.
the dictates of right, sound, and sober Reason; all the Lessons and 2 Timothy 1.
7. 1 Cor. 10. 15. 11. 13.
Documents and Duties of Natural or Christian Morality; even (...), (as the
Apostle speaks) Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, or just, or pur^, or lovely, or of good report; if there be any Virtue,
if there be any Praise.

I say all these, and whatever else concerns the well ordering of our Hearts
and Lives, either in reference to God, or to our selves, or to our Neighbor,
is all urged and pressed upon us, (in the main of it) in and by the Go^pel; i.
e. by the Rules and Pre^epts delivered in the Gospel; which is therefore called
by St. Paul, the Law ( That is, That Law according to which God will ^^al with
those that embrace Christianity. Thornd. Epil. L. 2. ^. 20. Page 158. To which
add that of Bucanus Loc. Comm. Loc. 38.. 10. ^. 432. Non tam Legis vox quam
Evangelii quod Apostoli prae^arunt, norma futura est, extremi judicii. Juxta
illud Joh. 3. ^. Joh. 12. 48. and Romans 2. 16. judicabit Dominus de occultis
ho^^^um, ex Evangelio meo. He shall judge the secrets of Men according to my
Gospel, or ex Evangelio mea, as both he and (...) and Piscator render it; out
of my Gospel. Now, if the Gospel shall be the Rule of Christ's Judgment
hereafter; doubt^ess it is appointed to be the Rule of our Duty and Obedi^^ce
here. For as Bucanus adds; Neque enim Sententia in ^dicio illo universali aliud
erit, quam manifestatio sive de^^natio sententiae jam ante in hac vita
ministerio Verhi pro^atiatae, de justisicatione and condemnatione singulorum.
of Faith, (Romans ^. 27. not only a Rule, but a Law) and by St. Peter, the Holy
Commandment, 2 Pet. 2. 21.

This then being the Nature and ^^atter of the Gospel; a Law of faith, a Holy
Commandment; the ^ain Work and Duty of a Chri^^ian that he has to do, is to
con^orm himself to the several Precepts of this Law, to the several
Praescriptions of this Holy Commandment.

For hereby know we that we know him, if we keep or observe his Commandments,
(1 John 2. 3.) And again, This is Love, that we walk after his Commandments, (2
John 6.) that is, when we make it our care and study both to know and obey his
pleasure; proving what is that good and acceptable, and perfect Will of God,
Romans 12. 2.

And thus have I given you both a brief and entire account of the first
Particular propounded; i. e. of the Nature of this Evangelical Obedience, as to
the main Parts and Branches of it. It Is an Obedience to the Truths of the
Gospel, by receiving and believing them; it is and Obedience to the general Call
of God in the Gospel, by returning to him, by closing with him, by giving up
our selves entirely to him, as our Lord and Savior. Lastly, it is an Obedience
to the special Rules of the Gospel, chalking out to us a Way to live and walk
in.

I have only now some few more Inferences, and I have done.

By all that has been said then upon this Subject, we may easily understand
three things.

First, That true and real Christianity stands not mere Words or Shows, but
Deeds; not in a bare profession of Christ with the Lips, but in a deep and
thorough sebjection of the Heart and Will, Life and Actions, to the Commands of
Christ. John 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, (i. e by Faith and Obedience)
then are ye my Disciples indeed. And John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified,
that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. A true and genuine
Disciple of Christ is known by his Fruits; not by the mere Leaves of a fair and
specious Profession; nor by the mere Flowers and Blossoms of some good
expressions; but by the real Fruits of Obedience and Newness of Life. This is
the constant Character of those that belong to God in Scripture. Romans 6. 16.
His Servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
Obedience unto Righteousness. Romans 8. 14. They that are the Sons of God, are
led by the Spirit of God: Now the Fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness,
righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5. 9.

And therefore as on the one side, where ever there are these Fruits, (of
Obedience, Holiness, and Righteousness) living in Gods fear, walking in his
ways, doing and cleaving unto his Will; such a one may rest assured, that he is
no longer a Servant of Sin, but made free from Sin, and become a Servant of
Righteousness. So on the other hand, Let none pretend to the Name of a
Christian, if he do not show the effects of it.

Show me thy Faith by thy Works, (James 2. 18.) show me thy Heart by thy Life;
thy Religion by thy Conversation; either disclaim having the Grace of Faith, or
else make it to appear by the Obedience of Faith. For most evident it is, that
the Apostle ( Romans 6. 17.) comprehends the whole effect of Gods Grace upon
their Hearts, in their obeying the Gospel of Christ.

And therefore secondly. Is this the full and right Character of a Christian?
Obedience to the Truths of God, Obedience to the Call of God, Obedience to the
special Will of God? Then how greatly do they deceive themselves, who rest
either in a bare knowledge of Christ, or in a dull and dead Faith and
Profession of Christ, but short of a true, real, and thorough Obedience? The
Scriptures have sufficiently cautioned us against this deceit; if we have but
Eyes to read, or Ears to hear, or Hearts to consider;

That of our Savior, Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says, (in profession)
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the will
of my Father that is in Heaven;

That of St. Paul, Gal. 6. 15. In Christ Jesus, (i. e. in the Profession or
Religion of Christ) neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision
but a New Creature; or (as it is Chap. 5. 6.) but Faith that works by Love;
or (as it is 1 Cor. 7. 19) But the keeping of the Commandments of God;

Lastly, that of St. John, 1 John 3. 7. Little Children, let no Man deceive
you, he that does righteousness, is righteous. As if he should say, take heed,
it is an easy thing for a Man to slip into such a deceit as this. Namely, to
think, that if he has but some measure of knowledge in the matters of Christ,
and a Belief of the Doctrine of Christ if he has but the Name of Christ in his
Mouth, and a Profession of him in his Life, with some attendance upon him in
his Ordinances; that then it is enough, enough to righteousness, enough to
acceptance here, and to Salvation hereafter. Yea, but let none flatter himself
into so gross a deceit. For, he that does righteousness, is righteous. He only
shall pass for such in Gods account, that brings forth the real Fruits of
righteousness (in the conscionable care and discharge of his Duty) toward God
and Man, in every kind. For, (as it is Acts 10. 34.) God is no respecter of
Persons, but in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted of him.

And ( Romans 2. 7, 8.) God shall one day render unto every Man according to his
Deeds, To them that by patient continuance in welldoing seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality, shall be Eternal Life: But unto them that obey not:
the Truth, but obey unrighteousness; to them indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish, upon every Soul that does evil.

Ye (hence) see, what is it shall carry the main stroke with God, what is it
that shall weigh with God, and cast the balance of his favor to us another
day: Namely, a beginning in Faith, and a patient continuance in welldoing; in
short, an obeying of his Truth in righteonsness.

And I would to God, this it were a thing more preached and pressed upon the
Consciences of Men, and more practiced in the lives of men. For it will be
found a true saying of His (what ever his Judgment was otherwise, in reference
to the thentimes) I say it will be found a great truth (what I meet with in a
fast Sermon, delivered, six and thirty years ago) where speaking of the Duty of
the Ministers, he has these words: Says Mr. Herbert Palmer, his Sermon before
the House of Commons, June 28. 1643. P. 35
he, 'When we all have preached up Repentance, ( to which let me also add
Obedience) as much as we have preached first Confidence, and then Faith, we
shall then be reformed and saved; but I doubt not till then. ( Tit. 1. 3.) This
(Word or) Witness, true.

Thirdly and lastly, by what has been said of the several Parts and Branches of
Evangelical Obedience, we may be able to make Judgment, how much of it goes
before the Grace of Pardon and Justification, and what it is ^ust follow and
come after. Obedience to the Truths of Christ by ^elieving them; and Obedience
^o the call of Christ, by return^ing and resigning up our selves to ^im: These
are clearly and fundamentally necessary as antecedents ^o our justification.
And, (be^ides what has been said) were there no other Scripture save that only
in Romans 8. 30. it were enough to prove it; Where it is said by the Apostle, That
whom God calls, them he justifies. Them, and them only does he justify, whom he
first calls, that is, calls (...), quoe quando nobis contingit,
praedestinationem nostram ex effectu cognoscimus. Paraeus. And that this is the
Judgment of our Church, appears plainly from the 17th Article of Religion.
Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a Benefit of God, be called
according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season: They through
Grace obey the Calling; they be justified freely; they be made So^s of God by
adoption.
effectually, so calls, as that they fully answer to his Call; neither can the
words with truth bear any other sense. So that the Blessing of Justification
belongs to none but such as are the Called of God; that is, such as obey his
Call by a sincere repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
And upon this measure It is for the honor of Christianity to maintain, that
God for Christ's sake is ready to admit the Heirs of everlasting damnation into
the Inheritance of everlasting happiness, in never so short a time as we can
believe they can change their resolution from following sin, to prosess that
Belief and Conversation which Christianity imports. Mr. Thorndike, Epilog. L.
2. c. 30. P. 256.
of Obedience, without more ado, the true Believer (who thus far answers the
Call of God) The sincere undertaking the trust of a Christian, really entitles
him to the promises of the Gospel. Mr. Thornd. (ibidem) L. 2. C. 7. P. 38. It
would be a disparagement to that Fountain which God has opened for Juda and
Jerusalem, that there should be ^^y sin which it cannot cleanse, supposing the
change sin^^re which the undertaking of Christianity professes. Mr. Thornd.
(ibidem) L. 2. C. 5. P. 22.
presently enters and passes into a state of favor and acceptance with God.

As for the third Branch of Obedience, consi^ing in a course of holy Actions,
and in a continued observance of the particular Rules of the Gospel; God stays
not for this; God does not suspend the Grace or benefit of Justification, till
the Person has run through a course of Obedience through all the Precepts and
Instances of a Holy Life; but forthwith bestows it on the faithful Believer
upon his first Faith and Obedience unto Gods Call, provided it be real and
sincere, which God can see and discern, though Man cannot.

And therefore this last kind of Obedience; i. e. to the particular,
superstructive Rules of a Holy Life; though it be necessary in its place, (for
we stand bound to it by the Law of Faith, by the Rule of the Gospel; and are
obliged to it in the virtue of Gods general Call;) yet if we speak of it in
relation to our Justification with God, it is not required as an antecedent to
go before it; but as a consequent to come after it; as the Evidence that must
prove and testify the effectualness of that Call, and our sincere obeying it.
For he that would be found Tunc veraciter fideles s^mus, si quod verbis
promisimus, operibus complemus. Gregor* in Evangel. Hom. 19.
true to that Call, he must and will pursue and prosecute it, through all the
Duties and Offices of a good Life, according as time and opportunity shall give
leave and occasion.

True indeed, a bare purpose of Obedience, if it be sincere and ^esolute,
joined with a Faith unfeigned, is enough to enter the Believer into a state of
Righteous^ess and Justification. But sure^y, it is neither sense nor reason for
any to think that God will justify him upon such a promise or purpose of
Obedience as takes Bona opera sunt necessaria ad justificationis statum
retinendum and conservandum; non ut causae ^^ per se efficient aut mereantur
hanc conservationem, sed ut ^^dia seu conditiones, sine quibus Deus non vult
gratiam ju^^ificationis in hominibus conservare. Davenant de actuali ju^^itia,
Cap. 31. Page 404. Conclusio sexta.
no effect, nor is duly execu^ed in the Life and Conversation, (where time and
space is afford^d.) For it is in vain to enter into Covenant, unless we keep it.
It Is by believing and repenting that we enter into Covenant. It Is by Obedience
These, ( i. e. Faith and Obedience) without just offense, I may call the
Conditions of the Covenant* Faith, whereby the Covenant is accepted, upon the
terms on which it is tendered, and Christ the Mediator received: Obedience,
whereby it is kept, viz. in an Evangelical way, in respect of desire and
endeavor. This is that which the Psalmist calls, Keeping of the Covenant,
Psalm, 25. 10. Psalm. 103. 18. Not a Legal, but Evangelical Keeping; when the
Promises being believed, there is a serious desire and endeavor of yielding
Obedience to all Gods Commandments. Mr. Brinsley of great Yarmouth, Treatise of
Christ's Mediatorship, P. 14.
that we keep it. Let no man therefore flatter or cozen himself with vain
words, or with false* confidences, or with a wrong or scanty notion of Faith.
For if there be any thing clear in Scripture, this I am sure is most clear and
perspicuous, That Life and Salvation belongs only to such as believe and obey.
Nos dicimus Vitam Aeternam promitti operibus, non solum ut sunt signa Fidei,
sed etiam ut sunt Obedientia filialis, Patri Coelesti debita; seu ut sunt
positio conditionis sub qua Deus Filiis haereditatem Vitae Aeternae donare
promi^ti^. Paraeus contra Bellarm, ad Cap. 3. P. 1242.


The good Lord of his mercy grant, That we may abound more and more in
Knowledge, and in all Judgment, that we may approve the things that are
excellent, that we may be sincere and without offense till the Day of Christ;
being filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto
the Glory and Praise of God. Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11.

FINIS.
The Christian's Sacrifice: OR A SERMON OF CHARITY Preached before the Mayor
and Aldermen OF THE City of NORWICH; upon occasion of the Annual Commemoration
of the Gift of Sir John Sucklin to that Corporation.

By Charles Robotham, B. D. and Rector of Reifam in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for William Oliver in Norwich. M DC LXXX.

TO HIS Worthy Friend and Patron, Mr. Francis Annyson.
Worthy Sir,
JUstice should ever be first served, before Charity, and ^^e paying of Debts,
be before ^he giving of Alms. And how^ver the Subject of this Dis^urse be mere
Alms, yet the pre^enting of it to your Hand, is ^ut a piece of Justice owing
from (...) to your self; not only from ^he more common score, as you ^re a part
of that Body, unto whose audience it was first deliver^d, but upon the private
account of ^our especial Favors to my par^icular, which I shall always
^knowledge, with all due and deserved thankfulness. For in truth, when your
Kindness first found me, it was very singular, being such as wholly prevented
my very acquaintance with you. So that I first felt you favor as a Patron,
before (...) had the Knowledge of your Fac^ or Person. This so unusu^^ and
surprising a Method of Benificence, has moved me to take this first occasion
in my appearing in public, to declare your Nobleness, and to testifi^^ unto
the World my deep Obligations. Accept, I beseech you this small Testimony, of a
great and grateful respect, from him who desires ever to show himself

Your much Devoted in a^^ Thankfulness and Christian Service, Charles Robotham
From Reifham Nov. 15. 1679.
Hebrews xiii. 16. do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.
THE coherence of these Words with the Context, is plain and obvious, if we do
but ^^st our Eyes back unto the tenth ^se of this Chapter, where the Apostle
tells us, We have an Al-^ We, i. e. we Christians, as ^ll as the Jews, yea and
in oppo^ion to them, and exclusion of ^^em; 'For we have an Altar whereof they
have no right to ^^at, who serve at the Tabernacle.

This Altar (as the Pontificians themselves confess) is no other ^^an Christ
himself; even He, mentioned in the twelfth Verse, who suffered without the Gate
Per altar, ipse Christus significatur, 3. 83. 3. 2m
says Aquinas. So Estius upon the place; so also Gaignaeus Hostiam in ara
crucis oblatam, ip sum scilicet Corpus Christi. And to speak properly, Christ
himself is the Altar of a Christian, the common Altar that sanctifies al^^ our
Gifts, the only Altar, (...)* (as it is Verse 15.) by whom w^ all offer unto
God.

Yea but may some say, here'^ the Altar indeed, (on Gods part) but (as Isaac
once said unto hi^ Genesis 22. 17
Father) where is the Sacrific^ (on our part?) To this I answer, in the words or
sense of Aquinas. There is a double Sacrifice, and both here specified, which
we are to offer unto God, by an^ through Christ.

The first is, Devotio erga Deum the juge Sacrificium, the daily Sacrifice of
Piety and Devotion to wards God.

The second is miseratio erga ^oximum, the occasional Sacrifice of mercy,
bounty and compassion toward our Neighbor. The first of these ye have
expressly in the 15th Verse; By him let us ^ser the Sacrifice of Praise unto God
^^^tinually, even the Fruit of our ^ips, giving thanks (or (...).
confes^ng) in his Name: There Is the Sacrifice of Devotion. The ^econd ye have
as plainly in the ^ords of the Text, now read verse the 16th. To do good and
rections communicate forget not; for ^ith such Sacrifices God is well plea^^d.
There Is the Sacrifice of Cha^^ty and Commiseration.

I shall not at present at all (...) with the first of these, especially being
already opened, from the Press, by a better and more Bishop Lany.
^everend Hand.

Yet seeing the Apostle, not without reason, joins these two sacrifices
together, something I shall note, partly from their connecting, and partly from
their order.

First, from the coupling and connecting of these two I shall observe, that the
Duties of Piety toward God must be followed and seconded with the Deeds of
Charity toward Man. Works of Compassion must attend and accompany Works of
Devotion, yea and in some Cases of Exigency be preferred before them. I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. God delights not in a^ naked Piety,
though never so specious, if stripped and divided from the Fruits of Charity. God
cares not for the Frui^ of the Lips, in confessing to his Name, if there be not
also the Gifts of the Hand, in dispersing and relieving for his sake. In short
they that offer the Sacrifice o^ Praise unto God, must not forget to do good,
and to communicate unto others. That, from the co^nexion of these two.

Again secondly, from the order and ranking of these two Duties or Sacrifices I
shall observe, that Christian Piety must lead the way, and lay the ground for
^ue Charity. First solid Devotion, and then Christian Compasion. First the
right and due Service of God in Sacrifices of Praise, and confessing to his
Name, and then the doing good and communicating unto others. This is the order
of the Text here, and of the Scripture elsewhere. Acts ^. 4. Thy Prayers and
thine Alms says the Angel to Cornelius) are ^e up before God; (and so Verse ^e
31.) First his Prayers, and then his Alms. The expressions of his Piety are
first mentioned ^ Gods acceptance, before the ^ercises of his Charity; yea, ^d
they ought to have the pre^dency, and that for a double season. First, Ratione
objecti, because Gods Due is before Man's Good. God is first to be served and
honored in the main, before Man be helped or benefited. Secondly, Ratione
motivi, Because Piety to God is and ought to be the proper Motive to a true and
a right Charity. For what is Piety, but the due regard and respect we have unto
God in the first place. And what is Charity but the loving of God for himself;
and of our Neighbor for Gods sake. So the Schools define Charity stretches it
self both to God and Man. Homily 2. Sermon of Charity, P. 38.
it, Amor Dei propter seipsum and Proximi propter Deum. Now to love God for
himself, is plainly Piety, both in the Principle and Practice; and to show
love, or to do good unto others, for the sake of God, this is still Piety in
the Motive, though Charity in the Practice. And indeed, without the pious
intention and disposition going before, the very Works of Mercy, Bounty and
Liberality will scarce deserve the Name ^ Charity; as the Apostle i^ mates in
that supposition ^ makes, (1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I give all my Goods to feed the
Poor, and have not Charity.)

The Rule in Christian Ethics ^s that of St. Ambrose, Virtutes non ^tibus sed
finibus pensantur, it is the right and due End and Motive added that makes a
true Christian Virtue, and not the mere outward Action. For a Man to give Alms,
merely or mainly for Mat. 6. ^.
the love of Praise, or to be seen of Men, is but Vainglory. For a Man to do
it out of any other by, Partial, or Selfish End or respects, Luke 6. 32, 33, 34.
is but a kind of worldly running and policy. But for a Man to do it for Gods
sake, and out of a Pious Love to God; this, this is Charity, even that Charity
which the Apostle calls, Love out of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned. ^ Tim. 1. 5.

Having premised thus much out of the Context, and as I hope, not impertinently
to the Business in hand, I shall now return to the Text it self, in these
words, To do good, and to communicate, for get not; for with, etc. Which Words
are an Exhortation to a very great and important Duty, to a very considerable
and concerning Piece of Christianity; i. e. The exercising of our selves in
Acts of Bounty, Mercy and Charity. In the whole Verse, for orders sake, we may
observe three main Particulars. First, the matter of the Duty; i. e. To do
good, and to communicate. Secondly, the Motive to persuade it; For with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased. Thirdly and lastly, the manner of enforcing it,
by way of special Item and Memento; To do good, etc. forget not.

For the first of these, the Sum and Substance of the Duty here exhorted to,
it is expressed in the Text by two words, much to the same purpose, (...) and
(...) To do good, and to communicate.

First, it is the doing of good, or as the word (...) may be rendered)
Well-doing. The same with that ^ Galat. 6. Verse 9. Be not weary of well-doing.
Good for the matter, and well for the manner. This (...).

But then we must know, it is not every doing of good that is here meant, but
good in a certain kind. There is the good of ^^iety and Religion; the good of
justice and Honesty; the good of Temperance and Sobriety: But that in the Text
here is the good of Charity.

To the purpose, there is a two hold kind of Good, Bonum in se, (...) Bonum
alteri, Good, Good in it self, and Good to another. In the first sense, the
doing of good takes in the whole duty of Man, (whether to God or to our
Neighbor;) according to that in Mica 6. 8. He has shown thee, O Man, that is
good, (that is, good in it self, what is fit and fair, right and duty to be
done) even to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.
All this is good in the larger sense.

But then secondly, there is a more special doing of good; not only good in it
self, but good to another. In which sense the Scripture frequently means when
it speaks of Good Works. Mat. 26. 10. She has wrought a good Work upon me. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. Charge them that are rich, that they do good, that they be rich
in good Works; i, e. such Works as are, some way or other, helpful, profitable,
and beneficial unto others; Works of Mercy, Works of Bounty and Liberality.
Such Works whose good effects reach to the Benefit of our Neighbor, either
public or private; such as are extended to the relief, ease, comfort, or
supply, either of the outward or inward Man. For Example sake, such as are the
feeding of the Hungry, the clothing of the Naked, the helping or curing of the
Sick, the visting and comforting the Afflicted, the succouring of the Helpless,
Friendless or Fatherless, the harboring of Strangers, the redeeming of
Captives, the defending or delivering the Oppressed; in short, all kind of free
and charitable contributing to the relief, comforting, or maintenance of
others, or distributing to the necessities of others. These, with many of the
like nature, are those which in the Language of Scripture frequently come under
the Name of Good Works; i. e. good in a peculiar and abounding sense, in
respect of the sensible (yea or Spiritual) good and benefit, thence and thereby
arising and redounding unto others.

And that this is the Good here meant in the Text, is evident from the next and
second word, ( To do good, and to communicate, forget not.) As much as to say,
to do good by imparting, by communi, cating of what we have to the use, to the
benefit and behoof of others. So that this latter is added to the former, to
show in particular what is that good exhorted to, it is Bonum dissusum, and
extensum, such a doing of good as spreads and diffuses it self to the
refreshing of our Neighbor, to the necessities of the Bystanders. The like
Addition, and the like Explication does the Apostle put elsewhere, 1 Timothy 6.
18. Charge them (says he) that they do good, that they be rich in good Works,
(and presently adds) ready to distribute, willing to communicate. This is to do
good in the sense of the Text, to distribute, to communicate to the Wants, to
the Exigencies of others.

But though this may well be conceived to be the use and intent of the word
(...) (added to (...)) yet there is something further that we must take notice
of, in this Phrase of Communicating. For why is it that the practice and
exercise of Charity ^s called by the Name of Commu^^cating, not only here, but
in Romans 15. 25. Gal. 6. 6. Phil. 4. 1^. 1 Timothy 6. 18.
many other places? To this I answer, When the Scripture fets ^orth the Duties
of Charity by the Phrase of Communicating, it ^s for a threefold hint or
instru^tion.

First it instructs us what judgment we should have, and what ^ccount we should
make of the Bona Terrae, of the good things of this World, of the Temporal
Enjoyments we possess in this Life. That we are not to look upon them as things
absolutely ours, so as wholly to detain, consine, or engross them to our
selves; but as Communionis, id est, Charitatis qua omnia putantur Communia.
Verb1 Augustini in Glossa. 1. t^m Hay^^o.
(...), as things to be imparted and communicated, that is, to be made common,
as were, by distributing to the necessities of others. None of ^s has an
absolute property in what he has. The strict property is Gods; the legal
possession (under God) is ours, ours by his Gift, by his Will and Providence;
but yet so, as he has made it our Debt and Duty to impart and communicate what
is ours, upon Public, Pious, or Charitable occasions. So that what is ours, in
the Eye of the Law, and in the way of Justice, becomes (in a sort and sense)
due to another in the way of Charity. Else would not the Spirit of God say, (as
it does, Prove. 3. 27.) Withhold not good from him to whom it is due. There is a
due of Charity, as well as a Right of Possession and civil Propriety. In the
latter respect every one may look upon what he rightly has, as his own; but in
the former respect, every one should look on what he has to spare, as his needy
Brothers, and upon himself only as the Steward of it at large; to dispose and
dispense it; yea and to account for it unto God: For the Goods of this World
they are a Talent, and whosoever has them, most certainly one day must come to
a double account for them; first how he got them; secondly, what good he did
with them, according to the ability he had, or the objects or opportunities he
met with. It will not then be sufficient for rich Nabal to stand upon his
property, (as we find he did, when David asked a Relief of him) 1 Samuel 25. 11.
What, (says he) shall I take of my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh, and give
it to I know not whom. This Man only considered the Legal Property, the civil
Title he had to his Goods; but not the Tenure upon which he held them, nor the
End for which God gave them; which was not merely to enjoy or behold them with
his Eyes, no nor to revel with them in a drunken kind of hospitality within
doors, but to lay them out for Gods Service, and our poor Neighbors benefit.
Incassum se innocents putant, qui commune Dei munus, sibi privatum vindicant,
(says Gregory the Great.) In vain do the Rich, or Men of Ability, think
themselves blameless and innocent; if so be what God has given, over and to
spare, and so to be communicated, they ingross unto themselves.

God indeed, for wise and necessary Ends, has established Property in the
World; but yet we mistake, if we think that all equality or community are to
all effects quite taken away. The contrary appears by the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8. 14.
wherein God has ordained, that one Man's abundance should supply another Man's
want, that there may be an equality. For God puts no Man into the World to be
necessarily starved, or pinched with extremity of want. He will have all to be
provided for, and has assigned to every one a Child's Portion, in some fair way
to be obtained by him, either by his own Legal Right and just Industry, or by
humble request, which according to Conscience ought take effect. And this is
the first thing which the Word or Phrase of Communicating hints unto us, namely
Communit as bonorum, a kind of Community of Goods, ( i. e. of the overplus of
what we have) in case of others want, and for the uses and purposes of Charity.
We must not look upon our Abundance as given us, (...), to be engrossed, but,
(...), to be imparted and communicated.

But then again secondly, another thing there is, which this Phrase of
Communicating holds forth unto us: And that is, The Nature of Charity; that it
is of a diffusive disposition; it is for distributing what it has. This is the
right Spirit and Genius of Christian Love, and Goodness. It does not tarry at
home, but goes forth to the wants and necessities of others. It seeks not his
own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. It looks not only to its own things, but to the things of
others, Phil. 2. 4. To do no body no wrong, that is Justice and Probity; but to
be helpful and succouring to others, that is Charity. The Jews have a pretty
Saying, whereby they give us the Motto and Character of three several Persons.
The Unjust Man, he says, That that is thine is mine, and that that is mine is
my own, (he grasps and gripes all he can.) The mere Just Man, he says, That
that is thine is thine, and and that that is mine is mine, (he keeps his own,
and leaves every one to his own.) But the Pious, and Good, and Charitable Man,
he says, That that is mine is thine, (thine to use, thine in case of
necessity.) and that that is thine is thy own. This is the Language, the
Practice and Pleonasm of Charity: It Is an extensive Grace; it is like a full
Breast, it milks out it self to the hungry and thirsty, to the sick and feeble,
to the cold and naked, to the poor and needy. It Is all for communicating; it
does not shut, but open, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Thou shall open thy hand wide unto thy
poor Brother. It does not rake and scrape, but scatter and disperse, Prove. 11.
24. There is that scatters, and yet increases. Psalm. 112. 9. He has
dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor; i. e. He is not tenacious or
close-fisted, does not hoard up, or keep close his Goods, for the gratifying of
his covetous humor, or the nourishing of his pride, or the pampering of his
sensuality; but, according as time and place, and ability requires, he sends
them abroad for the good, help and relief of others. In a word, the Charitable
Man is one that is good and does good; good in himself, and good unto others.
He sucks not up his juice to himself, he eats not his Morsels alone, Job. 31.
17. He does not, like the Snail, sibi vivere, live to himself, or hide up
himself within his own Shell; but rather like the Silk-work, that even works
and spends it self for the good of others. For so runs the Apostles
Exhortation, Ephesians. 4. 18. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him
labor, working with his own Hands the thing that is good, that he may have to
give to him that needs. Not only that he may have a Penny against a rainy day,
(that indeed is necessary thrift, and good husbandry) but that he may have to
give to him that more needs, (that is Christian Charity.) True Charity will be
giving, not only out of its Lands and larger Revenues, but out of its earnings;
something out of its own labor (more or less) to him that need^th.

This is the second thing implied ^n the Phrase of Communicating: (...) shows
the Nature and Spirit of Charity to be diffusive and communicative.

There is yet a third thing intinated in the word (...), as it is ^pplied to
Acts of Charity, and that ^s the (...), the Good that a^ises and accrues
thereby, both to (...) Theophylact. in Romans 15.
Doer, and to the Partaker. It Is ^he Note of Theophylact upon Rom: ^5. 25. That
the Apostle does every where call Alms or Charity ^y the Name of (...),
(com^union, or communicating) because there is a kind of Commu^ion, that is, a
common or a mu^ual gain by it, both to him that gives it, and to him that
receives (...).

First, he that receives our Cha^ity, gains by it succor and re^reshment, help
and benefit. And then it is as evident from Scripture, that he that gives out
his Charity gains by bestowing it. He gains blessedness, Acts 20. 35. It Is a
more blessed thing to give, than to receive. He gains good to his own Soul,
Prove. 11. 17. The merciful Man does good to his own Soul. The good that he does
reflects and redounds back unto himself. He gains here, and he gains hereafter.
Even here he gains a Blessing Qu^s dederis, solus habebis opes.
on what he possesses, ( Luke 11. 41.) a return and increase, ( Luke 6. 38.
Prove. 11. 25.) and as he gains here, so much more shall he gain hereafter. Luke
14. 14. Such shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the Just. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. And what shall they reap?
why Heaven^^ and Happiness, Life and Glory For in thus doing, they sow unto the
Spirit, (says the Apostle, Gal 6. 8.) and of the Spirit they shall reap Life
Everlasting. Great Gains for so small laying out. An Eternal reward for a
temporary bene^icence. This is the (...), the Trade, the Traffic, the blessed
exchange of a Pious Charity. It gives a way Earth, and gets Heaven. Miser homo
quid foeneraris homini, foenerare Deo, and centuplum recipies, and Vitam
Aeternam possidebis praebe lutum, and accipe Deum, praebe tectum, and accipe
Coelum. Aug.
It gives the (...), the (...), the carnal things of this World; and gains the
(...), the Spiritual and Eternal things of a better.

And thus I have opened to you the Matter and Substance of the Duty, (which is,
a doing of good, and Communicating.) And though the Text does not mention it,
yet it would be seasonable and pertinent to add unto the former the extent of
the Duty, the reach and compass of this Goodness, the Persons whom it takes in,
and to whom it must extend; and that is, unto all Men. So says the Apostle,
Galat. 6. 10. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all, (though
especially) to the household of Faith. Unto all? that is, not simply and
absolutely to all; for that is impossible: but unto all, first distributive, to
all in their degree and capacity, to all according to the exigence of their
necessities, to all, pro loco and tempore, according to the opportunity of time
and place, (and the proportion of thy ability.) So St. Austin seems to
interpret the Note of universality. Omnibus, Aug. de Doctrina Christiana.
i. e. omnibus qui locorum and temporum vel quarumcunque rerum
opportunitatibus, constrictius tibi quasi quadam sort junguntur. To all who
are brought near, and presented to us by Providence, as the Objects of our
present Charity.

And then secondly, unto all indifferently, without any undue exceptions,
exclusions or limitations; that is, not only to thy self, but to others, not
only to thy own within doors, (that are as it were a part of thy self) but to
thy Neighbor without, to them of the Vicinage; not only to thy Kin, but to the
stranger; yea not Beatus qui amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter
te. Aug. confess.
only to thy Friend, but to thy Enemy. Romans 12. 20. If thine Enemy hunger, feed
him, if he ^hirst, give him drink. And so Mat. 5. 43, 44. It has been said,
Lex Vetus amorem docet in proximos, Nova in extraneos, ( yea inimicos.)
Tertullian.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and ^ate ehine Enemy; but (says Christ) I say
unto you, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate ^ou. Ye see then, though
we do not take in singula generum, all ^bsolutely and collectively, here ^s yet
a large Field for Charity to walk in, a wide and a large Sphere ^o act in, for
the doing of good. ^t must be still (...), to all whom the Law of God has made,
and whom the Providence of God presents to us, as Objects of Cha^ity. It must
be Peregrinanti, to the Stranger, Fatherless and Wi^dow, that they may eat
within ^hy Gates and be filled. Deuteronomy. ^6. 12. James 1. 27. It must be
Esurienti, to the Hungry and Na^ed. Isa. 58. 7, 10. If thou draw out thy Soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul. It must be Aegrotanti, to the
Sick and Weak, to the Blind and Lame. Luke 14. 13. It must be Indigenti, to the
Poor and Needy. Deuteronomy. 15. 11. In a word, it must be omni petenti, to every one
that asks, Mat. 5. 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would
borraw of thee turn not away. And so Luke 6. 30. Give unto every one that
asks, that is, to every one that is qualified to ask, to every one that truly
wants, that has not, nor perhaps cannot have by all his earnings where with
to defray his charge.

As for such as make a Trade of asking, of begging, and yet refuse to labor, (
i. e. such as can labor and will not, or at least Non homini do, sed
humanitati, said the Philosopher.
not as they may and ought) doubtless it was never Christ's mind to oblige our
Charity to such, except in Cases of urgency and extremity, or in some lesser
proportion out of a common consideration of humanity. For with such as these
(if known to be such) there is another Rule to go by, even that of the Apostle,
2 These. 3. 10. If any will not work, neither let him eat.

And the truth is, the best Charity to such is to force them (by severity) to
labor, and so to bring them out of a course of idleness to a habit of working,
industry and diligence. And he that does this, fulfils the Precept of the
Scripture, in doing good to them; for he does them more good, than he that
gives to their cravings, though perhaps they do not think so. Multa enim bona
praestantur invitis, quando eorum consulitur utilitati, non voluntati, (as St.
Aug. Enchiridion ad Laurentium.
Austin well observes.) Seasonable and forcible severity, for the bettering and
amending of the Party; even in the judgment of the Removere malum alicujus
ejusdem rationis est, sicut procurare ejus bonum; procurare autem fratris bonum
pertinet ad charitatem. -- -- Remotio peccati magis pertinet ad charitatem quam
remotio exterior is damni, vel etiam corporalis nocumenti. Aquinas 22 q. 33.
Art. 1.
Schools, is as much an Alms, as much an act of Charity, as giving to his
relief; because it is an act of mercy, (mercy to the Soul, though severity to
the Body.) It Is a doing of him good, because it tends to his best good.
Correction to the lazy and negligent is as much Charity, as Collection for the
Indigent.

And thus I have entirely dispatched the first Particular of the Text; I have
shown you the matter of the Duty, what it is to do good, and to communicate,
and why so called, together with the extent of the Duty, as to the Persons or
Objects toward whom it must be exercised.

I shall now pass unto the next and second considerable in the Text; i. e. to
the grand Reason or Motive to persuade unto the Duty, contained in those words,
( For with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.) A double Motive, (as ye see
here;) First, because they are Scrifices. Secondly, because they are
well-pleasing. I shall consider each in their or^er.

First then, Works of Mercy, and Charity, and Christian Boun^y, they are
commended to us from the Notion and Title put upon them, they are Sacrifices.
They have the Name, and they have the Nature of Sacrifices. first the Name. So
the Apostle ^iles them in the Text; and so ^he Scripture elsewhere. The
Charity of the Philippians it is sti^ed, An Odor of a sweet smell, a ^acrifice
acceptable to God, Phil. 4. 8. So of Cornelius the Centuri^n, Acts 10. 4. it is
said, Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up ^^ a Memorial before God. Come ^^;
and, as a Memorial, they are ^oth of them Sacrificial Phrases. ^acrifices of
old were ordinarily ^alled (...), as much as to say ^scensiones, (from (...)
ascendit) because of the Smoke of them ascending or coming up from the Altar
before the Lord. And so for the other word ( Memorial) come up as a Memorial;
it is a form of Speech (says the learned Dr. Hammond) borrowed from the Law,
signifying an Oblation As Levit. 2. 9. The Priest shall take of the
Meat Offering, a Memorial thereof, and burn it upon the Altar, an offering of a
sweet Savor unto God.

So that Works of Mercy and Charity, they are the Christians (...), or (...),
his Sacrifice or Memorial before God. Grotius upon the Text says, that they
correspond to the Jewish (...).

But then secondly, Alms or Charity, as they have the Name of Sacrifice applied
to them, so they have something of the Nature (the general Nature) of a
Sacrifice, because they are an Offering unto God. That which is a relief of
Charity, in respect to the Poor and Needy, is an Oblation We humbly beseech
thee mercifully to accept our Alms and Oblations, etc. The Prayer for the whose
estate of Christ's Church. English Liturgy. In omni paupere Christus esuriens
pascitur, sitiens potatur. Hieronym.
of Piety, in respect to God. Sacrifice and Offering as such, have always a
regard to God, to his Honor and Service. Such are the effects of a right
Christian Charity, they have an Aspect unto God, as well as unto Man. Prove. 19.
17. He that has pity on the Poor, lends to the Lord. Mat. 25. 40. In as much
as ye have done it to the least of these my Brethren, (says Christ) ye have
done it unto me, So that God and Christ are the Receivers of our Charity, as
well as the Poor. The Poor has the benefit, God and Christ have the Honor and
Service. The Poor receive it as a Comfort, God receives it as an Offering. Acts
of Mercy and Charity, even according to the Raynerti Panthcologia. P. 75^
Schoolmen, are Actus Latriae, they pertain to the proper Worship and Service
of God, in the nature of an Offering, tendered ultimately to him; for though
the good done by them is done unto Man, yet the Duty and Service done therein
is rendered to God. For, first, they are, in Deuteronomy. 26. 10.
Honorem Dei, they are the Honoring of God with our Substance, and with the
Fruits of our increase, Prove. 3. 9. And again, He that has mercy on the Poor,
honors his Maker, Prove. 14. 31. And secondly, they are, In agnitionem Dei.
What we give in a way of Charity, is or should be given as an acknowledgment to
God of his Right and Property over us and ours. It Is the real Rent and Tribute,
whereby we do indeed profess and agnize him, as the Donor of what we have and
hold. There is a certain homage due unto God, for all the benefits and good
things of this World by him bestowed upon us. And that is, the Homage of
Thanksgiving, (1 Timothy 4. 4.) Now this same Thanksgiving of ours must not only
be a Verbal Thanksgiving, but a Real; not only in naked words, in the labor of
our Lips, but in the Gifts of our Hands; that is, we must pay and yield unto
God a Rent and Tribute, of and for what we have and enjoy by his Blessing. And
this Rent (as Mr. Mede His Diatribe on Acts 10. 4. P. 305.
well observes) is twofold. Either that which is offered for the maintenance
of Gods Worship and Service; or that which is tendered and given for the relief
of the Poor and Needy. The former is that which we term Works of Piety, or for
Pious uses; the latter is that which we call Alms, or Works of Charity.

So that our Almsgiving unto Men, is but our due and real Thansgiving unto
God. It Is that whereby we own and acknowledge our selves to be Gods Tenants,
Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18.
as holding all that we are and have of the Manor of Heaven; of the Gift and
Bounty of his Hand It Is that Tribute and Service which (once paid and rendered)
gives us the lawful use of, and a Blessing upon, the whole Lump that remains.
As our Savior intimates, Luke 11. 41. Give Alms of such things as ye have, and
behold all things are clean unto you.

By all that has been spoken upon this Head, we may learn two things. First, we
learn what kind of Sacrifices the Alms and Charity of a Christian are. And that
first negatively; not Sacrifices of Expiation. No, we owe that to a better and
a higher Sacrifice, to him, who has given himself for us an Offering and a
Sacrifice unto God, of a sweet sineling Savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ alone is
the propitiation for sin; 1 John 2. 2. His Blood alone is that that cleanses
from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. His Death alone is the satisfaction to Gods Justice
for the offense of sin.

And therefore secondly and positively. Deeds of Charity, they are Sacrifices
of Homage and Thanksgiving. Such as the Psalmist mentions, Psalm. 4. 5.
Sacrifices of Righteousness, i. e. tendered in a way of Duty and just
acknowledgment to God. And indeed nothing more ordinary in Scripture, than for
Alms and Charity to be called Justice or Righteousness, yea our righteousness.
Psalm. 112. 9. See Mr. Mede's Diatribe on Psalm. 112. 6.
He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor: His righteousness
endures for ever. Dan. 4. 27. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy
iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor. And so Mat. 6. 1. Erogando pecuniam
auges justitiam, minuitur pecunia, augetur justitia. Aug.
Take heed that ye do not your Alms before Men, so indeed we read it, (...) but
in the ancient Copies it is (...), Justitiam vestram) Take heed that ye do not
your Righteousness before Men. (So Beza and Curcellaeus read and render it. So
the Vulgar Latin; and so the Syriack and Arabic) your righteousness; i. e.
your Alms and Beneficence. They are Sacrifices of Righteousness tendered in a
way of Duty.

Secondly, hence we learn, the Necessity, the Obligation that lies upon us unto
Acts of Charity. They are Sacrifices, i. e. a part of Gods Worship; and
Sacrifices of Righteousness and Duty, of due homage and thankfulness. And
therefore we stand obliged to pay and render them to the Honor of God, as well
as to the good of others, or the furtherance of our own account another day.

They therefore are sadly mistaken, who look upon their Almsgiving as an
arbitrary thing, which they may do if they will, or let alone if they will. As
if they stood under no obligation to the Offices of Charity and Christian
bounty; as if these were things left wholly to their liberty, either to do, or
to leave undone.

Whereas on the contrary; if in the Language of Scripture our Charity be a
piece of Righteousness: If our Almsgiving unto Man be our Thanksgiving unto
God: Then surely it is not a matter of indifferency, but a peremptory and
indispensable Duty. For is it a thing indifferent whether we be righteous or
unrighteous? Is it left to our liberty, whether we will be really thankful or
unthankful? whether we will honor God with our Substance, or not honor him?
Surely no. For if this be the Rent Deuteronomy. 14. 29. 16. 11. 24. 19. 26. 11, 12.
and Acknowledgment that God expects to be made and paid for all the Blessings
and good things we enjoy; then certainly to detain this Rent, is not only a
piece of uncharitableness to Man, but of impiety, ingratitude and injustice to
God.

Away then with all excuses pretended to evade or avoid the Duty. Remember, God
is thy great Landlord, of whom thou hold all that thou have. And he expects
and requires a Lords Rent; and has appointed the Poor and Needy in a way of
Charity to be his Receivers of this Rent; it is for his honor, it is for their
use. He that neglects to pay this Tribute of his Goods, forgets his Landlord;
and he that looks upon it as not due, disclaims his Landlord, and denies God
to be his Lord and Supreme Proprietary.

Render therefore unto the Lord his due Tribute. Honor him with thy Substance,
(as it is Prove. 3. 9.) and with the First Fruits of thy Increase; so shall thy
Barns be filled with plenty, and thy Presses burst out with New Wine, Verse 10.
yea render unto Man his due, (as it follows Verse 27.) Withhold not good from
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy Hand to do it. It Is spoken (as
is evident from the next Verse) either of the Deeds of Charity, or of Res
pauperum, pauperibus non dare, est Sacrilegium. Hyeronym.
neighbourly help and courtesy: Plainly showing, that even in these things
there is a Due, a Debitum Charitatis, a Due and Debt of Charity owing from us,
according to the real ability given to us. It Is due by the common Rule of Love,
Mercy and Humanity. It Is due too by the many Precepts commanding it both in Law
and Gospel, (as we shall show anon more fully.) For, as the Son of Syrach says,
(Eccles. 17. 14.) God has given every Man a Commandment concerning his
Neighbor; not only in matters of Right and Justice, but also in matters of
Kindness, Helpfulness and Charity. He therefore that shall look upon these
things as left at liberty to be done or not done, as he please, he may even as
well look upon it as a thing indifferent, whether he will be indeed and in
truth a Christian.

And so much shall suffice for the first Argument, to press upon us the Offices
of Charity; because they are Sacrifices. There is yet another still behind in
the Text, and that is, because they are highly pleasing unto God; With such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

The word (...), is by diverse diversely rendered. Talibus promeretur Deus, (so
the old Latin) no very good word, and to a worse sense; as if we merited of God
by our Charity. Talibus conciliatur Deus, (so Cajetan) God is gained or won by
them. Placidus nobis fit Deus, (so Pellicanus) God is appeased to us. And so
Erasmns, Placatur Deus, God is pacified.

But what says Estius, though a Papist? The Greek word (says he) does not
signify placari, to be appeased, but delectari, to be delighted with:
Hilariter affici, to be taken and affected with: Placitum habere, to be
well-pleased with. And so St. Austin (in the ancient Ludovic. Vives, in
Augustinum de Civitate Dei. L. 10. C. 5.
Copies) rendered it, Talibus placetur Deo. So Oecumenius expounds it by the
word (...). And therefore most rightly and truly does our English Translation
give it, With such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

And surely to a Pious Christian this alone is Motive enough, and sufficient to
the doing of good and communicating, in that they are things highly pleasing
unto God. I shall therefore insist a little upon the truth of it, and then
subjoyn the Reasons. First, for the truth of it, that God is much pleased with
the Offices and Exercises of a Christian Charity, will appear from these
following Considerations.

First, From their power and prevalency with God. They are an Odor of a sweet
smell, says the Apostle to the Philippians, Phil. 4. 18. that is, highly
grateful and acceptable in his sight. See it in Zaccheus, Luke 19. 8. No sooner
had he said, Behold Lord, the half of my Goods I give unto the Poor; but Christ
blesses both him and his House with Salvation, (Verse the 9 th.) And though a
Publican, openly owns him as a Son of Abraham.

See it in Cornelius, how prevalent were his Prayers, when backed with his
Alms; let the Angel speak, Acts 10. 4. Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up
for a memorial before God. His Charity (ye see) was no less piercing the
Heavens, than his Piety; and his Compassion as prevalent as his Devotion. And
the same efficacy we find in it, when joined with Fasting and penitential
Abstinence. As God testifies by the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 58. 6, 7. Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen? -- To deal thy Bread to the Hungry, to bring the
poor Outcast into thy House, when thou see the Naked, that thou cover them,
and not hide thy self from thy own flesh. As if he should say, All your bodily
austerities, abstinences or severities, in humbling and fasting; if severed and
divided from Charity, in giving, are but idle and impertinent, but if joined
with it, prove grateful, forcible, and effectual.

Again secondly, Gods wellpleasedness with such Sacrifices, it appears from the
rich and large Promises made, and Rewards assured unto such Performances.
Blessings of all sorts entailed upon them: First Temporal Blessings. Psalm. 41.
1. Blessed is he that considers the Poor. Blessed in his Person. The Lord
shall deliver him in trouble. And Verse the 2d, The Lord shall preserve him
alive. -- The Lord shall strengthen him on the Bed of Sickness, (Verse 3.)
Blessed in his Posterity, Psalm. 37. 25, 26. He is merciful, and lends, and
his Seed is blessed. Blessed in his Estate and Affairs. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. For this
very thing the Lord shall bless thee in all thy Works, in all that thou put
thy Hand unto. All thriving is not by sparing or pinching; and least of all by
sparing where there should be Giving. For (says the Scripture) there is that
scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholds more than is
meet, and yet tends to poverty, Prove. 11. 24. There Is a better way for some,
if they could think on it; or if they could be persuaded to trust Christ upon
his Word. Luke 6. 38. Date and dabitur vobis; Give and it shall be given you,
good measure pressed over. For the liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that
waters, shall be watered again, Prove. 11. 25.

Secondly, Blessings Spiritual. He shall have mercy when he stands most in need
of it. Mat. 5. 7. The merciful shall find Mercy. He shall have audience from
God, and acceptance with God. His Prayers shall be heard, His Alms shall be had
in remembrance, (as in the Case of Cornelius) Acts 10. 31.

Thirdly and lastly, Blessings and Rewards Eternal. Even Treasures ^n Heaven,
Luke 12. 33. A full ^ecompence at the Resurrection, Luke 14. 14. A receiving
into e^erlasting Habitations, Luke 16. 9. ^^ a word, a good foundation laid ^p
in store here, and Eternal Life said hold of for hereafter, 1 Timothy 6. 19.

Again thirdly, once more. Gods well-pleasedness with such Sacrifices, such
Offices of Love and Charity, it appears from the great stress that he lays upon
these Duies, so frequently commanding hem, so vehemently pressing and ommending
them. Even in the Old Testament ye find them urged o the height. Deuteronomy. 15. 7,
11. Thou shall not harden thy Heart, nor put thy Hand unto thy needy Broher. --
Thou shall open thy Hand wide unto thy Poor, unto thy Needy in the Land. In
that short abridgment of the Law, it is made one of the main Heads of Religion,
viz. To love mercy. Mica 6. 8. He has shown thee, O Man, what is good, and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God? Even as our Savior too, when he reckons up the
(...), the weightier matters of the Law, he reckons first Judgment, and then
Mercy, Mat. 23. 23.

As for the New Testament, I should but weary both you and my self too, should
I number up those many Passages that call upon us so frequently in Scripture,
To give Alms of such things as we have, Luke 11. 41. To distribut to the
necessities of others, Rom 12, 13. To do good unto all Men, especially to the
Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. To be rich in good Works, ready and willing to
communicate, 1 Timothy 6. 18. To labor, even with our own Hands, working the
thing that is good, that we may have to give unto him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28.

With infinite many more Places; all which I shall omit at present: Only one
thing I cannot but name, as very considerable to show the weight and moment of
this Duty. And that is, the great stress which God and Christ will lay upon it
at the day of Judgment. Consider we, that at the last and final reckoning, when
all Works and Actions shall be weighed and scanned in order to the final
Sentence, a special Eye and regard shall then be had, either to the discharge
or neglect of these charitable Offices. For who are they that shall stand as
Sheep on the right Hand, and shall hear that comfortable Voice, (Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning
of the World?) I say, who but the merciful, compassionate and charitable? Such
as have relieved Christ in his poor Members. Mat. 25. 35. Because I was a
hungry, and ye gave me meat, thirsty, and ye gave me drink, a Stranger, and ye
took me in, naked, and ye clothed me, sick and in prison, and ye visited me;
(therefore) Come ye Blessed.

On the other side, who are those that shall stand at the left Hand, as
wretched and forlorn Creatures, and hear that dreadful Sentence, (Depart ye
Cursed into everlasting Fire?) I say, who but the hard-hearted, and
uncharitable; Because (says Christ Verse 42.) when I was a hungry ye gave me no
meat; a thirsty and ye gave me no drink; a stranger and ye took me not in;
naked and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison and ye visited me not;
(therefore) Depart ye Cursed. Ye see, how that on the one hand Charity is the
main Instance in the Sentence of Benediction: and on the other hand,
uncharitableness and uncompassionateness unto the poor and afflicted, is the
special Instance in the Sentence of cursing and condemnation.

And therefore, upon the whole matter, if we may judge of the well-pleasedness
of any Duty, either by the great stress that God lays upon it, or by the
Blessings annexed to it, or by the power and prevalency it has with God; we
must needs say with the Text, and conclude, That with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased.

And indeed, how can it be otherwise, (supposing the merit of Christ, and the
Grace and Covenant of the Gospel) if we consider the Reasons, in the next
place, why he is delighted with our Charity and Christian Bounty? I shall name
but two.

First, Because it is so great and near a resemblance and imitation of himself.
Hereby we become like unto God, in that very attribute and property, wherein
himself most delights, and that is, Goodness and Mercy, Bounty and
Commiseration. For He gives unto all, Life and Breath, and all things, Acts
17. 25. He gives liberally unto all, and upbraideth none, James 1. 5. He is
good unto all, and his tender mercies are over all his Works, Psalm. 145. 9. Yea
he is kind even to the evil and unthankful, Luke 6. 36. Therefore be ye also
merciful, (says the very next words) as your Heavenly Father is merciful. Or,
(as it is in Mat. 5. 45) That ye may be the Children of your Heavenly Father,
(who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good; who sends his Rain
upon the Just, and upon the Unjust.) That ye may be the Chilaren? i. e. the
true and genuine Resemblers of God in Heaven. (...) for (...) (says
Chrysostom.) The Children of God? that is, Like unto God. Nothing is so
God-like, nothing renders us more conformable to the Nature and Image of God,
as to do good, and to show mercy.

And then secondly, God must needs be well pleased with such Sacrifices,
because they so apparently tend to his Honor and Glory. For, hereby Religion
is credited, Christianity is graced, God and his Gospel are honored in the
Eyes of the World. Hereby our light so shines before Men, so that seeing our
good Works, our Father is glorified who is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. It Is that
which adorns the Doctrine of our Savior, when they that believe in God are
careful to maintain good Works, Tit. 2. 10. 3. 8.

The Papists are ready to charge us, that we are all for Faith and Believing;
and nothing for good Works, (for Charity or Giving.) But this it is a palpable
slander; for, as Dr. Willet, in his Syuopsis P. 1220,
Papismi, has made it appear, there had been as many, if not more, Monuments of
Piety and Charity erected by us, since the Reformation, as ever were before it,
(for the compass of so small a time) in the days of Popery. Let us go on to
wipe off this slander, and to stop the Mouth of this calumny, that it may blush
for shame. Let them see the goodness of our Religion, by the fair Fruits of our
compassion. Remember the Piety of our Ancestors that have been before us; yea
consider the Monuments they have left of both kinds, even in those former and
darker times. And since we in this Age profess and pretend (and that justly) to
a greater and purer Light; it highly concerns us, not to come short either of
their Pious or Charitable Devotion. Other wise their lesser knowledge will
certainly rise up in judgment against our greater. And we shall have nothing to
say, but that of Beza in Epistolis.
Beza, That we indeed have Plus Scientiae, but they Plus Conscientiae; we more
Science, more Knowledge, they more Conscience and Charity.

And surely there can be nothing more absurd or incongruous, than to see a
glorious profession, but no way attended or answered by a Pious or Charitable
Conversation. Even as on the other side there is not a more lovely sight, than
to see Religion looking with a right Pious Eye, and scattering its Dole with a
right Charitable and Communicating Hand. For this is that the Apostle calls,
Faith working by Love, Gal. 5. 6. This is that pure and undefiled Religion
before God, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep
our selves unspotted from the World, James 1. ult. This is that Wisdom from
above, (pure and peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated) full of mercy
and good Fruits, James 3. 17.

What remains then, but that we diligently consider both the Matter and Motives
to this Duty, to this so necessary, so lovely a piece of our Religion; and
carefully apply our selves unto the practice of it.

In the words of the Text then; To do good, and to communicate, forget not.
Forget it not in your Lives, forget it not at your Deaths; better late than
never; but best of all to do it in the time of Life and Health. Many there are
that forget it wholly, first and last. Too many forget it in a manner all their
lives long, and put it off to a dying hour: They will part with nothing for
Pious or Charitable uses, till they can hold it no longer. To such I may well
say, as St. Lucy is reported to have said to the Mother, Non est magnum, dare
Deo quod ferri non potest; Vivens ergo da Christo quod possides. It Is no great
thing to give what we cannot carry away. The best Charity is to give while thou
lirest, while thou have it in thy own dispose. Let thine own Eyes and Hands (as
much as may be) be the Executors and Administrators of thy own Bounty. It Is
possible a sudden or stupifying Disease may seize on thee, and so prevent thy
Pious and Charitable Intentions. It Is possible what is well and truly given,
may be fraudulently defeated by the cunning of those that come after: (As it
had like to have been in that noble and famous Donation of Charter House.) It Is
good therefore, it is prudence (as well as Piety) to make it the Work of thy
Life; and not to leave it, as the Business of thy Death or last Will, wholly to
the Survivors.

In a word, Remember, and forget not, that the doing of good ith what we have,
it is the proper Work and Business of Life and Health. This is the time of
doing; now or never. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Every one shall receive according to the
things done in the Body: That Is the time of doing, when and while we are in the
Body. It Is Heb. 12. 28. Let us have Grace.
the time of getting Grace, and it is the time of using it, to Gods Honor, and
the good of others. It Is the reason of laying out our Talents, our Abilities
(be they more or less) to the profit and advantage of our Lord and Master, and
to the furtherance of our good Account. And therefore, as it is Galat. 6. 10.
As we (...)
have time or opportunity, let us do good unto all. As we have time, ((...) for
(...), as often as we have opportunity) or, while we have time, ((...) for
(...), Quarndiu tempus babemus: Quamdiu manet vita, says Grotius.) As long as
we have time and space of doing, let us do good. Thereby intimating, we shall
not have it always. This (...), it is but (...), this season of doing, it is but
for a season, Let every one therefore do the Works of time in time; and be not
wanting to the opportunities of doing good, according to thy measure and
ability. Breve est vitae curriculum: Life is short; and being once past and
gone, it is then irrecoverable, and must at length be accountable. John 9. 4.
The night comes when no Man can work. It will be too late perhaps to think of
doing, when the time of doing is over. And therefore, as the wise Man speaks,
Ecclesiastes 9. 10. Whatsoever thy Hand (or thy Heart) finds to do, do it now
with thy might, for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in
the Grave, whither thou art going. And, (having begun) let us not be weary of
well-doing, for we shall reap in due time, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9.

The God of Peace -- make Hebr. 13. 20, 21.
you perfect in every good Work working in you what is well-pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
The END.

