THE Countrey-man's APOTHECARY. OR, A Rule by which Countrymen may safely
walk in taking PHYSIC. Not unusefull for Cities.

A TREATISE, Showing what Herb, Plant, Root, Seed, or Mineral, may be used in
Physic in the room of that which is wanting.

Published for the good of the KINGDOM.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Andrews, in Smithfield, near St Bartholomews gate.
1649.

To the Reader.
Friend,
IF thou would be found so to thy self, buy this handful of Physic, the
benefit will repay its price treble; for it is thy good it ayms at; herein
being showed what Physical Simple may be used instead of another, and that
without danger to the sick. In Country Towns very often that Simple which is
prescribed by the Doctor or Physician is not to be had: this short Book tells
what other may be administered instead thereof, and will prove as effectual in
the operation. It has been approved of by Latin Authors, and is now
translated, to be made use of among Englishmen; experience will tell thee more
of its worth. Farewell.

PEP TON ANTIALLOENON. OR, A Treatise of Succedanea's, One Ingredient used for
another in the administering of Physic.
The learned work of William Rondeletius sometimes Regius Professor
Monspeliensis.
Translated into English for public good.
AFter I had a long time considered and enquired concerning those Ingredients
which Physicians use in administering Physic, instead of such as are
prescribed, but are not to be got (commonly termed Succedanea;) at length I
lighted upon the Treatise of that most learned man, and famous Practitioner
William Rondeletius concerning the same; which I thought fit to publish in
English, for the general good of my native Country, as a Piece very
profitable and useful; and have for the easier finding them out digested the
Simples into an Alphabeticall order, that so the benefit may be the greater.

Physicians are often forced to use one Simple in the place of another; for
every soil does not bring forth all Simples, nor can they everywhere meet with
most proper Ingredients. In the Country they are forced to use such Simples as
are at hand; and in as much as upon sudden occasions proper Ingredients are not
at hand, but the present must be used, therefore they must necessarily make
choice of such Simples as may with most safety be administered instead of those
which are most proper, but cannot at present be had; as we read Gallen did, and
that with good success, in the like case; For wanting Euphorbium to draw forth
stings out of the fresh, he did instead thereof take from the Hives Propolis,
that which Bees make at the mouth of their Hives to keep out the cold.

These Succedanea are now more necessary then ever they were; both because at
this day we want many of those simples which ancient Physicians did prescribe,
and made use of, being they were supplied with a plentiful and fertile
increase thereof in their own Countries, Eastern and Foreign; and also for
that counterfeit, and (by the crafty invention of Jews and Merchants)
adulterate Medicines are transported, which if we reject, we must of necessity
substitute others in the place thereof; besides many ancient simple
Medicaments, formerly well known, and very common, are at this day exolete, and
grown out of knowledge. Very many useful compositions were devised and found
out by the Arabians, and most sovereign remedies of great use among them, the
Simples whereof (by reason of the barbarousnesse of their terms) are altogether
unknown unto us. For we are ignorant what they mean by those uncouth strange
names, or else want the Simples themselves.

But in the choice and use of these Succedanea, that most pernicious custom
among Physicians is deservedly to be rejected, which has now for many years
been much in use, though to the great pre^^^^^e and wrong of Patients; in
which, in compounding Medicines, they confusedly mingle all such Drugs which
are commended or prescribed useful in such a disease to be applied to the part
affected, or but sovereign for some symptom; so that having made use of all of
the same quality, they have not left unprescribed one Herb or Drug which may
be used instead of another; whereas, if they would content themselves with one,
two, or three Herbs, the Apothecary would never be destitute of Succedanea; But
because quantity will be necessary, for one handful add two; for two, three
or four, etc. Hence will ensue a double benefit; first, the more certain
working of the Physic, and a more easy and speedy preparing thereof; and
secondly, the greatest grace of his Art, the Physician will appear to abound
with variety of Drugs and Succedanea, when in his Recipies he can double, vary,
and change his Drugs, and to understand more then the ordinary sort of
Mountebanks and Empericks. As for example, if in his decoction he has
prescribed Borrage, but in defect thereof substitutes wild Buglosse or contra;
again if garden Endive be wanting, to prescribe the Juice or Syrope thereof; if
Succory be not to be had, to prescribe Lions tongue or Broad-lease, for ground
Pine, Germander, or contrary; but what shall the Apothecary do, if he
prescribe all Drugs in one and the same Recipe? certainly it will prove no
other then that Poetical Chaos, a rude and indigested lump.

Let them consider and continually call to mind that of Villanovanus; it is
deceit, cousenage to use compounds where simples may be easily had.

Let them leave off that bad custom, and avoid it as a dangerous rock; let
them likewise beware of naughty, covetous, dishonest, unlearned, and unskilful
Apothecaries, who greedy of wealth and profit, commend an hodge-podge of even
half rotten and putrified Drugs. Some do this that they may boast their store,
or else out of ignorance or pride; and if any learned Physicians do it, it is
that they may not seem to be less experienced in the knowledge of Drugs, then
in the virtue and use thereof.

Lastly, since there are some wholesome and fit compositions, by experience and
reason received and approved, invented by ancient Physicians, we ought to
search out, approve, and provide some Succedanea, that so sovereign and
excellent medicines may be prepared, which in that respect are no ways to be
refused and rejected, because with such good success some Succedanea, not
inferior to the simples prescribed, may with equal benefit accomplish and
effect all the promises of genuine or natural Physic.

Let your Succedanea be as near as may be, of the same genus and species,
nature and kind.

Herb For Herb Root For Root Flower For Flower Seed For Seed Juice For Juice
Gum For Gum Rozen For Rozen Mussilage For Mussillage Metal For Metal
Stone For Stone Earth For Earth Pitch For Pitch Grease For Grease Marrow For
Marrow Bird For Bird Serpent For Serpent One part of a living creature For
Another.
Composition for Composition:
Powder For Powder Trochus For Trochus Opiate For Opiate Electuary For
Electuary Pills For Pills Lohoch For Lohoch Confection For Confection Conserve
For Conserve Plaster For Plaster Oil For Oil, simple or compound. Ointment
For Ointment Salve For Salve
The universal or common Theoreme or speculation. The Drugs that are to be
used one instead of another, whether in inward or outward causes must agree in
virtues and operations both secret and manifest,
and in consistence, and be alike in taste smell age time and place of growth,
nature, and temperament of quality.



Some Drugs may by change be used in outward remedies which are not to be used
in inward applyings, as the Juice of Carline Thistle may be used for the Juice
of Lettice outwardly, but must not be taken for it inwardly, because it is
poison.

Sometime not the whole simple, but some parts must be substituted, or used
instead of another as in a Muccago Mussilage of the seed of the Herb Fleabane
for a Muccago Mussilage of the seed of Quinces: all the seed of the Herb is not
to be used, because the inward part thereof differs in temperament from a
Mussilage, and is thought to be venomous; nor may the Quince Apple be used for
the seed of the Quince, because they differ in operation and consistence.

Some recipeis or prescriptions in some remedies may be used instead of one
another, as a conserve for the syrrop of the same simple whether of fruit,
flower or root: as the conserve of Maidenhaire may be used for the syrrop of
the same in opiates -- but in the prescribing of the syrrop it cannot be so,
because the form or rule of the Physic will not permit it: For liquid druggs
must be used instead of liquid, therefore if the syrrop be prescribed and not
at hand, the destillation or decoction of the Herb is to be used instead
thereof.

In some Candids or preserves, we may use the syrrop of the conserve, because
they are conserved in the syrrop, as the syrrop of the conserve of Lemons, for
the syrrop of Lemon pill; the syrrop of the Conserve of the root of Buglosse,
for the syrrop of Buglosse.

Emplaisters and ointments may be mutually used one for another; in case the
part affected may be found to admit thereof: as the plaster of filii
Zachariae, for the resumptive ointment, and contra: but in the pains of the
breast or stomach unless the stiffness thereof be dissolved, or otherwise
mollified, it is not to be used, because plasters when they are laid on,
hinder the ribs from dilating, enlarging themselves, and the freeness of
breathing. A plaster of Cerusse or white lead, for unguentum album, unless
the inflammation do forbid it, which will not admit of neither hard nor stiff
remedies.

Diverse other medicines may be used instead one of the other; provided that
their virtue and operation be the same.
PIlls may be used instead of confections, and contra. as Hiera simply or aloes
for the pills made of it, and the Herb Benedicta or holywort, and contra for
Pills to purge Phlegm, electuary diacarthame purgative with Lemon: for Pills
to purge choler or melancholy, electuary of the juice of Roses and contra; so
that the quantity of every one be observed. The doses of the Hiera and such
like Electuaries are to be augmented by reason of the quantity of honey, which
does allay the strength of the Physic.

A Syrrop, for Eclegma or a lohoch, if it be taken by dissolving in the mouth:
as the syrrop of Jujuba for Lohoch sound and approved, the syrrop of Poppeyes
for Diacodion.

A powder for a Trochisous and contra. as the species of Diarrhodon for the
Trochus of Diarrhodon, a Trochus of Squills, for a Lohoch of the same, the
quantity being either auginented or diminished according to the nature and
quality of the disease and the scope of Physic

In simples sometimes the parts are not strictly observed, as Turbith the root
for Agarick in a Trochus, and contra. Thus a simple may be put for a
composition or contra, as Colocyn this wild gourds, or Colloquintida in a less
quantity, for Agarick; and a double or treble dose of wild Saffron for Agarick,
and contra. And yet a simple Medicine for this use to be put in the place of
another is hard to be found, which can truly, everyway and in every part agree
as Avicennas testifies, because two simple medicines in case of want of others
of like virtue and efficacy can scarce safely be applied instead thereof. Which
since it proves so difficult, he did apply sometime two, sometime three of
equal weight and measure, sometime in a doubled and trebled medicine, the fifth
or eight part of another Medicine being added; because (says he) there are
very few medicaments which are wholely like others in temperament and
operation, or the same in consistence in grossness or thinness of the parts,
and in other the hidden properties.

The use of druggs or medicaments in compositions is various and changeable in
respect, either Of The heat the coldness the moistness the dryness. In the
beginning of the first, or in the middle and first degree, and so of the rest.
Or Of the parts the clamminesse, the taste, the smell, the color. the
grossness. or the thinness.


And therefore that which is like another in temperament, ofttimes differs from
it in the grossness or thinness of the parts, or some other faculty and
quality; as some think they may use Galanga or sweet cane for Folesfoot, or
wild Spikenard, and yet they do not agree in every operation; for galanga can
only provoke urine, and bring down women's courses, and therefore to be
supplied for Spikenard in prescriptions to provoke them: it has no virtue to
cause vomitting as Spikenard has. In like manner the Hyacinth may be used
instead of Anchusa or Buglosse Orchanet: but if there be need of Anchusa for
the Color, as in ointments, the Hyacinth is not proper: but instead thereof,
dyers lacca or Red gum, Brasile, red Santalum, Painters Lacca or red gum, or
scarlet Dye. Assa dulcis or that sweet gum is not to be used for Assa foetida
because of the smell, as Avicennas did in the grief of the womb, so by a
sweet smell to have forced it upward, but it draws toward sweet, flies from
stinking sents or smells.

Some druggs are used for taste; which yet are not convenient in every
particular, as Honey, and Manna may be used for Sugar in some sorts of remedies
as in laxative medicines, but in no wise in binding receipts; for Manna is more
loosening then either Sugar or Honey. Muccus a Mussilage, is useful in a
bloody Flux, and is used for a Lentor. Fenegreek, which makes a Mussilage but
hot, and therefore not to be used in spitting of blood, as in external
remedies, as in the inflammation of the upper skin of the eyes, in which the
white of an egg is preferred in the beginning and increase of the grief, but
in the stay and declining thereof a Mussilage fenegreeke is commended.

Those druggs which may be made use of instead of others, are not yet to be
added in every sort of remedies; as Myrrh may be used for Bdellium in Pills
and ointments, but in Pills made of Bdellium it must in no ways be added, for
Myrrh causes a greater Flux of blood and of the Hemerods, as also of women's
courses. Therefore in those druggs that are substituted this rule is to be
observed, that the supposititious drugg, that is used in the Room of the
adulterate genuine drugg, can effect the same which the genuine should, whether
it be to heat, to cool, to make moist, to dry, to bind, to loose, or to
concoct. For Wormwood (simply taken) Sea Wormwood, or Southernewood may be
used; For Sea Wormwood, or Wormwood of Mount Taurus, Roman may be used; For
Roman, the Wormwood which grows in the place where thou dwell.

This may be done in the choice of all Herbs, they may be of any Country, yet
let your choice be of such an one as is an Herb of the nearest bordering
Country, or at least of the same temperature, of which sort is Craux vulgarly
Gallo a Province of Creet, where grows the best and greatest store of our
narrow leaf Thyme and Epithymon or that which grows often upon it. In the
second place Herbs of moist Countries, if it be a scortching Summer, may be
used for Herbs of an hot Country, which Galen informs us he did in preparing
a Theriace or remedy against Poison, using the rocke-parsley of another
Country for Macedonian rock parsley; and yet the temperature of the Country
ought to be observed, for the Country does very much add to, or diminish from
the virtue and goodness of the medicament; for the Sclavonian Flower deluce we
may use the Venetian, and for the African the Florentine.

I come now to set down the Succedanea, and first of Roots.
FOr Acorum or Galanga, take Calamus aromaticus or sweet cane in the shops.

For the same, in medicines to provoke and bring down urine and women's
courses, take the Roots of Asarum folesfoot, or wild Spiknard.

For Althaea Garden or wild Take the Roots of Mallows.

For Apium or Parsley. Rock or Macedonian.

For Aristolochy or long Birthwort; take the round; and contrary, and any one
sort for all.

For Asarus, Folesfoot or wild Spicknard, when prescribed in a Purge or Vomit,
take Hellebore, the seed of Genista Broom, and Raphanus or Raddish seed.

For Asparagus, Garden Sporrage: take Corruda or wild Sporrage, but in a less
quantity, because it is sharper and stronger.

For Calamus odoratus, sweet Gum of Libanus: take Schaenanthum, sweet Rush,
Camels hair, Acorus, or sweet Flags; if for smell, yel. Sanders.

For The rind of the root of the Caper tree: take the rind of the root of
Tamarisk, Wallwort or Dwarf Elderne, Laurel, Poplar and Elder trees.

For Costum, the root of an Indian herb: take bastard Pelitory.

For Galanga, the herb Galingall: take round Cyperus, a kind of Rush: and
c^ntra.

For Gentian or Felwort: take half the quantity of Asarus Folesfoot, and the
root of Caper tree.

For Lapathum Sorrel or kind of Dock: take the root of Oxalis or sour dock.

For Nardus, Spicknard: take any sort of it.

For Rhabarbarum, Rubarbe for purging: take juice of Roses.

For Rha Barbary Rubarbe to bind: take the root of Water dock; the greater
Galingall if there be need of hear, and of Bistorta the herb if there be want
of cooling.

For Rha ponticum: take the root of great Centory* a pill of Rubarbe first.

For Pontick Rubarbe infused and strained: and roasted Rubar be is approved by
many for empyreuma or a collection of corrupt matter in a man's body.

For Ruscum, Butchers broom: take the root of garden Sporage, and contra.

For Secacul, Sampire: take the root of a Seaparsnip, Pastinaca.

For Serpentaria Dragon, take Sarus Dracunculus, Dragonwort.

For Turbith, a root to purge phlegm take the root of Thapsia, Turbith Mesuae,
Agarick made into a Trochus, and Colochynthis or wild gourd in a less
quantity or dosis.

For Zingiber, take Ginger, Costum, Helenium, Helecompane, Pyrethrum, bastard
Pelitory.

For Zingiber, take Mechin, Woolfbane.

Succedanea of Herbs
Let Succedanea as near as can be alike in every part in virtue, in kind and in
sort. Abrotoni Southernwood, Absinthii Wormwood, Aconiti Woolfebane, Adianthi
Venus hair, Allii Garlic, Anagallidis Pimpernell, Anchusae Orchanet, Anemones
Redweed or wild Poppey, Anthemidis Camomile, Apii Parsley, Aristolochiae
Birthwort, Asparagi Sporage, Betae Beete Bituminis Brimstone, Bliti Spinach,
Brassicae Colewort, Caepae Onyons Calaminthae Calaminth, Cedri Cedar,
Chelidonii Celandine, Chondrillae Succory, Conizae Fleabane, Costi an Indian
herb. Cyelaminis an Herb, Dauci Carrot, Equiseti the herb, Horsetaile.
Hederae Ivy, except ground Ivy, Heliotropii Turnsol, Hieracii Hawke weed,
Intybi an Herb. Juniperi Juniper, Leucoii Gelliflower Lychnidis an Herb,
Malvae Mallows, Marrubii Horehound, Mercurialis Mercury the herb, Myrthi
Myrtle, Nardi Spiknard, Nympheae Water Lilly, Orcheos Ragwort Origani Organy,
Panacis an herb, Pastinacae Parship, Picis Pitch, Piperis Pepper, Plantaginis
Plantaine, Polygoni Polygony, male and female, Porri Leeke, Ranunculi Frogwort,
Resinae Rosin, Rhamni Bramble or Christs-Thorne, Rosmarini Rosemary, Rubi Great
Bramble, Rumicis Sour docke, Rutae Rue, Sabinae Savin, Seselis an Herb,
Sideritidis Wall Sage, Symphyti Wallwort, Tithymalorum Sea Lettice, Wolfs
milk, Milk Thistle,
Tribuli Thistle, Valerianae Setwall, Veratri Helebore, Verbasci Longwort,
Vrticae Nettle,
Of all the sorts of them.

And lastly, all herbs of the same species or sort may be used for another,
unless something discovered forbid, as in Perwinkle of which Dioscor. writes
that one sort gripes or frets, another loosens the belly, another gathers and
removes choler and phlegm, but the chief sort stays women's courses, and the
Dysentery or bloody flux. So the wild Cucumber and Garden melons, and
Colocynthis differ in their operation; but this is wont to be found in very few
herbs.

Also heed is to be taken to the parts; for some differ in their qualities, as
the root Medium decocted stays women's courses, being taken for certain days:
but the seed thereof taken in Wine brings them down. The seed of Juniper may be
taken inward, but the shavings are discovered to be deadly to kill. The Juice
of the herb Coriander is thought to be mortal, and yet the seed medicinal.
Therefore it is better for Physicians to use universals at no time, but rather
particulars; for, for the most part there is the greatest difference betwixt
those which would be thought the nearest.

Succedanea of Herbs and Leaves
Therefore for Take Adianth Venus hair, Salvian, Politriton Maiden hair, or
Black Venus hair. Leaves of Alsine, Chickweed, The leaves of Helxine Pellitory
of the wall, and contr. Amylon the flower of Wheat, The flour of Siligo, or
Rye, dry. Apium mon. Mountain Parsley. Garden Parsley dry and in a greater
dose. Beta al. white Beet Black Beet. Betony, Verveine. Herbs Bubonium
Inguinaria or Star-wort, The Herb Antirrhinon, and contra. Buglosse or
broad-leafed Burrage, Narrow-leafed Buglosse. Caepe Onyon, Portulacam
Purslaine. The Herb Chamaelea, The herb Thymelaea, Chamepytis, Ground pine or
Laurel. Chamaepyti or Ground Pine, Chamaedrys, Germander, or the leaves of
Eupatoria, Agrimony. Clchoria syl-Woodsuccory, Lions tooth. Coniza Fleabane,
the first sort, The second. The second, The third dry, and in a greater
quantity. The leaves of Coriander. The leaves of Garden Petroseline outwardly
only. Dauci the leaves of Carrot, The leaves of either wild or garden Parsnip
The first sort of Dittany. The second, third, and so of the rest. The herb
Doricneon, Mandrake and contra. Filix femi. seminine Fearne, Masculine.
Fumetory, Seenie. Halyca Barley, An whole Ptisan of Avena Oats. The leaves of
Hyppolapathon, Patience: Monks Rubarb, The leaves of Lapathon a kind of dock.
Hyppomarathon wild Fennel, Coriander or Petroseline. Leaves of Hypec^i Rue,
The leaves of Poppey. Hypericon St. John's wort, Androsemon Tusane, The herb
Ascyron or Schoenanthon. Camels Hair. Hysope, Organie or sweet Marjorum.
Indian Malabathron, the leaf, The leaves of Citron, Lemon tree, Cinnamon tree,
or common Mala bathron. The leaves of Labrusca or wild vine The leaves of
garden Vine, less pruned. Lettice, Garden Endive, and cont. Lathris Spurge,
the leaves, The leaves of Tithymaris or Sea Lettice. Laurel leaves, Lemon
leaves. The herb Lepi- The herb Drabe Iberis or wild cresses or water
cresses. Sterile Libanotis. The leaves of crown Frankincense. Mallows Arbwes.
Althaea or Mallows of another kind. Wood Mallows. Garden Mallows. Melissa
Mint. Marrubium Horebound and contra. or the Rine of the Lemon Tree. Mentha
Mint. Balsamita Coarstmary. The Leaves of Myrthon Mockchervill. The Leaves of
wood-Peare-Sumach, Mastick Wild Olive, Service or Quince Trees. The leaves of
the same. The berries of it and green unripe wallnuts. The white Mirth. Nardum
Monta. The black and contra. Mountain spikenard. Italic, or French Spikenard.
The Nymphaea Alba, white water Lilly. The yellow and contra. The leaves of the
wild Olive. The leaves of the Olive Tree. The leaves of the Olive or Mastick.
The leaves of the Walnut, Cypress tree Pine or wild Pine. Oxyacantha vera,
right white thorn. Pyrastrum the wild Pear tree. The leaves of white Poppy.
The leaves of nightshade, black Poppy, and of white Henbane. The leaves of
Peplus round headed spurge. The leaves of Sea Lettice or spurge. The leaves of
Philyrea mock Privet. Olive Tree Leaves and contra. Hearts Tongue Phyllitis.
Smooth spleenewort, Miltwaste or Ceterach and contra. The leaves of the Pitch
Tree. The Leaves of the Pine Tree. The leaves of Pithyusa Pine spurge. The
Leaves of Tithymali Spurge or Milkwort. Polygonum the leaves of Masculst
not-grasse. The Leaves of the Feminine of the same. Pulegion regal great Penny
royal. French or Hearts Penny royal. Portulaca Purslaine. Vmbelicum Veneris
Kidneywort, Wall Peniwort. Ruta sylv. wild Rue. Dried Garden Rue in a greater
quantity and contra. The leaves of Savin. The leaves of Cypres juniper and
Cassia. The leaves Sambuci Elder. The leaves of Ebuli, and contra. The leaves
of female Sanguinalis Bloodwort. The leaves of Masculine, and contra. The
greater sempervivum Howslick. The small Kidneywort, or small Penywort. Seride
Endive. Chondrillam Gum Succory. The leaves of Seris Endive. The leaves of
Lettice. Smyrnium Lovage Parsley or rock Parsley. Garden nightshade.
Halicacabum, Winter cherries. Soncho common Sowthistle. Prickly Sowthistle. The
leaves of the service Tree. The leaves of the medlar Tree and contra. Indian
spicknard. Syriack or Valerian. Italian spikenard. The Garden sort of it.
Staebe Diosc Knapweed Scabeous, Thorny burnet. Shepeards purse, dasies all
sorts and Cudwort. The leaves of Rock Wallwort or Comfrey. The leaves of
another sort or self heal. Orpine Telephum. Purslaine. The leaves of
Terebinthi the Turpine Tree The leaves of the Mastick Tree. The sorts of
Thlaspi Treacle Mustard. Nasturtia Cresses. Thymbra Savory. Time and mother
Time. Time. Savory, Organy. The leaves of one sort of Spurg, or Milkwort. The
leaves of another sort in purging. Goats Marjorum. Organy and Contra. Land
caltrops, in cooling receipts. Water caltrops, not in moistning medicines. The
leaves of one sort Verbasci of Mullein. The leaves of another sort. White
Briony. Black and contra The leaves and seeds Diticis of the Chast-tree. The
leaves and seed of Rue.

Succedanea of Seeds.
For Take The seed of Asarabacca. The seed of Furse or Thorn broom. The Seed
of Bastard Saffron. Nettle Seed or Agarick not made into a Trochus. Mandrakes
seed. Hemlock seed. The seeds of the Myrthi Myrtle. Of the Barbery Tree and
contra. Turnop seed. Rape seed.

Succedanea of Juices.
For Take For Juice of Wormwood. Of Southernewood well prepared, or of the
lesser centory, or of either sort of Cosemary, or Maudline. or The Juice of
Wormwood. The juice of Pontick, or Roman wormwood in outward remedies: Levant
Wormwood if washed, may gently be given inwardly. The Juice of Acacia binding
beanetree. Of the Black Thorn, Slowbush, or selfe-heale. Fountain water.
River water. The juice of the Pomecitron. Of Lemon. Of Sowbread. Of Flower
deluce. The Juice of Licoris. Of the same decocted and infused; or of Raisons
of the Sun, or Cute. The juice of Boxthorne. Of Felwort in ulcers. The Juice
of the same. The Lees of Oil. Grape Varjuice. Of Sumack and cont. Opium the
juice of the heads of Poppies. Meconium or the juice of the Leaves, or the
Juice of wild or garden Lettice in a greater quantity. Opobalsamum, the juice
of the Bassame tree. Stacte or the juice of Storax not adulterated, or of
Myrrh.

In infusion for digestion, take the Oil of Italian Spike or Spiknard.

For Take The juice of Spurge Olive. Of Dwarf Bay.

Succedanea of Liquors and Gummes.
For Take Turpentine of the Firr tree. Of the Pine. Aspalth the dry pitch of
India, The Oil of Peter and contra. Cedar Rosin, The oil of the bows of
Juniper, or the gum of Juniper. Cypress Rosin, Larch tree Rosin. Gum Lake,
Myrrh. Manna of the Frankincense tree, The bark to which some of the
Frankincense sticks. Mastick, Turpintine of Fir tree hardened or dried. Mumme,
Pisaphalthum or Bituminous, hard Pitch. Myrrh, Bdellium or the juice of
Alisanders and Parsley. For the Gum of the Olive tree, Of gum Elemni.
Opobalsanum, the juice of the Balsame tree, Stacte or liquid Balm prepared by
nature or art. The liquor of the Turpine tree.

Not the juice of Carpasus; not Oil of Laurel, not the liquor of Myrthi nor
the seed of Setwall, as some have prescribed.

For Take Carpobalsamum, the berries or fruit of the Balsame tree. The seed of
the Mastick tree or Turpine tree, of which there are diverse sorts. Cubebs in a
smaller dose or two parts of the seed of the Turpine tree and of Cubebs.
Opopanax the Gum of Frankincense. The Gum of Amomum, or Galbanum, or Bdelliu^
in outward remedies. Stone pitch, Pine Rosin boyld. Soft pitch, Stone pitch
dissolved in oil, or softened in Oil of Juniper. Pissaphaltum, Bituminous
pitch, Pitch and Brimstone. Storax, Benjamin. Turpentine, Mastick.
Xylobalsamum, the wood of the Balsame tree, Shoots or sprouts of the Mastick
tree.

Succedanea of Minerals.
For Antimony take burnt Lead and contra, or burnt Tin. For Cadmia ore of
Brass, take the stone out of which it is extracted. For the Flower of Brass,
take the green rust. For white Lead, take burnt Lead, or Lead ore For Lead,
take Tin. For the soil or ore of Brass or Pompholix, take Spodium the soot
of the trying of Brass. For Sandarack, red Arsenick, take Arsenick Orpine. For
Spodium the soot of the trying of Brass, take Antispodium, Ashes made of the
Myrtle, Mastick, and Oil of the wild Olive, Quince trees and Hearts horn.

The end.

