THE RESOLVTION OF THE HOLLANDERS CONCERNING Their Fishermen in the Northern
Seas; with the peoples arming themselves; their threatening Declaration against
their Magistrates; and Vantrumps returning into the Downs with above a hundred
sail, and his design against the English.

ALSO A Fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch, with the particulars
thereof, and the number of ships sunk and taken on both sides. With a full and
ample Relation of the mischief done by the great fire at Amsterdam.

LIKEWISE, The Proceedings of the King and Court of France, and the Parliament
of Paris: As also the hanging of diverse of the Parliaments soldiers in
Scotland.

LONDON: Printed by E. C. 1652.

THE RESOLUTION Of the HOLLANDERS Concerning Their Fishermen in the Northern
Seas; and the threatening Declaration of the people against their Magistrates.
Also the particulars of a Fight at SEA.
SIR,
IN my last I acquainted you that a great fire had happened in this Town; but
could not then give you the certain Relation of the harm there done: I shall
therefore endeavor to give you the more ample satisfaction now: the manner
thus. On the seventh instant about two a Clock in the morning (casually by
accident) the Fire took in the Townhouse, burning all the morning, and indeed
most part of the day with great violence, so that notwithstanding all the
diligent and industrious care used by the Magistrate for the allaying and
quenching the furious flame, it prevailed so far, that the whole Fabric of
that stately House was burned down to the ground: Yet was it a wonder that it
did no more mischief then it did. But the mercy and care of God for the
fatherless did appear, in that all the Deeds for Orphans were saved, as also
the Records, and most (if not all) of the Writings of the Bank, with many other
Papers belonging to, and concerning particular persons. There were some Jews,
who were more diligent about the Fire then was needful, for their diligence was
only a color to their evil intent, viz. To carry away what they could get,
some of them laying hold upon several bags of Ducats of a great value, they
were suspected and followed, and being seized, some of the Gold was found about
them: they stand committed to Goal, and will speedily be brought to a trial,
where they shall (no doubt) receive the reward due to so heinous a Crime, and
be made exemplary to all such as come (in such cases) rather to steal and carry
away, then to help or comfort such as are afflicted. The Magistrates caused the
City gates to be shut all that day, and drew the Chains placing Guards about
the City in all such places where conveniently they might. Many reports have
been raised touching the occasion of this Fire; diverse are suspected to be the
Authors thereof, but no certainty appears of any, but it is conjectured to be
done of mere purpose.

There is a vast disparity both in the minds and faces of men here; some
wishing peace and amity with England, but that party is inconsiderable; others
seek for nothing more then how to vent their rage against the English, yet even
these are not at one amongst themselves, but are divided, some aspersing the
States for not proceeding with more vigor in their cause, others again
endeavoring to excuse them; but all in general are against the English,
swearing, that their former Name and Reputation as Masters and Lords of the Sea
must and shall have an end, and that they must not think always to keep
possession of that which ought to be free and common to all.

Here is lately come News, That the English Admiral has been among our Busses
in the North, and that he has seized upon great numbers of them (though not
without strong opposition, there having been a sharp dispute for about 3 hours,
between the English party and the Durch Men of war that were for their Guard)
some say 130 Busses, some say more, besides 4 Men of War, and one sunk; but
also that the English have lost 2 Men of War, very gallant Frigates. I cannot
aver this for truth, but it passes currantly here; insomuch that the Bores
fearing to be half starved for want of their Fishing, arm themselves apace, and
grow very desperate, Declaring, That if their Lords do not provide some speedy
remedy in this Case, they will pull them out of their houses headlong, and tear
them peece-meal. So that they dare hardly show themselves.

Great is the talk here of Vantrumps return into the Downs again with above 100
sail of lusty stout ships (having sent 70 more toward the North parts to
encounter with Genesis Blake, and free their Fishermen from him. Mean time he with
his Fleet will attend the motion of the English in the Downs, and fall upon,
sink, burn and destroy them as he can light on them; as also to keep others
from coming to join with them. This all at present from

Amsterdam, July 19. st:n: 1652. Your most humble servant, A. R.

A Letter from France.
SIR,
WE hear from Piccardy that the Count de Fuensardagn who is General of the
Spanish army, after many days march is come to Noyen, a Town distant about 22
leagues from hence, which put them all to a great fear, thinking they intended
to have besieged it, but it proved otherwise, for they turned aside to a place
called Chauni, where having made their approaches, the Town was compelled to
yield at mercy, there was many persons of quality found therein, as the Duke
Delbeuf, the chief Marshal Manicamp, and many others; it is thought that since
the said General is sat down with his army before Noyon, which he intends to
take in with Roy and Mendidier. The 17 instant, the King and all the Court
departed from St. Dennis, and went to Penthoise, which is a Town in the road
between this City and Roan; it does not hold true concerning the departing of
the Cardinal, he having only played least in sight for a while the better to
beguile the Princes and this City, before the Commissioners had audience, where
after many words passed, he desired them to come to Penthoise, which having
denied, the King moved that they would send to the Parliament, that they may
send a greater number of Commissioners, and also the Princes, that they might
come to a conference, and seek the means to compose all differences; the
Commissioners thus remaining at St. Dennis, as they were desired, sent an
express to acquaint the Parliament of what had passed, who thereupon ordered
that they should return without delay; and so make their report to the house:
and the next day the Prince of Conde went in person with 800 horse to bring
them home, and the Duke of Orleans went also out of this City with many
attendants, and met them on the way, and so they came to this City, where all
manner of provision chiefly bread, are still at an excessive rate, the poor
people being brought to a very great extremity. The 18 the Parliament being
sa^e, all the Chambers assembled, the Commissioners made a large report of that
had passed at Court, and afterward they entered upon debate of many great
businesses, chiefly of that which concerns the appointing the Duke of Orleans
as Regent or Protector of France during the Kings detention by his mother and
the Cardinal, the business is not as yet perfected, therefore not passed as
was reported. The Spanish army is still in the River of Bourdeaux, their
General the Lord Vateuille having fortified Bourg near Bourdeaux, and placed
there a strong Garrison, and now going for Boarg, to join with the Count du
Daugnon, that so they may be able to encounter the Kings Fleet, who is daily
expected under the command of the Duke of Vendosm, who is High Admiral of
France.

We hear from Bourdeaux, that those that are called of the Elm-house get daily
more authority; being assembled the 7th instant it was resolved, That the
fourteen Officers or Members of Parliament which were banished and called in
again, should again depart the City, That the Jurats and other suspected
persons, should be laid hold on, and carried forthwith to prison, and some to
be banished during life.

Paris July 20, 1652.
A Letter from Scotland.
SIR, Here is great hopes of a speedy settlement of these parts, the chiefest
of the Gentry tendering their submission to the Commonwealth of England. The
discipline of war is exercised very strictly amongst our soldiers to keep them
from straggling and plundering. A Court Martial was held in the field near
Blair, where many were tried, three or four for Life and Death, but suspended
till further proof: Eight received sentence for straggling from their colors,
and plundering: One of them to be hanged on such a manner, that he might stand
on tip toes, and to receive a lash as every Division of the Regiment passed by,
and to have his Ear cut, and to be cashiered the Army; another was sentenced to
be hanged by the armpits whilst the Regiment marched by; A third to be tied
to a tree, and to receive thirty stripes. Here is little News concerning
General Blake and his navy, only that he has taken many Busses, and one or
two Men of War that were for a Guard to them; some of them he has sent toward
Dunbar, where in short space (we do not doubt) but they will well and safely
arrive.

FINIS.

