TO HIS Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. A few Proposals, relating to
Civil Government.
Humbly offered by John Rogers an unworthy servant of Christ, and Preacher of
the Gospel now at Tho. Apostles London.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
WHilst my soul is boiling over into earnest prayers to the great Jehovah for
VVisdome, Counsel, and Courage for you in this exigency of importance, as the
great Deliverer of his people (through Gods grace) out of the house of Egypt,
I am visited with that word in Exodus 12. 42. It is a night to be much observed
unto the Lord for bringing them out of Egypt; This is that night of the Lord
to be observed of all the Children of Israel in their Generations. So this is
the day (viz. April. 20. 1653.) to be much observed (or in Hebr. full of
observations) and the rather for that in the revolution of times, the changes
will run their round out, and then the Lord will come to reign. For at as
first Israel had no Governor but God, and next to him Generals, as Moses,
Joshua, etc. with their Officers; and after that Judges and Synedrions or
Parliaments over them, and then Kings; So now the change is to go back again
from Kings to Parliaments, from Parliaments to Generals, until we have
Governors as at the beginning, Isa. 1. 26. and till Christ come.

But my Lord, my heart is full (with humble thankfulness, and resentment of
the hopes you have put us all unto, and to your Honor indeed) I am pressed in
spirit; and so are many others (after a solemn meeting of prayers with
hundreds of this City at Tho. Apostles London, about this change, and to seek
God for you) to present you with these following Proposals.

I. That your Excellency do choose the men that must govern this Commonwealth
(being that it is the judgment of many faithful discerning Ministers, and
others, that you are called thereunto of God.) So Moses did choose able men to
be Rulers in Exodus 18. And they judged the people at all seasons, but the hard
causes they brought to Moses. So that Moses. gave them their charges to do
righteously without respect of persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. And Joshua the next
General (with his Officers) commanded the people, Josh. 3. 2. and the Lord said
to Joshua (though in another case) chapter 4. 2. Take you twelve men out of the
people, one of a Tribe, etc. and says the text, Verse. 14. that very day (that
Joshua did so) the Lord magnified him in the sight of all Israel, and they
seared him, as they feared Moses before him. So it is upon our hearts (Right
Honorable) that God will make you hereby, Right Honorable indeed, in the
sight of all his Israel. After this, Gideon (the General of that little Army of
three Bands, that destroyed the huge host of the Midianites) was offered by the
Israelites the Government, Judge. 8. 22. for he had won it. And Nehemtah, chap.
7. 2. gave Commissions out to men fearing God, to govern. And so all the
Governors that ever were victorious (in the word) were either Rulers
themselves, or else chosen to be such, or else chose such, wherefore we say, as
Ezra 7. 25. And thou, after the wisdom of thy God that is in thine hand, set
Magistrates and Judges which may judge all the people that are beyond the
River, all such as know the Laws of thy God, and teach thou them that know not.

The second Proposal, as to number of persons that shall Govern, I humbly
propose either a Synedrin, Parliament, or Council of seventy, or else one of a
County. For that in the Commonwealth of Israel (which is our best pattern)
they had three sorts of Courts, the Upper Court (or Synedrin) which consisted
of seventy able (fit) men joined with Moses, Numb. 11. 16, 17. And the Lord
said to Moses, Gather before me (or in my Name) seventy (worthy) men of the
Elders of Israel, whom thou know, to be the Elders and Officers over them;
For I will come down and talk with thee, and I will take of the spirit which is
upon thee, and I will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the
people with thee, etc. This number answers to the seventy, which at first went
into Egypt, Genesis 46. 27. Exodus 1. 5. Deuteronomy. 10. 22 and to the seventy Elders
which went up Mount Sinai, Exodus 24. 1. 9. Now in this first great Senate, they
sat in form of an half Circle round; so that the Nasi or Abbeth-Din, chief,
or father of the house sat as the Speaker in Parliament does, to see all before
him.

The second sort of Synedrin was called the Lower Court, etc. they were under a
great Senate, and consisted of three and twenty persons who sat in the City
gates, as Amos 5. 5. which Christ implies, when he promises the Gates of hell
(Councels and strength) shall not prevail against his Church. So Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
And the third Court consisted but of three Judges in small Cities. But

Secondly, or else choose one of a County, representing that County, as one of
a Tribe did represent the Tribe, in Number. 1. 4. And with you there shall be a
man of every Tribe; and Verse. 16. These were the renowned, i. e. famous for
abilities and qualifications, called to Statesmen, or to consult about matters
of State, Number. 7. 2. and 16. 2. But if the present juncture of affairs requires
a quicker dispatch, that in the interim, twelve Worthies may be chosen as
present Governors, Josh. 4. 1. 2. Numb. 14. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Ezra 7. 15. like to
Isreal's twelve Judges.

The third Proposal, As to their Qualifications, they must be menfearing God,
Nehem. 7. 2. Exodus 18. 21. lovers of Truth and Justice hating bribes and
covetousness (which corrupt Justice) Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Exodus 28. 21. not
respecters of persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and 16. 19. Wise (though not politic) and
Understanding in the times and seasons, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Searching Gods word, Dan.
1. 4. and 9. 2. (As the Jews Cachami wisemen or Magistrates do at this day,)
they must be able active men, Exodus 10. 21. Genesis 47. 6. 1 Chronicles. 26. 6. in the
things of God, and at all seasons ready to hear and help the oppressed, Exodus
18. 19, 22. the Greek is, at every hour, (who were wont to sit from the daily
sacrifice in the morning, till the daily sacrifice in the evening (so that they
began and ended with Sacrifices every day:) And then they must be Easers of the
people as Numb. 11. 17. Exodus 18. 22. hence the word Rulers, (Nasi,) is so named
of lifting up, or easing the burdens of the people. And they must govern as
the Servants of Jesus Christ, Isa. 60. 2, 10, 17. Rev. 21. 24. But not as Lords
over Christ, Rev. 4. 10, 11. least the Nobles be like Oreb, Judge. 7. 25. and
Zeeb, and the Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna, that take the houses of God (i.e.
Christ's Government and Jurisdiction over Churches and Consciences) into their
possession, Ps. 83. 11, 12. Such are (v. 13.) set as a wheel upon the run, till
they have run themselves all to pieces (and this was openly declared would be
the ruin of this Parliament at Thomas Apostles Febr. 18 (unless God prevented)
a day when we and the Navy were engaged together all day long. Lastly, they
must govern all for God (not too much for man) 2 Chro. 196. Take heed what you
do? for ye govern not for man but for the Lord, says Jehosaphat. O that! they
may be Moses's for meekness! and for their often meeting and conferring with God
on the Mount! Joshua's for courage! and Samuels for uprightness! and David's
for Gods Favorites! and for figuring out the coming of Christ! and Solomon's for
wisdom, and workers for Gods latter Temple! and Daniels for discerning the
days we live in! and Nehemiah's for activity, and abillity, and builders up
of the broken walls of Jerusalem; and then shall they in their measure make good
the promise of Judges as at the first, Isa. 2. 20. and then the work of the
Lord shall go on in the hands of Zerubbabel with shoutings of grace grace unto
it.

The fourth Proposal is, That those who are righteous, and spirited for this
Government, of the Worthies of the late Parliament (that honor, That the
righteous suffer not with the wicked.

The fifth Proposal is, That the Rulers (after they be chose) be set solemnly
and publicly apart by prayers to God for their Work, wisdom, as they were
wont to do in Israel, as Numb. 11. 16, 17. Gather them before me, and I will
take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them; and say to the
people sanctify your selves. So Ezra 9. 23, 24. So we fasted and besought our
God for this, and he was entreated of us; and then I separated twelve of the
chief, says he. And although in the Commonwealth of Israel, they were wont
when they set them apart for Governors to pour out a horn of oil, or else
to lay on hands on each. These Ceremonies are now abolished, and yet the
signification of them remains, viz. that there be some evidence or other that
the Lord has laid his hand on them, and has poured out his horn of oil upon
their heads, unto their very hearts; I mean his Unction from on high, the holy
Spirit, enduing them with sanctified gifts and abilities, separating, and
setting them apart for the work of this Government, by such a measure of his
oil of grace, as suites with the age wherein we live (i. e. abundantly more
then in former ages.)

These Five Proposals (Right Honorable) put in practice (with Gods blessing)
shall serve as five fingers sor the Work, and will show that the hand of the Lord
is with us; wherefore consult with the Saints Deu. 1: 13. and send to all
discerning spirited men for their Proposals.

And I beseech your Excellency to accept these few (at first) from a faithful
Commonwealths man, one that longs for the day of the Lord Christ, and that this
Government may be a forerunner thereof, and a preparative thereunto, these
Proposals are presented with the full sails and gales (I hope) of the Spirit.
Seeing thousands of glazed eyes are upon you, with hungry longings for such a
Government, as may be most intent to make way in these three Nations for that
day of Christ's reign in righteousness. That our mountains may drop down with
new wine, and our hills with milk Joh. 3. and great be the day of Jezreel by
this Government, is the soule-struggling and faith-acting unfeigned, and
resolved prayers of one who defires nothing of your Excellency for himself,
but to be

one of the meanest of Your Servants for Christ, and this Commonwealth. JO.
ROGERS.
From my Study Tho. Apostles 25. day of the second Month Ziu. 1653.
Printed for Robert Ibbitson, 1653.


