DIVISIONS CUT IN PIECES BY. THE SWORD OF THE LORD: OR, A Discourse on a Text
of Scripture, of the unlawfulness of DIVISIONS in the CHURCH of GOD, upon the
highest pretenses whatsoever.

By JOHN ROCKET, Minister of the Word at Hickling in Nottingham-shire.

Ante admissum facinus improvidi, post facinus obstinati; nec prius stabiles,
nec postmodum supplices: quando debuerant stare, jacuerunt; quando jacere et
prosternere se Deo debent, stare se opinantur. -- Errorem pro veritate
suscipiunt.

Cypr. de Lapsis. p. 224. JAM. 5.20. -- Know, that he which converteth the
sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide
a multitude of sins.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Maxey, in Thames Street, near Benets Pauls-wharfe
Church. 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Earl of RUTLAND, etc.
AND TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Esqs and Knights for the Shire of NOTTINGHAM. JOH.
HUTCHINSON GERVAS PIGGOT
Esqs and Burgesses for the Town of NOTTINGHAM. FRAN. PEIRPOINT GIL. MILLINGTON


Right Honorable, and right Worshipful:
IT was a worthy saying of Aelius Trajanus, who succeeded Trajane in the Roman
Empire, Non mihi, sed populo; signifying that which he was often heard to say,
Ita se Rem-publicam gessurum, ut sciret Rem populi esse, non suam: but it was a
more noble and gracious Speech of a King in Judah to his Judges, Non mihi, nec
homini, sed Deo: therefore God himself has called you Gods; Gods toward us,
but men toward God, yet Gods for God and us: they are not to look only
downwards to us, expecting a duty that belongs to such Gods; but look upwards
and remember the duty they owe to us by Gods appointment, that only makes Gods:
And surely their Name tells them their business, and that they are not only
concerned, but ought to have a special regard to those things, not only wherein
their peace, but the glory of God is most involved. God in holy Writ much
delights in two names, viz. to be a Judge and a Father; when he comes toward
the world in general, or toward his own Church chequered with good and bad
men, you shall meet with him as a Judge: but when he comes to his own, he calls
them Children, and speaks to them as a Father. The same has he given unto his
Presidents in this world, the Magistrates; if they look into the Commonwealth
to decide business, (though it be of Orphans and Fatherless) its in the
Garments of a Judge: but if to a Church, (such as is, or should be wholly his
own) then as Fathers, as nursing-Fathers. This I write to you, my Lord, and
Gentlemen, not as your Instructor, but Remembrancer for the experience of this
toward me (a small member of the Church) as a Minister, I have found, and must
acknowledge; which I desire might extend unto the whole Church; which to be
done by you, and others in the same Places and Callings, would much confer to
the Happiness and Peace of the Church of God (of which you are to be Fathers)
and to your own private Peace, making your Callings to act toward such high
and eminent Ends, and for Him, who for himself, has given you his Chair of
Judgment; for which prays

Your most humble Servant in the Lord Jesus, JOHN ROCKET.

To the READER.
READER,
WHAT thine and my Friend desired for himself, is sent to thee; and coming to
thee, only desires this of thee, To read it with the same mind it was
written, and for the same end; that so the Authors faults may be pardoned, the
Readers mended, and Gods name glorified in the Unity of his Church and People;
for which prays

Thine in the Lord, J. R.

Divisions cut in pieces by the Sword of the Lord.
1 Cor. 3.3. For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and division,
are you not carnal, and walk as men?


THe Apostle having received intelligence from the house of Cloe, a family well
known of Saint Paul to be sound in the Faith, zealous for the honor of God,
and tender of the Churches welfare (else their credit had not so much prevailed
with him) and as well known to the Church of Corinth to be of no less note
amongst them, (else he had probably not been so particular in his
Intelligencers to them) I say, having received Intelligence from such good
hands, of the strange disorders, and grievous distempers of that Church, writes
this Epistle, as undertaking those their discomposed actings: and this he had
not assayed but for Cloe's house. So that as its good for Christians to watch
over one another, so especially to keep a correspondency of information with
their chief watchman about the Spiritual estate of them, of whom he has a
peculiar charge, that so he might apt and prepare his Doctrines and
Instructions for their conditions.

Well, He hearing thus of the violent flames breaking out amongst them, does
first of all labor to find out and discover unto them the prime occasion of
that fire; that, though but small, but a spark tenderly nourished amongst them,
yet increases to hot and desperate burnings. It arose first about their
Ministers, to whom they might owe much, and deem themselves bound in Conscience
to acknowledge no less, then to extol them according to their several
apprehensions of their eminent gifts, and powerful workings on them. But
(admitting the Ministers in substance to agree, and to Preach the same Gospel)
the people assuming this luxuriant liberty to set up one above another (whom
God had placed with indifferency and equality of power) falls into dangerous
emulations, horrid divisions, and unchristian practices,

1 Toward the Ministers themselves they so much admired; trampling under-foot
whom they advanced, and overlooking their overseers, as appears Chap. 4.

2 Toward themselves,

1 In their unclean and filthy carriages, the hot movings of their unruly lusts
one toward another, as appears Chap. 5. 2 In their Civil Commerce, by their
bitter and self-devouring Contentions in Lawsuits, as Chap. 6. Such men as
despise their Ministry, often are delivered up to such vile affections, walking
cross to the Word as well as the Ministry.
3 Toward their Profession,

1 In the wanton abuse of all liberty, Chap. 8. 2 In the profane celebrating of
the most divine Ordinances, Chap. 10, 11. 3 In entertaining that damnable
Heresy against the Resurrection; as easily appears by Chap. 15. So still the
fire increases from the Church into their civil Stations, and out of them still
more and more violently consuming the holy Ordinances and Truth it self.
The Apostle taking notice of this lamentable fire thus taking hold of all
Relations, and consuming Ministers, Families, Estates, Discipline, Worship, and
Doctrine; begins at the Rise, and finds the rent but small: Yet sees that the
little The if is too much serviceable to put into the window, and to open the
doors for the rest: He finds the head of these Troubles very small, but the
further it runs, the greater it increases, insomuch that all is over-flown. In
this Epistle the Apostle labors to abate these: 1 By drawing down the
swellings of their high thoughts one toward another, and leading the whole
Church into a most necessary and useful subserviency one toward another. 2 By
applying particular Remedies for asswaging of each particular Rupture, as you
may see in their places. 3 By stopping the Fountain, and substracting the Fuel
that first stirred up, and still builds up this fire amongst them. The occasion
of their first Schism seemed harmless, nay good and commendable, viz. Each
one setting up that Minister he thought of best: But Saint Paul takes that away,

1 By Apologizing for himself: and this seemed necessary: for a great party in
the Church appeared for him: Some for Paul. Wherein they might seem much to
honor Paul, and that deservedly, being a laborious and painful Minister, nay,
and unchargable to any of them; much in sufferings and dangerous trials, yet
continuing unmovable, and steadfast in the Truth. Who could deny to follow this
great Doctor, and to set up a Church for him? True, while they follow him to
Christ, he could not but acknowledge them, and receive them into Communion, and
encourage them therein; but when they make him a Sectary, a drawer of People to
Paul, and not to Christ; or setting him up in opposition to any other godly and
Orthodox Ministers, to over-shadow their glory, who were his fellow laborers,
and fellow-helpers: then he rejects them, and shows to them what little cause
they had so to admire him above others; and to follow him before others.

1 In respect of their beginnings: Though he Preached to bring them unto
Christ, yet he Baptized them not to settle them in a particular Church Way; and
he thanks God for it that he baptized but few; as if they should call after
him, as if he brought them into a Church Covenant, and promise to be his
Followers, his Church, his Congregation, his Hearers, causing from them any
Engagement against any other true Ministers, or true Church society. Chap. 1.
v. 14, 15, 16. I thank God, that I baptized none of you, etc. Not because he
performed not the duty: but because least the performance of the duty should
have been an argument taken up by them to make him the Father, the Patron, the
Author of their Faction; which rather then to be to the disturbance and
disquiet of the Church, to the wounding of the Truth, he had rather not baptize
them, or any other, to produce such sad effects: and therefore he laying no
Foundation or Institution for a particular Society, incorporating them into one
Communion; they could not justly, any Church, People, or Party, cry up Paul's
Church, Paul's Congregation, Paul's People, more then, or not so much as any
others.

2 From the manner of his Preaching; that it was far from entangling his
Hearers, either by any Rhetorical and floscular expressions, to catch the ears
of some; or by smooth, sweet, and insinuating words, Romans 16.17 (...) sunt
homines sine malitia^, aut pravis intentionibus.
to beguile the simple and harmless soul; or with Doctrines in an high
Seraphical strain, curious and ambiguous terms; here a piece of oyled
Eloquence, there a subtle Distinction, anon a Phrase wrapping the People into
an admiration, viz. of words, and not of things: No, I sought not thus to
inveagle you unto my self, to set me up in your hearts above another, that you
might cry me up, and follow me rather then another: though I could do it,
having the tongues, etc. but thus and thus were my words, and thus and thus was
my carriage, Chap. 2. v. 3, 4, 5. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear,
and in much trembling. And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: That
your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
That is, I made it my chief business and design amongst you, to declare and
magnify Christ, not my self: for my speech was plain, and my behavior as
modest: no boaster, no deceiver: Say not therefore of me, That I endeavored in
the name and way of Christ, to beget a Sect or Party to my self.

3 From the free unfolding and laying himself open to them, and all others
view, and desiring their judgment and esteem, according to his own of himself.
If he could rejoice and glory of any thing, it was of his Office: but let them
not dote on him in that respect: and therefore he seems thus to abuse himself
in an holy manner, Chap. 3. v. 5. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo, but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? As if he
should say, And I pray you, who is Paul more then Apollos, that Apollos is left
and cried down before Paul? And what is Apollos more then Paul, that others cry
him up above Paul? What is he, or I, or any of us, that we should be preferred
by you, and divided by you? Are we not all Ministers, and but Ministerial and
Instrumental in our Series, and Places, and Seasons, according to the gifts of
God bestowed on us for your good? I beseech you therefore, make not that
difference amongst us, which neither God has made, nor we desire.

Hence we may observe,

1 That its an Apostolical way to oppose Opposition in the Church of God; to
take away Divisions, Separations, and with might and main to preserve Unity; to
hinder an exorbitant, singular, and curious following and admiring of one
Minister above another, though godly and Orthodox: For here the Apostle denies
it of himself, Sub his nominibus pseudo-apostolos taxat. Marlor. in 1 Cor. 3.5.
Sic per prosopopoeiam alter personatus est.
and labors to take it from others: Yet whether he mean it of himself, and
them nominated, (which I desire to follow, being obvious and probable) none are
taxed of the Ministry as making Church-Parties; but its solely charged on the
People: Its not good to deny a People to follow other Ministers, where they
sensibly profit in good; yet it is not safe for any to countenance them in it.
1 Lest the persons neglected have just occasion of Emulation and Offense. 2
Lest the person admired gather ground for Self-elevation. 3. Lest the People
grow further wanton, and fall into Licentious and Scandalous Disorders, as you
see here they did. 4 Lest evil claiming the same liberty, even Servants, and
others, make it secretly a way whereby the more easily, unsuspectedly, and
familiarly they may practice, and nourish their heady and corrupt Lusts: Let us
therefore labor to follow this Rule, not to speak, not to practice otherwise;
and not like the Salamander, that cannot hiss but in fire; but the Dove, that
cannot live but in his quiet coat.

2 We might observe, that the Apostle might accomplish this his end, in his own
respect, he humbles, he denies himself to cast them off from himself: As when
the People of Lystra would have deified Paul, he runs in to them, crying, Sirs,
why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach
unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which
made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein: Act.
14.15. Yet such was the madness, and simplicity of the People, that he had
much ado to hinder them. v. 18. And as he desires to appear to them as a man,
and so would not be Deified; so to these as a Minister, and would not be
Christed. He a poor weak instrument, that works not any thing by any
Intrinsecal virtue of his own; and therefore throwing down himself, solely
advances God in all their eyes. Chap. 3. v. 7. So then, neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that gives the increase.
Then has the force of an inference; therefore since that neither I, nor any
other can do any such work (for which you do follow us, and make us singular)
as from our selves, but from God; look not at us, but God: Is it the eloquent
waterings of Apollos, or the profound plantings of Paul? No: we are but
Instruments; and Instruments, whether weak or strong, are all one in the
almighty Arm of God, which is made bare through us, and in you, that God may be
all in all. And this has been one ray of wisdom shining in holy Writ from the
Spirit of God, who Recording the Saints of God, does own them in some things,
that so we might love, honor and follow them: but in other things does
condemn them, that as Gods, we might adore them in nothing: And you shall not
see the most accomplished Portraicture of man without his blemish: Paul over his
Excellency draws a shadow, that they might not look on him as a Christ: true,
where they too much debased him, he boasts of himself; yet where he is too much
lifted up, he takes down himself, that he might not stand betwixt them and
Christ; betwixt them and any Truth, or Minister. I have read what once a
Mistrisse did toward her Lover, who being extremly Melancholy at her frequent
Denials, and slightings of his tendered Services, and seeming to Despair, she
thought on no better a way to take off his Affection, and cure his dark
Distempers then this: The next time the Lover came, and in his usual Respects
tendered himself to her; after some Discourse, she opened her Breasts, whereof
one was eaten to the bone with a loathsome Ulcer: which seen by the Lover, his
fond Dotage was cured; and he satisfied with her Refusals. So that Paul might
take off their fond and unconstant Affections from him, they only looking on
the beauty of his Doctrine, he shows the weakness of his person; and
insufficiency of his workings of themselves: It was Paul that spoke, but not
converted; it was Paul that tendered, but could not give Christ: And sure, if
we all should deal so, it would be much for our honor, and more for the
Churches Unity.

Thus Paul does labor to clear himself, and his practices, as not guilty of
their Divisions; he being an Apostle, is loath to stand upon the File, (the
Record and History in the Church of God) that ever hereafter it should be said,
That Paul had one Church, and Apollos another; that Paul had one Church that
was not Christ's; that Paul had a People better known by the name of Paulians,
then Christians; and that he should have a Church, that would not own and
receive the least, and meanest Messenger of Christ Jesus, as well as him. And
though such a pretended honor might seem to be thrust on him, that it should
not be said (when he was dead) That ever he would accept of it, and that he had
left behind him a Sect called Paul's Disciples, Paul's Church, Paul's Way, and not
Christ's, or any other Ministers of Christ.

2 Paul having thus cleared himself from all suspicion or show of guilt that
they or any others might lay on him, he proceeds plainly and particularly to
charge it home against the men, the first Authors hereof, and lays down the
Causes and Grounds hereof, viz. That as the fire flames amongst you, so it was
kindled, and is nourished amongst you: It was not from Paul, or any faithful
Minister, neither of their seeking or approbation, but you made a difference
and Division amongst them, with whom there was really none: and this you gave
to them not of their minds, but your own, and that from a carnal mind, not a
solid judgment, and right understanding. For ye are yet carnal: for, etc.

But to come a little more clearly and distinctly unto the Text: The Apostle
having in Chap. 2. laid down the second part of his Plea, That it was no design
of his, to draw a Party to himself, or to set himself up solely or chiefly
amongst them: and proving this from the manner of his Preaching, it being in
simplicity, not in an affected, and self-exalting style; sets forth likewise,
That though the words were easy, yet the matter was deep, containing the
wisdom of God, v. 6.7. and so deep, that the most eloquent in the world, being
mere natural men, were not able to reach, v. 8, 9. and the reason is from the
corrupt infirmity of his understanding, insomuch that he is utterly void of
them, v. 14. But he that is a complete spiritual man, thoroughly regenerated, and
truly enlightened, does easily comprehend them, rightly receive, and fear such
things as he Preaches, verse. 15, 16.

Now the Apostle in an excellent Paragraphe passes from that general
deciphering a mere natural man, and a true spiritual man, to a particular
Application of it to these Corinthians, and to them concerning this case in
hand; And I, brethren, etc. Wherein the Apostle divides the other two Parties,
and joins them in these Corinthians; yet I could not look on you as such
spiritual ones, nor yet as mere natural ones, but in a mixed estate of them
both, or a middle betwixt them both; in the dawnings, or at least not in the
pure light of the Gospel. And this he proves from the Doctrine he was forced
to frame and suite for them according to their present capacities: He knew them
and their abilities, though they knew not themselves: therefore he writes to
them, not as merely natural, for its a spiritual Doctrine, and to them as in
part acquainted with it: nor to perfect Christians, for it was a plain and
elementary Doctrine, called Milk, v. 2. which was good and wholesome, though
not hard, as strong meat for grown and thriving Christians. I have, etc. that
is, At my first entrance amongst you, I then fed you thus, because of your then
weakness, not my skill: and I must so feed you still, for I still find you
little better, since I left you; ye are not yet able to receive higher
Doctrines; and no marvel, for ye are yet carnal, v. 3. And that they are yet
thus carnal, he further proves in my Text from the present practice, a very
plain and forcible Argument, For whereas, etc.

Mark the dependency of reason, and cleernesse of proof against them: he
writes now as before he taught them, a mean and humble Doctrine fit for their
capacities; the reason is, because he finds them for the most part such as at
first he met withal, sc. Carnal. They had made little or no progress
(notwithstanding their high and lofty expressions) in the school of Christ; he
therefore keeps them still in the same forms, and about the Principles of
Christianity: And that For: And that they are so Carnal, for: For ye are. For
whereas there etc. A clear proof from the effects of the flesh in them; for
whereas at this very day such envyings, strifes, and divisions are amongst you,
is it not because you are Carnal? for take me you when you were partly carnal,
and minded not any thing of the things of God, then envyings and such sins were
in the strength in you: because you practiced according to your understanding:
and since such is your practice now, are not such your minds? Whereas, etc.

Wherein observe these Three Parts: 1 A Charge laid down against them.
Carnality. 2 A demonstration and proof hereof a posteriori, the fruits of a
Carnal mind. Envyings, etc. 3 The certainty of this proof made good in the
Interrogation. For whereas, etc. Are ye not, etc. Such Interrogative
Propositions being the least dubitative.


But that we might fully handle these words, we shall resolve the whole into
these ensuing Queres, and resolve them likewise with what cleernesse we can.

1 To whom Saint Paul wrote this? 2 What he lays to their Charge? 3 How he
proves his Charge? 4 How it may be made good by plain Demonstratives, that his
Proof makes good his Charge?
First then of the Persons to whom he writes, the Corinthians called Chap. 1.
v. 2. The Church of God: not that all Corinth was of, or in the Church: but
that God out of those Idolatrous Gentiles, had called by the word of his
Ministry a People unto himself, to the profession of his Name, acknowledgement
of the Faith, and practice of his worship in peace, unity and order, and this
he calls The Church of God; nor that this Church was contained in one
particular Congregation or Assembly, for it was a famous vast and populous
City, wherein there had been many Ministers, and that had found a comfortable
and prosperous access unto them; yet though many Congregations, yet all one
Church, and to hold one Faith, Worship, and Order, all being the Church of that
only one God; and the Apostle afterward does give so large and singular a
testimony of them for their excellent gifts, that if we only had heard them and
seen their faces, we should have reported of them to have been perfect Saints
indeed, and in no wise to be called carnal. And though a Church of God, called
and sanctified, to whom Saint Paul makes an assurance of the faithfulness of
God, touching their perfection and of their glorious presentation as blameless
once unto God, yet these have their envyings, their strifes and divisions.

This I speak, not that any Church should hence encourage themselves in their
Schisms and Divisions, that it may be a true Church, as dividing, because a
divided Church may be a true Church. No, this can follow no more, then because
Christ justifies sinners, therefore we may be sinners; and because God owns a
Church with spots, therefore its lawful to have those spots; No, they are not
beauty spots, but deforming spots: Division is not sign of a true Church,
though sometimes of Truth; But this I infer, that though love is an inseparable
affection of a brother, a Disciple, a child of God, yet unity is no infallible
sign of a Church of Christ; for the dearest brethren may differ, not as
brethren, but as of different ages and capacities in Christ. If unity was
(though Rome has as little as England at this time to claim it) a specificall
and indivisible character of a true Church, Mat. 12.25, 26 Ephesians. 2.2.
then the Devils in hell may say they are a true Church, because amongst them
is unity and subordination likewise.

Neither let any Church boast her self of absolute purity, perfection, and
immixture; let them refine, purge, govern as severely, watchfully, and
spiritually as they can, yet there will be men, and children, and babes;
spiritual, less spiritual, carnal; nay, if it was possible to find a
Church without persecution, troubles, envyings, and division publicly, yet not
to find her without her several imperfections. But though Gods Church, Gods
family, yet having yet corruption, being yet carnal, being yet men, and
amongst men, it may walk as men. Which calls in the charge laid against these
Corinthians thus and thus honored and qualified. Are ye not carnal, and walk
as men?

2. (...). Its set down interrogatively, but it inferrs an indubitable, Mus^.
in loc.
and indisputable Position. Are you not? that is, is it not clear and evident
to all that have eyes to see and ears to hear these things of you, is it not a
thing past question to the judgment of all impartial and godly men, that
though it is long since I preached the Gospel to you, and since you received
it, yet you are carnal, and walk like men? here be two Phrases deserve a
little opening.

Q. What is meant by the word carnal?

Sol. Aliud est esse in carne, aliud est esse carnalem. Par. in Romans 7. 2 Cor.
10.3. Illi in carne carnales, caro sunt toti, and tantum: isti non toti nec
tantum sed ex part, quia sunt in spiritu.
Its one thing to be in the flesh, another thing to be carnal; every one
before his conversion is in the flesh wholly and all over, but afterward he is
fleshly or carnal: Its one thing to walk in the flesh, another thing to walk
according to the flesh: Every man living walks in the flesh, but not according
to the flesh; qui secundum se vivit, secundum carnem vivere dicitur. Aqu. 12.
q. 72. a. 2. pri.
for this is to follow the principles, directions, ways, and ends of a mere
carnal and fleshly heart, never truly and effectually changed in this world by
the Spirit. Carnales dicimur, quando totos nos voluptatibus damus; spirituales
quando spiritum sanctum praevium sequimur, i. e. cum ipso sapimus instruente,
ipso docemur authore. Hier. Com. in Gal. p. 933.
So the word carnal in a strict sense is put for one that is wholly in the
flesh, and savours nor at all any thing spiritually in the things of God, but
is wholly addicted unto evil actions, proceeding from, and tending to the
nourishment of sinful flesh. But to clear this more fully we must observe,

1. There is Caro prima, the seed-plot of all sin and root-corruption, called
otherwise concupiscence; this abides in the righteous after, as before
conversion, but not in that freedom, strength, and power, there being wrought
in the soul a gracious frame of Spirit, and general inclination to God, out of
which flows the particular acts of obedience, which are called distinctly such
and such graces, such and such duties; and this is to be taken out of the old
stock of Adam, of the flesh, and natural condition, and to be ingraffed into
the new, Christ Jesus, by whose virtue there runs new sap through the whole
man.

2. There is Caro secunda, or ex prima orta; which is that manifest working of
a man according to that general leaven of sournesse, Non tamen in quibus nulla
esset Spiritus Dei scintilla, sed qui sensu carnis plus nimio adhuc abundarent,
ut pravaleret caro spiritui, and lumen cjus quasi opprimeret. Marl. in loc.
and root of bitterness in the soul; and this acts as far as that spreads
in their several seasons, viz. over the whole man. These are the streams that
boil up in the unregenerate, and bubble out of the regenerate, though penitent,
believing, mortifying, etc. and oft-times break out in a child of God (by
reason of a spiritual Antiperistasis) more strongly and violently then in a
wicked man; and some particular sinful actions in themselves and circumstances
may truly appear more grievous then in others; so that these are carnal (as
the Corinthians here) in this respect, and that for these reasons.

1. Because of that ignorance which is in them, Carnales dicumtur, 1. Ob co rum
ignorantiam.
whereby in part they discern spiritual things, and so in part are carnal, and
therefore the Apostle joyneth these two, (...).

2. Because of that inward opposition and striving in him betwixt the Spirit
and the flesh, 2. Ob internam reluctantiam.
that though the whole man voice it not for sin, yet neither is he without his
sidings and votings with sin.

3. Ob externam praevaricattonem.
3. Because of some deeds of the flesh (of which they have, and do afterward
repent) which sometimes proceed from them.

Ob peccandi possibilitatem.
4. Because of the common condition of all living in the flesh, being obnoxious
and liable to the infirmities of the flesh.

Ob peccatorum imitationem and carnis in eis quanda^ ^i^ ill a^lonem.
5. Because of those secret movings of the heart to all sin in particular, in
some lesser degrees; though he abhors and proceeds not to murder,
revenge, etc. yet there are some daily passions, etc. though he proceed not to
Fornication, Adultery, etc. yet there may be a wanton eye, a vain word, a loose
thought, etc. though even for these and less, if less may be, he is offended
with himself, and mourns before God: yet in a degree here are the actings of
the flesh in a child of God, and so they are trully carnal, and accordingly
are more or less carnal.

2. Concerning the other Phrase to walk as men.

The word here (...) is not as (...) in the first verse, and the difference is
much; (...).
for the first (...) signifies only a kind of similitude, but (...) a kind
of conformity; and yet it is one thing to walk according to the flesh, and
another to walk according to man. For the first of these (as before you had it)
by way of excellency does set forth to us a man in his unregenerate condition,
following merely the dictates of corrupt reason, and all his actions tending to
himself. But secundum hominem ambulare, is,

1 Secundum praecepta hominum; when though we walk the right way, yet being led
by the commands and examples of men, its but a carnal acting in a spiritual
way: and hence is that exprobration, Isa. 29.13. wherein he reproves not the
matter of the fear, the worship, service, etc. but the ground and cause of it
being humane, taught of man; notwithstanding the Lord had several ways
instructed them by his Prophets, and his Judgments; yet by these they would
not learn as from the Lord, but only by the civil Sanctions of men: and so here
in my Text it has relation; even thus you walk as men, or according to men,
Secundu hominem ambulare, i. e. humanis duci affectibus. Musc. Ambulare
secundum hominem est non tantum hominus carnalis opera facere, aut tantum
vivere secundum carnem, sed etiam sequica, quibus homo carnalis nititur: quales
sunt res, humana sapientia, ratio, natura, etc. hinc patet etc. de tota^
hominis natural praedicari. Marlor. in loc.
to Paul, Apollos; what these men say, but not as they Preach the Word of the
living God, and Gospel of Christ Jesus.

2 Secundum; that is, juxta, or instar. You walk even in this respect as other
men that believe not, that profess not the Gospel, but are but mere men. Hence
is that prohibition of the Apostle, Romans 12.2. Herein there is in these
Christians a great conformity to the rest of wicked men in the World. Therefore
as in the first verse he does not call them absolutely (...), that, as in the
foregoing Chapter, tasted nothing of the things of God; but (...), that much
rellished the things of nature; for they were sanctified and regenerated in
part, but had yet the strains of the old man, and did in many things, even in
these, much resemble him. For in these their present actions, they were more
like what they were before they believed, and what their natural Countrymen,
Idolaters, are, then Converts, and Spiritual. For if you professing to be
spiritual, do but compare your selves with spiritual men, or the spiritual
letter, you much fall short; but if with carnal men, behold, Manifesta sunt
opera carnis, you shall find your deeds to be even as theirs, and your walkings
to be according to such men; and therefore you are but carnal, but men. And
this brings me to the proof of this so said, how and in what particular actions
he proves them such; Whereas ye are, etc.

3 The proof of the Apostles Charge in particulars, which is from their
actions, the sad effects of a carnal mind: Thus,

They that perform the works of the flesh, are fleshly; but ye Corinthians
perform the works of the flesh: Ergo.

The Major is clear; man's judgment can reach no farther then the appearance:
nay, its not only the judgment of right reason, but of the Spirit it self,
that sentences a man according to his outward and common actions. Jam. 3.11, 12.

The Minor is clear, that they do act the works of the flesh; for, do they not
know the deeds of the Flesh, and the fruits of the Spirit? The Apostle first
sets down carnal deeds, Gal. 5.20. having before discovered the fountain, there
being two heads in every gracious man, as verse. 17. Flesh and Spirit; and these
two strive first for passage: now if such streams as these flow from us, they
proceed from the flesh. And these very Three things are enumerated in that
Catologue, only translocated. (...).
Strife, or Contentions, Envyings, or emulations, divisions, or Sects. Thus he
sets the works of the flesh, and spirit contradistinct, and oppositively; so
does James, Chap. 3.14, 15. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth. This wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; Earthly and heavenly wisdom;
where we find these two (...), in the same order as in my Text.
the nature of earthly wisdom (wisdom falsely called) was to envy,
out-strive, weary one another with divisions; such was humane wit and wisdom;
the Apostle he follows these witty actions home, and discovers the rise, Jam.
4.1. Well, its plain then that these envyigns, strifes, and contentions, and
divisions are properly the workings of a carnal and unsanctified spirit. But to
the words; Whereas there is Envying, Strife, Division: Mark their series and
graduation: first Envy, (...) in pectore, (...) in lingua, et (...) in
operibus.
that begins to kindle first in the heart, and burn, and burns till it set fire
on the tongue, and then breaks out Contentions; and from words it falls to
deeds; that from jarrings and scoldings, they quite fall asunder and part;
whence are your Divisions?

First then a word of your Envyings. The word in the Original comes of a word
that signifies To boil with heat; and this envying is a boiling, (...) a
(...). hence those Epithites, pallidus ira and Hes. (...).
a vehement, hot, discontented, and troublesome motion of the affections
against a person, or cause not beloved, but an enemy to something that the
party so affected loves. And as men that deal much in the fire wax pale and
wan; Such is the Description of anger with the Poets. See it elegantly in our
English Virgil. This is zelus invidiae, non zelus conjugalis; or ipsa invidia,
as rightly translated.
so does this fiery affection dry up the good qualities of the Soul, contracts
and draws into himself all the good desires, nay the very good looks he owes to
another; as it takes away the color of the face, looking like death, and by
his looks promising no less in some degree or other to the party disaffected,
so that with the color of the face departs the goodness of the mind. This is
the nature of this anger, this emulation, this envying betwixt one another; and
here is the difference betwixt anger and envying (though confounded in the
translation) that Envy is a continued Anger, Quo quidem malo nescio quis
nostrum caret, etc. et postea -- nescio quis possit regnum Dei possidere, cum
is qui irascitur separetur a regno. -- Inter Iracundiam et iram hoc interest,
iracundus semper irascitur, iratus pro tempore concitatur. Hier. Comment. in
Gal. p. 937. vide Weems, the portraicture of the Image of man. vol. 1. p. 188.
or a real, fervent, and hearty desire of an other man's evil, arising out of
anger, to which all are subject, viz. Anger: and God owns it in himself, and so
it is good according to its object and carriage, as zeal is likewise: only as
it is sinful, hatred has an injury for its object; but envy has the
prosperity and happiness of others for its object: As David conquering of
Goliath made Saul envy him; and the Prodigals good and free entertainment
provoked his Brother: And therefore far worse then anger or hatred.

2 This cannot continue long in the heart undiscovered, being in a multitude,
one Church burning with envy in Spirit against another; but as heat causing
air in any concave bodies, produces disquiet motions till it finds its
passage; and as hot boiling liquors will arise out of the belly over the lips
of the Pot; so this will out of the mind and perplexed thoughts, and break
through the mouth and tongue into railings, strifes, invectives, contentious
disputes, etc. which is called this (...), or (...), promiscuously used and
translated: When men out of an affectation of glory, and desirous of victory,
encounter with men professing and eminent in the Truth, begin unnecessary
strifes, and endless disputes about words, things of indifferency, cases of
suspicion, and most about things (when resolved) not much making for
edification; but in the mean while to continued perturbations: from the
practice of which, and the society of such dispositioned men, the Apostle
frequently warns and dehorts Timothy.

3 These cannot continue long; but from words to blows; the Apostle therefore
adds to this, Wars, Jam. 4.1. or at the least to Divisions: For if they envy,
and then jarre and quarrel, and will not humbly and carefully take up (as
seldom men of such spirits do) these cannot continue long together in one
Church and Congregation, but must divide, and that in opposition and despite
one to the other. And here follows after envying and strife these (...),
Divisions. Amos. 3.3.
We see one house could not hold Isaac and Ishmael, because of Ishmaels proud
contentions, and fond mockings; which is more subject to the base-born, then
the free and true born of the Lord. We see that Lot and Abraham could not dwell
near together for this, but divided far asunder; though Lot fared never the
better, who was the cause of the division, and could not stoop to Abraham, his
betters. And so it is in the Church of God; for after strifes and envying, then
comes Sideings, Parties, Sects, Factions, several Churches according to the
things they envy one another, and strive with one another about. And this
comprehends Heresy and Schism, which arises from Envy, Pride and Strife, and
consummates the divisions. Envy is the first rise that divides the tongues,
and makes one say this, and another that, striving for mastery, and glory above
another; and hence it is, That one will not see as an other, will not speak as
an other, will not walk as another; but will contend against them to vex and
dishonor them, (...): cum scilicet sibi unusquisque eligat disciplinam (potius
doctrinam) quam putat esse meliorem: quicunque igitur aliter scripturam
intelligit, quam sensus spiritus sancti flagitat, quo conscripta est, licet de
Ecclesia non recesserit, tamen haereticus appellari potest. etc. Hier. in Gal.
p. 936.
will divide from them to eclipse and lessen their glory. Hence comes many an
Heretic; which is not dirived from the Latin word Haeres, but from the Greek
(...), which is a taking unto our selves a Point differing from the Truth and
Church of God in a Fundamental: and so a man walking this way, may be an
Heretic whether he divide from a Church or no; only he will divide, because a
true Church cannot suffer him to continue with them: and others will go
further, (I will not determine whether with more Judgment, or less Charity)
adjudging them to be Heretics, who will obstinately, and perversely against
all means, conscionably and holily used by the Church to reclaim them,
continue in an Error to the disturbance and vexation of the Church, See the
pious Exhortation of the London Divines at their late general Assembly, p. 131.
132
though not in Fundamentals. The reason is, Because Pertinancy, Obstinacy, and
Impudence is of the formality of Heresy.

And as for Schism, being no Latin word, it comes not a scindendo (though of
some affinity as in the former) but of (...), that signifies To rent, or
divide; and so (...) is in a proper sense called A rent, Matthew. 9.16. And this
has reference to the Government of a Church, yet not to extend to the
Excommunicate person who is a Schismatique, but its passively, and he is
deservedly made so being cut off from Church Communion; and not of another, but
of no Church: but this has respect to such as are Schismatiques actively,
cutting themselves off from a Church, and setting up another Church Way in
Government according to their own private judgment, or their groundless
spiritual fancies; leaving their former Assemblies, and in contempt, despite,
and opposition to them, sets up others: Such an one is a most complete and
absolute Schismatique, who out of a singular conceit, and end of their own,
leaves the general way of the Church, and walks in one of their own: The
English of such a man is a Sectary, which comes a Secundo, who divides himself
from a Church sound in the Fundamentals of Religion, and endeavoring in
Government to come to the most plain and exact Scriptural rules. These are your
Dichotomists that divide and sub-divide themselves so long, (...), of (...)
dupliciter, and (...) seditio. statio, hence (...), and (...), idem significant.
that you shall find no Church, I am sure no universal Church; and their
particular Churches will be as many as there be persons almost, in time: And
hence come your (...), divisions; which are either from persons once of one
mind and resolution, but now parting themselves, plot and contrive for, and
walk in several ways: Or else its a spiritual mutinying, and sedition in the
Church of God, where one Party cries up this, another that; and at last
unsatisfied, go their several way like Israel under Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 10.16,
Every man to your Tents, O Israel; and every man to the way that appears best
unto him; like an Army either routed through the strength of an Enemy, or
mouldring away for want of good Government and exercise.

The sense is this; O ye Corinthians, among you are envying, strifes, and
divisions of these natures, and degrees; some of you setting up a Church in the
name of Paul; another Party another Church in the name of Apollos; a third in
the name of Cephas; and these you do in opposition one to another; violently
maintaining one to be better, and more excellent then another: and yet for all
this, you will be the spiritual ones. What? Are these the fruits of the Spirit
and a sanctified hear? Does it bring forth such Briars and Thorns? Does it
work no better a change on the vile natures of man, but that still you should
have the spirit, and discover the cruelty of a Wolf, the greediness of Dogs,
the deadly poison of Serpents, and the cruelty of all Beasts? What is it a
spirit of Division, Strife, and Envyings? No; such comes not from the Spirit,
but quenches and ejects it; such shows not the heart of a spiritual man, a
Dove, a Sheep: but the contrary. And an happy and acceptable thing it is for
that Church, Haec est in Ecclesia noscenda simplicitas, haec charitas
obtinenda, ut columbas dilectio fraternitatis imitetur, ut mansuetudo et
lenitas agnis et ovibus coaequetur. Quid facit in pectore Christiano luporum
feritas? Et canum rabies, et venenum letale serpentum? Et cruenta saevitia
bestiarum? gratulandum est, cum tales de Ecclesia separantur, ne columbas, ne
oves saeva sua venenata contagione praelentur. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles. p. 233.
where such are divided from them, that the harmless Dove, and quiet Sheep be
not spoiled and poisoned with the violence or subtilty of their divisions: And
does not the spirit rather take down the swellings of the Proud, meeken the
spirits of the stout-hearted, unite the hearts of enemies, insinuate its oils
of humility and self-denial into the justified; and brings all hearts of what
nation, or condition soever (if a Barbarian, Scythian, Armenian, etc.) into one
agreement? Sure it is then, that you deceive and mistake your selves: in these
respects you discover but a carnal, unsanctified, unregenerated, and unchanged
heart from your first condition. And this brings on the last Quere, How by good
demonstration may this be made good, that envyings, etc. are the proper fruits
of the Flesh, and not the Spirit?

4 To make this good by clear demonstrations, That Envyings, Strifes, and
Divisions (notwithstanding their highest pretenses) for Paul, or Apollos, or
Christ himself, proceed from the flesh, and in that respect discover a mere
carnal, and not a spiritual mind.

1 The First is drawn from the first breakings out of corrupt nature from man
after his fall, wherein it will appear, That our dividing from God in our
affections, is the cause of our divisions one from another.

1 Consider this Division as a divine revenge on backsliding man; and you shall
see it a mere fruit of sin.

1 There is a division in the nature of man. When God made man, he so equally
tempered the quarrelsome elements in man's body, that they (who of themselves
would destroy one another, and thereby the whole frame) serve one another
willingly to the preservation of man: but in the day that thou eatest the
forbidden fruit, thou shall die; that is, become mortal. Soul and Body that
made up one before, and was to remain one, must now be divided; and therefore
there must be oppositions amongst the contentious humors of the Body; this or
that striving for predominanty: And being distempered and diseased, becomes
unfit for the Soul, destroys the Spirit, and banisheth the Soul to him that
first joined them to the Body.

2 A Division with the creatures. They were all made to serve man, and man
could not in his innocence more freely and cheerfully have served his maker,
then being innocent they should have unanimously and promptly have served him:
That as he gave them names, so he should by these names, like the good
Centurion, set over the host of God, call and send them at his pleasure. But
now because man has lost his integrity, he loses his dominion; and as they
War against one another, so rebel against their Lord and Master, hating to be
subject to him: And instead of living one with another, one lives upon another:
And as some observe, The worst of creatures has some good in it to preserve
and help man, so the best of creatures has something in it to destroy man.

3 A division with man; betwixt the good seed and the bad, Genesis 3.15. Ego
ponam, non ut vitium, sed ut poenam. That as there is an inveterate and
irreconcilable hatred betwixt the natural Serpent and mankind; so betwixt the
spiritual seed of the Serpent, and of the Woman: and not only the wicked and
the godly are thus divided, but the godly themselves, even amongst themselves,
so far as natural and carnal.

4 A general division amongst all men: not only in their hearts, but in their
tongues and ways too; and all arising from envy. Before Satan's envying the
happiness of God, and desiring to be like unto him, there was no division; but
then he, thrust out of the presence of God, seeing that not feasiable to become
as happy as God, being now become miserable, is loath that any should be more
happy then himself; he therefore envying man's felicity, sets him on a point of
emulation, striving, and aspiring to be like God, and so divides them. Then his
posterity, either proudly disdaining the judgments of God, or enviously
attempting heaven, builds a Tower; and then God curses their language with
division, that they have the cursed gifts of speaking several languages, or
else that one language so variously dialected, that they could not understand
one another. And afterward they could not live, rule, plant, build together,
but every one according to his tongue and his family betakes himself into
several parts, and there has his several God; and when grown up into Countries
and Nations, they War one against another; and those that could not live
together, cannot live one by another. And we see these judgments continuing and
increasing with the sins of mem amongst the Church of God, Deuteronomy. 28.

2 Consider this division as naturally arising sinfully from sin: What God
inflicts as a punishment, man practices as a sin; and in both these respects it
first breaks out in Adams own family (seeing the truth of the Curse performed
before his own eyes, and on the fruit of his own loins) as a most genuine
stream of a corrupt heart. The Apostle joins these two together, Envying,
Murder, etc. Murder is the height of division, when not only they cannot abide
to be together, but cannot abide to be at all: like fire and water, either part
them, or they must consume one or other, or both die together. Man cannot love,
nor unite his affection to any thing that is good, not to God himself, or his
Truth; because man is become so much bad, that there is nothing that is good
but its an enemy to him, and therefore he seeks to his power to destroy it: As
we read of Cain, 1 John 3.12. And wherefore slew he him? because his own works
were evil, and his brothers righteous. Satan is called the Murderer, and the
envious to be of him. Envy, and so Satan may be very well called by the
Serpent Basilisk, who is termed Rex invidorum; because he transmits death from
his eyes, seeing others well, conveyes his poison immediately to hurt them.
Natural wisdom is called (...). Jam. 3.14. Satan is styled (...). Mat. 13. and
his employment is (...), in sleeping time, in the very hour of our negligence,
etc. he sowes (...), weeds, not only making evil men amongst others in the
Church of Christ heretics, etc. but even in the hearts of Gods people; when
they are careless and watchlesse, he casts in tares, envious motions, dividing
thoughts, proud, ambitious designs into the heart, etc. this is his main
business he goes about. But none of his temptations could set fire on us, but
that there is fuel in us; and should he not tempt us, we should tempt and
provoke our selves hereto; we should solicit, and use the forciblest arguments
that might be to stir up our base natures to proceed from envyings to strife,
and from strife to divisions. How secretly does Cain carry fire in his bosom,
and he studies and watches a convenient opportunity to pour out his poison on
his own brother: Esau and Jacob could not live together. Paul and Barnabas
could not work together. This is natural to all, its the bitter fruit
proceeding from that root of bitterness in all.

2 The second Argument is taken from Jesus Christ, acting in his offices for
us, to us, and in us for this end, to make up this division made by our sins,
and continued: which if it had not been caused by our sins, the end of his
actions had been void.

1 Acting for us as an intercessor, which extends to all that then believed, or
should hereafter believe, Joh. 17.20, 21. When he prays for a positive
Blessing, its likewise against the curse and evil in the negative; when he
prays for Unity, he prays against division. Sure, as he prayed not in vain to
his Father, so not for us; viz. for a thing we wanted not, or could procure to
our selves. It was the groan, the longing of our dear Savior for us,
proceeding from an holy Spirit, and bowels filled with compassion, grieved for
our divisions with God, and amongst our selves: and what motion to the contrary
is in us, proceeds from a contrary spirit to that which was in our Savior.

2 Acting to us as a master, a preacher of righteousness, teaching and
instructing his people and servants according to the will of his heavenly
Father revealed to him, and his fathers and his example. Thus we read Christ
breathing out of the bosom of his Father his mind to us, Mat. 5.44, 45. But I
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you:
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven; for he makes
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and
on the unjust. Per verba scandit oration, ab affectu ad verba, a verbis ad res
ventura, etc. Grot. in loc.
There is the Precept teaching us how to demean our selves toward them that
are out of the Church, how to temper our language, our actions outwardly, nay
our prayers to God for them in private, perfumed with this odor of Love. Saint
Luke does at large set down the same in the Affirmative, Chap. 6. v. 35. But
love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your
reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the most high: for he is
kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. In the Negative, verse. 37. Judge
not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned:
forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. And couples them sweetly together, from the
great and near resemblance hereby they will have of God. Christ himself comes
as a Lamb, in all his preachings labors to work on them humility, innocence,
and unity, and proposes his own pattem for lowliness and meekness, the
preservatives of Union; and when he is to leave them in this world, (like
Joseph parting with his brethren, Fall not out by the way, Genesis 45.24.) leaves
this injunction to them as the words of a dying Savior, Joh. 15.12. This is my
commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. And verse. 17. These
things I command you, that ye love one another. And come we a little after him,
and hearken to the voice of John, his beloved Disciple, lying in his bosom,
and breathing out the mind of his Master to us: read I say his Epistles, and
you will think him totus compositus ex amore; Saint Beatus Johannes Evan
gelista cum Ephesi moraretur usque ad ultimam senectutem, et vix inter
Discipulorum manus ad Ecclesiam deferreretur, nec possit in plura vocem
contexere, nihil aliud per singulas proferre collectas, nisi hoc, Filioli,
diligite alterutrum; tandem Discipuli et fratres, qui aderant, tadio affecti,
quod cadem semper audir^^^, dixerunt, Magister, Quare semper hoc loqueris? Qui
respondit (dignam Joanne sententiam) quia praeceptum Domini est, et si solum
siat, sufficit. Hier. in Gal. Com. p. 947.
Hierome has a relation of him, That when he was so weak with age, that he was
not able to go to the public Auditory unsupported by his Disciples, and there
not to speak much; this was his constant Lecture, Children, Love one another:
but his Disciples being wearied with the constant repetition of this one thing,
said, Master, why always this? He answered, Because its the command of our
Lord Jesus, and do but this, and it suffices.

3 In us as a King, ruling and guiding his people inwardly, subduing their sins
and corruptions. And rules he not as King of Peace? And will he then suffer
these unruly lusts of envy and strife to abide in us? Will he suffer his
Subjects to bite and devour one another? It was for the men possessed with
devils to be rent and torn themselves, and to fly on such as passed by; but not
for such in whom Christ dwells and rules, swayes his Scepter of righteousness
and peace. Are not his Laws righteous, and well known before us? Has he given
toleration to any to tolerate division and strife in his Kingdom? Does his
Spirit by which he rules in us set us at variance, or anywhere give the least
allowance to dissenters? We read of him, That he only has power to govern,
and that in peace, Isa. 9.6. For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
prince of peace. Then strife and division do discover, that such have little
interest in the intercessory prayers of Christ, that they give little heed to
his command and example, and that they have as little share in him, who rules
them in peace and unity, that are his: but that which causes strife and
division proceeds from another spirit and mind, even from themselves and Satan;
and in no wise from him.

3 The third Argument is taken from the true, proper, and gracious working of
the Spirit of God through the word on the heart and spirit of every one that is
called to believe, brought out of their carnal and unregenerate estate, and
from the general and gross society of this world into the Communion of Saints
and Church Fellowship. Though these men be of diverse languages and nations, of
diverse estates and conditions, of diverse constitutions and qualifications, of
diverse practices and conversations; yet it has the self same work upon them
all, that are truly converted; I say, at their first conversion, when the high
thoughts of the flesh were brought down, and the strong powers of a carnal mind
subdued, it brings them in an holy and peaceable society. Many thousands were
converted by Peter's Sermons, questionless of several dispositions and natural
inclinations, callings, and practices; yet one general frame and heart wrought
in them all, by one and the self same Spirit, through one and the self same
Word: as we read, Act. 2.41: Then they that gladly received his Word, were
baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
souls. And verse. 46. And they continued daily with one accord in the temple,
and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart. And Chap. 4. verse. 32. And the multitude of them that
believed, were of one heart, and of one soul: neither said any of them, that
ought of the things which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things
common. And no less do all the promises of Christ and his Kingdom assuredly
portend for his people: as you may read Isa. 11. Your great ones, the Lion:
your cruel ones, persecutors, the Leopard: your profane ones, your Wolf, and
Bear: your wise, and subtle ones, that sorest hurt the people of God, the Aspe
and Cockatrice, all shall lie down with the meek ones of Christ's Kingdom, verse.
6, 7, 8, 9. And Chap. 55.12, 13. having showed the irresistible power and
efficacy of his Word: adds, you shall go out with joy, etc. Isa. 61.7. For
confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: A distinct lot and station; and
this they shall rejoice in instead of rude and disordered confusions, at the
pouring forth of the Gospel Spirit. So Jer. 32.39. One name, Zech. 14.9. They
shall subscribe freely unto the Lord. They shall Covenant with all their
hearts. they shall be of one lip, Zeph. 3.9. For what a strange paradox would
it be to Christians, to receive a Gospel of peace, that amongst the true
beleivers of it should set fire to consume them and the whole Church?

Nay, let us appeal to the hearts of any true believer, and but a little
catechize him; How wast thou before thy conversion? haughty, litigious, scorned
an affront, impatient in sufferings, active in broils, rejoicing in the
Churches disturbances, full of maliciousness, envying, etc? But how is it now?
all the contention thou have is in thy own bowels betwixt sin and grace, and
against the destruction of thy brother? And when thou art in a gracious and
spiritual frame before God, when thou recollectest thy self, and appliest
truth home to thy self, is not thy heart broken? could thou not pour forth
thy heart upon the Church, from the head to the skirts of Christ, to the
poorest member of his? nay, when thou sadly resentest the differences of his
people, could thou not be content to give them thy blood to join and fasten
them together, if it could prevail? Were not then the Saints of God, one that
had the least of the image of God, one in whom you could discern any thing of a
gracious Spirit, dear and precious in thy eyes? and did not grace make a great
difference in thy affection, even toward thy own kindred? Art not thou thus
still in the right actings of thy mind and affections? How is it now that thou
dividest from them, and enviest, and strivest with them? What! from the same
spiritual temper? or are those Christians to whom we were joined in the same
fellowship apostatized from the faith? No sure: they are the same, but you are
not: the Flesh has increased on you, and the Spirit but weak in you. Sometimes
if thou observest thy own heart, thou will be ready to wrangle with the Lord,
as Jonah, and Elias: and therefore he carries this character on him, That he
was a man subject to the like passions as we are. And thou art more ready to
vilify thy brother, in thy passions to whet thy tongue (I wish they were but
sudden passions) in his necessities thou putst thy hand into thy bosom, or
reproachest him in his distress; and his slips are matter of joy and boastings
to thee: but compare thy self with thy former frame of Spirit, deceive not thy
self, look heartily into thy actions, thou shall find no Gospel character on
them, thy heart and affections much altered, and thou will freely confess this
comes from thy overgrown carnal heart, from new risings of old mortified
corruptions, and a loosing of those Gospel reins once laid upon thy Soul.

4 Arg. It appears that these only have the rise from the praedominant flesh in
us, From those many and gross corruptions that disclose themselves in the
handling and managing of Church-contentions.

1 Envy. That is a grievous sin, but clearly acting herein; which is an
emulating another happiness, Invidus alterius rebus macres^it opimis.
glory, prosperity, etc. and so much the worse, to make at the blessings and
honor of God conferred on his Church. Its the sad prolocutor to many horrid
Tragedies; and none so desperate, and dangerous as the envy of friends; for in
its execution it loses all relations, even of nature it self.

2 Ignorance. Not knowning their own weakness, not the due honor they owe to
the members of Christ Jesus in their places; nor solidly apprehending the
truths of God, etc. else, true and sanctified knowledge would put an end to
many differences.

3 Pride. They suppose themselves slighted, and deserving far more then they
have, seeing that in such a Church way there will be many that will go before
them, outshine him; look upon their own gifts in a Multiplying glass, upon the
gifts of others at the wrong end of the Prospective glass; keeping no due
proportion, and spiritual sobriety in their thoughts of themselves, and in
their ways and callings over themselves, in reference to others.

4 The continuance in these, breeds a perverse and stubborn spirit, will not
return: hating to be thought ignorant, to be adjudged of error, or guilty of
unlawful strivings and divisions; that which thrusts them upon, keeps them in
the way and practicte of Divisions; and seldom do we find such constant to
any thing but factions and fractions; and are for any, wherein they may be
eminent. Oh it would make a heart to tremble to see what an horrid change is
wrought in them, what a spirit of deep slumbring is fallen on them, they lying
under the want even of natural light and reason.

5 Coveteousness; They cast about for ways that are profitable and gainful:
And when the ways of Truth become thorny, and dirty, culpable, obnoxious to
loss of place, estate, etc. then they must divide, as Demas leaves Paul, and
lay out for some other course, though opposite to truth it self.

6 Corruption: An ill judgment, and a worse affection. Some men love not to
live within compass, and by a sober, strict, and impartial rule; like a
diseased man, that is either ashamed of himself, or else fearful his companions
will be ashamed of him, keeps therefore by himself, or associates with his
like; an evil and unclean heart will warpe from a pure and watchful
Congregation. These and many others being thoroughly and impartially weighed, may
see these iniquities easily breaking forth, and fostered in divisions, and must
needs say, Surely these things cannot be from God, but from the flesh.

Arg. 5. Envyings, strifes, and divisions tend to the maintenance, and
satisfying of the flesh; and as the end is to which any thing directly tends,
of the same nature are the means; and whatsoever tends not to the glory of God,
advancement of the truth, promoting of the Power of Godliness, etc. cannot
proceed from the Spirit but the Flesh, and these lead directly and principally
to the pleasing of the flesh, and nourishment thereof: By flesh I here mean not
in a strict sense the touch and sense of flesh, and those sins that are acted
by, and terminated in the flesh, which are properly carnal pleasures, etc. in
which sense Saint John takes it 1 John, 2. and the Peccata recipient speciem ex
objectis etc. illa peccata quae perficiuntur delectatione spirituali, vocantur
pec cata spiritualia; illa vero quae perficiuntur in delectatione carnali,
vocantur peccata carnalia. Aqu. 12. q. 72. a. 2. c.
Schoolmen; but that which is commonly called the carnal part, the corrupt,
unregenerate, and unmortified part of man in the whole. And this

1. Tends to the satisfying and delight of the ungodly, and such as are not
only grossly carnal, but professed enemies to the truth; and herein we act no
more for them, then they would do themselves; But of this more hereafter; only
its a sign that that bears much evil in it, that pleases men that are
wholly evil, and relish nothing else, and this not only for them to see it in
us, but to join with parties against us.

2. It tends to a general licentiousness: men withdrawing their necks from the
yoke of Christ, run into any way that seems good to them; and makes way to an
everlasting evagation; for he that will take liberty to divide from a people
walking by Divine Rule in the main, must lay down in themselves a Principle of
unsetlednes, and to have a grant of Liberty to depart at pleasure from any else
that appears not to be more divinely grounded; and so like the Traveller,
passes from one place to another, from one Church to another, for novelty,
curiosity, and speculation sake; only is not so sure to return to his true
home as the Traveller; and this is done for Conscience sake. Hereby the
hypocrite, the unclean person, and weak brother may throw the reins off his
neck and return to his vomit, for such stand open to temptations; Seldom a
wanton head and heart being separable: if we consider who are subject to this
sad judgment, even corrupt people, 2 Timothy 3.6. For of this sort are they which
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with
diverse lusts, and what such does naturally produce, 2 Timothy 2.16. But shun
propha^e and vain bablings, for they will increase unto more ungodliness. and
take them at the best, (I dare appeal to any true believer) whether since his
division, and striving he has made any Vbi adhuc refidet talis ambitio, aut
nullus est aut exiguus Evangelii profectus, Marl.
sensible increase in holiness, nay, whether he is not lessned in his love,
care, and practice; and its seldom with such schismatic Non nos ab ill is,
sed illi a nobis recesserunt; and cum haereses and schismata postmodu^ nata
sunt, dum conventicula si by diversa constituunt, veritatis caput, atque
orignem reliquerunt. Cypt. de unit. Eccles. p. 234.
Volunteers, but they lose the very Truth it self; and let any judge how it
should be otherwise; for these merely tend to confusion, where there is this
(...), Division, there will be (...), no standing order, or confusion; and if
any thing can make greater gaps in the hedge of the Vineyard for good to go
forth, and evil to enter; if a wider gate can be set open for evils in
judgment and life, it must be the gates of Hell; and this we may easily judge
by what success it has already had even amongst all parties, and even such
that merely in tenderness of conscience, or desire of greater perfection in
holiness have parted from them.

Now, if we look upon envyings, strifes, and dlvisions breaking first out from
Satan, by whom the whole world was and is set on fire, and issuing freely from
man's lapsed nature, as to be made up by Christ, and wrote against by the
Gospel, as maintained by reigning lusts, and maintaining the reign of lusts, it
must needs prove thus at last, that a people beginning, and proceeding herein
do betray a carnal mind, if not totally carnal.

Cartwright, Ball. Synod against Dissenting etc. with many others.
And whereas there has been much said in the justification of Separation and
Division, and much more against it, I shall say little Polemically in this
Discourse; only hint an Objection or two briefly with their Answers.

Some from Matthew. 18.22. gather the lawfulness of gathered Churches made up of
members rent and divided from others.

The place makes against them; For,

1. That two or three, has reference to the Governors of a Church, as appears
clearly by the context to any intelligent and unbyassed Christian.

2. Or if in general it appertains to Christians, yet its spoken to such as
are still of the same Church before spoken of, and still preserve their unity
to the whole, notwithstanding their private assembling. Two or three of you.

3 Mark the manner of their meeting; In my Name: Nese quidem varia
interpretatione decipiant etc. ostendens non multitudini sed unanimitati
deprecantium plurimum tribui. Cypr. ib.
Can they be gathered in his Name that divide the Church and Truth it self? Can
they meet in his Fear that despise his Worship? Can it be to his glory that
labors against unity? Let us not deceive our selves by false glossing the
scriptures, etc. God hears not men of many mouths, but of one mouth and heart.
Others say, That God commands them to depart out of Babylon.

True, so you ought in respect of your spiritual and temporal safety, Non
laudamus errones, qui vagantur and ad nullam se Ecclesiam adjungunt, quia
nusquam inveniant talem ideam, in qua non desideretur aliquid in moribus, aut
disciplina; sed quaeramus Ecclesiam in qua articuli sidei recte docentur, and
errores non defenduntur, and adha^c nos adjungamus, hanc docentem audiamus, and
diligamus, and nostram invocationem, and confessionem ipsius precibus and
confessioni aggregemus, Chem. part 3. de Eccles. p. 279.
and out of a Church that is Babylonish, Idolatrical, defiled in the very
Fundamentals of Religion, and corrupt in the materials of the Ordinances, from
such depart, but not from Churches that every one calls Babylonish, and
especially such as call it so that they might set up another of their own; and
while you depart from Babylon so called, take heed you do not really run into
Babylon its damnable Errors, etc. But where doctrine is sound according to
divine Writ, discipline in general pure; No such is Babylon, from no such let
us depart.

But the more refined takes offense at our mixed Congregations and so depart?

1. Yea, if they depart because mixed with some unsanctified professors (as
they judge) and will not join with any mixed, they must resolve to be of no
constituted and particular Church in this world, no not of Christ's own, if he
and his Disciples, and hearers were now present in this world.

2. However, thou taxest many of them to be carnal, and so not to be
communicated withal in such high and spiritual mysteries (which thou can
never prove); But do not thou show thy self to be carnal in separating from
the whole, because of the corruption of one member, Sicut ipsi nihil minus quam
Dei ecclesia sunt, sic little improbitas Ecclesiam non tollit, Ecclesia nomen
delere non potest, 1 John 2.19. Neque enim dissitemur quin nomine Ecclesia,
Hypocrita etiam qui in ca sunt comprehendantur, dicente Domino etc. Matthew. 13.
and 25. Zanch. de Eccles. page 535. lib. 8.
and crying down this, and setting up another?

3. But does the Congregation tolerate, connive at, brook a profane person, an
obstinate sinner, an ignorant man to communicate with thee? if so, then more
occasion to divide:

But our division is not schism, or our separation is not division, nor
proceeds from envying and strife.

Truly in a Grammatical sense, division must be schism, and separation must be
division; but I know it not otherwise in your mystical sense; and I am sure in
a Scriptural and spiritual sense it shows a carnal mind, and that it does
proceed from a spirit of the former temper, even among you of this City. I
shall make it good in the Uses, applying the Doctrine in this particular, to
the People of this City, and in general to all Christians.

But before we fall on the Application, take with me these Cautions:

1. I make not every differing brother, a dividing brother, Vide Zanch. de
Eccles.
nor every difference a ground sufficient for strife or division; and if
divided, yet neither Heretic nor Schismatique so long as the difference is
not plainly determined by Scripture, and that the difference does not evidently
make way for dangerous, and more pernicious opinions and practices.

2. A Difference and division, and strife betwixt Church and Church in several
Kingdoms, is not so great, or of such evil consequence and hurtful, as in a
Church in one Kingdom; for times, places, and manners may much alter the
Government in Churches according to Ecclesiastical, nay and gracious policy.

3. A Difference in these days of ours, Quod in Cypriano naevus, in vobis
fuligo, etc. Aug. Quod in patribus error, in Armenis Haercsis. Cot. Bolt.
Arraign. of error, p. 152.
and amongst such as the men of these days profess themselves, is worse, and
more dangerous, and less tolerable then in any days and times before; for the
greater light, the greater love; more Gospel, more peace should be.

4. That smaller differences when under the Name of Christ, this for him, and
that against him, when really he is not concerned in them, but the very
adopting him Patron of them, makes them dangerously consequential, higher, and
less reconcilable; for they most engage conscience, provoke zeal.

5. That differences taking on them (as truly most do) the name of men, and so
gathering into divided Churches, as well as distinguishing names, do declare
them to be evil, Hinc Tertullianistae, Originistae, etc. Sic Brownistae, etc.
etiam Jesuitae, etc.
and proceed from carnal principles; for else all Truth, and ways meet in
Christ, whose name we have owned, and glory in alone, viz. Christians; and more
palpable are they that assume strange arrogant names to themselves, which
bespeaks nothing more then pride, envy, division, especially these being in
one Church and that a reformed one.

These premised, which you ought to take along with you to allay sometimes the
bitterness of speech (if there be any) for I direct not this to perverse
Heretics sealed under a judgment to the last day, but to men, to Christians
who were converted by the same means, nourished and brought up in the same
ordinance, whose affections burned as they walked together in the house of God,
and never more happy then in their public and private meetings; but now
estranged, if not envying, striveing, dividing like enemies, as if there was
now no peace to be had with the old Puritan as in former times; against you
must I make good this charge of the Apostle, and herein I must be plain, and if
I be sharp, if too sharp, I cannot be so sharp with you as you are one with
another; Non omnis qui parcit amicus, nec qui verberat inimicus. Aug. unit. ep.
48.
and happily I may be, and prove a better friend to you that call you carnal,
then he that calls you Saints, and a check in the mouth is fitter for you then
a stroke under the chin.

1. Do not your strifes and divisions arise from Envyings? not to meddle with
your State divisions, your boasting of triumphant and victorious enterprises,
your dis-officing, nay and persecuting of one another (though these fall under
my cognizance, and take their rise from your dis-agreements in opinion about
religion) but only in point of Religion. What means your depraving not only of
one Government, but all kinds of Government successively, as it has grated on
your evil humors, but of persons of honor, renown, religion, most tender
consciences, of unspotted lives, zealous Martyrs for the truth, laying sad
reproaches and aspersions on them in your Pamphlets we read in the Country?
What means those ridiculous and absurd retrolocutions, calling good evil, and
evil good, bitter sweet, and sweet bitter, liberty thraldom, and thraldom
liberty, falsitie fidelity, and fidelity falsity, backsliding constancy, and
constancy backsliding, true zeal sedition, and sedition true zeal? Whence are
those self-admirations, hyperbolicall jactations, worse then the very Heathen
Philosopher, that would not take the name (...) but (...)? What mean your
several cries in the City, and Congregations, setting up Paul's Church, and
Apollos Church, and Cephas his Church, and this the holiest, and that the
purest, the heavenliest Church? come not these from envious emulations? if from
love, I am sure it has not the characters the Apostle in this Epistle
attributes to it, 1 Cor. 13. First, he shows how far a man may act (as is
thought in a charitable way) without charity. Verse. 1, 2, 3. Though I speak
with the tongues of men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries and all knowledge: and though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing. And though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Then what true charity amongst
the members of the Lord Jesus will do, and will not do: Verse. 4, 5, 6. Charity
suffers long, and is kind: charity envieth not: charity vaunteth not it
self, is not puffed up, Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, Rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth: I confess in your way you show forth much of the first
in gifts, elocutions, prophecies, etc. but I cannot in charity (unless I belie
my knowledge and conscience) say that you suffer long, that you are kind, that
you envy not, that you vaunt not, that you are not puffed up, etc. which
things must needs destroy the society and communion of the Saints of God, and
sure that is not charity; No, no, thy envyings, strifes, and divisions,
testify to thy face O London, and we in the Country can witness against thee;
for though thy divisions at first arose like a small handed cloud, now it has
quite spread over thee, and have been the heaviest hand that ever thou barest;
nay, and they have spread over us too; the sparks, the flames of thy fire in
whole sheets have light on our Houses and Towns: Whence have come any
Emissaries to broach their dark lights, and infatuating opinions to divide our
Congregations, but out of London? and these not only come with thy opinions,
but with the same or more bitter, invective, scandalizing and reproachful
languages, then we read in thy Satyricall toy-books, as if in the next Edition
they were reprinted on their breasts, with their amendments: So that the Vipers
bred in thy bowels and have even consumed thee, now creep into ours.

And to manifest the coldness of your affections, that you desire still to live
in the fire, and that peace is not in your hearts, lo your earnest endeavors
for a toleration, not a bare connivance, but a command to divide; lo your
writings against the restraint of all evils, of any evils, that so you may
proceed to a Mathematical division. Some saying, I can live and keep my
conscience amongst any; and so I have my liberty, I care not what the rest be;
this Conscience is not such a one as Lots, as David's; but he that can live in
Sodom with them, may come to live in Hell with them; and this man's conscience
cannot endure to have Communion with a weak brother, that can live with comfort
and rest amongst men as ill as Devils: And others fly in the face of justice
with persecution, and of Government with Antichristianisme. What ailes these
lowings of Oxen, and bleatings of Sheep? but envyings, strifes, and divisions;
and such as are unchristian, fleshly, devilish; even such (if they be not
suddenly reconciled or abated) will consume you: And as for my part, I had
rather you were cold, then lukewarm, and that an impious Sect, and Error was
solely maintained, and Truth it self persecuted, then all Errors tolerated.

I will not enlarge my self further, least while I speak against division,
Homicidae sunt apud Deum tales etc. and cum nobis semel moricudum sit, illi
tamen and odio, and verbis and delictis suis quotidic perimunt. Cypr. Ep 55. p.
102.
you say I have no desire to Union; only let me tell you that you are set on
fire of hell; and you are of that evil one, that was a murderer, 1 John 3.2.
and though you do not actually slay, burn, and eat up one another, yet by
degrees you are consuming one another, and in a degree murdering one another,
putting them to death daily, whom nature has ordered but once to die, and no
marvel that St. James calls it divelish, and the fire is brought from hell,
when as these sad envyings beseem rather the damned in hell, then the people of
God on earth; for the happiness of Gods Church shall be an aggravation to the
miseries in in hell, and their glory the damneds envy, their triumph the
damneds terror, to which our Savior thus speaks, Luke 13.28. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your selves thurst
out. When they shall see them thus and thus, Stridor dentium opus est invidiae.
whose goodness and grace they mocked at on earth, their glory in heaven such
will envy.

2. I must now tell you, that these things being so evident, that you are
carnal; boast not of the Spirit, as if you had it, and none else, and therefore
ye depart from the Antichristian Congregations: True, if they were so clearly
proved by Text of Scripture, it were good to divide; but do not you say so of
them that you might justify your division, and still nourish your envious
strivings? but I say boast not of the Spirit, its not a spirit of envy, but it
meekens men's spirits; its not a spirit of striving, but stirs up to the
assistance one of another; not a spirit of division, but unites the members of
Jesus Christ with the strongest bonds that any society or body can be united
withal; Qui sectarii sunt, licet videantur esse spiritualissimi, revera tamen
carnales existunt. Musc. in loc. p. 81.
boast not of the Gospel, its not a Gospel of contention, but reconciliation;
not of division, but calls all true believers into one communion and spiritual
fellowship; boast not that you are the spiritual ones, when no ways more then
yours discover carnality. And its a shame, nay it will be a greater
condemnation to this City to be yet carnal, then for Bethsaida and Chorazin
not to believe; you seemed to believe, to repent, to embrace your faithful
Ministers with joy, and to make your City their refuge, who were your Cities
glory; to save their lives who spend their lives on you and for you, who have
been such glorious lights in your firmament, that have made you to outshine
other Cities, and increased your glory to a greater degree beyond what it has
been ever since it was a City: and you have had many of these Ministers
faithful, laborious, godly, learned, who for their paucity seemed but the
gleanings of this Church, yet better then the Vintage of the whole; and yet
carnal? You again reciprocally followed them, maintained them, rejoiced in
their doctrine, then labored for their unity in the whole City; and to these
add, you suffered with them, and you were ready to break the ice for them that
should have led you into the water; and yet carnal? What, the very Head of this
Nation sick, rent, cut a pieces, one piece of it falling this way, another
that, a third a third way, wherein there is little love, no rest, no ease night
nor day, and having so many Physicians with such admirable balm to apply? True,
thy wounds and diseases are great and have festred long, insomuch that they
have infected the whole, and stink in the nostrils of thy sister Churches; but
are these wounds incurable, these breaches, these divisions irreconcilable?
True, it may be the dividing opinions are; but are the divided Christians? I
must tell thee London, thou art ungrateful to thy Ministers, to thy God, and
badly requitest him for his gracious protections, Christ Jesus for his
Gospel-administrations; that when he has delivered thee from thy former yoke,
thou should throw off his own yoke, and when he made an open way of a full
union in the whole Church by his blessed mercies, and you to break yours
asunder, sure you are and were of carnal and unmortified hearts, which
otherwise in these times would not so fully discover themselves, being like
Nebuchadnezzars Image one part falling from another, because uncementable,
being of several tempers and natures; if it be that you are spiritual, you
will mourn for the divisions of the Church, labor to reunite and re-allie the
forces of Gods people, which by such as you are thus scattered, and thus
divided;

Use. My next endeavor is, (after the making good of the charge) to work some
remedy for the crime, to extinguish the fire of envy, to take off the edge of
strife, and to reconcile these carnal and dangerous divisions.

1. By showing you the causes why we reunite not.

2. By intermixing remedies with the causes.

3. By proposing some motives to make them effectual to us.

First, the two first fall in together; we shall subjoyn the means to remedy
the evil under each particular; its a thing has been much endeavored by many
far more learned and judicious then my self; its a thing so desirable, so
amiable, that its worth every man's prayer and work; a thing that gives occasion
of great joy, 2 These. 1.3. We are bound to thank God always for you,
brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the
charity of every one of you all toward each other abounds. Unity, peace,
what sweet and comfortable words they are? but as the constant drops of rain
(though small) do more refrigerate and refresh the hot and parched earth, then
the sudden dashes of rain; let my small drop follow their sweet and pleasant
showrs; it may contribute as much as a drop can do to this barren and thornie
Church of ours.

You heard before that a carnal mind is the cause of these; That Satan,
Heretics, Jesuits, etc. are great promoters and aggravators of these
miseries; But to pass by these, I speak to them that have been and may still
seem to be in and of the Church of Christ, and the hindrances of union lies on
the score

Of the Magistrate. Minister. People.


First, Of the Magistrate, whose duty it is to be so far from scattering
coals in the Church, and throwing in their bones of division, that they should
be one of the filii olei on the left hand of the Candlestick, to speak peace
unto her, and put forth her fires; but the reason why they abide still divided,
and stand far off from one another, nay, in part Adversaries, is, because

Of an Unwise Cowardly Self-interested
Magistrate.

1. An Unwise Magistrate that knows not that it is his duty to look after the
peace of the Church as well as of your Commonwealth, when need requires, and
in Policy he might labor for that Ecclesiastical Unity, being a great
prefervative to his just authority, and is sure to rule well amongst them that
are pure, peaceable, conscientious: And truly it is a most sad thing to have
men more rich then wise, more popular then religious to rule over us, that know
not what duty they owe to God in the Church, as well as of the Church in the
Common wealth. But will you understand, is it persecution to do justice, or is
there any justice for a wronged, a defiled Church? Are not Non distinguendum
est ubi Scriptura non distinguit. Bolt. Arraign. of Error in loc. Romans 13.
all evil doers to be punished? is not sin that is indicted and made clear so
to be, to be prohibited? is this to offend and force conscience (that only
falls under the power of God) Si quae igitur adversus vos le ges constitutae
sunt, non been facere cogimi ni, sed malefacere prohibemini. Aug. cont. lit.
Petil. l. 2. cap. 38.
to hinder the public profession of that which is evil? Have any power to
grant a Toleration to all Religions, and not a power to restrain any? or can
you lawfully confirm any, and dissolve none? Is Christ in the shadow more to be
protected and cared for then Christ in the substance? and are Kings and Princes
more to adore and serve Christ coming, then Christ come? Cannot his Gospel
challenge your sword as well as his Law? and because the equity and reason of
the general precept is not clear enough to you, do you expect divine
particular instructions under the Gospel? or is it a less sin to be a false
Apostle, then a false Prophet? Know you not that the winepresse as well as the
watchtower is set within the hedge of the Vineyard? or do ye expect that God
should immediately from heaven, declare his dislike of such evil doings,
execute justice, strike them with blindness, or cast them into a bed of sickness?
if you were not Christians, you might expect it; or if your Christian eyes were
open, you might see very much to convince you herein in fearful examples.

Be wise then O ye Judges, and kiss the Son with honor and reverence; offer
to your King all you have; your golden Scepter as well as your Box of Myrrh and
ointments; your sword, your glittering sharp sword as well as you glorious
Scepter; and know that Christ calls for this now, and will once require an
account for the use of all he has given unto you: And lo then (if you be wise)
the child Jesus swadled in his Truth and Government is laid before you; The
Harlot cries divide him, divide him; the true mother falls down at your feet,
weeping and beseeching you for the Lords sake not to cut him, not to divide
him, let her have him whole all, or none; Is there not a wise man amongst you
to decide this?

2. The cowardly Magistrate that is so wise to understand this, yet he would be
as wise as to save himself, he is afraid of a frown; their threats that
maintain division are high and lofty, and themselves in power; and its good to
act within a safe line, and to dare no further then we may safely return; its
good to walk on fairly in a Magistrates pace, and take notice of none on either
side; let them alone and part themselves; he that thrusts in betwixt two, Nec
Christiani ultra aut durare aut esse possumus, si ad hoc ventum est, ut
perditorum minas atque insidias pertimescamus. Cypr. Ep. ad Corn.
often has the most blows and the least thanks; and so the truth lies shred on
the ground, trodden on, and none will gather it up. Oh where is the public
spirit fit for such a public person? Did Moses, Nehemiah, etc. fear their
lives in resisting and punishing a people deparing from God? Know, that the
Lord threatens such as do remove the bounds, Limits Ecclesiasticos: ( Hos.
5.10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore I
will pour out my wrath upon them like water.) and such as do not with might
and main maintain the truth, Jer. 9.3. Jehu and Elias had other spirits, and in
this respect (though the one good and the other bad) put on the same spirit,
both being public persons, publicly showed themselves in the front of Gods
people against the enemies of the Church. 1 Kings 19.14. 2 Kings 10.16
God equally stood toward them both, in calling them to public offices; his
cause equally concerned them both according to their places, and they both
acted according to their capacities: Jehus sword was to be as keen as Eliahs
tongue: but the Lord grant that our tongues be not so much the more too sharp
with some, by how much the more the Magistrates sword is too dull.

Do you expect that the Lord should not act for himself yet? if he do, look
that you taste deep in the cup of astonishment, and that you must bear the
heavier for your toleration, your cowardly and ignoble spirits. With a very
little variation, if and at all, is that true in this sense; Isai. 59.16. And
he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessour:
therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his righteousness, it
sustained him. No man stepping in betwixt God and the people; not a Moses
eminent for acts of prayer, not a Phinehas with his act of righteousness; its
well if you have yet left an Elias to pray and preach to you, to help to pull
down that untempered mortar wherewith others build; else it might stand (so
long as it could stand) for such poor and weak spirited Magistrates, and there
would not then be a people in the world more miserable then you.

3. The self-interested Magistrate; as for those particular Interests, what
they are, and how deep they may be laid by the Magistrates in the people, shall
not be nominated, to avoid offenses; But wheresoever a Magistrate is
co-ingaged, or co-ingages a people with himself, there their secular respects
will draw them to satisfy that people in all accommodations that may consist
with their power and honor, nay and sometimes against their honor. This was
too much in the Primitive Church; and it was an argument that the Parliament
once took up in one of their Declarations against their late King, That he must
(though himself should be no Papist) congratulate the Papists in the free use
of their religion, for the service they then did him; this is it that hinders
union, that strengthens division, when such as these side into parties, and
help on the division.

Those that cannot deny themselves, cannot affirm Christ or his Truth; and what
worldly thing soever swayes in the heart, it will flect and carry most
powerfully the whole man after it into any party whatsoever; so Judas leaving
the Apostles to sit down with the Scribes and Pharisees, who ever thought to
have seen him in their Council? Histories are plentiful in such examples. He
that sets not Gods glory in the top of his aims, will never be found thoroughly
faithful to the cause of God; hence is that exhortation Phil. 2.3, 4. Let
nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let
each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others. Mark how subordinately he sets the
directions; First, let all your actions public and private, sent of nothing
but love to the Church of God. 2. Then love not your selves, but sometimes wave
your own things, and place the things of others in their room, in your mind,
desire, and chief aims: For as Ex codem font huc usque dissidia continuata,
and nunc acerbius quam usquam, and plura quam usqua^ and absurdiora quam usquam
falsa dogmata defenduntur. Zanch. in loc.
Zanchie well observes, That though such may favor others for their own
respects, yet even in that and in all things else, that sinful self-love shall
eat up, as the lean Kine did the fat, all that truly makes to the welfare and
peace of others; and this has been and still is, in civil and military
Magistrates the cause of much envying, strife, and great divisions; above all
men a Magistrate should least love himself, and be like the highest bough of
the tree, hung with bunches of fruit, dropping into the mouths and skirts of
them that are before him; for him to love himself, is for the Sun to be the
darkest. Make then other men's business your own, for you are Magistrates not for
your selves, but them; and labor to strike into those business that are in
your sphere, wherein you may honor God most, bearing that Motto in your mind,
1 Samuel 2.30. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed, that thy
house, and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever: but now the
Lord says, Be it far from me; for them that honor me, I will honor, and they
that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Well then, if we had a Magistracy
wise, that could understand; or unbyassed, that would understand; and
courageous, to act according to what they understand, we should see truth
waited on with peace and righteousness, and the lovers of truth live
comfortably and rejoycingly on the breasts of Kings and Princes.

2. As touching the Ministers, something is amiss in them, nay some a chief
cause hereof; though I think it was beside their intention, and some would now
have wished to have burnt in the flames of persecution before these times, or
been buried in the greedy Seas, rather then they should escape one fire to
kindle a worse. Yet some there are whose hearts rejoice that they have brought
their divisions to this perfection. Who would have rejoiced in the expectation
of these times ten years since, if one should have ascertained them of so great
a Reformation? and when even now they had their desires, they exceedingly
loathed them. A word to these in reference

1. To themselves. 2. To others.
1. To such as have undertaken the calling of the Ministry, as concerning
themselves, their divisions have bin the worst of all divisions; their schisms
look like heresies, and their strifes like waves; theirs are examplary; when
the chief parts of the body are distempered, all the rest must needs be
grievously affected and afflicted. To you thus;

1. Take heed of the humor of Diotrephes; if the Church do not give thee that
honor and respect thou judge fit for thy self, and worthy of thee, do not
straight quarrel with the Church, reproach, and discredit it, and then cast out
for another way wherein thou may be more eminent, and have a party that will
cry thee up. Of such the Apostle forewarned, Acts 20.30. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them; whereon says Calvin in loc. Ambitio est matter omnium haerese (...). and
so of strife, envy, and these divisions of fond disputes to seem some body,
perverse and froward in their disputes, etc.

Let us therefore in the fear of God prefer one another, give the right hand of
fellowship one to another; be tender of one another honor, and labor to cast
the mantle over thy brothers infirmities; be every man as in the Sanctuary,
content to be set in his own order, and stand like the fixed stars in the
Firmament, though all having not the like glory, yet preserving one another in
his glory. Let us not be too confident of our private judgments, but enquire
of others, and yield, or at the least suspend thy own from the public, if
contrary to the determination of many holy, gracious, and learned men; let us
take unto our selves the rule of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.23, 24, 25. But foolish
and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes. And the
servant of the Lord must not strive: but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient: In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.

2. So far as you agree, practice together, that you may be fellow laborers;
mutual undertakings commonly bind the hearts and affections of men in all
callings, and engage us to mutual assistance. Babing. in Exodus
The Church is a ship, says one, the Spirit the Steerman, the Ministers as the
Oars, that must lift together, and strike together, if they will have the Ship
to speed well. Friends that walk to one journies end, will walk together as
much as may be, meet as often as may be; our ends carry the same pretenses; why
walk we two ways? keep not asunder in all, because of some differences.

Therefore take heed that your Ink be not mixed with gall, though sometimes
with vinegar; let not the least of the poison of Aspes lie under your tongues;
a little thing will keep them from union that have walked abroad at large and
have no mind to return: Its the strangest thing and most dishonorable for such
as we to disagree; we see if Captains fall out, their Soldiers will side right
or wrong: I wish it was not so in the Church. Let us strive to keep as close as
we can together, to lay aside as much of our selves as we can; however to walk
so far as we may safely together, and wait till the Lord shall reveal the
rest unto us. Thus much concerning our selves one to another.

2. In reference to the Church; let the peace and union of others be dear to
us; to whom should it be precious if not to us, who have charge over them in
the Lord? and for this end,

1. Urge this Doctrine much on them, in reference to our fellowship, and the
Articles of our Creed, and a truth so much inculcated in Scripture.

2. Be Catechizing much, a duty much commended to us by the reverend Synod; its
well if it were set up. Do such as are well grounded in the faith backslide and
divide from the Church? very few; most return: yet some there must be for
example to them that stand; for above 900 years after Christ this duty was
much exercised, and then neglected, Vide Mr Torshel his Exercitat. on Mal.
joined to Barlow. p. 36.37.
till the rising up of Luther; and King James tells us, that the reason why so
many fell into Popery and errors, was, their ungroundednesse in the points of
Catechism: and it was strictly enjoined, but loosely observed in the Church,
when over much rashness overspread this Kingdom. The Minister that uses it,
shall find as much comfort in his people as they benefit by him. The Apostle
takes this course, considering the weakness of his people, ver. 1 hujus
Capitis; (...).
he fed them with milk, or as it is in the Original, gave them milk to drink,
because of their carnal minds; that is, he instructed them in the plain
foundations of Christianity; such as contained enough to save them; and very
edifying and wholesome Truths; he did as a good Schoolmaster, lays a good
foundation in Grammar; for when they hoist them up into books higher then they
can well digest, they neither understand them, nor any whit benefit; but are
confused, ignorant, proud, and ordinarily run into Grammar Errors. For the
Apostle kept not strong meat from them to wrong them, but because they were not
fit for it, and so might do them more hurt then good; puff them up, and make
them seem knowing Christians, when they know nothing as they ought; viz. what is
that judgment of method, and understanding of sense, as become solid and sober
Christians: and thus the Apostle deals with the Hebrews, he brings them back
to the place in Christianity where they began, and makes them Christian
Abcedarians again, beginning at the elements, the rudiments, or principles (as
the word signifies in the heathen Authors) or affections of Christianity, Heb.
5.12.13. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one
teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God, and are
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For every one that
uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness for he is a babe. This
is a safe and sure way to lay a good foundation, and make them fit for great
proficiency in the School of Christ.

3. Let them that receive members divided from others, take the Apostles
caveat, 1 Cor. 3.10. Monentur itaque doctores, ut inter docendum respectum
infirmorum habeant illis se in omnibus and verbis, and doctrinae, and vitae
moribus accommodent, and little se captui attemperent, ut ab elementis
incipiant, nec altius conseendant, quam sequi possunt, ut denique paulatim
distillet doctrinam, ne largius infusa superfluat, ut eos omnes, etc. Marl. in
1 Cor. 1.2.2. (...). Elementa initii. Par. Rudimenta, quia sunt pro rudibus.
Primordia vel initia Christiani.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise master builder
I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. But let every man
take heed how he builds thereupon. For as verse. 9. They were laborers
together with God, and begun a good foundation for a glorious frame of grace;
now they come to you, take heed, build according to the good foundation laid
and begun; else you may spoil them in respect of what is already wrought, and
of what shall be wrought.

4. Countenance them not in their foolish wrangling questions, either in things
beyond them, or beside them, especially in the unravelling of them, there being
no profitablenesse: and let not acceptance and encouragement be given of thee
to any that out of wantonness, curiosity etc. withdraw from an holy and
conscionable ministry unto thy own, unless it be upon extraordinary and
unusual occasions, such as Christian liberty allows, and wisdom may make use
of without scandal. Do not quarrel, but check them, for I know no minister but
he desires to be dear in the eyes of the godly, and much in their thoughts
and prayers; only he would have himself so set up in others, that his love
should not procure another hate, his honor another shame, his respect
another slight; no, but would have a fellow-sharing with all in the hearts of
all, therefore he would give to all their share, and not impropriate others
hearers to be his followers; and chiefly make them Christ's: so let every
minister deny his own name, and not gather any to cry up his name, as John did
in John 1.23. He said I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make
straight the way of the Lord.

5. If thou do resolve their quaeries and niceties, let them be according to
the Apostles rule, in the evident power and strength of spiritual reason, and
in the Authority of his ministry.

6. Let him labor to preserve his own peace and unity among them over which
the Lord has set him; for many corrupt men out of envy and dislike to such
particular persons, do divide from their Congregations; and at the best, if
thou be at just difference with them, thy exhortations to peace cannot be well
taken, where they see contrary actions; men loving to have the double light of
life and doctrine going before them, and many being willing to find out
stumbling blocks for themselves in the ways of God. Follow peace with all men;
if possible, labor to preserve it; avoid just occasions; be apt to put up
injuries; flee suits, and contentions; Lord it not over them, that they may see
thy desire is after unity and peace, thy actions being the real proof, and
testimonies of thy exhortation; for want of the practice of these and such like
rules, much is added to our divisions.

Lastly, the people are a grand cause of this division, and this is most
apparent out of the Text. We see here Paul pleads for himself, and throws away
all his followers; and he taxes no ministers else as desiring or laboring
after any such thing: but wholly and only charges it upon the score of the
Corinthians; it were they that envied, and strived amongst themseves: some for
Paul, others for Apollos, a third party for Cephas, without their seeking for.
Now briefly (because we have spoken to this something already) to show you some
other grounds of the peoples prompt, and ready sundring themselves;

1. From The too much affectation of the particular gifts of this man above
another; therefore they cry him up above another, and resolve to follow him and
none other.

1. Know, that thou ought not to have thy admiration drawn to any persons by
their gifts, or any other ways.

2. That thou have (if a member of Christ) an interest in all their gifts, and
equally sharing in one as well as another, and all sent and given for thee; not
this man alone, but this, and that, etc. Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am the least of
all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ; In whom we have boldness and access with
confidence by faith in him. 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours.

2. From a Zealous affection he bears to him whom God has made most
isntrumental for his good in the exercising of these gifts; and therefore
looks on it as his bounden duty to own him, admire him, and follow him before
another: he does (as he thinks) out of a pious, and due esteem of him.

Know therefore, 1. That it is not his gifts that has wrought this in thee, or
for thee, but the grace of God through them.

2. The Lord if he had pleased, could have chosen another for the work, and
endowed the meanest of his creatures with power sufficient to effect this.

3. Hereby thou may take too much from God, and attribute it to the
instrument by himself: and though thou think otherwise, and denyest it, yet
God will not part with the glory of thy words, and actions, as well as of thy
inward esteem.

4. Thou may love him with an higher degree of love then another, but not
with another love.

5. Another may be useful and serviceable for thee in another estate, as he in
this. Its not all to convert a man, but to strengthen him; nay after thy
beginning the work is behind; not all to Paul for planting, but some to Apollos
for watering.

6. If this man die before the work of grace be finished, even dye before thee;
take heed then of a sensible decay, or you must acknowledge a spirirituall
dotage.

3. From weakness of judgment, that looks at the floscular phrases; and
flourishing deckings of their high expressions; as if it was a more high and
mysterious Divinity then usually they hear. Simplex turba eo pro doctoribus;
Marlor in Cor.
illos consuevit habere; quo minus quae dicunt intelligit.

Know therefore, 1. How to strip such a holy day Sermon of its fine clothes,
and then compare it to plain and old Divinity, and that by the plain and
evident truths of God.

2. Examine seriously which comes the nearest, and quickest to the heart; which
sticks most in the brain without further descent, and fastening on the
conscience.

3. Be soundly grounded upon the Fundamentals of Religion, and have them
confirmed to thy mind and judgment on Scripture proof, and withal bring in
thy own former experience in the ways of God.

4. Quid vero astutius, quidve subtilius, quam ut Christi adventu prostratus,
and inventus inimi^us (postquam lux gentibus venit, etc) videns illa idola
derelicta, and per nimium credentium populu^ seeds suas, ac Templa dejecta,
excogitaverit novam fraude^. ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat
ineuntes; haereses invenit, and seismata, quibus subverteret fidem, veritate^
corrumperet, scinderet unitatem; quos detinere non potest in viae veteris
cacitate, circu^scribit, and decipit in novi itineris errore: rapit de ipsa
Ecclesia homines, and dum sibi appropinquasse ja^ lumini, atque evasisse
saeculi noctem videntur, alias nescientes tenebras infundit, etc. Cypr. de
unit. Eccles. p. 231.
From want of experience, and over Satan's wiles: if he cannot destroy, he would
distract a people: if he cannot keep them from going to heaven, he would have
them at a loss, and puzzle them in the way, and fill them full of doubts,
crosse-wayes, etc. and in all his proposals to them of new ways, he will put
them under the name of Christ, and with the same Authority, face, and language
as the true way; being an Angel of light, and his ministers ministers of
righteousness: and many simple souls with good intentions and aims at higher
Spiritual achievements, divide from the true, and old way of Christ.

Therefore, 1. Beg wisdom of the Father: be wise as serpents to prevent that
old serpent.

2. Trust not thy own judgment: be frequent in the counsels of the righteous.

5. Unsetlednesse of spirit is a cause of Division: not only a particular
doubting of this or that truth, upon such and such grounds of a mistaken truth,
but a general unsettled frame of mind, constant to nothing, no, not to error
it self: as many likewise possess themselves with an opinion of unsetlednesse;
that is, to hang in the expectation of new light in substance, not a further
light in the same thing; and maintain that they should not be firm to any
thing, not knowing when they have fully obtained a truth, or whether that which
now they take for a truth, will hereafter prove an error, and so must needs
stand ready to entertain any motion of mutation; and to cure this,

1. Mind the state of thy soul, whether thou do particularly increase in
grace, or no: sure if thou find a fruitfulness in real grace, 2 Pet.
3.17.18
and a gracious thriving come upon thy soul, thou will not abide wavering.

2. Humbly implore of God (being sensible of thine own, Psalm. 51.12.
or others lapsings) the settlement of his spirit.

3. Forsake not the Assemblies of Gods people, Heb. 10.24, 25.
whether private, or public; they will recover a tottering mind.

4. Neglect not any practical duty, and where thou performest it, do it in
relation to the promise annexed to it; for there is no duty left without the
assistance of a spiritual promise. If thou be loose in one way, thou will
be loose in many; and if thou be uncertain with God in any, God may give
thee over to a general looseness in all; oh therefore, tolerate thy self not
in the least evil.

6. A last occasion and ground of division is a superlative liberty due unto
Prerogative saints, under which all heteroclitall judgments lies couched: this
has been so much searchad into by others, that I need to say nothing in
reproof, only propose to every true conscientious professor these
considerations.

1. That none can divide from any Congregation upon hopes of obtaining more
purity, light, and Christian liberty, etc. unless he be infallibly assured
that he falls into a way more Scripturall, and agreeing to the plain speaking
Texts of Scripture: he must else most precipitantly and ignorantly run from
them (if the way be not groundedly cleared to him before) or make his liberty
of Conscience a mere pretense for his division, which is either to vex the
Church, or please his lusts.

2. That our Christian liberty lies not loose, neither under the definitive
determination of any man; but our Christian liberty either lies explained in
Christ's laws in things necessary, or may parallel to some of his Laws in things
indifferent; and these Laws are to be easily known of all, whereby the happy
peace and unity of the Church is much settled: Our liberty is a necessitous, not
an arbitrary liberty; fixed, not unbounded; ordered, not confused; real, not
imaginary; explained, not mysterious; holy, not licencious, but wholly serving
the Lord.

3. That there is no Christian liberty, that destroys natural affection,
civil bonds and interests; that gives way to any ungrateful and unfaithful
treachery in civil matters; but rather confirms and rightly orders the
contrary; much less is destructive to the order, decency, peace and unity of a
Church.

4. That the use of all Christian liberty in things indifferent is allowed for
the preservation of our Christian brother, with whom we are commanded to bear
as a weaker brother, not to offend a little one, to lay no stumbling blocks
before him; which weaker brother you judge to be the Church that you do
forsake, and from whom you divide: that Church dwelling as it were in a lower
region, and sitting in a more unknowing Classis then you do; and therefore by
the Gospel rule you ought to have a care that you offend them not (and of them
there be many thousands) in the use of your Christian liberty.

5. That all liberty ought to serve unto the Kingdom of Christ; else the
privileges of his Kingdom would destroy the being of it: and so by necessary
consequence all liberty must serve to unity; Unity being absolutely necessary
to the well-being of his Church.

And that thou may walk like a Christian in the use of thy liberty, take
these Directions. Have not an overweening conceit of thy own judgment, worth,
and excellency; this will cause thee else to despise others, to put thy self
before others, and in all actions and disputes to show more ingenuity, then
conscience. Such a mind is an enemy to the Spirit, stands open to temptation,
especially to seductions, and has man more then God before his eyes. Be sober
minded, and of a sober carriage, for he that has an intoxicated fancy, and an
inebriated brain, knows not himself, nor where he is, he is sick of wholesome
truths, and reels too and fro in his mind from this opinion to that, but
adheres to none. Be you then babes, not in knowledge, but in actions; be ye
little ones as in the eyes of the world, so in your own; such will be
spiritual children, children associating and uniting together; such seldom
fall from the truth, and divide from the Church. In a word, let him that names
the Lord Jesus Christ depart from iniquity, separate betwixt himself and sin;
for its unmortified lusts in us that causes us to divide; let us be
contentious against sin within us, sin without us, striving against the
corruptions of nature, temptations of Satan, the oppositions and allurements of
the world: On these if a man spend his zeal, the strength of strife, the
activity of division, he shall find much brotherly concord and unity in the
ways of Christ's Kingdom, nor leisure to dispute unnecessaries, nor will to
divide for them.

I am now tedious to my self, much more to you; let me but set on these
instructions and directions by a motive or two and so conclude.

(...) a (...) a In conjugatione Piel significat dividere. Therefore the Greeks
called them (...). Leigh and Weems.
If I could persuade you that you were guilty of envy, strife, and division, I
should persuade you to leave it, especially those actions wherein they appear.
I know you see it in your selves; oh leave this Pharasaical, this merely
Pharasaical way; the Church of the Jews in their decaying age fell into several
Sects; the Sadduce, the Pharisee, the watching and the strict-living Pharisee,
the Essaeni; and so the Church of Rome in their backsliding age, fell into
their Friars, and them of several sorts, etc. Oh let this scandal pass from
us, and let us not be in a dying age when we should be reviving; let us all
study now how to make peace; make it your business every one of you in your
places and callings, Masters, Magistrates, Ministers, etc. to put on this
smooth skin, this meek heart, and to procure peace and unity in the Church of
Christ; and for this end consider,

How the Church of God stands toward Her self. Christ her Head. Her Enemies.


(...) translated by the 70 evermore congregare, or (...), congregatio, and so
(...).
First, concerning the Church as she is in her self: not only many precious
promises of peace and unity are made unto her, but the Gospel (the complement
of promises) holds out the same by way of direction; love as a stream runs
through the whole channel of Scriptures; its the great cry of all the Prophets
and Apostles; if it had been an Observation scattered in one or two places,
that had been sufficient; but its that silver string that is drawn through all
the Epistles, and tied on a most complete knot in St. John's Epistles.

And as these commands are sent to the Church and all that is of her, so mark
under what Parables she is shadowed forth in Scripture; to name but a few: She
is frequently compared to a vineyard, and that must not lie common, but be let
forth to husbandmen to be fenced, the trees pruned and watched, the stones cast
out, the briars plucked up and burnt, the Foxes taken; I cannot stand to
comment upon all these passages. She is again set forth to St. Peter under a
sheet; this sheet has four corners, which are the four parts of the world, out
of which the Church was to be called: in these are all creatures, and all these
are common and mixed together in one sheet; but as corn of several grains
thrown into a sheet will soon be mingled, so all people, nations, and languages
without separation, or distinction, being called, are to hold communion. She
is frequently compared to a body, as in this Epistle, not as in reference to
Christ their Head (as in Ephesians. 5.) but in reference one to another, as
members. 1. All the members are firmly knit by sinews. 2. What gifts that any
have, the rest partake of. 3. There is need of the weakest. And here I must
insert a Story much used: There were often grievous broiles betwixt the Commons
and Nobles of Rome: Livius Decad 1. l. 7. Mr. Par. in Romans 12.4.
once among the rest, when the people had banded themselves, and the
Commonwealth in great danger, the Senate sent unto the people one Menenius
Agrippa, a famous Orator, to persuade them; He tells them this Parable, On a
time says he, the members of the body objected against the stomach, that it
devoured all, and idly and sluggishly lay in the midst of the body, while the
rest of the members labored full sore; whereupon the foot refused to stir and
carry the stomach, the hand refused to put meat into the mouth, the mouth to
receive it, the teeth to chew it, etc. what followed? the stomach being empty,
the eye began to be dim, the hand weak, the feet feeble, all the members began
to faint, and the whole body to wither; so that at last they were compelled to
be friends with the stomach, and they learned, that the stomach is the most
profitable to all the members of the body; and by this parable he quieted the
people, and brought them to concord with the Senate, and so ought it to be in
the Church.

Again let us look upon the Epithites given to her; Friends, not only to
Christ, but to one another; Brethren, begat of the same word, bound together
per eadem sacramenta unitatis; and having subdued the Egyptian that would have
enslaved you, will you kill one another? not only heirs but coheirs of one
Kingdom, whereof we hear of no division: Nay, to make up all, She is called
one; not only one by way of distinction, Vritas Distinguens and Conjungens.
because the Concubines that pretend some right to Christ are many, the Papist,
the Jacobite, etc. and those that quite abominate Christ are many, the Jew,
Turk, Persian etc. and she is but one, from, and out of all these; but one,
perfectly one in her self, having one God, etc.

All these laid together they conspire nothing but unity; and are they that are
of the Church, nay the Church, yet divided? what the persecutors in the
Primitive days made you seem to be by putting on you Bears skins, etc. you
really act on one another to your power, by putting on you their hearts and
affections. You are Heirs of heaven, but do you expect to stand before Christ
as Paul's or Apollo's his disciples? Will you appear as of this or that sect or
Church? no, no, I am afraid ere then many of your works must be burnt, and that
by fire, and its well if some of you escape it; for your works are very rotten
and counterfeit: Oh therefore you that profess the true Church, agree of one
way, before you appear before the Head of this Church, for I would say to such,
as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.7. Do ye look on things after the outward appearance?
if any man trust to himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this
again, that as he is Christ's, even so we are Christ's. And sure, if we belong to
one Christ, why should we be of two Churches? has he two? Nay, conclude this,
from the nature and constitution of the Church; For the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

2. Let us look upon the Church in reference unto Christ. She is a Queen
having a garment of diverse colors of needle work, yet all these colors, these
gifts so excellently are placed, that they make up that one garment, and her
very beautiful in the Kings eyes. Called a flock, washed, and even shorn; not
scattered, but in one sheepfold; and all these bringing forth twins: The House
of God: Does the God of peace dwell in the midst of you?

There is one head, and one body; one Spouse, and one Husband; one Shepherd,
and one Flock; one Lord, and one way: Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the prisoner of the
Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.
Mark what he exhorts us unto, viz. a walking answerable to our calling. And
what more answers Truth then Unity, as the natural daughter of the mother? and
that is showed, ver. 2, 3, 4 -- With all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love: Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, etc. and he shows the
means of preserving this, by using our gifts to this end, ver. 7. But unto
every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Though all one in substance, yet different in gifts; yet this difference not to
make difference, but to maintain jointly the unity of the whole, ver. 12. And
then he applies this doctrine of Unity by way of dehortation, ver. 14. and
exhortation and direction, ver. 15, 16. Nay, more cannot be said then by the
Apostle, Hebr. 2.11. -- He that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are
all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. And sure,
that virtue whereby we are made one with Christ, should make us all as one. God
the Father so preserved our Savior, that his coat was undivided, and not a
bone broken: and such should be his mystical coat, the Discipline of his
Church; and his mystical body, his members in the truth of Jesus. Those then
that will keep close to Christ, need to keep close to his Church: He is the
fountain; stop the fountain, where are the streams? He is the root, that gives
sap only to the branches uncut off. Surely (Beloved) we stop the fountain
head, we cut our selves from Christ, if we leave the body of Christ; we indeed
lose our relation to Christ wholly. And that you may see whether it be not so,
that you lose Christ in losing his spouse, his body, search and deal with your
selves impartially, and know of your selves since your divisions,

1. Whether softnes of heart, and tenderness of conscience be not lessened?

2. Whether duties of holy practice be not neglected?

3. Whether, when thou have thoughts to rejoyne, pride, in much strength and
power appears in thee?

4. Whether the very real warmth of true affection to godly Ministers,
brethren, and natural friends (if not in thy division) be not decayed?

5. Whether much confusion be not in thy thoughts?

6. Whether sound knowledge, saving light that brings peace, and joy on sure
grounds, be increased in thee?

7. Whether yet thy mind flotes not? whethou make a period in thy present
division, and there rests thy mind: Sure by these, and the like queries thou
may put to thy soul, thou shall find in truth, that thy division from the
Church of Christ, was a division from Christ, and since then he has withheld
the most sweet, effectual, and saving operations of the spirit from thee. Thus
if we consider the Church in it self, and would preserve it in its essence,
beauty, and glory; if we look upon her in reference to Christ how nearly
joined, we must (if we desire to belong unto Christ,) keep close to her;
unless thou expectest salvation out of Christ, or Christ out of the Church.

Lastly, we must now consider her as she stands in relation to them that are
not of her, even to her enemies: And this with the rest might lay a great
engagement to seek her peace, and unity.

If we consider her desiring, To have them saved. To be saved from them.


First, As she desires to save them, or to have them saved. They cannot be
saved out of the Church the dividers themselves confessing: and we must or
ought to endeavor their salvation; at least they are to have the tenders of
salvation, 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth. Nay, to have our utmost endeavors, Romans 10.1. Brethren,
my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
They are your brethren by nature, and questionless many of them in grace too:
What have you to woe for you, to invite them in unto you? Peace, a place of
unity and rest, every one desires; What may they find with you, that are the
Church of God? If not with you, then where? Better it is, will they say, to
keep a way I have received from my forefathers, and of which I have some
probable grounds, then to undertake a new way, where I shall find no certainty,
lose that little Religion I have, and find none other unless it be in
disputes, doubts, changes, strifes, divisions, objections, etc. As once the
distraction of the Church of Germany gave occasion to a Prince thereof thus to
answer to those that persuaded him to turn Lutheran; If I associate with you,
then I am censured of others; if I associate with others, Si me adjungo vobis,
tune condemnor ab aliis; si me aliis adjungo, a vobis condemnor; quid fugiam,
vidco; sed quid sequar, no^ habco. Raul. 2. l. c. 5. Sect. 2. p. 249.
then I am censured of you; What to decline I see, but what to follow I find
not.

1. Then he will enquire for the Doctrine of salvation; Is the name of God one
on whom they call? is the Creed one, and only one? Its said, Isa. 2.2. And it
shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house
shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills. Can it be said so of us?

2. Then for discipline: he would enjoy the truth with order; Christiani
propter illas dissentiones and sectas in theatris a Gentibus infidelibus
derideri soliti fuerant: sicut etiam nunc inter Turcas, and Judaeos, eandem ob
causam ^ridemur omnes. Zanch. c. 8 p. 538.
Is there no confusion, disturbance, rents? Is there no envyings, strifes? etc.
Where is your beauty, your amiablenesse but in this? Psalm. 133.1. Behold how
good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity. Christ
Says, Let your light shine before all men. and Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation
be known unto all men. Your division not only draws some weak souls after
you, but keeps back many a soul from coming into the Church, loses and
destroys souls, justly openning the mouths of wicked ones against you, whose
holy and peaceable conversation should stop them.

2. You desire to save your selves; then keep your walls in repair; that as
Sanballat and Tobiah said of Jerusalem, their walls were so bad, a fox might
run over them; and so truly of our Church; these, indeed, invite the thief to
enter when the walls are down: and as you keep them in repair, so your selves
in unity; for your division weakens your selves: for envy through divisions
may arise so high, that one party may sit down to see the other destroyed,
though a worse come in their room: whereas their unity might preserve them
both. Experience, reason, and truth maintains this, to what sad ruins it has
brought famous Cities, Churches and Commonwealths: for envy, strife and
division never cease, till they be buried in ruins, unless God reconcile
their hearts: As two posts leaning upon one another, either stand by the
strength, or fall by the weakness one of another. Nature, Reason, History,
Experience and Scripture fruitfully prove these things.

Considering all these, if any thing be dear to you, to you that should have
the bowels of our Savior; if the spouse of Christ, if your own unity with
Christ the Head, if the salvation of others, and your own temporal
preservation be valued of you, lay aside these envyings, strifes, and
divisions; hold that one Faith in Unity, be knit together (as you would be to
Christ) as one man; and where you see occasions of division, refusalls of
union, drive and force upon men terms of unity; this is (...) to persecute one
another with peace; And even for Christ's sake, for his Churches sake, for the
strangers sake, for your own sake, I beseech you to lay to heart what has been
said; help to make up breaches you have made, and to honor the truth in your
second return, and reunion to the Church of Christ. And so with the Apostles
exhortation to these Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. we conclude, Now I beseech you,
brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

FINIS.

