Love to the Captives: OR, The love of God to the World;

Who so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to be the light
of the World, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life, and no man comes to the Father, but by him, (who is the Redeemer
of the Captives.)

Given forth for their sakes, who desire to turn to the Lord, or to see a
return out of Captivity, declaring the way to God, and where power against sin
may be received, that your souls may no longer be held under the snare of the
Devil, nor you be made a prey upon by Deceivers, but come away to the light,
which is the power of God unto Salvation; and he that believes shall be saved,
and he that believes not shall be damned.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the
face of all people; A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel,

Luke 2.30, 31, 32. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of
the World, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life, that was the true light, which lights every man that comes
into the world,

John 8.12. and 1.9. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil;
for every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved; but he that does truth, comes to the light,
that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God,

John 3.19, 20, 21. february 11th

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, 1656.

LOVE to the CAPTIVES, etc.
REturn, Hos: 14: 1. Joel: 2: 12. Mall: 3: 7. Isa: 5: 13.
Return, O Captivated People, and see how you are fallen from innocence, oh how
great Captivity are you in? how darkness has overspread the wise men; and
pride and covetousness has stolen away the hearts of the greatmen, and
oppression is greatly exalted in the Rulers, Hos: 4: 8. Prove: 13: 10. Obed: 3.
and instead of protection to the innocent, there is a Cry, away with him, to
prison he must go! Oh, what a fence is here made against equity, Truth fails,
there is no room for it in the streets! and if oppression can keep out equity,
it shall not enter, and this is done against the Lord, Isa: 59.
and he is displeased with it; Therefore while it is called to day, harden not
your hearts, but turn to the Lord who has all this time spared you, Heb: 4: 7.
Prove: 28: 13.
and gave thus long time, and yet has not utterly consumed you; and his long
sufferings toward you, Lam: 3: 22. Rom: 2: 4.
have been to have drawn you to repentance, that you might awake out of your
self-security (wherein you have been lulled a sleep) and arise from the dead
works, Ephesians: 5: 14. John 5: 25.
and hear the voice of the Son of God and live: behold him, his witness is in
your consciences; calling you out of the evil of the world; it has been in
you, in the years past, and in the days long ago, and when you have committed
evil, it was a present witness against you, sometimes letting you see evil
before you acted it, Ephesians: 7: 13.
and that you should not have acted evil, and have judged and condemned and
brought trouble upon you for your evil doings, and sometimes when you have run
rashly into the evil; not taking advice of the Lord what you should have done,
but have rushed into iniquity, as a horse rusheth into the battle; yet when you
have done thus, if you in moderation did but consider what you had done, this
witness, the light of Christ in your Consciences, Luke 2: 32. John 1: 4.
let you see you were wrong, and that you should not have touched the unclean,
nor have acted in sin and uncleanness, and then you have been judged and
condemned, 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 18.4.
by the witness of God in your selves, which has smitten you inwardly, for the
evil of your doings, and yet you returned not unto the Lord, to be guided by
his witness, Hos. 6.1.
though it has thus dealt with you, and if you had obeyed it, it had been your
power to have led you out of evil, 1 Cor. 1.1^.
and from under his power, who subjects to the evil, and it would have led you
into Gods righteousness, where you should have found peace and rest to your
souls: But O you silly people! you have slieghted the day of your visitation,
and neglected to obey the counsel of the Lord, and have not minded the
teachings of his power, the light in your Consciences, which is the Saints
teacher; Isa 30.20.21. John 6.45.
but you have sought after God in your own ways, and have not found him,
because you have not sought aright, nor walked in the obedience of the light,
the witness in your Consciences, which condemns all evil, Jo. 3.19 etc. and
1.2.36.
which if you had, you had ceased from your own works and ways, and it would
have led you into the one way, which is Christ, who is the light of the world,
and lights every man that comes into the world, and no man comes unto the
Father but by him, the way, the light, the truth, John 14.6.
and there is no other way or name by which any can be saved, but by him who is
the light, unto whom you have not yielded true obedience, nor given your
hearts; but captivity yet remains upon you, and the Captivator is entertained,
who has led, Psalm. 5.5. Acts 8.21.23.
and does lead you in evil, and yet you lean upon the Lord while iniquity is
standing, and the bands of it strong in you, and your thoughts and desires is
to enjoy the Kingdom of God; but they that take not up the Cross, Romans 1.16.
1 Cor. 1.18.
(that is the light which condemns all evil, which is the wisdom and power of
God in them that are saved) shall not enjoy the Crown, for the Crown is
obtained through the Cross, which leads out of the evil, to serve God and deny
Self, and self-works, Luke 9.23, 24 and 14.26. Matt. 10. Phil. 2.13. Exodus
14.13.
and self-willing, and self running, and wait upon God who gives both to will
and to do, whose own power does his own work: And O that you could but stand
still, and see this power, the light (which leads into righteousness) break
forth in you, to lead you out of captivity, then would you cease from your own
works, and from your own willings and runnings, and from exalting self, and
setting up your own devices, invented in your fallen wisdom, wherein your
imaginations is highly exalted, above the knowledge of God, and there the
wicked one has his seat, 2 These. 2.4. Rev. 13.8.14. 2 Cor. 11.14.
and Antichrist is exaled above all that is called God, and sits in the
Temple of God, and says he is God, and so deceives them that dwell on the
earth, who is transformed into the likeness of the truth it self, and is a
leader of the children of disobedience, in all manner of deceivableness of
unrighteousness, and keeps you in captivity; 2 These. 2.10. Isa. 5.13.
and into much profession you are led, and many likenesses and invitations are
acted, and many sects, and forms, Eccles. 7.24.
and opinions ran into, though the life and power of God is lived out of, yea
it may be not one of a thousand that are acquainted with it, or that dare own
them, who witness it forth as it is in Jesus, who are ready to seal to their
testimony with their bloods; 2 Timothy 4.3.
and though you reject the power and testimony of this pure life, yet you have
heaped up Teachers to your selves, and they have your praise, and are exalted
by you, though I know, and if you did but examine your own hearts, the light of
Christ in you would let you also see and know, Jer. 23.21.22, 32.
that they have not profited you, but the bands of iniquity yet is strong in
you, and them who you have so set up, and do exalt and praise to be rare
Teachers, many of you do not understand what they say, nor they themselves
whereof they affirm, but many of you are in such sottishness, that when you are
hearing these you so allow of, 1 Timothy 1.7.
that sleep overcomes you, yea, in the very time of your pretended worship, and
some of your your hearts run a whoring after the things and lusts and pleasures
and vanity of the world; Ezekiel. 6.9. Hosea 4.11.
imagining or coveting, what to have to eat or drink, and to put on to your
bodies, and inventing how to get money to satisfy your lusts with, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and how you should take pleasure enough in your own beloveds, or deceitful
lovers, which your adulterous hearts delights in; and thus you poor blind
people are held captive, and though you draw near unto God with your lips, and
profess his name with your tongues, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9
yet your hearts is far from him; and thus have you delighted your selves in
vanity, following the wicked one, who has stolen away your hearts, which runs a
whoring from the living God, delighting in the ceatures more than in the
Creator, and thus you spend your time in vanity, treasuring up wrath against
the day of wrath, Rom: 2: 5.
and thus in your pretended solemn meetings and best duties as you esteem of
them, you even add sin unto iniquity, your minds running a whoring from God,
yea, when pretended to serve and worship God, and in the captivity where you
are, where iniquity is lived in, it cannot be otherways, for where the light
is not your guide, there your wills is at liberty, and the wicked one
subjecting you to vanity, and the light in which your minds should be stayed,
is rejected, and so in vain is your worship, and your drawing near unto God
with your mouths, Psalm. 66: 18.
while iniquity is regarded in your hearts, and the light of Christ rejected,
Isa. 58.
which should lead you out of captivity, and break the bands of iniquity; And
this I know that in time past, (when the night was upon me, and my soul held
captive, and the creature made a servant to sin and corruption) I followed
after such men as you have set up to be your Teachers, yea, I followed them day
after day, long together, and never found any satisfaction to my soul, by what
I heard them speak, though some praise of men I got thereby, yet misery
encompassed me, yea, often day and night I sought after the Lord, and that in
tears, and my soul desired after the Lord; but their teachings was so dirty,
and their words so deceitful, and so contrary to the life and power of God,
that instead of awakning me to the Judgments of God, 1 Cor: 15: 34. Ephesians. 5
4. Rom: 8: 20.
they lulled me asleep, and that in the very time of being to hear them, and
though I was a constant hearer of them several years together, yet vanity and
pride increased, and the vain mind and wicked thoughts were at liberty in the
tim s of their speaking, and I followed them till misery overtook me, and the
light in my Conscience showed me the evil of their doings, and the vanity of
their words, and before I heard the everlasting Gospel, the light truly
declared of, I saw by the witness of God, in the Priests and people great
wickedness, and my self to be one amongst them, and knew no way to recover out
of it, until the Lord revealed his power; and while I was a follower of the
Priests, I, instead of going to the Steeple-house, have been made to go and
lament my condition in a secret place, yea, from amongst men; (in a word) to
seek the Lord, and to bewail my soul that was overwhelmed with iniquity, and
desired in tears to know the Lord, but the way I never found by the wisdom of
man, nor had known it to this day, if the Lord Jesus had not revealed himself
to me in his mavelous light, which often appeared to me when I knew it not; I
speak the truth I lie not, God is my witness who knows the secrets of all
hearts, who is the righteous Judge, who will reward every man according to his
deeds; Isa 59.13. Romans 2.6.
and every man's deeds shall be witnessed in the presence of the Lord, by the
light of his Son in their consciences; And all people consider in your beds,
and in your secret clossets examine your selves, and let the light in your
consciences manifest your conditions to you, (which light is present at all
times, letting you see you should not commit evil) and then you will see that
you know but little of the life and power of God, though in words you have made
a large profession of his name, and this is it which the Lord requires of you,
that you obey the light of his Son in your consciences, that is the light which
lets you see the evil of your doings, and a measure of it you have every one
received, and obedience to it God requires, John 1: 9. 1 Cor. 12: 7. 1 Samuel:
15.22. Matt: 11.27.
and doing this its better than Sacrifice; and all that comes unto God its in
this light, and no man knows the Father, but them to whom the light reveals
him, and so all your profession of God, which is out of the light, is but
vanity and iniquity, and while pride and lusts is obeyed in the professor,
there is the hypocrite, the thief and the robber, running before Christ,
professing his name, Job 15: 31. Mal. 4.1. James 4: 6. Matt: 23. John 10: 8.
Isa. 1: 12. Deuteronomy: 4: 30, 31
being out of his life, God requires not this at your hands, but obedience the
Lord requires, and the breaking off iniquity is that which is well pleasing
unto God; And now is the day that the Lord calls unto you, and if ever you find
redemption or recovery out of iniquity, it must be by the light, else you are
lost for ever; and know this that you cannot enjoy two Kingdoms, if you enjoy
the love, and delights, and pleasures of the world, (which are enmity with God)
you partake not of the joys of the Kingdom of God, James 4: 4.
you cannot serve God and Mammon; if you are servants to sin, you are not
servants to God, and to whom you yield your members servants to obey, Matt: 6:
23. 1 Io: 3: 6: 8. Rom: 6: 16. John 3: 16.
his servants ye are, whether of sin unto death, or righteousness unto life,
and now the love of God appears toward you, that your nakedness may be
covered, and your pollutions done away; O that you would but consider how the
Lord has waited on you to be gracious unto you, who has given his Son a
light, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life,
Isa: 42: 6. John 3: 15,
and this was the love of God to sinners, who has given his Son, that in him
you might have life, and this is the Lords mercy to you, and your blessing if
you receive him, who is not of this world: And in your return to the Lord would
my soul rejoice, and when shall the day be seen, that you seek no more your own
honor or delights, but the honor of the Lord? John 5: 44.
and if you come to see and possess this, then you will see all flesh to be as
grass, and the glory of it to be as the flowers of the field, Isa. 40.6, 7, 8.
Isa: 52: 7. Rom: 10: 15.
which soon withers and passes away; then will be seen how beautiful are the
feet of him that brings glad tidings to the meek, and then will you see how
your souls have been captive, and that in the light is the pure liberty, and
blessed are they that receive it, and walk in the love of it, for there is no
occasion of stumbling, though it be a stumbling stone and rock of offense to
the world, Rom 9: 32, 33 Psalm: 56: 9: 16 and 62: 2. and 94: 22. Heb: 11: 38.
yet its the defense and strength of the saints and servants of God, of whom
the world is not worthy, though by the world they are accounted as the
offscouring of all things, yet their reward is in the Lord God Almighty, who
is over all the world; And this I lay upon you all, Isa: 56: 11. Ier: 5: 31:
and 23: 21: 22, 32 Ezekiel: 22: 28. Ezekiel: 34. Mica: 3: 5: 11. Mal. 2. Matt: 15: to
20 Matt: 6: 5. and 23. 2 Timothy: 3. 2 Pet: 2: 13. 14, 15. Iud: 11: 16. Lu: 13: 3:
5.
as you will answer it before the Lord at the day of your account, that you
take heed you hold not up such as you know have deceived you, or as the
Scriptures witnesses against to be deceivers, lest you partake of their sins,
and so must partake of their plagues; (and by their fruits you shall know them)
so see that you come out from amongst them, and be you separate and touch no
unclean thing, that the Lord God may receive you, and you may see forgiveness
of sins, and iniquities blotted, and so obey the life of the Lamb, who takes
away the sins of the world, and if you hate your part in him, your sins remains
upon your heads, and God is clear of your blood, and has no delight in the
death of a sinner, but calls to the wicked to repent, that they may find mercy;
and his witness that reproves for evil is in you, and calls to repentance; and
if you repent not, you perish; and this is in love to your souls, though it may
appear folly to your wisdom, to which I do not send it, nor do I look to be
owned by it, but commend it to that of God in your Consciences.

Given forth in the Common Goal of Saffron-Walden in Essex, the 1. day of the
11. month, 1656. By a sufferer for the Testimony of Jesus. G. R.
Learn to know the Spirit of God, with it to try all things, and hold fast that
which is good.



FINIS.

