NEWS FROM MANCHESTER

Being A perfect Relation of the passages, which happened there, between the Lord
Strange, and the Commissioners for the MILITIA.

Together with the occasion, and other circumstances of their skirmishing, and
the number, and state of those which were slain and wounded.

As also how the Magazine for that County is disposed of.

Sent in a Letter from M. Jo. Ronsgore, an eyewitness, and an Inhabitant of
the said Town of Manchester.

July 23. Printed for T. N. 1642.

Sir,
MY humble respects unto you, I have not any thing to write unto you about,
save only to acquaint you with some sad passages that happened yesternight, here
at Manchester.

My Lord Strange yesterday, six miles from Manchester, viz. at Bury, by virtue
of the Commission of Array, summoned all persons of able body, betwixt sixteen
and sixty years of age, to meet him therewith such Arms as they had, which was
performed accordingly, whereof 2000 went forth of Manchester and the
neighboring villages.

After in the evening, about four of the clock, the Townsmen of Manchester
hearing my Lord was coming to lodge all night at Sir Alexander Radcliffs house,
went to meet him on the way, and invited him to take a banquet at Manchester,
which his Lordship courtuously accepted of; and about five of the Clock came
into Manchester, attended with about 12^ horse well accoutered.

My Lord and the Townsmen were all agreed about the Magazine, his Lordship
promising the Town to join with them in any reasonable thing they would
propose; and withal, that he would stay with them till Monday morning: But in
the mean while Captain Holcroft, Sir Thomas Stanley, and your Cousin Birch, who
were appointed Commissioners for the Militia, began to strike up their Drum, to
put the Militia in execution, in another part of the Town; which when my Lord
Strange, and my Lord Mollineux heard, they came and met them, and some blows
passed on both sides, but two men of your Cousin Birch his Company are shot, one
of which, dyed this morning and nine more are mortally wounded. There are on my
Lord Strange his side, some eleven or twelve men wounded mortally; your Cousin
Birch was shot at twice, yet escaped with some few blows, by means of a Coach
that stood in the Street.

The Townsmen are all gone to my Lord, and to Sir Alexander Radeliffs house,
this morning to disavow the quarrel, and to entreat his Lordship to join with
them, to expel Captain Holcroft and the rest of the Town; That upon some
private grudges, would have occasioned a general quarrel betwixt his Lordship
and the Town? What the issue will be, God best knows; But I hope all will be
well, for my Lord and the chief of the Town are all agreed. I made bold to
write, because I believe you my perhaps hear a more terrible relation then is
true.

Your obliged Son in Law John Ronsgore.
16. July. 1642.
FINIS.

