A MESSAGE from the ESTATES of SCOTLAND TO THE English Commissioners at
Edinburgh, By the Lord Lotherdale, the Lord Lanerick, Sir Charles Erskin, and
Mr. Kennedy.

ALSO The Answer of the Earl of Nottingham and the rest of the English
Commissioners, to three Propositions from the kingdom of Scotland.

A Declaration by the Scotch Ministers against war and raising of Forces. And
a Proclamation from the Estates of Scotland, published at the Market Cross in
Edinburgh.

March 6. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM Mr. WILLIAM ROSSE, Concerning The Affairs of
SCOTLAND: Dated at Edinburgh, Feb. 29. 1648.
Right Honorable,
THe Grand Committee of the Estates of this Kingdom of Scotland, had on
Tuesday last, Feb. 22. 1647. a great debate about the Reports made by the Lord
Chancellor to them, concerning the Answer of the English Commissioners, to the
Message upon which his Lordship was sent from the Convention of Estates.

And the Committee having now provided the Lord Aires house for them in the
City, with accommodations in some sort suitable, resolved to give them an answer
with all convenient speed, And Instructions are gone out for fitting the house
and equipage.

Prince Griffin is come to this City; It is said he would have ravished a Lady
in England, and being prevented killed a man, and is fled hither for refuge.

Wednesday the 23 of Feb. There was a great debate about the English
Commissioners Papers. And diverse speeches were made with sweet notions for
peace, which has been pressed by diverse Earls and Lords viz. the Marquis of
Arguile, the Lord Lothean, Lord Balmerinoth, the Lord Craford Lindsey, The Lord
Twadeale, and others the most considearble Peers in the Realm, as the Lord
Belcarry, the Lord Yester, and others, who are much inclinable to peace, so
that there is great hopes of a good accommodation if actions were according to
the outward face of things here, according to the opinion of the most juditious
moderate men.

It was declared before the Grand Committee of Estates, (...) some of the said
Lords: That if any new breach should (...) made between the Kingdoms it would
be the ruin of both, And that the Covenant does expressly bind to peace, and
amity; and if divisions should come to a national quarrel, It would make both
England and Scotland to be the corn of Christendom. Make way for the
Antichristian party to come in again, and Tyrannize over the Church and People.

Thursday the 24 of Feb. There came Advertisements to the Convention of
Estates, That the English Northern Army had called a Council of War upon
notice from the South of Scotland, that diverse of the Supernumeraries, that
were disbanded in England, passed daily through Carlisle, Barwick and other
ways into this Kingdom out of England; in expectation (as they said) to find
preferment in Scotland, turning their backs on the warm Sun.

Which the Council of War taking into consideration, together with the great
concourse of Malignants about Edinburgh, it was resolved that some Foot
Companies of Soldiers should be sent to the borders of Scotland to quarter
at, and about, Hexam, Morreth and Alnwick, for securing of those parts from the
insulting of the Cavaleires, who are at present some what predominate in these
parts.

But they are mistaken (I hope) in thinking to find a reception by the Scots,
with them against whom they have covenanted, and joined with the loss of so
much blood as has been spilt.

The Scots are (at present) very silent, for the Clergy (for the most part)
have (upon the activity of Malignants) changed their note, and are now for
peace, only two Ministers of this City, are with some others) averse.

And the wives of Edinburgh and Leyth who carry a great sway especially at home
do cry for peace, and say their husbands shall not fight.

Friday the 25 of Feb. The Commissioners of the Kirk taking into consideration
that if an Army should b^e raised, there must of necessity be received all the
Malignants into their assistance to the Scots Army which will be a destruction
to al honest men: And therefore the Divines have absolutely declared that they
will not make any war against the honest Party in England, with whom they
have joined: so that our open or disguised Malignants here, or in England are
not like to prevail, For the Ministers (notwithstanding their discontent) are
now very much pressing to the Estates, that there may not be an Army raised.

There are diverse Englishmen (which have been of the Kings party) waiting at
Edinburgh, indevouring mischief, in expectation of a public falling out
between the kingdoms. Here are, besides Sir Lewis Dives, and the rest,
nominated in my last, Sir Timothy Fetherston, and others of quality; but have
every day less hopes then other. The Scotch women stare upon Prince Griffin,
as if he were some monster, and some of the Scots Ladies dare scarce be
venturep in the City.

The Lord Chancellor has made four Knights, by Commission from his Majesty.
Here are Chequer Knights; Isle of Wight Knights, etc.

Saturday the 26 of February, Proclamation was made at the Market-crosse at
Edinburgh, by Order from the Convention of Estates, that the Parliament of
Scotland, is to begin on Thursday next: on which day the Lords of this kingdom
do intend to ride in their Robes in State.

The Marquess of Argyle has made two Propositions to the Estates, which are
much liked.

1. That the taking of the Covenant, and the keeping thereof, be made into an
act by the kingdom of Scotland, And

2. That by an Act there be a prohibition for toleration of any Church
Discipline at all, other then the Presbyterian, throughout the whole kingdom
of Scotland.

On the Lords day Feb. 27. Mr. Herle, Prolocutor to the Assembly at Westminster
in England, (being with the English Commissioners here, upon the desire of the
Ministers of this place) preached in one of the Scots Congregations; and
preached very stiffely against Sectaries, and other things were delivered by
him, for which he was much applauded by diverse Ministers, and others of this
kingdom.

Yesterday the Committee of Estates sent the Lords Lotherdale and Lanerick, Sir
Charles Erskin, and Mr. Kennedy, to our Commissioners, to know what they had to
offer to them, from the Parliament of England: our Commissioners delivered them
three papers, The first intimating to them the desire the Parliament of England
had, to preserve the union betwixt the two Nations; The second concerning the
payment of that 100000 li. which was due to them the third instant, which our
Commissioners promised should be paid to them as soon as it could possibly be
raised by the Parliament, and in the iuterim, 8 li. per cent. for forbearance:
The third, concerning the payment of the Scots Army in Ireland; which papers
they promised faithfully to report, and to return answer with all convenient
speed.

The Committee of Estates have referred the transactions with the English
Commissioners, to a Subcommittee, who are all the Commissioners they sent into
England, except two, and some others added, who are to make reports to the
Parliament. The Earl of Stamford is not yet come hither.

This is all at present, as any thing occasions, it shall be imparted to you by

Your affectionate Friend to serve you. WILL. ROSSE
Edinburgh. 29 of Feb. 1647.
FINIS.

