AN EXPOSITION On the whole book of Solomon's SONG, Commonly called the
CANTICLES. Wherein the Text is explained and useful Observations raised
thereupon.

By John Robotham, preacher of the Gospel.

PSALM. 45. 13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought gold. EPHESIANS. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church. London, Printed by Matthew Simmons, in Aldersgate Street
next door to the guilded-Lyon 1651.

To the HONORABLE COLONEL DOWNS, Esquire, A Member of the Honorable House of
Parliament, Justice of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant of the County of
Sussex.
Much Honored Sir,
THe experience that I have of your candor and ingenuitie, emboldens me here
to prefix your name, not from any worth in the work performed on my part; but
in respect of the subject mattter of this book, which is a declaration of that
mutual intercourse and vicissitude of divine love, passing between Christ,
and the Church his Spouse; set forth by a most sweet and comfortable, by a most
excellent and ravishing Allegory, of a Marriage-Song: Marriage being the most
joyful passage of all our life, and a Song being the highest expression of
joy; by this amiable resemblance, is the souls spiritual conjunction with
Christ, most lively delineated: Oh! the superemin nt excellency of divine love;
it is the glory of God, the joy of his heart, it is the fullness of Christ, his
Crown and dignity, it is the work of the Spirit, in all its operations, it is
the Song of Angels, and their continual delight: it is the sourse and spring of
true happiness to all Saints: the Sanctuary and support of their dejected
souls: This opens the Fathers bosom, draws forth the affections of Christ,
and melts men's hearts into each others; the sweet sense whereof is the breath
of our nostrils, and the life of our union with him.

Noble Sir, I have but three words to speak, The first is, of you: the second,
to you: the third, for you.

That of you is to testify, that as the Lord has called you to high and
honorable employment, so he has raised your Spirit suitable to the work in
hand; wherein you stood as a Rock immovable in the midst of storms and
tempests, having (like Obed-Edom) owned the Arc, when few would own it,
ventring all that was dear unto you, accounting godliness the greatest gain,
when others have reckoned it their loss, esteeming that your honor, that
others have deemed their shame. Though it be granted, that Truth needs no
Patron (veritas stat in aperto campo) being better able to support, honor, and
advance us, then we can that, yet thrice happy and blessed are they that own
it: therefore the more you engage for Truth, the more will truth dignifie and
advance you. Whatsoever you expend for Christ, in Christ you shall find it
again, and shall receive your own, with the greatest advantage. The
Philosophers expression of good is, Bonum est-sui communicatum: Good is
communicative; the more good therefore you shall expend, the more shall you
discover a principle of goodness to dwell in your heart, flowing from the
fountain of fullness, distilling from Christ.

And that you have engaged me with many undeserved favors, I should be
ungrateful either to deny or forget them: though I cannot make you a
retaliation, (Nihil dat quod non habet) yet that you may know, kindnesses are
ner forgotten in a thank full breast, give me leave to present this as
witness, and testimony of my gratitude to you-wards; being confident you will
receive it. as I present it, with the spirit of love.

That to you is, that you would fix your affections upon, and let the whole
stream of them run unto that only delectable, and love deserving Object
Christ, who is the glory of all delights, and abstract of all praises. Its the
nature of true joy, to delight it self in some solid good, and there is no
good can be compared cum summo bono with that only chief and eternal good,
that is treasured up in Christ.

When we suffer the creatures to steal away our affections, we not only lose
the right use of them, but thereby bereave our selves of true comfort in God,
render our selves dishonorable in the eyes of good men, and unprofitable to
our selves: for though the creatures may serve us, yet they cannot love us; it is
only Christ that can make sweet returns of love, for our love. In which
gracious manifestations of Christ, our hearts are made a Spring of living
waters, a garden of spiritual delight, the music of heavenly joys, the
treasure of divine comforts, and by the impressions of that heavenly love, and
the sweet glimmerings and flashes of light, life, and glory in Christ, our
souls are abundantly refreshed, and satisfied, as with marrow and fatness.
Then (Sir,) this will be your Crown and glory, this is that will heighten your
spirit, ennoble your mind, enlarge your heart, and make you most acceptable to
God, precious in the fight of men, and exquisitely carry you through your
weighty employments. It is said of Solomon (that excellent Son of wisdom)
that his heart was as large as the Sea, viz. in judgment and understanding: so
shall your judgment, wisdom, and understanding be enlarged, according to the
largeness of Christ's love living in you. The Jews were to offer those
creatures in sacrifice unto God, which the Nations worshipped for their God: so
though other men fall down and do hommage to the creatures; yet let it be in
your heart, to sacrifice them all unto the Creator. Surely man is never more
straightned, then when he is bound and pent up in the narrow compass, and
scantinesse of earthly things: for let his heart stoop never so low, the World
falls beneath it; and let him advance the world to the greatest height, his
heart is still above it. But in relation to Christ (cujus contrarium verum est)
the matter is far otherwise: for when man's desires and affections soar never
so high, as an Eagle; still Christ is above them, fills them, answers them, yea
he does exceedingly heighten, enlarge, and abundantly satisfy them.

Sir, I shall conclude with a word for you, expressing the desires of my spirit
on your behalf: that the Lord would be pleased to fill your precious soul
with the exceeding riches of his love, grace, and favor, and cause his glory
to shine upon you so, as to transform you into the image of his glory: that
the sweet kisses of Christ's lips, may be more precious to you, then fragrant
wine, and his name then the richest oyniment, that the senses of your soul may
be more refreshed with his redolent sweetness, and filled more with his
redundant fullness, then withal the most delightful things in the world; yea,
that Christ would please to lodge all night betwixt your Breasts, continually
dwelling in your heart and affections, and that he would come into your soul,
as into his garden, to eat his pleasant fruits, his honey, with his
honeycomb; and to gather his myrrh with his spices; that by his divine
influence, your soul may be filled with all the aromaticall fruits of the
Spirit: And lastly, that you would cast down your Crown and glory at the feet
of Christ, who will be the glory of your Crown here, and your Crown of
eternal glory hereafter.

This is Sir, the hearty desire of him, who is. Your Obliged Servant. John
Robotham.

AN EXPOSITION Of the Song of SOLOMON Called Canticles.
CHAP. 1.
VERSE. 1.
A song of songs, which is Solomon's.
THIS Song of Solomon is not unfitly compared, and called after the most holy
place of the Temple, which he built; for this song of songs, or most excellent
song resembles the Holy of Holies, or the most holy place.

The occasion of this Song was Solomon's marriage with Pharaoh's Daughter, who
was a stranger by birth from the Commonwealth of Israel; yet she became a
Proselyte to the Jewish religion, as you may see in Psalm. 45. 10. Hearken (O
daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people,
and thy Fathers house. By daughter here is meant the Queen, mentioned in verse.
9. which did figure out the Church, or the heavenly Jerusalem, the Lambs wife,
Rev. 21. 9, 10. So that herein Solomon was a type of Christ, admitting the
Gentiles into communion and fellowship with himself.

Now it was the manner of old, at Espousalls and Nuptials to sing (Epithalamia)
love-songs, or songs of betrothings: this is then, without all controversy, a
song between a Bridegroom and a Bride, wherein diverse persons are brought in,
uttering their parts in it, but especially two, which are Lovers, betrothed
each unto the other. True it is, that the Bridegroom and this Bride are not
named by any proper names in all this song; but it is most clear and evident
who they be, by those excellent descriptions which are made of them. For the
Bridegroom is described to be a King of that transcendent and most excellent
shining glory and majesty, which none has attained unto but Jesus Christ, the
Son of the most high God; and the Bride is described by such rare beauty and
glory, which far surmounteth all the glory of the world, and cannot belong to
any but to the Bride the Lambs Wife, mentioned Revel. 19. 7.

Again, how ridiculous and absurd would it be for any to think, that this song
was penned by Solomon to express his own affections to Pharaoh's daughter, or
hers to him; in respect of those strange comparisons, liking the Spouse to a
company of horses in Pharaoh's Chariot, her bed to Carmel, her eyes to
Fish-pooles, her nose to the tower of Lebanon, her teeth to a flock of sheep,
and the like: this song therefore ascends far above all earthly respects of
worldly marriage, being a declaration of the blessed and sweet conjunction
between Christ and his Church; and of that contract and espousals made between
them, whilst the Church is here on earth.

It was the ancient manner, that the parties intending marriage were betrothed,
and after some distance of time the marriage was solemnized: Between the time
of their betrothing, and of their solemnizing the marriage, tokens of love and
favor did use to pass between them: but when they are married, the Wife is
received into the nearest society of her Husband, and becomes a partaker with
him of all his riches and possessions, his glory and dignities. Thus it is with
the Lord Jesus, he has betrothed himself to his Spouse here on earth, and at
last the marriage shall be solemnized, Revel. 19. 7. So that all those riches
and dignities the Church now receives in the promise, then she shall have the
fruition of them.

We may further take notice, that it is not unusual in Scripture, for Christ to
be called the Bridegroom, and the Church the Bride, as in Isa. 62. 5. As the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. And
again in Hos. 2. 19. I will marry thee unto me for ever; yea, I will marry thee
unto me in righteousness, etc. And also in 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have prepared you
for one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ, says the Apostle.
We have it from Christ's own mouth in John 3. 29. He that has the Bride is
the Bridegroom: but the friend of the Bridegroom which stands and hears
him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegrooms voice. By these Scriptures it
is plain, that Christ uses this similitude of marriage, to express his love
to his Church.

In this song here be diverse persons brought in, uttering their parts; sometime
speaking, and sometime spoken to: and also the Bride makes mention sometimes of
her mother, and of her little sister. It was the manner of old, that the
Bridegroom had young men to be his companions or friends, such are Angels and
Saints unto Christ, such were the Prophets and Apostles: John Baptist was
termed of himself to be one of Christ's friends. Also the Bride had Virgins to
be her companions: these are called in this song, the daughters of Jerusalem.
And touching the mother and sister of the Bride, they are both meant the Church
of Christ; for it is the manner in the Hebrew tongue to call the whole the
Mother, and the parts thereof the Daughters and Sisters: now there is but one
universal Church, and therefore called the Brides mother: but the Church is
never whole in the world at one time; and in Solomon's days consisting of the
Jews only: the Church of the Gentiles which was not then in being, is called
her little sister.

Now the carriage of this song is such, that it does as well recite the most
dismal and saddest passages of the Church, as those that are good and
comfortable; yet, lest any thing might darken this marriage song, the saddest
passages in it are made sweet by some amiable resemblance. The Church sometimes
most of all desires a near communion with Christ: at other times she declines
in her affection again: after this she recovers: Yet again, she declines in
her affections, till at last Christ draws her nearer in affection to himself,
by discovering his own love to her. Now in these intervails and changes which
the Church went through, she met with much trouble and affliction, which is
declared in this song, together with the joy and comfort she found in the
enjoyment of her beloved.

Before we come to open this song, something must be said concerning the
title, which stands as a glorious Eulogie or praise to the whole ensuing
Book, which is contained in the first Verse.

VERSE. I.
The song of songs which is Solomon's.
IN the Title observe,

1. The matter, or rather the form of the Book, it is a song. 2. The
transcendency of it, A song of songs. 3. The Author of it, which is Solomon's.
The song of songs, etc.
Songs and Psalms are for the most part arguments of joy and rejoicing in them
that sing, as in Jam. 5. 13. Is any merry, let him sing Psalms. So likewise
they are arguments of praise and honor to them, whom they concern; according
to the exhortation of the Prophet David in Psalm. 66. 2. Sing forth the honor
of his name: make his praise glorious. In the Greek it is read, give glory to
his praise; that is, make his praise glorious and honorable.

In Ephesians. 5. 19. there is mention made,

First, of Songs, which the Greeks call (...) a song, (...) Cantavit, unde.
(...) Can^icum.
or lay: it is also called by the Hebrews, Shir, a song, which was chiefly
made for the voice, and it contained matter of exultation and rejoicing.

Secondly, hymns, called by the Greeks (...), a hymn or praise: by the Hebrews
Tehilleh, and signifies land and praise in commemoration of benefits received
(...) Laus^laudatio.
from God: An hymn is uttered by the voice only.

Thirdly, Psalms, which the Greeks call (...), the Hebrews Mizmor, which
comes of a root, that (...) Landavit. (...) Psalmus. a (...) Putavit,
praecidit.
signifies to prune or cut off superfluous twigs from trees: this is a kind of
an artificial song in a proportioned number of words: A Psalm is played on an
Instrument, as well as with the voice; it contained Arguments of all sorts, for
exhortation to moral doctrine or holiness of life, petition, thanksgiving,
and instruction. Many times any of these are put indifferently for all; but
this most excellent song contains them all in one: it is as a song for joy and
rejoicing: it is as a hymn for praise and thankesgiving: it is as a Psalm
exhortation and instruction.

Again, for as much as we find sundry parties singing, and the one side
answering to the other: for which it may be called a Responsorie, and hence the
form of this song differs from all other songs in Scripture: For as there are
diverse singing at once, so there seems to be many songs in this one, and all
treating of the mutual love between Christ and his Church.

Hence observe,

First, The Church and servants of Christ have always matter of joy and
singing; these only have the true cause of joy, and their joy shall never be
taken from them. The joy of carnal men is nothing but madness, Eccles. 2. 2.
Believers only have true and solid joy, flowing from the spirit of Christ
within them; they only can sing, making melody in their hearts unto the Lord,
Ephesians. 5. 19.

Secondly, note, That the Church can rejoice in affliction, as well as in
prosperity.

David can sing of his deep waters and calamities, as well as of his great
mercies and deliverances: and the Apostle says in Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the
Lord always: Not only in times of prosperity and mirth, but also in times of
adversity and distress: the troubles of the Saints are not so many, or so
great, but spiritual joy will mitigate and overcome them all. Afflictions are
turned into matter of rejoicing, when they are a means to stir up our faith
and patience, according to the Apostle, Jam. 1. 2.

Thirdly, Man's reconciliation with God by Jesus Christ is matter of great joy.

This Book treating of man's reconciliation with God, and of his sweet
conjunction with Christ, with joy in the holy Ghost, is called a Song: yea, it
is a marriage song, a song of betrothings. Now what passage of our life is more
sweet than that of marriage? and what sweeter expression, then by a song? It
thus is set forth unto us the sweet conjunction between the soul and Christ.
It is the nature of joy to delight in some solid good: now no good can be
compared cum summo bono, with that chief and eternal good; it is no wonder
then, if the soul does much rejoice to be joined to Christ, who is the very top
of all felicity and happiness.

Fourthly, observe, How the Lord takes all advantages to win our affections
unto himself. He presents before us the pure, free, perfect, eternal, and
constant love of Christ toward his Church, with all his incomparable and
heavenly riches, wisdom, beauty, and graces by that amiable and pleasant, that
sweet and comfortable allegory of a marriage song; to the end, that he might
carry up the soul to things of a divine and heavenly nature. The holy Ghost
does many times frame arguments most suitable to the nature of man, as that in
the Prophet Hosea 11. 4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with bands of
love, etc. That is, as if the Lord had said, I used arguments suitable to man's
nature; I did not use violence and rigor, but rather chose to overcome them
with mercy and loving kindness.

Secondly, We have the transcendent excellency of this song.

A song of songs: That is, the chiefest and most excellent song; for by
doubling of the words, the Scripture uses, when it speaks of good things, to
understand most excellent things, as Deuteronomy. 10. 17. The Lord your God is God of
Gods, and Lord of Lords. That is to say, most high Lord and God: and whereas if
it speak of base things, it does on the other side by doubling debase them as
much, as Genesis 9. 25. A servant of servants shall he be. That is, he shall be a
most vile and base servant. In like manner it is spoken of Christ, Revel. 19.
16, 17. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. That is, the most high and mighty
King, and supreme Lord of all. The doubling of the words make an Hebrew
superlative, by which this is noted to be the chiefest song.

First, of all Solomon's other songs, for he made a thousand and five, 1 King.
4. 32.

Secondly, of all other songs in Scripture: David was the sweet singer of
Israel in his time, and had his golden Psalms; besides many other songs there
be in Scripture, and all of them very precious: yet this song excels them
all, and that in these respects.

First, Because this song speaks of Christ's love to his Church, and the
Churches love to Christ more largely, sweetly, and comfortably then any other
song in Scripture: and by such allegories and amiable resemblances, taken from
the most beautiful and stateliest things under heaven; the sweetest,
therichest, and the most precious things that are found among men, as the
richest Jewels, the sweetest Spices, Gardens, Orchards, Vineyards,
Wine-sellers, and the like: these with the like set forth and express the
spiritual and heavenly Ornaments and Jewels which Christ bestows upon his
Church, with the fruits of her love to him again.

Secondly, This song admits more variety of interpretation then any other:
some understand it of the Catholic Church, some of particular Churches, from
Solomon's time to the last judgment, some of the mutual affection and love
between Christ and every Believer: We deny not, but that there may be useful
truths in each one of these interpretations; but sure it is, that all, or the
most passages of this song will very well agree to the spiritual state of the
Church in every age of the world.

Thirdly, The difficulty and hardness of this song, which arises from these
grounds.

First, The sudden change of the number, tense, and person, as now speaking
singularly, then plurally; now in the present time, then in the time to come.

Secondly, In that there are several persons speaking, now the Bride, then the
Bridegroom, and sometimes the friends of them both, viz. the daughters of
Jerusalem.

Thirdly, In respect of all those parabolicall and enigmaticall phrases and
dark speeches, wherein is contained very divine and heavenly matter.

The Jews had this song in such reverence and high esteem, that none of them
would read or study it, until they were thirty years of age.

Now forasmuch as this song excells all other in the Scripture, in that it
celebrateth the mysteries of Christ and his Church, and the conjunction between
them, more amply and excellently then any other;

Observe, That this song of Solomon is a most excellent portion of canonical
Scripture. It were horrid blasphemy to prefer this song above all the songs in
Scripture, if it were not given by divine inspiration as well as they.

First, The title of this Book is, as a crown of glory set upon the head of it,
and is as ancient, and of as great authority as the book it self: Now if this
song were not canonical, we should make all the songs in Scripture in
comparison, (...) come behind a humane love-song.

Secondly, If we consider the (...)^ne and heavenly matter contained in this
song: it takes the best things in the course of nature, and applies them to a
most divine use; but of this we have spoken already.

Thirdly, If we consider that speech in Chap. 7. 4. Thy nose is like to the
tower of Lebanon. Now the tower of Lebanon was not built until a long time
after Solomon had married with Pharaoh's Daughter: beside, how odious and
unseemly would the comparison have been, if it had been made in respect of
Solomon's wife.

Fourthly, The description of the Bride and the Bridegroom are so transcendent
and excellent, that they cannot be applied to any, but to Christ and his
Church: And although none of the ten proper names in Hebrew be once named in
this song; yet this Book is full of such names, as do most of all suit with
the argument thereof, as King, Welbeloved, Brother, Shepherd, the chief of
ten thousand, etc. That most excellent shining glory, dignity, and Majesty,
which is here put upon the Bridegroom, can belong to none beside Christ. And as
for the Bride, she is described by such rare beauty and glory, which cannot
agree with Pharaoh's daughter: for how is she compared with all that dwell
under Solomon's Curtain? and how is she found black, parched with the sun, and
afflicted by her Brethren?

Fifthly, It is manifest that Christ and his Apostles made use of this Book by
applying the phrases, and borrowing of matter and frame of speech from it, as
in Chap. 1. 2. Draw me, etc. Suitable to that are the words of Christ, in Joh.
6. 44. None can come to me, unless the father draw him. Again in verse. 9.
Behold him through the casement, looking through the grates, etc. Agreeable is
this, to that of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 3. 18. We behold the glory of the Lord
as through a glass, or casement. See also the title which Christ gives his
Church, in Chap. 5. 2. calling her undefiled, agreeable to the Apostle, who
would present the Church to Christ, as a chaste and pure Virgin.

These places, with many other, which might be brought, do clearly demonstrate
what a sympathy and agreement there is between this song and the new Testament,
and with the matter and manner of phrase alleged there, by Christ and his
Apostles.

Sixthly, There would be open contradictions found to be in this song, if it
were applied to any other then Christ and his Church; for how can it be said of
Pharaoh's daughter, that she is the only child of her mother, Chap. 5. 6. when
in the last Chapter, that she had a little sister? Now concerning the heavenly
Jerusalem, she is called the mother of us all, and the Church is but one in
Christ: but in respect of those several congregations that the Church is
divided into, she may be said to have many sisters; and thus according to the
right interpretation, we see a harmonious agreement in this seeming
contradiction. I might bring many more arguments to prove this song to be an
excellent part of canonical Scripture, but I forbear, forasmuch as the
several passages of it will agree to the experience of the best Christians:
wherefore it will be worth our time and pains to read, study, and meditate in
this most excellent portion of holy writ; and when we come to understand this
song clearly, we shall be forced to confess, that there is not such choice
and heavenly matter, neither the like sweetness and comfort in any song, as in
this song of songs.

Thirdly, we have the Author of this Song (which is Solomon's)

Solomon was the greatest son of wisdom among men, whose understanding was as
large as the Sea, 1 King. 4. 29, 30. And whose affections were as large as his
understanding: he is made the holy Ghost's instrument for the composing of
this excellent song of songs. A man of the deepest apprehension is made use of
in the highest matters, to wit, the intercourse of love betwixt the Lord Christ
and his Spouse.

Solomon was a type of Christ:

First, In that he had his name of peace, which is called in Hebrew Shelomoh,
but after the Greek Solomon, peaceable, for he was a man of peace and rest; and
God said of him, Solomon shall be his name, and I will give him (Salom) peace
and quietness unto Israel in his days, 1 Chronicles. 22. 9. Which promise was made
good, as we read in 1 King. 4. 24. He had peace on all sides round about him.
Now Christ is our Prince of peace, Isa. 9, 6. and is called by the Apostle our
peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. That is, he is the author and cause of all our peace; he
is the cement, the only tie, and ground of all that peace and union between God
and us, and also between the Jews and Gentiles bringing them into fellowship
and communion one with another.

2. Solomon surpassed all the Kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 2 Chr.
9. 22. And all the earth sought the face of Solomon, to hear his wisdom which
God had put in his heart, 1 King. 10. 24. He was the wisest of all Kings, as we
see in 1 King. 3. 12. There was none like him, before him, neither after him
shall any arise like unto him. He was also the wisest Prophet, whose heart was
lifted up higher then the sun, and who had received a large measure of the
spirit of Prophecy from the Lord: but yet behold Jesus Christ, a greater then
Solomon, Matthew. 12. 42. For in him are the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2. 3.
That is, Christ had in him the perfection of all wisdom and knowledge: and the
Apostle calls him in 1 Cor. 1. 24. The wisdom of God. Christ is essential
wisdom and understanding: Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom (says he) I am
understanding, Prove. 8. 14. This song therefore is commended unto us by the
holy Ghost, in the highest degree of excellency, in respect of the Author, who
was such an eminent type of Christ both in peace and wisdom.

Observe from hence, that Solomon is a canonized Saint, else he had not been
the Penman of Canonical Scripture, and so to have been a Scribe of the holy
Ghost: The Apostle Peter speaks thus of all the holy Prophets and Penmen of
holy writ, in his 2 Epist. Chap. 1. verse. 20, 21. First know this, that no
prophecy in the Scripture is of any private interpretation^ For prophecy came
not in old time by the will of man that holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. Now Solomon being one of those holy men of God, he
must need be a dear and beloved Saint of God.

2. He was a most excellent type and figure of the Messiah's in love, peace,
wisdom, and glory: and Christ himself is called Solomon, in Chap. 3. 11. It
would be therefore more then absurd rashness to conclude him a reprobate.

3. The promise which God makes to David, that if Solomon sinned, he should be
chastised, but that God would never take away his mercy clean from him, as he
did from Saul, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. This cannot be meant of succession in the
Kingdom; for it would have been no comfort to have enjoyed the Kingdom for a
while, and afterward to perish for ever; therefore it must be taken for a
promise of an estate of life.

4. God speaks well of Solomon after his death, making an honorable mention of
his name, and joins him with his Father David; the Lord commending Rehoboam and
his people for their first 3. years government, 2 Chr. 11. 17. Three years long
they walked (says the Lord) in the way of David and Solomon. Now God never
made any such honorable mention of a reprobate after his death, in all the
Scripture.

5. Consider that name of love and favor which God gave unto him, Jedidiah,
beloved of God.

6. Solomon himself is said to have loved the Lord, 1 King. 3. 3. which thing
being true (else it would not have been recorded in Scripture) he could never
fall finally from God.

7. It is said in Luke 13. 28. that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Prophets
(of which number Solomon is one) are in the Kingdom of God: Yet the false
Prophets are excepted, as Balaam, by whom God spoke sometimes in a compulsitory
way; but the Lord used no such instruments to be Penmen of the holy Ghost.

8. And lastly, his own 3. Books evince his repentance and reconciliation
with God: For this glorious light of Israel for a season was clouded and
overshadowed by Idolatry; for it is said, Solomon worshipped strange gods. Now
upon these words the Romanists conclude, that Solomon died a reprobate; but Mr.
Broughton is of another opinion concerning these words: I have oftentimes mused
(says he) what should be the meaning of these words, And Solomon worshipped
strange gods. For (says he) I could Brought. general view of the Scriptures,
p. 154.
never think that he could esteem the idols of the heathen for gods,
considering he had such wonderful knowledge, but surely this is the meaning;
that by allowing his Concubines to worship them, and in that it was done by his
Commandment, it was as his act; and this I hold, till I be better instructed.
If he had come to so open a folly, as to worship them as God, this his sin
must needs have been of very high nature, if not the sin against the holy
Ghost, which is unpardonable.

But however it must be confessed, that Solomon fell grievously by giving the
reins to his lusts; yet, as it was said already, his 3. last Books will declare
what the frame and temper of his spirit was in his old age.

1. The book of the Proverbs, wherein by allegories taken from the most
excellent of the creatures, and also from those of the lowest rank and esteem,
he shows the wisdom of God in the government of the world: from whence he
persuades men to seek after the wisdom of God, admonishes the people to beware
of strange women, and labors to settle them in the grounds of Religion.

2. His Book called the Preacher, which book was made in his old age, and
after his recovery out of sin: he begins, Vanity of vanities, all is but
vanity, says the Preacher. He preached worldly vanity from selfe-experience,
admonishing others to beware by his evil. In which Book he shows in general
the transitory estate of all things in the world. For, says he, consider the
Sun, it rises and sets, and returns again to his place. The wind goes
toward the South, and turns about into the North: it whirleth about
continually, and it returns again according to his circuits. All the rivers run
into the Sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers
come, thither they return again. So by this he shows, that there is no
felicity in any thing under the sun, but all is vanity. He goes on, and tries
wisdom and knowledge; but says he, in much wisdom is much grief, and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. He went yet further, and tried all
pleasant things; for (says he) I made great works, I built houses, set Gardens
and Orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits. I made me
pooles of water, etc. In a word, I was full, and much increased, I wanted
nothing that my heart could desire: but when I began to consider what felicity
these things could bring unto me, I beheld nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit, and that there was no profit under the Sun.

3. This most divine song penned (as was hinted before) in his old age: his
affections and his mind is taken up in contemplating and celebrating those
sweet mysteries of Christ and his Church, and of that intercourse of love
passing between them: his heart is now lifted up higher then all the things
under the Sun, reckoning of them nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit. Now
by what has been said, we may conclude Solomon a glorious Saint of God, and
therefore should be stirred up to the study and meditation of this Book the
more, for Solomon's sake, the Penman thereof.

CHAP. 1.
VERSE. 2, 3.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy love is better then
wine.

Because of the savor of thy good ointments; thy name is as ointment poured
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.


IN this Chapter observe two parts.

1. The earnest desire of the Church to be effectually joined unto Christ, and
to enjoy his presence; that she might have sweet and most comfortable communion
with her head and Spouse, and this is from verse. 2. to the end of verse. 7.

2. There is contained the ready offer of Christ to entertain and embrace his
beloved Church, together with a mutual commendation one of another, and both
setting forth the praises of each other, from verse. 8. to the end of the
Chapter.

In the first part observe,

1. The Churches earnest wishes and desires, ver. 2, 3, 4. 2. She preventeth
some objections that might be made against her, verse. 5, 6, 7.
The earnest desire of the Church is set down under the similitude of a lover.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, etc.
In this Verse. observe two things.

1. The Churches prayer or request to Christ, in these words, Let him kiss me,
etc. 2. The reason of her prayer, wherein she sets forth the excellency of
Christ's love, in these words, For thy love is better then wine.
To kiss in the Scripture notes 3. things.

1. It notes worship and service, as we have is in the Prophet Hosea, Chap.
13. verse. 2. Let the m^^ that sacrifice kiss the calves; it being an act and
token of worship and religious honor. See also in 1 K. 19. 18. Yet I have left
me (says God) seven thousand in Israel, which have not bowed unto Baall, and
every mouth which have not kissed him. That is, that have not so much
reverenced or honored Baal, as to kiss him.

2. To kiss is an expression of duty and obedience; thus Samuel kissed Saul,
when he had anointed him King of Israel, 1 Samuel 10. 1. This he did, as a token
of obedience: this is that duty toward Christ, expressed in Psalm. 2. 9. Kiss
the son: That is, yield all obedience to him, regard the law of his mouth, be
instructed, counseled, and commanded by him.

3. To kiss is a symbol and pledge of love; therefore the Christians of the
Primitive time used such expressions of love in their love feasts: and this is
enjoined by the Apostle as an expression of Christian love, and as a sign of
their unity and oneness, and of that Christian tie, whereby they stood bound
one to another.

The last of these serves for our purpose; for in these words, Let him kiss
me, etc.

The Church desires that the sweet and comfortable pledges of Christ's love may
be given in unto her.

By a mentonymie, she puts the sign for the thing signified; for a kiss is
but a pledge of that love of Christ, which she desires to be made a partaker
of. Here we have an exclamation, full of spiritual passions and divine love;
with which the Church is enflamed, and as it were impatient in her desires,
after a nearer conjunction with Christ. Let us see it farther, what that is
which the Church so earnestly desire, in the following words.

With the kisses of his mouth.
The Church does not say, with the kisses of his lips, for that is a more
silent and still gesture; but the kisses of his mouth, which is no superfluous
speech here; but it implies the heavenly and gracious speeches which proceed
out of Christ's mouth. Grace was in Christ's lips, Psalm. 45. 3. All Christ's
affections were sweet, and his heart was a treasure of divine grace: his mouth
then by which he utters the things that are in his heart, must needs be sweet
and desirable.

Qu. But was ever the Spouse of Christ without all pledges of his love? or, was
she ever without the word? for she seems to cry after that which she had
not?

Answ. Christ did always kiss his beloved Spouse with some of the kisses of
his mouth; but he let out his light, minuatim, by little and little, as it were
by degrees.

The promise was first made to Adam in the seed of the woman. After this, the
promise was renewed again with Abraham: And after that the children of Israel
were come out of Egypt, his Laws and Ordinances were more fully delivered by
Moses, but as yet all things were under figures and shadows; the Church was as
a child in her nonage, and in that respect the Apostle says, they were under
tutors and governors, until the time appointed of the Father, Gal. 4. 1, 2.
And in Chap. 3. 23, 24. he says, they were kept under the law, shut up unto
the faith, which should afterward be revealed; which law was a Schoolmaster
unto Christ. In this respect the Apostle says; that the heirs of life and
salvation were but Children before Christ's Incarnation, because in general
they knew but as children, for that we have done since: besides other points of
minority touching legality and ceremonies, which the Apostle in the aforecited
place calls elements or rudiments; so that their light was but an obscure and
glimmering light to ours now in the days of the Gospel. Christ's discovery of
himself then was but a standing behind the wall, a looking forth of the window,
a showing himself through the lattice, Cant. 2. 9. So although the godly in
the time of the Prophets saw the promises afar off, and embraced them: yet they
had them but in the expectation, not in the enjoyment: they had the promises in
respect of the benefit, but not in the perfection of them. These (says the
Apostle) Heb. 11. 39, 40.
received not the promise: God having provided some better things for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect. Now the Prophets foresaw and
prophesied of the rising of the sun of Righteousness, that bright morning
star, who would make glorious discoveries of heavenly light: and they also
prophesied of the pouring forth of the spirit of wisdom, and of revelation
after Christ's coming in the flesh: and hence it is, that many Kings, and
Prophets, and righteous men desired to see Christ's day, and saw it not, Luke
10. 24.

This is one of the kisses of Christ's mouth, which the Church did so vehemently
desire, saying, Let him kiss me, etc. Whereby the Church desires to have
Christ manifested in the flesh, and to have the sweet and comfortable Doctrines
of the Gospel applied to her heart, and that she might not be always under a
legal dispensation, for the law works wrath, Romans 4. 15. It was a
ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3. 8. for the tenor of it runs thus, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of
the law, Gal. 3. 10. But (says the Apostle) after that faith is come, we are
no longer under a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 25. That is, now we are not as
children in knowledge and understanding, that we should need a Schoolmaster;
but we are as men of riper years, and as men grown in knowledge, by the clear
light and sunshine of the Gospel: so the Church desires here, that she might
be prevented with the grace of Christ, and have the feeling of his love and
favor toward her.

For thy loves are better then wine.
Here the Church rendereth a reason of that her most earnest desire, which she
has to be joined with Christ, and enjoy a more full and near communion with
him.

Thy loves, etc.
By loves she means favor and acceptance: and she speaks in the plural
number. (...)


1. To declare the plentifulnesse of Christ's love, and withal that great
comfort and joy she received by the abundance thereof.

2. In that she had not Christ's love only, but also the fruits thereof, namely,
her love to Christ, Christ's love to her being as the cause; her love to Christ,
as the effect; her love to Christ a reflection of his love, wherewith he loved
her first, according to that in 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first
loved us.

(better then wine) or, good more then wine. (...) Est bonus, utilis, jucundus,
suavis, pulcher, laetus, commodus, aptus, idoneus, beatus fuit.


The word good is of a large extent, and is used for that which is fair, sweet,
pleasing, profitable or commodious, causing joy and comfort. The same word is
used in Genesis 24. 16. where it is said, the Damsel was fair to look upon.
That is, she was of a good countenance. And we have the same word in Esther 1.
10. where it is said; the Kings heart was merry with wine. So that by good, the
Church means profitable, sweet, pleasant, comfortable, and full of salvation;
for it is the love of election, of adoption, justification, of righteousness
and sanctification, and therefore a very sweet and comfortable love.

Better then wine.
Wine is one of the most precious, comfortable, and delightful creatures that
is in the world. It is here put synechdochically, as one pleasant species or
kind for all the rest: and because Wine is the principal thing in Feasts and
Banquets, it is here put for all dainty, pleasant, sweet and comfortable meats
and drinks, used in the banquets of the great ones of the world.

The Verse being thus opened, let us draw some Observations from it.

Obser. 1. That such as have the least taste of Christ's love are impatient and
restless in their desires after the nearest fellowship and communion with him.
Hence it is, that the Spouse here breaks forth into such a speech with an
exclamation, being full as it were of divine passions, and of enflamed love,
saying, let him kiss me, etc. This was grounded upon some tastes of Christ's
love; for Christ had not spoken as yet to the Spouse; but she on a sudden (as
it were) without any word from Christ, utters this vehement exclamation of
hers, and that without any other ground, then that his love is better then
wine. See this in the Apostle: he counted all things but dung, (...),
dogs-meat, that he might win or gain Christ: that is, that he might get more
nearer communion with him; and that he might be satisfied with a larger
portion of his fullness: and yet the Apostle goes higher then this, and desires
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, that so he might enjoy the highest
communion of all. The Church here desires Christ's manifestation in the flesh,
that she might enjoy him in a Gospel Dispensation, and have sweeter
discoveries of his favor: so in like manner the Church of the New Testament,
who did enjoy all the privileges of the Gospel; yet she goes higher in her
affections, and desires Christ's last coming, that so she might enjoy him in
that heavenly and everlasting communion, which the Saints shall enjoy hereafter.

2. Observe; that Christ has given more sweet and comfortable pledges of love
and reconciliation to his people under the Gospel, then he did under the Law.

Hence it is, that Christ tells his Disciples, and says, Blessed are the
eyes that see that ye see. For I tell you, many Prophets and Kings have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, Luke 10. 24. To this
purpose is that of the Apostle, in Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20. For you are not come
unto the mount not to be touched, and that burned with fire: Nor unto
blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of words, etc. By the mount is mount- Sinai, whereon the law was given:
and by all those expressions of darkness and tempest, and fire; we are given to
understand the slavish, servile, and fearful condition of them who were under
the law: and how far short their condition came of the excellency of our
condition, who are under the Gospel. And he says further, Verse. 22. But ye
are come un o mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to innumerable company of Angls: to the general Assembly, and
Church of the firstborn which are written in heaven, etc. By mount-Sion he
means the Church under the Gospel, whereof mount-Sion was a type, Psalm. 14.
7. And the Doctrine of the Gospel was to go out of Sion, Isa. 2. 3. And by all
the other expressions he shows the happy condition of them, who are under the
Gospel. It is the same argument for substance, that the Apostle uses in Romans 6.
14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law,
but under grace. That is, now having such manifestations of grace under the
Gospel: sin shall not take such advantages against you, as to keep you under,
or to enthrall you, as it did those under the Law.

Again, Christ has powered out a greater measure of his spirit on his people,
now in the times of the Gospel, then before. The Saints of old have had the
same spirit for substance, but not for measure; the spirit was given out unto
them by small drops; but in the times of the Gospel it was powered out in
showers and abundance, Tit. 3. 6. The word translated abundantly signifies
Riches, which notes not only the pretiousnesse, but the plenty and
superabundancy thereof. And it is said, when he (meaning Christ) ascended up
on high, and led captivity captive, he did withal give gifts unto men, Ephesians.
4. 8. In these words the Apostle alludeth to an old custom of the Jews, who
in days of great joy and solempnity, did use to send gifts and presents one to
another, as we read in Neh. 8. 10. 12. The people did eat and drink and send
portions. This the people did in token of their joy after their redemption from
captivity. So when Christ ascended up on high, as in the day of his Majesty and
Inauguration in his Kingly seat and Chariot of triumph; he sent plentiful
portions and gifts of his holy spirit into the hearts of his people. Now in
that Christ powrs out more abundantly of his spirit in the days of the Gospel
then before; the spirit of evidence and demonstration, the spirit of revelation
and knowledge as it is called in 1 Cor. 2. Herein Christ has given more pledges
of his love in the times of the Gospel, then in the times of the law.

Lastly, The will and mind of God is more fully and more plainly revealed to
his people under the Gospel, then it was under the Law: God let out light by
little, and little, till the sun of righteousness arose. So we have it in Heb.
1. 1. God spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets at sundry times, and in diverse
manners; but in these days he has spoken by his son, Verse. 2. That is, he
has spoken morefully and plainly.

The antithesis or opposition which the Apostle sets between Gods speaking by
the Prophets of old, and by his Son in the latter age of the world, shows
plainly the dimnesse and darkness of those former ages in comparison of those,
which have been since the coming of Christ.

3. In that the word of the Gospel is called the kiss of Christ's mouth,

Observe. That the Doctrine of the Gospel is very sweet and desirable.

From hence it is, that David does so highly commend the holy Doctrine of the
Lord, that it is perfect, pure, and infallible, and of such mighty operation
and effects, that he says, it is more to be desired then gold, yea then much
fine gold, sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb, Psalm. 19. In the Original
the words run thus, sweeter then the dropping of the honey-combs: It is meant
of that which comes forth without pressing and therefore counted the sweetest
and purest honey of all other.

All the Epithites given in Scripture unto the Gospel do show, that it is sweet
and comfortable; it is called the good word of God, Heb. 6. 5. A good doctrine,
1 Timothy 4. 6. A faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
The word of life, Phil. 2. 16. The word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. The
Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 2. 17. The Gospel of salvation, and the word of truth,
Ephesians. 1. 13.

Besides, the Gospel brings glorious effects along with it; as liberty to
Captives, and blessed joy and comfort to those in distress, as in Isa. 61. 1,
2. It is tidings of great joy, viz. of reconciliation to God by Christ, and of
peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

It is no other then the sweet kisses of Christ's mouth; and those heavenly
Oracles of his mouth, whereby he calls, enlightneth, comfort, and works
faith in his people. Christ's affections were (as I may so speak) dyed in love
and sweetness: and his heart was as a fountain of grace, therefore needs must
his mouth be sweet, which is (as it were) the instrument by which he utters
what is in his heart. Christ conveyeth all his graces and all good things into
his people by the word of his mouth. No marvail then, though the Church be
enflamed with the desire of the kisses of his mouth.

4. Observe from the reason which the Church renders of her most earnest
longings and desires after Christ: For thy loves, etc.

That those strong desires, and those earnest longings of the faithful after
Christ, they flow from a principle of love.

Love is impulsive and constraining, it has a sweet kind of violence to draw
out all the affections of the soul unto Christ, see this in 2 Cor. 5. 15. The
love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle. So again in Jer. 31. 3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with mercies have I drawn thee,
says the Lord. And in Hos. 11. 4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with
bands of love, etc.

Now we must understand this principle of love to be, either Christ's love to
us, or our love to him; for there is an interchange of spiritual love between
Christ and his people. First, Christ's love to us (in respect of the
extrinsicall part of it) is the expressing of his love to us by the evident
testimonies of his favor and grace: and by uniting of himself unto us, making
of us to partake with himself of his own goodness. Now by the manifestation
of Christ's love to us, he begets in our souls a love of him: his love is, as
the cause, our love as the effect: and as Solomon says of the rivers, that
they both come from, and return again into the Sea, Eccles. 1. 7. So Christ is
the ocean of spiritual love, from whence we derive, and in to which we return
our love: so that our love proceeds from Christ's love; his love is as a
lodestone, attractive, drawing our affections to him; our love is as the
reflecting back to him again the beams of his own love.

Now that principle of love by which we are drawn to Christ, is both Christ's
love to us, and the fruits thereof, namely our love to him. Now there are three
things in love, whereby the affections of the soul are drawn unto Christ.

1. An affection of the will, whereby we are inclined unto the thing beloved:
Now the nature of the will is elicita, not coacta, inclined and drawn forth,
not compelled and constrained; will should be no will, if it were so: but there
is that divine excellency, and that excellent dignity in Christ, which is as a
lodestone, very attractive, and an object very tempting and alluring to bend,
to draw, and to incline the will, making of it to close with Christ, as with
the best, and most excellent object in all the world.

2. A desire of union and enjoyment of the thing beloved. Now when the soul
eyes such an excellent object as Christ is, in respect of his spiritual
beauty, and super-eminent worthiness and dignity: it presently covets the
enjoyment and function of him; the soul desires nothing more then union, then
peculiarity and interest, then the everlasting possession of him, who is that
love-deserving object.

3. A complacency or wel-pleasednesse, whereby we rest our selves well pleased
in the goodness of the thing beloved: now nothing in the world is more
pleasing to a believing soul then Christ: so that let his dispensations be
what they will, his Saints are never weary of him. Yea, they take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
his sake: and when they be weak in themselves, then they are strong in him, and
more then Conquerours, as says the Apostle. Now by these 3. acts or effects in
love, are the affections of Believers eminently drawn out toward Christ.

5. Observe from her form of speech (thy loves) speaking in the plural number.

That the love of God in Christ is an infinite, and a manifest love.

The Apostle would have the Ephesians to comprehend with all Saints, the
breadth, and length, the depth and height of the love of God in Christ: but
yet for all that he concludes, that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
God's love is of one nature and substance, but it is various in respect of the
dispensations thereof. Love is an internal affection in God, and therefore it
passes understanding; so that we cannot conceive of it as it is in it self:
but only we know and understand it according to the dispensations thereof.
Now the acts, or the effects of Gods love in Christ are various and many, viz.

1. His electing love, whereby he has predestined a certain number of men,
that the glorious grace of God might be manifested in them, see Ephesians. 1. 4, 5,
6. The Apostle says, God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: who has
predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to
the good pleasure of his will: To the praise of the glory of his grace, whereby
he has made us accepted in the beloved. Here we see the first act of Gods
love in choosing of his before the foundation of the world; and that (says the
Apostle) according to his purpose, Ephesians. 1. 11.

2. His redeeming love whereby he has brought his from the bondage of sin,
into glorious liberty and freedom. Our redemption was a full testimony of his
love, as appears by these Scriptures following. Gal. 4. 4. For when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of a woman, made
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. So in Act. 20.
28. The Church of God, which he has purchased with his own hlood. And in 1 Timothy 2. 6. The man Christ, who gave himself a price of our redemption. This
was a plain demonstration of Gods love in Christ; for says the Apostle, God
showed his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us.

3. Gods love of calling: now there is a double calling, an inward and an
outward; the outward is a bare propounding of the Gospel; but the inward call
is a spiritual enlightening, whereby the soul is enlightened by the spirit of
wisdom and revelation, to know the hope of his calling, Ephesians. 1. 17. And that
whereby the soul is made able to apprehend him, of whom it is apprehended,
Phil. 3. 12. This is that grace begotten in the will of man (that being the
proper subject of this grace) by which means the whole man is converted unto
God.

4. We have Gods justifying love, whereby he does free and discharge his
people from sin and death, and accounts them righteous in Christ.

5. His adopting love, whereby he accepts the faithful, unto the dignity of
sons. John 1. 12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to be made
the sons of God, to those that believe in his name. Now Christ is the band of
this union; for by him we come to be made heirs of God, Coheirs with Christ,
Romans 8. 17. This excellent dignity is procured for us by Christ, as a Redeemer.
Gal. 4. 5, 6. God sent his son, etc. to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons, And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying abba, Father.
Observe here, that the spirit of adoption is called the spirit of the son,
because the holy Ghost seals up our adoption in Christ, so that through
Christ it is made sure unto us.

6. His sanctifying love, whereby he does free Believers from the filthiness
and pollution of sin, and restore in them again the image of God, which
consists of righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

7. And lastly, his glorifying love, whereby he lifts up his people unto that
state of life and glory, and gives them an immortal inheritance, where all
comfort, peace, and joy shall abound, and where they shall have the communion
of the chiefest good, viz. the love of God shining forth immediately upon their
hearts. Now though the love of God in Christ be one entire, single, and
internal act: yet after the manner of our conceiving, it is set forth by
diverse external acts or effects. And we must know, that all these effects
flow from that original love of God; these are but new acts, proceeding from
that eternal love of God, which was in his own breast from eternity.

6. Observe, That the sense and feeling of Christ's love is more excellent and
efficacious unto Believers, then all the most pleasant and delightful things
in the world. The Church does prefer it beyond all comparison of worldly
things, saying, Thy loves are better then wine.

Now what is more pleasing and delightful to the taste, then fragrant wine? yet
Christ's love is the same, and far sweeter to the hearts of Believers. Wine is
exceeding useful and comfortable to man; but Christ exceeds in his usefulness
to the soul: so that look, of what use or virtue wine is to man, of the same
use and virtue is Christ to his people. The properties or virtues of wine are
such as these.

1. Wine delights the heart of man, Psalm. 104. 15. And in Eccles. 10. 19.
Wine makes merry: That is, it does refresh, comfort, and make glad the heart
of man: so Christ gives his people comfort and refreshment in the midst of
fears and dangers: He is that Shilo, which brings tranquillity and peace unto
his Saints; he refreshes them with living waters, even with the sweet communion
of his spirit, and with the abundance of his graces.

2. Wine causes to forget affliction and misery, Prove. 31. 6, 7. In like
manner the love of Christ causes us to forget those things that are behind,
Phil. 3. 13. And the Apostle says of himself, that he does now rejoice in his
sufferings, Col. 1. 24. The sweetness and the joy that he found in Christ's
love, did swallow up all the bitterness and sorrow of his afflictions.

3. Wine was used in the legal sacrifices and service of God, Numb. 15. 5. Thus
was Christ's love manifested by a sacrifice in himself, by which we draw
abundance of comfort to our selves. 2 Cor. 1. 5. As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ. This consolation is much
more then was in all legal sacrifices, which could never make him that did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, Heb. 9. 1.

4. Wine enflames and overcommeth; therefore says the Apostle, be not drunk
with wine, Ephesians. 5. 18. But (says he) be filled with the spirit; that is, let
the comforts and graces of Christ's spirit fill and overcome your hearts.

5. Wine is put for all delicate, comfortable or costly things in the world,
which the greatest sort of men do use in their Feasts, Isa. 25. 6. The Lord
promises to make a feast of fat things; a feast of wines on the lees. He
alludeth to the practice of great Kings of the earth, and delicate persons,
which follow their pleasures, and have their sweet wines, etc. But yet they
find not so much delight and comfort in their Feasts, as the Saints do in the
love of Jesus Christ.

Hence it is, that the Church cries out with desire to enjoy her beloved,
rendering this reason, that his love is better then wine; that is, better then
all the sweet and costly things that the Princes of the earth do enjoy. Thus we
have heard the Churches desire of fellowship with Christ; and the reason of her
request, drawn from the excellency of his love: now it follows in the next
verse, she rendereth a reason of her so much delighting in his love.

VERSE. 3.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is an ointment powered
forth, therefore the Virgins love thee.
IN these words she rendereth a reason why her affections were so set upon her
beloved, and why she does so love him, and why she preferres his love above
all the glory and pleasures of this world; her reason is drawn from the
excellency of Christ: that he is as a box of odoriferous ointment, and that in
him was found redolent savours, and precious sweet things, by which he does
perfume her with his spiritual sinels, and so makes her sweet also.

This verse contains two things.

1. A cause, or reason of her delight in Christ's love; because of thy
ointments, etc. 2. An effect flowing from the cause; therefore do the virgins
love thee.
Because of the savor, etc.
By savor, smell, or odor, is meant knowledge, understanding, (...) Odoratus
est, olfeci^, sentit.
sense, or feeling; the Apostle calls it, the savor of life, 2. Cor. 2. 14.
So it is said, when the tow smells the fire, it is broken, Judge. 16. 9. The
meaning is, when it feels the fire.

Of thy good ointments, or good oiles.
In this comparison she seems, not only to mean (...) Pinguedo, oleum,
unguentum.
those ordinary confections in the Apothecaries shop; but the holy ointment and
perfume which God commanded Moses to make, with which the Tabernacle and the
ministering Vessels were anointed, and also Aaron and his sons, Exodus 30. 2^,
24, 25. And we read in Psalm. 133. that this ointment was powered upon the head
of Aaron, and went down to the skirts of his clothing. By this similitude the
Church commends the graces of Christ which he had, being clothed with the
holy spirit; for the Lord anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. And says God I will put my spirit upon you, Isa. 42. 1.
And it is said of him, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel, Isa. 61. 1. Now the odor of Christ's graces
are smelt and become savoury by the preaching of the Gospel: and therefore she
adds.

Thy name is as ointment, etc.
Concerning what is meant here by Christ's name, we may take a double
interpretation.

1. By name, we may understand it, of those proper names given to Christ in
Scripture. As Messiah, and Christ, which are by interpretation anointed; these
names are given to Christ by way of excellency, he being anointed by the Father
unto that great Office of his Mediator-ship: and he is called ointment, in Isa.
10. 27. And indeed all names given to Christ are very sweet and redolent: as
Shilo, which signifies tranquillum esse; intimating that Christ our peace and
tranquillity, he is called Ithiel, Prove. 30. 1. A word (as Junius writes)
compounded of three parts, as if one should say, the strong God with me: the
name comes all one with Immanuel, God with us: so he that is Ithiel, God
manifest in the flesh, is also called Veal, Almighty, able to save us. He is
likewise called Jesus, a Savior, because he saves his people from their
sins. Besides these, he has names of office, as of King, Priest, Prophet;
he is a King for government and rule: a Priest for sacrifice and intercession;
a Prophet for teaching and revealing the secrets of the Fathers bosom.

Lastly, he has a name suitable unto his twofold nature, (...) God-man, the
Apostle calls him, (...), the man Christ; for as man, he was in one hypostasis,
or person with God. Now how delectable and sweet are all the names of Christ?
and how much more redolent and savoury then all the precious ointments in the
world.

2. By Christ's name is understood the Gospel, and the publishing thereof to the
world. Paul was a chosen vessel to carry his name unto the Gentiles, Act. 9.
15. And it is said, the Gentiles shall trust in his name, Matthew. 12. 21.

As ointment powered forth.
By the pouring forth of Christ's name, is meant the preaching and publishing
of the Gospel. Here the Church alludeth to the perfect odor of such precious
ointments, which, if it be closed up in a vessel, is not felt savory, until
it be powered forth, then the sweetness thereof does spread abroad, and perfume
all other things. We read in the Gospel of Mary's pound of Spikenard ointment;
and when she had broken the box of precious ointment, and powered it upon
Christ's head at table, the house was filled with the savor of it, Mark. 14. 3.

So when the name and Gospel of Christ is preached abroad, it gives an odor
to every believing soul: so that by the preaching of the Gospel, they also
receive the holy spirit. Gal. 3. 2. They received the holy Ghost by the hearing
of faith.

The word to power forth in the Original, signifies to (...) Evacuavit,
exhausit, Evaginavit.
exhaust, or draw dry; to empty, which may denote the plentiful pouring of it
forth. It also signifies to draw forth the sword to the battle, so it is used
in Ezekiel. 28. 7. This may denote unto us the majesty and power of the Gospel: so
Christ is bid to gird his swore upon his thigh with glory and majesty, Ps. 45.
3. By the sword is meant the word of the Gospel, which proceeded out of Christ's
mouth, Rev. 1. 16. And by glory and majesty is meant the magnificence, and
powerful effects of the word.

Therefore do the Virgins love thee.
The Church having laid down the cause, she also shows the effect: the
sweetness of Messiah, and of his graces powered forth upon her, have enflamed
her heart with love toward him.

Some understand these Virgins to be such as are not espoused to Christ; such
as the unconverted Jews, and the uncalled of the Gentiles.

Others understand them to be the fellow-friends of the Spouse, and of those
that are faithful and called of God, who with pure minds serve the Lord only,
and worship him in their spirits.

These Virgins are either,

1. Of particular congregations; so the Apostle calls the Church in 2 Cor.
11. 1. I have prepared you for one husband, and to present you as a pure Virgin
unto Christ: or else,

2. Of particular members of the Church; for the Hebrew tongue (as I hinted
before) uses co call the whole the Mother, and the parts the Daughter; for so
these Virgins are called in diverse places of this song.

Now the Saints and members of Christ are called Virgins in these respects.

1. For their chastity, as in thefore-named place, 2 Cor. 11. 2. That I may
present you as a chaste virgin unto Christ. These love Christ with a chaste (but
not with an adulterous) love.

2. For their purity: These are they (says the Apostle) which are not defiled
with women, for they are virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: these were redeemed from among men, being the first
fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb: and in their mouth was found no guile; for
they are without fault before the throne of God, Rev. 14. 4, 5. These as
virgins abstain from all things that might be offensive to their beloved.

Love thee.
These Virgins love Christ for the odor of his good ointments, which they
receive by his word and spirit; for by the preaching of the Gospel, his name is
powered out like odoriferous ointment, to the exceeding great joy and delight of
the Saints, drawing and inluring their minds, as Virgins are drawn with the
offer of some great and lovely match: their senses are so exceedingly taken
with his sweetness, which causes in them a very high and worthy esteem of
Christ, and of all those heavenly graces which flow from him. This Verse being
thus opened, let us draw some conclusions from it.

1. Observe, in that the Church seeks out the most precious ointment to set
forth her Beloved and his graces, it teaches us: That all the most excellent
things in nature are but types and shodows of Christ and his graces. What is
more pleasing to the smell then precious and sweet ointments, of an exquisite
composition? Christ is the same, and far sweeter to his Saints.

First, By ointment were anointed to their Offices Kings, Priests, and
Prophets: so by the annointings of the spirit, Christ was consecrated to his
threefold office of King, Priest, and Prophet: this was prefigured by the
anointing of Aaron and his sons, whereby they were consecrated unto the
Priests office, Exodus 30. 30. It is said of Christ, The spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, etc. Isa. 61. 1.
For God has anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm.
45. 8. So the Prophet tells us that there should come a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, and a branch out of his roots, and the Spirit of the Lord was to rest
upon him, and the Spirit of wisdom and understanding; the Spirit of counsel
and of might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, Isa, 11.
12. It is said that God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him, John 3. 34.
That is, he did not bestow it upon him imperfectly, and in part only, but
fully and entirely: for measure is not opposed to that which is infinite, but
to that which is not whole, entire, and perfect. Christ was full of knowledge,
wisdom, and of all Heavenly gifts. The Apostle says, That in Christ dwells
all the fulness of the Godhead, (...), bodily, Colloss. 2. 9. That is, not by
naked and bare communicating of virtue, as God is said to dwell in his Saints;
but by a substantial union of the two natures, whereby they become one, (...),
one person, or substance. Here is then the Vessel, which as a rich treasury is
full of all Heavenly wisdom, knowledge, Divine revelations, and all sweet
graces, even Jesus Christ the Anointed of God.

Secondly, By the savor and by the pouring out of these Ointments is
represented the pouring forth of the Spirit upon all the Members of Christ: the
graces of Christ which are called his sweet Ointments, they cast a sweet
savor, and are powered out into all Christian hearts, and do flow from him the
head, into all the Members of his Mystical body, as it is written, Of his
fulness we all receive, and grace for grace. John 1. 16. That is, we receive
suitable graces for his graces; we receive part of every communicable grace of
his. This sacred Oil was powered (as upon Aaron so) upon Christ who was the
head of all Saints; and from him that was the head, this Ointment of the Spirit
runs down his Mystical body, even to the hem of his Garment. And the Apostle
says, But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, 1
John 2. 20. That is, you have the Spirit of Truth which leads you into all
Truth. And in Revel. 1. 6. But he has anointed us, and made us Kings and
Priests to God his Father.

This anointing of the Saints by the Spirit of Christ was prefigured, in that
the Tabernacle (a figure of the Church of the new Testament) and all the
Vessels of the Tabernacle (which figured out the particular members) were all
anointed with the holy Oil, and consecrated unto the Lord, Exodus 30. 23. 25.
Christ has received the Spirit as a public person, as a common head of all
his Church, he then is the head and seat of all spiritual influence from which
the mystical body receives life and motion: this is the Apostles Similie in
Collos. 2. 19. He makes Christ there to be the head, and the Church the body,
knit together by certain joints, and ligaments as it is in nature: and by this
means does minister supply to all parts of the body; whereby it increases with
the increasings of God.

Thirdly, in that the holy Oil (from which the comparison was taken) was not
to be powered upon any man besides the Priest only, neither were they to make
any other Oil after the composition of it, because it is consecrated Oil, Ex.
30. 32. It does demonstrate unto us, that none have the anointings of Christ
upon them, but the Saints only; a stranger intermeddleth not with this joy:
For says Christ, He (meaning the Spirit) shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you, Joh. 16. 14. He does not say, the
Spirit shall declare those things it received of him unto the World, but to his
own Servants: See also, Joh. 14. 26, 27. I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: Even the
Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells in you, and shall be in
you. And the Apostle says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none
of his. Romans 8. 9. By these Scriptures it is plain, that Unbeleivers neither
have, nor understand the spirit of Christ. Now by what has been said, it is
evident that these precious Ointments (here mentioned in the Text) were but
tipes and shaddows of Christ's graces. First, as they were in himself.
Secondly, as they are conveyed in his Members. Thirdly, as they are denied to
Unbeleivers, being too holy to be cast unto Dogs: all which do show, of what a
redolent savor, and of what odoriferous sweetness all the anointings of God
are in Jesus Christ.

Secondly observe, That though the name of Christ, towit, his glorious Gospel,
be very redolent and savory in it self, yet the Saints come to the sense and
feeling thereof most of all, by the publishing and displaying of the Gospel.
The Virgins were most sensible of Christ's graces, when his name was an Ointment
powered forth. The most full and perfect odours that are, and the most sweet and
precious Ointments in the World, are never felt so savory, as when they be
powered forth. As the Box of precious Ointment, when it was broken and powered on
Christ's head, the savor thereof filled the house, Mark. 14. 3. For by the
Preaching of the Gospel, or the pouring forth of Christ's name; his fame,
glory, and renown is made known in the World: according to that in Luke 4.
14. There went out a fame of him throughout all the Region round about, and he
taught in their Synagogues, being glorified of all. This was that the Apostle
rejoiced in, and said, Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us, in
every place. for we are unto God a sweet savor in Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish: to the one, a Savor of death unto death; and
to the other a Savor of life unto life, 2 Cor. 14, 15, 16.

Now the name of Christ is powered forth, when all his virtues and graces are
displayed and laid open, when it is declared, that he has fullfilled all
righteousness, and that he has offered up himself by the eternal Spirit,
without spot, unto God: and that he has appeased the wrath of his Father, and
made perfect reconciliation for the sins of his people; thus is Christ's name as
a precious Ointment powered forth.

Again, when Christ is set forth in his beauty to be Fairer then the Children
of Adam, to be the chief of ten thousand: in his love free, rich, and
everlasting: in his graces to be complete and full: in his Offices to be a most
excellent Prophet, Priest, and King: in his riches to be the Heir of God, and
of Heaven: in all the operations of his Spirit, working Sanctification and all
needful graces in his Saints; in all those rich and costly gifts which he does
bestow on his people, redeeming of them with his precious Blood, sanctifying of
them with his precious graces, enriching of them with his precious promises,
reviving of them with his precious love, comforting of them with his precious
Spirit, and enabling of them with precious Privileges: when all these things
(as I said) are opened and displayed, then is Christ's name as it were, as a Box
of the good Ointment broken, and powered forth, then there is smelt that blessed
savor, that causes the Virgins to love him.

The Ministers of the Gospel may learn here, and see, what their duty is, and
which way they should employ their whole strength: namely, to display those
treasures of grace, and to publish and spread before men those manifold
transcendent excellencies, and all those ways of shining glory which are in
Christ, to draw and allure poor souls to come unto him. Who will seek after
that which he knows not of? But who will not seek after a precious Jewel? O
then! Let Christ be laid open in his natures, in his graces, in all his shining
excellencies, dignities, and virtues; that so his fame being spread, and his
name powered out as sweet Ointment: by this means multitudes may be drawn unto
him.

Again, the pouring forth of Christ's name, by the Publishing of the Gospel,
will be as effectual unto those that receive it, as Ointment is to the body
unto which it is applied: So that look, of what effects or use the most
precious confections are to the body of man; of the same effect, and of far
greater use is the pouring forth of Christ's name to the soul.

First, Ointments are compounded of very rich and costly things: In this
respect the Ointment that Mary anointed Christ withal, was called Precious,
because (says Judas) Much might have been given for it, Mark. 14. And of the
precious things which King Hezekiah showed to the Ambassadors of the King of
Babylon, this was one; namely, the Good Ointment, 2 Kings 20. 13. So is the
Gospel a compound of rich and costly things; it is a treasury full of Heavenly
wisdom and Divine Revelation; it is called, Riches of glory, Col. 1. 27. And
the wisdom and power of God, 1 Cor. 1. The Gospel is rich in its privileges,
in its matter, in its effects, in all the promises therein contained. In a
word, the divulging of the Gospel is a displaying and spreading before men all
the riches of God, and of Christ: the riches of wisdom, the riches of power,
the riches of love, the riches of mercy; all which are eminently showed forth
in the Gospel. This is that the Lord told Moses, when he said, I will make all
my goodness to pass before thee, Exodus 33. 19. Now what does the Lord mean
by all his goodness, but only a Proclamation of the Gospel unto Moses. The
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, etc. Exodus 34. 6, 7.

Secondly, Ointment is a sign of joy and comfort; and with such they were wont
to be anointed at Feasts, Amos 6. 6. And they used it in sign of joy, Eccles.
9. 7, 8. Thus the Gospel is called Tidings of great joy, Luke 1. 19. And good
Tidings, Isa. 61. 1. The Gospel of great joy, Luke 2. 10. because it brings a
glorious joy along with it.

Thirdly, Ointment heals wounded bodies, and knitteth up the joints which are
broken, Luke 10. 34. So the Oil of Gods grace heals the bruises of the Souls
of those that are broken in Spirit: Thus we have it in Isa. 61. 1. The Lord
anointed me to Preach glad tidings to the meek, and he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, etc.

Fourthly, Oil does make the face to shine, Psalm. 104. 15. Eccles. 8. 1. So
the Gospel puts a shining and glorious luster on the faces of those to whom
it comes. It is said of Stephen: That the Jews looked steadfastly on him, and
saw his face, as it had been the face of an Angel, Acts 6. 15. It makes men's
faces shine, as did the face of Moses, when he had been with God on the Mount.

Fifthly, By Ointment were Kings, Priests, and Prophets. Anointed to their
Office: So by those graces brought by the Gospel, the Saints are Anointed by
Christ to be Kings, Priests, and Prophets; they are so made by Christ unto God,
and his Father, Revel. 1. 6. The Gospel gives men the highest Privileges in
the World, to be Kings and Priests unto God: to be a royal Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a peculiar people; yea, a whole Nation of Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

Thus the Gospel is as Ointment powered forth, to the unspeakable delight of
the Saints, drawing and ravishing the minds of them that hear it, sweetly to
embrace Jesus Christ. Thus much for the cause, the effect follows, Therefore
do the Virgins love thee. Whence observe,

Thirdly, That the sweetness of Christ causes love in his Saints. The
Original of our love is Christ's communicating of goodness to us; there is
nothing in the streams but what comes from the Fountain: he is the Fountain
of love and sweetness, who by his streams flowing into our hearts, causes in
us to abound a Divine love toward him: the fire of his love kindles the flame
of our love to him again; our Ointment is from Christ's Ointment, the head
being Anointed the Oil ran down to the Skirts, as it was said of Aaron. Love
is the inclining of the will to something that is excellent, and agreeable to
it self: now the nature of the will is Elicita, not Coacta, inclined and
drawn forth, not compelled and constrained: The will is absolute and free, no
violence can be offered to it, therefore nothing but the sweetness and
efficacy of Christ's grace, can be a Lodestone attractive to draw out and
incline the will.

Again, the object of the will is something that is good: Bonum est objectum
voluntatis, says the Moralist; whither it be Bonum reale, a substantial good,
or Bonum apparens, a seeming good, yet both are the object of the Will: Hence
it is, that the transcendent excellency, beauty, love, goodness, and thato
verflowing Fountain of grace and sweetness, apprehended by the Saints, to be
in Christ, these make him to be the best object, these also incline the Will,
attract the heart, and draw the souls of Beleivers unto him.

Again observe, that the object of the will must be a thing suitable, Bonum
sibi conveniens, a good agreeable to it self. Now such a proportionable good as
this, is found to be in Christ, which is respondent or answerable to all our
desires or Capacities; he is suitable in all his Offices and communications, in
his blood for pardon, in his grace to adorn us, in his love for lost sinners,
in his fulness for empty and poor souls. Now when the Saints can take a
spiritual view of Christ, and observe all the dimensions of his love and
sweetness, they apprehend him to be Summum bonum, the chiefest good, far
beyond all worldly things, though of never so exquisite and delicate an
extraction; and therefore desire most of all to have the possession of him,
according to that in Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, says David.

Fourthly, in that the Church changes her Speech from the whole to the parts;
for she does not say I, but the Virgins love thee.

Observe,

That as the whole Church, so every Member of Christ has the sense and feeling
of Christ's love and graces, by the pouring forth of his name. John 1. 10. Of
his fulness we have all received, and grace for grace. Every Member has
received a measure and proportion from Christ's fulness. The Apostle speaking
of the Gift of Continency, says, Every man has his proper gift of God, 1 Cor.
7. 7. And so he speaks concerning spiritual gifts, and says, There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God which works all in all: but the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal: for to one
is given by the same Spirit the word of wisdom, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 6, 7, 8.
And so the whole Chapter goes on, and tells us, that the Church is the mystical
body of Christ; and though the body be but one, yet the Members are many: and
that the same Spirit divides to every Member as it pleases himself. As in
the natural body, there is not any one member, but receives an influence from
the head: So it is in the Mystical body of Christ. And again the Apostle
says in Ephesians. 4. 7. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Christ does measure out proportionable gifts and
graces for every Saint; therefore as the whole Church is the Spouse of Christ,
so is every particular Member; and all the privileges and graces belonging to
the whole Church, belong to every Beleiver.

Fifthly, Observe,

Such as are true lovers of Christ, are only those that are holy and pure. By
Virgins here are not understood those that are single or un-married; but it
signifies the chastity and spiritual purity of those that truly love Christ.
These are chaste in their lives, holy in their thoughts, sanctified in their
actions. These are not defiled with the World, as to give themselves up to
unclean lusts of the flesh, nor to commit spiritual whoredom against God:
the Saints studdy to possess their Vessels in Sanctification and honor:
their bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, they labor to be like unto
their head and Spouse; holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure: These are they
which are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins, Revel. 14. 4. That is,
that are not polluted with spiritual Fornication, as the Apostle calls it, 2
Cor. 12. 2. These follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. They will not follow
Antichrist for their head and guide, but they follow Christ, though it be with
the hazard and loss of all their worldly enjoyments; their love to Christ is
pure and chaste, like unto Virgins whose affections will not easily be drawn
unto any besides their Beloved.

VERSE. 4.
Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his Chambers:
we will be glad and rejoice in thee: we will remember thy love more then wine:
the upright love thee.
IN these words we have a second request of the Spouse unto Christ, that he
would not only call her outwardly, by the voice of the Gospel, but (forasmuch
as the word Preached profits not, if it be not mixed with faith in them that
hear it, Heb. 4. 2.) that he would open her heart, Acts 16. 14. and enlighten
her by his Spirit: that he would give unto her his Spirit of wisdom and
revelation, that the eyes of her understanding might be opened, that she might
know what is the hope of her calling, Ephesians. 1. 17.

In these words there are two things considerable.

1. The Prayer of the Church. 2. The Reason of it.
First, The Churches Prayer in these words, Draw me, etc.

Secondly, The Reasons are drawn from the effects or fruits thereof, which are
two.

The first in these words, We will run after thee.

The second is set down in these words, The King has brought me into his
Chambers.

From which effects we have the Churches protestation of engagement, declared
by a threefold respect which she bears to Christ.

First, she does exalt and rejoice in him, We will be glad and rejoice in thee.

Secondly, her mind or senses are set at work, We will remember thy love more
then wine.

Thirdly, her engagement of affection: The upright love thee.

First, we have the Churches Petition, the reason subjoyned with Draw me, we
will run after thee: or take it more fully thus, O my beloved, because I find
and feel an utter inability to come unto thee, do thou with the sweetness and
efficacy of thy grace, powerfully incline my will and affections toward thee,
and then both I and all my several Members, shall readily and earnestly run
after thee.

Draw me.
The same Original word is used for diverse kinds of (...) Traxit, pertraxit,
prehendit, apprehendid, tenuit, retenuit, continuit, prohibuit, retraxit.
drawings.

First, to draw with violence and force; to invade or set upon, thus God
promised to draw Sisera unto the River Kishon, that he might be taken, Judges
4. 7.

Secondly, to draw with power and strength. It is said, A man drew a Bow at a
venture, 1 Kings 22. 34. To draw a Bow requires strength: and in Job 24. 22. He
draws the mighty by his power. He means, that after wicked men have destroyed
such are weak, they set upon the strong.

Thirdly, to draw with love and mercy; the word signifies sometimes to draw
with words and reasons, persuading by Arguments and the like: so God is said to
draw us with the Cords of a man, and bands of love, (...) Interdum signisicat
trahere verbis atque rationibus.
Hos. 11. 4. And the Lord declares what signs of his love and favor he had
showed to his People Israel, he says, Yea, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, therefore with loving-kindnesse have I drawn thee, Jer. 31.
3.

Fourthly, to draw notes also the lengthning or enlarging of mercies and
favors: as in Psalm. 36. 10. O draw thy loving-kindnesse to them that know
thee. That is, O that thou would enlarge, bring home, and continue thy
loving-kindnesse. Now that which the Church desires here, is, that Christ would
draw her by the efficacy and power of his word and spirit, and by the
sweetness of his grace, into a close and near communion with himself.

We will run after thee.
Here we have the first reason or condition of her Petition, We will run, etc.
Or take it more fully thus: O my Beloved, draw me with the power of thy Spirit,
and by the sweetness of thy grace nearer unto thee, then I thy whole Church
will follow thee. Here she changes the number, but not the person, and says
in stead of, I will, we will run, etc. because she would comprehend in her
Speech every particular Member as in the former Verse.

We will run.
The word Run signifies readiness of affection, and (...) Significat currere,
cum promp(...) ne and propensione.
inclination of mind; so we have in 1 Kings 19. 19. Elisharun after Elijah, he
run with a full intention of mind; his affections run strongly after Elijah:
and thus the Gentiles are said to run to Christ, Isa. 55. 5. Behold thou shall
call a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that know thee not shall run
unto thee. That is, the Gentiles that know thee not, neither had they any
notice of thee before, shall with all eagerness and readiness of mind run
unto thee.

Secondly, it signifies celerity and great speed, to pass through a Race, 1
Cor. 9. 24. They which run a Race run all, says the Apostle: and so the
commanding word of God is said to Run very swiftly, Psalm. 147. 15. And David
says, I will run the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. And he says
again, I made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Verse 60.

Thirdly, it signifies perseverance and constancy, to hold out to the end. So
run (says the Apostle) that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. And again, Heb.
12. 1. Run the race that is set before you: That is, so run as to continue
and hold on in your race, until you come to the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls. This is that we have in the Prophet Isa. 40. 31. They
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not
faint. It is in the Hebrew, they shall change, or double their strength: That
is, they shall have a new supply of strength, to hold up their spirits, when
they seem to befeeble, and weak, and almost spent: and they shall as Eagles,
fly strongly, and soar aloft: and they shall walk (that is, be enabled to
persist and persevere to the end) and not faint.

4. To run, argues strength in the runner: this we read in Daniels vision, of
a Ram that had two horns (meaning the Persian and Median Empire.) Now this Ram
with his two horns was pushing Westward, and Southward, and Northward, so
that no beast might stand before him. But afterward he sees a hee-goat, that
came from the West, etc. (which is thought to be Alexander the great) and this
hee-goate came to the Ram that had two horns, and ran unto him in the fury
of his power, Dan. 8. 6. That is, by his mighty power and strength he overcame
him.

5. It signifies our whole Christian: conversation, which is called a race, 1
Cor. 9. 24. And says the Apostle, Gal. 2. 2. I went up by revelation, and
preached the Gospel, etc. Lest (says he) I should run, or had run in vain. He
means here by running, his earnestness and diligence to preach the Gospel.
And again, Gal. 5. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you. That is, you were
in the right way, and you made a good progress therein, you out-stript others
in way of life. Our life is called a course or race, which is run; as it is
said, John fulfilled his course, Act. 13. 25. And Paul says, I have finished
my course, 2 Timothy 4. 7.

6. To run, signifies a desire to obtain the prize, as well as swiftness and
strength: Hence the Apostle labors, that his preaching might not be in vain;
for then says he, I should run in vain, Gal. 2. 2. And again, he says, So
run that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. That is, that ye might obtain the
prize, which is eternal life. So here the Church has Christ in her eye, as a
rich and glorious prize, unto whom she runs, saying, We will run after thee:
And these follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, Revel. 14. 4. They do
reckon Christ a good prize whithersoever they run after him: they will run
through thick and thin (as we use to say) through good report and evil report,
that so they may enjoy him.

Observe first, From the Churches prayer, Draw me, etc.

The efficient cause of our coming unto Christ, is not in our selves, but from
Christ alone, who by the efficacy of his word, and by the sweet operation of
his spirit and grace, draws us unto himself.

1. By nature we are utterly unable to do any thing in this respect; for we are
wholly destitute of the saving knowledge of God, and of Christ, according to the
saying of David, Psalm. 14. 3. There is not a man that understands, etc. And
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned. That is, they are to be
taken and understood in a spiritual and heavenly sense, to which the carnal
man's reason cannot reach, unless he be enlightened by the holy spirit. And
again in 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy
Ghost. That is, no man can say Jesus is the Lord, who has bought and redeemed
him, but by the instinct of the holy Ghost.

2. In conversion we are merely passive in respect of the grace, which comes
from without a man, and preventeth him, because there is no power in man to
prepare himself to grace, or to receive grace being offered unto him, or to
will any thing that is good; for we are dead in sin: Now the dead man is only
passive in respect of his quickening. Ephesians. 2. 5. Even when we were dead in
sins, has he quickened us together with Christ: That is, he is dead in sin,
who has not the life of grace in him: so that by the quickening power and
operation of the spirit, is begotten in the will of man a spiritual principle
of grace; for the will is the most proper and prime subject of this grace,
because the conversion of the will is an effectual principle of the conversion
of the whole man: but notwithstanding the understanding does also concur, not
to the conversion, but in the conversion; because man's conversion is not
wrought without his consent: so that the holy Ghost works, and of unwilling
he makes us willing, not as free Agent, but only in respect of obedience and
subjection, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Because God who has said, that light should shine out
of darkness, he it is who shined in our hearts. And again the Apostle says,
Phil. 2. 13. It is Certum est nos velle cum volumus sed ille fecit ut velimus
qui operatur in nobis velle, Aug. lib. Arbitrio, cap. 2.
God who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Where
the will, is not understood of the substance of the will, but of a new quality.
Agreeable hereunto is that of a Father: It is certain that we will, when we
will, but he causes us to will, who works in us to will.

But we must note also, that the will is active in conversion, and it follows
the holy spirit, who draws it; for the holy Ghost does so bend and incline
our wills, that he causes us to will good perfectly: so there is Act us
elicitus, an act of the will drawn forth, whereby it does close with Christ,
which indeed is an act of faith. But this act of the will does not only depend
upon a principle or habit of grace ingenerated, but also upon the secret
operation of the holy spirit, according to that in John 6. 44. No man can come
unto me unless the Father draw him. And though this act of the will be drawn
out freely, yet unavoydably and efficaciously. John 6. 37. Whatsoever my Father
gives me, shall come unto me. Now in all the actings of the will in
conversion, it is but as an instrument of the holy Ghost; it is first acted by
the spirit, and then it acts according to the actings of the spirit upon it.

3. The Saints are insufficient of themselves, after conversion to follow
Christ. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, John 15. 5. That is, you
can do nothing that is good or acceptable. Thus the Apostle testifies of his
spiritual life: I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. And
again the Apostle says, By the grace of God I am that I am, and the grace in
me was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I.
It is not I that have taken such pains, though he did it in much travail and
weariness, YET NOT I. Neither was it the grace of Christ that was in me, but
the grace of Christ which was with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. That is, I was thus
enabled for the work of the Gospel; not by any power that was in me, but it was
by the flowings in, and the actings of the Spirit of grace upon my soul.

Observe, 2. From the effect of the Churches prayer, We will run after thee.
That the Saints when drawn by Christ, have a will to follow Christ. This the
Apostle testifies of himself, Romans 7. 18. To will is present with me, but how
to perform that which is good I know not. This will appear, if we observe the
nature of the will; it is elicita, not coacta, inclined and drawn forth, not
compelled and constrained: will should be no will if it were so; for the will is
absolute and free, no coactive force can be used against it, unless it be such
as is pleasing and delightful to it. The old saving is, ducimus volentem, and
trahimus nolentem: we lead him that is willing, and draw him that is unwilling:
but when Christ is said to draw us, he uses no compulsion ot coaction, but
it is done by the sweetness and efficacy of grace, and by the secret operation
and working of the spirit, convincing the judgment, persuading the affections,
inclining the heart, and swaying the will. There is in the bringing of the
soul to Christ, Trahere, and Venire: the Father is said to draw us, John 6.
44. And here Christ is said to draw us: now this notes to us the efficacy of
grace, and that Almighty power, by which we are drawn unto Christ. Hence it
is, that the Apostle says, God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined into our hearts, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Now Gods word by which
he commanded light to shine out of darkness, is a very operative word: Let
there be light (says God) and there was light, Genesis 1. 3. Such an Almighty,
operative, and powerful word goes out from Christ to draw a soul to himself.
And thus his grace works so sweetly upon our hearts, whereby we come freely
and cheerfully, and therefore we are said to come unto Christ.

Now the will being (...) and (...) drawn to Christ; it is made to will good
freely, really, and completely.

The office of the will is either,

1. To choose. 2. To refuse. 3. To suspend.
1. The regenerate will does will all good, and nothing but good; for good is
it is proper object, therefore it can properly choose nothing but good:
therefore says the Apostle; If then I do that which I would not, I consent
unto the law, that it is good, Romans 7. 16.

2. It refuses all evil, and nothing but evil: the regenerate will cannot
properly choose any evil, because it is not it is proper object: it may fall
into evil, but still there is a secret dislike of it, so says the Apostle: For
that which I do, I allow not; for what I would do, that I do not, but what I
hate, that I do, Romans 7. 15.

3. The will suspends it is actings in dubious things: when it knows not whither
a thing be good or evil, it suspendeth; and when it knows not whether such a
thing be truth or error, it will suspend it is either choosing or refusing of
it: it will not venture in the dark, like unto the unregenerate will, but
suspendeth it is actings because whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

Quest. Whether the regenerate will may not choose that which is evil, and be
unwilling to that which is good.

Answ. 1. The regenerate will cannot will any evil fully and completely: So
says the Apostle, what I do, I would not. But there may be a kind of veleity
or willingness to evil, but not a complete will: even as corrupt nature may
have a kind of veleity to that which is good: as a corrupt regenerate man may
have some kind of willingness to do a good action, but he never wills the
good of the action his will to good is therefore incomplete: and so it is with
the regenerate will in respect of evil, it never wills evil, as it is evil,
it goes not out with full purpose and consent.

2. The holy will cannot properly refuse anything that is good, because it is
it is proper object; but the will that is good, may be so much depressed and kept
under by temptation, or by desertion, and such like distempers, that it cannot
draw it self up to the height of it is actings; so that there is not that
agility, strength, and vigor, as there is, when it acts more strongly; but
however it wil's good truly, and it goes forward still, though not with that
vigor and eagerness, as (if otherwise) it would.

Put though the will of the regenerate be set free unto good, yet we must so
understand it, that the regenerate will cannot do good of himself: Hence it
is, the Church desires, that Christ would draw her continually, without whose
help she is not able to run after him. Where grace over-swayes the heart,
there is a readiness to obey, and constantly to follow Christ, but so as it
always proceeds from Gods spirit, leading and drawing forth of the will: even
as a Mother by leading her child, causes it to go, which otherwise could not:
so the Lord draws forth, leads and directs our affections according to the
actings, and good pleasure of his own spirit: our wills are but instruments
for the holy Ghost, and can do nothing without the breathings in of his spirit
upon them. This the Apostle testifies of himself, I am able to do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. And again he says, He that
has begun his good work in you, he will also finish it, until the day of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6. We cannot work that which is good with grace
received, unless there be the continual flowings in of Christ's Spirit, to
carry forth the soul in it is workings. So that free grace is in the beginning,
midst, and end of all our workings. Herein we are made happy without any
merit, that we should be unto the praise and glory of the riches of his free
grace.

3. Observe, The life of a Christian is as the running of a race.

1. The whole life of a Christian is here termed a running, and by the Apostle
called a race, 1 Cor. 9. 24. And again says he, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4. 7.

2. In respect of the readiness of the minds and affections of the Saints;
they are said to delight in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. 2. The word
Chephets, is voluptas and prompta voluntas, a delightful and ready will, as
one (...) Voluit, optavit, desideravit, delectatus, been affectus fuit,
placuit, complacuit.
that takes abundance of joy and delight in that which he does; it is to
embrace with love and good will, yea, with a pleasurable love, and an
affectionate will and desire unto a thing: Hence the Lord promises to call the
Church, Chephtsabah, that is, my pleasure in her, Isa. 42. 4. And so David
says of the Saints, Cheptsiham, that is, my pleasure in them, Psalm. 16. 3. And
so Eis (...) Sept.
in Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that
have pleasure therein. This denotes to us the election of the will, the
readiness of the affections, and the complacency and delight of the heart of a
Christian in walking with Christ: the ways of Christ yield nothing but
pleasure and delight to a gracious heart.

3. In respect of speedy performance of actions: Satan's industrious compassing
the earth, caused Job to send speedily for his children to sacrifice unto the
Lord, Job 1. 5. And it is said, Abraham rose up early in the morning and sadled
his ass, etc. when he was to offer up his son a Sacrifice. And David says, I
will run the way of thy commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. And in verse. 60. I made
have, and delayed not to keep thy commandments, or, I distracted not my
self, to wit, with the cares, profits, pleasures of this life: Agreeable
hereunto is that of Paul, when he was called by God to preach the Gospel among
the Heathen, he says, I conferred (or I consulted) not with flesh and blo^d,
Gal. 1. 16. That is, I did not consult with carnal reason, or with fleshly
arguments, but was obedient to the heavenly revelation or vision.

4. The Saints run in respect of perseverance; hence saitht the Apostle, So
run, that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Which implies, there be some that
run, which do not obtain; but the Saints do renew, or change their strength,
Isa. 40. 31. That is, when they are weak and feeble, they shall have a new
supply of spiritual strength from Christ the fountain of strength, whereby they
shall run, or persevere to the end, and not be weary.

The Apostles hearty persuasion and confidence is, That he who has begun a
good work in the Philipians, will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 1. 6. And to this purpose says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 23. You are
renewed not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, which
abides for ever: And 1 John 3 9. He that is born of God sins not, because
the seed of God remains in him: nor can be sin, because he is born of God:
That is, he that has the immortal seed of God's word and spirit within him,
cannot (notwithstanding his infirmities) finally fail, or give over his hope,
but shall persist and persevere in faith and holiness.

5. The Saints run in respect of their strength, having received a new
principle of life from Christ, by which they are enabled for all things: They
that want upon the Lord, renew, change, or double their strength, says the
Prophet. And says David, I will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.

6. We are said to run, in that we earnestly look after the prize which is set
before us; and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. 24. They that run a race,
run all: That is, forasmuch as all desire the prize. Now then in all our
seekings and enquiries after Christ, in that we long after him, and desire to
be joined in the nearest communion with him, we may be said to run after
Christ. So much for the Petition, and the first reason or effect thereof: now
follows the second effect or fruit of the prayer.

The King has brought me into his chambers.
This second effect of the Churches petition is, the effectual answer of
Christ, The King has brought me, etc.

In Christ's grant observe,

1. The title given to him, The King, etc. 2. The thing granted, and that is a
sweet introduction into his chambers, where we have
1. The manner; he brought me. 2. The matter; into his chambers.
The King has brought me into his Chambers.
The King) that is to say, Christ, of whom King Solomon was a type: Kings are
such as hear rule by such power as is committed unto them. Christ is appointed
King over his Church. Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
In the Original it is, I have anointed, or powered out, etc. That is, I have
ordained and authorized my King, by pouring out the oil of my spirit upon him.
Of this word Nasac, that signifies to power out, comes Nasick, which is used
for a Governor, or one in authority; as in Micah. 5. 5. The Lord promises,
that when the Assyrian should come in the Land to raise up against him seven
Shepherds, and eight principal men, or (as it is in the Original) Princes of
men: That is, such as should be eminent and chief in authority: So in that
Christ is called a King, it denotes his transcendent dignity and honor, his
rule and authority that the Father has invested him withal, having made him
King and head over his Church.

The King has brought me, etc.
The word signifies to lead, to bring to, to apply, to induce and persuade: it
is to be understood of Christ's winning (...) In hiph: significat venire fecit,
adduxit, introduxit, intulit, attulit, obrulit.
and persuading the hearts and affections of his people, whereby he draws them
into the most intimate and nearest fellowship with himself.

Some would have this clause to be translated thus: When the King has brought
me, etc. Because the Church seems to speak of a joy and gladness thereupon,
which she had not enjoyed before: but most certain it is, that she had been
brought into Christ's chambers before, and had many tokens of his love: but
this being an effect of her prayer, it may be aptly paraphrazed thus: I have
prayed to my King for the sweet pledges of his love, and behold what follows:
he like a royal and glorious Husband has brought me into the chambers of his
heavenly and spiritual treasures.

The King has brought me iuto his Chambers.
By Chambers she shows the dignities and privileges which she finds by
following Christ.

The Hebrew word Cheder, is used in Scripture to signify the inmost, and most
retired part of any place. Judge. 15. 1. Chambers are the places of the greatest
secrecy: it is said, that Elisha told the King of Israel the words that he
spoke in his Bedchamber, 2 Kings 6. 12. The most hidden, inward, remote, and
secret things are signified by this word Translated, Chambers: as in Job 9. 9.
The Chambers of the South. That is, the most remote and inward places of the
South. Man's Spirit is thus expressed, because it is the most secret and inward
of man's soul, Prove. 24. 4. By knowledge shall the Chambers be filled; that is,
the most secret parts of the soul shall be filled by knowledge, Prove. 18. 8.
The inward part of the Belly, Prove. 7. 27. They go down to the Chambers of
death. That is, into the secret ways of death, towit the Grave. Luke 12. 3.
That which you have spoken in your Closets. That which you spoke in secret, and
thought none should hear, Mat. 6. 6. Enter into thy Closet, and thy Father
which sees thee in secret, etc. So here, by Chambers is meant the most inward,
secret, and close revelation of Christ to the soul.

Again, Chambers are the places of most safety, Deuteronomy. 32. 25. It is said, The
Sword without, and terror within, (or from the Chambers) shall destroy, etc.
That is, destruction shall follow them into the places of the greatest safety.
And in Ezekiel. 21. 14. The great men are slain which enter into their privy
Chambers. That is, they shall not escape, no not in their Chambers of safety.
So that here by Chambers is hinted out to us, Christ's protecting and preserving
of his Saints.

Observe hence, first, from the title given to Christ, The King, etc.

That Christ is King and head over his Church. Christ was the natural Son of
God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. For by him
the World was made, who was the brightness of his glory, and the express
Image of his person, and upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.
2, 3. Therefore this prerogative will very well befit the Son of God.

God has designed and appointed Christ to this great Office and dignity, He
loves him and has given all things into his hand, John 3. 35. He judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to his Son, John 5. 22. He has made him
to be Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. He has appointed him over his own house,
Heb. 3. 2. 6. And says God, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, or
the Hill of my Holiness, and that by virtue of a solemn decree; I will declare
the decree, etc. Psalm. 2. 6, 7. And the Government shall be upon his Shoulders,
Isa. 9. 7.

Now Christ is a King, whose glory and dignity shines forth most eminently, for
says God, I will make my firstborn higher then the Kings of the Earth, Psalm.
89. 27. Christ is a King above all other Kings; and that in these respects.

First, his Kingdom is spiritual, he rules over the souls and Consciences of
men: other Kings may subject the bodies and estates of such as are under them,
but not their Consciences; this is Christ's glory which he will not give to
another. Ye are bought with a price (says the Apostle) be not ye servants of
men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. That is, do not mancipate and inslave your Consciences to
any humane devise in matters merely spiritual; because Christ alone is King of
the Conscience.

Secondly, Christ is an universal King.

First, in respect of all Nations; There was given him Dominion, and glory, and
a Kingdom, that all people and Nations, and Languages should serve him, Dan.
7. 14. The Heathen are his Inheritance, and the ends of the Earth his
possession. Psalm. 2. 8. And the Apostle speaking of the Preachers of the
Gospel, says, Their sound went into all the Earth, and their words to the end
of the World, Romans 10. 18.

Secondly, in respect of all sorts and conditions of men; this is elegantly set
forth by the Prophet, Isa. 41. 19. Where God promises To plant in the
Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittath Tree, the Myrtle; the Oile-Tree, the
Fir Tree, the Pine, and the Box-Tree together. This is also sweetly represented
unto Peter by a Sheet knit at four corners, wherein were all manner of
fowr-footed beasts of the Earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and
Fowls of the Air, Acts 10. 12. By this we are taught, that not only the
Gentiles as well as the Jews were to be received into Christ's Kingdom; but
also that in every Nation (as himself afterward Expounds it) he that fears
God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him, Verse. 35.

Thirdly, Christ is King universal, in respect of all ages and times of the
World. God is my King of old, says the Church, Psalm. 74. 12. It is meant of
Christ because it is said of him in the following words, He works Salvation
in the midst of the Earth. It is Christ that works Salvation in the midst of
the Earth; and he is called a King eternal, immortal, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

Thirdly, Christ rules alone; he has no colleague or partner; he carries the
Government upon his own Shoulders, as we read, Isa. 9. 6. He alone has
received power from on high in Governing of his Church.

Fourthly, Christ is an everlasting King; He receives a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken: The God of Heaven (says the Prophet) shall set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed; neieher shall it be left to other people, but it
shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44.

Fifthly, and lastly, Christ is matchless and eminent above all other Kings in
all royal virtues and endowments.

First, he is wise and sapient, and therefore called Counselor, only wise,
the wonderful numberer, which seals up the sum full of wisdom.

Secondly, a most magnificent and warlike King; hence Christ is called, A man
of War, the Lord of Hosts, the Captain of our Salvation: he overcomes all his
Enemies, and his foes are made his footstool.

Thirdly, Christ is a most just and righteous King; he reigns in
righteousness; his Scepter is a Scepter of rectitude and uprightness, He is
called the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

Secondly Observe, That Christ sweetly draws and persuades his people to a near
communion with himself. The King has brought me, etc. Christ does win the
hearts of his people by love and goodness. This is manifested Chap. 2. Verse.
4. where it is said, He brought me into the Banqueting House, and his banner
over me was love. A flag, or ensign is a warlike sign, whereby Soldiers are
drawn from place to place: So here, Christ sets up a Banner of love and
goodness, whereby he draws his people after him; when he displayes his Banner,
then all the Armies in Heaven and Earth follow him. It was by love we were
redeemed; for Christ loved his Church (says the Apostle) and gave himself for
it, Ephesians. 5. 25. By love we are sanctified and cleansed, as we have it in
Revel. 1. 5. Christ has loved us and has washed us in his blood. He has
washed us, both from the guilt and pollution of sin, and all from love. It is
also by the same love wherewithal Christ does win and draw his people after
him.

Thirdly Observe, Christ reveals to his Saints, the secret and hidden
Mysteries of the Gospel. Christ leads his people into his privy Chambers, and
displayeth the secrets of God to them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14.

Consider, first, Chambers are the places in which the Bridegroom and the
Bride use to rejoice together, Joel 2. 16. So Christ as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, and does communicate spiritual comforts unto her,
Such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that love him: but God
has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things,
yea the deep things of God, and thus we have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 9,
10, 16. This is that the Apostle does earnestly desire, that the Church of the
Collossians might have their hearts comforted, being knit together in love, and
unto all riches of the fullness of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ: in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Collos. 2. 2, 3. When Christ reveals such
Mysteries unto his Saints, he may be said then to lead them into his Chambers.

Secondly, touching these Chambers or inner rooms, they import a sight of rich
Treasures, or precious Jewels: Kings have the greatest treasures upon Earth;
and they keep their richest Ornaments and precious things in their Chambers.
Now Christ is the richest of all Kings, and he like a Kingly Bridegroom
leads his Spouse into his Chambers, and shows her all his riches and glory
which he has laid up for her in the Heavens. Christ is rich in love, rich in
mercy, rich in grace, rich in wisdom, and rich in knowledge: yea, as rich as
God himself: now Christ spreads these his riches before his Saints, that
they may see how rich they be in him.

But we must know Christ leads his people into his Chambers by degrees; he led
his Church into his Chambers in the time of the Law, and showed her the riches
and glory of his Kingdom: but this he has done more fully under the Gospel,
since his manifestation in the flesh, since the rising of the sun of
righteousness, and the shining of that morning Star: and most fully it shall
be done at the consummation of the Marriage of Christ and his Spouse. Here the
Spouse has some glimmerings of these riches, but then she shall have them in
perfect sight: here she injoys them by virtue of a promise, but then she
shall have the full fruition of them.

Lastly Observe, The Saints are most safe and secure in Jesus Christ. Chambers
are places of great security, therefore the Lord says, Come my people, enter
into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self for a very
little moment, until the indignation be over past, Isa. 26. 20. And thus
Christ comfort his Disciples against the Persecution of men, These things I
have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace; in the World ye shall
have Tribulation; but be of good cheer I have overcome the World, John 16. 33.
Thus David susteineth his faith by the power and protection of God, For in the
time of trouble (says he) he shall hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of
his Tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock, Psalm. 27. 5.
That is, he shall keep me safe as in the most holy of his Sanctuary, into which
none might enter but the Priest, Levit. 16. 2. And therefore it is called Gods
hidden place, Ezekiel. 7. 22. And the Saints are called hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 4.
because they are hidden of God, in his Tabernacle in the evil day. And their
life is hid with Christ in God, Collos. 3. 3. Christ therefore is a Chamber of
safety and preservation to his people in evil times.

So much for the fruits or effects ensuing the most fervent Prayer of the
Church. Now follows her protestation of engagement in these words.

We will be glad and rejoice in thee: we will remember thy love more then Wine:
the Upright love thee.
In these words the Church declares how much her affections are engaged to
Christ for all his love manifested unto her: her affections of joy and delight,
and of love, are fixed upon him: and also her mind or Senses, one Sense, namely
the Memory, is put for all the rest, to record his love, and that before Wine,
which is one of the most delightful creatures to the nature of man, under the
Sun: as if she should say, look how the affections and minds of worldly men
are ready to rejoice in, and to remember Wine or any Worldly delight: Even so,
and much more will we rejoice in thee, with spiritual mirth and gladness, and
we will celebrate and magnify, yea we will record and make mention of thy
loves above all the pleasures and delights which are to be found upon Earth.

We will be glad and rejoice.
The word (Glad) in the Original, signifies to exult and rejoice exceedingly,
and to leap for joy, and to triumph (...) Exultavit, gestij^ gaudio and lae^i
tia animi loetitiam gestu corporis expressit, exilivit g^udio, loetatus fuit.
(...) exulto, ge in tripadio.
with outward gladness expressed by the gesture of the body, and by the
countenance: answerable hereunto is the Greek (...) which also signifies
exceeding great joy, such as is expressed by outward signs of the body, as by
an outward leaping of heart and mind. It is rendered by our Translation, Judges
24. Exceeding joy. The same word is also used, by which Mary joy'd for being
the Mother of Christ, Luke 1. 47.

And rejoice.
The word signifies joy and pleasantness: also metapherically to shine,
because joy and prosperity is (...) I ^aetatus, hilaris fuit, metaphorice
c^aruit, luxis.
often signified by the name of light: as in Esther 8. 16. The Jews had light
and gladness. And so in Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous. That
is, comfort and joy is reserved for the righteous, after all their troubles.
Light is sweet and pleasant, Eccles. 11. 7. So this rejoicing is such a joy
whereby the mind is refreshed and the heart comforted. So the sum of the words
(We will be glad and rejoice) is this, we will be comforted and refreshed
inwardly, and we will exult and triumph outwardly: these are the comforts she
finds in the Kings Chambers, wherein Christ reveals to her the secrets of
his Fathers bosom, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom; and where he shows her
those Heavenly treasures and rich Ornaments and glory, which he reserveth for
her, and assures her of; from-whence arises all her spiritual joy and
gladness.

We will remember thy love more then wine.
The word (Remember) signifies to record, rehearse, (...) Recordatus fuit,
meminit, memor fuit, in hiph recordari fecit, memoriam constituit, in memoriam
celebravit. Signisicat id quod in cord reservatum.
and to make mention of a thing, to recall into the mind, to celebrate the
memorial of any thing. So the Church ingageth to remember and to bear in
mind, and to tell abroad, and to rehearse all the sweet pledges, and
manifestations of Christ's love unto her. Now the Memory is the Storehouse of
the soul wherein we lay up things for our use and bring them forth as we have
occasion to use them; it is as Christ says of the Kingdom of Heaven, Like a
Treasury, out of which a man brings forth things new and old, Mat. 13. 52.
Our memory is that in which we record and set down the things that we would
remember: it is as a Book of Accounts; as we use a Book outwardly, so the
memory is that we use inwardly. David says in Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy
word within my heart: that is, that I might not forget it: it is a metaphor
taken from precious Jewels and treasures, which men lay up and hide safe from
danger: So in Mat. 13. 44. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to treasure hid in
the Field, which when a man finds it he hides. That is, he concealeh it and
makes it sure to himself, lest any should beguile him of it.

Thy loves more then wine.
That is, those manifold and various manifestations of (...)
thy loves, which are better, and shall be more remembered by us, then the most
fragrant wine: one pleasant species or kind for all other pleasant things in
the world. Yea, we will remember thy loves, every particular love, not one of
them shall be forgotten, of all those several loves wherewithal thou have
loved us. I pass this, because we had the like in the first Verse.

The Upright love thee.
It is in the Hebrew, uprightnesses, or righteousnesses love (...)
thee: whereby the abstract is put for the concrete: for it is meant righteous
or upright persons, who have upright conversations and upright hearts: So in
Jer. 50. 31. Behold I am against thee O thou most proud: that is, O thou most
proud person: So in Prove. 13. 6. Wickedness overthrows sin, that is, it
overthrows the sinner. And again, Nehem. 12. 31. And I appointed two great
Thanksgivings: that is, I appointed two great companies of Thanksgivers. So
here, Vprightnesses love thee: that is, holy and upright men, such as have
washed their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb, such as were the Virgins before
mentioned, do with pure and upright affections love Christ.

But here we must take notice, that the uprightness which the Scripture
attributes to the Saints, is not to be understood of a legal uprightness or
perfections; for that they cannot possible attain unto: but it is to be
understood,

First, of the sincerity of the mind, and uprightness of the heart: it is a
single, perfect, and upright heart, as Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be
upright: that is, be thou sincere or upright: the same word that is here
translated upright, is in many places of Scripture Translated perfect, as Job
1. 1. Now the Saints are perfect in Christ (...) Integer, perfectus corpore vel
animo, absolutus, completus.
their head, and they are perfect in respect of their justification, For by one
offering Christ has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.
And they are perfect in parts, in respect of sanctification, being sanctified
in every part; they are sanctified throughout, in soul and body, and Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

Or thus, the Saints are perfect and upright comparatively, being compared to
others that are weak or less perfect.

Lastly, uprightness may be opposed unto hypocrisy, or to one that will
pretend much, and intend little; one that has a double heart, a heart and a
heart: So it notes to us one of an upright heart, and of a sincere mind, one
that is single and plaiue hearted, and of a simple disposition, without guile
or wickedness. The Greeks express this by such words as signifies one that
is without complaint, none can justly complain of him: (...) and (...)
Irreprehensibilis, inculpatus.
and one that is blameless, or without blemish. The word (Tamin) be thou
perfect, upright, or sound, or honest and plain in thy walking, Genesis 17. 1.
comes from the same root that the word Thummim does, which we read of, Exodus
28. 30. the High Priest was to bear Vrim and Thummim on his Breast Plate; and
Thummim was to signify the uprightness and integrity of his heart (...) Vnde.
(...)
and life, as the Vrim did the light of his understanding and knowledge.
Uprightness being opposed to that which is crooked, is that which is straight
and right: it being opposed to that which is lame and defective, it is perfect,
sound, and firm: it being opposed to hypocrisy, it is sincere, pure, and holy.

The upright love thee.
That is, the righteous are confirmed and increased in love toward him, more
and more: thus the Apostle writes to the Saints, That they might believe on
the Son of God, 1 John 5. 13. That is, that they might continue and persevere,
and that they might increase and grow strong in faith. So the sense is this,
whereas Christ leads his Saints into his Chambers, and there discovers to
them the secrets of the Fathers bosom, and gives them glorious sights of
those Heavenly riches and treasures which he has prepared for them; now by
their remembering and mentioning of Christ's love, they are confirmed and
increased in love toward him again. The words being thus unfolded yield us
these Observations.

First, That those glorious discoveries of Christ made (towit, in his Chambers)
to the Saints, causes in them glorious and unspeakable joy. It makes them to
rejoice inwardly, and to triumph outwardly; yea, they leap for joy: their joy
is like the joy in Harvest, and like to those that divide the spoil, Isa. 9.
3. As John Baptist leapt in his Mothers Womb at the tidings of Christ: So the
Saints cannot but rejoice in the spiritual revelation of Christ; whose
Kingdom is not meat and drink, but righteousness and joy in the holy Ghost,
Romans 14. 17. Wherefore the Prophet says, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the Garments
of Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of reghteousnesse; as a
Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with Jewels, Isa. 61. 10. It is in the Hebrew, In rejoicing I will rejoice;
that is, with exceeding great joy: this joy is called unspeakable and full of
glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. forasmuch as the thing it self wherein we rejoice, and the
workings of Christ's Spirit, causing this joy, is more Heavenly and divine, then
we can either conceive or express. And this is that which the Apostle
exhorts us unto, Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord. And he says further, take
it upon good grounds, forasmuch as you have the true cause of joy. And again I
say rejoice. Take a Virgin which is betrothed to some great Prince, and lead
her into his Chambers, and show unto her all his rich Treasures, and Jewels
which are reserved for her: will it not make her greatly to rejoice? Thus the
soul is led into the Heavenly Chambers of Christ, and there is showed unto her
the glory and riches given her by Christ, how is it possible but she should
rejoice and be glad? and rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Secondly Observe, The Saints record and make mention of all Christ's
manifestations of love to their souls. Come and hear (said David) ye that
fear the Lord, and I will declare what he has done for my soul. As if he had
said, I shall tell you of many strange passages of love, which the Lord has
showed toward me. And this is that the Prophet calls for, saying, Praise the
Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the People, make mention
that his name is exalted, Isa. 12. 3, 4. And again, I will mention the
loving-kindnesse of the Lord, the praises of the Lord, according to all that he
has bestowed upon us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel,
which he has bestowed on them, according to his mercye^, and according to his
lovingkindnesses, Isa. 63. And so in Psalm. 45. 18. I will make thy name to be
remembered in all Generations, therefore shall the people praise (or confess)
thee for ever and for ever. That is, I shall for ever confess and celebrate
the glory of thy Kingdom.

Now the Memory is the Storehouse of the soul; if it were not for this
faculty, all the favors we receive from Christ would be lost and forgotten, it
would be as the Prophet speaks of him that earneth wages, to put it in a bag
with holes, Hag. 1. 6. And forgetfullnesse is complained of very much in Jer.
2. 32. Can a Maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people
have forgotten me days without number; as if the Lord had said, I am much
better unto you then your garments, or attire; and if it be such a hard thing
to forget such things as they, how is it that you have forgotten me. All the
service that is expected of us, is comprehended under the Memory, Eccl. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc. Remember is put for fear,
honor, obedience, and the like: Christ's love cannot be forgotten in a gracious
heart, but it makes us never to be satisfied with the setting forth, and
publishing to others the sweet refreshing comforts we find in his love, yea, of
his loves, that is, of all his particular loves, even from election unto
glorification: a beleiver will celebrate and set forth every new act of grace
Which he receives from Christ, he will not commit any of them unto oblivion or
forgetfulness.

3. Observe, That all a Beleivers faculties, senses and affections are
dedicated and given up to Jesus Christ. The memory, the will, the affections of
joy and delight, and of love, areall fixed upon that love-deserving object,
Christ: if it were not so, what do we differ from Beasts? and a beast in the
shape of a man is the worst of all. Our affections are very pleasant and
delightful to us, and this object is as pleasant as our affections: there is no
object in the world but there is a will inclinable to close with it: now what
better object can our will and affections have, then Christ.

4. Observe, The affections of the Saints are more engaged to christ, and
consecrated to his love, then unto the greatest delights in the World. More
then wine. Wine is put (by a Synechdoche) for all pleasant and delightful
things in the World: yet says the Church, we will remember thy loves more then
worldly minded men do remember Wine: yea, more then we our selves do remember
our worldy enjoyments. A Saint may love the Creature according to that
Character God has stamped upon it; but still he sets Christ on the top of
his affections: witness David in Psa. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
and there is none in Earth that I desire besides thee. When we let our
affections run out upon the Creature, we do but lose them and they become
unprofitable unto us; but when they are set upon Christ we lose them not, he
makes them Heavenly and gracious, and gives them to us again: whatsoever we
expend on Christ, in Christ we shall find it again.

The upright love thee.
Hence Observe, That the Saints are perfect and upright in a Gospel account: A
man is that in Gospel account which he sincerely desires to be: a beleiver
aims at perfection, and therefore he is called a perfect man, his desires carry
the denomination of the thing desired. Now that part in man that has the
predominancy, and is most active, that part carries, the denomination of the
whole: now uprightness, and righteousness, holiness, and sincerity, these
carry the greatest sway in the hearts of the Saints; they being sanctified in
every part, in soul and body, and Spirit: hence they are called holy,
righteous, pure, undefiled and clean, having their Conscience clean by the
blood of sprinkling, and the like.

Secondly Observe, That holy and righteous men are only fit to praise and make
mention of the love of Christ. All the righteousness of the will, of the mind,
of the affections, will praise and celebrate Christ's love: but as for
unrighteousnes it is enmity against Christ, and unfit to mention or to praise
his love. And therefore the exhortation is to the righteous, Ps. 33. 1. Rejoice
in the Lord O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright. The word
translated comely, denotes a fair and comely grace, for which a thing is to be
liked or desired.

The Apostle expresses it in Greek by fair and beautiful. Romans 10. 15. How
beautiful are the feet of those that preach the Gospel, etc. That is, how
desirable are the feet of those that preach the Gospel; For the beauty of a
thing makes it to be desired: now the praises of Christ's love are most
desirable and glorious in the Saints, none but they are fit to record and make
mention of Christ's loves

Lastly, Observe,

The Saints by remembering and making mention of Christ's loves, are the more
confirmed and increased in love toward him.

The Church had declared before, that those chaste and pure virgins loved
Christ; but here she does mention it again, to declare, that now the Spouse had
been in the Bedchamber of the King, and had a sight of those heavenly
treasures which are reserved for her: whereupon she rejoices with exceeding
great joy, and does also record and rehearse all his loves: and by this means
all the upright are enflamed more and more with love to Christ. As fire is
increased by adding of fuel unto it; so is our love to Christ, upon fresh and
new manifestations of his great love toward us.

VERSE. 5, 6.
I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem: as the Tents of Kedar,
as the curtains of Solomon.

Look not upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me;
my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept.


IN the precedent verses we had the Churches first speech unto Christ,
professing her faith and love: now we have an Apostrophee, or her aversion or
turning of Speech from her Beloved, unto the Daughters of Jerusalem, to prevent
those scandals and offenses, which might arise in respect of the Churches
afflictions and infirmities which she was subject unto in this life. It falls
out sometimes, that some do love them, that do not love them again: and so the
objection might be thus; Thou art enflamed with a vehement and passionate love;
but is it not toward one that cares not for thee? and one that does far
excel thee? For thou have set him forth to be a glorious and great King, so
gracious and loving, so sweet and pleasant so fair and beautiful, so rich and
complete, as that nothing under heaven is any way comparable unto him. Now how
is it possible that thou should be a Spouse to such a glorious Bridegroom?
how should he love or delight in thee, thou art but a black hued Virgin, and
therefore can not be fit to match to such a beautiful sweet King as is
Messiah. Now she answers all this fully, and that first by a double adjunct
of color, or hue, one contrary to the other.

1. By confession, I am black. 2. By refutation, but comely.
Both which are illustrated by two comparisons.

1. To show her blackness; As the tents of Kedar. 2. To show her fairness; As
the curtains, or the hangings of Solomon, verse. 5.
Now she proceeds unto a more full answer, because none should take offense
at her blackness, as to impair her dignity or worth, or more lightly to
regard or esteem of her: and this she does

1. By admonition to the daughters of Jerusalem, not to despise or disdain her,
in these words, Look not upon me because I am black. 2. She rendereth a
reason of her admonition, and that is drawn from the cause of her blackness,
and the cause is threefold.
1. From the supreme cause; The sun has looked upon me. 2. From the
isntrumental cause, my mothers children were angry with me, etc. 3. From the
impulsive cause, which was internal and wholly in her self; that is, though
they made her the keeper of the Vinyards, yet she kept not well her own
Vineyard.
I am black, but comely.
The Hebrew word here translated black, signifies (...) Denigrari,
Nigresceie, nigrnm esse. In pih. diluculo, mane, sedulo, studiose quaerete, a
nomine
blackness, or darkness: and therefore the Hebrew word Mishchar, is taken
from the same root, which signifies the morning, or the day-dawning, because
of the blackness or darkness thereof.

1. By blackness or darkness we may understand affliction or tribulation: so
the Prophet calls tribulation night, because the solitariness and fear
thereof, is like the darkness. Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee
in the night: Yea my spirit within me, will I seek thee (...) Aarora sic a
nigrore di cta qui eam comitatur, Buxtorf. in lex. Inde. (...) Jer. 2. 18.
Nilus ob aquarum nigredinem sic dictus, uti etiam a Graecis (...).
early. And Job complains; My skin (says he) is black upon me, and my
bones are burnt with heat, Job 30. 30. And thus Jeremie lamenteth the
blackness of the Nazarites visage, saying, their visage is blacker then a
coal, Lam. 4. 8. The words in the Original run thus, their visage is darker
then blackness: that is, it is dark and sad with grief and famine.

Again, in Jerem. 14. 2. Judah mourns, and the gates thereof languish, they
are black unto the ground: that is, they are made to bow down to the ground,
as David says, Psalm. 38. 6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: or else
for faintness they sink and fall down to the Schiod. in lex. pentag. lot.
ground, as the Psalmist speaks in Psalm. 89. 44. Thou have cast his Throne
down to the ground: that is, I will afflict him, and lay his glory in the
dust: thus darkness and blackness may be taken for affliction.

2. Blackness may also imply sin, and that in respect of her negligence,
which she confesses, in that she did not keep well her own Vineyard. The
Apostle calls sin darkness, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered you from the
power of darkness: that is, from the power and dominion of sin. And again, in
1 These. 5. 5. The Apostle speaking to Believers, says, Ye are the children of
the light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, or of
darkness: he means the night and darkness of sin. Now darkness is called
sin in these four respects.

1. Because sin proceeds from darkness, that is, from the ignorance of the
unregenerate understanding and will: As the Apostle speaking of the Gentiles
that did not glorify God, as God, says, They became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, Romans 1. 21. And in Ephesians. 4.
18. Having their understanding darkened, or (as it is in the Original) being
darkened in the understanding, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindn^sse of their heart.

2. Sin darkneth the very light of nature, and men by sin come to increase
their darkness: this is the meaning of the Apostle in the place before
mentioned, Romans 1. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart was darkened: that is, it became darker then it was by
nature; for the Apostle tells us in verse. 20. That the light of nature would
reach thus far, as to know the invisible things of God, by those that were
visible, that is, by the creatures; but says the Apostle in v. 22. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools: that is, they were grown more
sottish then they were before.

3. They that commit sin, love to act in darkness; they that do the works
of darkness, love to work in darkness. John 3. 19, 20. Light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil:
that is, they love darkness, because their deeds are deeds of darkness: For
he that does evil, hates (and shunneth) the light: neither comes to the
light lost his deeds should be reproved, or discovered, and made manifest.

4. Because darkness of sin brings (unles it be pardoned in Christ) darkness of
misery: Everlasting punishment is called everlasting darkness, Lu. 8. 12. and
22. 13. Darkness leads to darkness; that pure darkness upon the
understanding, leads to everlasting darkness of misery. Now in all these
respects sin may be called darkness and blackness: and seeing this is the
nature of sin, the Church in respect of the remainders of sin may say, I am
black.

3. By blackness we may understand her sorrow and mourning for her present
miseries; for black color was the habit of mourners; For the hurt of the
daughter of my people am I hurt: astonishment has taken hold on me, Jer. 8.
21. That is, I go in black, as mourners use to do; or else, I mourn and am in
heaviness. Now we may take either of these interpretations, concerning the
Churches blackness; for she was under the scorching sun of persecution, and
under the darkness of sin by her negligence; and under blackness of sorrow
and mourning, because of the two former, to wit, trouble and sin: so the sum
of all is this much, I am black: If you look upon me with carnal eyes, my
fairness does not appear to the eye of sense and reason: I have no external
beauty, and therefore if you look upon me, as the world looks upon me, I shall
seem to be black, and without any comeliness at all. Now to prevent this
objection, she adds:

But comely.
Here by way of refutation; though I am black, yet I am also comely: else it
might have been reasoned against her thus: Thou art black, and therefore not to
be beloved, neither art thou a fit Spouse for this gloririous King, that thou
so magnifiest; for it is most fit, that such a worthy Prince should have a
glorious and a beautiful Wife. She answers, saying, notwithstanding
blackness, yet I am lovely, and to be desired.

The Hebrew Navah, signifies desirable, comely, amiable, beautiful: It is
used to express that desire, by which we long earnestly after a thing, even
with a greedy appetite: according to this the Prophet uses it, when he says,
My soul desires the first ripe fruit, Mic. 7. 1. The Greeks turn it, by
(...), to desire; and by (...), to will, Job 23. 13. And also they translate it
goodly, fair, and (...) Desideravit. In Niph. (...) Desiaerabitis, and per
metalepsin, pulcher, decorus, conveniens suit, decuit.
beautiful, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet, etc. That is, how
amiable, and how desirable are the feet of those that preach the Gospel of
peace, and bring tidings of great joy.

Now comeliness consists in two things.

First, in fairness of Complexion: thus Christ is said to be beautiful by his
countenance and complexion. Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy. White
and red show the best temperature in man, and the mixture of these two colors
makes a beautiful and good complexion. Herein the Church is also beautiful,
and commended for the comeliness of her countenance, Song 2. 14. And thy
countenance is comely, says Christ.

2. In a just symmetry or proportion of parts: and thus Christ is set forth to
be comely, by that pleasant harmony and specious consent of parts, which is
found to be in him. Song 5. 10, etc. where the Church does sum and reckon up
all his parts, from top to toe, (as we use to say) from his head to his feet;
and at last concludes thus, he is altogether lovely. But this is not meant of
the outward lineaments and proportion of his body, but of his spiritual beauty
and grace. Now the Church must needs be also beautiful, in respect of inward
and spiritual beauty; forasmuch as she is the workmanship of God created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. So that as we were Gods workmanship
in our first creation, so likewise in our regeneration or second creation. This
workmanship of God is that whereby he does renew us by his spirit, and change
our wills to holiness and righteousness, wherein consists his own glorious
image: So that now all parts of man are renewed, and sanctified; they have all
received a proportion of grace, and they all sweetly concur with one
harmonious consent to act for Christ, even as they are acted by his Spirit.

Now it appears that the Churches comeliness is not any natural beauty; but
it is supernatural, it is a derivative beauty. Thus we have it in Ezekiel. 16. 12,
13, 14. Where the Lord says; I clothed thee with broidered work, verse. 10.
And I decked thee with ornaments, etc. verse. 11. And I put upon thee jewels of
silver and gold, verse. 12. And says God, Thy renown went forth among the
heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my comeliness which I had
put upon thee, says the Lord, verse. 14. The Lord gave of his own beauty and
excellency, and thereby Jerusalem became beautiful and glorious: So all the
Saints shine in the glory and excellency of Jesus Christ. Hence we are said, to
put on the new man, Colos. 3. 10. The Apostle uses a metaphor, taken from the
putting on of garments, to show, that those graces which we receive from
Christ, are so many additions to our nature; and that we are wholly destitute
and naked by nature, having no form nor comeliness upon us: but those renewed
graces, which are after the image of God; they are as beautiful ornaments to
our souls. Now in this respect the Church is comely, yea, and she is much
more comely then she is black; she is not so black in her self, as she is
comely in Christ.

O ye daughters of Jerusalem.
These are they unto whom she directs her speech, who (as she conceives) might
have framed objections against her. The Church often speaks to these
daughters in diverse places of this song. We must understand by these daughters
of Jerusalem, the friends of Christ, and of his Church. Now it was the custom
of the Jews to call the whole the mother, and the parts the daughters: So the
Villages round about a City, are called the daughters of the City, 1 Chronicles. 7.
18. And so Jerusalem which is above, is called the mother of us all, Gal. 4.
26. whose daughters are all particular Churches and Saints. And the children of
the Church are called daughters, in that they are presented as a pure virgin to
Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. And Psalm. 45. 13, 14. The Kings daughter (meaning the
Church) is brought unto the King in raiment of needle-worke: the Virgins her
companious follow her. Now these may may be called daughters in either of these
respects.

1. In that they were not so well instructed in the way of Christ, as other
believers were: they were not so confirmed and grounded in the knowledge of
God, or 2. They were such as were newly converted, and so not joined to any
particular congregation, or 3. They were the particular congregations, into
which the Church was divided, and this agrees with the Hebrews form of speech.
Now the ground of the Churches turning her speech to these daughters, is, that
they might not be offended with her blackness, to take off all discouragements
which might befall them, by reason of the cross, or of weakness, which the
Church was subject unto: so that such like things as those, might not be a
cause of scandal, or of stumbling unto them.

As the Tents of Kedar.
Here we have her Comparison, by which she does demonstrate her blackness to
be as the Tents of Kedar, Kedar was the second Son of Ishmael, Genes. 25. 13.
The Kedarites which came of his race, dwelt in Tents and open Fields, where
they were exposed to the scorching Sun: they were Scenites, being such as did
wander up and down, feeding their Flocks in Tents, which they Plinle, (...)
Hist. Lib. 6. Cap. 28.
made of Goats-haire, as Pliny reports. And the Prophet says, they dwelt in
the Wilderness, Isa. 42. 11.

Kedar, has his name of blackness and darkness: (...) Obscurus, luce
privatus fuit, nigruit.
And David lamenteth that he was so long conversant in the Tents of Kedar,
Psalm. 120. 5, 6. The Church is likened to these Tents, in respect of her
adversity and sorrow: hence the Church is called the Tents of Jacob, Jer. 30.
18. And the Tents of Judah, Zech. 12. 7. That is, in respect of her misery and
distress.

But we may further take notice, that these Tents were in Arabia, and they were
very rich and glorious, as is shown by diverse Scriptures: The Prophet Ezekiel
says, in Arabia was all kind of Merchandise, Ezekiel. 27. 21. and it was full of
Flocks and Herds of Gattell, Jer. Aliena non emunt, vendunt sua.
40. 28. and their men were given to their Bow and to Wars, Isa. 21. 13.
Besides humane Histories do largely treat of the excellent and precious things
of Arabia Solinus in Polihist c. 46.
deserta. Solinus says, They buy not of others, but sell to others. And Pliny
reports, that it comes behind no Country in the world for largeness and
greatness, Pliny not. Hi^t. Lib. (...) 6. Cap. 28.
being full of people, and richly seated; from whence it has its name Foelix,
happy, because in it were plenty of Pearls, and Mines of gold: there was also
those Trees that brought forth the sweet gums of Frankincense and myrrh; and
there was all kind of sweet odours and Spices, besides plenty of Honey and Wax.
Now the Church drawing her comparison from Kedar, may as well mean besides
blackness, matter of desire: as if she should say, It is true, I am black as
Kedars Tents, yet in mether earepretious things for which I am comely and to be
desired: for as Kedars Tents have been desired, not for their outward beauty or
comeliness, being made of Goats-haire, a Stuff very course and black: but for
the most precious Jewels, and precious Stones, for riches and gold, for the
sweet odours of frankincense, and myrrh, and such like precious things as was
contained in it: yea, in it was the Phoenix (if ever there was such a Bird in
the world who might resemble both Christ and his Church, in that there is said
to be but one at a time in the World: so Christ and also his Spouse are both
said to be one: Messiah is one, and his Dove, his Spouse is but one. Now I say,
in that the Church does demonstrate her blackness by the Tents of Kedar in
Arabia, it may signify, not only her outward blackness, as she seems to
the World, by reason of sin and sorrow; but also her inward riches and glory.
It is as if she had said, I am black of color, and outwardly void of form or
beauty, but in wardly I am comely, and much to be desired.

As the Curtains of Solomon.
These Curtains are to set forth her Comeliness, as Kedars Tents did her
blackness. Sometimes Curtains signify Tents, as the Ark of the Lord remained
under Curtains, 1 Chronicles. 17. 1. but Solomon's Curtains seem here to be meant
of those Hangings that were in his house, and about his bed. Solomon was
glorious, in riches, in wealth, and in honor: he built great Houses, set
Gardens, Planted Vineyards, and Trees of all sorts; he was glorious in his
Man-servants and Maids, and had Children born in his House, etc. Eccles. 2. 4,
5. Now as all that Solomon had was glorious, so in all probability his
Curtains (or Hangings) were answerable to all the rest of his glory.

Josephus says, that Solomon's Chambers were adorned with Planks of Carved
Cedar, and of stone, and of curious Marble. And (says he) that which made it
more beautiful, were three panes of Tapistry, and the fourth admirable for
artificial engraving: it seems that the inward Hangings were more rich then
those that were more outwardly. This sets forth to us the surpassing glory of
the Church, who shines in the graces of Christ, which exceeds all ordinary
glory. So though the Church be black outwardly like the Tents of Kedar, yet
she is in wardly beautiful as Solomon's Curtains. Let us collect some
Observations from hence.

First, from the Churches confession, I am black, etc. Observe,

That sin and the effects thereof, towit, trouble and sorrow, does very much
darken and overcloud the Saints of God. You heard that sin was darkness it
self, and therefore darkness must needs follow it: nothing does more debase
and deforme men then sin, and the effects of it. Hence it is David complains,
Mine eyes are consumed because of grief, it waxes old because of all mine
Enemies. Psalm. 6. 7. That is, his affliction and trouble did cast him very low,
so that he was like some old deformed man that had lost his eyes. And Christ
counsels the Church of Laodicea, to buy of him white Raiment, that she
might be clothed, and that the shame of her nakedness might not appear,
Revel. 3. 18. That is, take a clothing of white raiment (towit, of holiness
and righteousness) that so thy defects and defaults be not discovered, and lie
open to thy disgrace. Thus it is said of the people of Israel, that Moses saw
that they were naked: For Aaron had made them naked unto their shame, amongst
their Enemies, Exodus 32. 25. That is, their fin was discovered as the deformity
of a nakedman, who wants clothes to cover it: or they were naked as being
stripped of the chief Ornament of their souls, towit, righteousness and
holiness. And the Lord says in Ezekiel. 23. 29. I will discover the nakedness
of thy Whoredoms. That is, I will make known thy shameful forsaking of me,
to serve Idols. Nothing in the World does so much deforme men, as sin does; it
defiles the Conscience, it darkens the understanding, it overshadows the
affections: yea, it defiles the whole man from top to toe (as we use to say) it
makes him altogether unbeautifull and deformed.

Secondly Observe, from the Churches confession,

That true Christians are ingenious to acknowledge their own defects. The
Daughters of Jerusalem were prevented in laying this charg upon the Church, by
her own confession. There are two special grounds of this ingenuity in the
Saints.

First, the glory of God: hereupon Joshua exhorts Achan to this duty: My Son,
give glory to God, etc. We honor God exceedingly by acknowledging our own
defects; we show forth the honor of his mercy that will not take every
advantage against us, the honor of his power to pardon; the honor of his
faithfulness, in that he keeps Covenant with sinful Creatures: the honor
of his wisdom in knowing all things, even the very secrets of the heart: yea,
we give God the glory of all his Attributes, for in debasing our selves we lift
up Gods glory.

Secondly, the Saints do by confession ease their own Consciences: this we
see in the example of David, Psalm, 32. 3, 4, 5. When I kept silence (says he)
my Bones waxed old: I was in great distemper of Spirit, and unquiet in my body,
My moisture was turned into the drought of Summer: that is meant of an airy
substance, whereby the life is cherished, which if it be spent it causes
death: now for ease in this condition, what course does he take? I said (says
he) I will confess my sin, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: hereby
the Saints do not only glorify God, but also obtain rest and peace in their
own souls.

Thirdly Observe,

The Saints are deformed, and without beauty to the outward view of the World.
The carnal eye sees no beauty at all in the Disciples of Christ; they appear
in the same form that Christ appeared in to the World: in respect of the
sufferings of Christ: the Prophet speaks thus. His Visage was so marred more
then any man, and his form more then the Sons of men, Isa. 52. 14. That is,
he had no respect or estimation in the eyes of worldly men: He seemed a Worm
and no man, Psalm. 22. 6. Again, the Prophet brings in worldly men speaking
thus of Christ, He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him, Isa. 53. 2. And therefore he is
despised and rejected of men, etc. Verse. 3. That is, he was scarce accounted
worthy the name of a man, or to be reckoned among the number of men. Now if the
men of the World could see no beauty in Christ, much less can they see any
beauty in his Servants; if they cannot see beauty in the head, much less in
the body; if Christ were accounted a dry saplesse Tree, what esteem can there
be of the branches; If they call the master of the House Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his Household, says Christ, Mat. 10. 25. And if
the World hate you, ye know (says he) that it hated me before it hated you,
John 15. 18. Hence it is that the Apostle says, We are made as the filth of
the World, and are the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. The Apostle
uses two words to express the vile account (...). Sordes, purgamentum.
that the World have of the Saints, towit, filth and offscouring: the words are
of a like import, and do signify properly filth or dirt scraped off men's
shoes, or from the pavement of the ground. It also signifies (says godly
Master Borroughs) the Dung-cart that goes Mr. Borroughs in his Moses Choice.
through the City, into which every one brings his filth and casts in. So that
it is as much as if the Apostle had said, we are despiseable and odious to the
outward view of the People, and laden with reproaches and revilings not worthy
to be accounted of, or esteemed among men: yea, as men not fit to live in the
World.

But comely.
Hence Observe,

Though the Saints are black in themselves, yet they are fair in Christ. Else
they were not fit to match with Jesus Christ; it is confessed they are black of
themselves, but when Christ comes to marry the soul unto himself, he puts
a kind of divine luster and beauty upon it, whereby he makes it glorious like
himself yet it is true that we have sinned and have come short of the glory of
God; but Christ restores this glory in us again: this is that the Apostle
tells us, when he says, Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it,
even as a Husband gives himself unto his Wife: but to what end does Christ
thus give himself unto his Church? That he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water, by the word: that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church (or Spouse) not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. And again he
says, Col. 1. 22. Christ has reconciled us in the body of his flesh through
death, to present us holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight. The
Saints are thus glorious in the eyes of Christ in two respects.

First, in respect of Justification, so they are absolutely fair and complete
in him. They are absolutely freed and discharged of sin, being clothed with
Christ's righteousness, they shine forth most gloriously in the beauty thereof.
And in this sense the Church is pure and undefiled in this World, and yet not
free from sinful imperfection. But still we must remember our beauty is not
connaturall with us, but it is a derivative and a borrowed beauty: the Saints
who are the Members, shine in the glory and dignity of him that is head; and
the Church who is the Spouse of Christ, shines in the beauty of him who is her
Husband.

Secondly, the Church is comely in sanctification; she is not only fair from
Christ's fairness, and from his imputative righteousness, but also in those
graces which she has received from Christ, even in those inherent graces
infused into her soul by the Spirit of grace. Sanctification is a restoring of
the Image and of the glory of God in man's heart, making of it conformable and
like unto the image of God: so says the Apostle, Col. 3. 10. Having put on the
new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him. Now the new man here spoken of, is nothing but the changing of the will to
holiness and righteousness, wherein consists the image of God.

Secondly, in that the Church does set forth her fairness, by opposing it
against her blackness, Observe, That the Churches fairness appears the more,
in that it is opposed to her deformity. Thus it is in nature, those that are
beautiful appear to be so most of all, when they are compared to them that
are deformed. As that which is evil appears to be more evil when it is set
against that which is good: so that which is good, appears to be more good,
when it is set against that which is evil. The Apostle says, That sin by the
Commandment became exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 13. The Law (says he) is holy,
just, and good, and sin wrought in me death by that which is good. That is, by
the Law, Was that then which is good made death unto me, God forbid says he,
but sin, that it might appear sin. That is, being opposed to a holy Law. And
so the Apostle speaks in respect of the grace of God, Where sin abounded,
grace (...) much more abound, Romans 5. 20. That is, grace did not only
countervaile with sin, but above measure out-passed it. So that if sin reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign unto eternal life. The power of grace
appears to be most potent when it is opposed to the power of sin. As black
spots in the face make it show the fairer, so the deformity of the Church makes
her beauty to be the greater. It must be excellent beauty that must cover such
deformity; it must be infinite and divine beauty that can make the Church, in
the midst of sin and sorrow, say, I am comely.

As the tents of Kedar: as the curtains of Solomon.
Now forasmuch as the Church does illustrate her blackness by the tents of
Kedar, or by those that dwelt in those tents, who though they were black in
color, yet very rich in precious things, as gold, and precious gems: Observe,

That though the Church be deformed and black outwardly, yet she is very
desirable and beautiful inwardly.

Notwithstanding, Kedars tents were not desirable, yet Kedar was full of
riches and substance, for which it might be desired. So the Saints, although
they are disesteem'd by the world, yet they are desirable of Christ. The Kings
daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 14. That is, she has her heart
adorned with divine grace, as faith, hope, love, etc. The Apostle prayed that
the Ephesians might be strengthened in the inner man, and that Christ might
dwell in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. And again he says in 2 Cor.
4. 16. For this cause we faint not; but though the outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. By the outward man is meant our bodies, our
persons, and condition by nature, which is much depressed by sin and misery:
and by the inner man, he means the regenerate part, which is renewed by the
holy Ghost, and also strengthened daily, to bear pressures and afflictions.
The Temple at Jerusalem was a type both of Christ and of the Christian Church,
and the greatest glory was inward, in the holy of holies; and all the glorious
Vessels in the Tabernacle did prefigure the glory of the Saints.

2. Whereas she does illustrate her beauty by Solomon's curtains, observe: The
graces of Messiah are far more glorious then all the glory of the world.

The curtains of Solomon, unto which the allusion is made, must needs be very
glorious, answerable to the rest of his glory. We read in Scripture, that
there was no glory in the world comparable to his glory: the Queen of Sheba was
astonished when she beheld it. Also we may understand by the tapistry or
curtains of Solomon, all the glory of his house, of which we read of, 1 King.
10. 1, 2. How surpassing them must the glory of those graces be, which Christ
adorneth his Saints withal, whereof Solomon's curtains was but an earthly
shadow or type. Now if the spiritual comelines and beauty of the Spouse, now
in the time of her blackness and imperfection be comparable unto, yea, far
beyond Solomon's curtains, and all his royalty besides: what will her beauty be,
when all her blackness shall be taken away, and when she shall appear in her
full and everlasting beauty, being cleansed from all her spots and dimnesse,
yea when she will shine in glory, in the sight of all her beholders.

O ye daughters of Jerusalem.
This she speaks to strengthen and confirm those that were weak, and not so
well grounded or confirmed in the knowledge of Christ; to the end she might
remove all occasion of scandal, which otherwise might have been a cause of
stumbling unto these daughters of Jerusalem.

Observe hence,

That those that are strong Christians, should by all means endeavor to
strengthen and confirm those that are weak.

Here the Church seeks to satisfy the daughters of Jerusalem concerning her
blackness, by telling them that notwithstanding her blackness, yet she was
desirable.

An example of this we have in Christ, when he shows what a hinderance riches
are in the way of the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 19. 23, 24. Christ counsels
the young man to sell all that he had, and give to the poor: the Text says,
he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Presently upon this,
Christ turned to his Disciples, and said, That a rich man shall hardly enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Now the aim and drift of Christ was, to uphold
the spirits of his Disciples, in respect of their poverty, having left all to
follow him. And on the contrary, the Apostle says, give none offense neither
to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. That is, do not
scandalize any by the use of your liberty, whether they be without, or within
the Church; but rather labor to win them by love. And again, for his own
particular he says, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, rather then
make my brother offend, 1 Cor. 8. 13. That is, as if he had said, I will rather
abstain for ever from all kind of flesh, then put a stumbling block before, or
give occasion of sin to any of my brethren. So in Romans 15. 1. We then that are
strong (says the Apostle) ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not
to please our selves.

VERSE. 6.
Look not upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me:
my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept.
NOw the Church proceeds unto a more full answer unto this supposed objection
that might have been made against her: and that because none should impair her
dignity or worth, or more lightly regard or esteem of her. And this she does,

1. By admonition unto the daughter of Jerusalem, in these words, Look not
upon me, because I am black. 2. She rendereth a reason of her admonition, and
that is drawn from the cause of her blackness, which is threefold. 1. The
supreme cause; The sun has looked upon me. 2. The isntrumental cause, My
mothers children, etc. 3. The impulsive cause; My own vineyard have I not kept.

Look not upon me, etc.
The Church continues her speech to the daughters of Jerusalem, desiring them
not to look upon her so as to be discouraged from joining with her in the
service of Christ, notwithstanding all her deformities, which outwardly make
her deformed: but rather to have their eyes upon Messiah, in whose beauty and
glory she is also decked and adorned.

The word signifies to see with great observation, or to see with great
curiosity, with delight, and with (...)
sense and feeling: and therefore in that she says, Look not upon me, or
behold me not: that is

1. With disdain; do not behold me with contempt and scorn, because of my
blackness. Thus it is spoken of Leviathan in Job 42. 34. He beholds all
high things: that is, he scorneth and despises all other beasts, he fears
none, and is the proudest of all others: and the Lord is said to look upon the
proud afar off. That is, with great disdain and contempt.

2. Look not upon me with triumph and rejoicing over me, as in Obad. verse. 12.
Thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother. It was spoken
concerning Edom, because he magnified himself in the day of Israel's
distress; and it is spoken of the enemies of the Church, when they gathered
against Israel. Mic. 4. 11. Let her be defiled (say they) let our eye look
upon Zion: that is, we will satisfy our selves in her defilement; let her be
defiled, and we will rejoice.

3. Look not upon me with amazement, be not affrighted or astonished at my
blackness. Affliction is called the wine of astonishment, Psalm. 60. 3. meaning
they were drunken with afflictions, which caused horror and astonishment, as
drunkenness with wine causes staggering and giddiness. Hence it is, the
Apostle does labor to confirm the Saints in the faith: That (says he) no man
should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves know, that we are
appointed thereunto, 1 These. 3. 3. That is, we are ordained, that we should be
conformable unto Christ: first in sufferings, after in glory; therefore (says
he) let not these things move you from the faith.

Because I am black.
The form of the Hebrew word here, differs from (...) Subnigra, quod sim
subnigra, so Iun. translates it.
that in the former verse, and seems to diminish the signification, and
signifies somewhat black, or blackish: by this the Church would signify, that
her blackness was not such, as that she might be contemned or disdained for
it: her blackness was but an outside blackness; though her skin was black, yet
her inside was fair, and that outward blackness of hers was not her proper
color neither, but by accident, and therefore she proceeds to give the
reasons of her blackness.

Because the sun has looked upon me.
Hereby are meant persecutions and afflictions: so it is expounded by Christ
himself, Matthew. 13. 6. 21. When the sun was up: that is (says Christ) when
persecution and tribulation arises, because of the world. The Sun has
looked upon me: that is, God has looked upon me in anger and displeasure; and
therefore O ye daughters, do not you look disdainfully upon me, because I am
blackish, and of a dark hue; for this color is not so much natural to me, as
caused by the scorching heat of affliction, wherewith I have been often
sunburned and scorched: neither was this altogether my own defect, but by the
envy and deceit of my false brethren. Hence she proceeds to declare the
second, to wit, the isntrumental cause of her blackness.

My mothers children were angry with me. (...) Filij matris meae, Arius
Montanus.

Arius Montanus renders it, the sons of my mother. Some question there is,
who they be, whom she calls the sons of her mother.

First, Some have taken it, that she calls original sin, even all those
concupiscences of the flesh, all those inordinate lusts and sins, which are in
all the elect from the womb, her mothers sons; for by these she was forced
to commit many sins, and to omit many good things, by which means her glory
and beauty was very much dimmed and darkened. Now the Apostle tells us of the
lusts that war in our members, Jam. 4. 1. and of fleshly lusts that war
against the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. And says Paul, I find a law, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me, Romans 7. 21. And all this arises from
that original concupiscence which is in the elect from the womb; according to
that of Psalm. 51. 5. I was shapon in iniquity (said David) and in sin did my
mother conceive me. Now this is true concerning concupiscence, but I do not
conceive how it can here be called the sons of her Mother: because in this Song
she does often call the Church her Mother; and therefore it may the rather be
understood, that she means by her mothers sons, those degenerate children,
which profess themselves to be children of the Church; but are false Brethren,
false Prophets, and deceivers: such as these might be called the children of
her Mother, but not of her Father, because they were degenerate: they were such
as do profess faith and godliness, but do desperately oppose the same. Of
such David complains; I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alient
to my mothers sons, Ps. 69. 9. That is, their carriage and estimation toward
him, was as toward a stranger whom they knew not. And the Apostle says, Of
your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them, Acts 20. 30. So that such as were near in relation to the
Church, and pretended much, such as they were angry with her.

Were angry with me.
Arius Monianus readers it, succensi sunt in me, they were enflamed in me.
Fratius, accensi^ra contra me, they were incensed against me with indignation.
The word signifies to Burn or be in^iamed with indignation, or with grief.
Thus it is used in Psalm. 37. 1. Fret not (...) Arsit, exarsit ira. Ira accensus
fuit. In Niph. (...) Accensi sunt ira contra me. Buxt. in lex.
thy self, etc. That is, enstame not, thy self with anger, or griese. And we
have same word in Prove. 24. 19. Fret not thy self because of evillmen; do not
enframe thy self with them: It notes also enflamation of choler, so it is used
in Psalm. 2. 5. He shall vex them in his sore displeasure: That is, he will vex
and trouble them in his enflamed displeasure. Again, it signifies such an
enflamation, as to fight, or make war; so it is used in Isa. 41. 11. All they
that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed. It is meant of outward
enemies, that made war against Israel: Now by this we may perceive with what
great vehemence and indignation, with what burning heat and choler these false
Brethren, false Prophets, and false Priests were set against the Church, they
were incensed with wrath and envy against her, as appears by their carriage
toward her, they seduced and led her aside; which indeed is the third, to wit,
the impulsive cause of her affliction and blackness.

They made me the keeper of the vineyards, but my own vinyard have I not kept.
They made me: They did constitute or assign me, they (...) Posuit, apposuit,
imposuit, statuit collocavit.
put me: that is, they did impose it upon me, they did set me upon this work,
as Taskmasters use to do: also they assigned me, as to an Office; thus they
made the Church their Servant to observe their fancies and pleasures. They made
me. That is, they assigned, enforced, and constrained me to observe their
devices and pleasures, or else to suffer their cruelty and wrath.

The keeper of the Vineyards.
It is a hard Task they impose on the Church: for (...) Custodivit, observavit.
nothing is more laborious then the Husbandry of the Vineyard. Therefore says
Christ, Why stand ye idle? go work in the Vineyard, Mat. 20. 6. And they that
have labored in the Vineyard do complain how they have borne the burden and
heat of the day. The Kingdom of God is likened to a Vineyard let out to
Husbandmen, Mat. 21. 33. And in Song 8. 11. Solomon let out his Vineyard to
keepers. And in the Captivity of Babylon, the poor of the Land were left to be
Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen, 2 Kings 25. 12. This notes the grievious bondage
and oppression the Church was under, in respect of carnal and humane
Ordinances, which were imposed on her, by those great pretenders to Religion,
towit, her Mothers Sons, false Prophets and Brethren.

Of the Vineyards.
By the Vineyards which she here opposes to her own Vineyard; seems to be
meant of false Churches, and of all corruption and superstition used in them:
into which she was seduced and brought by her Mothers Sons, who set her to
observe humane Ordinances and Traditions. Thus the Pharisees made the word of
God of none effect, through their Traditions, Mark. 7. 13.

The Church in a spiritual sense is often called a Vineyard, Psalm. 80. 8. Thou
have brought a Vine out of Egypt. That is, a Church, the Commonwealth of
Israel. And the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the
men of Judah are his pleasant plant, Isa. 5. 7. So in opposition to the Lords
Vineyard, towit, his Church; false Churches, and false Worshippers, are called
Vineyards.

But my own Vineyard I have not kept.
My Vineyard that is mine, or, that belongs to me. That is, that was given me
in trust, of God, and committed to my charge. The Apostle exhorts Timothy, to
keep (...) Vineam meam, quae mihi Arius Montan.
that which was committed to his charge, 1 Timothy 6. 20. That is meant of the
precious Treasure of holy doctrine, and the Talent: of those gifts by which he
was enabled to dispense the word of life. And the Apostle says, the Gospel
was committed to his trust, 1 Timothy 1. 11. And says he, The Gospel of
uncircumcision was committed unto me, Gal. 2. 7. And a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed unto me, 1 Cor. 9. 17. Hence he calls it, My Gospel,
Romans 2. 16. So here the Church calls it her Vineyard: that is, those
Ordinances and Laws which God gave me to keep; those things which he did
entrust me withal, even in those things I have been defective.

I have not kept.
I have not with faith, diligence, and observation, kept those things which God
has committed to my trust, but I have been negligent, and careless, and
fruitless; and that partly by the impositions of such as hated me, and
tyrannized over me, drawing of me aside to observe humane rights and
traditions; and partly through my own weakness, to comply and yield to the
corruptions of the times, for fear of persecution, or for love of the World:
In that I have been slothful and sluggish in keeping that which was committed
to my trust. The wise man speaks of the sloathfull man's Vineyard thus, I went
up by the field of the sloathfull, and by the Vineyard of the man void of
understanding: and lo, it was all grown over with thorns, etc. Prove. 34. 30,
31. So the Church here had been sloathfull and careless of her Vineyard: she
was overrun with the weeds of sin and superstition, and with the Thorns and
nettles of persecution. Now this she gives out as the last cause of her
blackness and deformity; namely, her not keeping well her own Vineyard. Now
let us prooceed to the Observations that these words thus opened will afford us.

First, Look not upon me; that is, not with disdain or contempt.

Hence Observe,

That we ought not to disdain or contemn our Brethren in Affliction. To him
that is in affliction (says Job) pity should be showed from his Friends, Job
6. 12. It is in the Original, To him that is melted; for afflictions melt the
heart of man, and therefore pity ought to be shown: The word translated pity
signifies a pious affection of (...) Pietas, bonitas, benignitas.
mercy, goodness, and pity: so that Bowels of compassion ought rather to be
shown to Brethren in misery, then contempt and disdain.

Secondly, Look not upon me: that is, with triumph and rejoicing over me.

Hence Observe,

As we ought not to disdain, much less should we triumph or rejoice at the
affliction of our Brethren. This was a brand upon Edom the Posterity of Esau,
where the Lord says, Thou should not have looked on the day of thy Brother,
Obad. Verse. 12. That is, thou should not have insulted and tryumphed over
thy Brethren, towit, the Children of Israel, and of the seed of Jacob, who was
Brother to Esau their Father. The contrary is that for which Doeg the Edomite
was sharply reprehended, for in Psalm. 52. 1. Why boastest thou thy self in
mischief, O mighty man? That is, why do thou insult and vaunt in thy
wickedness, and that because the Lords Priests were slain by the hand of
Saul: the word signifies, to vaunt, insult, or to rage like a mad man: and
therefore foolish and vaineglorious Boasters, are called in Hebrew Holelim,
which comes of the root Halal, to praise or extol: but when men are lifted up
at evil, then it is folly (...) Splenduit, metaphorice laudavit, celebravit,
per antiphrasin.
and madness: as all they that rejoice at the affliction of the Saints, shall
find it to be nothing but folly and madness in the end.

Thirdly, Look not upon me with horror and astonishment.

Again Observe, Insanus, insanivit, Unde. Halle lujah, praise ye Jab.


The afflictions, or the deformities of the Saints, should not dishearten, or
drive us off from the ways of Christ. If our own afflictions should not make
us flag or fail, much less the afflictions of others: the Apostle comfort
the Saints in that they were tempted and tried: There has no temptation taken
you (says he) but such as is common to man. By temptation he means
affliction and persecution, whereby their faith was tried, as Gold in the fire;
and (says he) such afflictions are common to man. That is, it is no more then
is incident to man, as man: you might have had as great afflictions as any you
have endured, even as you are men: for as men, you are subject to as great
afflictions as any that have befallen you: but says he, God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. That is, God will so
moderate the affliction, and prevent you with grace and strength, which shall
enable you to bear the temptation, And with the temptation will make a way to
escape. He will give an issue together with the temptation, 1 Cor. 10. 13. now
if the Saints have no affliction, but such as they might have had, as they were
men: and that affliction measured out to their strength, or their strength
raised according to the temptation; and in that they are not only kept under,
but delivered out of affliction, there is nothing in the afflictions of the
Saints, if well considered, that may dishearten or discourage us in the ways of
Christ.

The Church says no less her self in the Text, Look not upon me with
astonishment and fear, Because I am blackish, or somewhat black: as if she
had said, my blackness is not so much as to trouble or amaze you: I am not
altogether black, though my outside be something blackish, yet my inside is
fair and beautiful. Hence Observe,

That there is no evil sufficient in the afflictions or deformities of the
Saints, as to be a stumbling block unto us, either to cause us to disdain
them, or to fear the like afflictions. The evil of sin is the greatest evil,
and the evil of affliction is but a fruit of the evil of sin. Now the Apostle
does triumph both over sin and affliction, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. O death where is
thy Sting? O grave or hell where is thy Victory? Now he tells us the evil of
both these is taken away, The Sting of death is sin. That is, sin is death's
weapon, by which it is armed against us; but when sin is taken away, the sting
of death is also taken away: But how comes sin to be so prevalent and strong?
The Apostle tells us, The strength of sin is the Law: That is, sin is not
imputed to us but by the Law, and our flesh does always oppose that which is
commanded. But (says he) thanks be to God which gives us the Victory through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Now mark what the Apostles Exhortation is upon this,
Therefore my Brethren be ye steadfast and unmovable; let nothing cause you to
forsake the way of Christ, it is not affliction or sin shall hinder your
acceptance with him. Forasmuch (says he) as you know, your labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

The afflictions of the Saints are but something like afflictions, they are not
afflictions themselves, they are but the outsides of afflictions, the sting and
evil of them is taken away. Thus the Apostle affirms in 2 Cor. 4, 8, 9, 10.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: That is, though we are beset
round with trouble, yet God gives an issue, and makes a way for escape: We are
perplexed, but not in despair, we are never without hope. Persecuted but not
forsaken, the Angel of Gods presence going always before us: cast down, but
not destroyed: though affliction may keep us under, yet it shall never consume
us. And again the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. As deceivers and yet
true, as unknown, and yet well known, as dying, and behold we live, as
chastened, and not killed, as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor, yet
making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing althings. They were not
so indeed, but reputed to be such: or they were like unto those that were so
indeed, but they had but the shadow of afflictions. Hence it is, says the
Apostle, that we faint not: though the outward man perish, yet the inward man
is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4. 16. We have new supplies of strength every
day: And says the Apostle, our afflictions are but light, but our glory we
expect is weighty: our afflictions are but momentary, but our glory is
eternal, that our glory far exceeds our afflictions.

Because the Sun has looked upon me.
The Church gives a reason of her blackness, to the end the Daughters of
Jerusalem might not be offended with her: and that because she was under the
scorching Sun of Persecution.

Hence Observe,

The afflictions of the Saints are many times causes of offense to weak
Christians. As for such as are meant in the Parable of the stony ground, they
are wholly offended, when the Sun of Persecution arises on them, mat. 13. 21.
but not only such, but the Saints themselves, by reason of weakness are much
cast down: All of you (says Christ to his Disciples) shall be offended
because of me this night: for it is written (says he) I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad, Mat. 26. 31.
By reason of their weakness their hearts failed them, and they left Christ.
But this proocedeth from the distemper of their spirits, and from the flesh:
for they ought rather to do, as the Apostle says of himself and the rest of
the Saints, Being justified by faith, we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation brings experience, experience patience, patience hope, and hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shead abroad in our hearts, Romans
5. 3. So that we being justified and freed from sin,, and from the evil of
affliction, it should make afflictions and tribulation so welcome unto us, as
that we should not be troubled or moved at them.

Secondly Observe,

That it is incident to the most godly in the World, to have tribulation and
affliction in the flesh. So says the Apostle, All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And therefore it is, that
Christ asked his Disciples, whither they could be Baptized with his Baptis^ne
and withal tells them that they should drink of his Cup, and be baptized with
his baptism, Mat. 20. 22, 23. That is, you shall endure afflictions like to
mine, and such as shall be my entertainment in the World, the same shall be
yours: And again he says, if we will be his Disciples, we must take up our
cross, and follow him, Mat. 16. 24. there are many that seeing the cross,
will step out of the way, but says Christ, my Disciples must not go out of my
way to shun the cross, but rather take it up and follow me, who have endured
the cross and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2. for the afflictions which we
suffer in this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed, Romans
8. 18. Satan desired to sift Peter as wheat, Luke 22. 31. Now wheat is one of
the purest sorts of grain, and therefore requires the most sifting: So the
Saints, and the purest of them, do many times endure the greatest siftings and
trialls.

Now although God does dispense outward things alike to all, and causes the
sun to shine, and the rain to fall, upon the good and upon the bad: yet he
has different ends, and works several effects by thus his dealing. He
afflicts the Saints to purge and purify them, but he afflicts the wicked to
destroy them. As Gold is purged by the fire, so by fire is stubble consumed: as
Wheat is cleansed by sifting, so chafe is scattered abroad: as the Sun causes
a dirty Channel to stink, so it causes the sweet flowers to give a fragrant
smell. Hence it is that Job says, When he has tried me I shall come forth
like Gold, Job 23. 10. God does chastise his people, says Augustine, that we
should not be over-greedy of these things, which in this world are August. de
civit. dei, lib. 1. cap. 9. Vt nec bona cupidius appelantur, quoe mali quoque
habere cernuntur, nec mala turpiter evitentur, quibus and boni plevumque
affi^iuntur.
common to the wicked; neither with baseness and reproach shun those evils,
which we see for the most part happen to the godly.

My mothers children were angry with me.
Such as were nearly related to her, and did profess themselves of the same
faith, and had been ^one one society with her. Hence observe,

1. The greatest enemies of the Church are such as are the nearest in relation
unto her.

Where there is the greatest sympathy, when divided, turns to the greatest
antipathy. Hereof David complains, I am become (says he) a stranger unto my
brethren, and an alien unto my mothers sons, Psalm. 69. 9. Such was the enmity
of Cain toward Abel, of Esau toward Jacob, of Absalom toward David: and as
in natural relations, so it is in civil relations, and in some sort in
spiritual relations; for they that profess themselves of the Church, are great
enemies unto them that are faithful in their own Society.

Secondly, Observe,

That the greatest pretenders to religion and holiness, prove many times the
greatest enemies to the same.

Many will pretend godliness, and yet are haters of that godliness which they
do pretend. The Prophet describes such as these in Isa. 48. 1, 2. Such (says
he) are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of
Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of
Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness, For they call themselves of
the holy City, etc. Here we have a people as formal as possible can be, they
are called by the name of Israel, they glory and rest in legal shadows; and
they did swear by God, professing to serve him, by making mention of his name:
they loved to be named by the holy City of Jerusalem, but all this was not in
righteousness; but they used all these things falsely, and to deceive: Such
were the false Prophets, and false Brethren of the Jewish Church: such were the
Scribes and Pharisees in Christa^ne: None pretended more holiness and
strictness in respect of outward forms, then the Pharisees did. Josephus
says, they used a very austere and strictkind of life, and did not adict
themselves to any delicacy, Josephus Antiq. lib. 10. cap. 2.
but diligently follow that which their reason induces them unto: they honor
their Elders, neither dare they reply, or reproach them for their admonitions.
Beside, the Scripture shows how strict they were in legal observances: I was
as touching the law (says Paul) a Pharisee: concerning zeal, persecuting the
Church, and touching the righteousness of the law blameless, Phil. 3. 5, 6.
Paul had a zeal, but not according to knowledge; and therefore none more
forward to persecute the Saints then Paul; none more greater enemies to Christ
then the Scribes and Pharisees; none more opposite to the Apostles, then the
devout Jew, one that was zealous for legal observances.

Such have been all Popsh Priests and Prelates; and such are all those, of
whatsoever form, distinction, or name they be of, that impose superstitious
orders under the Gospel: Let them pretend order, or uniformity, or whatsoever;
yet if they impose humane inventions, so as to urge and press them upon the
consciences of Saints, they are the greatest enemies of the Saints of Christ.

3. Observe, Those that are ne arest in relation to the Saints, and those that
pretend most holiness, if such prove false brethren, they afflict and hurt the
Saints most of all.

1. Such are most apt to seduce them, and draw them from the truth: so the
Apostle says, Of among your selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things,
drawing Disciples after them, Acts 20. 30.

Josephus in his Book of Antiquities, reports; that when Jerusalem was
besieged by the Romans, the Jews received more damage by their several
divisions within their City, then from the Romans without, who were their
besiegers: so a false brother does more endanger the welfare of the Saints,
then an open Enemy.

2. Such as are false brethren do not only seduce the Saints, but grievously
afflict them: they know how to strike, where it will most smart; they know the
conscience to be the most tender place; and therefore aim to oppress that
most. When any of our late Bishops had a mind to persecute the Saints, they
would make use of one that had professed Religion; and having apostatized, knew
the better how to vex the Saints; he knowing the most tender place, would lay
the burden upon it.

Julian the Apostate did the Saints more hurt, then any persecutor beside: so
none was more fit to betray Christ, then Judas.

4. Observe, That falls brethren persecute with the greatest heat a^^
indignation.

Of this the Church complains here; my mothers sons were angry with me:
they were incensed with indignation, and with burning heat and choler; with
wrath and envy they were set against her. So the Apostle says, he persecuted
the Church with zeal, Phil. 3. 6. Zeal carries in it a spirit of indignation.
Acts 5. 17. The high Priest rose up (against the Apostles) with indignation. It
is in the Original, they rose up, being filled (...)
with zeal, because zeal carries a spirit of indignation along with it. And
the Text says, Paul breathed out threatening and slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, Act. 9. 1. Which phrase of breathing out threatenings
imports a vehement heat, of a heart enraged, and burning with indignation.

They made me, etc.
They did assign or constitute me, they did impose or put upon me the keeping
of the Vineyards. Hence observe,

1. That those false pretenders to Religion (before spoken of) do use coaction
and compulsion to constrain others to observe their ways.

This is like Nebuchadnezar, who commanded all to worship the golden image, or
else they were to be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3
6. The Apostle was not of this mind, when he says, we have not dominion over
your faith, but are helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. By this the Apostle
shows, that what he was to deliver unto them in the preaching of the Gospel,
he did it not as a Lord over them, but as a servant sent by Jesus Christ to
administer joy and comfort unto them: and withal shows, that the Gospel is a
Gospel of peace and of joy in the holy Ghost: Now if the Apostles might not
Lord it over the conscience, much less those, that be inferior to the
Apostles, and of much less infallibility then they. And again he says, Ye are
bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. 1 Cor. 7. 23. That is, do
not enslave your consciences to men, in matters divine, because he that
redeemed you is King alone over your spirits. Now these false members being
enraged against the Church, they forced her to serve their fancies and
pleasures. But the Gospel knows no such way of coaction or compulsion, it uses
no violence to compel men; but it shall prosper, because of truth, meekness,
and righteousness, Psalm 45. 4.

The keeper of the Vineyards.
It is a hard task they impose upon the Church; nothing is more laborious then
the husbandry of a Vinyard.

Hence observe,

That the pressures and burdens which false brethren impose upon the Saints,
are very heavy and grievous to be borne.

Thus it is said of the Scribes and Pharisees, that they laid heavy burdens,
and grievous to be born, and laid them upon men's shoulders, Matthew. 23. 4. That
is, they press the strict observance of the law upon the people: but (says
Christ) they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. They will
not touch them, much less will they go about to lay them on their own
shoulders: false brethren are for the most part exactors of those things, which
they themselves most of all neglect. And so in Acts 15. 10. They put a yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples, which they nor their fathers were able to
bear: and this the Apostle calls a tempting of God; because if they were
circumcised according to the law, then they were bound to keep the whole law,
as the Apostle testifies in Gal. 5. 3. Now seeing Christ bare the law for his
people, it would be a tempting of God, for they to go about to undertake it,
it being a burden too heavy for them to bear. Again, the Apostle speaking of
false brethren, says; As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh (who
pretend to be very zealous and forward) they (says he) constrain you to be
circumcised: only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.
This they did to avoid trouble and persecution, and that thereby they might
obtain the favor of the people, in that they were conformable to the customs
of the law; but neither they themselves who are circumcised (says the Apostle)
keep the law: so that notwithstanding they press carnal rites and ceremonies
upon you: it is not out of any affection or zeal they have to the law, but to
get the praise of men, and favor of the people: so says the Apostle; they
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh, Gal. 6. 12,
13. And the Apostle does reason it out with the Colossians, thus: Wherefore
(says he) if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, Col. 2. 20. That is,
why are ye burdened or enthralled with the (...), signiheth as well
enthralling of our selves to doctrirall errors, as ceremonial rites. Neither
is it meant of the Jewish t^es, but the traditions of men, as appears by ver.
22, 23.
opinions, and with the traditions of men? you do but mancipate and enslave
your consciences, in subjecting of them to humane ordinances. This oppression
of the Saints is a spirituall-bondage, typified by the Egyptian bondage.
Pharaoh's Taskmasters were cruel oppressors of the Jews: so are all
spiritual Taskmasters, which would compel the Saints to work in their
Vinyards, and to bear the heat of their indignation and wrarh, which is more
then the heat and burden of the day.

2. In that the Church is called the Lords vineyard, and the false Church, and
false members are in opposition to the Church of Christ, called the vinyards.

Observe hence: The Church is the Lords husbandry.

Thus Christ comparing his Church to a vineyard, calls himself the vine, his
members the branches, and his Father the Husbandman. John 15. 1, 2. I am the
vine, and my Father is the husbandman, every branch in me, etc. By this kind of
phrase we are taught, that the Saints are by the Father spiritually ingraffed
into Christ, as the branch in the Vine: and by virtue of their implantation in
him, they become the trees of righteousness, bearing fruit of holiness, by
the working of his Spirit in their hearts: So the Lord speaks in Jer. 2. 21. I
planted thee a noble vine. The Lord had taken in the Nation of the Jews from
the world, to make it his Vinyard, on whom he had bestowed many
vinyard-mercies, as we may see in Isa. 5. 1, 2. My beloved (Church of the
Jews) has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill (or, in the horn of the son
of oil) that is, in (...) Sepivit, maceria munivit.
a rich and fat soil: and he fenced it, or, made a wall about it: He by his
power defended them against their enemies, round about; and he gathered out the
stones thereof. As if the Lord had said, I removed those enemies of yours out
of the Land, or I gave you means to cast out them that offend, out of the
congregation: And planted it with the choicest vine; or Sorek, which is a kind
of the best and most laudable vine of all: And I built a tower, and also made a
wine press in it. A tower for watchmen to look to the Vineyard, to wit, the
Prophets, and good Kings: and a Wine Press to press the grapes of the
Vineyard, by which is signified to us the Temple, where they offered up their
Sacrifices, the blood of the Sacrifice being powered out, was like the pressing
out of the juice of the grape. Thus the Lord fitly resembles his Church to a
vineyard: God has like an excellent Husbandman enclosed a vineyard, and set
Christ as the vine, in whom all the Saints are implanted; and by the shining
sun of love, and the Howing forth of his Spirit as water, he makes his pleasant
vinyard a fruitful garden, where he delights to see his own pleasant fruits.

But my own Vineyard I have not kept.
That vineyard which was given me in trust, and committed to my charge. Hence
observe,

That G O D does entrust his Church with heavenly treasures.

The Church calls it her vineyard, because the Lord did entrust her with those
heavenly mysteries which she was made to partake of. Christ says to his
Disciples, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven,
but not unto others, Matthew. 13. 11. And says God, Shall I hide from Abraham my
counsel? The Lord does entrust his people with precious jewels, and with rich
treasures, of knowledge and revelation of his grace and spirit: he puts a
large stock into their hands, he lends them talents, he makes them his Stewards
of all his Laws and Ordinances: He has given his law unto Jacob, he has not
dealt so with every nation, Ps. 147. 20. God had not entrusted any other Nation
with his Laws and Ordinances, as he did them.

2. Note; That it is a great evil to be negligent in those things wherewith
God has betrusted us.

This is that of which the Church complains of here, and one of the reasons
which she gives of her blackness, my own vinyard I have not kept. This is
verified in him that received a talent, and hid it in the earth, Mat. 25. 18.
28. To be negligent in the Lords trust, is to be like the unjust Steward,
spoken of in Luke 16. 1. which wasted his Masters goods; but his Lord called
him to an account. Now when we shall leave Christ to follow Antichrist, when we
leave God for man, when we leave Divine Ordinances for humane Traditions: when
we leave the substance of Christ's will, and follow the empty husk of man's
fancy: we greatly dishonor God and Christ, we give away Christ's honor to
man; we set man in Christ's Throne, now there is no greater evil then to lift
up the Creature, and depresse the Creator.

Thirdly, in that the Church brings her neglect as a cause of her blackness,
Observe.

That the evil of sin is seen in the evil effects that it brings forth. Here
we see the evil of neglecting of Gods trust, in the Churches blackness. We
may see the evil of unfruitfullnesse in Isa. 5. 2. and 5. 6. I looked for
Grapes (says God) and it brought forth wild Grapes: But what is the effect? I
will tell you (says God) what I will do with my Vineyard, I will take away
the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and I will break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down: and I will lay it wast, and it shall not
be pruned nor dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns: and I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. Here is nothing but
blackness and deformity, and we have a complaint of the Church to this
purpose, in Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is righteous, but I have sinned against his
Commandment: but what is the effect? Behold, is there any sorrow like to my
sorrow? my Virgins and my young men are gone into captivity. And in Verse. 17.
Zion spreads her hands, and there is none to comfort her. We might read their
sin in their punishment; and so God may justly let his people be oppressed by
their oppressors, when they first yield unto them in matters of worship and
service.

Lastly, in that the false Church and false members are called a Vineyard, as
well as the true Church and members,

Observe,

That those Enemies and false Brethren that afflict the Church, they will come
as near the Saints in outward form and worship, as possible they can. And in
this respect the false Church is called a Vineyard, as well as the true. And so
they that serve Baal, will offer Sacrifice, as well as they that serve the
Lord. Balaam went to meet the Lord as well as the trne Prophets; Antichrist
sits in the Temple of the Lord, as well as Christ sits upon his Throne. Hence
it is, the Lord reprehended the people of Israel, that they and their Kings had
set their thresholds by Gods thresholds, and their Posts by Gods Posts, Ezekiel.
43. 8. As God has his thresholds, so man has his thresholds also: and man
sets his thresholds by Gods thresholds, that he may take hold of a form,
something like the ways of God, that so he may shelter himself under it,
whilst he does mischief to the Saints.

VERSE. 7, 8.
Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy
slocks to rest at Noone: for why should I be as one that turns aside by the
flocks of thy Companions.

If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.


THe Church having removed those Objections which might have been made against
her, she now returns unto her beloved, and makes a third request unto him,
for direction in respect of the dispensations of Christ's Kingdom here on
Earth, that so she may no longer be led out of the way by false Brethren, but
may be directed in the way of his worship; and that she may be under Christ's
government only, and enjoy his Ordinances, be filled more with divine
knowledge, and have more power to resist temptations, and the like.

In these two Verses we have,

First, the Churches request unto Christ her beloved. Verse. 7.

Secondly, Christ's answer unto the request of the Church. Verse. 8.

In Verse. 7. we have,

First, the Churches request unto Christ, Tell me, etc.

Secondly a reason of her request, For why should I be as one that turns
aside, etc.

In the Churches request observe,

First, the amiable and sweet form of words she uses, O thou whom my soul
loves.

Secondly, the matter it self of her request, and this is delivered in two
things.

First, her desire to know of Christ the place of his feeding, Tell me where
thou feedest.

Secondly to know the place of lying down and rest in the heat of the day,
even when the Sun was come to the Meridionall point. Where thou make thy
flocks to rest at Noone.

Secondly, we have the reason of the Churches request, and that is by way of
interrogation, for the more patheticall expressing.

First, of the worthiness of her Beloved.

Secondly, of her sincere affection toward him, accounting it an un reasonable
thing to depart from him. For (says she) why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy Companions.

Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) etc.
Tell me.) or show, declare unto me, the word signifies to declare a thing
before hand, so it is used in Psalm. 38. 18. (...) Coraminde biphil. (...)
Nunciavit, indicavit.
I will declare mine iniquity: David declares before hand, that he will
declare his iniquity. And in Zech. 9. 12. Even to day (says the Lord) do I
declare that I will render double unto thee. That is, I do before declare what
I will do for thee. Also the word signifies to show or (...) Anteceffor,
antistes, dux praesul, princeps.
declare very plainly with words and gestures, and with signs of the body, to
declare with certainty and most directly. And lastly, it signifies to show by
example, or going before: as a Captain or Conductor does declare his mind unto
his Soldiers, by going before them, and so showing of them what they should
do. So the sum of the Churches request, is thus much, Tell me, O thou great
Shepherd, where thou feedest thy flock, for I am ignorant of the place where,
and the time when thou feedest; direct me, go before me to the place of
feeding, and repast.

Hence Observe,

First, That it is no easy thing to find out the way of Christ. The place is
not always easy to be found where Christ walks, for says Christ, Many will
falsely say, lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, Mark. 12. 21. Sometimes
the Church is driven into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 14. Sometimes Christ hides
his face, as in Cant. 5. 5. now by reason of all those sad occurences of the
Church, in respect of Persecution, Temptation, Darkness, and sometimes the
Sun of righteousness withdrawing his light, the Church is far to seek in the
things of Christ.

Secondly Observe,

The Church being ignorant her self of Christ's ways, does dilligently and
earnestly seek unto him for direction. Thus we are commanded, Seek the Lord
and his strength, seek his face continually, Psalm. 105. 4. The Saints are
described to be such as seek after God. This is the Generation of those that
seek him, Psalm. 24. 6. And let all those that seek thee rejoice, Psalm. 40.
16. Wicked men are described to be such as seek not after God, Psalm. 52. 2.
and Psalm. 14. 2. And thus Moses tells the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Unto
the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes, to put
his name there, even unto his Habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall
thou come. They were to seek the very place that God had chosen, and come
thither.

O thou whom my soul loves.
Here we have the amiable, lovely, piercing form of the Churches request,
wherein she expresses the Character or Print of her souls affection toward
her Beloved. The Hebrew word Ahab, signifies a vehement and ardent (...)
Amavit, dilexit. Gramatici, notant verbam ahab, d^ligendi, esse ardens and
vehemens, and significare aliquid tenerum and affectione plenum, ut sit is
diligens justitiam, qui in ea sibi placet and acquiescit eam exquirit and
persequitur Rivetus in Ps 45. 7.
love, so as to pursue and seek after the thing beloved: So it is used in
Psalm. 45. 7. Thou love righteousness: that is, Christ did earnestly pursue
and follow after righteousness, and he did, as it were acquiesce, or rest well
pleased in righteousness, he did take great delight in it.

My soul.
The soul is put for all the faculties of nature, and for the uniting of all
the affections, whereby they go forth most strongly. Like unto this is the
longing of the soul, Genesis 38. 8. It is called the knitting of the soul, I
Sam. 18. 1. The delighting of the soul, Isa. 42. 1. And the waiting of the
soul, Psalm. 33. 20. And the rejoicing of the soul, Psalm. 35. 9. So that this
periphrasis is of greater force then if she had said, O my beloved. So that by
it is meant her unfeigned and ardent love, with a longing desire to enjoy
fellowship with Christ. The soul is here by a Synechdoche put for all the
Affections of the soul.

Hence Observe,

First, A Christians love to Christ, it is a collective or united love.
Christians love Christ with their whole soul and strength; with all their
affections, and all their affections together. As all the Rivers run into the
Sea, and meet in one Ocean: so all a Christians affections (however divided and
branched out to other things) meet in Christ, as in a Fountain. Christ is as
the Center and resting place of all the affections of the Saints.

Secondly Observe,

The love of the Saints toward Christ is a hot vehement, and an ardent love
The Saints burn in their love toward Christ; all their affections are (as it
were) set on fire, by the flames of his love, kindling and enflaming of their
hearts. When we bring our hearts to the fire of Christ's love, they must needs
wax hot within us. United love must needs be very strong, like unto the
Sunbeams when they are contracted and meet in a Burningglasse, are of great
force and strength; such are the affections of the Saints unto Christ.

Where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flocks to rest at Noone.
Here we have the substance or matter of the Churches Petition: she desires to
know the place,

1. Of feeding. 2. Of lying down.
Feedest) In the Original it is, Where or how thou will feed: That is, where
thou art wont continually to feed thy flock. The word Flock being omitted in
the Original, is supplied, as is usual in Scripture; as in Genesis 29. 7. Water
ye the Sheep, and go and feed: that is, feed the slock.

The word (Feed) comprehends all the duties of Pastor or Shepherd; as
feeding, guiding, governing, and defending (...) Pascere pascere se, pasci,
depascere. St Metaphorice, pavit homines, rexit, gubernavit docuit,
the flock. Hence it is Kings are said to feed their people, in which respect
they have the title of Shepherds, as in Psalm. 78. 71, 72. David was taken by
the Lord from the Sheep folds, from following the Ews great with young, and he
brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. Hence it is,
Christ is called the Shepherd (...) lingua sancta pro^rie pastoiu^ est, aut
ovium, ponitur enim transitive, and intransitivepro subjectorum ratione, in
transitive, cum ovibus attribuitur, aut hominibus seipsos pascentibus. Rivertus
in Psa. 23. 1.
of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25.

Therefore it is that the Church desires to be so guided and directed by
Christ to the place of his feeding, that she might be fed of his heavenly
food, and be refreshed by drinking the water of life: she desires to know
where, or how Christ feeds alone by himself; yea, where he feeds his; flock
(opposed to the flocks of his companions) she desires not only Christ's
feeding and guiding her, but also to feed with his Lambs, with his Sheep, that
so she and they may be mutually refreshed one of another.

Thou make to rest.
The word (rest) in the Original signifies to lie (...) Cubare, recubare,
succumbere. Fortasse inde verbum. Eng. Rabbet: because it is a creature much
given to couch or lie down. Est accumbere vel accubare, sicuti solent armenta,
dum ruminant post past um Muscul. in Psalm. 104. 22.
down, because we take our rest by lying down. To desire repast, and to
desire rest after repast, it is agreeable to nature, as first to eat, and so to
rest after meat: so that after the heavenly Banquet of spiritual dainties,
she may ruminate and chew the cud, as it were, by spiritual meditation, such
Beasts as under the Law did chew the cud and part the hoof were accounted
clean, Lev. 11. 3. So the clean soul does ruminate upon the spiritual food
by which Christ refreshes it. But the rest here, is meant chiefly of that rest
and safety she desires of Christ, in respect of persecution and trouble, as
appears by the next words.

At Noone.
This is meant of the heat of the day, the midday is called Zeharajim, and it
is put in the duall number, because it divides the day into two equal parts,
and contains a part of the forenoon, and a part of the afternoon; the medium
or middle part is a distance or (...) Lucere Vnde. (...) Merid es. quia diem in
duas parts aequas dividit and geminae'ucis, ansemeridanae and vespertinoe,
medium est interstitium and terminus. Buxt. in Lex.
space between both, when the Sun is come to the Meridionall point; by which
means it sends forth a most scorching and burning heat. Now this must needs
be meant of the scorching and burning heat of Persecution, tribulation, and
affliction, which is figured out by the heat of the Sun, in Mat. 13. 6. 21.
This being an unseparable companion with the Gospel, as appears, Tim. 3. 12.
She desires to rest under the shadow of Christ's wings, where she may enjoy
rest and peace, when the Sun of persecution is at the highest, even at
noonday, when the scorching beams thereof, do cast the greatest heat and
extremity.

Now from the matter of the Churches request unto Christ, Observe,

First, That Christ is a most complete spiritual Shepherd, feeding, guiding,
governing, and directing his flock. The Scripture does often ascribe the title
of Shepherd unto God, and unto Christ, as in Psalm. 80. 2. Hear O Shepherd of
Israel. And Christ is the Shepherd of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. And says he, I
am the good Shepherd, John 10. 11. Christ has all the properties of a good
Shepherd, and they are such as these.

First, a good Shepherd is careful to feed his Flock: so is Christ as
careful, and much more then any earthly Shepherd can be to feed his people.
The Lord is my Shepherd or feeder, says David, and what is the effect? Why
says he, I shall not want: he will feed me plentifully and abundantly, so that
I shall want nothing. So in Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his Flock like a
Shepherd. Christ does excellently feed his flock.

First, Plentifully, with abundance, with the greatest variety of all good
things: thus the Lord did promise to feed his people in Ezekiel. 34. 14. I will
feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high Mountains of Israel shall their
fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they
feed upon the Mountains of Israel. There is a redundancy and an overflowing
good in Christ, so that when he gives any good thing he gives abundance of it;
if he give life, peace, joy, or any refreshment, he does not give a scanty
measure of it: but he fills the empty soul with good things: Christ is both
able and willing to do for us, far more abundantly then we are able to ask or
think, Ephesians. 3. 20.

Secondly, Christ does not only feed his people with plenty, but also with the
choicest food, he does extract the very quintiscence of all good things for
them. He makes a feast of fat things, and the marrow of fatness, and Wine on
the Lees well refined, Isa. 25. 6. For such preserves the strength, and does
most of all refresh nature: So Christ's comforts are the best comforts, his joy
the best joy, his peace the best peace, his Spirit the best Spirit: Christ does
not feed his people with course diet, but with the best and the most daintiest
of heavenly food.

Thirdly, Christ feeds his people with the most suitable food; he feeds them
according to their appetites and desires, according to their necessity or need:
he has strong meat for strong men, and milk for Babes, he answers all our
wants, and that with the greatest sufficiency; he is made unto us Wisdom in
respect of our folly, righteousness and sanctification in respect of our guilt
and pollution, Redemption in respect of our misery and bondage. Hence it is,
David says, I shall not want: so long as the Lord is my feeder, I shall not
want any thing that is good or suitable for me. As earthly appetites are
satisfied with earthly food, so are the heavenly appetites of the Saints filled
by Christ of all heavenly food: for of the like nature as the appetite is, must
the food be; earthly food will satisfy a natural appetite, and heavenly food
will satisfy the heavenly appetite, and no other: now Christ feeds the
heavenly appetites of his Saints with that heavenly Mannah, that bread which
came down from heaven; and gives them to drink of the waters of his heavenly
Sanctuary, which flows from him, as from the Spring of living waters, feeding
and refreshing their spiritual desires and longings, with heavenly food.

Fourthly, Christ feeds his people even to saturation (as I may say) he gives
them a full meal of his spiritual dainties; according to this is the charge in
Song 5. 1. Drink abundantly, O my friends: the more they drink, the more
welcome they are; they may be drunken and never the worse, neither any way
distempered by it, but the more they drink, the more earnest are their desires
after it, as being satisfied and yet never satisfied, they are satisfied in the
enjoyment of it, but they think they never have enough of it. Hence it is that
Christ says in John 4. 13. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shll give him
shall never thirst more. That is, he shall never thirst with an inordinate
thirst after sin, or earthly things, his lustful desires are quenched with
this spiritual water: but (says Christ) The water that I shall give him, shll
be in him a well of water, springing up unto overlasting life. That is, this
spiritual water shall not only refresh and comfort the weary soul whereby it
is satisfied in the presence of Christ, but it shall as the water of the
Sanctury, abound and increase more and more; it shall increase with all the
increasings of God. Thus Christ as an everlasting Spring of living waters, will
continually issue out his streams into the hearts of his people, whereby they
shall be fed unto the full. Thus Christ as a good Shepherd feeds his flock.

Secondly, Christ (as a good Shepherd) does rest and refresh his people: hence
the Church does here desire to know the place of his rest, of his lying down,
that so he might not only feed her, but (as it were) refresh her after meat.
Christ does refresh, and make his people to rest by his presence, by his
Spirit, by his promise, and by his power and strength, making them sit securely
under his protection. The Prophet David brings in this refreshing as a thing
which the Lord added to his feeding, Psalm. 23. 5. Thou have prepared my Table,
etc. And thou have anointed my head with Oil. That is, thou do not only
feed me abundantly in supplying me with all good things, but thou anointest my
head with Oil, or thou make fat my head with Oil, towit, by pouring it
forth upon me: wherein the Prophet alludeth (...) Saginatus, pinguefactus fuit
to those hot countries, because it was a use among them to welcome and cheer
their guests with pouring out precious sweet Oils upon their heads. And this is
that which the Lord promises to his flock, besides the feeding of them, I will
cause them to lie down, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 34. 15. That is, I will refresh
and comfort them, I will give them rest and peace, whereby their hearts shall
be comforted.

Again, Christ will not only cause his people to lie down and rest, and to
take their repast, but he will cause them to lie down at noou-day: namely, in
the greatest heat of persecution. Hence David concludes, Though I walk in the
valley of the shadow of death. That is, though I walk in the midst of
temptations and troubles, where is nothing but fears and misery, Yet (says he)
I will fear none ill, But why? Because thou with thy thy Rod and Staff do
comfort me. That is, if I go out of the way, and so fall into great danger,
thou will sweetly bring me home and secure me. it is otherwise with the
hireling. For (says Christ) when he sees the Wolf coming, he leaves the
sheep and flees, and the Wolf catches them, and scatters them, John 10.
12. Hirelings and false Shepherds will not stand by their flocks in imminent
dangers: but Christ will save and protect his flock in the midst of fears and
dangers: and by the rod of his power he will govern, rule, and protect his
people in the greatest extremities.

Thirdly, Christ does lead, guide, and direct his flock, so says David, he like
a good Shepherd leads me beside the still waters, or the waters of rest,
Psalm. 23. 2. That is, he does comfortably guide me to those calm waters, such
as give rest and refreshing: and in Verse. 3. He returns my soul that was
going astray and wandering from him. And he leads me in the paths of
righteousness: he sweetly guides me in holy paths, but not for any merit in
me, but for his name sake. And in Psalm. 80. 2. Thou leadest Joseph like a
flock. And the Lord is said to lead his people in the Wilderness like a
flock, by the hand of Moses and of Aaron, Psalm. 77. 20. That is, thou did
lead them through the red Sea, and through the Wilderness by the hand of
Moses, even as a Nurse leads her Child by the hand, because of it is
weakness; (...) In Hiph. dux^ deduxit, commode and leniter: Buxt. in Lex.
so thou leadst them with all tenderness and lenity, with all meekness and
gentleness. And so the word Lead in the forenamed place, Psalm. 23. 2.
signifies an easy soft, gentle leading, with sustaining of infirmity, as when
a Mother leads her Child. Thus Jacob is said to drive his Cattle softly least
they should over-heat them, Genesis 33. 14. Hence we may note

Fourthly, that Christ does tenderly bear and compassionate his flock, and he
does restore and make up that which is broken or defective. So the Lord says
in Ezekiel. 34. 14. I will bind up that which is broken, and strengthen that which
is sick. And so in Isa. 4. 10. He will not only feed his flock like a
Shepherd, but he will gather the Lambs with his arms, and carry them in his
bosom. He has a tender care over them, that those weak Christians, who as
Lambs are unable to walk by themselves, he will carry them (as it were) in his
bosom, and in his arms, that none of them might be lost or perish. And in
that he says he will carry them in his bosom; he alludeth to the custom of
the High Priest under the Law, who was to bear the names of the Children of
Israel in his Pectorall or Breast Plate upon his heart, which was to figure out
unto us, the tender love and pity that Christ bears unto his people, comforting
the comfortless, restoring such as are out of joint, so that all is mercy,
love and sweetness that comes from Christ. Full to this purpose is that in
Isa. 63. 9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare
them, and carried them all the days of old. The place may be read
interrogatively, thus, Was he not afflicted? etc. That is, did he not take to
heart the wrongs done to his people in Egypt? Was not Christ, the Angel of
Gods presence their Savior and Conductour? Did he not bear them, as a tender
Mother does her young Child? Did he not carry them as the Eagle does her brood,
with such care that she her self may not hurt them, and at such a height as
others may not reach them to do them any wrong?

Now in that the Church does introduce Christ as a Shepherd, and her self as
Sheep, it holds forth unto us these Observations.

First, That those Sheep of Christ are apt to go astray and wander from
Christ. As Moses, David, Solomon, Peter: all these had their straglings from
Christ: So far as we are led by the flesh we are as Sheep going astray.

Secondly, The Saints desire therefore to be directed by Christ, and are
willing to submit themselves to be ordered by him. It is from Christ the Saints
desire to have direction.

First, for that sweet and heavenly food of their souls; for the Saints know
there is but one true Shepherd, and therefore they seek after him alone,
expecting no wholesome food unless it come from Christ.

Secondly, the Saints do not only desire the food of Christ, rejecting all
the doctrines of men; but also to be refreshed by him in the hottest
Persecutions. It was the manner of the Shepherds in those hot Countries to
drive their Sheep in the heat of the day unto a place of shadow where they
might lie down and refresh themselves in the time of the parching heat. So the
sum of the Churches desire is, that Christ would refresh and comfort her in the
hottest calamities and persecutions, even when Tyrants do rage, and when all
the World is in a flame; that then she might lie down and refresh her self
under his shadow and protection. Hence it is that the Saints rejoice in
tribulations and afflictions, Romans 5. 3. And when they have trouble in the
world they have peace in Christ, John 16. 33. So that the Church is not
solicitous how to shun or avoid trouble, but only she desires to fly unto
Christ, that he may refresh her, and cause her to lie down in peace, even in
the midst of extreme dangers.

Thirdly, the Saints desire not only to be fed and to be refreshed by Christ;
but also to rest and feed with the flock of Christ. So the Church here desires
to know where Christ feeds, and where he makes his flock to rest. Saints
desire to feed with Saints, and to lie down with Saints, and to have communion
only with Saints, they desire that the precious may be separated from the
vile, Jer. 5. 19. and that their feeding may not be with ravenous Wolves and
Tigers, but with the harmless, innocent, and peaceable Lambs of Christ.

Fourthly, the Saints desire such food and such refreshing as is heavenly and
divine; they look above the creature, and above themselves, and depend upon
Christ for heavenly food, and for spiritual rest, knowing that nothing can
secure them but a divine protection: all the shelters and poops that the
creature can afford us are but like Jonah's Gowrd, or some such poor shadow,
that cannot shelter us in a fiery storm of persecution. We may obtain rest
and quietness under Christ's shadow in evil times, but not under any shaddows
of our own.

Now follows the Churches Reason.

Why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy Companions.
We have her reason by way of interrogation, for the more patheticall
expressing,

First, Of her Beloveds deserts and worthiness, as if she should have said;
Why should I turn aside from such a Heavenly and gracious Shepherd, and
turn to Wolves and Tigers? Why should I leave heavenly doctrines for humane
traditions: Why should I leave him by whom I have been refreshed and comforted,
to follow strangers whom I know not? Why should I turn aside to honor the
creature and neglect the Creator?

Secondly, she expresses her own sincerity of affection toward Christ, and
so the frame of her words must run thus: why should I wander through ignorance
and blindness from thee whom I love and delight to honor, and to follow after
those that are enemies to thee? Why should I honor them by dishonouring of
thee? Why should I serve whom I would not, and neglect thee whom I desire to
serve. And thus the Church expresses how worthy Christ is to be honored, and
how sincere her affections are toward him, desiring to honor him only.

Why should I be like, etc.
It may be well Translated, Why should I be as one that pitcheth or spreads
his Tent by the flocks of thy Companions. (...) Obvelavit, operuit induit,
abscondit, glomeravit, cur enim essem quasi extendens tentorium apud greges
sociorum tuarum Jumus.
For the word that is here Translated (Turn aside) signifies to put on
Garments or to cover ones self, as it were: so they covered their Tents, and
they were as a hiding place unto them that used to so journe in them. Junius
^enders it thus, For why should I be as spreading of Tents with the flocks of
thy Companions. That is, I would not be conversant with them that are false
Shepherds, or take up my abode with those who presume to join themselves with
Christ in rule and authority.

Or this covering may be with a Veil, and so the Quasi operta sive vellata.
Buxt. in Lex.
Greeks use to render the signification of the Hebrew word; and so it may
signify, either,

First, her sorrow and grief, as Mourners use to cover their faces, Ezekiel. 24.
17. where it is said, Forbear to cry, and bind the tire of thine head upon
thee. That is, show no sign of mourning at all; towit, by going bareheaded,
Levit. 10. 6. or by going barefooted, 2 Samuel 15. 30. or covering of the face,
Levit. 13. 45. for all these were signs of sorrow and mourning: or,

Thirdly, her unchastity and dishonesty, as Thamar was taken for an Harlot,
because she had covered her self, Genesis 38. 14. 5. having put off her widows
Garments, or those Garments which were signs of gravity, or mourning; she
veiled her self, as one that would cover her lightness and unchastity. Now
according to this Interpretation the sense may run thus, Why should I be as one
that covers her self, as one that is light and unchaste, and that follows
strangers, as Harlots use to do? why should I be as one that shamefully
leaves her Husband, to follow after Strangers? or why should I be as one that
must cover my self with shaddows and pretenses, pretending to be for Christ,
and yet turn aside to his Companions.

Or lastly, why should I be as one that turns aside, that is, into false
ways, to be seduced by false Teachers, and such as would lead me out of the
way; of such the Apostle speaks off in Gal. 1. 5, 6. I marvel (says he) that
you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ,
unto another Gospel, which (says he) is not another, but there are some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. Here the Apostle uses
the present Tense, (...), to intimate thus much, that they were not already
moved, but were in danger of being removed by false Apostles and Teachers. So
according to this Interpretation the sense runs thus, why should be as one that
is seduced and misled by false Shepherds and Pastors, seeing thou art my pastor
or Shepherd, what a dishonor is it that I should be lead and directed by them
that will lead ^e out of the right way, and make me follow their flocks?

By the flocks of thy Companions.
The word Gueder here Translated Flock, signifies (...) Ordinavit, disposuit,
instruxit, scil. aciem militarem. Bux in Lex. Vnde verbum. (...) Grex, because
the flock or herd is ordered and disposd of by the Shepherd or Herdier (...)
Consociatus, conjunctus fuit. Vnde nomen (...) consors, sodalis.
both an Herd and a Flock, Joel 1. 18. And the word signifies to order,
dispose, or instruct Soldiers in military discipline, to put them orderly in
Rank and File, in Battle array, or in an orderly posture, so the word is used
in 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. so that it is meant here of those flocks or companions that
are led and ordered by false Teachers that are instructed of them, even as
Soldiers are taught by their Commanders.

Of thy companions.
The word Translated Companions signifies to consociate or to conjoyne ones
self to another. So the false Prophets, Apostles, and Teachers did conjoine
themselves to Christ, they put themselves as it were, in equal authority with
him, to command, to govern, and to direct their flocks, even as Christ did
his. The Hebrew word Chober of Chabar, is Translated a Charmer, Deuteronomy. 18. 11.
because by sorcery they associate themselves with the Devil, and have
communion with familiar spirits. So here, false Teachers they associate
themselves with Christ, they will be, as it were copartners with Christ, in
matter of government and authority: if Christ command the Conscience, so will
they, if Christ (...) Laws, they will do the same; and so they are not unfitly
called Christ's companions, not because of their dignity, but of usurpation.

Now if we take this turning aside, for her covering or hiding of her self.

Hence Observe,

First, That to leave Christ, and to follow Strangers in matters of divine
worship is shameful Idolatry. Therefore it is that the Lord says, he will
make the wickedness of the whoredoms of Judah to be discovered, Ezekiel. 23. 29.
That is, as if the Lord had said, I will unveile and discover thy nakedness,
to wit, thy shameful forsaking of God to serve Idols.

Secondly, if we take the covering for pitching of her Tent, with seducers and
false sheep: Observe, That true Christians have great care and circumspection
that they join not themselves unto false Teachers. The faithful desire to
worship God aright, in spirit and in truth, John 4. and therefore dare not
join themselves with Idolaters or false Christ's; such as seek to betray their
souls.

Thirdly, if we take her turning aside into danger: Observe, That it is a very
dangerous thing to follow false Teachers, or to join with false Congregations.
They are such as come under covering; and false pretects, and Christ tells us,
that they are rending wolves in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7. 15. they have an
external habit of simplicity and humility, but inwardly they tear and
devour.

Fourthly, from the title given to those false Teachers: Observe, That false
Teachers are Usurpers of Christ's prerogative. Hence they are called his
companions and fellows, because they share with Christ in his Government and
Lordship, not by his appointment, but by usurpation: neither are they
companions indeed, for they are not called so in respect of any dignity or
honor that belongs unto them, but rather to give us to take notice, what proud
insolent usurpers they be, who thus join themselves with Christ in point of
Government, for Christ alone is Caput ecclesiae, the chief head and Shepherd
of his Church, the only Teacher sent from God: he reserves the headship and
royalty over his people as peculiar to himself; he alone carries the
Government upon his own shoulders, Isa. 9. 6. he alone has sovereign power
and authority in ruling over his Church: he alone has the supremacy of
Government, and is Commander in chief, as I may say: he alone can command,
forbid, permit, reward, punish, do justice, and repress all disorder, which
authority he has as Mediator received from his Father: he is the great Monarch
and King over his Church; and there is not any that has such sovereignty and
rule besides him. Now hence it is, that all such as set up a devised worship
and doctrine of their own, that undertake to make and establish Laws to rule
and sway the Conscience: such I say, advance themselves, even to be Christ's
companions, such a companion is the Pope, for one of the chiefest of all
Babylon's Merchandise are the souls of men, Rev. 18. 13. by her inventions she
has made Merchandise of the souls, and domineered over, the Consciences of
men. Episcopacy in all places has trodden in the same path, and so all men
whatsoever, that shall frame a Religion of their own, and impose it on the
Consciences of men, they do join themselves in equal authority with Christ.
There are many usurpations in this kind, but never tolerated by Christ:
neither is there any in the world that can command the Conscience in matters
merely divine besides him.

Verse. 8,
If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flocks, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.
In these words we have Christ's answer unto his Spouse, wherein is contained
his ready offering himself to embrace, comfort, and instruct her. In the
former part of the Chapter we had the Bride seeking after her wel-Beloved: now
in the second part we shall hear what answer Christ makes unto her.

In Christ's answer observe.

First, his supposition, If thou know not, or his assumption, for as much as, or
seeing thou know not.

Secondly, his compellation, or sweet form and manner of Speech, O thou
fairest among women.

Thirdly, his direction unto her, and that is two fold, Christ directs her,

First, where she should walk, Go thy way forth by the footsteps of thy flock.

Secondly, where she should feed, And feed thy Kids besides the Shepherds
Tents.

If thou know not, etc.
These words are Translated by way of supposition, (...) Si, siquidum siquando,
and interrogative, ^trum, An?
as appears by the particle (If) in the entrance of them, but I think they are
not simply conditional, for then Christ would seem to reprove or check his
Spouse for her ignorance, which I can scarce think to be so. But rather I take
the words to be an assumption of Christ, taking the Church at her word, for in
the former Verse she pleaded ignorance, and here in this Verse Christ does
grant the truth of what she said: and so the words may run thus, Forasmuch as,
or seeing that thou know not. As in Numb. 22. 20. If the men be come to call
Quandoquidem ignoras. So Junius renders it.
thee: that is, forasmuch as they are come. The words are morefull in the
Original, then they are in the Translation; and they run thus, Forasmuch as
thou know not for thy self, or to thy self. Wherein there is a pleonasme,
or fulness of Speech, the more aptly to signify the ignorance which the
Church had in her self, upon acknowledgment whereof, Christ does direct her
what to do in the case.

Or the words may imply the form of a Reason, Because Particula im (si) pro
simplici conditionalis hic accipi non debet, sed pro particula rationali, ut
aliquando apud latinos si pro quia accipitur. Rivet. in Genesis 28, 20.
thou know not, etc. Christ does undertake to direct her, because she is
ignorant, and cannot find out the true way of worship without his help.

Know not.
The word in the Original signifies properly the knowledge of the mind, and of
the understanding; so (...) Scivit, novit cognovit, animadvertit, intellexit,
sensit, probavit, approbavit, curavit, amcvit, benesecit. Proprie mentis est
and intellectus. Buxt. in Lex.
it is taken in 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. And the men that had under standing of the
times. That is, the men that can readily observe the times, that can understand
when matters of moment were fittest to be done. And it is applied to the^ that
are Skillfull in all wisdom, Dan. 1. 4. That is, of a ready understanding:
also the word notes to know with respect and affection, as in Exodus 1. 8.
There arose a King that knew not Joseph. That is, that did not respect or love
Joseph. And in Hos. 2. 8. For she did not know that he gave her Corn and
Wine, etc. That is, she did not regard or take notice, that I gave her Corn,
etc.

Again, it notes regard or care, as in Prove. 12. 10. A righteous man regards
the life of his Beast. That is, he does regard and care for the Beast that does
him service. Lastly, the word imports a knowledge with approbation and good
liking: so it is used in Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous.
That is, he so knows it, as to approve and like of it: So then, the words
import thus much, as if Christ should answer thus: Forasmuch as, or because
thou know not to thy self, being altogether unable to direct thy self: and
whereas thou know^st not with a good understanding, nor with that affection
care and approbation as thou ought to have done, therefore get thee forth,
etc.

Hence Observe,

First, That the faithful Servants and Saints of Christ walk in much
blindness and ignorance. Hence it was the Church called unto Messiah for
direction in the former Verse, and here Christ does assume and take up her
words by way of grant, Seeing thou know st not, etc. She had been drawn aside
by false Prophets, and by false Brethren, who had challenged to themselves the
name of true Prophets, and true Churches, by which means the Saints and true
Sheep of Christ, had been very much darkened in their knowledge and
understanding, that they did not know which way to turn themselves, being
always in danger of joining themselves to false Churches, namely, to the Hocks
of Christ's companiens. This ignorance of the Saints is demonstrated, in that
the Lord appointed a peculiar Sacrifice for the ignorance of the Priest's, of
the Magisirates, and of the People; Levit. 4. The word Shegagah, there used for
Ignorance, (...) Erravit, aberravit, o berravit.
signifies to go astray, or to err out of the right way, through ignorance or
forgetfullnesse, unadvisedly to be drawn away and deceived. Hence it is that
the Apostle calls such sins in Heb. 9. 7. (...) Errours-doneof-ignorance:
(...) Erratum.
so the word signifies any sin which proceeds from ignorance and error. So
that these errors or ignorances were such sins as did flow from the error of
the mind, or of the affections, when the mind, judgment, will, and affections
are led aside, through negligence or want of care, not thinking of the
heyniousnesse of the sin before it be committed: such was the Churches sin
here, she wandered from Christ through the ignorance of her understanding, or
unawars and unwittingly, before she was aware, she was drawn aside from her
Beloved to turn aside with his companions. Hence the Apostle says, such are
to be restored with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. Observe the Apostles
expression, If any be overtaken with a fault. The word in the Original
signifies to be taken before he is (...), Occupo, prae occupo.
aware as one that is surprised or set upon on a sudden. Besides this, we have
the Apostles testimony, wherein he tells us, that we see but through a glass
darkely, or in a riddle, 1 Cor. 13. 12. That is, the greatest sight we have of
Christ here, at the best it is but a dark, and aenigmaticall sight; and says
he, we know but in part: our knowledge is imperfect as well as our sight. Thus
Agur complains of himself, saying, Surely I am more brutish then any man,
and have not the understanding of a man; I never learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy, Prove. 30. 2, 3. That is, I am more foolish then an
ordinary man, I have not obtained to any great knowledge of holy and heavenly
things. And the Apostle labors to take men from all self-confidence in this
respect. And if any man (says he) thinks that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet, as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. That is, he that has an opinion
that his knowledge is perfect, knows nothing at all. But Christ does not
upbraid the Church with her ignorance, but is ready to embrace and instruct
her. Hence Observe,

Secondly, That Christ takes not advantage from the sins, or from the ignorance
of his people to utbraia them, but does rather help them against their
infirmities. The Church had many deformities and failings, she had observed
men's traditions, and neglected those things which Christ had given her in
trust, she was ignorant of the ways of Christ and yet Christ deals very
tenderly and sweetly with her, Seeing thou know not, etc. Christ is so far
from casting off his people for weakness, that he delights in helping and
sustaining his people under their infirmities. When I am weak then I am
strong, says the Apostle. And Christ himself has commanded us, that we
receive him that is weak in the faith, and not to cast him off from our
fellowship and society; surely then he will not cast off his people for their
weakness and ignorance, neither will he any way neglect them for some
failings. Christ does bear with the infirmities of his people, in relation to
his Office of Priesthood; so says the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 2. 17, 18.
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God,
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: for in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that be tempted. That is,
Christ was like to his Brethren in all things, sin excepted, to the end he
might be a faithful High Priest; never to neglect his people at any time, but
in all their flips and oversights to show them mercy: and hence it is, he has
taken our weaknesses upon him, as a pledge, to testify and assure us, that he
will both pity and help us. Now in that the Apostle says, He being tempted, is
able to succor them that are tempted: He does not mean, that Christ received
any ability by his temptatations; but he would assure us thereby, that Christ
is willing to succor us under temptation, as one that has undergone
temptations himself.

Now the truth of this appears yet more in the following words, wherein we have
a sweet compellation, or ravishing form of words.

O thou fairest among women.
Christ does here commend the excellent and surpassing beauty of his Church,
not withstanding all her deformities and blackness spoken of before. She was
deformed and black in the eyes of the world, and also in her own apprehension,
but fair and beautiful in Christ's eye; and she was not only of some mean
or ordinary beauty, but the fairest among women.

The Hebrew Japhet, fair, signifies fair or beautiful, not only in respect
of color and complexion, but also in a just symmetry or proportion of parts:
for both fairness of complexion, and proportion of members, makes the most
complete beauty. The word does also (...) Pulchrum esse, venustus, decorus fuit.
import such a beauty as attracteth love, and draws approbation or good
liking. Sometimes the word is used in a double form, to increase the
signification of it; and then it signifies the most transcendent and very
excellent beauty: so it is used concerning Christ, (...) Psa. 45. 3.
Thou art fairer then the Children of men, Psalm. 45. 2. That is, thou art much
fairer then all the Sons of Adam: this fairness is not only meant of the
body, but of the mind and of the understanding: such beauty is called, The
beauty of wisdom, Ezekiel. 28. 7. This beauty consists in wisdom and holiness,
it is the beauty of all spiritual graces of the Saints, as faith, love,
patience, humility, etc. it is not an outward beauty of the body, but an inward
beauty of the soul.

The word imports (as I hinted before) such beauty as attracteth love and
approbation; for the same word is attributed sometime to Cattle, Genes. 41. 2.
Sometime to Trees, Jer. 11. 16. And to all the works of Gods hands, Eccles. 2.
11. So that it is applied to such things as does draw and win the affections of
man: yet Christ adds to this beauty by saying,

The fairest among women.
The most comely beauty is usually set forth by women, as strength and valor
is set forth by men; and when he says, Fair among women, he means more
fair then other women, or, the fairest of womankind: thus Mary the Mother of
Christ is called, Blessed among women, Luke 1. 28. That is, more blessed then
other women: so the Lion is said to be strong among Beasts, Prove. 30. 30. That
is, the strongest among Beasts. Now the meaning must needs be thus, that the
Church is far more excelling in all spiritual beauty, beyond all earthly and
temporal beauty, however she seems black in her own eyes (as all the
Saints are privy to their own deformities) and however others do contemn her,
esteeming her to be void of beauty, yet unto Christ she seems to be most
fair. There are many in the world that have a show of external beauty, and
are adorned with many external Ornaments: but their beauty in the eyes of
Messiah, is nothing comparable to the beauty of the Saints, who indeed are base
and contemptible to carnal view; but yet by their spiritual beauty and
Ornaments they excel them all; Hence it is Christ calls the Church the
fairest among women.

Now from this insinuating sweet compellation of Christ to his Church, Observe,

First, That Christ's does win the affections of his Saints, by sweet
insinuations. He does (as it were) insinuate and get into our affections before
we are aware. Hence it is, that he uses such sweet terms of relation to his
people; as Love, Dove, undefiled, Spouse, Brethren, Children, Friends, Sons,
and the like: all to insinuate and get within their hearts, and that for these
ends.

First, to assure them of his good will, love, delight, and acceptance. I call
you no more Servants, but friends, (says he) Because that I receive from the
Father, I declare it unto you, John 15. 15. That is, you are my Friends, and I
deal with you as a friend, and by this you may take notice of my love and
friendship toward you, because I reveal unto you the mind of my Father.

Secondly, to cause them to take notice of his grace and love: The Saints of
Christ are often complaining of blackness and deformity, but seldom
acknowledgeing their beauty and fairness: they can often see their meannesse
but not their riches, their weakness, but not their strength; their sins, but
not their graces. The Church here had called her self black, but Christ
calls her fair: she was something blackish in her own eyes, but exceeding
fair in Christ's eyes. Now that the Church might apprehend her own beauty, as
well as her deformity, and that she might see her self fair in Christ, as
well as black in her self; he uses this insinuating sweet form of Speech, O
thou fairest among women.

Secondly Observe, That the Church is exceeding fair and beautiful in
Christ's eyes. The false Church is compared to a woman, Revel. 17. But an
Harlot, drunken and beastly: and the several parts thereof to Aholah, and
Aholibah, Ezekiel. 23. whose Breasts are pressed, and the Teats of whose Virginity
are bruised: but the Spouse of Christ is beautiful, for whom he gave himself,
That he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of water, through the
word: that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and blameless, Ephesians.
5. 25, 26, 27. And says the Apostle, The blood of Christ cleanses us from all
sin, 1 John 1. 7. And to this purpose see how the Church is compared in Revel.
12. 1. to a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon
her head a Crown of Twelve Stars. The Church is resembled to a woman for her
beauty, clothed with the Sun, the brightest and most glorious Creature in the
World, darting forth it is glorious beams into all parts: such is the glory of
her life and conversation, such is the beauty of all her graces, such is the
brightness of her heavenly doctrines, and as for Jewish rites and ceremonies,
and all worldly glory, which are mutable, like the Moon, she does tread them
under her feet, as things far beneath her: and for her Ornament or Crown, she
has Twelve Stars upon her head; and as for Crowns of gold, and all worldly
dignity, she treads as dung under her feet: having the Stars, towit, those
several lights which Christ has set up in her, as so many precious stones set
in the circumference of a Crown, for so many lights or glorious dispensations
given her of Christ, to be glorious Ornaments about her head. Well then might
Christ say unto her, Behold thou art fair my love, Behold thou art fair. And
O thou fairest among women.

But now we must take notice of two things.

First, that this beauty is not natural, neither do we receive it from
nature: for so we are showed by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 16. by nature we are
unclean and loathsome, our Nativity was of the Land of Canaan, of Amorites,
and Hittites, Verse. 3. And we were cast out, as being loathed in the day of our
birth, Verse. 5. polluted in our blood, Verse. 6. but,

Secondly, it is a supernatural beauty: Hence the Apostle exhorts us, to put
on the new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. He uses the metaphor of putting on, to show unto
us, that those graces of the new man are as so many venust and beautiful
Ornaments to our souls. Thus the Lord put excellent Ornaments upon his Church,
Ezekiel. 16. 7. and covered her nakedness, Verse. 8. washed away her blood, Verse.
9. decked and adorned her with Chains and Jewels, etc. and so she came to be
exceeding beautiful in his eyes, Verse. 10. 13. The Church shines in the bright
beams of Christ's excellency, her beauty is a derivative beauty, which flows on
her from the Fountain of beauty; as the members shine in the glory of their
head, and as the wife shines in the glory of her Husband; so Christians shine
in the glory of Christ.

Thirdly Observe, That the Saints are most fair in Christ's eyes, when they
are most deformed in their own. The Church as being privy to her own
deformities, calls her self black, Verse. 5. but here Christ calls her
fair, yea, the fairest among women: and in Verse. 15. he magnifieth her beauty.
The Church is never more fair then when she judges her self to be most
deformed; never more happy then when she accounts her self most miserable;
never more holy then when she reckons her self most of all polluted: she is
never richer then when she sees her self to be poorest of all: for the sense
of misery, poverty, deformity and weakness is the Primum mobile, the first
mover, as it were, that causes us to look for help from another; when we are
sensible of evil, then we run to the fountain of good: so says the Apostle,
When I am weak then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. That is, when I am weak in my
self, I am strong in Christ, and when I am weak in the flesh I am strong in
the Spirit. And in Verse. 9. His strength is made perfect in weakness. The
Apostle does not mean in thus speaking, that the strength or virtue of God can
be either increased or diminished; but then it is said to be perfect, when it
manifests it self to the full, and demonstrateth that nothing can overcome
or conquer it: the greater the infirmities of the Saints are, and the greater
their assaults and temptations are, the greater and stronger does that power
and virtue appear to be, that supporteth them under such infirmities and
temptations: So that when our weakness does most appear, the perfection of
Gods strength is most seen. Thus it is Christ does not esteem of his people
more at one time then at another, but only the difference is in the making out
of his love to us; and there is never so much of the beauty of Christ seen in
us, as then, when we see our selves most deformed.

Now from this sweet compellation, and most amiable form of Speech, O thou
fairest among women, Christ proceeds to give his Church direction.

First, in the way where she should go. Secondly, where she should seed.
Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids beside the
Shepherds Tents.

Go thy way forth, etc.
In the Original it is, Go forth for thee, or, Go forth (...)
for thy self. So the Lord said unto Abraham, Go thou forth of thy Country,
or, Go forth for thy self, Genes. 12. 1. That is, up and be going, and I will
go along with thee. And thus we are commanded to go forth and meet the
Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 6.

The Hebrew word Go forth is applied to diverse things: as going from place to
place, Genes. 8. 7. to going (...) Exivit, prodiit, processit, egressus fuit.
forth of the womb, Genes. 15. 4. to the rising of the Sun, Genes. 19. to the
going forth of the word of God, Genes. 24. 50. It signifies an hasty going
forth, as in Exodus 12. 31. Arise and get you forth, says God to Moses and
Aaron; (...) Go out, the Hebr. word has in it aprick extraordinary, which
increases the signification, as an hasty going forth.
that is, make have and stay not, but go speedily and serve the Lord. And in
Genes. 19. 14. Lot advised his Sons to arise and be gone, that is, hastily,
with all speed. So that we may take the meaning of the words thus: Go forth,
abide no longer under false Shepherds, sit not still under their Government,
bestir and put forth thy self to know what I have given thee in trust, forsake
false Teachers and Brethren, and follow the steps of those that have been
faithful unto me. Christ wills his Church to come away from those flocks of
his Companions, and not to walk in their ways: for though they pretend to
worship Christ, yet they observe nothing but men's Traditions.

By the footsteps of the flock.
If thou will find me where I do feed my sheep, that thou may join with
them, and not follow strangers, Go forth by the footsteps of the flock. The
word here Translated footsteps signifies the end of a thing, as in Psa. 119.
33. I will keep thy Commandments unto the end. Hence (...) Calx calcaneus,
extremum pedis, inde lateest, finis, extrema pars. Kimchi addit, merces, quia
extremum laboris est. Buxt. in Lex. Vox. (...) proprie significat calcem,
calcaneum, plan tam pedis seu vestigium, and quia planta ul timaest pars
corporis humani, ideo per metaphor. significat omne illud, quod finem vel
operis alicujus, vel studij perinde atque fructus quidam consequitur, sive id
studio quaeratur, sive non quaeritur imo etiam si operans nolit ut sequatur.
Moller, in Psalm. 119, 33. Sic (...) finis apud graecos pro fructu and
emolumento quod ex re quacunque capitur usurpatur. Legh in Crit, Sac.
also it signifies reward; because reward is given at the end, Psalm. 19. 12. In
keeping of thy Commandments there is great reward. Reward is the end of
obedience, but properly it signifies the heel or footstole, and sometimes the
footsteps or print of the feet, because the footstole or heel is the utmost
part of the body. Now by footsteps are meant the print of the feet, or the way
trodden out before us; so we are told by the Apostle, That because Christ has
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps who
spoke no sin, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22. So that to follow Christ's steps, is to
take him for an example; it is a borrowed kind of Speech taken from Painters,
that draw out the form or fashion of a thing: or a Schoolmaster that writes a
copy for an example to his Scholar: Such a form and pattern has Christ
given to his Servants, wherein they are to follow his footsteps.

Of the Flock.
Some read it, Of the flocks; and indeed the word Tson lacks the Plural
number in form of declension, but not in sense and signification: so that it
may be taken either Singularly or Plurally, according as the words will bear.
But I rather here take it in the singular number, because Christ does oppose
his own, only flock, unto the flocks of his companions: as he himself being
that only great Shepherd, is opposed to his companions, and generally Christ
has one flock and one fold, John 10. 16. And he calls his Church his flock,
and the flock of his pasture, Ezekiel. 34. 22, 23. And in Song 6. 9. My Dove
(says Christ) and my undefiled is but one.

Now the flock being the Saints whom we must follow, their footsteps are their
faith and obedience; for so we are taught to walk in the footsteps of the
faith of our father Abraham, Romans 4. 12. And so of all the godly that went
before us: the Author to the Hebrews says, That by faith the Elders obtained a
good report, Heb. 11. 2. That is, they left a good report or example behind
them. And in Chap. 12. 1. he calls them a cloud of Witnesses: by which
expression the Apostle seems to allude to that cloud whereby the Children of
Israel were led and directed withal, Exodus 13. 21. So that as that cloud
guided the Children of Israel from Egypt to Canaan, so this cloud of
witnesses, towit, that multitude of the faithful that went before us, may
direct us, as by their example, in the holy and spiritual ways of Jesus
Christ. And thus the Apostle expostulates with the Corinthians, and says,
Walked we not in the same Spirit, walked we not in the same steps: towit, that
Titus did, 2 Cor. 12. 18. So that to walk in the same steps with the Saints,
is to walk in the same faith, in the same Spirit, in the same obedience with
them.

Now by a little recapitulation you may take the words yet a little more fully
thus: Go forth for thy self, or get thee forth: That is, from thy blackness
and superstition, get thee out of thy self, out of the world, out of thy
former course, put thy self forward, set not up thy rest here, but up and be
doing; be not always to seek, but, go forth by the footsteps of the flock,
in the footsteps of former Christians, Abraham, Moses, and David, and of all
the Prophets and Apostles. Now as for these latter times, they are Apostate
times wherein Antichrist has darkened the whole Earth: but look to
evangelicall times, and walk as John, Peter, and Paul, and the rest of the
holy men of God did in their times. Christ proceeds to a second direction.

And feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.
Kids) are young Goats, which sometime signify the wicked, as being opposed to
the sheep of Christ, Matthew. 25. 32. yet notwithstanding Kids were offered up in
Sacrifice in the Law, and so prefigured Christians offered up as a living
Sacrifice to God: And Christ himself was figured out by Goats and Kids, Heb.
9. 12. And the people of Israel were to offer a Lamb without blemish, from the
Sheep or from the Goats, Exodus 12. 5. So that the flocks in Scripture did
comprehend both Sheep and Goats, for so the Hebrew word Gedi signifies: So we
may take it of any young ones of the flock. (...) Inde. (...) Haedus caprarum
and ovium. Schind, in Pentaglot.


By these Kids here we may understand them of young Christians, such as are
tender and not able to shift for themselves: these Christ would have to be
nourished and fed, not with humane doctrine, but with the sincere milk of the
word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. And thus Christ commands Peter to feed not only his
sheep, but his young and tender Lambs, John 21. 15, 16. So that Christ would
have the Church take care of young Saints, that they might not want food, but
that she might find pasture for them.

Beside the Shepherds Tents.
The word Gual Translated beside, signifies sometimes (...)
against, sometimes near, sometimes oppositively, sometimes with, and
sometimes above, which causes diverse Interpretations.

First, Beside the Tents or Tabernacles of the Shepherds. By which Shepherds
we may understand such as are called Christ's Companions, Verse. 7. And then we
must read, Above the Tents: that is, thou shall feed thy Kids with more divine
and heavenly food then those false Shepherds can give: thou shall not feed
them with humane doctrine, and with the fancies of men, bur with that food that
comes down from Heaven, with solid and everlasting food: or,

Secondly, we may understand these to be the true Shepherds of Jesus Christ,
which of old fed the flock of God, as many Scriptures restifie. Psalm. 77. 21.
Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and of Aaron.. That
is, Moses and Aaron did guide, direct, feed instruct, and teach thy people, as
a Shepherd does his flock. And the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews To remember
them that had the rule over them: or as it is in the Original, As are the
guides unto you; such as the Lord had (...) Heb. 13. 7.
filled by his Spirit, with understanding, were as guides and Shepherds to
weaker Christians. Now if we understand the words according to this
Interpretation, then we must read them thus, Feed thy Kids with, or near the
Shepherds Tents: that is, bring thy young and weak Christians to those that
are the Shepherds of Jesus Christ, whom the Lord has endued with spiritual
wisdom and understanding, to feed, guide, and direct them. We may take the
words in either of these senses, for they both hold forth one and the same
thing, towit, that the Lambs of Christ, the members of his Church, should not
be fed with husks and Hogs-meat, of the inventions of man's brain, and with the
superstistitious ceremonies of false Churches, but with the pure and wholesome
food of Christ's word and doctrine, and with Ordinances and Laws of the King of
Sion; they should be fed, guided, preserved, and governed by Christ alone. The
words being thus explained, let us gather some Observations from them.

Go forth, etc.
First, in that Christ directs his Church to go forth from her blackness,
ignorance, and superstition. Hence Observe,

That Christians are not to sit down under, but to arise and depart from sin,
ignorance, and superstition. First, they are to go out of former evils of
blackness and ignorance unto purity and saving knowledge: Thus did Paul at his
Conversion, turn from persecuting the Church of Christ, and fell to preach
Christ. And thus the Apostle exhorts the whole Church, To lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make strait paths for their feet,
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed,
Heb. 12. 12, 13. That is, they ought not to yield and give over because of the
sharpness of affliction, but lift up their hands as men ready to fight, and
their feet as men ready to run, and make straight paths for their feet, Lest
that which is lame be turned out of the way. That is, least by yiedling to the
temptation, they that are weak seek bypath, for avoiding the danger thereof,
whereas they should by strengthening their hands, quit themselves, and walk in
a straight and even path. And we are exhorted to abhor that which is evil,
and cleave to that which is good, Romans 12. 9. We must depart from sin and
blackness, and cleave to that which is good and comely.

Secondly, Christians must go forth from one degree of grace to another; they
must not rest in their first beginnings of grace, of wisdom, and of knowledge,
but proceed by making an addition thereunto. And so Israel went from strength
to strength, Psalm. 84. That is, increasing their strength daily more and more:
like to this says the Apostle, we are changed into the image of God, from
glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. That is, from grace to grace, from one degree of
perfection unto another, until the image of God be perfectly restored in us,
by the Spirit of the Lord. And Gods justice is revealed from faith to faith,
Romans 1. 17. to the increasing of faith more and more. Thus Solomon tells us,
that the path of the just shines more and more unto a perfect day, Prove. 4.
18. His light shall increase until it come to perfection. Hence it is that the
Apostle prays, that the faith of the Thessalonians might be perfect, 1 Thessalonians.
3. 10. The word in the Original here Translated perfect, signifies to make
even, (...) The word signifies to make even or to set that which is out of
joint or dillocuted, and so make it sound and perfect.
because an even number is a perfect number, and so consequently signifies
perfection also: the Apostle desires they may be more and more confirmed in
their faith, until they come to perfection.

Thirdly, Christians are not only to go forth from that which is evil unto
that which is good, and from the smaller degrees of good to greater perfections
of it: but also from all kind of superstition and idolatry, unto pure worship
and sanctity. Christians must not content themselves to sit down in Babylon,
or in Egypt; but they must depart out from thence as the Children of Israel
did, and to worship the Lord in Canaan. Antichrist is called mystical Babylon,
Revel. 18. 2. from whence the Lord calls his people, verse. 4. And he is called
Egypt and Sodom, Revel. 11. 8. he is called Sodom for uncleanness and
wickedness, as we may see in Genesis 19. 5. and Egypt for oppressing the people
of the Lord, and for idolatry. And John adds, Where (says he) our Lord was
crucified: either he means he was Crucified under Rome's Dominion, by the
authority of that Empire, or else Christ was Crucified and put to death in
Egypt, in respect of his Saints in whom he suffered very much. Now the Lord
calls his people out of Egypt, and out of Sodom and Babylon. That is, from
their spiritual idolatry and superstition, and from their sin and wickedness.
Thus the Lord called his people out of Babylon, in Isa. 52. 11. Depart ye,
depart ye (says the Prophet) go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing, go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean that bear the vessels of
the Lord. This was an admonition from the Lord warning those that were
faithful, not to pollute themselves with Babylonian superstitions. And we have
the like call from the Apostle, Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, 2
Cor. 6. 17. This is meant of coming out from spiritual idolatry, as is
apparent by verse. 14. Be not unequally yoaked, says the Apostle, with
unbelievers: That is, be not yoked or enthralled with Heathenish idolatry, be
not pertakers with infidells in superstition. The Greek Scholiast, render it
thus: Draw not down the beam, or incline not in any part to the superstitions
of the heathen. For the metaphor is taken from Beasts, that draw both in one
yoke, and the one less then the other, draws down the burden upon the
other, which is unequal. Thus it is for the faithful to join with
unbelievers in matter of divine worship and service, it is an unequal thing,
and therefore the Lord would have us take no such yoke upon us. The Saints
ought therefore to go forth from all superstitious orders whatsoever, with all
speed and have, even as Lot departed out of Sodom, and as the Israelites
departed out of Egypt; and with all zeal and earnestness of Spirit, even as
Gods people came out of Babylon with their faces toward Zion. We must not be
partakers of Babylons sins, unless we be made also partakers of her plagues,
Rev. 18. 4.

By the foote-steps of the Flock.
Go forth by the footsteps of the faithful in former ages, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, etc.

Hence observe,

That the holy paths and ways of the faithful in former ages, are as so many
holy examples, left for the direction of their Successors which shall live in
after ages. The faithful are said to be such as walk in the steps of the faith
of their father Abraham, Romans 4. 12. All the godly (as I hinted before) of
former ages, are called a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. That is, as the cloud
of fire led and guided the people of Israel in the Wilderness, so the former
examples of holiness in the Saints, are as guides and directions to us in the
ways of Christ. To this direction the Apostle exhorts the Saints, Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. He does also give them a
limitation; for says he, be ye imitators of me, but how? not in evil, but as
I imitate and follow Christ: neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor the most
holiest Saints upon earth are to be imitated by us, but as they imitate Christ,
and so they are leading examples (...) imitator.
unto us. The Greek word used by the Apostle, signifies to imitate in gesture
and action, so that they were to shape and fashion themselves to him, as he
did unto Christ. And again the Apostle says in Heb. 13. 7. Remember ye the
guides, who have spoken unto you the word of God, whose faith imitate ye,
considering the end of their conversation. The Apostle would have them imitate
those that are godly in their faith, but in nothing else: So we should be
imitators of the Flock of Christ, according to the Apostle in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
Ye Brethren become imitators of the Churches of God. And again says the
Apostle, We desire, etc. that ye be not sloathfull, but imitators of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 11, 12. So many
examples as we have in Scripture of those holy men of God, who lived in former
ages, so many guides and leaders we must reckon our selves to have before us.

Now when we look upon the steps of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and other holy
men of God, but chiefly upon the Apostles and Ministers of the New Testament;
we look upon the Faith and Doctrine of these Worthies; we look how they
worshipped, and how they lived, as holy Writ does set out unto us; for if the
word did not testify of them, how should we know their steps: Also we see in
former t^mes, the Prophets and Apostles were Christ's Shepherds, and fed his
Flock; we should therefore look unto their Tents, and there seek for good and
wholesome pasture

But this is now a great question in the World, where we shall find the Tents
of these Shepherds, or to whom we may join our selves; for all say theirs is
the way, and how shall we know? Indeed Christ foresaw these streights of the
latter days, and has told us, that many shall come and say, Lo here is
Christ, and lo there is Christ. For there shall be (says he) false Christ's,
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if
it were possible) they would deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24. 23, 24. But what
is now to be done? see the advice and counsel of the Lord himself by the
Prophet, saying, Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the way, and see: alluding
to a passenger, who having set forward in his journey, does come to sundry
ways; and not knowing which way to take, he stands there doubting,
considering and enquiring; but he does not only say, stand in the way, but see:
that is, see and consider seriously the several courses that holy men have
taken in times past; and that upon good grounds, and due examination, having
discovered the right way, which all the people of God have walked in from time
to time, and walk in it: and what will be the fruit of this? ask for the old
way (which is the good way) and walk therein, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls: that is, you shall no more be tossed too, and fro, or be
disquieted, or be to seek for the way of God, but you shall find satisfactian
and rest to your souls, Jer. 6. 16.

But of whom shall we now enquire? for some will tell us one thing, and some
another: And the foolish will believe every thing, but the prudent will
consider his steps, Prove. 14. 1^. But unto whom then shall we go to enquire
the way of Christ; for

1. If we go to the Papists: they will not direct us to the Prophets, or to
the Apostles, and other holy men of whom the word of God bears witness: they
will not allow that the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles shall be the
Tents of these Shepherds here spoken of, and that in them only we may find
wholesome pasture: but they will send us to the steps of certain Popes,
Cardinals, Monks and Friars: they will send us to the decrees of Popes and
popish Prelates, and to their own constitutions, there is to be found wholesome
food say they. Now what a madness were it to follow such strange Doctrines,
which are contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets; and when they
can prove their Doctrine and worship by nothing but by their own authority:
such a Pope and so many Cardinals and Bishops did decree this thing, and that;
these cannot err (say they) and therefore we must believe them. Now no wise
man can follow after such wicked companions as these are.

2. If we go to ancient Fathers, they have erred, and therefore we cannot
rely upon them. We may not then enquire of Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose,
Augustine, Hierome, Bernard, etc. For all these have had their failings, and
have erred in many things: and though they saw much in respect of the ignorance
of their times, yet their light was very dim: their light in comparison to that
of the Apostles, was but (as it were) the light of a candle, compared to the
light of the Sun. And as for those that are of later years, that were the
first restorers of the Gospel, since the general Apostasy; as Wickliffe,
Luther, Zwinglius, etc. These performed many great things, having received
singular gifts from God, but these had their failings and errors also.

3. We may not go to Councels and Synods, for these have, and may err
likewise: even the best Counsels may err, for so did the Council of Nice:
therefore we cannot rely on synodicall determinations; but then whether shall
we go?

I answer positively, we must go to the Scriptures, which the Apostle calls
a sure word. And the holy Scriptures can only make us wise unto salvation, it
is that which will make the man of God perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 5. 16. The Apostle
referring to the voice heard upon the mount, when Christ was transfigured in
glory, calls it a more sure word of prophecy, to the which (says he) ye will
do well to take heed, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

The Scripture of the Old Testament shined in those dark times, and it was a
perfect rule even in the days of Moses, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. The Scripture is a
perfect rule of faith, and of good manners: Christ himself giving authority to
the Old Testament, and John the Apostle does approve and give witness to the
New Testament, sealing up the divine authority thereof, Revel. 22. 18, 19. The
cause of mistake in any, is the ignorance of the Scriptures: this Christ
tells the Jews, Ye err (says he) not knowing the Scripture, Mat. 22. 29.
Hence he counsels them to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. He alludeth to
those that digg deep into the earth for those precious things that lie hidden
in the profundity thereof; for such a profound search it is, that the Apostle
does so highly commend the noble Bereans.

But now here arises another question, namely, how we shall understand the
Scriptures; for one interprets them this way, and another that way: how then
shall we come to the right understanding of them?

I answer first negatively, secondly affirmatively.

1. Negatively thus; no man can by wit, learning, or any humane art understand
the Scriptures, because they contain heavenly and divine mysteries in them. I
grant that a man by humane learning may understand the literal sense of the
Scriptures; but he understands not that spiritual hidden mystery therein
contained; he may read the Scripture, and not understand, see, and not
perceive, as Christ says, Matthew. 13. And the Apostle declares the same thing,
in 1 Cor. 1. 18. For (says he) the preaching of the Cross is to them that
perish, foolishness. That is, it seems to them a very ridiculous and empty
thing. The Apostle confirms this by a citation out of the Prophet Isa. Chap.
29. verse. 14. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent, verse. 19. That is, I will infatuate their
wisdom, and their understanding shall perish. Now then says he, where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? That is, how
are all your wise men, and great Philosophers, that spend much time in
searching out the secrets of nature, but yet are ignorant of the hidden mystery
of Christ. The divine writings of God will not stoop to the spirit of a
natural man: Hence the Apostle says, The natural man receives not the things
of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. He
shows that a man that has no farther light of understanding then that of
nature, cannot with his carnal reason reach the heavenly mysteries of the
word, which must be understood in a divine and spiritual sense. But

2. The Scriptures are a sufficient rule, when we come to make use of them,
with the inward anointings of the spirit of Christ upon our hearts. And hence
the Apostle does comfort the Saints against seducers, saying, But ye have an
unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, 1 John 2. 20. That is, you
are not in danger of being seduced or drawn aside from Christ, because the
spirit of God, that anointed Christ a Priest and King, has also anointed you
to be a spiritual Priest, Rev. 1. 6. So that ye may be able to guide and
defend your selves against false teachers: this anointing you have received
from the holy one, even from Christ, in whom is a spring of spiritual graces
to be communicated unto us, by Which means ye know all things needful to be known
to preserve you from being seduced, or led from Jesus Christ. And in verse. 27.
he says, But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and
ye need not that any man should teach you: but as the same anointing teaches
you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie. Although in particular things
we may teach and edify one another; yet none can teach the mind and the
affections to stick fast to the truth of Christ, but the Spirit, which is to
lead and guide us into all truth. Now the Spirit of Christ is the best
Interpreter of the Scripture; the same spirit that first indicted the
Scriptures, must teach us to understand them: when we have the spirit of the
Prophets and Apostles, who were penmen of the Scriptures, then, and not
before, shall we understand the Scriptures. It is the Spirit of God that must
teach us, and lead us into all truth: Hence the Apostle calls the Gospel the
Administration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. And this spirit is called the law of
the spirit, Romans 8. 2. And the spirit of adoption and freedom, verse. 15. the
spirit of discerning, for it searches all things, yea the deep things of God,
1 Cor. 2. 10. The spirit of faith, 1 Cor. 4. 13. The spirit of wisdom and
revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. Now we must bring the Spirit of the Scriptures to
understand the Scriptures, the Spirit of God to understand the word of God. For
wisdom will be justified of her children: none of the wicked shall have
understanding, but the wise shall understand, Dan. 12. 10.

And feed thy Kids above the Shepherds tent.
By Kids you heard was meant young Christians that were tender, and wanted to
be cherished.

Hence Observe,

1. That the Lord does tender and take care for young Christians. If the Lord
exhorts us not to offend our weak brethren, he will not himself offend them.
Hence it is the Lord uses such mild expressions in Scriputre, as a Father,
Mother, Nurse, and the like; As a father pittieth his child, so the Lord
pitties his people, Psalm. 103. Can a mother forget her child, etc. The Lord
pitties us, and bears with our weakness, even as a tender mother does her
child's: and he provideth for us, suitable to our weakness; milk for babes, as
well as strong meat for strong men.

Secondly Observe,

That those that are strong should strengthen and feed those that are weak.

Feed my Kids, my young and tender Christians; we must feed and instruct all
those committed to our charge. Thus Abraham taught his household, and Joshuah
served the Lord with his house, so did Cornelius: Thus we are to feed, refresh,
edify and build up one another, but especially the weak and tender Christian.

3. This feeding is enlarged from the place where they were to feed; that is,
either beside or above the Shepherds tents, both interpretations hold forth
the goodness of the pasture.

Hence observe,

That young and tender Christians must be fed with wholesome food.

Those that are weak are the most like to be turned out of the way, and
therefore should not be fed with superstitious ceremonies, but with solid
truth; their feeding should not be only moral observation, but divine
Doctrine; they are to be fed above the Tents of false Shepherds, and be
brought near the Shepherds of Jesus Christ: they must not be fed with the
husks and hog-meat of the world, but with heavenly Manna that comes down from
heaven: If those that are natural know how to give good gifts to their
children, and will not feed them with scorpions and stones in stead of wholesome
food; surely then Jesus Christ the great Shepherd of souls, would not have
his Saints fed with the hard stones of the world, or with the husks of man's
invention, but with pure and spiritual food: Christ would not have his sheep
put under the hands of Wolves to be fed, but he would have them feed above such
Shepherds Tents.

4. From the phrase Tents, observe: That our estate and condition here is of no
long continuance. The Apostle calls his abode in this world as the building
of a Tabernacle, referring to the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, which was
removed from place to place: so it is said of Christ, John 1. that he came, and
dwelt (or pitched his tent) among us, as one that was not long to continue: So
our life is but as a Shepherds tent, now pitched down, and by and by raised
up; now spread forth, and anon folded up in a bundle; now we are strong and
fair, soon after weak and deformed. Hence it is, that Job says, man comes
up like a flower, all glorious and fair, and is cut down: he flees as a
shadow, and continues not, Job 13. 2. And again in Chap. 8. 9. For we are but
of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow.
Bildad styles himself and his friend to be of yesterday, to declare the
shortness of their lives, and therefore we know nothing in comparison, as if
we had lived a long time; for our days are like a shadow, which is moveable
and unconstant, short and transitory. And the Apostle tells us, we have no
continuing City here. The life of man (from the beginning to the end) is but a
shadow, a vapor, a smoke, as a blast of wind, as passes by, and returns not
again; such an uncertainty there is of the life of man, that he never stands
at one stay, but is continually subject to changes.

VERSE. 9, 10, 11.
I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh's Chariot.

Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver.


CHrist having instructed his Church, now enters into an high commendations
of her, to the end he might comfort her against her manifold temptations: she
was possessed with blackness, verse. 5. she wanted Christ's presence, verse. 7.
The first cure Christ gives in the two first verses, declaring how beautiful
and glorious she is in his sight, even at present, and that she far exceeds
the chiefest Egyptian horses of Pharaoh, both for comely shape, and honorable
service: and also that she is gloriously adorned with the graces of his
Spirit, which are for their worth and beauty, as so many precious borders of
precious stones, or chains of pearl. The second cure is in verse. 11. wherein
Christ does further declare what good she shall afterward be possessed of,
namely, a more plentiful effusion of his Spirit should be powered out upon her,
which shall add to her former ornaments, as it were pure gold beautified and
curiously wrought with the silver specks of a new increase of holiness,
whereby she shall shine more gloriously by the Brightness of his glory.

Now all these graces and excellent gifts, which the Church is possessed of
already, and promised to receive of Christ hereafter, are set forth by a
comparison, with Chariot-horses, furnished with all complements, beseeming King
Solomon in the midst of all his royalty.

The words in the Original run thus:

To the company of horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh, I have compared thee, O
my Love.

In the words are two things considerable,

1. The sweet Epithet Christ gives unto his Church, O my Love. 2. The
comparison by which he sets her forth, namely by the horses in Pharaoh's
Chariot.
O my Love.
The word regneh, translated love, signifies a companion, a familiar, a
fellow-friend: it has it is name in Hebrew, (...) Pavit, unde. (...) Amious,
socius, proximus.
of feeding together; and so generally of society, friendship, and
neighborhood; of conversing together, and so pertaking of each others good or
evil.

This title Christ gives to his Church often in this song, in verse. 15. and
Chap. 2. 2. 10. 13. and Chap. 4. 1. 7. and 5. 2. and 6. 4. And this he does to
show, that the Church is the only object of his love. All the beams of Christ's
love meet in the Church, it is united to that, and is not scattered to their
objects.

Hence observe,

That the greatest outgoings of love and friendship from Christ, is toward his
Church.

Christ and his people feed together, walk together, and do sweetly converse
together; their hearts are knit one to another, as the hearts of Jonathan and
David; Christ cannot content himself with his happiness and glory, until he
has communicated of the same unto his Saints. The general love of Christ is
scattered and branched out to all creatures in the world; but his special, his
exceeding great and rich love is fastened only upon his Church. Christ does
declare wherein he has manifested his love unto his Disciples, saying, I have
called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you, John 15 15. That is, I have in a friendly manner revealed the
secrets of my Fathers bosom unto you, and declared unto you the mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven, which I should not have done, if you had not been my
friends. Christ's love to his people is,

1. Infinite and unmeasurable, beyond all imagination or comparison. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you, says Christ to his Disciples, John
15. 9. Now who can understand with what love the Father has loved the Son?
no more can we define and fully set out what is the love of Christ unto his
Saints. The Apostle indeed would have the Ephesians able to comprehend with all
Saints the breadth, and length, the depth, and height of the love of Christ: but
yet for all that he concludes, that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.

2. A gracious love: I will heal their backesliding, I will love them freely,
says the Lord, Hos. 14. 3. We have nothing to invite Christ to love us; but
his love is free, without the least desert at all.

3. A liberal and a bountiful love: Christ has parted with that for his
people, which was most dear unto him, the soul in his body, the blood in his
veins, and (which was more dear unto him then all the rest) the sweet and
ravishing apprehensions of his Fathers love, which was so ecclipsed in his
agonies, that he cried out with a loud voice, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? It is reported of the Pelican, that she opens her breast with
her bill, and feeds her young ones with the blood distilling from her: and
therefore (says mine Author) the Egyptians used to make that kind an
Hieroglyphick of piety and pity; and upon that consideration they spared them
at their Tables. Such, and far greater is Christ's love to his Saints; for
says he, Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends, John 15. 13. And the Apostle says, that he loved his Church, and
gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25.

4. An eternal love is Christ's toward his Church. I have loved thee with an
everlasting kindness, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 3. And again he says, with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee. Though the Saints are black
and deformed, though they have been negligent and ignorant; yet Christ does not
lessen or detract his love from them: but still he gives them this Epithet, O
my beloved, etc.

How should this warm and kindle all our affections unto him again: Christ's
love should be a lodestone attractive to draw our love unto him: there is
nothing does more conciliate and attract love, then love it self. Hence it is
the Lord says, I have drawn them with loving kindness, Jer. 31. 3. Surely if
love will not draw out our affection to Jesus Christ, nothing will. Oh what an
infinite and wonderful love is it, that majesty and love should dwell
together in the heart of Christ! Christ does much condescend in his love to us:
so that here is the greatest Majesty, and the greatest debasement that ever
was, met in Christ, and all out of love to poor souls.

I have compared thee to a company of horses in Pharaoh's Chariots.
I have compared, or, I have imagined, or thought thee to be like. The word
signifies to frame a likeness of a (...) Assimila vit, comparavit, cogitavit,
imaginatus est. In Phiel. cogitavit, putavit, intentus fuit, consideravit,
observavit, Schind. in Pentaglot.
thing in the mind, or to impute a thing to be this or that. So that though the
Church had been negligent and slow in the work of Christ, and thought she had
been unable to withstand all her temptations, yet he accounts her as one that
was strong and active, as one that was glorious and beautiful.

Hence observe,

That Christ does esteem of his servants and people, not as they are in
themselves, but as they are in himself.

Christ did not account his Church to be sloathfull and ignorant to be black
and sunburned, as before she thought of her self: but says he, thou art fair
and beautiful, thon art strong and active, I have compared thee to Pharaoh's
horses, etc. Christ does always esteem of his Church according to the better
part, not according as they have made themselves, but according to that, which
he has made them; and not only according to that he makes them to be now, but
according to what he intends to make them hereafter.

To a company of horses.
The word susah, which being the feminine of Sus, a (...) Equus, unde (...)
Equitatus; unde (...) Equitio, cum paragogico, Buxt. in lex.
horse, may in propriety signify a mare, but here it signieth a troop of
horses: there be many things in Scripture spoken of collectively, as in Exodus
15. 1. The horse and his rider, for the horses and their riders. The horse is a
warlike beast, as he is described, Job 39, 19, 20. He is terrible, neighing
like thunder, he makes a breath, which covers his neck, and shows his courage:
he is so fierce, as if he would devour and swallow down the ground under him.
And Solomon says, The horse is prepared against the day of battle, Prove. 21.
31.

We may read it, my company of horses; the Hebrew letter Iod, usually signifies
mine, although sometimes it is added in the end of a word without
signification, as in Lam. 1. 1. Now according to this reading, my horses, the
Lord does liken his people to goodly horses, thereby noting the strength and
victory which he gives them over the enemies. Thus the Prophet speaks of the
children of Israel, in respect of their victory over Pharaoh, saying, Thou
did walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of great
waters, Hab. 3. 15. Thus Christ fighting against Antichrist, is accompanied
with all the Warriors in heaven (that is, all the faithful in the Church)
following him upon white horses, Rev. 19. 14.

In the Chariots of Pharaoh.
Pharaoh was a name common to all the Kings of Egypt, See Schind. in Pentag.
and in the Egyptian tongue signifies a Prince or Ruler. Now we know the
Horses and Chariots of Egypt were in great request and estimation, not only in
Egypt, but in other Countries, as the Scripture shows, Solomon had horses
brought out of Egypt, 1 King. 10. 28. And in Ezekiel 17. 15. The King of Judah
sent his Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much
people. And the Prophet pronounces a woe against such as trusted on the horses
of Egypt, forsaking the Lord, saying. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for
help, and stay on horses, and trust in Chariots, because they are many, etc.
Isa. 31. 1.

Now by this comparison Christ sets forth the glory and renown of his Church
in respect of her victories and achievements; for he having directed his Church
to follow the footsteps of the Flock, and to feed above the tents of false
Shepherds, no question now but these false Shepherds, who before were called
Christ's companions, will persecute and afflict her: now for the comforting and
supporting of her, Christ tells her, she shall be strong and victorious, she
shall be like the horses of Egypt, ready for the battle. And thus when the
Lord threatens wars against the daughters of Sion, he says, The shepherds
with their flocks shall come unto her, they shall pitch their tents against her
round about, etc. Jer. 6. 2, 3. Now the Lord to comfort his Church against the
fury of these false shepherds, compares her to the horses in Pharaoh's
chariots; wherein he shows, that his Church should be strong, cheerful,
prompt, and ready for the war, she should be valiant and victorious. Thus
the Lord promises victory to his Church, against those false shepherds which
should arise against her, in Zach. 10. 3. he says, (by a like simile) mine
anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats; for the
Lord of hosts has visited his flock, the house of Judah, and has made them
as his goodly horse in the battle, etc. Hence they shall obtain the victory
over their enemies, and therefore he adds in verse. 5. And they shall be as
mighty men which tread down (their enemies) in the mire of the streets in the
battle, and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them, and the riders on
horses shall be confonded. By the shepherds and goats are meant the cruel
Governors, which did oppres the poor shreep: but now when God shall turn his
favorable countenance toward his people, he will cloth them with such
valor and strength, so that of Sheep they shall become great War-horses, with
which the Lord will overcome and trample down his enemies. So in that Christ
compares his Church to Pharaoh's Chariot. Horses, he does promise and declare
that they shall obtain the victory over all their enemies whatsoever.

Hence Observe,

That Christ has armed his People with spiritual armor, power, fortitude and
valor to overcome all their enemies. Antichrist shall make war with the Lamb,
but the Lamb shall overcome him, Revel. 17. 14. But mark the reason he gives
why the Lamb shall overcome: For they that are with him are called and chosen,
and faithful: These are the Army that follow Christ in Heaven, who are of high
account with God, though the World call them Heretics; yet these are called to
destroy Antichrist, and will faithfully perform it. Now though their Enemies
be strong, and the war sharp, yet the Saints are sure of victory, they shall
surely become Conquerours. Thus it is spoken of the two Witnesses in Revel. 11.
4. That if any man will hurt them, that is, if any way persecuting or
afflicting them, or attempt to hinder them in the course of their Prophecy,
Then fire should proceed out of their mouths to devour their enemies. Their
Enemies shall be destroyed because they despised their Testimony. Thus all the
Army in Heaven which follow Christ upon White Horses, Revel. 19. 14. they shall
make war with principallities and powers, and with all the rulers of darkness
of this World; they war against all the Devils in hell, and against all
spiritual wickedness, having received power and Commission from Christ, and
therefore shall overcome. The Saints are ready prepared unto this Battle,
they are pro^p^ and ready, they are full of fortitude and valor, yea and far
beyond the Horses of King Ph^raoh. The Horses of Egypt were strong and ready
for the Battle, but yet they were but flesh and not spirit, Zech. 4. 6. But
the Saints are clothed with all sorts of Spiritual weapons, yea, with the
whole armor of God, Ephel. 6. and thus all the Saints with Paul are more then
Conquerours.

Verse. 10.
Thy cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.
Christ having set forth the Churches strength and valor, now continues his
Speech, showing also, how his Church is decked with his Ordinances and graces.
The beauty of the Church is set forth,

First, in respect of her Cheeks.

Secondly, of her Neck.

First, her Cheeks were adorned with rows of Jewels and precious stones, as
the manner of the Egyptians and other Countries was.

Secondly, her neck is assimilated to Chains of gold, which was a goodly and
glorious sight.

Christ in commending the particular parts and members of his Church, speaks
of those that are most in sight, because if they be beautiful and fair, there
is not much inquiry made of the beauty and fairness of the rest.

Thy Cheeks are comely, etc.
The Hebrew Lechajaik, signifies thy cheeks, Or, thy jaws: it is sometimes
used for the cheeks or jaws of (...) Vnde. (...) Gena, maxilla.
Beasts, and of Horses, as in Isa. 30. 28. There shall be a Bridle in the jaws
of the people.

Are comely.
Comely) or desirable, gracious, beautiful; the word denotes (...) Pulchrum,
decorum, amoenum esse, convenire decens esse.
a fair and comely grace, for which a thing is to be much desired, as in Psalm.
33. 1. Praise is comely for the upright. That is, it is very desirable. And in
Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness becomes thy house. It is a gracious and decent sight to
come before thee with holiness and reverence.

With rows of Jewels.
The Hebrew word Torim, rows, coming from the (...), Jecit projecit,
ejaculatus, est, Vnde. (...) Doctrina, institutio.
Singular Tor, it signifies an ordinary distribution or disposition of things,
and has affinity with Thorah, a Law, which comes of the root Jarah, which
signifies to dart, or to cast forth, and it implies an orderly disposing of
doctrine; and in Scripture an orderly disposition is put for an explaination of
the word Law; David said, Is this the Law of man, etc. 2 Samuel 7. 19. which
another Prophet speaks in this wise, Thou have regarded me according to the
order (or disposition) of a man of high degree, O Lord, 1 Chronicles. 17. 17. So the
Law of God is an orderly disposition of his precepts, proposing of them to us
as a rule of life. The same word ^or is also used (...) Terminus, ordo,
conditio, Ratio: Item Turtur avis, voce quam edit, ste dicta
for a Turtle-Dove, which some therefore take here to be Jewels or Ornaments
that had the figures of Turtle Doves.

Thy Neck with chains of gold.
It was an Ornament of honor and dignity, especially in those Eastern
Countries, to wear Chains of gold, or of pearl or of precious stones. This
word Charuzim is not found in any other place of Scripture besides this, and is
Translated collars or chains, and it signifies a Chain of pearl or precious
stone; when many pearls are drawn together upon one thread, and made into one
chain and so put about the neck.

Now it is questionable whither this similitude of rows and chains is to be
referred to the Church, as she was compared to the Horses in Pharaoh's
Chariot, Ver. 9. or to a woman as she was a Shepherdess in Verse. 8. The
comparison will agree to both.

First, we may refer these rows and chains unto the Church, as she was
compared to the Horses of Pharaoh, taking it thus: Christ had decked and
trimmed her, even as great Princes do adorn their horse bridles, he alludeth,
no doubt, to the manner of those Eastern Princes, who used to trim their
bridles, and other kinds of furniture for the forepart of their Horses, with
sundry kinds of Ornaments, as gold, pearl, precious stones, etc. As we may see
in Judge. 8. 21. 26. The King of Midian had Ornaments of Chains of gold, and
pearl, etc. about his Camel's neck. Now by this comparison he means, that
there was no greater glory nor comeliness in these things, then was in the
outward parts and members of the Church.

Or if we retain the similitude of a woman, it is meant of eare-rings and
Jewels which adorn the face; as we have it in the Prophet, I have decked thee
with Ornaments, I put Bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on thy neck, and
I put a Jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thy ears, and a beautiful
crown upon thine head, thus wast thou decked with Gold and silver, and thou
wast exceeding beautiful, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 12, 13. 14.

Now the spiritual signification is one and the same, according to either
similitude. And to the same end must that be referred, when he says, Thy neck
with chains of gold, as may appear in the places of the Judges before
alleged. We must know also, that by the recital of the particular parts, does
recommend unto us the whole.

These rows and chains signify the Ordinances and wholesome Laws of God, which
were binding like chains, and directive to guide the Church, as his goodly
horse in the battle, Zech. 10. 3. and being managed and guided by Christ she
might overcome all her enemies. And all the Ordinances of Christ were as so
many Ornaments of Jewels, and chains of gold, to adorn the face and neck of
the Church; and also by her conformity and obedience to them, she becomes
beautiful in the eyes of Christ, and in the eyes of all his people.

Hence Observe,

That the observance of the Laws and holy rules of Christ, do adorn the
Saints as pearls and chains of gold do the outward man.

The doctrines, instructions, and counsels of Christ, received by his Church,
are as so many Ornaments unto her, even as Pearls and Jewels are Ornaments in
the Bridles of Horses. This is that we have in Prove. 20. 15. There is gold and
a multitude of rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a precious Jewel. And
again, My Son, hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of
thy Mother, for they shall be an Ornament of grace unto thine head, and chains
about thy neck, Prove. 1. 8, 9. The observance of the rules of Christ, makes men
orderly, gracious, holy, and upright, all which are comely Ornaments unto
Beleivers: patience, humility, love, self-denial, these and such like graces
are the pearls and Jewels of the Saints.

Secondly Observe,

That by the observance of Christ's Laws, the Saints are guided, protected, and
made victorious. Hence the Church is said to have her Cheeks comely with rows
of Jewels, or Ornaments upon her Bridle, wherewith Christ guides and
directs her. Thus the Lord says, that he made Judah as goodly Horses for the
Battle, Zech. 10. 3. That is, he has endowed his people with valor and
strength, so that they are as goodly War-horses, who being managed and guided
by the hand of God, should be able to overcome and trample down all their
enemies.

Thirdly Observe,

That Christ has not only endowed his people with inward strength and valor,
but also with outWard glory and beauty. In the former Verse he compared her
unto Pharaoh's Chariot Horses^, in respect of her inward strength and vigor,
so here in this Verse for her outward deckings and Ornaments, such as is the
trimming of the horses Bridles, and such like furniture of gold, pearl, and
p^etious stones. This is also demonstrated in Psalm. 45. 13, 14. where it is
said, The Kings Daughter is all glorious within. That is, she is honorable
inwardly, having the heart and inward man adorned with faith, hope, love, etc.
and being inwardly endowed with spiritual strength, she is able to withstand
her enemies. And it is added. Her clothing is of wrought gold, and she shall
be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-worke, etc. That is, her outward
clothing should be of purled works of gold, set with precious stones. This
outward adorning of the Saints was figured out by Aarons Breast plate, wherein
there was Twelve precious stones, Exodus 28. 11. And the Garments of the Priests
were holy, made of white linen; all which did shadow forth the outward
beauty, righteousness, and glory of the Saints.

Verse. 11.
We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver.
Christ having showed the present happiness of the Church, in respect of her
strength and comeliness; he now declares what should be her future
happiness; namely, a further increase of her graces, and some addition of rich
Ornaments. She is richly decked already, but her decking shall be yet more and
more: she shall have the most excellent Ornaments of gold and silver, which
wrought together do set forth each other.

In the words observe two things.

First, the maker or framer of these works, We, spoken in the Plural number.

Secondly, the work thus framed or made, which is considered in two degrees.

1. In borders of gold. 2. In studs of silver.
We will make, etc.
By the Plural number we, most do understand of the Father, Son, and
Spirit: as in Genes. 1. 26. Let us make man, which is meant of those three in
Heaven, the Father the word, and the Spirit, 1 John 5. 7. Hereupon he is called
God our maker, Job 35 10. and so the Apostle wishes, Grace and peace from the
Father, Son, and holy Spirit, Romans 5. 7. And the Apostle speaking of the
diversities of gifts, in 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. says, that the diversities of
gift are of the Spirit, and the diversities of ministries to be of the Lord,
that is of Christ; and the diversities of operations, meaning the effectual
working of the Spirit, to be of God.

Again, the effectual teaching and Revelation of the glorious Gospel is
attributed to the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, as a joint work belonging to
them all.

1. The Father reveals the Mystery of the Kingdom: thus Christ tells Peter in
Mat. 16. 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed thus unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven, And again says he in Joh. 6. 45. It is written in the
Prophets, they shall be all taught of God, every man therefore that has heard
and learned of the Father, comes unto me.

2. The Son likewise teaches the same glorious Mysteries unto men, and is
therefore called the Angel of Gods Covenant, Malach. 3. 1. And says he, No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him, John 1. 18. And therefore is said
to be a Teacher sent from God, John 3. 2. And the Lord which speaks from
Heaven, Heb. 12. 15.

3. The holy Ghost is also a revealer of these Mysteries unto men; hence the
Apostle says, The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God, 1
Cor. 2. 10, 11. And therefore it is called the Law of the Spirit of life, Romans
8. 2. The ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. the revelation of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 17. And no man can call Jesus Lord but by the Spirit, 1 Cor.
12. 1. And so for the sending of the holy Spirit, the Comforter, the Father is
said to send the holy Spirit. For I will pray the Father (says Christ) and he
shall send you another comforter, etc. And the comforter, which is the holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, etc. John 14. 16. 26. And Christ
says, that he will send the Comforter. John 15. 26. But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send you from the Father, etc. The Father sends the Spirit in
Christ's name, and Christ sends him from (or in the name of) the Father.

Lastly, the Comforter is said to come of himself, Ioh. 16. 7. Thus it was in
the creation of the world, Genesis 1. 1. God, or Elohim created the heaven and the
earth. In which place the verb bara, being of the singular number, does
signify the most simple essence of God: and the Substantive, Elohim, being of
the plural number, notes out unto us, the Father, Son, and Spirit. So all
the works of creation, redemption, calling, glorification, are jointly, and
also variously and promiscuously attributed to the Father, Son, and Spirit. So
here, we will make, etc. The Father, Son, and Spirit do jointly work in the
adorning of the soul. Hence observe,

First, That works of grace are very glorious works.

The excellency of the worker sets forth the excellency of the work: God made
all things very good at the first: And as for man, let us (says God) make him
in our own image (which phrase in our image, signifies the unity of the
essence of God) now this image was very glorious, and is called the glory of
God, Romans 1.

Now all the works of God are glorious: The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy-worke, Psalm. 19. 1. But much more glorious
is the work of grace, or the new creation made upon the soul, which is the
renewing of it, according to the image of God, Col. 3. 10. And a changing of
the soul into the same image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. This image is a glorious image,
and it is a glorious work to frame it upon the soul. This work is so glorious,
that it commends the workman and framer thereof; and the worker of this grace
is so glorious, that his worth magnifies the works that he does.

Secondly, observe, That all our graces, both in the beginnings and encreasings
of them, are from God. Christ is called the beginner and finisher of our faith,
Heb. 12. 2. He is the Alpha, and Omega, the first contriver, and the last
finisher of all our work: he that has begun a good work in us, is the same,
that must perfect that work until the day of Christ. Every good gift, as also
the increase thereof, is from God, Jam. 1. 17. The Apostle attributes all
praise to him, that is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, Ephesians. 3. 20. It is a
magnificent power that works in us, and that power only can work abundantly
more for us. As our bodies came naked into the world, so did our souls, Ezekiel.
16. 4. It is the Lord that decketh and adorneth us with grace, verse. 12. 14. It
is from Christ we must receive gold to enrich us, and white raiment to cloth
us, Rev. 3. 18. We put on the new man, as garments, which are additions to our
nature, given us of Christ; we are poor, it is he that does enrich us;
naked, he clothes us; deformed, he beautifies us; miserable, he makes us happy:
in a word, he works all our works for us.

Borders of gold, with studs of silver.
Now we have the work it self commended to us in two degrees.

1. In borders of gold. 2. In studs of silver.
Borders, or rows, the word is the same that we had in the former verse, and
signifies an orderly disposition of things, setting of them in frame and order,
as in a row.

Rows of gold.
The word Zahab is rendered gold, from the clearness (...) Aurum. (...)
Splendour coeli, qui similis est colori auri.
and brightness of the color of it; for the clearing of the Heavens coming
from the North, is like the color of gold. This shows the excellency of the
matter, from which this form is made, to wit, of gold. Rows of gold: he spoke
of rows in the former verse, but here he adds rows of gold, which implies
an addition and enlargement of grace.

With studs of silver.
The word translated studs, signifies some little point or print. fathing,
coming of fixing or fasting a thing. (...) Vnde. (...) Punilum a figendo vel
insigendo: plurali (...) Puncta, Buxt. in lex. (...).
The Greek translation reads it thus, we will make likenesses for thee; with
prints of silver. The Apostle uses the word, stigmata, marks; speaking of
suffering, he calls them the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. 17.

Some understand here by the borders of gold the foundation of a Christians
hope, the very ground work of his faith; and the studs of silver to be the
superstructure put into the edifice or building, according to that of the
Apostle, where he exhorts the Hebrews not to stay at the foundation or
groundwork, but to go on to perfection, Heb. 6. 1. And because we are saved
by the foundation, and not by the edifice built thereon, according to 1 Cor. 3.
10. So referring the first to our justification, and the second to our
sanctification, as to the fruits flowing from our sanctification; that is,
works of sanctification.

Others understand the words for the increasing of graces, and the bringing of
the Saints from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. From one degree of grace to
another, and this is taken from the nature of Gold, because it will be beat out
to a very large substance. And as for the prints of silver, they make it an
allusion to that place in Prove. 25. 11, 12. where it is said, a word spoken in
his place (or aptly) is like apples of gold, with pictures of silver. As an
ear-ring of gold, with an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an
obedient ear. Which does declare unto us, that reproofs well given, and well
taken, are as beautiful ornaments unto the Saints.

Or we may understand it of the glorious Ordinances and graces, that should be
dispensed in the times of the Gospel, and how they should far exceed those
carnal ordinances under the Law: according to this the Lord speaks in Isa. 60.
17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for
wood, brass, and for stones iron, etc. This was a promise, that the Lord in
the days of the Gospel would make all things better, and make a
through-alteration of Ordinances; he would demolish all carnal Ordinances,
and set up those that are spiritual. We may understand the words to be a
promise of a new supply of graces and strength, that Christ would give unto his
Church; or of the glorious ordinances and graces dispensed unto the Saints in
the days of the Gospel: all those carnal Ordinances of meats and drinks, and
diverse washings should be turned into a more spiritual administration. The
Apostle tells us that those rites and ordinances under the Law, stood only in
meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances imposed on them,
until the time of reformation, Hebr. 9. 10. The Apostle sums up all legal
rites and shadows whatsoever, calling them carnal ordinances, of
justifications of the flesh, because they did sanctify only to the purifying
of the flesh, freeing of those who used them from legal pollutions: And says
he, these were imposed until the time of reformation: that is, until Christ
came in the flesh, who should reform all such carnal rites and ceremonies,
with all those legal observations and services, exhibiting the truth and
reality of spiritual things signified by them, and by instituting a more holy
and spiritual worship. We may take either of the two last interpretations,
either of the increase of grace unto the church then present, or of those
plentiful measures of grace, and spiritual administrations under the Gospel.

First, if we take the meaning of the words for an increase of grace, oberve,

That where ever the Lord begins a work of grace, he does add new supplies of
grace to such beginnings.

This is that the Apostle was very confident of in behalf of the Philippians:
That he that had begun a good work in them, would finish it until the day of
Christ, Phil. 1. 6. And he says in Heb. 12. 2. Christ is the author and
finisher of our faith. When God had made the world, he did not cease from
exercising his power; but it is still at work for the upholding of the
creation: so concerning the work of the new Creation, I mean the work of grace
in the soul: Christ does not only begin this work, or work some small degrees
of it, but he does proceed to maintain what he has begun, and to increase that
which he maintains, and to perfect what he does increase, carrying the soul
from glory to glory.

2. If we understand the words of those glorious things, that were to be
exhibited by Christ in the time of the Gospel

Observe hence,

That the Doctrine of faith, and ordinances of the Gospel, with the graces
accompanying them, are much more glorious and excellent, then those under the
law.

This glorious Gospel the Apostle sets forth at large in 2 Cor. 3. from verse.
7. unto verse. 11. But if the ministration of death written and engraven in
stones, were glorious, etc. how shall not the ministration of the spirit be
more glorious. He calls the law the ministry of death, because the letter
kills, because it does not communicate an ability to man to keep the same,
neither makes any promise of forgiveness unto the transgressor; for tste
tenor of it runs thus: Cursed is every one that abides not in all the things
which are written in the law. It convinces us of sin, and therefore it is
called the ministration of death and condemnat^on: but the Gospel is the
ministration of the Spirit, and of life and righteousness; because the Gospel
does not only show the way to life by Christ, but it is accompanied with the
power of the holy Spirit, whereby we are raised from the death of sin, and
quickened to the life of holiness; and it does also crown us with
righteousness, administering the same unto us by Jesus Christ. Hence says the
Apostle in verse. 10. For that which was made glorious, had no glory in this
respect, by reason of the glory that excels. That is, all those legal
administrations, which had some kind of glory upon them, yet they had no glory
comparatively: as the light of a candle shines very bright in the night, but it
is obscured in the daytime; so is the light of the Moon obscured by the light
of the Sun, so likewise is the glory of the Law obscured by the light of the
Gospel, that it seems to have no glory or light at all.

Indeed the law was glorious in two respects especially.

1. In respect of the promulgation of it, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 12. 18,
19. There was fire, and blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound
of a Trumpet, and the voice of words, etc. The Lord came in great Majesty to
give the Law, even as the Kings of the earth do put on their garments of State
when they go to enact Laws: but Christ discovered more glory upon the Mount;
at his transfiguration, there was Moses and Elias, and the voice of God from
heaven, and the appearance of the holy Ghost descending upon him, etc. And
hence it is, the glory of Mount- Sion exceeds the glory of Mount- Sinai

2. In respect of the matter of the Law, it was glorious: it contained the
image and glory of God, which at first was stamped upon man's heart, and after
written in the tables of stone; but now the Gospel holds forth this image as
stamped upon Christ, and so represented to us again. This the Apostle testifies
unto us in 2 Cor. 4. 4. saying, Lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine into their hearts. And Christ is
called the express form or image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. This is spoken not
only in respect of his divine nature, but also in regard that he is God
manifest in the flesh, by whom the glory and righteousness, grace, mercy,
goodness, wisddome and power of God is revealed unto us.

Again the Apostle tells us, that the glory of the ministration excels
that of the law, because that of the law is to be done away, and that of the
Gospel was to remain, 2 Cor. 3. 11. All those carnal rites and ordinances of
the Law were to be abolished; and the Lord promises that in their stead, he will
create new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, or
come into mind, Isa. 65. 17. The Lord would so alter and change the state of
his Church, that it shall seem to be a new world: and the spiritual excellency
thereof shall so much exceed that which was before, that the consideration of
the one, shall seem to drown and abolish the memory of the other. The Apostle
does argue the abolishing of the old Ordinances, and the continuance of the
new, thus: In that he says a new covenant (speaking of the promise of God) he
has made the first old: now that which decays and waxes old is ready to
vanish away, Heb. 8. 13. That is, the old legal administration shall be
disannulled, or abrogated at the coming in of that which is new.

To conclude, in the times of restoration of the Gospel, all things shall be
altered for the better, as in Isa. 30. 26. The light of the Moon shall be as
the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the
light of seven days, etc. That is, every administration of the Gospel shall
far exceed in glory and light all those of the Law. And in this respect the
Prophet says, The Sun and the Moon shall be ashamed, when the Lord of hosts
shall rule in Zion, etc. Isa. 24. 23. That is, the light and glory of the Sun,
and of the Moon shall be darkness in comparison of the light and glory of God,
that shall shine in his Church under the Gospel. See also in Isa. 60. 19, 20.
where the Lord says, Thy sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory: thy Sun shall no more go
down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self, etc. If we understand these
words of the first times of the Gospel, then by the Sun and Moon we must
understand all legal rites and shaddows, which were the lights of those times.
But if we understand the last restoration of the Gospel, which shall be after
the general Apostasy, and falling away, by reason of the over-spreading of the
darkness of Antichrist. I say if it be meant of this last restoration, then we
must understand by the Sun and Moon all outward and worldly means, whereby
God has conveyed any light unto his people: such outward and worldly means
shall cease, and the Lord will communicate light and grace into the hearts of
his people, by some higher, and some more spiritual way, then he has done
formerly.

Thus much for Christ's embraceing, commending, and promising unto his Church,
wherein he sets forth her excellency in respect of the time then present, and
also in respect of the time to come. Now it follows that the Church does
endeavor to set forth the excellency of her Beloved.

VERSE. 12, 13, 14.
While the King sits at his Table, my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.

A bundle of Myrrh is my Beloved unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt my
Breasts.

My beloved is unto me as a clustre of Camphyre in the Vineyard of Engedi.


IN the three last Verses, Christ set forth the excellency of his Church, in
respect of the time that then was, and also in respect of times that should
come after: now the Church in these three Verses sets forth the excellency of
Christ, with the excellent effects of all those graces which he had bestowed on
her, and that she being so adorned by her Beloved, the odor of his Spirit in
her, issued and flowed forth with such a fragrancy, as it did very much delight
her self and others with the redolency thereof. The Church does, as it were,
answer her Beloveds commendations of her, by returning the like praises and
commendations unto him, as before he had commended her. The Church sets
forth her Beloved Messiah, not barely or simply, but what a one he is to her;
that he is one of excellent sweetness and redolency. Now the sweetness of all
Christ's heavenly graces unto her, and in her, are set forth to us by three
excellent comparisons: towit,

Spikenard, Camphyre, and Myrrh,
We have the effects of all his graces and sweetness as our graces from his
graces, and our sweetness from his sweetness. And we have the cause of all
this, namely, our union and near communion with him, all which is contained in
these three Verses.

Verse. 12.
While the King siteth at his Table, my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.
In this Verse we have,

First, Christ's communion with his Church, which is implied by his siting at
his Table with her. This communion is enlarged by the time, While the King
siteth, etc.

Secondly, The effect of this communion, the Church has her odor by it: My
Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. So that Christ has his communion,
and his Church has her odor.

While the King sits, etc.
Here we have the Kingly feeding of Christ with his people; his repast or
feeding is not expressed in the Text, but necessarily implied: for the words
according to the Hebrew, verbatim, run thus: While the King was in his circle
(or in his compass) which phrase al (...) Circuivit, circumivit, Vnde (...)
Accubitus, icrcularis proprie, in orbem enim antiquitus ad mensain sede bant:
Buxt, in Lex.
ludes to the Jewish form of sitting at Table, which was round about, as it
were in a circumference or circle. Now by this sitting round, it cannot be
meant of Christ sitting alone, but a session with others; towit, with all his
faithful guests, that together with Christ do environe this Table.

The King is Messiah, who is Lord and head over his Church; they that associate
with him are the Saints gathered from all parts of the World: the place of
their session is at the Table, for that is meant by the round or circle here
specified. The Hebrews were wont to sit round, or in a circle, as was said
before; an example whereof we have in 1 Samuel 16. 11. when Samuel desired Jesse
to send for David his youngest Son, he says, We will not sit down until he
come hither: in the Hebrew it is, Because we will not round until he come
hither. That is, We will not sit down to Feast before he (...)
come. The Table that these sit at is to be considered according to the place,
and that is twofold.

1. The place of Christ's siting may be meant of Heaven; and if so, then it
sets forth the wonderful sweetness of Christ, even whilst he is in the
Heavens; then the sense would be as much as if the Church should say, now while
the King sits in Heaven, compassed with his holy Angels, and I here on Earth
below, there is a wonderful distance between us, and yet his sweet savor
comes unto me; yea, I do smell his sweetness though at a great distance,
even as it were the precious Spiknard, Myrrh, and Camphyre.

2. We may take it for Christ's feasting with his people while they are here on
Earth; of his spiritual Banquet with his Saints, feeding them with his word
and graces: for thus he says, Behold Istand at the door and knock, if any
man hear my voice and open, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me,
Revel. 3. 20. This spiritual communion that Christ has with his Church, is
called, The Table of the Lord, Mal. 1. and 1 Cor. 10. 21. and it signifies that
blessed, sweet, and heavenly communion between Christ and his Church.

Hence Observe,

That there is a mutual feasting betwixt Christ and his Church. The unity and
communion that we have with Christ is set forth to us, in our siting down with
Christ at his Table, to the end we may partake with him of his spiritual
dainties, and heavenly Manna, with which he feeds and refreshes his Saints. It
is most true, that we have nothing to invite or welcome Christ, but he sends
provision of his own, and comes (as we use to say) at his own cost; he first
sends a spirit of faith, a spirit of love, a spirit of holiness, a spirit of
humility; and then comes and makes a feast of such provisions as himself
sends. Now what ever may be said in the praise and commendations of a
plentiful Feast, the same and much more may be said in the high commendations
of this Feast that Christ makes for his Saints.

1. In Feasts there are the chiefest provisions of meat and drink, etc. So in
Christ we have the chiefest food in all the World. My flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed, says Christ, John 6. 55. That is, his flesh is that
spiritual Manna that came down from Heaven, with which our souls are fed to
eternal life. The Crucified flesh of Christ, by which divine justice was
satisfied, is the only meat to refresh our souls: what greater rarity is there
in all the World for the soul to feed on, then the graces of Christ's spirit,
flowing out abundantly upon our hearts.

2. A Feast has all sorts of provisions: So Christ is variety of food unto the
souls of his people. All the promises are yea, and in him amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
There are promises suitable to every condition and relation of his people:
there is most precious and pure blood to wash away their guilt, there is
strength to support them in weakness, there is a Garment of righteousness to
cover the shame of their nakedness, a Spirit of truth to lead and guide them
into all truth; sweet mercies and consolations to comfort them in all their
droopings; Gold, and Pearls, and precious stones to enrich them. In a word,
there is a plenitude and fulness of all grace to feed and fill, their empty
and destitute souls. And thus we have the Apostle in 1 Cor. 1. 30. least we
should not be too much cast down with our own folly, says Christ is made
unto us of God, wisdom; and for our uncleanness and corruption, he is made
unto us holiness and sanctification: and for our misery and bondage he is made
unto us redemption. The Spirit of the Lord anointed Christ, and did solemnly
design him to be home unto every Saints condition, and to be made (as the
Apostle says of himself) all things to all men: He was anointed to preach
glad tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken hearts, to proclaim liberty
to captives: to appoint beauty for ashes, joy for mourning, and garments of
festivity and praise for sad and heavy spirits, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. So that
Christ has in him sufficiency relative and suitable to all the conditions of
the Saints, they may feed on him with all sorts and varieties of good things.

3. In Feasts there is great plenty of Meats and Drinks, and such like
provisions, so that none use to go away hungry from a Feast. So there is
abundance of satisfaction in Christ; yea, in him is a redundancy and an
overflowing of all good things: when Christ gives his people good things, he
gives them in abundance. As for our redemption, the Apostle says we have it
according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. That is, we have a full and
bountiful redemption by him. And the glory that Christ gives to his people is
called riches of glory, Ephesians. 3. 16. And Christ is said, to give us all things
richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And to power his Spirit richly into our hearts,
Titus 3. 6. If Christ gives of his Spirit, he gives abundance of it; if he
gives us peace, he gives it in abundance, yea, he fills the soul with good
things.

4. A Feast is intended for joy and rejoicing; So Christ does rejoice and make
glad the hearts of his people: he feeds them with inward tranquillity and joy
in the holy Ghost, shedding abroad his own love in their souls. It is true
that the world feeds the Saints with the bread of affliction, but Christ gives
them to drink the wine of consolation: In the world (says Christ to his
Disciples) ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer I have overcome
the world, John 16. 33. Hence it is, that the Apostle exhorts Believers to
rejoice, in Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice always in the Lord (says he) Forasmuch as you
have the true cause of joy, you may take it upon good grounds, and therefore I
say again rejoice. Christ does make a feast of triumph and rejoicing with
every soul that is brought home unto him, an instance whereof we have in the
Prodigal Son, Luke 15. 24. The Father of the Prodigal brought his fatted
Calfe and killed it, to eat and make merry with his Friends. O what greater joy
and rejoicing can there be then that sweet harmony between the soul and God
reconciled unto it through Jesus Christ! The soul that was dead is now alive,
and that was lost is now found, and sweetly entertained by the Father: what
peace and joy is like that which flows from the Spirit of Jesus Christ?

5. At a Feast there is a meeting of many friends together: So here is a good
company at Christ's Table, it is surrounded by Christ and all his faithful
Servants. The Father himself is present at this Feast, for says the Apostle,
Our fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3.
The Saints being united to Christ by faith, have fellowship with him, and by
him they are united to the Father, whereby they have communion with him also.
The Angels are likewise at this feast, rejoicing with the Saints.

6. The Master of a Feast does use to welcome and cheer up his Guests. It was
the custom of the Jews to welcome their Guests by pouring out precious Oiles
upon their heads, as appears in Luke 7. 46. and John 12. 3. Hence it is, that
David alluding to the Jewish custom, says, Thou preparest my Table, and thou
anointest my head with Oil, Psalm. 23. 5. Thus Christ as the Master of this
heavenly Feast, cheereth up his Guests by pouring forth the Oil of grace, and
of gladness upon the heads of his people, and by filling of their hearts with
joy and gladness. Thus we find Christ welcomming of his Church, in Song 5. 1.
saying, Eat O my friends, drink ye, drink abundantly, O Beloved. Thus Christ
feasteth with his people, and conveyeth all the dainties of salvation unto
them; and thus his people come to enjoy Christ, and all his comforts and
graces; here they have a Feast of grace, and at last shall come to a Feast of
glory.

My Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.
Here we have the effect of this communion, My Spikenard sends forth the
smell thereof. Christ has his communion with his Church, and his Church has
her odor from that communion.

Spiknard is a very pleasant fruit: Some of the Rabbis think that Nardus was
like to Saffron. It seems there was diverse sorts of it: One sort is called
Nardus celtica, which the Frenchmen call Lawand, and we in a term not far
from theirs call it Lawander. Another sort was called Nardus assiria, of which
was made an ointment of all others most precious; and (says Pliny) of all
other spices Spikenard is of greatest estimation: the ointment of Spikenard was
very precious, which Plin. l. 12. cap. 12.
they used to power out and anoint men with; such was the ointment that Mary
anointed Christ with, as he sat at Table, and the house was filled with the
odor of the ointment, John 12. 3. Mar. 14. 3. This Spiknard was very costly
and precious, as may appear, in that it grew in India, or in Assyria. And for
this most precious oil which was made of this sweet plant of India, it had the
nature of a warming, piercing, digesting. The herb it self is hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second, whereby it falls out that it is of an
excellent comforting nature, and also repercussive.

Now under this odoriferous nard, we may mistically understand the most
precious gifts and graces of the spirit of Christ, either

First, as the sweetness of them flows from him, unto the Saints, or

Secondly, as they are planted in the hearts of his people, sending forth a
sweet savor from thence.

First, we may understand this sweet ointment made of Spikenard, to be meant of
Christ's graces in himself, from which a sweet and redolent savor descends down
to all his Saints. The words in the original will indifferently bear a double
translation, because the letter which is the affix, sometimes forms the
adjective, and so we may translate it thus; that which is of spikenard gave
the smell thereof. And so Junius renders the words. According to this
translation, the Church praises the sweetness of Christ, setting forth how
Nardinum edit cdorem suum. Jun.
sweet he is unto her: as if she should say, even now while the King my
Beloved is sitting in the Heavens, compassed about with his holy Angels, and I
here upon earth below; there is a wonderful distance between us, and yet the
sweet savor of him comes unto me: yea, I do smell his sweetness, even as
it were the precious ointment made of Spiknard, or

Secondly, We may take the words as they are in (...) Mea nar dus.
our translation, My spikenard, so Arius Montanus renders ^t: And then we may
understand the graces of Christ in the Saints, as the fruits of faith, love,
and all the sacrifices of prayers and praises of the Saints: these and many
such like fruits the Saints show forth by virtue of their communion with
Christ. The Apostle in Romans 6. 3, 4. sets forth this communion of the Saints
with Christ, under an elegant metaphor, representing unto us, that as Plants
engraffed, do receive moisture, juice, and nourishment from the stock, whereby
they sprout out, budd, and bear fruit: so the Saints, being as it were in
serted into Christ, do receive vigor and life from him, whereby they walk in
the spirit, and become spiritual, holy, gracious, and active in all good
works. Now good and gracious works flowing from the Spirit of Christ, are
called fruits, which signify not only an issuing from the stock, but the
sweetness and pleasantness of them. And thus the Wise man says, A good name
is better then ointment, Eccl. 7. 3. because it has a good savor with it: And
on the contrary, the Israelites said to Moses and Aaron, Ye have made us
stincke before Pharaoh and his servants: That is, in their credit, good name,
and estimation. And again in Prove. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight. That
thing is most abominable to the Lord, which the wicked think to be most
excellent, and whereby they think to be most of all accepted: but the prayers
and praises of the godly are delightful in his ears, they have the savor of
a sweet odor before him.

First, observe hence from the first interpretation,

That the graces which are in Christ, cast a sweet odor and perfume into the
hearts of all believers. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, says Solomon,
Prove. 27. 9. So all Christ's graces, which are the anointings of the Father upon
him, are sweet, rejoicing the hearts of the Saints. Christ was anointed with
the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. His graces were matter of
joy and gladness to himself, and to all his Saints. Christ's love is better
then wine, because it revives, strengthens, and refreshes the hearts of his
servants. All Christ's graces are very fragrant and redolent, refreshing the
senses of the soul; his very word and Gospel is a savor of life unto life, 2
Cor. 2. 16.

Secondly, according to the latter interpretation, observe,

That the graces of the Saints are very savoury and delightful.

Their graces are delightful,

1. To God. 2. To Man.
1. They are delightful to God, as being the fruits of his own Spirit: God
loves and delights in none but in himself; but when he communicates any of
the graces of his Spirit, they are part of himself, and he greatly delights
in them. As a Father delights in his Child, because he sees part of himself
in his Child: so the Lord conveyeth his own grace and image into our hearts,
and then delights to see them there

2. The graces of faith, love, prayer, and praises of the Saints are acceptable
to God by the mediation of Jesus Christ. Thus the Apostle says, his preaching
of the Gospel was unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved,
and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2. 15. He alludeth to the ointment of the
Priest, and the sweet incense which they offered unto the Lord. And David
prays, that his prayer might be directed before the Lord, as incense, Psalm.
141. 2. He means such incense or perfume, which was a confection of sweet
spices, made after the Art of the Apothecary, pure and holy, and was by the
Priests burned upon the golden Altar, every morning before the Lord, Exodus 30.
34, 35, 36. Which Incense was a figure of the prayers of the Saints, acceptable
to God, through the mediation of Jesus Christ.

And thus it is said of Noah's burnt-offerings, which he offered, after the
deluge of waters ceased, that the Lord smelled a savor of rest in them, Genesis
8. 20. And Christ is called that Angel that stood before the Altar, having a
golden Censor, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer
it, with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the
Throne, Rev. 8. 3. That is, Christ the Angel of Gods presence, who had a
golden Censor, as the High Priest had, to offer Incense, Heb. 9. 4. unto whom
was given much incense, like those sweet spices which the Priests burnt upon
the golden Altar, Exodus 30. 34. which he was to offer with the prayers of the
Saints, mingling the sweet odor of his own merits with their prayers, and so
offering of them up upon the golden Altar, to wit, his own self, which was
figured out by that golden Altar upon which Incense was offered, Numb. 4. 11.
and overlaid with gold, Exodus 30. 3. And thus he makes our prayers acceptable
unto God, that he smells a sweet savor in them.

2. The graces of Christ's spirit in the Saints, are not only savoury and
delightful to God by Jesus Christ, but they are savoury to men also. To this
purpose tends that of the Apostle Peter, when he exhorts us to have our
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of us, as
of evil doers, may by our good works which they shall see, glorify God in the
day of their visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. This odor is bonae famae, the savor or
smell of a good name: for a good name is better then ointment, Eccles. 7. 3.
And this the Apostle calls pure religion, and undefiled before God, even the
Father, to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep
our selves unspotted of the world, Jam. 1. 17. And the Apostle Paul wills u^
to walk wisely toward them which are without, Coloss. 4. 5. That is, we
should walk in-offensively toward them, giving of them no offense, but rather
to win them by a sweet, holy, and godly conversation.

VERSE. 13.
A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt my
breasts.
THe Church having praised her Beloved for his graces bestowed on her: She now
declares farther how delightful, and how really welcome Christ is to her: And
lest any should think it vainglory for her to commend her own graces, she now
shows by what means she became so sweet and savoury: she plainly declares,
that it was not of her self; but says she, my beloved is unto me a bundle of
myrrh, etc.

In this verse we have,

First, The Churches declaration of her Beloved's sweetness.

In which Declaration consider,

1. A note of propriety; My beloved is unto me. 2. Of her affection; Beloved.
3. Of Christ's sweetness, expressed by a bundle of myrrh.
Secondly, we have Christ's entertainment from the Church; he shall lie and
lodge with her.

This is amplified by two adjuncts.

1. Of the time; all night. 2. Of the place; betwixt my breasts.
A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me, etc.
A bundle of myrrh: Myrrh is an odoriferous tree, and says Plyny, it
sweateth out a sweet gum called Plin. lib. 12 cap. 16. (...) Ligavit,
colligavit: Vnde. (...) Fasciculus, eculus.
stacte, which is preferred before all others. This gum is also called myrrh,
from the tree whereon it grows: it is gathered and bound up in baggs; and
though the word in the Hebrew be rendered a bundle, yet according to the nature
of myrrh, it being a gum or liquid thing, it may be more aptly called a bag of
myrrh. so the word is rendered, Prove. 7. 20. A bag of money. And in Genesis 42.
35. A bundle of money. The word may indifferently be used for any thing that is
made up in a bag or bundle.

As for this Myrrh, it is an Indian Tree, and it is very sweet of smell; and
leniter amara, meanly, or somewhat bitter in taste, as the Naturallist writes,
and of the second degree hot and dry, and of a preserving nature, and it is
reckoned of God for one of the most prinpall and chiefest of spices, Exo. 30.
23. which holy ointment figured out the graces of Christ, and the graces of the
Saints. Christ is said to be anointed by the Spirit, Isa. 61. 1. And with the
oil of gladness, or of grace, Ps. 45. 7. And the Saints have an unction from
the holy one, 1 John 2. 20. This was one of those precious things with which
the wise men honored Christ at his birth, Mat. 2. And it is of much use for
embalming; for which cause Nicodemus in John 19. 39. does mix myrrh with
Aloes, for the embalming the body of Jesus. Hereby the Church declares how
sweet and comfortable Christ is to her, and how well pleased she is with all
his dispensations, and that he is always as a sweet odor unto her heart.

A bundle, or bag is for to keep safe those things which are in danger to be
lost: As the soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with
Jehovah, 1 Samuel 25. 29. And thus Job says, his iniquities are sealed up in a
bag, Job 14. 17. And when Christ wishes his Disciples to get an heavenly
treasure, he says, provide your selves bags which wax not old, Luke 12. 33.
And for those things we lose and wast, we are said to put in a bag with
holes, Hag. 1. 6. Now this denotes the Churches care to enjoy and possess
Christ, with all his graces and communications, and with the benefits of his
death and resurrection: all these are bound up safe in a bundle, or bag; she is
careful that she lose not the sweetness or virtue of any of the graces of her
Beloved: and these are all safe in Christ, as bound up in a bundle.

My beloved.
Christ having called the Church his love, verse. 9. Here the Church returns
the same Epithet to him again, and calls him her Beloved: not that she first
loved him, but he loved his Church, and gave himself for her, Ephesians. 5, 25.
Whereupon she loves him again, because he loved her first, 1 John 4. 10.

The Hebrew word, Dod, wel-beloved, is written with the same letters that
David, whose name signified Beloved, he was a figure of Christ, and his Father
after the flesh, Romans 1. 3. And Christ is called David, Jer. 30. 9.

Unto me.
A speech of faith and propriety, applying Christ and all his graces unto her
self: A like example the Apostle gives us, when he says, Christ loved me, and
gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. He applies the benefit of Christ's death to
himself in particular, to teach us special faith, and to inflame our love to
him, as if he had shed his blood for us alone, and in particular.

He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts.
He shall lodge, or he shall abide: The word lun, which (...) Pernoctare.
signifies to lodge, or stay all night, is of the future tense, which yet
frequently in the Hebrew bears the signification of the time past. And though
the word properly signifies a nights lodging, or abiding, as in Genesis 28. 11.
yet it is used for a longer continuance, as in Psalm. 49. 12. Adam lodged not in
honor: that is, he stayed no long time in honor. And in Psalm. 25. 13. his
soul shall lodge in goodness: that is, it shall continue in goodness, And in
Psalm. 55. 7. I would lodge in the wilderness, That is, I would remain in the
Wilderness. This denotes unto us the Churches desire, that Christ might
continue and abide with her, that he might lie down, and settle his abode with
her for ever.

Or we may understand it for the adjunct of time, to wit, All night, etc. the
night commonly signifies the time of darkness and affliction, it being the
time of solitariness and meditation, as in Psalm. 77. 3, 4. 6. and Psalm. 63. 7.
And so in Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with
my spirit within me, will I seek thee early. That is, in the greatest fears
and dangers, I have made my address unto thee. That notes, that Christ with
his consolations, should be her continual joy and comfort, whom she would
rest on in the times of the greatest tentations and troubles.

Betwixt my Breasts.
The Hebrew word that signifies a Breast, or Pap, is (...) Mamma, a Child.
(...) Effudit, quia mammae effunduns lac.
derived of a Chaldae word, that signifies to power out, because Milk is
powered forth from the Breast. The Church seems to allude to the manner of
women and Maids, who were wont to wear betwixt their Breasts, or in their
bosoms, Nosegays, as we call them, made of very odoriferous and sweet smelling
flowers, of which they made great account, esteeming of them as a principal
part of their Ornaments. So the Church here finding and feeling her wel-beloved
to be so sweet unto her, says, that he is as a bundle of sweet Myrrh, and
that she will set him in her bosom, even between her Breasts, and there he
shall remain, that she may always smell his sweetness. She shows also of
what great account Christ was to her, that she would place him so nigh her
heart, as it were, as between her Breasts; that as the Apostle says, Christ
might dwell in her heart by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

Or the Breasts may signify the ministry of the Church, feeding of the Saints
with the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
According to this the Prophet says, Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, etc. that yes
may suck and be satisfied with the Breast of her Consolations, that ye may
milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory, Isa. 66. 10, 11.
According to this Interpretation the Church declares how exceedingly she
should be nourished and fed by the sweet administrations of Christ unto his
Church; and that she should be spiritually nursed with her, and receive
abundance of consolation from her, being nourished together by the doctrine of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Let us take a few Observations from hence.

A bundle of myrrh, etc.
Myrrh you heard was very sweet in smell, but better in taste, and it was a
precious ingredient in the holy Oil.

Hence Observe,

First, All the dispensations of Christ are very sweet and savory unto a
beleiving soul. There is such a kind of complacency, or well-pleasednesse in
the hearts of the Saints, that they do as it were acquiesce and rest well
pleased in his grace and goodness. It is true, Christ is in this world a kind
of a bitter sweet unto his Saints, as I may so say: but his sweetness does
swallow up all his bitterness: his bitterness is in the lowest degree, but
his sweetness in the superlative, so that let his dispensations be what they
will, his Saints are never weary of him; yea, they take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
his sake: and when they are weak in themselves, then they are strong in him,
and more then Conquerours, as says the Apostle. And thus Christ is welcome to
the Saints upon any conditions whatsoever: Let him come with a smile or with a
frown; with a rod or with sweet imbracings; in what shape soever he represents
himself, he is accepted of them. Thus it was with Peter, Lord, if it be thou
(says he) bid me come unto thee on the water: So it is with the Saints, they
refuse not to venture, even upon the Boisterous waters to go unto Christ. When
Samuel told Ely of judgment to come upon his Family. It is the Lord (says he)
let him do what he will. So David, I was dumb and opened not my mouth because
thou did it, Psalm. 39. And Job, Though he kill me, I will trust in him.
Hence it is that the Children of God, though they walk in darkness, and have
no light at all, yet they will trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
themselves upon their God, Isa. 50. 10. Though Christ be like myrrh, somewhat
bitter in taste, in respect of the amarulency and bitterness of trouble,
tentation, and the Cross, yet he is also sweet, like a bundle of myrrh,
refreshing the senses of the soul, yiedling of them abundance of sweetness
and satisfaction.

Secondly Observe,

That all our comforts in Christ are very sure comforts. All his graces,
goodness and sweetness is as a bundle, or bag of myrrh, bound up safe for
us. Hence the Apostle says, there is laid up for him a Crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. It was kept sure for him, yet was treasured up for
him, as we use to treasure up Jewels and precious things. So the Apostle Peter
says, our Inheritance is reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1. 4. These things
are kept sure and certain for us, they are not given to us, as grace was given
to Adam, who might lose it at his pleasure; but we are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation, Verse. 5. Hence it is, the Covenant of grace and
of eternity is called, The sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. So are all things
we have in Christ, very sure and safe; our comforts in him are sure comforts,
our peace a sure peace, our joy a sure joy, and the sweetness and redolency of
his graces are sure unto us, they are in him as myrrh bound in a bundle, or
put into a bag which cannot be lost.

My Beloved.
Christ having called his Church, his Love, here she returns the same
Epithet unto him again.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints return love to Christ, for his love first manifested unto
them. Thus we have the Apostle, We love him because he loved us first, 1 John
4. 10. The flame of Christ's love warming of our hearts, does kindle a fire of
love burning toward him again. The Trumpet of his goodness does cause his
people to echo back praises unto him. If first he love us, we then can love
him; if first he praise us, we then can praise him; if he go before and draw
us, we shall follow after. Then let us eye Christ loving, exalting, and
praising of us, that so we may abundantly love, exalt, and praise him.

My Beloved is unto me.
The Church does apropriate the sweetness of Christ unto her self.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints do apply all the benefits of Christ unto themselves in
particular. We have an example of this in the Apostle, when he says, Christ
loved me and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. He applies the benefits of
Christ's death to himself in particular. And Thomas, my Lord, and my God: and
Job, my Redeemer: and David uses this word of propriety eight times together,
in Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my Deliverer, my
God, my strength, in whom I will trust, my Buckler, and the horn of my
salvatian, and my high Tower.

He shall lodge.
He shall continue and abide with me.

Hence Observe,

That those that have once felt the goodness of Christ, de sire always to
enjoy the same. This did something appear in the Jews that followed Christ;
when Christ told them of the bread of life, they cried, Lord evermore give us
of this bread, John 6. 34.

He shall lodge all night.
He shall continue with me in the night of trouble and Tentation.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is never nearer his people, then in their greatest afflictions.
Christ is nearest unto his people, when sometimes they think him to be
farthest off. Thus it was for a time with Christ, when he said, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Yet God was never nearer Christ, assisting and
upholding him by his power, then at that time. And so David in Psalm. 77.
complains that his Spirit was overwhelmed, Verse. 3. upon which he says, Will
the Lord cast off for ever? And will he be favorable no more? is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten
to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? But says he at
last, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right hand of
the most high. That is, I will remember his wondrous works of old, how he led
his people out of Egypt by a strong hand, how and therefore is able to keep me
in the greatest troubles, and deliver me out of the greatest dangers.

He shall lodge all night betwixt my Breasts.
If we take that Interpretation as alluding to those that wear Nosegays in
their bosoms, that they may smell the sweetness of them: by which is
signified the great esteem the Church has of Christ.

Then Observe,

1. That the Saints have a high account and esteem of Jesus Christ. They place
him between their Breasts, near their heart; nay, in their hearts: so says
the Apostle in Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.
Christ has the heart for his entertainment in the Saints, he is set in the
highest part and top of all their affections. It is true, that worldlings
slight, scorn, and cast Christ at their heels, as it were; yet all the Saints
do magnify him, and account him very precious, they give him the highest
room in their soul, and do, as it were, make him Commander there in chief.
And as for carnal men, who mind earthly things, they have nothing but carnal
joys, and carnal comforts, and carnal enjoyments, these and such like lodge
all night between their Breasts, these take up the best rooms in their souls;
but the Saints delight that Christ and his holy Spirit, and all the operations
thereof, should lie all night between their Breasts, that these should dwell,
and operate in their hearts.

Secondly, if we take the latter interpretation, that these Breasts should be
meant of the ministry of the Church, feeding and refreshing of the Saints with
the sincere milk of the word, then it yields us this Observation.

2. That Christ's ministry in the Church, is a very sweet refreshing, nourishing
ministry. The Members of Jerusalem might suck and be satisfied with the Breasts
of her consolations, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory, Isa. 66.
10, 11. The Saints may be spiritually nursed and cherished by one another. Thus
the Apostle tells the Thessalonians in 1 Epist. Chap. 2. Verse. 7. But we (says
he) were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children. That is, we
were so tenderly affected toward you, as a Nurse which bears with a froward
Child, that we might cherish and nourish you, by imparting unto you the Gospel
of Christ: Because (says he in Verse. 8.) ye were dear unto us. And thus the
Apostle tells Timothy, that he should be a good minister, nourished up in the
words of faith, 1 Timothy 4. 6. And the Saints are abundantly comforted and
refreshed in the Churches Consolations, as in Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the River of thy pleasures. And in Psalm. 65. 4 We shall be satisfied
with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple. By goodness he
means good things, by which good things we may understand the principal of
all good things, namely, the holy Ghost; for that which is called good things
in Mat. 7. 11. is called the holy Ghost, in Luke 11. 13. So that the ministry
of the holy Ghost is that which refreshes and comfort his Saints. It is not
the ministry of men, or of humane wisdom, that yields the Saints so much
comfort and refreshing, but the ministry of the holy Spirit, the ministry of
life and righteousness, when Christ holds out unto us the Breasts of joy and
consolation.

Verse. 14.
My Beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphyre (or Cypres) in the Vineyards of
Engedi.
The Church goes on in commending her Beloved, and the graces she receives
from him, comparing him to another sweet smelling thing: as before she had
resembled him to Spiknard, Verse. 12. and to myrrh, Verse. 13. So here to the
sweet berries or clusters of the Cypres Tree.

In the words observe,

1. A declaration of Messiah's sweetness, he being compared to camphyre or
cypres.

This sweetness of his is amplified,

First, by the quantity, it is a cluster of camphyre.

Secondly, by the place where it is to be had, in the Vineyards of Engendi.

2. A note of propriety; My beloved is unto me, etc. as in the precedent verse.

A cluster of Camphire.
Camphire is a sweet gum, and for smell much like unto Spikenard: Cyprus is a
tree, whose fruit grows in clusters, and is very sweet. The Hebrew word
Caphar, (...) Texit, operuit nomen significat expiatio, re demptionis pretium,
Exodus 21. 30.
from which Camphire, and also Cyprus seems to be derived, signifies to
cover, or plaster over, Genesis 6. 14. The cover which was laid upon the Arc, is
set forth by a word derived from this, and it is applied to the covering or
appeasing of an angry countenance, Genesis 32. 20. To pacify wrath, Psalm. 78. 38.
It is also used to signify propitiation, favor, and mercy, as in Deuteronomy. 21. 8.
It is often used to expiate and purge away uncleanness, and to make
atonement. Thus it was applied to things under the Law, see Levit. 16. 33. and
23. 27. This may note unto us the sweetness of Christ's redemption, and the
fruits of his death, whereby he became as a cluster of redemption unto his
people; for as a cluster consists of many berries compact together into one
bunch, so the redemption of Christ has all mercy, grace, and love compacted
together: there is no grace, but it is in the cluster of man's redemption; as
mercy, justice, power, wisdom, love, and free grace, all these are gloriously
manifested in the work of our redemption.

Now all the graces of our redemption in Christ have a fragrancy and a sweet
odor with them, they are likea cluster of camphire for their sweet odoriferous
smell, whereby the Saints are continually refreshed and comforted.

In the Vineyards of Engedi.
Engedi was the name of a place in the Tribe of Judah, appears, Josh. 15. 62.
It should seem to be a City famous for sweet smelling trees, and of a very
fruitful soil, for Gardens and Vineyards. This City Engedi, was sometimes a
place of safeguard and defense unto David, when he hid himself from the fury of
Saul, as in 1 Samuel 24. It was called Hazazon Tamar, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2. where
Jehosaphat prayed, and was delivered from his Enemies. It was also a place full
of rocks and wild goats, adjoining to the Sea-cost. This notes unto us the
great victories which the Church obtains by Christ: he has brought a full
redemption unto his people, and will give them victory over all their enemies.

The word Engedi (...) or Gnen-gedi, is a compounded (...)
word: the first part signifies an eye or fountain; the latter part of the
word signifies a Kid, or a company: hereof it was that Leah's adopted son Gad
took his name, which signifies a troop, or company. Considering the rocks and
wild Goats in the bounds of Engedi, here may be an allusion from those young
Goats, who from the Rocks, would not only cast their eyes upon the Fountains
below, which were their watering places; but also upon the Vineyards, desiring
to root up and spoil the Plants there. But as the owners of the Vines would
wall and fence their Vineyards in such a manner, that these Goats or Kidds,
which longing and bleating after the pleasant plants, could not come to spoil
them: even so it is with the wicked persecutors of the world, they may see and
cry after the Saints, and much desire their destruction: but Christ the owner
of this Vineyard has set a hedge about his Saints, as he did about Job, so
that Satan could not touch his soul: and Christ himself is a wall of fire
round about his Church, Zech. 2. 5. where the holy Ghost alludeth to the
practice of Travailers in the Wilderness, who surrounded themselves with a
fire, and did thereby fray away the wild beasts, and kept them off from
annoying them: Christ is such a defense unto his people, and therefore they
must needs be in great safety, who have such a defense, notwithstanding all the
attempts of the wicked against them.

As for these words of propriety and affection: My beloved is unto me, etc.
Having spoken of them in the precedent verse, I shall not repeat them again but
shall only give you two or three Observations from this verse.

First, Observe,

That redemption by Christ, and the fruits thereof are very savoury and
delightful unto the Saints. The pardon of sin, and reconciliation with God
through Jesus Christ, with that spiritual peace flowing from thence, with all
those heavenly graces that follow and accompany this redemption; these cannot
but be very delightful and precious unto the Saints, yea, and much more
precious and sweet then all camphire, and Cyprus trees are unto any worldly
sense. Here is, as it were, a cluster of graces compacted together, and that do
shine forth together most gloriously, being the very life of a Christians joy
and comfort. In our redemption there is, as I said before, a cluster or heap of
mercies and graces compacted together, as rich mercy extended to the vessels of
mercy, the Sts are made vessels of mercy, and by redemption, these vessels are
filled full of mercy, mercy is manifested upon them. There is also rich love in
our redemption, in that the Father gave his Son to death for us: and the Son
also gave himself, and laid down his life for us; greater love then this was
never shown by any.

Again, Free grace does exalt it self in this work also; for we were bought
with a price, and that not with our own, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ.

In a word, in our redemption all the attributes of God shine forth most
gloriously; as for justice, it is honored, because it is satisfied: and for
mercy, it is enlarged, and has a portion as well as justice: his power is
magnified in effecting such a glorious work, and his wisdom in finding out,
and in contriving, and in finishing the work of our redemption. Here are
graces compact together, even as clusters of berries on the Cyprus tree: Thus
Christ is sweet to his Saints, in redeeming and saving of them; he is like a
cluster of camphire, or of cyprus.

Secondly, observe,

That Christ will be a safeguard and shelter for his Saints in the midst of
the greatest dangers.

Wicked men may look down from their mountain, and behold the Saints in Christ's
vineyard, and desire much to spoil those tender plants, but Christ will be a
wall of defense unto them. Thus David declares the Lord to be his defense, and
he expresses it nine times together, in Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord (says he) is
my rock, and fortress, etc. Two names of a rock are in this verse; the first
is Selaugh, a firm stony rock; the latter is Tsur, a strong or sharp rock: he
is says he, My deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my
buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

A horn signifies power and strength, Psalm. 92. 11. and therefore they
signify the great Monarchs and Kings of the world, Dan. 8. 21. An high tower
has it is name in Hebrew Misgah, which is an exaltation; that is an high Tower
or Fort, wherein men are protected from danger and invasion: and he adds, my
refuge, that is, saving me from all wrong and violence of men: And this is that
which Christ has promised to his Sains, never to leave them, nor forsake them,
Heb. 13. 5.

There are no less then five negatives in this place, to strengthen and
confirm our faith in the truth of the promise: And it is, as if he should have
said, I will in no wise, whatsoever come of it, at any time forsake thee, mine
eye shall be still over thee, and I will watch over thee for good continually.
So the Lord promises to be with his people in the greatest danger, when they
pass through the water, and when they walk through the fire, Isa. 43. 2. Fire
and water are two most devouring Elements; good servants, but bad masters, as
we say; and therefore here they are put for all other perilous and dangerous
kinds: Christ will save and deliver his people from them all. We read, Dan. 3.
25. That the three children were cast into the fiery furnace: but what said the
Tyrant? I see four (says he) and the fourth is like the Son of God. And in
all probability it was so, it being usual under the Old Testament for Christ
upon some weighty occasions to appear in humane shape. Thus Christ will be
with his people in the furnace of affliction, and either he will preserve them
in, or deliver them out of trouble; he will so sanctify affliction, that it
shall prove a very blessing unto them.

3. From the note of propriety, my beloved is unto me, etc. Observe,

That the Saints only have the right feeling and sense of Christ's sweetness.

They only are redeemed and sanctified by Christ, they alone feel the free
remission of sins, and reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ: from
whence arises this sweet refreshing peace and spiritual joy in their souls.
The men of the world do smell the sweet savor of many earthly things, and do
abundantly delight in them; but this divine and spiritual sweetness of Christ
they do not smell.

This is no great wonder neither; for let the sun shine never so bright, and
yet he that is blind cannot perceive it. So let him that is without sense of
smelling come among sweet savours, yet he smells no sweetness at all: Thus
Christ is preached abroad in the world, and he is as it were a box of precious
ointment powered forth; but yet for all this, the men of the world are so
stuffed with the stinking savours of carnal lusts, which seem more delightsome
unto them; as that they cannot smell any spiritual sweetness in Christ at
all: so that when the Saints are exceedingly moved and taken with the sweet
savours of Christ, yet others are nothing taken with those spiritual savours
and that because they savor not the things of God. Then the Saints only are
perfumed with Christ's sweetness, so that their hearts for love of him do
despise unclean lusts and carnal pleasures, aspiring unto the heavens in their
souls, where Christ is, who is their happiness, their joy, and their
treasure, whom they fix, as it were, a bundle of sweet myrrh between their
breasts, and do smell a sweet savor in his redemption and mediation, even as a
cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi. Thus much for the commendations
of the Spouse concerning her Beloved.

VERSE. 15, 16, 17.
Behold, thou art fair my Love: behold thou art fair, thou have doves eyes.

Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is green.

The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of fir.


CHrist and his Church having already mutually commended each other: now again
they do renew the praises one of another, and that more succinctly then
before. For this commendations Christ begins, and the Church follows after.

1. Christ commends his Spouse, verse. 15. 2. The Spouse praises her Beloved,
verse. 16. 3. We have a conclusion of praise jointly between them both, verse.
17.
First, Christ commends his Spouse: his Eulogie is laid down,

First, By way of preface or introduction, and this is twofold:

1. By a word of attention; Behold. 2. By a love-title; my love.
Secondly, we have Christ's assertion of his Spouse, and that is double; thou
art fair, thou art fair.

Thirdly, this assertion is enlarged by a comparison; thou have doves eyes.

Or we may take it for Christ's commending his Spouse for her properties.

First, for her beauty, as she was made glorious in him, and without spot;
thou art fair, etc.

Secondly, For her spiritual chastity; thou have doves eyes.

Behold, my love, thou art fair, etc.
It was the whole desire of the Church to be well favored, comely, and
beautiful in the eyes of Christ: now for Christ thus to acceept of her, is all
she can wish or desire. A singular joy it must needs be unto her, to be
assured, and made certain, that she is indeed made beautiful in his sight. And
therefore the Lord to cheer, and to comfort her in the assurance thereof, does
pronounce her excellent beauty, which can hardly be uttered with any words, and
therefore he does preface his speech with a note of attention, saying,

Behold, thou art fair, my love, etc.
The Scripture uses this word behold, when it would stir up the minds of men
to consider some rare some excellent or wonderful matter: As, Behold a virgin
(...) Eu, ecce, adverbium demonstrandi, usurptur in rebus motabilibus.
shall be with child, etc. And, behold the day of the Lord, shall come.

To behold, in it is proper signification, is to look on a thing with our
fleshly eyes; but it is used to signify a due consideration, or a due regard of
a thing; as, Behold therefore the beautifulness and severity of God, Romans 11.
12.

Sometimes the word is taken by way of derision, as in Genesis 3. 22. where God
says concerning Adam, behold the man is become as one of us: but this is least
of all meant in this place.

Again, the word behold is taken by way of asseveration, to assure us of the
truth of a thing. And thus it is used here; for the Church being sensible of
her blackness and deformity in Verse. 5. Christ comfort her against that
deformity which she saw in her self, by telling her that she was the fairest
among women, Ver. 8. but now to assure her of the truth and certainty thereof,
he does preface his commendations with this word of asseveration, saying,
Behold thou art fair, etc.

Lastly, Behold is prefixed to such phrases, by which the Lord would raise up
our thoughts to the highest pitch of attention and admiration, to quicken us
against our dull and misgiving hearts. The Saints many times think worse of
themselves, then happily Christ would have them, and they are hardly drawn to
believe that Christ has made them so glorious and so happy, as he has done:
now that Christ might raise the hearts of his people against such misgiving
thoughts, he does rouse and stir them up by this note of attention, Behold,
thou art fair, etc.

So this word of attention, Behold, notes unto us three things.

First, how backward and slow of heart we are to believe the things of-Christ,
and how dull we are at the best; so that we always stand in need of being
quickened and rouzed up by such a word of attention as this, Behold, etc. Hence
it is that the Apostle exhorts Timothy to stir up the gift of God that was in
him, 2 Timothy 1. 6. where the word stir up signifies to stir up fire, or to give
life to fire; as fire burns under ashes, and is revived, or rekindled (...)
Of (...) again, and (...), to vivifie and put fire.
by stiring up. This notes unto us, that the gift of God is as it were a
certain flame kindled in our hearts; but our natures are as the ashes which
are ready to cover and choke this fire in us, and the flesh, and the Devil go
about to put it out, and therefore we on the contrary should labor as much as
in us lies, to cherish and keep it burning. In this metaphor the Apostle
seems to allude to the type of the Priests under the Law, who were to cherish
the holy fire on the Altar, that it might not go forth: thus our faith and
other graces must be blown and stirred up: and however we may have the graces
of Christ in respect of the habits of them, yet we should stir them up unto
their acts, else they may lie dead in us, as fire covered with the ashes.
Christ would raise our hearts from earthly things unto those that are heavenly,
from worldly glory unto that which is divine, and from carnal joy unto
spiritual delight. Christ had told the Church before that she was beautiful,
but least her dull and misgiving heart should not believe it, he adds, Behold,
thou art fair, etc.

Secondly, It is a note of wonder and admiration, as Behold a Virgin shall be
with Child. What greater wonder can there be, then for a Virgin to conceive and
bring forth a Son? So here, Behold thou art fair: this must needs be a
wonderful thing that she that was black and deformed, should be thus
beautiful and fair, and that her natural deformity should be covered with a
supernatural comeliness; this is an admirable thing indeed, and well may it
be prefaced with a note of admiration, Behold thou art fair, etc.

Thirdly, it imports to us an assurance of our spiritual beauty: for this
word Behold is a note of asseveration, as I said before, to assure us of the
truth of the thing. Our hearts are apt to misgive us, and very unapt to believe
the bounty and goodness of Christ; we can hardly think he will bestow such
glory and happiness upon us as he has promised: now that he may take us off
from this unbelief, he does declare it to us by this asseveration, Behold thou
art fair, etc. Thus much for the word of attention, admiration, and
asseveration: the next thing in the Preface follows, which is his love title
unto his Spouse.

My love.
The same word is used here, as was in Verse. 9. and it signifies a familiar, a
fellow-friend, a companion: it has its name of feeding and conversing
together. And thus Christ declares the reason of that intercourse of love
between him and his people, saying, I have called you friends (not Servants)
for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you: And
says he, you are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15. 15.
Now in that Christ does so often give unto his Spouse, this sweet and lovely
title of friend and love, and the like: it manifests unto us his sweet,
everlasting, undying affection unto his Saints, by which he is one and the same
to his Church for ever.

Hence Observe,

That Christ's love unto his Saints is an everlasting and an undying love.
Christ's love is eternal and everlasting: a love that never decays or waxes
cold, like the stone Jul. Solin. in Polyhist. cap. 12.
Albestos, of which Solinus writes of, that being once hot, it can never be
cooled again. The love of Christ toward his Saints is like a Fountain ever
flowing, and never dried up, or like the sacred fire which never went out. The
love of Christ (whose gifts and calling are without repentance, Romans 11. 29.)
is an undying affection that never will decay. Hence says he in Jer. 31. 3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love. And in another place, With
everlasting kindness will I have merry upon thee. Though the Saints offend
Christ often, yet he loves them still, he only purges them and heales them of
their spiritual maladies, which cannot be done without some smart; but he does
not a whit lessen or detract his love from them. Though his people come upon
him every day for new supplies, yet his goodness is never wearied or tired
out; yea, though thousands, millions of his Saints press upon him at once, yet
he has for them all, and the Fountain of his love and grace is never emptied.
O what a whetstone should this be to our Spirits? and how should this flame of
Christ's eternal love toward us kindle a fire of love in our hearts toward
him again? Nothing does more concilliate and attract love, then love it self:
it would be horrible ungrateful in us, not to spend and be spent for him that
has loved us so much as Christ has done; certainly if love do not draw us
unto him nothing will. The acts of Christ's love are the cords wherewith he
draws souls unto himself, I drew them with cords of love, says he, Hosea 11.
4. And I drew them with loving-kindnesse, Jer. 31. 3. Nothing will draw us unto
Christ effectually, if love will not. Thus much for the Preface, the
Proposition follows.

Thou art fair, thou art fair.
The word Japhah, signifies fair or beautiful, not only (...) Pulcer,
elegans, venustus, decorus fuit.
in color, but in comely proportion and elegancy, such as draws love and
liking, as you heard in Ver. 8. The Church is called fair by reason of the
graces, and the spiritual beauty of faith, hope, love, patience, wherewith
Christ has beautified her.

The doubling of the word increases the signification, it expresses the
superlative degree, it is an usual Hebraisme to express that which does
excel by the doubling of the word, as fair, fair, that is, most excellent
and very fair, for it does express the vehemence of the mind, when the Speech
is so doubled. Sometime we use the same form of Speech even among our selves,
when we would most of all villifie one, we say, he is naught, he is naught, as
Solomon says of the buyer, Prove. 20. 14. In like manner, when we would
express something most rare and exellent, we use to say, it is excellent, it
is excellent. Even thus the Lord Jesus commends the beauty of his Church to
be most rare, excellent, and transcendent, that which can hardly be uttered
with any words. And thus Christ praises the excelling beauty of his Church,
not only to comfort her with all the members thereof, that neither the whole,
nor the parts of the whole, should be discouraged with their blackness and
deformity, but also to declare thereby, that she is not only fair but
excellent, transcendent, and wonderful fair and glorious in his sight.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints excel in beauty and are most amiable in Christ's sight. It
must needs be so, for Christ is made unto them of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. Wisdom for covering their ignorance,
Righteousness for bearing their iniquity, Sanctification for making them holy,
Redemption for her full and absolute Salvation. Although the Church be black,
and there be many deformities and spots in the Saints, while they are here, yet
Christ beholds his people according to those comely graces and virtues of
faith, love, hope, patience, and the like, wherewith he himself has decked
them: and he does not so much regard their spots and deformities, because he
has by his sanctification and cleansing, washed them all away, and made his
Church glorious to himself, not having spot or wrincle, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. He
will cleanse us, by the washing of water, by the word: it is a promise of free
justification and sanctification by faith in Christ. And the Apostle John tells
us, That the blood of Christ washes us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. That is,
from the guilt of all sin, and also from the filth and stain of sin. And Paul
in Tit. 2. 14. he has purified unto himself a peculiar people. That is, he
has separated and consecrated a people holy for himself, zealous of good
works. And Christ's blood purges our Consciences, Heb. 9. 14. Now in that
Christ has washed and purged his Church, he has demonstrated the greatest
love and liking unto her; according to this we have an expression in Revel. 1.
5. where the Apostle says, that he has loved us, and washed us in his blood.
The greatest demonstration of his love was, in that he shed his blood for us
for the cleansing of us from our sins. Thus the Church is made fair and
beautiful in the sight of Christ, even by the washings of his blood.

Again, she is beautiful in respect of all those graces that Christ has
endowed her withal, as faith, love, hope, patience, and the like. In Ezekiel. 28.
7. the Prophet mentions the beauty of wisdom. And when the Church shall obey
Christ's voice, and forsake her own natural corruptions, it is said, he takes
delight in her beauty. Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine
ear: forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King
greatly desire thy beauty, etc. Psa. 45. 10, 11. Thus much for the proposition,
the comparison follows.

Thou have Doves eyes.
Concerning the comparison between the Churches eyes and Doves, let us
inquire, first, what these eyes be, secondly, wherein they be compared to Doves.

The Hebrew word that signifies an eye, does also signify a Well or Fountain,
because the eye is of a watery (...) Oculus, pe synecdochen aspectus, quia
aspectus est in oculo. Per metaphoram fons, ex quo tanquam ex oculo aqua efluit.
constitution, and because it is the greatest in let to evil of all the
Members of the body, and it being the cause of much sin and misery, therefore
God has placed in it the greatest tokens of sorrow and lamentation.

The eyes of the Saints may be referred to these three sorts: they be
Corporal, Mental, or Personal.

1. The corporal or bodily eyes be external instruments seated in the head
(as the windows of nature) having lids for drawing up, or letting down,
according as the inward sense instincteth. Unbridled eyes are said to be full
of adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And eyes beholding strange women, Prove. 23. 33. The
eye is an inlet to filthiness and uncleanness: hence it is Job says, he had
made a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31. 1.

2. For mental eyes, they be the inward senses of nature, as Imagination,
Fantasy, Conceit, etc. all these have their seat chiefly in the head,
commanding all the external senses as they please. All which senses are
comprehended in the word Mind: now as for the natural man he minds earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19. And therefore the Apostle enjoyneth the Saints to be
renewed in the Spirit of their mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. and that according to the
Creation that is in righteousness and true holiness. The mind is the eye of
the soul, so that he means not a bodily change, but a change, but a change of
the faculties of the soul, and that of the highest faculty, namely, the
understanding and reason, By which also the Spirit of God does work upon all
the inferior faculties.

3. For personal eyes, they be such as be imputed to be such in respect of
their Office and place: and such are the Ministers of Christ, those that have
received some excellent gifts from the Lord: as in 1 Cor. 12. 12. 17. If the
whole body were an eye (says the Apostle) where were the hearing? The Apostle
speaks this, lest any should be discontented at the meannesse of their gifts in
comparison of others, and also shows them, that if it were so as they
desired, to wit, that all should be quall one to another in the gifts of the
Spirit, there would be a destruction of the whole body: for it could not be a
body unless it were made of many Members knit together, and diverse one from
another. Now Magistrates they should be eyes to the Commonwealth: and for such
as the Lord has clothed with his Spirit for to administer the word of truth,
such are as eyes to the Church of Christ.

Now I might come to examine what Doves be, to whom these eyes are resembled:
they are Birds well known amongst us, and therefore need no personal
description. A Bird of a right simple carriage, and a feeder of the best
grain, whose Song is mourning, very fruitful, and one that constantly
returns to her own home, and very faithful unto her mate.

Now here Christ commends the Church for her eyes, because if they be fair,
they do easily cover the spots and deformities of the rest of the members of
the body. He seteth forth the simplicity, sincerity, humility, meekness, but
especially the spiritual chastity of the Church, setting forth not only her
inward affection, but also her outward appearance, so that the Church has no
unchaste looks or countenances (of which we read somewhat in Psalm. 44. 17, 18.
20.) but contenteth her self with Christ her only Husband, and even as the
Dove, when she has chosen a match, she keeps her self unto him only, and
looks not upon any other, according as the Philosophers write and affirm of
them.

Hence observe,

That the spiritual chastity of the Saints is very beautiful and pleasing
thing in the eyes of Christ.

The Lord does not only commend the beauty of his Church, but also praises
her spiritual chastity, for indeed her spiritual chastity is a great part of
her spiritual beauty. The chastity of Virgins is much to be commended, and a
thing requisite for all Christians to possess their vessel in holiness. Thus
also is the spiritual chastity of the Church very commendable and comely, when
the Church can be said to be a chaste and pure virgin given up unto Christ. Now
as there is the filthiness and uncleanness of the flesh; so there is a
spiritual whoredom often complained of, and condemned in Scripture: Then as
in marriage, the Bridegroom does much delight in the chastity and simplicity
of his Bride: so the faithful soul, being married unto Christ, there is
chastity required, a thing delightful in the eyes of Christ.

The Church of Christ then must not look after others, or commit spiritual
whoredom with any; but she must keep her faith, hope, love and affection
wholly and entirely toward him alone.

To this purpose tends that of the Prophet, when he prophesies of a remnant
that should forsake idolatry, he says: At that day shall a man look to his
maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy one of Israel: and he shall
not look to the Altars, the work of men's hands, neither shall respect that
which his fingers have made, either the groves or the images, Isa. 17. 7, 8. In
that he names groves and images, he has respect to the diverse sorts of
places which they had to worship their Idols: their groves and shady places
were such as they used in the heat of summer; and their sunne-images, set in
sun-shiny places, which they made use of in colder weather: by these two
therefore, are all sorts of Idols and idolatrous services designed: but the
Prophet tells of a remnant, that should escape all these, and should look to
the holy one alone.

They then that embrace the doctrines and inventions of men, worshipping stocks
and stones, they commit abominable whoredom, according as the word of God
charge them. Such as embrace this world, be called adulterers and
adulteresses, Jam. 4. 4. And covetousness which is idolatry, Col. 3. 5. And
such as did forsake the Lord, their eyes went after their idols, Ezekiel. 20. 24.
And such are called eyes, beholding strange women, Prove. 23. 33. Those then
that will be faithful unto the Lord, and be beautiful in his sight, must have
doves eyes: they must with a single eye of faith look upon Jesus Christ, and
love him, and stay upon him alone, and not upon the world, or upon riches,
honors, pleasures, or any worldly contentment whatsoever.

The corporal eye must be like the Dove for simplicity and chastity: this eye
(as our Savior teaches, Matthew. 6.) is the light of the body: and without the
eye there is nothing but darkness in the body: it is the window of the body,
which if it be not carefully watched, will be a great inlet of evil. The
mental eye, which is the eye of the soul, must also assimilate the Dove in
all simplicity: and so much the rather, must the mind be simple, chaste,
innocent, because it is the light of the soul, and it sits at the souls
helm, steering all the outward senses, according as it is self pleases. And
for those that are personal eyes, the Ministers of the Gospel, they should
prepare the Church for one Husband, even to present it as a pure Virgin unto
Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. To conclude, the eye of the soul is the light of the
soul, and that is faith; the delight then that Christ takes in his Saints, is
the beauty of this eye of faith; and this beauty shall never decay, but wax
more and more beautiful. So much for the commendations given by Christ: now
follows the like praise which his church returns to him again.

VERSE. 16.
Behold thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is green.
THe Church does express the great liking she has of Christ's beauty; and
thus she does,

1. By returning back his praise, saying, Thou art fair, etc.

2. By amplifying and enlarging his beauty, or by adding to his praise, by his
amiable delectablenesse, whereby he enflameth her heart, yea, pleasant.

As for the last clause: Also our bed is green, I think it is to be joined with
the last verse, being a part of that joint praise which belongs both to
Christ and his Church, unto which I shall refer it.

Behold thou art fair, etc.
The Church returns the word Japhet, fair, unto Christ; as if she should
say; yea, rather thou art fair, and whatsoever beauty I have, I have it from
thee: I am Iaphet, fair, but it is because thou art Japhet, fair, my fairness
springs out of thee, who art the fountain of spiritual beauty, and have not
the Spirit by measure, John 3. 34. But in such fullness, that of thy fullness
we have all received, and grace for grace, John 1. 16. Christ is the fairest
of all the sons of Adam, Psalm. 45. 2. From whom the Church receives all her
fairness and beauty, so that she does not assume the praise unto her self,
but gives back to her Beloved, from whom she had received it, and unto whom it
was due, according to the practice of the Church, in Psalm 15. I. Not unto us O
LORD, but to thy Name let be the praise. She adds the praise of his amiable
delectablenesse.

Yea, pleasant.
The Church adds another Epithet of love, saying; thou art Nagnim, turned of
the Greeks (...), (...) Jucundus amabilis, decorus, gratus fuit.
which implies the very spring or flower of beauty, a term far before the
former, which signifies pleasant, amiable, delightful, beautiful. Now the
Covenant which the Lord made with his people in Zech. 11. 10. is called beauty,
or pleasantness. And Moses desired, that the beauty of the Lord might be upon
them in the performance of his Covenant, Psalm. 90. 17. And David desires to
remain in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, that he might
behold the pleasantness of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 4.

Now all these things were fulfilled and completed in Christ, who by his
heavenly Doctrines, and words of grace and consolation to his people, does
become sweet as the honey comb unto them, and very pleasant, All Christ's
administrations of the covenant of grace are his staves of beauty and
pleasantness. From this high commendations of the Church given unto Christ,
Observe,

First, That Christ is the fountain of all that spiritual beauty of the Saints.

As Christ had commended her graces, so she praises him for the cause of
those graces. For it is clear, that the Church has all her beauty and
ornaments from him, it is he that washes her, and makes her glorious, Ephesians.
5. 26. It is most true, that the beauty and glory of the heavenly new Jerusalem
is exceeding great, as it is set forth, Revel. 21. Yet the glory of the
Bridegroom Jesus Christ far exceeds in beauty, even as much as the Ocean does
the lesser streams, for he is the fountain of all glory and beauty. Hence it
is, the Church returns this praise unto him; for he indeed is fair and
comely. Who can set forth the glory of Christ? who can describe his beauty and
comeliness? Not the carnal men of the world, in whose account Christ had no
form or comeliness upon him, Isa. 53. 3. And in respect of his depressed
condition in the world, and by reason of his deep sufferings, his visage was
marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men, Isa. 52.
14. Therefore he was rejected of men, Isa. 53. 3. He was scarce deemed worthy
the name of a man; he had no respect or estimation in the eyes of the men of
the world: these see not his beauty, and therefore praise him not: but the
Saints do glory in Christ's beauty and comeliness, because they see him to be
the fountain of glory and praise.

Secondly, Observe,

The Church does not so much glory in her own beauty, as she does in the
glory of Christ.

The Saints do indeed glory in their own beauty; but yet so, as they know
they have all from Christ, and so indeed they glory only in him, according to
that in 1 Cor. 1. 31. If any man glory, ^er him glory in the Lord. Therefore
Christ is made all things of God unto us, as wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption: That no flesh should glory in his presence.
Thus the Apostle attributes the glory of his life unto Christ, Gal. 2. 20. I
live (says he) yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I^tew
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. So that we derive all our life, beauty, and comeliness
from Christ, so that we cannot so much glory in our own beauty, as in the
comeliness of Christ, the fountain of all spiritual beauty.

Thirdly, observe,

That Christ is exceeding delectable and well-pleasing unto his Church, in all
his administrations of grace unto them.

Christ's words are full of grace, and therefore sweeter then the honeycomb:
the performance of his Covenant is beautiful and pleasant. And indeed Christ
is the very spring or fountain of pleasantness and beauty: for there is in him
a greater measure of beauty then is powered upon the Church, as appears by the
Churches adding another Epithet of love, saying, yea, pleasant, an expression
far beyond the former. And this falls out, because he has received the
Spirit above measure, we in measure; he had the Spirit as a fountain, we as
the streams: he had all glory and beauty as the sun; we receive of his divine
beams, as the bright rays of his glory darted down upon us. Thus much for the
Spouses commendations of her beloved, either of them having praised each other
in their several speeches; in the next place they do both jointly rejoice and
glory together. Yea, our bed is green.

VERSE. 17.
The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of Fur,
This joint speech of Christ and his Church contains a glorious declaration.

1. The place of conception, or the increase of the children of the Church, in
these words, our bed is green.

2. The place of spiritual education and instruction, that is, in the houses.

Which houses of Christ are set forth by their adjuncts, Beams and Galleries.

These beams and galleries are set forth by the matter they were of: the beams
were Cedar, the galleries were Fur.

Our bed is green.
The Hebrew word signifies a bed, or Bed-steed: Beds (...) Lectus, sponda.
were used to rest and sleep on, as in Psalm. 132. 3, 4. And sometimes they did
use to sit upon beds at their Feasts and Banquets, as in Esth. 1. 5, 6. For it
was a custom in those eastern Countries, to use beds in stead of tables, that
so soon as they had eaten, they might presently go to sleep: whence it is,
that the Prophet prophesies against those that lie upon beds of ivory, and
stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the Flock,
etc. Amos 6. 4. See also Ezekiel. 23. 41. And John 13. 25. Again, the high Altars
and places of offering sacrifice are called beds, Isa. 57. 7. Upon a lofty and
high mountain have thou set thy bed, even thither wentest thou up to offer
sacrifice, says the Lord by the Prophet: that is, thine Altars have thou set
up a loft in open view; like an impudent Strumpet, that shows her filthiness
in the sight of others, as we read in Ezekiel. 16. 24, 25.

Our bed is green.
The word translated green, signifies to flourish, to (...) inde. (...) Vires
ere.
be fruitful, and to wax strong, and of force: it is not so much meant of
color, as of budding forth and flourishing, like trees and plants in the time
of spring, when things are green and flourishing.

The word is often applied unto men, setting forth their flourishing and
prosperous estate: hence it is said in Job 15. 32. That a wicked man shall be
cut off before his time, and his branch shall not be green. That is, his
flourishing estate and condition shall end before his time; for he shall not so
exalt himself in prosperity, as he had thought to have done. And David speaking
of the prosperity of the wicked, says, I have seen the wicked in great power,
and spreading himself like a green bay tree, Psalm. 37. 35. That is, fresh and
flourishing, as Nebuchadnezzar said, I was at rest in my house, and green (or
flourishing) in my Palace. And David speaking of his prosperity, likeneth
himself to a green, or flourishing olive tree in the house of God, Ps. 52. 8.
Now by this comparision, or similitude of a bed, by which the Church became so
flourishing and fruitful; we may understand,

1. The flourishing, fruitful, increasing condition of the Saints, who shall
bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and green (or flourishing)
Psalm. 92. 14. That is, they sprout or grow up in stature and fruitfullnesse,
through the blessing of God, and the increasings of his grace, in whose house
they are planted, according to that of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 3. 6. I have
planted, Apollo watered, but God gives the increase. The Saints are fruitful
in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1. 6. 10. or,

2. We may understand it of the spiritual increase of the faithful, which are
begotten by the seed of the word: Christ by the power of his word and Spirit
sows the seed of his word, the Saints as the ground, receive the seed into
the midst of their hearts, by which means they as spiritual Sons and Daughters
are begotten unto Christ. Thus we have it in Psalm. 45. 16. Instead of thy
fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth.
This is meant of the succeeding Christians, that by the immortal seed of the
word are begotten to Christ and his Church, he being their Father, Isa. 9. 6.
And so is that heavenly Jerusalem, which seeks her salvation, not by the
first Covenant of the Law, but by the second of the Gospel, which is said to
be above, because it has its Original from Heaven: she is called the Mother
of us all, Gal. 4. 26. For as Sara was the Mother of Isaac, the true and proper
Heir of his Father Abraham; so is this Heavenly Jerusalem, to wit, the Church
of Christ, the mother of all the faithful, who are Heirs of the Kingdom of
Christ. We may take either, or both of these Interpretations. Now according to
the first, if we take the meaning of these words for the fruitful and
increasing condition of the Saints in the knowledge of God, and in the graces
of his Spirit: Observe,

First, That the Saints become flourishing and fruitful by the communion they
have with Jesus Christ. Hence it is the Apostle prays that the Collossians
might be fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
Unto this are all the Saints exhorted, Ephesians. 4. 15. But speaking the truth in
love (says the Apostle) that ye may grow up into him in all things, which is
the head, even Christ. The Apostle speaks of the spiritual growth of the whole
body of Christ, and every Member thereof, who were to bear an earnest
affection to the truth, whereby they might grow in Christ, for he quickneth and
cherishes his Church, which consists of diverse Members, and gives unto each
of them a suitable measure and proportion; and by this effectual working in
the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edisying of it
self in love, ver. 16. Now we must know, that this spiritual growth does not
flow from any principle of nature, but it is Christ thet ministers vigor and
strength above nature. For which observe the phrase in Psalm. 92. 14. speaking
of the righteous, says, He shall bring forth fruit in old age: In the
Original it is, in graynesse, or hary age. Now in old age, when natural
strength is decayed, none can be (...) cunicio.
fruitful without a supernatural supply of strength and vigor. Hence it is,
that David prays unto the Lord, saying, Cast me not off in the time of old
age, forsake me not when my strength fails, now also when I am old and
gray headed, O God forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto this
Generation, and thy power to every one that is to come, Psalm. 71. 9. 18. It is
said of Sara, that she received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered
of a child, when she was past age: And he (to wit Abraham) as good as dead,
etc. Heb. 11. 11, 12. So are the Saints, as it were, past age, and dead by
nature, therefore they must (as Sara) receive strength from Christ to conceive
and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.

Secondly, if we understand the words of the spiritual increase of the Saints,
begotten unto Christ by the seed of the word: Observe,

That multitudes of Children are borne unto Christ, which are begotten by the
immortal seed of the word. For by this phrase Our bed is green, notes unto
us the fertility of Children (to wit of Sons and Daughters) arising from the
womb of the Church, especially of the Gentiles. The Evangelicall Prophet seeing
this, it caused him to cry out in this wise. The desolate has more Children
then the married wife. And because of the multitudes that should come in and
embrace Christ, he adds, Enlarge the place of thy Tents, and let them stretch
forth the Curtains of thy habitations, etc. Isa. 54. 1, 2. The Prophet speaks
as if so many should come in to Christ, that she should seem to want room to
receive them; and therefore bids her stretch forth her curtains, alluding to
the Tents in which they dwelt. And in Chap. 66. 8. he cries out by way of
admiration, Who has heard such a thing? shall the Earth be made to bring forth
in one day? or shall a Nation be borne at once? for as soon as Zion travailed,
she brought forth her children. By this the Prophet does intimate the
multitudes of those that should suddenly be borne a new, and begotten unto
Christ by the publication of the Gospel, which was figured out by those
multitudes that returned on a sudden from Babylon, as if a whole Nation had
been borne in one day. This was the promise that the Lord made to Abraham, and
it is not to be limited to his Children after the flesh, but to his Children of
the promise, that his seed should be as the stars, and as the dust for
multitude, Genesis 28. 14. And at the first promulgation of the Gospel, there
were daily added unto the Church, Acts 2. 47. And the Savior of the Gospel
was manifest in every place, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Hence it was that Beleivers after
Christ's ascension were called (...), The multitude of them that believed. And
it was Prophesied that Ten men shall take hold out of all Languages of the
Nations, of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for
we have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8. 20. 23. That is, many of the
Nations should embrace the truth, which in former times were restrained within
the Nation of the Jews, according to the Prophecy in Genes. 9. 27. where it is
said, God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, etc.
But we must not make universality the note of the Saints, for universality is
common to Antichristian Idolatours. The whore was to set upon many waters,
which were peoples, and multitudes, and Nations, and tongues: and the Kings of
the earth were to be made drunk with the wine of her fornications, and all the
Nations to drink thereof, Revel. 17. 15. 18. 3. Therefore we must understand
the Church of Christ to be numerous in her self, and not comparatively,
setting her with the world; but to be many comparatively with the old Church of
the Jews, for more are the children of the desolate then of the married wife,
Isa. 54. 1.

To conclude, this spiritual birth is that which concerns both Christ and his
Church; for the union of Christ and his Church is the cause of such an
everlasting greenness and fruitfullnesse. Christ is as the Agent, and the
Church in her senses and affections is the patient: Christ sows the seed of
his word, and the Church as the ground receives the seed, that so between them
are many spiritual Sons and daughters begotten unto God. Hence they do
mutually and jointly rejoice and sing at the Churches enlargement. It is not
said My bed, but our bed, thereby showing that it concerns them both. The
heavenly procreation of many spiritual Sons and daughters, and the fresh and
flourishing springing of those goodly plants which are thus borne of the Spirit
of God, is matter of joy and rejoicing both to Christ and his Church.

Thus much for the place of conception, now follows the place of spiritual
education.

Verse. 17.
The beams of our house are Cedar, the Rafters are of Firr.
Here is commended their house which they dwell in; and the commendations is
from the matter which it is built of: which is expressed by two adjuncts,
beams, and galleries.

The beams of our house.
The word Translated beams, signifies beams or Rafters, (...) Occurit, Inde.
(...) Tignum.
which bear up the roof of the house, or any timber or stone, whereof any
such prop is made. Beams are for strength and sustentation of the house: by
these beams may be meant those that are strong; as James, Cephas, and John, are
called Pillars of the Church, Gal. 2. 9. because these by the preaching of the
doctrine of faith, did, as it were, stay and uphold the Churches of Christ.

Of our house.
Our house) Or the houses of us, for the Catholic body is distinguished into
sundry particular Congregations, or Churches, in every of which (as in sundry
Nurceries) the Saints are brought up and Nursed. The Church is called the house
of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. which is Interpreted to be the Church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of truth. And so the faithful are called, the house of
God, Heb. 3. 6. But what is this Palace? It cannot be so properly meant of
Heaven, in which the Saints shall dwell for ever but rather of an house while
they are yet in this World, and this house is the Church of Christ, she is the
Temple of the living God. Every faithful soul is the habitation of Christ;
and hence it is, that the Psalmist calls upon men to open the doors of their
heart to receive Christ: Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in Psalm. 24.

The beams of our house are Cedar.
The beams of this spiritual house are set forth by the matter they were of,
they were of Cedar: Cedar is a Tree very common in Mount Lebanon; and (as some
say) like unto Juniper, or rather to Cypres for leaf; but for the Tree it
self, it is tall, and strong, and the wood of permament nature, and of a very
sweet smell, and it rotteth not, nor admitting any worm. Now the Saints (who
are the beams, rafters, and materials of this house) are compared to Cedars,
in Psa. 92. 13. And Balaam likeneth the Tabernacles of Israel unto Cedar trees
beside the waters, for goodlinesse, Numb. 24. 5, 6. This wood was used in
Solomon's Temple, 1 K. 6. 36. And he made Cedars like Sycamore Trees, which are
in the val', for abundance, 1 Kings 10. 27. Prefiguring the Saints of whom the
spiritual Temple of the Lord was to be built: the Saints are as living stones,
put into the edifice or building of Christ's spiritual Temple. Thus is
commended the matter of the beams of this house, wherein is set forth the
stability and strength of this house or houses. Now follows the seting forth
of the excellency and stateliness of this house.

And the rafters (or gallerirs) of firr.
Rafters) or Galleries, as the word borrowed from running intends: Galleries
were certain walking places, which were built on the tops of houses. Now in
such Galleries as these, men were wont to walk and converse together: So here,
these Galleries in Christ's house may signify the sweet conversing the Saints
have with Christ, in the communication of all his graces. These Galleries are
set forth by the matter they were of.

Of Fir
Our Translation says of fir, some others Cypres; the Hebrew Brothim (whose
singular for the form of its Characture, may be Brut) is turned by the Latin
word Bruta, which was a Tree (as Pliny records) Pliny in Lib. 12. Cap. 17.
like to a broad Cypres tree, with whitish boughs, of excellent sweet savor,
much like unto Cedar. This sets out unto us the excellency of Christ's
Galleries, wherein he does sweetly converse with his people, and wherein his
people do contemplate of divine things.

These Cedars and Brutine trees, may both be applied unto the persons of the
Saints; and also unto the doctrine of faith, wherewith the Curch is built upon
Christ the chief corner Stone, as in 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. where the Apostle
says, No man can lay any other foundation then that which is laid, which is
Christ: Now (says he) if any man build upon this foundation, Gold, Silver,
precious stones, etc. That is meant of the Saints, who are the super-structure,
built upon Christ the foundation: thus was the building of the new Jerusalem,
whose twelve gates were of pearls, and the street of the city was pure gold,
Rev. 21. 21. Now all these similitudes do set forth those holy persons and
graces wherewith the Church should be adorned: all those things, signified by
the houses of Cedar, and by the Galleries of fir, are strong and firm and very
redolent and savory, unto the comfort of the Saints, and the glory of Christ.

In the Verse before Christ and his Church sung the praise of their Bed, here
they sing the praise of their Houses.

Hence Observe,

1. That the Saints are Christ's house.

They are called, the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. and the Temple of God, 2 Cor.
6. 16. Heaven is his house, where he manifests his glory, and the world is
his house, where he manifests his power and wisdom; but the Saints are his
house, where he manifests his especial grace and favor. The Lord dwells
with the humble spirit, Isa. 57. 15. That is, he is present with them, to
cheer and comfort them with his grace and spirit.

Now the Lord makes use of the Saints as men do of their houses.

1. Men use to abide and be resident in their houses; a house is a place of
residence. So Christ is always present with his Saints, by his Spirit unto the
end of the world, Matthew. 28. 18. And lo (says he) I am with you unto the end.

2. Men do refresh themselves by eating, and drinking, and the like, in
houses: thus Christ is said to feast and sup with his Saints, Revel. 3. 20.
Christ does converse familiarly, cheerfully, and comfortably with them, as
friends use to Feast and make merry one with another.

3. Men do take great delight and contentment in their houses, as being a part
of their worldly excellenency: So Christ takes great contentment and delight
in his Saints: The upright are his delight, Prove. 11. 20.

4. Men lay up their greatest treasures and their most precious Jewels in
their houses: So does Christ, he comes into the soul (his house) to bestow his
Jewels, and to spread his treasures of grace there; he makes the spirit of
glory to rest upon his Saints, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

Now as the glory of Christ's house is set forth, so also is the glory of the
beams or rafters thereof commended unto us. You heard that these beams were
applied to the persons of the Saints, wherewithal the house of Christ is
builded. Christ is the Foundation, and the Saints are the super-structure put
into the building. This is that the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom
coming (that is unto Christ) as unto a living stone: ye also (says he) as
lively stones are built up as spiritual house, an holy Priest-hod, to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So Gods house is
built of Saints, of lively stones, such as have received life from him, and
this house is Gods dwelling place, where he communicates both grace and glory.
And it is called a spiritual house, because it is built up by the Spirit of
God.

Now as Christ's house is commended by the beams thereof; so the beams or
rafters, are set forth by the matter they are of and that is Cedar.

Hence note,

That the Saints (who are the materials of Christ's house) in respect of their
excellency, are called Cedars. Cedar was used in Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 6.
36. and did prefigure the Saints under the Gospel Church. And the Saints are
compared to Cedars. Psalm. 92. 13. Now the Saints may well be compared to
Cedars, in diverse respects, but especially in these that follow.

1. The Cedar is a very tall and high tree, all other trees are but shrubs unto
them. So are the Saints, in their gifts, in their graces, in their privileges
and seize; they are above the men of the world, and therefore they are
taller then the people by the head and shoulders, as it was said of King Saul.
Solomon confirms this and says, The righteous is more excellent then his
Neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.

2. Cedar is a tree of incomparable strength: So the Saints are made stronger
then their enemies; they are so strong that they are become more then
Conquerours, through him that loved them.

3. Cedar is a very durable wood: So the Saints are such as endure to the end;
they stand fast in the faith of Jesus Christ, and are not moved away from the
hope that is in them. Though they walk in the midst of temptations, yet they
never give over their hope: Though thou kill me (says Job) yet will I trust in
thee. And though the Saints walk in darkness and have no light at all, yet
they will trust in the name of the Lord, and stay themselves upon their God,
Isa. 50. 10.

4. Cedar rotteth not; no more do the Saints decay in their graces. Indeed
there may be some spiritual languour or deadnes befall them, by reason of some
desertion or temptation, and the like: but for the graces of the Spirit in
them, they never perish nor decay.

5. Cedar (as some report) will not admit of any worm; no more will the Saints
admit of any worm of coveteousnesse, or any worldly thing to consume them, or
eat them out.

6. Cedar is very sweet of smell; So the Saints are odoriferous and redolent of
savor, in all their Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ: and to man in their
lives and conversations.

7. Cedar (as some say) will putrify and kill things that are living and
restore and conserve that which is rotten: So the Saints have received power
and grace from Christ to kill and mortify all their lusts, and have also
received power from him to live and revive, although dead before. This Christ
himself tells us, John 5. 25. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they shall live.

8. And lastly, the Cedar is more fruitful in age then before; and for this
cause are the Saints compared unto Cedars, in that as Cedars they grow from
perfection to perfection, bearing most fruit in their age: as it is in Psalm.
92. 14. a Christian is a Cedar, set in Christ the chief Cedar, he is a plant
that grows in him, he has eternal root, and therefore he flourishes
eternally.

Lastly, from the Galleries of converse and contemplation: Observe, That Christ
does sweetly converse with his people, in his Galleries of contemplations.
Galleries are for walking, and walking for converse: Christ has his Galleries
where he does converse with his Saints. Now it is by faith we must ascend up
into these Galleries, and being there, we may with Abraham see Christ's day afar
of, and rejoice. It is in these Galleries, where we may, with Jacob, see a
Vision of Angels ascending and descending upon the Son of man. Here is that
Mount that with Moses we may see all Canaan before we come there: and with
Peter, James, and John, we may see Christ in excellent and transcendent glory.
In these Galleries it is that Christ reveals such glorious secrets unto his
people, which are unpossible to be uttered; as he did unto Paul in his rapture,
2 Cor. 12. 4. I heard things (says the Apostle) which is not lawful (or is
unpossible) for a man to utter. That is, none but God (...)
himself could reveal such things unto me.

In a word, Christ does take the soul into these Galleries, and shows it all
the glory, excellency, riches, and glory of heaven, and does also, to the
unspeakable comfort of his Saints, assure them of the fruition and enjoyment of
all these things. Thus much for the first Chapter.

CANTICLES. CHAPTER II.
VERSE. 1, 2.
I am the rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the Valleys. As the Lilie among
thorns, so is my love among the daughters.
THIS Song is called the Song of Songs (as you heard from the Title of it) not
only from its excellency, but also (as some suppose) because it does contain
in it diverse Songs: If so, then we have finished one Song in the former
Chapter, in which we left Christ and his Church in the Galleries of
contemplation. In that former Chapter, the Church began the Song, and both
Christ and she did jointly conclude it.

In this Chapter are two parts.

In the first part the Bridegroom Christ commends himself and his Spouse,
and this is contained in the two first Verses of this Chapter.

In the second part the Bride praises the Bridegroom, recites his benefits
to wards her, and earnestly desires his continual presence and favor, and
this reaches from verse. 3. to the end of the Chapter.

The Bridegroom sets forth her own dignity and the Brides, verse. 1, 2. She
again answering, praises him, and declares the favors that he has bestowed
upon her, in leading of her into his Banqueting house, sustaining her with
Flagons, and comforting her with apples, even when she was ready to faint,
Verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. Afterward she declares the coming of the Bridegroom unto
her, his calling, and making large promises unto her, from the 7. Verse unto
the 13. And therefore she not only rejoices in his communion, but desires
also his presence until all his promises be fullfilled, from verse. 14. unto
the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1.
I am the rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys.
In this Verse we have Messiah's declaration of his own excellency, and this
is done by way of comparison.

1. His commendations are held out to us under the resemblance of a rose: which
rose is set forth by a certain peculiar Field where it grew, which from the
Original appears to be Sharon. I am the rose of Sharon.

2. He does assimilate himself to the precious Lilie, which Lilie also is
commended by the fertility of the place where it grew; to wit, in the Valleys,
or the low and moist places of the Earth. And the Lilie of the Valleys.

I am the rose of Sharon, etc.
The Pronoun (Any) which signifies in our tongue I, is common both to man or
woman; as I man, or I (...)
woman, so it cannot be decided by the form of Speech, whither Christ or his
Church uttered these words: hence it is thought of some to be the speech of
Christ: Of others, to be spoken by the Church: It is most true, that Christ and
his Church are both of them sweet, fair, comely, and beautiful; yea, so
exceeding sweet and beautiful, that all the sweetest Roses, and whitest lilies
in the world, are not comparable unto them. If Christ be called the Rose and
the Lilie, it is most true, he is so, in respect of the excellency of his
graces in himself, which he does most freely communicate with his Saints. And
if the Church be compared unto them; it is a very fit comparison, whereby her
graces received from Christ may be shown forth, wherein she is most lovely and
pleasant, for sweet odor and beauty, according to that promise made in Hos.
14. 5. 7. I will be as the dew upon Israel, and he shall grow as the lilie: and
they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent thereof shall be
as the Wine of Lebanon. He means that the knowledge of him and his doctrine,
and the receiving of his graces shall be very pleasing and delightful unto his
people, like unto excellent wine.

But I take these to be the words of the Bridegroom commending himself for
his most excellent sweet virtue, testified to all, but especially to his Church
by communicating his grace and spirit unto her. The Church does not speak this
of her self, for then she should commend her self, which is not meet. The
Apostle in veighs against false praisers, 2 Cor. 10. 12. We dare not (says he)
make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some that commend
themselves. And in another place he speaks home to this purpose, No man (says
he) lives to himself, Romans 14. 7. That is, none ought to live unto himself;
yea, even Christ himself relating to himself as a mere man, says, That his
witness is not true if he bear witness of himself; John 5. 31. But yet in
another place relating to himself as mediator, as God and man in one person,
and one with the father, he spoke clean contrary to this: Though I do bear
record of my self (says he) yet my record is true, John 8. 14. So that the
Saints may not commend themselves, although it be true, they did sometimes
report something of their own virtues, but it was for holy example and
instructions sake, and it was still with reference unto the maine object of
praise, which was Christ.

The Saints may commend themselves.

1. When the praise thereof is given unto God. 2. When it is for holy example
and instructions sake. 3. When they are forced thereunto by way of
justification, through the calumniations of wicked people.
Thus Paul (as you know) was constrained to praise himself, least his doctrine
should be defaced, 2 Cor. 11. 17. The false Apostles which sought all occasions
to discredit him, did force him thereunto: and he says, That he dealt therein
after the manner of fools.

Put for Christ to praise himself, it is without question very good and
lawful: for,

1. Christ does never commend himself above his worth and excellency; neither
did he commend himself above that which was meet.

2. Christ was God, and therefore could not sin: and as he was man he was holy,
harmless, and separate from sinners; there was never any sin found in him, 1
Pet. 2. 22.

3. As Mediator he was filled with the holy Ghost beyond all measure, and
therefore his actions were holy, and all of them infinitely praiseworthy.

4. He has not a greater in the point of our justification, sanctification,
and eternal salvation, to bear witness of, or to commend, then himself. He
indeed is the Apostle of our profession, and the Angel or Messenger of the
Covenant between God and us, and therefore unto him give all the Prophets
witness, Act. 10. 43.

Now then we may see, that as the Bride began the former Song, seting forth the
excellency of the Bridegroom, and her desire to be with him, as the Author and
Spring of all her joy and happiness: so here, the Bridegroom begins first
to praise himself, and then he commends his Spouse.

Now in that Christ does thus praise himself: Observe,

That Christ may and does commend and praise the sweetness and beauty of his
own graces unto his Saints. Christ does here commend himself and his Spouse,
both of them being excellent, good, sweet, fair, and beautiful; yea so, as
they resemble each the other: for as he is as the lilie, she is so likewise;
but yet Christ praises himself in the first place, because he is the very
Fountain of sweetness and beauty, all fulness of sweet things is in him, and
from him the Church receives all her goodness, beauty, and sweetness. It
does appear that Christ may and did praise himself for his own virtue and
graces, by those self predications of his which we find in the Scriptures.
Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden. When he read that place of the Prophet Isaiah,
Chap. 61. 1. etc. He told the people, this day is this Scripture fullfilled in
your ears. When the excommunicated man asked him who the Son of God was, he
answered him, Thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee:
and he told the Samaritanesse plainly, that he was the Messiah. And it is said
of the two Disciples, That beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
Expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Now
all this does commend unto us the excellency of Christ's graces, that he might
praise and commend himself without the least blot of arrogance, or taking too
much upon himself. Thus Christ might do, being the very Fountain and Spring
of all spiritual sweetness and beauty. Thus much for Christ's commending
himself, next we have the commendation it self.

The rose of Sharon.
Christ's commendation is held forth under the resemblance of a sweet Rose which
grew in a certain peculiar Field, Viz. in Sharon. The Greeks turn it, The
flower of the field. The Rose is the Queen of (...) Rosa.
flowers, most excellent for sweetness and beauty. In the Translation we have
the species used for the Genus, and so he is called an especial flower which
is the rose.

Of Sharon.
The Hebrews express the word Field by Shadeh, as in Genesis 3. 1. but here the
word is Sharon, which expresses not any field, but one particular field so
called. Of which field Sharon we read in 1 Chronicles. 5. 16. bordering upon the
holy Land. The fruitfullnesse of this field may appear in 1 Chronicles. 27. 29.
where David fed his Cattle. And the Prophet makes mention of the excellency
of Carmell and Sharon, Isa. 35. 2. And when he promises mercy, he says,
Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, Isa. 65. 10. But when he threatens
desolation, he says, Sharon is like a Wilderness, Isa. 33. 9. It was a fat
field, and therefore employed for grazing or fatting of Cattle. Now unto the
rose growing in this pasture, Christ assimilates himself. Now let us take
notice, that in diverse respects Christ may be likened unto a rose, which may
serve as so many Observations. Christ may be resembled to a rose in such
respects as these.

1. The rose is pleasant to the eye for the red and orient color of it: so is
Christ, he is said to be white and ruddy, the chief of ten thousand, Song 5.
10. White and red meeting in a rose, it is (as I may say) the beauty of
beauties, and such is the beauty of Jesus Christ. The red color of Christ may
signify his bloody sufferings: Candet nudatum pectus, rubet cruentum latus,
tensa arent viscera, decora languent lumina, regia pallent ora, procera rigent
brachia, crura pendent marmorea, rigat terebratos pedes beati sanguinis unda.
Aug. Med. cap. 6.
Of him it is said, Who is this that comes from Edom, with red Garments from
Bozra? He is glorious in apparel, etc. wherefore art thou red in apparel,
and thy Garments like him that treads in the winepresse? I have trodden the
winepresse alone, etc. Isa. 63. 1. 2, Christ was stained with his own blood.
He is also white in his righteousness, his righteousness is described by
white linen, Revel. 19. 8. Now this temperament and mingling of white and red
after such a mystical way in Christ, denotes the surpassing beauty of Christ,
making him more glorious then any in the World. No marvel then though the
Psalmist says thus of him, Thou art fairer then the sons of Adam, Psalm. 45.
2. It is true, the Prophet Isaiah brings in carnal people speaking thus of
Christ: He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him there is
no beauty that we should desire him, Isa. 53. 2. But though Christ appear thus
to carnal hearts, yet he is very excellent and desirable unto the Saints: he
is to them red and orient of color, as the rose of sharon.

2. The rose is sweet and comfortable to the smelling, to refresh the senses,
and so the chiefest of all Flowers. Such a one is Christ, nothing in the world
is more pleasing and delightful then he is to his Saints: the redolency of his
grace does exceedingly take the senses of their souls: his love like
odoriferous flowers does, to their unspeakable delight, draw and ravish their
minds after him: whereby the senses of their soul are exceedingly taken with
his sweetness. Hence it was, that Christ was represented to us by fragrant
wine, by odoriferous Ointment, and by sweet spikenard, myrrh, and camphyre, as
in the former Chapter, and here by a sweet smelling rose. This comfort caused
Paul to forget the things that were behind him, and to count all things dung in
comparison of Christ: such a savor it was that did comfort and refresh the
Martyrs senses and affections: when one of them thought no otherwise of the
fire, then if he had been lodged in a pleasant bed of roses. When PolyCarpus
(Bishop of Smyrna) was burned, in stead of stench, the Christians are reported
to Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 15.
have smelt a fragrant sweet odor, as of incense, or of some precious perfume.
Hence it is, that the faith and graces of the Saints are so impregnable, and
that their hope is so indefatigable and never out of breath, that no storms of
temptation can break their spirits, and make them give out: it is nothing (I
say) but that exceeding swavity and sweetness, that they find to be in Christ:
his sweetness makes them take pleasure in infirmities and reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for his sake; and when they be
weak in themselves, then they are strong in him, and more then Conquerours, as
the Apostle says.

Besides, Christ is no less sweet unto his Father also; for by Christ all our
services are made sweet and redolent. It was not the savor of Noah's Beasts
and Birds, (Genesis 8. 21.) but the savor of Christ's Sacrifice, which caused the
heavenly Father to smell a sweet savor of rest with the Earth. It is through
Christ we find acceptance with the Father: it is he that is gone into the
heavenly Sanctuary (as in the Law the High Priest went into the Sanctuary) with
Vrim and Thummim, with the names of his people upon his Breast, for a memorial
before the Lord continually: so that now through his mediation we may draw
near unto God in Plerophorie, and full assurance of faith: nothing doubting,
but that God will for his sake accept both of our persons and of our prayers.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, If any man sin we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1
John 2. 1, 2. Here is sweetness indeed, let us but observe the Apostle.

1. He says, If any man sin, not as though there were some that did not sin;
for that this very Apostle beats against expressly in the end of the first
Chapter: but when he says, If any man sin, he speaks cordial things, he
speaks to the heart and comfort of sinners, showing that with God there is no
acceptance of persons; but all without exception of any exterior adjuncts and
qualitits, do find grace in Gods sight through Christ: this is plainly the
inference of the indefinite particle, Any.

2. He says, that we have an Advocate; an Advocate is a a forensicall word,
and it signifies properly one that is called to, or assumed as an assistant, as
a friend, as an helper, as an intercessor: such a one is Christ for his Saints,
he is their Patron, he is their spokse-man, he it is that pleads their cause,
he it is that by the merit of his expiation, does entreat for them.

3. Christ is an Advocate with the Father: he is so with the Father that he is
own natural Son; so with him that he needs but only show himself for us,
and without speaking any word we are accepted: hence it is that he says, I
will pray the Father for you, John 16. 26.

4. Our Advocate is Jesus; a most sweet and heartravishing name, and it
signifies a Savior; one that, does not only entreat for us, but perfectly
save us.

5. He is called Christ, there is an addition and increase of comfort in this
name, it signifies anointed. He was anointed to be our Priest, to offer a
reconciling Sacrifice to God for us.

6. Christ is called the Righteous, and that (...) by way of eminency; none so
righteous as he, he is perfectly righteous, so that he need not plead for
himself, he pleads only for us, and therefore must needs have good success
in his pleading.

Lastly, Christ is such a one as stands in our room, and takes the whole
penalty and punishment due to us for our offense, upon himself: therefore the
Apostle adds that he is the propitiation for our sins: That is, he is the
Sacrifice that begs and procures pardoning mercy for us. Thus Christ gets
acceptance for us with the Father, according as he says, Whatsoever you will
ask the Father in my name he will give it you, John 16. 23. It is Christ that
puts incense upon our prayers, and mingles them with the sweet odours of his
own merits: he is the only Altar of Christians, sanctifying all their gifts
and Sacrifices.

3. The rose delights in shadowy places: for as over much cold would starve
it, so overmuch heat would scorch and burn it. Thus Christ does appear unto
his Saints in a moderate way, in all his dispensations; he sometime afflicts
his people that he may purge them, and heal them; which cannot be done without
some smart and bitterness, but yet withal he mingles abundance of love and
sweetness with those afflictions: So that his sweetness does (as it were)
swallow up all his bitterness: his bitterness is in the lowest degree, but
his sweetness in the superltive. Christ does so moderate his dispensations,
that he will not suffer us by wantonness to abuse his love and mercy, neither
yet will he suffer us to perish by afflictions.

4. The rose is a cooler unto nature: thus Christ is a cooler of his Fathers
wrath and indignation. The soul being convicted of its sinfullnesse, speaks as
the Prophet does, Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among
us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? God is devouring fire and
everlasting burnings in relation to sinners: his wrath is like the fire of
hell, as I may say: the breath of his indignation is like a River of brimstone,
kindling and perpetually maintaining the flames of Tophet: What shall the poor
soul do now? Here is nothing but menaces and threatenings, terrors and
amazements, death and destruction, and where is the remedy? No where but in
Christ alone. Israel passing through the Wilderness had a Cloud to cover him,
and defend him from the Scorching Sunbeams: now what was that Cloud but a type
and shadow of Christ, as the Apostle makes it, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. he makes there
the Cloud, and the Sea, and the Manna, and the water of the Rock, to be all
figures and Images of Christ. Christ is a Sea to wash, Manna to feed, water to
refresh, and a cloud to hide the soul from the hot and burning wrath of God:
the fiery beams of that wrath would surely suffocate and stifle us, were it not
that Christ did interpose and sot between to ibnubilate and veil our souls
from it.

5. The rose though it be sweet and comfortable to the smelling, yet it is
offensive to the sense of feeling, because it is full of prickles. Thus is
Christ's Gospel accompanied with the Cross and Tribulations, his self
suffered in his own person, so that in respect of his depressed condition the
Prophet says, His visage was so marred more then any man's, and his form more
then the Sons of men, Isa. 52. 14. And again he says, He was despised and
rejected of them, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: he was oppressed
and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth, etc. Isa. 53. 3. 7. His Members
also must suffer the same things, they must drink of his Cup, and be Baptized
with his Baptism if they will be his Disciples, they must take up their cross
and follow him. Christ is the Rose of Sharon, or the flower of the field. Now
Sharon (as was hinted before) was a field of pasture for Bulls and Oxen
contiguate to Bashan; it being a field for grazing and feeding of Cattle, must
not only be fertile, but also admit shaddowing plats for the best shelter, in
the heat of the day: so that the roses of Sharon must needs be flowers of a
singular kind. Now we may note two or three things from the place where this
rose grew, towit in Sharon.

1. Sharon was an open field where Cattle fed: Bulls and Oxen and unreasonable
Beasts did graze there. Hence note, these roses then were subject to all spoil
and lewd trampling under feet: so that Christ and his Church were both exposed
to persecution, to be plucked of all that pass by the way, and trodden down
and eaten of Beasts.

Secondly note from the places fertility and shadow, whereby the rose was
super-excellent, notwithstanding the danger it was in: that notwithstanding the
danger of this flower, by reason of Sharons beasts (yea of Bashans Bulls) and
all those perilous things accompanying Christ, yet Christ is made able to
overcome and conquer them all. Let all his enemies fret and push their fill:
from Edom and Bozra, with red garments stained with blood, yet Christ alone
shall triumph over them; for says he, Who is this that comme^h from Edom, with
died garments from Bozrah? wherefore art thou red in apparel? etc. I have
(says Christ) trodden the wine press alone, and there was none with me: for I
will tread them in mine anger; and trample them in my fury, and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment, Isa. 63.
1, 2, 3. Edom is put by a Synechdoche for all Christsenemies: because among the
enemies of the Church of the Jews, the Edomites were none of the least as
appears in Psalm. 137. 7. and therefore here Edome is propounded as a type of
all the spiritual enemies of Christ and his Church: now Christ threatens to
dissipate and break them al; he will tread them down, as grapes in the
wine press: so that Christ will preserve both himself and Church from the
fury of the Beasts of Sharon, and Bulls of Bashan: for he is exalted at the
right hand of the Father, and shall reign until his enemies be made his
footstool, Psalm. 110. 1.

Thirdly, he is the Rose of the field, not of the garden. Hence note: That
Christ is not a rose sprung up, and become orient, and sweet from the industry
of man, but grows only by the providence and good pleasure of God. Christ was
not brought forth by any humane power, wisdom, or wit; but he was the wisdom
of the Father, and the power of God, so that Christ had his being and all his
excellency from God but not from man.

Fourthly, the flower of the field is not enclosed and made private to a few,
as the flower in the garden, but it is common to all that will gather it: so is
Christ a common Savior, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also: God
has enlarged his heritage, so that the sons of Iaphet may dwell in the Tents
of Shem. Christ does not refuse any that come unto him; but all sorts of
people, Jew and Gentile may be accepted. This is elegantly set forth by the
Prophet, Isa. 41. 19. where God promises to plant in the wilderness the
Cedar, the Sitath tree, the myrtle, the oil tree, the fir tree, the pine, and
the box-tree together. This was also represented unto Peter by a sheet knit at
four corners, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and
wild beasts, and creeping things, and fouls of the air. Act. 10. 12. And the
Apostle was bid to arise, and to slay and eat. Now by this he was taught, that
not only the Gentiles, as well as the Jews were admitted into Christ's kingdom:
but of every nation (as himself afterward expounds it) he that fears God,
and works righteousness, is accepted of him, verse. 35 We read, that the
fleece of Gideon was first wet, and the bean-floor dry; then afterward the
barne-floore was wet, and the fleece dry: so God gave his law first to the seed
of Abraham, and not unto the Gentiles; then the Gentiles which were the wild
olives, were ingraffed, and the natural olives were rejected, but he will at
length save both Jew and Gentile. The Scripture it self speaks thus, Isa. 56.
6, 7. God promises, that he will bring the sons of the stranger (that is the
Gentiles) to his holy mountain, and make them joyful in the house of prayer,
and their burnt-offerings, and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon his
Altar: for (says he) my house shall be called an house of prayer for all
people. So that Christ was an Altar for all nations, where on both Jews and
Gentiles were an offering acceptable to God. And a like place there is in Isa.
60. 7. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee; the Rams
of Nebajoth shall minister unto thee; they shall come up with acceptance on
mine Altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory. Here Christ is made an
Altar, that makes the Gentiles (as I may say) a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
favor unto God.

Fifthly, the flower of the garden is only for pleasure, but the flower of the
field is for profit, it is medicinable, and fit for an ingredient inelectuaries
to heal diseases. So look upon Christ as upon the most gainful and
profitable thing to the soul, that can be imagined: nothing more fit and
commodious, nothing more enriching then Christ is: he is gain for himself,
without relation to any other besides himself: he is a rich and inestimable
treasure to the soul. Wisdom is better then Rubies; and all things that may be
desired, are not to be compared to it, Prove. 8. 11. And doubtless Christ is
the wisdom there spoken of: So for the rose of Sharon, it follows,

The lilie of the valleys.
Here Christ does assimilate himself to the precious Lilie. The lilie (says
Pliny) is next in nobility Pliny Not. Hict. lib. 25 cap. 5.
unto the rose. The Scripture sets it forth to be a glorious and amiable
flower, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these, says
Christ, Matthew. 6. 29. Christ does assimilate himself to the precious lilie or
the valleys, and that in these respects.

First, The lilie is a flower of hot quality: so that as Christ was compared
before to a rose of cold quality, because he cooles his Fathers wrath, and
because he cooles the hot distempered lusts in the soul: so here he is
compared to a Lilly, which is hot in operation, because he does warm and
revive his people.

Secondly, the Lilly is of an excellent clear color, it was of a super
exexcellent beauty, according to the forenamed place, Mat. 6. 29. Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. But behold (Jesus Christ) a
greater then Solomon is here, Matthew. 12. 42. compared to the lilly of the
valeys, which far surmounted Solomon in all his glory. Christ was clothed
with the Spirit of God: It was said of him, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
Isa. 61. 1. And God says, I will put my Spirit upon him, Isa. 42. 1. That is,
I will cloth him with my Spirit. Now if the Spirit be his garment, then no
creature, nor all the creatures in the world can compare with him in glory.

Thirdly, the Lilie is is called of the Hebrews Soshan, which signifies the
flower of six, because of his six leaves, we have the same expression in the
Title of Psalm. 45. It is dedicated to him that excels on Shoshannim, that
is, on six stringed instruments. The Hebrew word is derived of Shesh, that is,
six: So in six days God created the world: so the creation of the new Heavens,
and new earth is agreeable to the former; which shall be done by Christ.

Fourthly, The Lilie is of golden color within: so is Christ full of golden
graces, he is a head of gold, Song. 5. and he makes his Members suitable, by
issuing out of himself, golden streams of grace into their hearts.

Fifthly, The higher and the taller the Lilie's stalk is, the more dependent
and hanging down is the head thereof: thus it was with Christ, (...), in the
form, (or essence) of God, or in the nature and condition of God: yet he took
upon him the state, and condition of a servant He thought it no robbery (or
rapine) to be equal with God: yet he suffered himself to be denuded and
robbed of his glory by sinful men; God calls him the man, that is his fellow,
Zech. 15. 7. and yet he was made a fellow to Thieves and malefactors; and
though he was full of glory and excellency, yet he emptyed himself of all;
for so are the words of the Apostle, (...) he evacuated or emptyed himself,
that is, he reduced himself as it were to nothing, he did, as it were, exhaust
and draw himself dry, he did for a time deny himself, casting aside his
robes of Majesty; by his voluntary condiscending to such a low debasement, as
he under-went for us.

Sixthly, The Lilie is a flower of a redolent and sweet savor: so Christ in
all his graces, is much more sweet and ravishing.

Now for the valleys, where these Lilies grew, it notes unto us.

First, That Christ's condition was mean and low, in respect of outward
things, he is not the lofty Cedar, but the lowly Lilly: But though Christ was
like a Tree, whose root was in the earth; yet his fruit reached as high as
heaven.

Secondly, The Valleys note unto us the fruit and benefit of Christ's
humiliation, for the Lilie of the valleys is capable of more moisture, then is
the Lilie of the mountains: even so Christ by debasing himself, received
abundance of grace and glory from the Father; and we also are exalted by his
debasement, for by a supply of his grace, notwithstanding our low and base
estate, are made sweet and amiable like the Lilie; as the Lord says, I will be
as the dew upon Israel, he shall blossom as the Lilie, and strike forth his
roots as Lebanon, Hos. 14. 5.

So much of Christ's speech touching himself, having so compared himself to
The rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the valleys. Now follows his speech
touching his Church.

Verse. 2.
As the Lilie among Thorns, so is my love among the Daughters.
Now Christ utters the commendations of his spouse, where he confirms and
amplyfieth the former speech, preferring her above other people, as the Lilie
is above Thorns and Thistles; and withal siignifying how she is afflicted and
pricked with them, as with Thorns.

In this verse we have Christ's comparison between the Church, and such a
Lilie, as grows among Thorns.

Now let us consider,

First, What and who is this Lili.

Secondly, The Thorn.

Thirdly, The love.

Fourthly the Daughters.

First, what this Lilie is; it may necessarily be concluded of the Church;
notwithstanding Christ himself was compared unto the Lilie in the former verse.

It is not unusual in Scripture for Christ, and his Church to be set forth, by
one and the same thing: Christ is called the light, Joh. 1. 7, 8. his Church is
called the same, Matthew. 5. 14. So in the former verse, Christ is termed a
Lilie, which for a new consideration the same term is given unto the Church,
and that in these respects.

First, in respect of spiritual beauty, the Church is compared to a Lilie that
is white of color, and very beautiful: The Church is washed, and sanctified,
and justified in the name of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Secondly, The Saints rely upon God, as Lilies are said to be glorious by his
providence. Why care ye for raiment says Christ? learn of the Lilies of the
field, how they neither labor nor spin, yet I say unto you, that Solomon in
all his glory, is not clothed like one of these, Matthew 6. 28. Hence we
should be taught to rely wholly upon God, casting all our care upon him.

Thirdly, It is incident to this delicate and dainty flower, to grow among the
perverse and unbeleevers; the Saints, as Lilies, flourish and shine among the
Thorns. Hence it is that the Apostle says, We must be blameless, and pure,
as the Son of God, without rebuke in the midaest of a naughty and crooked
generation, among whom ye shine, as lights in the world, Phil. 2. 15.

Secondly, what and who these thorns be, is easily decided. The natural
thorn is no tender herb or flower, but a sturdie hard Tree, not smooth as the
Lilie, but knotty and full of dangerous pricks; who these thorns be, let David
declare, in that he says, The wicked be every one thorns, 2 Samuel 23. 6. where
the word wicked is expressed in the original by the word Belial, which well
declares the nature of wicked men, for that they be (as some expound the word)
Beli. gnol, without yoke, that is such as will not come under the yoke of obe
di ence. Others derive it of Beli and Gnalah, not ascending, because their
matters prospered not, or, because they were such as ascended not to the
Temple, nor to Mount Zion, the Tabernacle of the Lord. Such base earthly
spirits, such beastly rude libertines, they be these Thorns.

Now wicked men are compared to Thorns, and that in these respects.

First, Briars and Thorns were the fruit of God's curse upon the earth, Genesis 3.
17, 18. So are the wicked men of the world.

Secondly, Briars and Thorns, they are of a perplexing nature, being full of
dangerous prickles; such thorns are the wicked, who are continually pricking
and fretting, and galling the people of God. Hence it is, that when the Lord
promises to free his people from such, he says, There shall be no more a
pricking bryer to the house of Israel, nor any grievous thorn, of all that are
round about them, that despised them, Ezekiel. 28. 24.

Thirdly, Briars and thorns, the best use that is commonly made of them, is
but to hedge and fence in: So it is, that God often times makes use of these
Briars and thorns for the good of his people, so as by this means, he keeps
them from wandering and straggling abroad, as Cattle do out of unfenced
pastures. Thus the Lord tells his people in Hosea 2. 6. Therefore Behold I will
hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not find her
paths. A like place we have in Numb. 33. 55. If ye will not drive out the
Inhabitants, etc. Those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your
eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in in the Land wherein you
dwell.

Fourthly, The end of briars and thorns is to be burned, Heb. 6. 8. they shall
be dried and made fit fuel for the fire, and at last burned, for which see 2 Samuel 23. 6. They shall be burnt together. Such will be the end of all ungodly
ones, and such as dye in their sin: Who would set the Briars and thorns
against me in battle (says the Lord) I would go through them, I would burn
them together. Thus we see what and who these thorns be, and in what respect
wicked men are so called: Now it follows that we enquire concerning the love
here spoken of.

3. The love here spoken of is the Church (as before (...) Socius amious, (...)
^ ^
in Chap. 1. 9. My love, companion, or fellow-friend) who loves Christ because
he loved her first, 1 John 4. 19. and whose love is kindled by the flames of
Christ's love. The love of Christ is as a lilie among the thorns.

4. and lastly, as for these daughters amongst whom she converseth, they be as
thorns: by Daughters may be meant the great multitudes of people, as the
Scripture mentions, The daughters of Babylon, Psalm. 137. The Daughters of
Iyrus, Psalm. 45. So here we may understand multitudes of false brethren, hard
hearted and knotty conditioned, being full of prickles, such as are very
offensive to the Saints.

This then is the condition of the Church of Christ: though she be as fair and
glorious as the lilie; yet it is allotted to her to suffer persecution and hard
entreaties of the wicked, even as Christ did before her: Christ is a lilie in
the open fields of Sharon, exposed to the wild Beasts that be there: so is his
Church as a lilie among thorns by whom she is persecuted and pricked; but yet
she remains passing glorious and beautiful, though among thorns.

VERSE. 3, 4, 5, 6.
As the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
sons: I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet unto my taste.

He brought me into the Banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.

Stay me with flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love.

His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.


IN the two former Verses we had Christ praising of himself and his Spouse;
upon which the Church in these four Verses does return praise to him again:
as he set forth her praise, that she excels all the daughters, as far as
the lilie excels the thorns, so she commends him that he in dignity
surmounteth all the Sons, as far as the Apple tree excels all the trees of
the forest.

The Church does declare Christ's excellency.

1. By comparison, she compares him with all other for beauty, fruitfullnesse,
comfort, and delight, unto the Apple tree, above all other trees, which bring
forth no fruit, but are barren in the Forest, Verse. 3. As the Apple tree among
the trees, etc.

2. The effects or fruits of Christ, and they are double.

1. A fervent desire in the Church toward Christ, I exceedingly delight to sit
under his shadow, Verse. 4. 2. Christ's loving provision made for her, He has
brought me into the banqueting house, etc. Verse. 4. This was as a cause of
love-sicknesse to the Church, upon which follows these effects.
1. A patheticall exclamation, or sudden outcry of the Church, Stay me with
Flaggons and comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love.

Lastly, a remedy follows this disease, His left hand is under my head, etc.
Verse. 6.

1. For the Churches comparison in these words, As the Apple tree among the the
trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. In which we may consider
four things.

1. What the Tree is that is here spoken of. 2. The place it grows in, to
wit, in the Forest. 3. The person resembled by this Tree. 4. The persons
resembled to the place of the trees growth.
The Apple tree here spoken of is expressed in the Hebrew by the word Tapuach,
expounded in Greek (...) Inde. (...) Malus arbor, and malum fruct us
by (...), in Latin Malus. Some think that Malum an Apple, comes from Malum
evil, because sin came first into the world by eating of an Apple. But others
(unto whom I incline) think that it comes from Malo, I more will or desire,
because it is passing pleasing to nature, it being a fruit which man much
desires and delights in. An Apple tree is commended to us in these respects.

1. For its comfortable shadow that it gives, as appears in the following
part of the Verse, it being a tree of a spreading nature.

2. It is very fruitful, as likewise appears in this Verse, the Apple tree is
fruitful above all the trees of the Forest, which bring forth no fruit, or
else they bring forth wild, harsh, and sour fruit not fit for food.

3. The Apple tree has more variety of fruits then any other tree whatsoever,
so that it can hardly be reckoned up how many various sorts of Apples there be,
and that of different taste.

4. It is very pleasant in taste.

5. It is very sweet and refreshing unto the sense of smelling, as thereby a
quickening power is conveyed into a fainting weak body.

Now by this is held out the plentiful supply of grace in Christ, flowing
down upon all his Members. Hence Observe,

That the Saints find a sweet supply of all grace in Christ.

For look of what use and comfort the Apple tree is to man's body, the same,
and much more is Christ unto the soul. Christ is a shadow of protection unto
his people; fruitful in his communicating of grace, he abounds in variety of
all his graces: his fruit is good to the taste, and sweet unto the senses of the
soul cheering and comforting those that are weak by communicating of those
graces to them. Christ has in him sufficiency of all grace relative and
suitable to all conditions: as Job says that he was eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame, and a Father to the poor: so is Christ made every thing to
Believers, in proportion to their wants. As Elisha, when he raised a Child to
life, Put his mouth upon the Child's mouth, his eyes upon the Child's eyes, his
hands upon the Child's hands: still similar parts were applied to similar: so
does Christ apply himself to us in a relation suting and answering to every
necessity. This of the Apple tree.

Secondly, the place of this Apple trees growth, it is among the trees of the
wood, or, of the Forest, or Grove, among wild trees, begrowne over with moss,
and without culter, trees that bring not forth fruit meet for man, that are
either barren, or else they bear wild, sour, bitter, and unsavory fruits,
such as is food for Hogs and wild Beasts rather then for man. Such is the state
of all the Sons of men by nature, for so says the Apostle in Romans 11. 24.
that we are wild by nature, not as we were first made, but as we were corrupted
in Adam, and so derived from him to his posterity: and therefore he says, we
were graffed in contrary to nature. That is, we are ingraffed in to Jesus
Christ by some means which is above nature. Now Christ far excels in beauty,
fruit, and comfort, all the Sons of men.

Thirdly, the person affimilated to the Apple tree, it is Jesus Christ, the
Churches Beloved, from whom she receives life, health, and every saving grace
of the Spirit. The Hebrews express Beloved by the word Dod, which is the same
in signification with David, as was hinted before in Chap 1. 13. Christ is the
Churches Beloved; he loved her first, therefore her duty is to love him again,
and therein she fails not, although she be not able to love him so
perfectly as she ought, nor in such a measure as he loves her.

Fourthly, the persons resembled by the Forest trees they are termed Sons,
not sons of men, yet the adjunct (of men) may be added, and so it may be
meant of all the Sons of Adam, whom Christ far excels, as it is said of
him in Psalm. 45. 3. Thou art fairer then all the sons of Adam. The Church
considers Christ not exalted but here on earth, in his estate of humiliation:
not sitting in the Heavens, but pitching his Tabernacle among men. And
therefore it cannot be that Christ is here compared unto the Angels which are
called the sons of God, Job 1. 6. unto whom, in this estate, and in respect
of taking our nature, and for the suffering of death, was somewhat inferior,
Heb. 2. 7. but in respect of the former similitude of the trees of the wood, we
may understand it of all earthly creatures, as the Kings, and Potentates, and
wise men of the world; these are called sons, as the peoples of the world
were called Daughters in Verse. 2. Thus the King of Assyria is likened to a
Cedar in Lebanon, under whose shadow dwelt all great Nations, Ezekiel. 31. 3. 6.
And Nebuchadnezzar is likened to a tree strong and high under which the beasts
of the Earth dwelt, etc. So the Church does extol her beloved above all the
great ones in the world, he being the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.
5. These things remembered, let us see what is inferred.

First Observe,

That all men by nature are like the Trees of the Forest, which bring forth
nothing but sour, bitter, and unsavory fruit.

All the fruits that man produces by any natural ability, it is like the
fruit of a wilderness, wild, bitter, and unsavory.

Secondly Note,

Christ is the Churches Beloved.

Christ loved us and gave himself for us; he loved us when we were not, yea,
when we were his enemies we were reconciled unto him; hence it is that the
Saints love Christ.

Thirdly Note,

That Christ far excels all the great ones of the world, for beauty,
sweetness, and comfort. So is my beloved among the sons, etc. Christ was the
firstborn of God, and therefore he was set above all the Kings of the Earth,
Psalm. 89. 28. The first borne among the Jews was the principal, and had three
prerogatives: first, a double portion of goods, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. Secondly, the
rule or government, 2 Chronicles. 21. 3. Thirdly, the Priesthood, Numb. 8. 14. 15.
Now Christ is called the firstborn of God, to show, that he is to be
worshipped and honored above all things: he is said to be the firstborn of
every creature, and the firstborn of the dead, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence, Col. 2. 15. 18. And therefore was to be worshipped of
all the Angels of God, Heb. 1. 6. And is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
Revel. 1. 5. Thus much for the comparison it self, now follows the fruits or
effects thereof.

I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was pleasant
unto my taste.
Here the Church declares the fruit of Christ's shadow, and fruitfulness, and
withal expresses her earnest affection that she has to be kept under Christ's
power, and under his protection from persecution and affliction.

Under his shadow, etc.
This comfortable shadow is the shield of protection and defense. The tree
shaddoweth from the heat of the Sun, so Christ shadoweth from the wrath of God,
and from the persecutions of men. The shadow of Egypt that we read of in Isa.
30. 2. and the shadow of Heshbon, Jer. 48. 45. signify the defense wherein men
trusted: now such a shadow of defense is Christ unto his people.

I sat down with great delight.
We may read the words thus, I much desired that I (...) Desidera vit, optavit,
cupivit, concupivit.
might sit, etc. The form of the Hebrew word does increase the signification,
so that it notes a continual and fervent desire of that which is pleasing,
delightful, or profitable: so that the sense is as much as this, I did much
please and delight my self to sit under his shadow, etc. By siting is meant
abiding, or resting, as in Psalm. 91. 1. He shall lodge (or abide) under the
shadow of the most high. The shadow of a tree is comfortable, and does refresh
those that are parched with the boiling heat of the Sun. The Church is under
hot persecutions, being in the world, as a lilie among thorns, she is also
under wrath reveiled by the Law, therefore she takes so much delight under
Christ's shadow, in him she finds rest and peace, and therefore she siteth
down and remains under his shadow, because he has delivered her from the
wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. In whom she has peace, though in the world, she
has tribulation. John 16. 33. now she proceeds to an other fruit of his
goodness.

And his fruit was sweet to my taste.
The Church acknowledges, that she is not delivered only from evil, but made
partaker of his goodness. Fruits signify graces and good works, Mat. 3. 8.
and Gal. 5. 22. and they also signify a comfortable reward, Psalm. 58. Prove.
27. 18. but here we may take them for the words and works of Christ.

First, Christ's words are sweet; for David cries out most pathetically,
saying, How sweet are thy speeches to my palate, beyond honey unto my mouth!
Psalm. 119. 103. The Jews confess, That never man spoke like him: and Peter
says, Lord, thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68.

Secondly, Christ's works are sweet, his work of incarnation, taking our
nature upon him; his work in our nature, killing of sin, by his death and
resurrection, and all the fruits of them, which are communicated unto us by the
Gospel: his glorious ascension in our nature, leading captivity captive, and
giving spiritual gifts unto men; his sitting at the right hand of Majesty in
our nature, making continual intercession for his people, his protection in
times of trouble, his presence in the midst of persecution, in a word, all
the works of his mediatourshipp are sweet, yea, pleasant and pleasure it self
unto us.

From the first of these effects, Observe, That Christ is a shadow of
protection unto his people.

As Trees are a shadow from the hot scorching sun: so is Christ a shadow unto
his people, from the heat of the wrath of God, and from the persecutions of the
world. Thus the Lord promseth in Isa. 4. 6. There shall be a Tabernacle for a
shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a
covert from storm, and from rain. The Lord does promise by this Tabernacle,
to be a defense unto them against all dangers and annoyances, set forth by
allusions, as to the cover of the Tabernacle, Exodus 36. 19. and the use of the
cloud, Psalm. 105. 39. And thus we have the Prophet saying, Thou (Lord) have
been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress; a
refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat; when the blast of the terrible
ones is as a storm against the wall, Isaiah 25. 4.

Secondly, Observe,

That the Saints are much delighted and refreshed by this shadow of Christ's
protection. I fate down under his shadow with great delight, etc. Hence it is
that the Psalmist cries, Hide me from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from
the rage of the works of iniquity, Psalm. 64. 2. This comfortable shadow, this
shield of protection, the Saints most of all desire in the suns heat of
persecution; hither they fly, as Doves unto their culture house, as the Child
in the mother lapp; Christ was a shadow unto his Church in respect of the
weight of her sins, she being terrifyed with the curse of the Law, which
herself could not bear: now under this distress of mind, she flies unto
Christ for succor, to be shrouded and protected by his grace, and to be
covered by his righteousness from that terrible curse. When the soul is full
of restless vexations, fluctuating and tumbled up and down in a whole Ocean
of perplexities and fears, and can see no shore, no land, no creek or haven of
comfort: then it must into the Arc, then it uses the Soliloquie of the
Psalmist; return unto thy rest O my soul! then it cries out with the blessed
Martyr, O! none but Christ, none but Christ; there is my Arc, there is my rest,
there is my refuge, there I shall fiinde relief and releasement, or else no
where: Christ will be a calm to me after a storm, he will dispell and drive
away all these clouds, he will hold my head above the water, and keep me from
sinking; he will be light and joy, and unspeakable solace after al these
distempers: thus the poor afflicted soul, as a Prisoner of hope (as the
Prophet speaks, Zach. 9. 12.) returns unto Christ, as to it is strong hold:
Christ is called the propitiat orie, Romans 3. 25. for as the propitiatory
covered the Arc, and the Law in the Arc, which was The handwrighting of
ordinances against us, Col. 2. 14. from the presence of God; so Christ covers
our sins, and puts himself between us and the indignation of his Father.
The Apostle says, As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse, for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. So that
there is no help but to fly to him for succor. Moses was a type of Christ,
where it is said, that Moses his chosen Servant, stood before him in the gapp
to turn away his wrathful indignation, that he may not destroy his people,
Psalm. 106. 23. So Christ, the Mediator of the new Testament, must come between
God and us, that the may not behold us but in him. The Saints find that in him
only is a full sufficiency to refresh them, and to quench and cool all the
heat of their sins, and of Gods wrath: far otherwise it is with Idolaters,
and such as worshipp false Gods; when they have done all they can, they are not
satisfied, they find no ease, nor no way to take away the sting of conscience;
They multiply their sorrows, as David speaks, Psalm. 16. They do punish and
afflict themselves many ways, seeking all means to make some satisfaction for
their sins, to cool the burning heat of their guilty conscience, but when
they have wearied themselves, they can find no ease or rest, for that is only
to be found under the shadow of this Apple Tree, where the Church here takes
her delight and is set down: so that the Churches prayer is the same with that
of David, Psalm. 91. 4. that she might dwell under his protection, and abide
under the shadow of his wings, that he would cover her with his feathers; his
faithfulness and truth being applied to her by faith, it may become hers, and
so be unto her a shield and buckler.

Lastly, In that she does not only delight under his shadow, but adds, his
fruit is sweet unto my palate, or taste: Observe, That the Saints are sweetly,
and fully satisfied with all good things in Christ. All the faithful feed upon
Christ, and are nourished with all heavenly food, even with all the fruits of
his mediatour-ship. And what is wanting in him? Who is made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 1. 30. It pleased the father that in Christ, should all fullness dwell,
Col. 1. 19. from whom we receive all spiritual blessings in heavenly places.
The water of the Rock and the Manna in the Wilderness were the signs, that
Christ should spiritually feed and refresh his people. Now from the redundancy
and overflowing fullness of all good things in Christ, the Saints have there
sufficiency and fullness, Of his fullness we receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.
16. that is, graces answerable to every communicable grace of Christ, that as
face answers face in water: so we may be made answerable to our head; now then
let us eat of these apples in faith, digest them by meditation, and we shall
find in them more sweetness, than the Israelites did in their Manna,; taste,
and see how good the Lord is, as it is in Psalm. 34. 8. every fruit of Christ's
mediation, is an Apple of life, and every leaf of this Tree, serves to heal
the Nations withal, Revel. 23. 2. Now the Church being fully satisfied with
all good things from Christ, which she does here declare, not only by this
allegory of an Apple Tree, but also by a banquet, for she adds in the next
verse, saying:

Verse. 4.
He brought me into the Banqueting house, and his Banner over me was love.
The great Kings, and noble Princes of the world, do use to entertain one
another in sumptuous and royal banquetring houses, in which they do use to
set before them all the dainty things which can be gotten for money: So here,
the most high and glorious King of Kings, brings his beloved Spouse into the
banqueting house, which does excel all the banqueting houses of earthly
Kings.

In this verse, we have a narration of the plentiful provision Christ makes
for his Church: wherein are uttered two glorious favors, and manifestations of
Christ's love unto her.

First, By his conveying her into the Banquettinghouse, or, by a special
adjunct termed, The house of Wine.

Secondly, By his spreading his banner over her, termed from the effect,
dilection Or love.

He has brought me, etc.
By this form of speech she declares her own inabilitie, (...) Venit, unde
in High. (...) Venire fecit adduxit, introduxit.
to come unto this heavenly banquet, that Christ had provided for her, and does
withal declare the sweetness and efficacy of Christ's grace, working by the
secret operation of his spirit inclining her heart, and swaying of her will,
and so makes her partaker of all his heavenly treasure.

Hence, Observe,

That we cannot partake of the heavenly treasures which are in Christ, but
through the operation of his own spirit. He (to wit Christ) brought me, etc.
No man (says he) comes unto me, except the Father that sent me draw him,
Joh. 6. And the Apostle does fully show, that all the grace we receive from
Christ, is from the powerful working of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. It is Christ
that does comfortably and sweetly introduce his beloved Spouse into the house
of spiritual delicates.

The Church names the place into which Messiah brought her.

To the banqueting house.
In the original it is, Beith haijn, domum vini, the house of wine: it must
needs be meant of the wine-celler, the place where wine is kept; or the
banqueting house where wine is drunk, for Cellers are called the Treasuries,
or storehouses of wine, in Chron. 27. 27. now because a wine-Cellar is a low
vault under the ground, dark, and cold, it may rather be taken for the
banqeutting-house, alluding to Kings of the earth, who use to entertain one
another in sumptuous and royal banqueting houses.

Now wine is very comfortable to the nature of man it slacketh his thirst, it
cheareth his heart, Psalm. 104. 15. it causes him to forget his sorrow and
misery, Prove. 31. 6. 7. it comfort the sick by cherishing and augmenting
the vital spirits, it is also said to be delightful to God, because it was
offered up in sacrifice, (as I observed in Chap. 1. verse. 1.) by a Synechdoche,
it is put for all fragrant, sweet, and comfortable things in the world. Now by
this, the Church signifies an increase of grace from Christ; the shadow of
Christ was a comfort unto her. but to be fed under that shadow with delectable
fruit, that caused greater comfort: but now to be brought into a banqueting
house and to be refreshed with fragrant wine, this must needs be exceeding, and
far more comfortable unto her; forasmuch as the fruit of the Vine excels
the fruit of the Apple Tree, and is much more comfortable unto the heart.

Hence, Observe.

That Christ's love unto his Church, increases more and more.

It is like Nilus and Jordans waters overflowing their banks, not that Christ's
love does admit of any increasings, or decayings: but in respect of the
manifestations thereof, it is sometimes augmented for the spiritual
consolation of his Church: for so says the Apostle: For as the sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
And Israel shall grow from strength to strength, Psalm. 84. 7. Christ's love
never lessenneth, nor decays; but it is constant and firm, it is like the
water of the sanctuary, which abounded more and more, it begins in a drop and
ends in an Ocean; and like a spark converteth into such a flame, as that it
shall consume all dross and stubble before it.

Secondly, By this banqueting house, is noted all those rich and costly things
which Christ and his Church does banquet withal, which are not trash and
dross, and beggarly scraps, but those rich and precious delicates of Heaven.

Hence Observe,

That Christ communicates all his sweet gifts to his Church.

Christ does communicate his Spirit unto his Saints, with all the fruits
thereof, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance,
Gal. 5. 22. 23. And the Saints are never satisfied until Christ have filled
their souls with divine graces, which they are made partakers of by faith:
they feed upon Christ Crucified. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed, John 6. That is, true spiritual food. In Christ there is all
fulness, whom then can the Saints want? For if there be light in the Sun
the Air cannot be dark: if there be sap in the stock, the branches cannot be
dry: if there be fulness in the Fountain, the streams cannot be empty.
Christ is the Olive Tree that stands before the ruler of the whole Earth, and
emptieth it self by the pipes and Conduits of his word, into the golden
Candlesticks of his Church, Zech. 4. Light and grace in the ministration of
holy Ordinances flow from him; for in him there is righteousness, there is life,
there is peace, there is joy, even unspeakeable and glorious, as the Apostle
says, I Peter 1. 8.

Thirdly, by this house of wine we may understand it of the Scriptures, or of
the assembly of the Saints who are the house of God, and unto whom is afforded
all spiritual comforts signified by wine. And thus wisdom (which is meant of
Christ) is said to have built her house, Prove. 9. 1. That is, Christ who is the
supreme wisdom, yea, wisdom it self, has prepared him a Church, and it is
added, she has hewn out her seven pillars: that is, he has many chief
props and stays which are principal parts of his Church: his house being
built, in Verse. 2. he prepares for to make a great Banquet, the Text says, She
has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has also furnished
her Table. Wisdom is compared to a stately Queen that makes a Feast, and
keeps open house (as we use to say) for all comers: So is the Kingdom of
Heaven likened to a King that married his son, Mat. 22. 2. And they are
blessed and happy which are called to this supper, Revel. 19. 9. And in that it
is said, she has mingled her wine, it alludeth to the custom of the Jews,
who, because of the hotnesse of their Countries, did use to power out, or
mingle their wine with water, to allay the heat of it. So does Christ quallifie
and fit heavenly food, and makes it suitable to our appetites. Now wisdom has
built her house, and mingled her wine, etc, inviteth the simple to come, and
eat of her bread, and drink of her wine, Verse. 5. And so Christ in Song 5. 1.
says, Eat O my Friends, drink ye, drink abundantly, O beloved. Thus much
for the first favor of Christ toward his Spouse, to wit, his conveying her
into the house of wine. The second favor manifested by Christ to his Church
follows.

And his banner over me was love.
The spreading of a Banner, or the lifting up of a Standard, is mentioned in
Isa. 49. 22. Behold (says the Lord) I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles,
and set up my standard to the people, etc. The end of Gods seting up his
standard here is noted to be for the drawing in of the Gentiles, which banner
must needs be meant of the displaying of the Gospel. And Christ laid open in
the Gospel is said to stand for an Ensign of the people, and to him shall the
Gentiles seek, Isa. 11. 10. And he shall be set an Ensign for the Nations,
Verse. 12. This Banner or Ensign has allusion to the manner of Captains, who
by their setting up of their Ensign do gather their Soldiers together. So
Christ the Captain of our salvation, does gather and draw a people to himself
by the setting up his Standard of the Gospel, and by displaying the colors of
his truth. The standard of his word of life he lifts up among his people,
calling them by the display of his banner unto himself.

Secondly, the displaying of a Banner signifies terror to the adversaries, and
victory to the Church; she is said to be terrible as an Army with Banners,
Cant. 6. 4. 10. And the Church in sign of victory, says, We will shout
joyfully in thy Salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up the
Banner, Psalm. 20. 6. The Israelites were every one to pitch by his own
Standard, Numb. 2. 2. So must the Saints pitch under Christ's Standard of
victory and defense.

Hence Note,

That Christ obtains victory over all his enemies, and is a defense to his
own people. But we are farther told whereof this Ensign was made and set up,
and that was of Love, His banner over me was Love. Love, here is meant of that
wherewith Christ has loved us, 1 John 4. 10 by which he redeemed his Church,
Ephesians. 5. 26. This love is the Ensign, that he displayes over us for provoking
us to come unto him; yea, all his several loves are displayed in his glorious
Gospel, as an Ensign or Banner to gather together unto him all his Saints.

Hence Observe,

That all the Saints and chosen of God are drawn unto Christ by his love. For
the love of Christ is the Ensign spread, by which he draws all his Saints
unto him: and none are drawn, but those only over whom the same Ensign is
displayed. Now this banner is spread, when the Gospel is preached, and the
riches of Christ's love laid open, whereby the faithful are drawn to Christ.
What love is like to his, who has given himself for us, when we were his
Enemies? Romans 5. Who washed us in his own blood, Rev. 1. Here then is the
principle and ground of all our obedience, or of our praise, and that is love,
which love is wrought in our hearts by the displaying of the banner of Christ's
love over us. All that we can do is nothing if there be not this principle of
love: hence says the Apostle, The love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.
14. And we read of the woman in the Gospel which washed the feet of the Lord
with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head: from whence proceeded
all this? Was it not because she loved much? And why did she love much?
Because (says Christ) Many sins were forgiven her. She had felt the banner of
his love spread over her in forgiving her many sins, and this did draw her to
love him exceedingly. The Apostle does reckon up all the fruits of Christ's
spreading of his love abroad in the hearts of the Saints, saying, We rejoice in
tribulations being justified by says, knowing that tribulation brings
patience, patience experience, experience hope, hope makes not ashamed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which
is given to us, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. When the soul comes to the assurance of faith,
by the displaying of Christ's banner of love in the Gospel, then neither
tribulation, nor anguish, persecution or famine, nakedness, or peril of
sword, shall be able to separate them from the love of Christ, but they shall
be more then Conquerours through him that loves them, as the Apostle says.

Hence learn what is the chief duty of the Ministers of the Gospel, namely,
to spread before men the Banner of Christ's love; yea, to publish and lay open
the riches of his love to mankind, in offering himself to be a ransom for the
sins of the world, to draw men out of carnal misery, unto a most happy,
spiritual, and blessed condition. Then extol and lift up the Ensign of
Christ's love, and display the banner thereof, that men may be gathered in unto
it. The Ministers of the Gospel should spend their whole force this way, that
men may be drawn to Christ; who will seek after that which he knows not of?
And who would not seek after some precious Jewel? O then! tell people where
this Jewel, this pearl, this treasure is, that they may seek after it:
Display the Ensign of Christ's goodness, mercy, grace, and love, that people
may be provoked to praise Christ, and yield obedience unto him. So far
concerning the narration of Christ's favors; now follows the Churches
request.

Verse. 5.
Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love.
Here we have a wonderful effect of those former things which she spoke of;
she compared Christ unto an Apple tree, under whose shadow she took delight,
and sat down, and his fruit was pleasant unto her palate. He brought her into
the house of wine, by the displaying over her the banner of love. Hence it is
her heart is so much taken and ravished with love toward him again, that she
is lovesick, and ready to swoon therewith, and cries out to have them stay
her up with Flagons, and to comfort her with Apples.

In the words we have,

First, a request of the Church, and this is twofold; she says,

1. Stay me with flagons. 2. Comfort me with apples.
Secondly, we have the Churches reason of her earnest request, in these words,
For I am sick of love.

The thing she so much requesteth is spiritual sustentation and strength,
compared with flagons of wine, and the savor of Apples. So that look how
comfortable wine is to the heart, and the savor of pleasant apples to the
sense; such, and much more is the sense and sweetness of Christ's graces to his
Church.

Stay me with flagons, etc.
Stay) or sustain, strengthen, prop, or uphold ye me. The similitude is drawn
from hence, when a Virgin is betrothed, (...) Inniaeas fuit, imposuit,
fulcivit, sustentavit.
and through the vehemence of her love toward her beloved, is sick and
swooneth. So here, the Church having tasted the sweetness of those Apples, and
of that heavenly wine, has such a desire of Christ, that makes her break
forth into this patheticall exclamation, or sudden outcry, Stay me with
flagons, etc.

But unto whom does she cry out for these flagons, and for these sweet Apples?
She seems not to direct her words unto Christ, for she speaks in the
Plural number, and not unto one single person, saying, Stay or uphold ye me.
Most think that she speaks unto the Ministers of Christ, and other
Christians, that they might uphold and stay her, applying the comfortable
doctrines of the promises of the Gospel unto her heart and conscience, because
of her own infirmities, and the want of the feeling of Christ's love and
graces. For spiritually we are sustained and strengthened by words and promises
of Christ, these comfort the heart, these quicken the spirit, these strengthen
the weak faith, as the Apostle James says, Be ye patient, strengthen your
hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. 5. 8. And says Paul, I
long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end
you might be established or strengthened, Romans 1. 11. Now then the Church
calls unto those into whose hands Christ has committed these treasures to
deliver unto her, towit, those faithful Servants, the Apostles and Prophets,
and all holy teachers, for by the ministry of these, the Lord has delivered
unto his Church all those heavenly mysteries of Salvation; and so the Apostle
speaks, That which I have received of the Lord (says he) I also have delivered
unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And thus the Apostles were said to Confirm (or
establish) the souls of the Disciples, Acts 14. 21, 22. Now the Church does
direct her Speech unto them, not as unto the Authors, but as unto the ministers
of those things: for she knows that they be wholly and altogether in Christ.
They are but as Stewards and dispensors of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1.

Hence Observe,

That Christians in distress desire to be comforted of others.

Many times when we are not able to apply the promises of comfort unto our
selves, yet others may so apply them, that we may be comforted. The Church
adds.

With flagons.
By Flagons no doubt she means by the figure Metonimie, the thing containing,
for the thing contained: to wit, the Wine in those Flagons, which must needs be
meant of the wine of consolation, and of grace and favor. So the cup is put
for the wine therein, Luke 22. 20. Now by Flagons is meant of the distribution
of all good things in the Banquet of this Gospel of Christ. When David had
brought the Ark of God unto his place, and had Offered Burnt-offrings and
Peaceoffrings, and blessed the people, He dealt to every one of Israel, both
man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread and a good piece of flesh, and a
Flagon, 1 Chronicles. 16. 1, 2, 3. Meaning a Flagon of wine. And there is mentioned,
in Hos. 3. 1. Flagons of grapes. That is, of wine made of Grapes.

Arius Montanus turns the Hebrew according to the Letter thus, Underprop me in
the Flagons: and so the (...) Fulcite me in lagenis. Arius Mont.
next words, Comfort me in the Apples, that is, amidst the Flagons, and amidst
the fruit: for the Text has not the particle (Eth) with, but the letter Beth,
which fignifieth in, among, sooner then With. And you may take the sense thus,
is if the Church should say: O my welbeloved, vouchsafe that thy Ministers,
towit, thy Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Teachers, etc. may apply unto me
with all care and diligence, all the cordial promises of the Gospel: these
are the full flaggons of that spiritual wine which only can cheer and
comfort me, who am ready to faint and swoon amidst this divine Banquet: my
senses being weak to sustain the strong odor of thy graces, unless
sustained by some spiritual assistance from them that are able, sweetly and
comfortably to apply the promises of the Gospel unto me.

Hence, Observe,

That the promises of the Gospel yield most comfort unto the Saints when they
are sweetly applied unto them.

The Church here desires to be sustained with flagons of the wine of Christ's
grace and consolation distributed unto her soul. It is the explication of
Christ's excellency and riches, and the applying of them to the hearts of the
Saints, that brings comfort, peace, joy-unspeakeable, and full of glory. Hence
it is, that the Apostle says, Unto me, who am less then all the Saints, is
this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles, the unspeakable
riches of Christ; and make known unto all men, what is the fellowship of the
mystery, which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ; to the intent that now unto Principalities
and powers in heavenly places might be made known by the Church, the manifold
wisdom of God, Ep. 3. 8, 9, 10. The Apostle does testify, that he was to
display and reveal the hidden mysteries of Christ unto the Gentiles; by which
means, principalities and powers, to wit, the Angels, who are very desirous to
look into, and contemplate the manifold wisdom of God, and the dispensing of
gifts and graces in Christ to the Saints: even these Angels might have a new
proof of the wisdom of God, by the preaching of the Gospel.

Thus for the first request of the Church.

The second follows.

Comfort me with Apples.
The original Rapad, signifies properly to spread abroad as a bed to lie on,
so it is used by Job, when he says, I have made my bed in the darkness, Job.
17. 13. that is, I have spread or prepared my bed; we may read it, spread me a
couch, bolster me up, or, strew me a bed. It was their manner then, to strew
their beds with herbs, or to stuff and bolster them up. Now the Church
means the same thing by these Apples, laid as it were under her; as in the
former words, by the flagons, for they used beds at banquets and feasts, Amos
6. 4. Or, it signifies her falling into a swoone; and then she alludeth to
the custom of men, who, when others are swooning or fainting, are wont to put
strong smelling things into their nostrels: so the Church means, that for her
comfort and refreshing, and restoring her again, as it were from death to
life, she would have the sweet smelling Aples, to wit, the comfortable
doctrines, and fruits of Christ, that are brought out of Christ's treasury, both
held and applied to her, that by that means she may be recovered.

Hence, Observe.

That the only means to recover and refresh a soul, that is ready to faint
for want of the feelling of Christ's love, is to apply the sweet promises and
consolations of the Gospel unto it.

For here the Church being inflamed with the love of Christ, that she is ready
to swoone and faint in the midst of the banquet, as it were for longing after
her beloved, crying out with patheticall exclamation, Stay me with flagons,
comfort me with apples. The Church having requested some aid and help, she
renders a reason, and declares what is her distemper.

For I am sick of love.
Here we have the reason of the Churches sickness, enlarged from the cause
thereof, namely, love; she was (...) Aegrotavit infirmus fuit.
in languishing with desire to enjoy the comforts of her beloved. The word
cholah, signifies sickness or weakness: so by this speech may be meant her
want of feeling and enjoying the presence and comforts of Christ, for such is
the condition of the Church often. Now love is one of the strongest affections,
and therefore the sickness arising from it, must needs be very sore; as may be
seen in the example of Ammon, who was sick of love for his Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel, 13. 1, 2, etc. now this sickness growing from love, let us consider what
love is.

It is an affection or motion whereby the will is inclined, with desire of some
good thing, with a strong desire after the fruition of that good, which is
propounded to the soul. The cause then by which the heart is stirred, is the
goodness of some object propounded to the sense, and by the sense propounded
to the heart. Now then we may understand the cause of this sickness to be
either.

First, The sense and feeling of Gods wrath due to her for sins, and the
curse of the Law, according to that in Psalm. 90. 8. where the Psalmist says,
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. Whereupon it is said, The Inhabitant shall not say I am sick; the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, Isa. 33. 24. when
their sins were forgiven, their sickness was healed.

Hence, Observe.

That the apprehansion of wrath due for sin, causes sickness in the soul.

Christ tells us, That the whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick,
Matthew. 9. 12. Sin-sick sinners will enquire and seek the Physician of souls.
The sense of misery is the primum mobile, the first mover, that sets the soul
in fainting and longing after Christ, for when the soul finds it self in
darkness without light, lying under the guilt of sin, and not able to
deliver it self, this cannot but make it look out for it self, and seek
with great importance for a Savior. The Dove could find no rest for the soale
of her foot, till she returned into the Arc. The Saints are very impatient of
Christ's absence; for he may withdraw himself for a while; he may withdraw his
light and comfort from the soul, though he take not a way his love, yet he may
suspend the Acts of his love, he may seem to frown, he may so abscond and
eclipse his love, that the soul for a time loses sense, and feels not its
own happiness. Now when it is thus, Christ seems to be gone, the comfort and
assurance of his love is gone, joy and light is gone, O! how dejected, how
disconsolate is the soul then! It is a perfect hyeroglyphick or resemblance of
A wounded spirit, as Solomon calls it, when the soul is full of perplexities
and fears, and can see no comfort; then it must return to Christ, as to its
strong hold, there is my stay, there is my comfort, there I shall find relief
and refreshment, or else no where. Or else.

Secondly, We may take the cause of the Churches sickness the object, to wit,
the sight of Christ's loves, displayed by his banner, and by tasting of his
banquet, even all the variety of his sweet graces: now because her mind
(which is the eye of the soul) could not sustain the glittering shine of his
love, no more then Job could shut up the Sea with doors, Job 38. 8. or Agur
close up the winds in his fist, Prove. 30. 4. hereupon she is as one in a
Syncope or fit of swooning, being overcome with the bright and glorious beams
of his love; as it was said of the Queen of Sheba (according to Historians)
who had no Spirit left in her, because she was astonished at Solomon's glory,
riches, wisdom, and the like: So here the Church having both sights and tastes
of Christ love and sweetness, is as it were overcome with it.

Hence, Observe.

That the fullness of Christ's love to his Saints, does as it were, transport
and overcome them.

The Church had been in the house of wine, banqueting with Christ; and under
the displaying of the banner of his love, upon which she cries out, I am sick
of love, I am overwhelmed and overcome with his sweetness, hereupon her heart
was so much ravished with love, that she is lovesick, and ready to swoon
therewith. Or,

Thirdly, We may take her sickness to be her exceeding love toward Christ,
that her heart is so ravished with love toward him, that she is sick. Love
has a strong appetition of peculiarity, or private interest in the thing
beloved: Here is a marveilous passion of love in the Church toward Christ: Now
according to this interpretation, the similitude is drawn from hence, when a
Virgin is betrothed, and through the vehemency of her love toward her
Spouse, is sick, and swooneth; a greater or a more vehement love cannot be.

Hence, Observe.

That the Saints love to Christ, is vehement and strong.

Here the Church is so taken and ravished with love toward Christ, that she is
lovesick, and ready to swoone, and with a patheticall exclamation cry th out,
as one that is ready to depart and dye, she desires to be refreshed with the
sweet water of life, distributed unto her in flagons, and the sweet smelling
Aples fetch out of Christ's treasury, and both held and applied to her, that by
that means she might be, as it were recovered of her sickness. The faithful
soul tasting the sweetness of those Aples, and of that heavenly wine, has such
a desire of Christ, as that she cannot be any means be satisfied without the
enjoyment of him. Here then is a sickness, but not to death, but unto life and
satisfaction. Christ himself pronounces such Blessed, that do hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for (says he) they shall be filled, Matthew. 5. 6.
The sweetness of these Apples which she tasted, and of that precious wine,
brought her into this passion: yet her appetite and desire of them, is not any
thing at all diminished, but she desires to be more refreshed and comforted
with those flagons of wine, and to have applied unto her self those sweet
apples of Christ. When Christ does first lead a soul into his Wine-Cellar, and
does refresh it at the heavenly banquet of heavenly delights and comforts, he
does not distribute out a full measure of his spirit and grace, but as it were
some tastes, or small drops of them, which the Apostle calls The first fruits of
the Spirit, Romans 8. 23. And The earnest of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. Now by these
drops the Saints are so taken and ravished, with the wonderful sweetness
there is in those heavenly things, that they are insatiable in their desire
after a more plentiful measure of them. Thus for the Churches request, with
the reason thereof. Now follows the fruit or effect of her request.

Verse. 6.
His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
In the last Verse we had the Churches disease described, here we have the
remedy. She called out to the Ministers of Christ to help her in the former
verse, but it appears here that it is only Christ that can apply cure: Indeed
they be instruments, and no more, for Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but
it is God that can give increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. It is Christ himself that is
able to support his Church by his divine power. Hence it is the Church adds
to her former Speech, saying, His left hand is under my head, and his right
hand does embrace me. So that though she had called unto others for help, yet
here she confesses that all the efficacy is from Christ himself, declaring,
that he does stay her up with both his hands.

In these words, observe, The Churches declaration of Christ's exceeding love
toward her: and this love of Christ appears in one general act of favor,
namely, his sweet embracing her, which embracements must needs argue love and
favor.

In Christ's embracements of his Church, we have two particulars.

First, in his left hand conveyed under her head.

Secondly, in his right hand, amiably embracing her.

His left hand, etc.
Some understand it, prayer-wise, Let it be under my head: and then the Church
prays unto Christ, for supply of strength and sustentation, and that he would
comfort her heart by his word and Spirit, as a loving Husband does his wife in
her sorrow and sickness, for so the Apostle tells us, That Christ nourishes
his Church, Ephesians. 5. 29. Seeing these things are spiritual, what may be meant
by the left and right hand? for the resolution of this mystery, we cannot
bring in that of Christ's right and left hand, spoken of in Matthew. 25. because
the left hand is turned to the wicked: but both hands here do uphold the
Church. Some understand by the left hand of Christ his manhood, and by his
right hand, his Godhead. But I understand it here of whole Christ embracing of
her, with both hands as it were, both his God head and manhood, his life,
death, resurrection, and ascension, even all that is Christ's, is employed for
the good and comfort of his people.

The form of speech may also seem to allude to their feasts, when they lay on
the ground, so that if any fainted, they put one hand under them to lift them
up, and gave them some comfortable potion with the other. In like manner,
Christ does not leave his Church in her sorrow and sickness, but imbraceth her
with his own hands, in the manifestation of all love, and mercy, and keeps
her safe from evil. Now if we take the words for a narration, then the
comfort of Christ's goodness and mercy is set forth in the refreshing his
people by his word and spirit. But if we take them prayer-wise, Let him
embrace me, etc. then they hold forth the faith and thankfulness of the
Church, because she sees Christ present, administering comfort to her, even in
a fainting condition.

Hence Observe, First,

That it is in Christ's power alone to support and comfort his Church, by the
ministry of his Spirit.

It is not in Paul that planteth, nor in Apollo that waters, but in Christ,
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. therefore though she had called to
others for help, yet here she acknowledges all the efficacy to be from
Christ, he does stay her up with both his hands, when she is ready to faint.

Secondly, note.

That it is a marveilous comfortable thing unto the Church, to see Christ
presentewith her, by his spiritual power and grace.

His left hand is under my head, as a Pillow for me to be refreshed on, when by
reason of sin the whole heart is faint, and the head is sick, then Christ
does comfort the poor afflicted consciences, in the forgiveness of sins, by
the applying his own righteousness, and the consolations of the spirit: So
that the Saints can say with David, when my flesh and heart fails, God is the
Rock of my heart for ever.

VERSE. 7, 8, 9.
I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the Field, that ye stir not up, nor awak my love till he please.

The voice of my beloved; behold! he comes leaping upon the mountains,
skipping upon the hills.

My beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart, behold! he stands behind our
wall, he looks forth at the Window, showing himself through the Lattesse.


IN the former part of this Chapter, we have seen how Christ calling himself
a Rose and a Lilie, gives us to understand, that in him is the Fountain of
all grace, and the fullness and perfection of all sweet and heavenly treasures.
Also, that from his sweetness and beauty, his Church is made so sweet and
com^ly that she excels all other Daughters, as far as the pure white Lilie
does the Thorns. Then she sets forth the praise of her well beloved, by a
like comparison; namely, that as the Apple Tree excels the trees of the
forest: so does he excel the Sons.

And further she declares, that by the comfortable shadow, and fruit of this
tree, she being led into the house of wine, she is made partaker of all
heavenly blessings in him, and by the feeling of his love, she is sick of love
toward him, calling for a further supply of grace, and is embraced, comforted,
and supported by Christ. All which is contained in the first six verses of this
Chapter.

Now to proceed. In these three Verses we have.

First, A strict charge given, that this peace she enjoyed, may not be
interrupted, verse 7.

Secondly, A Declaration of Messiahs coming, together with the discovery
thereof, verses, 8, 9.

First, We have a vehement charge given to all the Members of the Church, I
charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, etc.

Secondly, The manner of the charge, By the Roes and Hindes of thee Field.

Thirdly, The matter of the charge, That ye stir not, nor awake my love.

Fourthly, The duration or continuance of the charge, until be please.

Here arises some difficulty, to find out whether it be Christ or his Church
that gives this charge; by some of our English translations, it seems to be
Christ, because it is read, That you awake not my love until she please; for
if it were the Church, she should say, That you awake not my love until be
please. But it is not very easily discussed by the Hebrew text: for the word
Ahabhah, love, is feminine: and if the Church call Christ her love, the
construction is with a verb of the feminine gender. Some do expound this
charge to be Christ's, which he should give unto the false Brethren, and false
Churches, such as were degenerate Assemblies of Idolaters, that they do not
molest that sweet peace and rest of the Church, which she had obtained in him.
But I rather take it, to be the charge of the Church, not to her false Sisters,
but unto her companions, that they do not by any miscarriage or rude behavior
of theirs, cause Christ to withdraw himself, or to hide or eclipse his love.

The reasons of this interpretation are,

First, The original will indifferently bear either.

Secondly, She had authority to command, as she does in verse 15. saying, Take
us the Foxes, etc.

Thirdly, The words preceding, and following after, are the words of the Church.

Fourthly, She does apply the words unto the Daughters of Jerusalem, her fellow
friends, unto whom she often speaks, as in Chap. 1. verse. 5.

Let us now descend down unto the words in particular.

I charge you, etc.
The Hebrew word here translated, I charge, signifies to swear, or to adjure,
or earnestly to charge, (...) Septem, Inde Niphal (...) ^uravit. (...) Cum,
puncto sinistie, satiatus saturatus fuit.
etc. It has also the signification of seven, which is a mystical number,
Genesis 2. 3. and some give the reason of it to be this, because an oath is
confirmed by seven, that is by many witnesses. The word also signifies to
satisfy, because he to whom we swear must be contented. An adjuration is
near of kind to a curse, and sometimes one is put for an other, as appears in
Genesis 24. 8. Josh. 6. 26. Hence it shows the weightinesse of this speech.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are very serious in the things of Christ.

Here the Church lays such a weighty and strict charge on the Daughters of
Jerusalem. True, good, gracious, and heavenly impressions upon the heart, will
be very strong and vehement in expressions, as here the Churches are, saying, I
charge you, etc. Now follows the parties thus charged.

O ye Daughters of Jerusalem.
By these Daughters, no question, she means such as wished well to the
Church, and had somewhat to do therein, such as were the several Members of
her. But though these Members are expressed by the daughters of Jerusalem, yet
so, as there by is comprehended all the faithful, wheresoever dispersed. Hence
it is said, that the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, to other Nations and people, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 2. 3. We
had occasion to speak of the Daughters of Jerusalem already, in Chap. 1. 5.
yet give me leave to add one thing, which I omitted there, namely, to observe
that the Church is called by the name of Jerusalem, or the holy City. The
Church may well be called Jerusalem, and that from such resemblances as these.

First, Jerusalem was the chief metropolitan City of the Jews. So the
Church has the greatest advantage or precedencie above all other societies
whatsoever, because unto her Members are committed the Oracles of God, as the
Apostle speaks of the Church of the Jews, Romans 3. 2. unto whom also pertained
the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and
the service of God, and the promises, Romans 9. 4.

Secondly, Jerusalem was eminenter then other places, for it is said, they went
to Jerusalem, and down to Egypt, and other places: so the Church, is from
above, Gal. 4. 26. because it has its original from above, and steeres its
course toward heaven above.

Thirdly, Jerusalem was a City compact in it self, Psalm. 122. 3. So is the
Church the body of Christ, compact and knit together, by joints and legiaments,
as it is in the natural body: for so the Apostle tells us, that The whole
body (of the Church) is fitly joined together and compacted, by that which
every joint supplyeth, etc. Ephesians. 4. 16.

Fourthly, Jerusalem is a free City, and had many, Citie-priviledges and
immunities: so is the Church, Ga^. 4. 26. Jerusalem (or the Church) which is
above is free. The Law was delivered in a most terrible manner on Mount Sinai,
and the effects thereof was nothing but bondage; but after it was sent out of
Zion, and out of Jerusalem, with the Spirit of grace and adoption, and brings
with it cheerfulness and liberty, so though Agar ge^dereth to bondage, yet
Jerusalem which is above is free.

Fifthly, Jerusalem was the seat of God, chosen from all places of the world,
as appears, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. For the Lord has chosen Zion, ^he has desired
it for his habitation: this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
desired it. So the Church of Christ is his seat, where he dwells, and holds
forth the word of life, and distributes the rich treasures of grace and glory,
and does beutifie it with all heavenly excellencies and privileges of
salvation.

Sixthly, Jerusalem was the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48. 2. So is the
Church, the joy and comfort of the word; what are all the men in the world
besides? the Church is the seat of saving truth, and is built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, so that the Church is the depository
of the truth, that orb out of which this glorious light shines forth; and unto
the Church pertains the Covenant, and the promises as you heard before. So much
for the Parties charged.

Now we proceed to the manner of the charge.

By the Roes, and by the Hindes of the Field.
Some render these words thus: Tarry ye abroad with the Roes, or with the Hind
of the field. We may understand it thus, Ye that are by the Roes, that is,
ye that feed your flocks abroad in the Feilds, where the Roes and Hindes
run. The meaning may be this, get you abroad for a while, take your pleasure,
and do what you will, only disquiet not, neither vex my beloved. This is
spoken by the Church, after the manner of men and their wives, who when they
would talk off secret matters, or take their rest and be quiet, will bid their
Children and servants get them abroad, and recreate themselves, where they
will, for a while. Indeed some take the words, as if the Oath were by the Roes
and by the Hindes, which cannot be but improper and only figurative, because
Oaths and Adjurations are by the name of God only, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. We may read
it among the Roes, so does Arius Montanus, rather then by the Roes, because the
Letter Beth is here prefixed, which signifies (...) In capreis.
in, Or among, more properly then by. The Church does in her charge to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, take these creatures, to wit the Roes and Hinds, as
witnesses against them if they neglect their charge: an example we have in
Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call Heaven and Earth (says Moses) to record this day against
you, etc. This obtestation of Heaven and Earth, is meant the creatures in
Heaven and Earth. We have the like expression in Josh. 24. 27. This stone shall
be a witness (says Joshua) unto us, for it has heard all the words of the
Lord. This figurative Speech is as much as if Joshuah had said to the people
thus, this stone shall as truly witness against you, if you shall falsify
your promise and Covenant, as if it had heard the words that were spoken.

Hence Observe,

That unreasonable creatures are called to testify against men that deal
falsely with Christ. Suitable to this is that in the Prophet, Jer. 2. 12. Be
astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord. Implying, that the very senseless creatures, were
they apprehensive of such evils, would abhor such dealings, and tremble to
think what the issue of them would be, or that such courses were such as might
justly fill Heaven and Earth with astonishment.

And so in Isa. 1. 2. Give ear O Heavens, and hear O Earth, etc. Because men
are obstinate and senseless, the dumb creatures are called upon as more ready
to hear and obey Gods word then they, and are therefore witnesses for God
against them. And in Psalm. 50. 4. He will call to the Heavens to judge his
people, that Heaven and Earth may bear record. And in Job 20. 27. The Heavens
shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him.

Let us consider the nature and condition of these Roes and Hinds, and then we
shall see how fitly they are here brought in, in this obtestation or adjuration.

1. The Roes and Hinds are wild Beasts of the Field, (...) Militia, congregatio
populi, axercitus.
and have their names of Armies and Powers: and by wild Beasts, the people of
the world, who are not of God, are named: so that his people are admonished not
to provoke Jesus Christ, least these wild Beasts among whom they live, should
be made isntrumental to afflict them.

2. These Roes and Hinds are set forth in Scripture for their swiftness of
foot, as in 2 Samuel 2. 18. which being referred to Gods judgments, may signify
the swiftness of Gods judgment on them that shall break this adjuration.

3. These creatures are also commended for their mutual love one to another:
by them is the love between man and wife set forth, as in Prove. 5. 19. Let her
be as the loving Hind, and as the pleasant Roe, etc. That as the Males and
Females of these Beasts do dearly love one another, so is the unfeighned love
between man and wife, and also between Christ and his Church; for Christ
himself is likened to a Roe, or young Heart, in Verse. 9.

4. These Beasts are very much desirous of the highest places: this is a
property given by the Prophet Habakkuk to the Hinds, when he says, The Lord
will make my feet like the Hinds, and he will make me walk upon mine high
places, Habak. 3. 19. So should the Saints walk on high places, and not remain
below on Mountains of Earth, but we should Mount up to Heaven in our hearts,
the hill of Gods holiness, and of our happiness, unto which Paul ascended in
the vision of his soul, and unto which Stevens heart and eye was lifted up in
the end of his Apology, because his defense was in the Heavens. All our
Salvation, joy, and happiness, comes not from the Mountains of flesh and
blood, but from the Heavens.

5. These creatures were often made a prey, and overreached by the Huntsman;
therefore Christ himself is called Aijeleth Kashacar, The Hind of the morning,
Psalm. 22. 1. Who in that Psalm is extremely hunted with Dogs of the Evening:
so are all the Saints hunted by the men of the world.

6. These Hinds are very charitable one unto another: it is reported of them,
that when they swim over a River, the first sustaineth the second, and the
second upholds the third, etc. Thus the Saints are exhorted by the Apostle to
bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. Not
looking every man on his own things, but every man also unto the things of
others, Phil. 2. 4.

Thus in some measure all the Saints may be likened to the Roes and Hindes of
the field: not that they were to swear by them, but for whose sake and by
whose means they were to take themselves bound, as by a Solemn Oath, not to
stir or provoke Christ by any miscarriage whatsoever. Thus far for the manner
of his charge, now follows the matter thereof.

That ye stir not up, nor awake my love.
The words may be read, If ye stir, and if ye stir up, or, If ye awake, and
if ye awake up: for they are both (...) Vigilavit, excitatus fu it. Trausitive
excitavit.
of one signification, save they differ in form, and being both referred to
the Love after mentioned, they mean a stirring up more or less. The word If
used in Oaths and adjurations is a prohibition upon penalty, as in Genesis 21. 23.
Swear unto me here by God, If thou shall lie unto me. That is, that thou will
not lie, as Psalm. 89. 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, if I lie unto
David. That is, I will not lie unto David. And in Mark. 8. 12. If a sign be
given, which is explained in Mat. 16. 4. A sign shall be given. And so if they
shall enter into my rest, Heb. 3. 11. Psalm. 95. 11. which the Apostle, opens
thus, He swear that they should not enter, Heb. 3. 18. It is an imperfect
Speech, where an imprecation is understood.

Stirring) is opposed unto sleep, and quietness, as sitting still: The Lord is
said then to stir up, or awake, when he delivers his Church out of trouble,
as in Psalm. 78. 65. Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, etc. That is, he
stirred up himself to punish the Philistims, whereas before he seemed to
sleep. And the Church then stirs up the Lord, when it earnestly prays for
such deliverance, as in Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou O Lord? says
the Church; but these things are spoken Ad captu^ humanum, after the manner of
men, for properly, he that keeps Israel, slumbereth not, nor sleeps not,
Psalm. 121. 4. We may apply this unto the stirring and provoking of Christ by
sin, for which he does often chastise and correct his people, as appears in
Exodus 23. 20, 21. Behold (says the Lord) I send an Angel to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place, which I have prepared. Beware of him,
and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions, for my name is in him. The Angel here spoken of, is Christ, as
appears by this, that he has power to pardon sin: and Gods name is in him,
that is, he is essentially God: for Gods name and attributes are his very
essence. So that the charge is not to provoke or stir up Christ to indignation
by sin, or any miscarriage: It follows the title here given unto Christ.

My Love.
This word My is not found in the Original, but we may understand it my love,
to wit, Christ her beloved, who is called Love, by an excellency, as in Song 1.
4. Righteous persons were called righteousnesses. God is love, 1 John 4. 8. and
is most worthy to be loved. The Church is called by the name of love in Song 7.
6.

Lastly, we have the duration or continuance of this charge.

Until he please.
Until it please) or until he please, meaning Christ: and if we take it for
provoking of Christ by sin, it is meant never: for so the word until does
often signify, as in Isa. 22. 14. this iniquity shall not be purged from you
until ye die; that is, never: and it is said, Michal had no Child until the
day of her death, 2 Samuel 6. 23. That is, she never had any Child.

Or, it may be meant of Christ's coming in the flesh, and then we must take it
thus: the Daughters of Jerusalem are charged to suffer affliction under the
Law, being shut up unto the faith that should be revealed, which Law was a
Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3. 23. And the Church was as a Child in her
nonage, under Tutors and Governors, under the Law, Until the appointed time of
the Father, Gal. 4. 1, 2. Now I say according to this Interpretation, they were
charged to wait in faith and patience, unto the coming of the Lord, as it is
in Jam. 5. 7. 1 Pet, 5. 6, 7. and not to provoke him by Murmuring, or
otherwise, through fear or unbelief. Now from this weighty charge, Observe,

First, That we ought to be careful not to disquiet Jesus Christ, whilst he
seeks our quiet. The Apostle advises us not to grieve the holy Spirit, adding
this reason, Because (says he) by it ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. So are we also on the other hand to please the
Spirit, as we would not turn away the Seal of our salvation The Prophet tells
the reason why the Lord fought against his people, Because (says he) they
rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, Isa. 63. 10.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ is the Churches love. The love of the Saints may be divided and
branched out to creatures, some love to one creature, and some to another, but
all the stream of their affections meet in Christ, as the Rivers meet in the
Sea, and as the Sunbeams meet in the Sun. As Christ eternal, exceeding, rich
love is fastened only upon the Church, for indeed his love grows and plants it
self there: So a believers love is fixed only upon Christ, as upon its proper
and only object.

Thirdly, in that this adjuration is limited to the Beloveds will and good
pleasure: if we take it for provoking by sin: Observe,

That our great care must be, not at any time to sin against Christ, to provoke
him to wrath. Job says that fair weather comes out of the North, but with
God is terrible Majesty, Job 37. 22. The meaning of it is this, that though the
creature may be pleasing and flexible enough, and there may be fair quarter
between man and man: yet not so with God; if he be once provoked, with him is
terrible and dreadful majesty: and thus it is said of Christ in the forenamed
place, Exodus 23. 21. Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he
will not pardon your transgressions, for my name is in him. When we sin against
God, we have a Mediator to go unto: but when we sin against Christ we have no
Mediator unto him, therefore it is a dangerous thing to sin against Christ, for
then indeed we sin against a Mediator.

Lastly, if we take this limitation to the beloveds good pleasure, for his
coming in the flesh, when she might enjoy a greater manifestation of his
presence: then Observe,

That the Saints are patiently to wait for those good things that are promised
them in Christ. Here the Daughters were adjured not to provoke Christ by
unbelief, or impatience or murmuring, but patiently to wait for Christ's
appearance. Suitable unto this is that of the Apostle when he tells the Hebrews
that after they had done the will of God, they had need of patience, that they
might receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36. That is, they were patiently, without
grudging or murmuring, to wait for the good things promised them. The Saints
that lived before Christ's coming in the flesh, were to wait with patience for
the day of his appearance: and so now the Saints since his coming in the
flesh, must also wait for his last coming in glory, as we have it in the
Apostle James. Be patient therefore Brethren, (...)
unto the coming of the Lord, James 5. 7. The word Translated Patient,
signifies to be long patient, or to suffer with long patience: so that the
Saints are exhorted to wait with patience and long-suffering, until they
receive the Crown of glory which is laid up for them.

Thus far of the Charge given to the Daughters of Jerusalem, not to provoke or
stir up Christ by sin, or to be impatient of his coming. Now follows a
declaration of Messiah's coming, together with the discovery thereof.

VERSE. 8.
The voice of my Beloved, Behold, he comes leaping upon the Mountains,
skipping upon the Hills. VERSE. 9. My Beloved is like a Roe, or young Heart, etc.
The Church still continues speaking, either declaring her own sense, or the
actions of her Beloved: all tending to express the mutual affections one
toward another; and in respect of Christ's near approaching, either in the
discoveries of his grace, or his coming in the flesh; the Spouse breaks out
and rejoices to hear the Bridegrooms voice, and declaring this joy of hers
unto her friends, she says, It is the voice of my Beloved, etc.

In the words we have uttered,

1. The Churches sense and feeling of Messiah's approaching in the gracious
discovery of himself.

This sense and feeling of Messiah's approaching is laid down.

1. From the knowledge she has of his voice. 2. From the knowledge of his
pace.
The voice is made excellent by the subject, when she says, It is the voice
of my Beloved.

The Pace is made excellent.

1. From the word of attention, Behold. 2. From the speediness thereof, by
saying, He comes leaping over the Mountains and Hills. Afterward by
comparing him in that respect, to the Roe, or young heart, in Verse. 9.
The voice of my beloved.
By the voice here is meant the word of Christ's grace, and the Preaching of the
Gospel, which the Church knows to be Christ's voice, and therefore receives
it with joy: now in that she does acknowledge his voice notwithstanding her
former distempers. Hence Observe,

That the Saints do and may discern the voice of Christ, yea, and that in a
weak and distempered condition. This is testified by Christ, when he says
Every one that is of truth hears my voice, John 18. 37. And again he says,
My Sheep hear my voice, John 10. 3. And they know not the voice of Strangers,
Verse. 4. It is said of the Jewish Rulers that dwelt in Jerusalem, that they
knew not the voice of the Prophets, Acts 12. 27. That is, they slighted their
doctrines, and hearkened not unto them. Hence it is said, to day if ye will
hear his voice, Heb. 3. 7. Now the Sheep of Christ they can discern Christ's
voice, they can (as Job says) taste words by the ear, Job 12. 11. They have a
spiritual taste, a discerning relish in their ears, because they have the
Spirit of God, and therefore relish what is suitable and agreeable to the
Spirit.

But now the great Question is, How we shall know the Voice of Christ from the
voice of strangers? How shall we understand the word, and know the truth from
error, light from darkness, etc?

For answer hereunto, consider.

1. That the Voice of Christ has a supernatural power and majesty in it,
which carries its own evidence with it. How do we know light to be light but
by that evidence of light that it has in it self? How do we know fire to be
fire but by that evidence of heat that it has in it self? So the word and
voice of Christ carries such a majesty and power with it, to cast down, to
raise up, to kill, and make a live, that it carries its own evidence in it
self. Hence it is that the Apostle says, that the word of prophecy does judge
and convince the unbeleiver, and it makes manifest the secrets of the heart, 1
Cor. 14. 24, 25. That is, the unbeleivers false persuasions of God, and his
lusts and desires shall be discovered and convinced by the word. And again he
says, For the weapons of our warfare (meaning the spiritual applying of the
word to the resisting of their enemies) are not carnal (such as natural men
have recourse unto, and d^e great things by: As namely, riches, friends,
honor, eloquence, favor of Princes, and the like) but mighty through God, or
to God, for the accomplishing of his will, moving the heart, and convincing the
Conscience by the Spirit, and punishing those that withstand the Gospel, by
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations (or the
reasonings of the soul) and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. No adverse power being able to stand before the power
of Christ's voice, or to withstand it.

2. The Saints have the spirit of Christ to lead them into all truth, John 14.
16. That is, not simply and absolutely, but into all truth necessary for them
to know, whereby they may judge and discern of the voice of Christ: So that
the Saints have a faculty to discern of such food as is agreeable unto them:
and also to reject that which is not fit nourishment, and to let it go. As
there are in nature, passages fit for concoction, and digestion, and also for
rejection; so there is in the souls of the Saints, to receive that which is
wholesome food, and fit for the soul and Spirit.

Object. But some may say, How shall we out of our own breasts, without the
allowance and approbation of those that are learned, be assured that it is the
holy Ghost that does so guide us in the way of truth?

Answ. That whereas the Apostle Paul for assurance of our salvation, and that
we are undoubtedly the Children of God, alleges, That we have received the
Spirit of adoption, and that Spirit bears witness to our Spirits, that we
are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. Now it may as well be demanded of them,
that feel this assurance in their souls, how they know it to be the true Spirit
of God which does assure them? which is to contradict the Apostle, and to deny
the principles of Religion, against such there is to be no disputation. The
same Spirit which does witness unto us, that we are the Children of God, and
cannot deceive, does also assure us of the true voice of Christ, in the
interpretation of the Scriptures, and it does assure us so, that we cannot be
deceived. It is true, that the natural man (as Paul says) perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The divine
writings of God will not stoop to the natural spirit of man, neither will the
divine Scriptures be understood, but of such as have received the Spirit of
Heaven, and them unto whom the Lamb Jesus Christ shall unseale the Book of
Life, Rev. 5. Therefore we must bring the Spirit of the Scriptures, for the
understanding of the Scriptures, and he that is spiritual (says the Apostle)
judges all things, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 15. That is, the spiritual man discerns
and understands all things which are of God, and that belong unto eternal
life.

Secondly, in that the Church says, It is the voice of my beloved, Observe,

That Christ is beloved of his Church in what condition soever she is in.

Although the Church were weak and ready to faint, and felt but little divine
assistance, neither had she but small discoveries of Christ, yet she says,
It is the voice of my beloved. The Saints, even in spiritual desertions, when
Christ hides his face, and vaileth himself from the soul: I say, then the
Saints are enough wel-pleased in Christ, though the tentation be full of
amarulency and bitterness, yet in Christ himself there is abundant sweetness
and satisfaction. Hence was that resolution of Job, Though he kill me, yet I
will trust in him. Hence it is also said of the Children of God, That though
they walk in darkness, and have no light at all, yet they will trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay themselves upon their God, Isa. 50. 10. Believers
can say in the midst of fears, tentations, and afflictions, It is the voice
of my beloved. Thus much for the Churches acknowledgement of her sense, and
feeling of Messiahs approaching, and gracious discovery of himself unto her,
and that by the discerning of his voice.

Now follows the acknowledgement she makes of Christ by his pace, which is
prefaced with a word of attention, and after set forth, to be very speedy in
these words.

Behold! he comes leaping upon the Mountains skipping upon the Hills.
Behold! is a word of attention, of admiration, and of asseveration, as you
heard in chap. 1. 15. Behold how my beloved comes running like an Hind.

Hence Observe.

That the approaches and drawings near of Christ unto us, is matter of great
observation.

When the Prophet Isaiah foresaw Christ coming to assume flesh, he cries out,
Behold a Virgin shall conceive etc. Isa. 7. 14. The Ancients saw Christ coming
afar off. Abraham saw his day and rejoiced: but when John Baptist comes, he
says, Behold the Lamb of God, for the succeeding ages of the Church, the
Saints beheld Christ ascending to heaven, from whence he first descended:
surely it should be our work to contemplate Christ's approachings to us in his
spirit, and in the gracious discoveries of himself unto us, in this last age
of the world.

Thus far the preface: Now follows the manner of his coming, which is
first set forth to be speedy.

He comes leaping, etc.
The manner of Christ's coming, is set forth unto us by the similitude taken
from the Roes and Hearts (whereunto Christ is likned in the next verse) which
are swift and speedy in their running, and skip upon hills and rocks: as the
Prophet Isaiah speaking of the glorious effects of the Gospel, says, The lame
man shall leap as an Heart, Isaiah 35. 6. that is, he shall go on evenly and
straightly, he shall walk nimbly and cheerfully in the ways of God. Hereby
then is meant the speediness and readiness of Christ's coming, either to help
and support his people, or else his coming in the flesh, when he would more
fully discover himself in a Gospel-ministration.

Upon the mountains.
These words do marvelously express Christ's singular love, as though the
Church should say, the danger of the journey, the hardness of the way, neither
any thing else as man's power, or the like, can hinder him from coming to
comfort me: but he will pass all impediments whatsoever, as the sins of his
people, and the opposition of the world, and the like. And that mountains and
hills are thus used, may appear, Isa. 40. 4. the Prophet speaking of John
Baptists coming, to prepare the way before Christ, says, Every mountain and
hill shall be made low. So the adversaries of the Church are compared to a
Mountain, in Zach. 4. 7. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabell,
thou shall become a plain. So that notwithstanding the sins of his people,
and the opposition of the world, Christ declares his coming, by his voice, to
comfort his people.

Hence Observe.

That nothing can keepeback, or separate Christ from his Church, his love is so
great toward her.

There be as it were high hills and mountains of sins, in the people of God,
which might separate: and the Devil raises up banks to make the way
unpleasant, but he passes over all these high mountains: The Apostle tells us,
that his love is so abundant, As neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39. Hence it is, even
from that unseperable love of Christ, toward his Church, she so glories
saying, Behold he comes leaping over the mountains, etc. that is, he comes
without let or hinderance, though our sins be as great hills and mountains,
which make a great separation or distance between us, yet he passes over them
all. The Prophet Isaiah compares the pride of the Jews, and their
pharisaicall presumption upon their own merits, to the mountains, as likewise
too much dejection of mind, to the valleys, declaring, that by the preaching
of John Baptist, to prepare the way of Christ, Every valley shall be exalted,
and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made
straight and the rough places plain, Isa. 40. 4. That is such as in their own
conceit of works, are exalted like mountains, shall be cast down by the
ministry of the word; and such as are dejected and cast down in their
spirits, shall be comforted and raised up.

To the godly are incident smaller imperfections, which are common to all the
Saints, and they are compared to little hills, according to that of the Apostle
We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin, says
he; for I allow not that which I do, for, What I would, that I do not, and
what I hate, that I do, Romans 7. 14. 15. And these smallest imperfections are
great enough to separate us from God, were it not for Jesus Christ: But says
the Apostle, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1.
The Church does yet further declare the manner of Christ's coming.

VERSE. 9.
My beloved is a Roe, or young Heart: behold he stands behind our wall, he
looks forth at the window, showing himself through the lattice.
THe first clause of this verse, would better have been placed in the eight
verse, it being the same for substance with it; and only an illustration
thereof, we have the manner of Christ's coming set forth, by a comparison taken
from a Roe, or young Heart.

Christ in approachings, and drawing nigh to his Church, is first compared to a
Roe for swiftness, because the Roe is a creature light of foot, as appears, 2 Samuel 2. 18. And so is a Fawn or young Heart, as appears, 2 Samuel 22. 34. where
David praising God for victories, says He makes my feet like Hindes feet,
that is, very swift and nimble. So that what the Church declares by this
comparison, is, that Christ is swift and nimble, like a Roe, or young Heart, to
draw near and comfort her.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is ready, and makes much speed to help and comfort his Church.
Whither we take the meaning of the words for Christ's approaching near the soul
in the discoveries of his love and grace, or Christ's coming in the flesh, for
the more general comfort of his Saints, yet in both, Christ is swift and
ready, and delayeth not when the appointed time is come. Christ is more ready
to help his Saints, then they can imagine, he is near unto them that do not
think of him, and he is most strong when his people are most weak: Hence it
is, that the Prophet cries out in his extremity, saying, Have thee O God to
deliver me, make have to help me O Lord, Psalm. 70. 1. And again he says, I
stretch forth my hands to thee, my soul gaspeth after thee as a thirsty Land:
Hear me O Lord, and that right soon, for my Spirit waxes faint, hide not thy
face from me lest I be like one which goes down to the pit: O let me hear of
thy loving-kindnesse betimes in the morning, Psalm. 143. 6, 7, 8. And in Psalm.
9. 4. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, says the Psalmist; that is, early in
the morning, after the dark night of afflictions. Thus the Church listening and
looking after Messiah's approaching, she having seen him, but afar off: now
in the next words she exulting-wise sees and declares him to be far nearer,
and introduces him in a familiar way speaking unto her.

Behold he stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the window, showing
himself through the Lattesse.
The Church does here signify a more near communion with Christ then she had
before, when he was leaping upon the Mountains and Hills; and yet not so near,
but the sight she now had of him was imperfect; there was still a wall
between her and him, which separated them. The Church within, does see Christ
but as under her walls, looking in by the windows and grates.

This near sight, and yet imperfect sight, which the Church had of Christ, may
be considered three ways in respect of the impediments to the sight.

1. In respect of the Wall. 2. In respect of the Windows. 3. In respect of the
Grates.
All which impediments were betwixt Christ and his Church.

Behold he stands, etc.
Behold, is a word of attention, as you have heard in the former Verse.

He stands.
Or he waits, or ministers: for the word that signifies (...) Stetit,
perstitit, mansit.
to stand, metaphorically is put for waiting, or ministering. It is said in
Nehem. 12. 44. that Judah rejoiced for the Priests, and for the Levites that
waited, or stood: that is, that stood and ministered in the Priest's Office. And
so in 1 Samuel 16. 21. 21. David came and stood before Saul, and Saul desired
that David might stand before him: that is, to wait and minister before him.
This may well be applied to Christ, who is the minister of the true Tabernacle,
to wait and minister unto his people; he waits how, and when he may be gracious
unto his Saints.

Hence Observe,

That Christ waits to do his people good. Standing is a posture of one that
waits; Christ is often said to stand and wait upon us for our good, as Revel.
3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, etc.

Behind our Wall.
Some understand by this Wall the Incarnation of Christ, when he appeared in
our flesh, John 1. 14. The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth. For Christ incarnate, stood as it were behind the wall,
because his Godhead was hidden in his Manhood: so that his deity being hidden
under our flesh, he is said to show himself, not fully, but through the
windows and grates.

Secondly, others understand it of the wall of man's heart, for such an
expression we have in Jer. 4. 19. the Prophet bewailing the destruction of the
walls of the City, says, I am pained at my very heart: it is in the Orig. I am
pained at the walls of my heart. Agreeable unto this is that saying, Behold I
stand at the door and knock, etc. Rev. 3. 20. Meaning, at the door of the
soul. The heart is called a Wall and a Door, because of the power and Authority
of it, it rules and swayes the whole body. As in Cities, the strength of the
City is in the gates and the walls, and there were their seats of justice in
ancient times, and there was munition stored up for war, so that open the gates
to the enemy, and you give them all. Now all the natural senses and
understanding of our hearts are as a wall to hinder us from Christ, till they
be pulled down, and made conformable to the will of Christ. The lusts and
reasonings of our souls are called strong holds, that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

Thirdly, we may understand by the wall, those ancient, legal ceremonies,
called by the Apostle a stop, and the partition wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. For Christ
and the New Testament-Church, were parted by that wall of Sacrifices, and other
Leviticall Ceremonies, during the continuance of that ancient Priesthood. It
was a joy to those under the Old Testament to see Christ standing behind the
wall of oblations, sprinklings of blood and washings: and to see the light of
the world, behind the Sanctuaries Lamps daily burning: such a sight of Christ
was comfortable, though it was but an obscure and glimmering sight of him. This
was the first impediment of the Churches sight of Christ.

The second follows.

He looks forth at the window.
Looks forth, or looks in at the window: this word (...) Inde Hiphil. (...)
Prospexit, aspexit cum consideratione.
Translated looking is found but three times in Scripture, and it signifies to
look with diligence and observation, making dilligent search, looking
narrowly, and with intentive observation. So that it notes to us the care
Christ has over his Church, to see how she does receive his word.

The windows here mentioned may be meant of the opening and expounding of the
word, whereby the Ceremonies were cleared up unto the people; to which windows
the Prophet tells us, that the Lords Doves do fly and flock together, Isa. 6.
8. The wall was a stop, and these windows are a stay, but less impeding then
the former. These windows were made (as the Temple windows were) for the
letting in of light: that is, by ministering the knowledge of the Ceremonies,
that so the people might know the end and use of them, who through them did
contemplate and spiritually behold Christ as behind them: for what can a man
behold through a wall but by the windows? This was the second dim
representation of Christ unto his Church.

The third follows.

Showing himself through the Lattesse.
Showing) or flourishing, or blossoming: that is, showing himself as a flower,
sweet, pleasant, and amiable, to show, that Christ comes not to his Church
empty handed, but brings all graces with him. The Greek Translateth it looking
in, according to the former word.

The word Translated Lattesse or Grates is not found in any other place. The
Greeks turn it, by the nets. (...)
The Chaldee uses the word for windows. This may be applied according to the
windows, for Grates are also to let in light. Now by all this is showed forth
the manifold and diverse discoveries of Christ from time to time. 1. There is a
wall of partition between Christ and his Church. 2. The Windows. 3. The
Grates. The first kept them most a sunder, the second less, the third least of
all.

Hence Observe.

That Christ has let out his light unto his people, by little, and little,
till by degrees he make the Sun of righteousness to arise upon them.

Christ did not at the first exhibit, and show himself present unto his
Church, but he stands as it were behind the wall: thus Christ has approached
from the mountains to the hills, from the hills to the Temple-wals: thence to
the windows, and lastly, to the Grates or Lattice. In the times of the old
World, he was upon the mountains, a far off: in Abraham's time, as upon the
hills, something nearer in the discoveries of his grace: in Moses time behind
the partion wall of ceremonies, and legal rites: in Daniels time, as at the
Windows: yet all the godly under the Law, saw him, but as under types and
shadows: Now, the new Testaments age are beholding him through the grates,
since his coming in the flesh; this the Apostle testifies, But we all (says
he) with open face, beholding, as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Here the Apostle declares, that the Gospel is full of
light, transforming of us with its glorious beams; and that we have a free
access to God by the Gospel, which is not like the dark veil, that Moses
put upon his face, but pure resplendent glass, wherein the glorious
countenance of God is seen by us: and we are thereby renewed, and as it were
glorified in our minds, according to the same image of God: and this work of
his is still in progress here in this life, so as we grow from grace to
grace, and from glory to glory, until we be perfect as Christ is perfect.
But yet the Church knows Christ but in part; for we see him but (...) through
a glass darkely, for what we shall do hereafter,: here we see God but by
reflections, as it were, and at second hand, as in Ordinances and in creatures,
but then we shall see him face to face: The Lord tells Moses, that he will
speak to him, Mouth to mouth, and by vision, and not in dark words, Numb. 12.
8. Such is the difference between the knowledge we have of God now, and that
we shall have hereafter, as is between the propounding the same thing in the
obscurity of a riddle, and declaring of it in plain and familiar terms: or
the seeing of a thing in its perfect shape, and the seeing of the shadow of a
thing in a glass.

Now the cause of this imperfect sight of Christ is not to be imputed to God,
but to our Apostaticall nature, covered with the veil of fleshly
understanding, to which infirmity of ours, God has applied himself, in
shining out of his glory unto us; yet so, as we see but the image of his
glory in a glass: neither can we contemplate in that glass, the pure and
naked image of God, but it is clothed and wrapped about with an intricacie of
words, and corporal significations, according to our understandings and
reasonings: for the brightness of his glory, no flesh can behold and live:
but hereafter, We shall know him as we are known: that is, we shall know
him fully and perfectly.

Thus much for the Churches rejoicing in her sight of Christ's approachings
toward her.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12. 13.
My beloved spoke and said unto me, rise my love, my fair one and come away.

For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.

The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come,
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.

The fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the Vines with the tender
grape give a good smell: arise my love, my fair one, and come away.


HEre we are to observe, a beginning of Messiahs speech to his Church, which
is continued to the end of the 15. verse, and all this recounted by the mouth
of the Spouse, she taking upon her the person of her beloved, as it were,
declaring what words he used unto her, who calls her up to higher
attainements, and to a morefull communion with himself. The Church heard
Christ's voice a far off, she saw him approaching nearer unto her, an coming
swiftly: and now being come so near (as through the grates, he made himself
known unto her) he answers her loudly, and speaks more comfortably unto her.

In these four verses we have.

First, Christ's call unto his Church: yet uttered by the Church herself: as
she before had desire Christ to draw near unto her; so now Christ desires his
Spouse to draw near unto him, in these words, My Beloved spoke, and said unto
me, rise up my love, etc.

Secondly, Observe the reason given of Christ's call; and that is drawn from
the opportunity and fitness of the time for coming unto him.

First, Because the Winter is past, ver. 11.

Secondly, Because the Spring was come, verse. 12. 13.

Lastly, We have the former call and exhortation of Christ renewed, verse 13.
Arise my love, my fair one, and come away.

First, we have Christ's Exhortation to his Church; My beloved spoke and said
unto me, arise my love, my fair one, and come away.

In this speech of Christ unto his Church, are to be considered two things.

First, Those amiable Epithites given by him unto her.

Secondly, The words of his exhortation, and both these in this tenth verse,
and for the rest, you shall have the particulars in their due place.

First, The Epithites or Titles given to the Church, are two.

First, My love.

Secondly, My fair one,

Secondly, The exhortation, Arise thou, and come away.

First, We have Christ's speech, calling his Church from her present estate and
place of affliction, unto a better, and more glorious condition: or from her
carnal security wherein she lay, to follow him in faith and love of the
Gospel, saying:

My Beloved spoke, and said unto me.
Christ is the Churches Beloved: The Hebrew word dodi, my beloved, whereof
comes David; in English, beloved, a term given by the father from heaven to
his Son here on earth, when he said; This is my Beloved Son, Matt. 3. ult.
figured out by the ancient beloved, David. Christ is the Husband of his Spouse,
and nothing will content a believer, but the enjoyment of the Beloved.

Spoke, or answered, the word Gnanah, signifies so to speak, as is by way of
answering. Arias Montanus (...) Respond it. (...) signifies also to sing by
(...) when one part answers another in singing.
renders it, delectus meus respondit, my beloved answered. Now in that the
Church says, he answered, it does not only argue Christ's readiness to help
his Church, but also that there was some question or demand used before of the
Church, whereunto this answer of Christ was framed.

We find such sudden answers often in the Gospel, even before any question
was propounded, And(...) answered and said, etc. which some term an Heb^^isme,
or form of speech used of the Hebrews, even then, when no demand went before.
But I rather think, that Christ answers something, that the Church desired
before.

Now we must consider, that the Church speaks unto Christ two manner of ways.

First, By a vocal speech, whereto the voice of the body, is required: and
such speech as this, we find not diverse times in the Gospel, nor here,
whereto the answer may have relation.

Secondly, The Churches speech is only mental, which is only begotten in the
mind: and Christ does very often in the Gospel, frame an answer to the
thoughts of his hearers, and so Moses was heard to cry, when he uttered never a
word: and thus the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar are introduced, crying,
How long Lord, holy and true, Revel. 6. Now we may guess the Churches demand
by the answer, which tends to the drawing of her forth of an uncomfortable
condition, to a comfortable state; as it were out of winter storms into a
pleasant spring; her demand then (by Analogy of reason) must be this. O my
beloved Savior, how long will it be, before I am delivered from this calamity
and bondage, when shall I be freed from the burden of legal ceremonies, and
from the rudiments of the world, and carnal Ordinances? When shall I be taken
from under the Schoolmaster of the Law, that I may be no longer under Tutors
and Governors? whereunto Christ answers in effect thus, Even now is the time
of the flourishing Spring, therefore arise and come away.

Hence Observe.

That Christ does answer every gracious desire of his Saints.

The Church had not uttered one word, but only desired more comfortable times,
and Christ gives her in the answer of her desire, The Lord prepares the heart,
and hears the prayer, Psalm. 10. 17. The Lord does as well hear and answer the
prayer of the mind, and of the heart, as the prayer of the lips. David's
purpose to build the Lord an house, was accepted as well as Solomon's actual
building of it.

Thus far Christ's speech in general, containing Christ's answer to the secret
desire of his Church.

Let us come to the Speech it self. And first of those two Epithites given by
him unto his Church.

My love, my fair one.
My love, Or my fellow friend, my companion, familiar: so named of feeding
together, and conversing one with another, and so partaking each of others good
or evil. This title of love is often given by Christ to his Church, sometimes
a Husband is called by this name, friend, as in Jer. 3. 20. there is mention
made of a wife, that deals treacherously with her friend: So Christ gives a
title unto his Church, suitable unto her, as she is his Spouse, and he her
Husband.

Hence Observe.

That Christ's love, seats it self in his Church.

The Church is the maine object of his love, it is united to that, and is not
scattered to other objects: who can imagine what Christ's love is to his Churh;
As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, says Christ to his
Disciples, Joh. 15. 9. None can understand with what love the Father loved the
Son: no more can any define and fully set out what Christ's love is unto the
Saints. The Apostle would have the Ephesians able to comprehend with all
Saints, the breadth and length, the depth and height of the love of God in
Christ: but yet for all that he concludes, that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.
18. 19. And indeed there is no love comparable to this love of Christ, which is
above the love of women, of father or mother, or any earthly love whatsoever.

Thus much for the first Epithet.

The second follows.

My fair one.
The Hebrew word Japheh, fair, signifies not only fair and beautiful in
color, but in comely proportion (...) Pulcer, elegans, venusius.
and elegancy, such as draws love and liking. The Churches fairness is by
reason of the graces and spiritual beauty of faith, hope, love, patience, and
such like graces, wherewith God in Christ had beautified her. It is a very
fair term for the greater to give unto the lesser, for Christ to give unto
his Church: yea, it is a sign of singular affection for Christ to give unto
his Church before she was arisen, before she was comencer unto his presence.
Hence Observe,

That the Church is exceeding beautiful and fair in Christ's account. Hence it
is he gives here such a soulravishing title, My fair one, etc. It is a very
high expression for Christ to give to his Church, but he who knows best what
the Church is, calls her my fair one. But how comes the Church to be thus
fair? Her fairness is a derivative beauty, she is fair and comely in that
she is the Spouse of Christ, and clothed with the robes of his
righteousness: for so soon as ever we are united to Christ, our sins are upon
him, and his righteousness upon us, and therefore in Christ the Church is
comely. It is Christ that gives us life, and puts excellent Ornaments upon us
to cover our nakedness, and decks us with Jewels and Chains of gold, etc.
and so we become beautiful in his sight, Ezekiel. 16. 10, 13. It is Christ that
cleanses her by the washing of water by the word, that he might present her to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle, or any such thing, but
that she should be holy, without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. So much for the
two amiable Epithites given by Christ unto his Church: in the next place
follows his Exhortation, and that is laid down in other two words.

Rise up, and come away.
Rise up thou) or rise up for thy self, and for thy good; (...) Surge tibi.
sit not still under darkness and superstition, lie no longer under the
burden of legal rites and ceremonies, for the time is coming on that thou
shall not be under rudiments and traditions, but under a more pure Gospel
dispensation. Thus the Apostle bids us arise from sin, he says, Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light,
Ephesians. 5. 13. That is, let us sit no longer in sin, but arise, that Christ may
give us light.

Come away.
Or go thou, or get thee away for thy self. As God said to Abraham, go thou,
or go for thy self, Genesis 12. 1. (...) Et abi abi.
signifying, that though no other would, yet he should for his own good, get
him out from that idolatrous place. The Church is not only to arise and stand
still, but being arisen, to come roundly away, as it is said or Matthew, that
he arose and followed Christ, Mat. 9. 9. And James and John lest their Nets and
followed him. Now Observe from this Exhortation of Christ to his Church.

First, That there remains some lump of corruption in the Saints of Christ.
Else what need Christ call his Church from that security and
Earthly-mindednesse, but that she was willing to sit down in this world, and
to have her affections somewhat entangled with the cares and pleasures of the
flesh. Hence it is that Christ calls her with his continual voice sounding in
her ears, arise, O thou whom I love, which art fair in my sight, and come
away. We are ready to mind earthly things, and to set up our rest here, but
alas! the holy City, where is our freedom, is above: indeed worldlings are not
moved at all with the voice of Christ, for they can feel no taste
nor-sweetnesse but in worldly things, and it is death to them to hear the
voice of Christ to say, Arise and come away: they cannot willingly part with
their treasure whereon they have set their hearts; that is to say, their Gold,
their Silver, their Houses, and their Lands: but such are not worthy of Christ:
but let all the Saints hearken unto Christ's voice, and follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ does graciously invite his people to come from those things he
would have them to forsake.. Arise, and come away for thy self, or for thy
good. Thus the Lord calls to his people to come out from that darkness they
were in, saying, Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee: for behold the darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross
darkness the people: but the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee, Isa. 60. I. When the Lord shined forth upon his people in more
glorious discoveries of himself, he calls them away from their former
condition: when the Lord discovered himself in a Gospel dispensation, his
people were no longer to sit under the dark cloud of legal ceremonies.
Therefore let us follow the Lords call unto any dispensation of his, and not to
be over confident of our present ways, we must remember the Lord did depart out
of the Sanctuary into the Temple, and out of the Temple into the ministry of
John Baptist, and out of John Baptist into that of Christ and his Apostles. We
know not what the Lord may yet bring us unto; there are many glorious
Prophecyes yet to be fulfilled, and many glorious things are spoken of the new
Jerusalem which shall descend down from above, where there shall be no need of
the light of the Sun, or of the Moon. If the Lord shall call us from those
ways wherein we have enjoyed God formerly, unto an higher dispensation: let us
be willing to hear his voice, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes:
Our happiness lies not so much in this or that form, but in the enjoyment of
our beloved.

So much for Christ's Exhortation to his Church: the Reason of his Exhortation
follows.

VERSE. 11.
For lo, Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone.
The Church had a longing desire after a near communion with Christ, who had
made some discoveries of himself unto her: now it remains that she draw near
unto him: to which end Christ uses quick Arguments to quicken her up to this
duty: his motive is from the opportunity and fitness of the time, and
therefore he says first of all, for lo, the winter is past, etc.

Winter) is a time of cold, hardness, storm, and tempest, (...) Inde. (...)
Cha'd, Hyems tempestas, pluvia.
when all things lie, as it were barren, under Frost, and Snow, and cold
Blasts, there is no pleasure to be taken then: But in the Spring time all sweet
and pleasant things spring and bud forth, whereas in winter all flowers and
fruits are consumed, and as for Exusu Chaldaeo um School in Pentaglot.
travel it is difficult, and walking is unpleasant: therefore says Christ,
Pray that your slight be not in the winter, Matthew. 24. 20. But in the Spring
time all those things are pleasant, then there is the melody of the singing of
Birds, then there is comfort and solace to be taken in walking abroad.

The Rain is over and gone.
Rain is over) or changed: that is, the storms and tempests of the winter is
past away and gone, and fair and pleasant weather come in the place. Rain in
winter is uncomfortable to travel in, as in Ezr. 10. 9. The people trembled,
for the rain was great. And in verse. 13. The people were not able to stand
without, because it was a time of much rain. Showers and tempests are very
troublesome to those that are abroad, or without doors.

These things may be applied,

First, to the bondage of sin, which may well be compared to the winter; for as
a nipping winter deflowreth the beauteous face of a Garden or Orchard, so does
sin deforme and rob a people of their beauty.

Secondly, we may apply these winter storms and blasts to outward trouble and
grievances in this life, by the malice and persecution of wicked men: as when
Israel was under Egyptian bondage, and under the captivity of Babylon: such
times as these were winter seasons, full of trouble and tempest. Now we may
apply it unto the spiritual winter of Antichrists reign and rage, after which
we begin to see buddings of glory and liberty shine forth again

Thirdly, We may apply this winter to the menaces and showring threats of the
Law; and this I rather understand to be the right interpretation of the words;
even as by the subsequent Spring, I understand to be mystically meant the
Gospel.

Now look how the winter is to the fruits of the earth, the same is the
ministration of the Law to the soul.

The Law was promulgated with ensigns of fear, namely, with burning, fire,
Blackness, darkness, and tempest: yea, so terrible was the slight, as Moses
said, I exceedingly fear and tremble, Heb. 12. 18. 21. This stormy winter
began with the Law in Mount Sinai, when Christ came in the flesh to publish the
Gospel of joy and peace, the showers of judgment ended: or rather the showers
were changed, from windy tempestuous showers, to refreshing showers of the
Springtime.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints under the Gospel, are under a more glorious and comfortable
dispensation, then the Saints were under the Law.

Hence it is, that Christ uses this as an argument to quicken and stir up
his Church, to draw near to him: namely, because The winter was changed, and
the rain gone.

Now the nipping ceremonial impediments were removed, and a greater discovery
of love and grace manifested. The Apostle speaking of the New Covenant says,
Now that which is old, (meaning the Law) is ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. 13.
that is, seeing Christ is come, and the time is now of the New Covenant, the
Leviticall ordinances (which he calls in another place carnal) and all the
whole form of the legal Covenant and ceremonies, forms of worship are
abrogated. And now says the Apostle, in Heb. 12. We are not come unto Mount
Sinai, but unto Mount Sion, that is, to the Church under the Gospel, whereof
Mount Sion was a Type, Psalm. 14. 7. Hence it is that the Prophet Isaiah
foretelling of the glory of the times of the Gospel, says, And it shall come
to pass (says he) in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house,
shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above
the hills, etc. that is, the spiritual glory and grace of Christ's Kingdom,
shall be advanced above all worldly state and power, and says he, The Nations
shall flow unto it; and many people shall say, come ye, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, etc. Isa. 2. 2, 3.
that is, they shall embrane the ways of Christ readily, and spontaneously,
with a free spirit, they shall not be filled with that terror and amazement,
as the people of Israel were at Mount Sinai; that when they heard the words of
the Law, desired to hear them no more: but they shall say, He will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth
the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: That is, the doctrine of the
Gospel shall be first preached in Jerusalem, and from thence sent abroad into
all the world.

Christ having used a motive to quicken his Church to come away, taken from the
pleasantness of the season, to wit, the spring time.

Now let us consider the particulars, whereby this Spring is described.

VERSE. 12.
The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come,
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. VERSE. 13. The Fig Tree
puts forth her green figs, etc.
HEre we have a particular description of the Spring, by the flowers that
appear, by the singing of Birds, by the voice of the Turtle, by the fig tree
bringing forth figgs, and the Vines with their first grapes, casting forth a
smell, etc. The persuasion then being drawn from the comparison of the times.
We are to consider how it stands in the mystical sense.

First, We may apply this to the State of all the elect, before their calling,
and then to their estate after regeneration. Before they be called, their
hearts are even like the earth in winter, under the cold frosts and storms of
sin, where can be nothing but bitterness and things unsavourie. After the
Lord has called them, there is a fragrancie, and heavenly dew of all graces
upon the soul, then the sweet flowers and wholesome fruits do bud forth.

Secondly, We may apply the words to the state of the Church, under nipping
frosts, and stormy threats of the Law: Now by the coming of Christ in the
flesh, and the publishing of the Gospel of peace and glad-tydings, those
winter-showres were changed, from windy showers, to showers beseeming the
Spring, then there was abundance of spiritual peace and joy in the Holy Ghost,
even heavenly melody, which is here represented by the springings of flowers
and the singing of Birds.

The flowers appear on the earth, etc.
The flowers, or, the flowerings appear. The Hebrew word signifies any
flourishing thing, in Ezekiel. 7. 10. it is used for the blossoming of a rod: By
these flowers we (...) Floruit, Effloruit.
may understand,

First, the Saints themselves, which now begin to hold up their heads, and of
the fruits of the Spirit, whereby the elect give a pleasant smell: and whereby
they are much adorned, and comforted. Thus when the Lord promises grace to his
people, he says, Israel shall blossom, and bud, and fill the face of the
world with fruit, Isa. 27. 6. Though they seemed to have been so grievously
afflicted, that they seem past all hope of recoverie, yet they shall settle,
and thrive, and increase again.

On the earth, or, in the earth, which being dry and barren by nature, (being
cursed for man's sake, Genesis 3.) (...)
is by the supply of the rain, and dew from Heaven, is made fruitful: so are
the Saints by nature, but are made fruitful by grace: Hence it is the Lord
promises to be, As dew upon Israel, that he shall grow as the Lilie, and cast
forth his roots as Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be
as the Olive Tree, etc. Hos. 14. 4, 5, 6. that is, as if the Lord had said, I
will heal their backslidings and love them freely: for I will so water them
with the dew of my grace and heavenly blessing, that, they shall be like the
Olive Tree, which is always green and flourishing as in Psalm. 52. 8.

Hence Observe, First.

That the Saints in respect of their graces, are very sweet and fragrant.

They are compared to the flowers of the spring, which are appointed rather to
savor unto, then to seed upon: all the gracious speeches, thanksgivings, and
prayers, are as so many sacrifices of sweet smelling savor unto God by Jesus
Christ. The Prophet Zeph. in chapter 3. 9. calls it a pure language, which the
Lord would give to his people under Messits, the face of the earth should be
changed, by the calling in of the Gentiles, and by their sanctification in
heart and tongue, when they should speak the language of Canaan, as the
Prophet Isaiah speaks, Chap. 19. 18.

Secondly, Observe.

That the Gospel makes men that are barren by nature, to be exceeding
fruitful.

The flowers appear in the earth, etc. which was naturally dry and barren.
Hence the Prophet Isaiah says, The Wilderness and solitary place, shall be
glad for them, and the Desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose: it shall
blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing, etc. Isa. 35. 1, 2.
that is, the Wilderness, and the solitary place, or (as it is in the
original) the land of dryness, or drought; that is without moisture, shall be
a most plentiful and beautiful place, by the glory of Gods presence in his
Church. And in verse 6. he says, For in the Wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the Desert; that is, those that were barren before, shall
become fruitful in grace and holiness; Being (as the Apostle says) Filled
with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1. 11.

So much for the first description of the Spring.

The second follows.

The time of the singing of Birds is come.
The time of singing, to wit, by Birds. The clause (by Birds) is not in the
Original, but is necessarily understood; seeing not any other singing, but such
a singing of Birds (as afterward, namely of the Turtle) can here be
understood, that being one glorious effect of the Spring. The old Latin turns
it, Tempus putationis, the time of lopping or pruning the Vines.

The Hebrew word Zamir, indeed sometimes so signifies, as it signifies also a
singing; as here, it cannot be taken for cutting, but for singing, because
afterward we have Vines brought in with their fruit, and therefore cannot be
the time of pruning and lopping.

Arius Montanus renders it, Tempus cantus, a time of singing.

Birds in Scripture are considered Sometimes in a good part Sometimes in an
evil

1. They are taken in the evil part, Matthew. 13. where the Birds of the Air
steal away the seed of godliness.

2. They are taken in a good sense, as Levit. 12. 6. where Doves and Sparrows
are an analogical Sacrifice to God; as also in flocking of Fowls, for such
supply of oblation, unto Noah's Ark.

Now for the first sort of Birds they are such as John speaks of in Revel. 18.
they be a Cage of unclean and hateful Birds, whose Song is vanity and
discord: but for the singing here introduced, intimates unto us the Song of
Christ's people, who feeling the comforts of the Gospel and of the Spirit, do
sing his praise; and with Psalms, and Hymmes, and spiritual Songs, do sing
and make melody in their hearts unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. The holy Ghost
here alluding to the sweet accents of Birds. Let us Observe hence. First,

That the Gospel of Christ fills men's hearts and mouths with joy and praises.
The Gospel is called good tidings, Isa. 61. 1. And tidings of great joy, Luke 1.
19. and 8. 1. Romans 10. 13. And thus we have the Prophet, saying. They shall
lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, etc. From the
utmost parts of the Earth, have we heard songs, glory to the righteous, Isa.
24. 14, 16. And again, speaking of the times of the Gospel, he says, Then
shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing, etc. Isa.
35. 6. That is, they shall sing Songs of joy and praise to the Lord; when the
Gentiles began to appear a Church, then she began to sing the praises of
Messiah.

Secondly Observe,

That the ministration of the Gospel is much more comfortable then that of the
Law. The Law was the ministration of the Letter, of death, and of condemnation:
but the Gospel, of Spirit, of Life, and of righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. The Law
was given with terrible sound of thunder, the Gospel in form of delectable
singing: the first Song was an Elegy or sad dump, the second an Eulogie, an
Hymme, a Psalm of joy and gladness. The Gospel puts Songs of joy, and notes
of delight into our mouths.

So much for the second description of the Spring. The third follows.

The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land.
This Bird in the Original called Tor, which word (...) Dispositio, forma, and
gurtur.
appellatively is order, as if this Bird above others were a Bird of order.
This Bird is a kind of Dove, addicted to the Desert and solitary places; true
to his Mate, whose Song is mixed with sadness, in the winter season couched in
some hollow Tree, coming forth in the Spring with his mournful Song.

By this Bird is sometimes meant the Church, as in Psalm. 74. 19. O deliver not
the soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the wicked. That is, deliver
not the life of thy Church to be pierced by the wicked, she being mournful,
weak, and timorous, and unable to help her self. And so the Church is called
in Song 2. 14. and 5. 2. but here it cannot be meant of the Church, seeing she
is stirred up to arise by the voice of the Tirtle. What Bird of order can this
be then, but that which was appointed for a burnt Sacrifice in Levit. 1. 5.
even Christ himself, who during the time of the Laws winter, was couched under
shadows, and therein lay as dead; but when his Gospel was to be set up, when
he should appear in the flesh, and show himself in our nature, then he sung
personally to the Jews, and to the first fruits of the Gentiles, afterward by
the glorious and plentiful mission of his spirit: for thus Christ's spirit is
resembled to a Dove, as at his Baptism, Mat. 3. 16. So then by the voice of
the Turtle Dove is meant the voice of the Spirit, whereby they are refreshed,
and do mutually comfort one another, and do jointly praise God with, and for
his graces.

Hence Observe,

That the voice of the Spirit of Christ sounding in the Gospel is very
comfortable. And therefore the comfortable givings out of the Spirit in the
days of the Gospel is compared to the voice of the Turtle Dove in the Spring,
who had hid her self in the holes of Trees all the winter before: So Christ
that was hid under types and shadows, to appear in the plentiful powrings out
of the Spirit, this must needs be very comfortable. The Spirit is called the
Oil of gladness, Psalm. 45. And the Comforter, John 14. and all the effects of
the working of the Spirit in the soul, are of joy and peace; and the joy of the
Spirit is like the intercession of the Spirit, unspeakable and glorious, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Thus we have the first part of Christ's Spring described.

1. By the flowers. 2. By the singing of Birds.
Now follows some further fruits of the Spring, represented to us by the
Trees fruit. 1. Of the Figtree. 2. Of the Vine-tree, and these fruits make up
the Springs perfection, and stand for a prologue to the Summer season, as in
the following words.

Verse. 13.
The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines with tender Grapes
give a good smell: arise my love, my fair one, and come away.
For the Fig Tree, Christ makes the budding thereof a sign of the Summers
approaching, and also of a fruitful year following. Learn a Parable of the
Fig Tree (says he) when her branch is yet tender, and puts forth leaves,
ye know that summer is nigh, Mat. 24. 32. And Pliny does count the Fig Tree
amongst the Trees that are of quick nature, so that the time of young Figs
appearance, must argue the forwardness of the Spring, ready to entertain
Summer. Now the blessed effects of the Spirit and grace of Christ upon his
Church, is manifested by the Fig Tree; as when the Lord threatens destruction
by the Prophet, he says, There shall be no Grapes on the Vine, nor Figs on the
Fig Tree, etc. Jer. 8. 13. So that when the voice of the Spirit shall be heard
as the voice of a Turtle Dove, then the Saints shall be fruitful, as Fig Trees
in the time of summer.

The second Trees fruit follows.

And the Vines with tender Grapes give a good smell.

Grapes of themselves casting no savor, it must necessarily be understood of
that time, wherein there be small Grapes budding forth, and flowers or blossoms
falling off, which flowers give a true pleasant odor, and therefore she
says, The Vine with the tender grape, etc.

The young or small grape, called in the Original Smadar, a word used not
above three times in Scripture. By this variety of fruit is signified the
graces and fruits of the Spirit in the Saints, in the days of the Gospel, and
of more plentiful effusions of the Spirit then before: when the Saints are
reconciled unto God by Christ, the sweet odor of their graces are like the
buddings of the Fig Tree, and the Vine. The people of God are likened to Grapes
and Figgs, as in Hos. 9. 10. I found Israel like Grapes in the Wilderness, I
saw your Fathers, as the first ripe in the Fig Tree, at her first time. It is
noted of some, that the Fig Tree bears fruit three or four times a year. Now
in that he says they were like the first ripe in the Tree, it notes the
forwardness of the Saints to bring forth fruit, even as the Fig Tree that
hastens to bring its first fruit, that it may hasten to bring forth more fruit.
Now in that the Saints are likened to the Fig Tree, and to the Vine for
fruitfullnesse.

Hence Observe,

That the Spirit by a Gospel ministration makes the Saints to abound in all
fruitfullnesse. The Apostle tells us of the fruits of the Spirit, in Gal. 5.
22. But the fruit of the Spirit (says he) is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. The Saints abound in
such fruits as these; they are such as bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7. 4.
Now the Saints in respect of their fruitfullnesse in grace, may well be
assimilated unto the Fig Tree, and the Vine.

First, the Fig Tree bears fruit very often, at least Plin. Lib. 13. Cap. 7.
four times a year; and Pliny says of the Egyptian Fig Tree, that it
brings forth fruit by the very stock, not by the Branches. So are the Saints
very fruitful in holiness and righteousness, and therefore they are called
by the Prophet, The Trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
may be glorified, Isa. 61. 3. that bring forth much fruit to his glory. And
Christ says unto his Disciples, Herein is my Father glorified, in that ye
bring forth much fruit, John 15.

The second note, that the naturalist observes of Idem, Lib. 13. Cap. 7.
the fig tree is, that when it is cut down and cast into the water, it
presently sinketh being dry, but when it is thoroughly steeped in the water,
then it will rise again; contrary to the nature of other trees, who in their
dryness swim, and when they are through wet, then they sink to the bottom.
Thus it is with the Saints, when they are first cast into the water of
affliction, they begin to sink, as Peter did, when he walked upon the Sea with
Christ: but when they have been long in affliction, and more exercitate, that
have been as it were tried Soldiers, such as have their senses well exercised,
or schooled, as the Apostle says, such I say, never will utterly sink in
their trouble, but they can bear reproaches and persecutions for Christ's sake,
and when they are weak in themselves, then they are strong in him, and more
then conquerours.

Thirdly, It is further reported of the fig tree that, Scalpendo tantum
ferreis unguibus aliter non (...) rescit, it will not ripen any otherwise, then
only by Plin. lib. 13. cap. 7.
scratching it with Iron hooks or rakes: and it being so scratcht, it will
bring forth seven fold, says Pliny. Such is our nature, that it will not
bring forth any fruits unto righteousness; unless it be quickened and stirred
up by the Word and Spirit of God. We shall never be fruitful trees in Christ's
Orchard, unless we be pruned by the Father, unless he purge us, and make us
bring forth fruit, as Christ speaks, Joh. 15. So much of the fig tree: now
follows the simile of the Vine.

First, A Vine is good for no use, if it bear not fruit, for so says the
Prophet, Ezekiel. chap. 15. 1, 2. The Vine-tree is for his wood, less regarded
for building, then any Tree of the Forest, insomuch as none will make a pin
thereof to hang any Vessel thereon, but rather cast it into the fire and burn
it. We may apply this to our selves; for what substantial thing is in our
nature, that may be depended upon? he that makes any natural ability, as a
pin to depend on, will lean on a broken reed.

Secondly, A Vine is very fruitful, it brings forth abundance of grapes, as
appears, Psalm. 128. 3. and Ezekiel. 32. 12. So the Saints are made exceeding
fruitful, by the flowings out of the Spirit of Christ upon their hearts.

Thirdly, The Vines, and their fruit come to nothing, except they be
underproped and lift up from the earth: so it is with the Saints, both they and
their fruits come to nothing, unless Christ underprop them by his power,
spirit, and grace: but being underpropped by the flagons of Christ, and by the
distributions of his grace, they become very fruitful.

The Spring thus described: First, figured by flowers and Birds singing.

Secondly, From the budding and sprouting forth of the fig tree and the Vine,
wherein is set forh the gracious and pleasant voice of Christ in the Gospel,
with all the effects and fruits thereof upon the Saints: Now it remains that
we speak of the exhortation subjoyned.

Arise my love, my fair one, and come away.
This exhortation is the same, that we had in the tenth verse aforegoing, and
therefore the less may be said of it now: only two things we may note from the
iteration of this exhortation.

First, It notes the backwardness of our natures, and the untowardnesse of our
hearts, for yiedling unto Christ: and therefore the Lord does graciously call
his people again and again to come up to a more full enjoyment of himself.

Secondly, It notes his exceeding great love, and rich mercy, that does call
us to arise from the evil wherein we lay captivated by sin, and from the
winter blast of the Law, even from the curse and bondage thereof, and also he
calls us into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: so that in all our
troubles and tentations, we may come to him, and find rest, where we may
sweetly enjoy our selves in him: all which is represented to us, by the
flourishing and joyful time of the Spring; which Christ uses as a motive, to
persuade us to come unto him.

VERSE. 14, 15.
O my Dove! that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the
stairs: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely:

Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines: for our Vines have
tender grapes.


THe Church continues here in her repetition of Christ's speech unto her, which
speech begun verse 10. In which we may Observe.

First, An exhortation.

Secondly, A reason thereof.

The exhortation is given forth unto us:

First, In a description of the Church.

Secondly, In the thing exhorted unto.

The description lies

First, In a sweet and friendly compellation given by Christ unto his Church,
My Dove.

Secondly, In a description of her dwelling place.

First, In saying, Thou art in the holes of the Rock.

Secondly, In adding, In the secret of the stairs.

The thing exhorted unto, is the Churches manifestation of her self.

First, In saying, Show me thy face,

Secondly, In adding, Cause me to hear thy voice.

The reason of this exhortation is drawn from the Churches excellent
qualification, and this is laid down in a twofold assertion.

First, he says, For thy voice is sweet.

Secondly, he concludes, And thy face is comely.

As for the next exhortation in the 15. verse you shall have the resolution in
its due place.

Now to the exhortation, and the parts thereof.

My Dove,! etc.
Christ here calls the Church a Dove; a title sometimes attributed unto
Christ himself: the Holy Ghost sometimes appeared on Christ in the shape of a
Dove, to discover unto us thus much, that Christ should have the property and
disposition of a Dove, as meekness and gentleness, for indeed he became man
for that end, to be a merciful Savior. I will not quench the smoking stax,
nor break the bruised reed, says he, Matthew. 12. 20. So that the mercifulness
of Christ's nature, and the mercifulness of his Office is set forth by the
resemblance of a Dove. Now as Christ had the Spirit in likeness of a Dove: so
all that are Christ's, to wit, the Spouse of Christ, have the disposition of
Christ: that spirit that framed Christ to be meek, and gentle like a Dove,
does also frame the Church into the same likeness and disposition: hence he
says, My Dove, etc.

Observe hence.

That as Christ's, so is the Churches temper and disposition framed after the
likeness of a Dove.

Now we must know, that there is some good in all the creatures: there is a
beam of Gods majesty, and an image of virtue, even in the inferior creatures,
wherefore the Scripture sends us to such creatures for many excellencies, that
are to be found in them. Now the Church may well be compared to a Dove, and
that for such properties as these.

First, The Dove is a mournful creature, and therefore Hezekiah says, I did
mourn like a Dove, Isa. 38. 14. And the Jews are said to mourn like Doves,
Isa. 59. and it is said of those that should repent, that they should mourn
like Doves, Ezekiel. 7. 16. This was David's condition, in Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me
that I sojourne in Mesech: that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar.

The State of the Saints is like Doves, who mourn to God in their desertions,
afflictions, and tentations, who hears the bemonings of his own spirit in
them.

Secondly, A Dove is an innocent, harmless creature, and simple, without
guile: hence the advice of Christ is to his Disciples, Be innocent as Doves,
Matthew. 10. Now there is a simplicity that is sinful, when there is no mixture
of wisdom in it: for it is said in Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is like a silly Dove
without heart, they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria: that is, when they did
rely more upon friends, and outward helps, then upon God: But there is also a
pure, holy simplicity, and so God is said to be simple, because there is
nothing in him contrary to himself, or to his own nature. In this respect,
the Church may be said to be like the Dove, in respect of a good and holy
simplicity, when there is no no mixture of fraud, no duplicity in in the
soul; A double hearted man is unconstant, and unstable in all his ways, says
the Apostle, Jam. 1. 8.

Thirdly, The Dove is weak and impotent, not being able to help her self
against the Birds of prey: it has nothing but flight: So the Saints are unable
to defend themselves, but only they can fly to God as to their mountain, and
fly to Christ as to their Arc and strength, for they have no other refuge
then God, nor any hiding place besides Christ.

Fourthly, The Dove is a very weak creature: Hence it is said of Ephraim, that
He shall tremble as the Dove, out of the Land of Assyria, Hos. 11. 11. So the
Saints are called, The meek of the earth, Zeph. 2. 1, 2, And we are exhorted
by the Apostle, As the Elect of God, to put on the bowels of meekness and
compassion, etc. Colos. 3. 12. Because this grace disposes us to a nearer
communion with God then other graces: it is a grace that God much delights in,
and would have all his Saints adorned with, as is manifest in 1 Pet. 3. 4. it
is the best jewel or ornament, that the Saints can be adorned withal, because
it empties the soul of all fleshly conceits, and so makes it the more
capacious to receive any good from God.

Fifthly, The Dove is loving, chaste, and faithful, to her mate, always keeping
close unto her: So the Saints, they will not leave Christ to turn to Idols. It
is reported that in the days of Julian, when Idols were set up in every corner
of the Christians Temples, yet then they made a shift to turn their eyes from
beholding them. The believing soul is faithful to Christ, and will set up
nothing in the heart above Christ,: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? (says
David) and what is there in earth that I desire besides thee? Psalm. 73. 25. The
Church is brought in like a chaste virgin contracted, and her Members to be
such as follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, for they have not defiled
themselves with women, Revel. 14. 4. that is, those that are chaste to Christ,
have not desiled themselves with idolatry and spiritual fornication.

Sixthly, The Dove is a cleanely Bird, and it feeds cleanely upon pure grain,
and will not lodge but in a cleanely place, where it may not be annoyed with
any unsavourie stentch, and the like: so it is with the faithful soul, it
will not feed upon the dung or dogs meat of this world, or on sinful
pleasures, but upon Christ and spiritual things. The carnal man uses to feed
upon dust, and earthly things, when as the faithful soul, that has tasted
the heavenly Manna, it will not feed upon that which is base and earthly,
neither can it endure to feed upon men's inventions or lying legends, but it
loves to feed upon the pure word of God, and upon heavenly and spiritual things.

Seventhly, The Dove is a Bird that loves communion and fellowship, as the
Prophet speaks, Who are those that flock to the windows like Doves, Isa. 60.
8. C0For so they use to flock to their houses by companies: So the Saints love
to have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, as the Apostle John speaks,
and also they love to have communion one with another. Doves will consort with
Doves: so will Saints have communion with Saints and none else.

Eighthly, and lastly, the Dove is a low prized creature, as appears by that
allowance under the Law, that they who could not compass a Lamb, might offer
a pair of Turtle-Doves, and yet by the reason of the apparition of the spirit
in the likeness of a Dove, it is stamped with no small worth and excellency:
So the Saints are of very low esteem in the world, and lightly accounted of:
but in regard of those spiritual and divine appearances of God in their
souls, they become of great worth, and excel in divine excellency; so says
the wise man, The righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.

Thus I have touched upon some properties of the Dove, unto which Christ does
resemble his Church, and so far of the loving attribute given by Christ to
his Church, in saying, my Dove, etc. Now follows the second thing in this
description of the Church, to ^wit, the manifestation of her mansion place, and
that first in saying.

That art in the Clefts, or holes of the Rock.
Some understand this Rock to be the Churches station, or abiding place in the
day of distress and persecution; who then hides her self from danger, as the
Dove hides her self in the Rocks, as it is said, O ye that dwell in Moab,
leave the Cities and dwell in the Rocks, and be like the Dove that makes her
nest in the side of the holes mouth, Jer. 48. 28. But we may understand this
Rock mystically to be meant of Christ, who is the Rock of the Churches
salvation, as the Psalmist often expresses. Christ was typified by the Rock in
the Wilderness, as appears, 1 Cor. 10. 4. But for the clefts or holes of the
Rock, they seem to insinuate the secret counsel of God sealed up in Christ
concerning the election and calling of the Gentiles: and those elect Gentiles
did as it were, lodge in the eternal decree of God in Christ, all the time of
the legal winter: The Apostle says that God has elected us in him before the
Foundation of the World: And the same Apostle tells us in Gal. 3. 23. That we
(meaning both Jew and Gentile) were kept under the Law, and shut up unto the
faith, which should afterward be revealed. So that the Church before her
calling had her abode in Christ; yea, within the secret stairs and lodgings of
Christ. The second manifestation of the Churches mansion place follows.

In the secret places of the stairs.
The word Translated secret signifies a hiding place, by which is meant a
hiding place in the Rock. Thus David often calls God his secret or hiding
place, as in Psalm. 32. 7. saying, Thou art a hiding place to me, from
distress, thou will preserve me, etc. And it is said, that the godly shall
dwell in the secret place of the most high, Psalm. 91. 1. That is, under the
glorious shadow and protection of the most high.

Of the stairs) or a steep place, as it is in the Original; this, as the Rock,
is to be applied unto Christ, by (...) Inde.
whom we ascend unto God, as it were by degrees, as by steps and stairs. Christ
is to the Saints as Jacobs (...) Gradus priaeci(...)
Ladder which he saw in the Vision, upon which the Angels of God ascended and
descended, Genesis 28. 12. John 1. 51. Christ is both our hiding place and steep
Rock, where we may ascend to God the Father, it is through him we have any
access to God. The Church was bashful by reason of sin, and the like; but now
for her encouragement Christ calls unto her to a near communion with himself,
with this description and motive, O thou my Dove, that art in the clefts of the
Rock, and in the secret of the stairs. That is, thou that art put into the
Rock of Salvation, by whom thou may ascend up to me, as by steps, and
stairs, etc.

Hence Observe,

That it is Christ alone in whom we may make our safe approaches unto God.
Christ had called his Church to come unto him; now she being disheartened
because of sin and wrath, he again exhorts her to let him see her face, and
hear her voice, and gives her this encouragement, O thou in the cleft of the
Rock, etc. The Lord tells Moses, That no man can see his face, and live. We
may see Jehovah's back-parts, but his face, that is, an immediate view of his
absoluteness and perfection cannot be seen; and therefore he is called the
invisible God, but in Christ we have a manifestation of God, whereof we have a
figure in Moses, Exodus 33. The Lord proclaimed his mercy, his patience, his
goodness, his truth, and justice before him, these are his back-parts, and
more then these he could not see: and therefore it is said, that the Lord
covered Moses with his hand, while he passed by: But where was Moses when he
had this Vision and appearance of God? He was in the clift of the rock: Now
verily that Rock was a shadow of Christ, we see the glory, goodness, and face
of God through him, Per speculum, as it were in a glass. Christ is the lively
image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The brightness of his glory, and the express
Character of his person, Heb. 1. 3. There is no excellency in the Father but it
is in the Son, and by the Son we come to enjoy it, so says the Apostle, God
who has commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Both this expression, and that in the Hebrews before
mentioned, where Christ is called the brightness of God^ glory, are a metaphor
taken from the beams of the Sun: as the Sun is manifested by his own
brightness, viz. by his Beams, for we cannot see the Sun in Rota, in his
Chariot, or circumvolution, but by his Beams: so the inaccessible light of
the Fathers glory is revealed, Tanquam per radios ac splendorem, as it were by
beams and brightness, shining most clearly in Christ, and the Fountain and
root of that brightness is in Christ's Godhead, but darted upon us through
the Manhood, according to the testimony, John 1. 18. No man has seen God at
any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him. The bosom is the place and seat of secrets: now it is
Christ only that opens the bosom, declares the secrets, and reveals the
glory and brightness of Gods face unto us. In a word, all our happiness,
safety, and glory, lies in Christ: if we be in the Rock, we sit in heavenly
places with Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. And we are in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 3.
1. And our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. And by him we have
access to the Father, as it were by steps and stairs.

So much for the description of the Church, in respect of her mansion or
dwelling place. Now follows the thing she is exhorted unto, with the
Exhortation annexed.

Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice,
and thy countenance is comely.
Christ having awaked his Love, he now exhorts her to a more near fellowship
and communion with himself: and that first by saying,

Let me see thy Countenance, etc.
Let me see) or cause me to see thy aspect, thy visage, thy (...) Vidit,
invisit, praevidit, aspexit, prospexit. Inde. (...) Visio, visus, aspectus,
species.
form and fashion: that is stir up thy faith, and hold up thy face, show me
thy Countenance boldly, with joy and comfort; look upon me, as it were with
open face, and see my glory, contemplate upon my excellency and goodness: and
in this manner does Messiah call the Church to a near and sweet communion with
himself.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints with faith and boldness have access unto the Father, through
Christ their Mediator. Hence it is, that the Spouse being in the Rock (by which
is meant Christ, as was showed before) is bid to come, and unveile her face,
and to take a view of the glory of God in Christ. And this is that which the
Apostle declares, saying, But we with open face beholding as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. This expression is taken from an
allegory of the covering wherewith Moses veiled his face, when he appeared
before the Lord, Exodus 34. 33. And by that beholding of God, had his face
lightened, and shining with beams. So have the Saints a free access unto God by
Christ, which is not as a dark veil, but a pure resplendent glass, wherein
the glorious countenance of God is seen by us; and we are thereby renewed, and
as it were glorified in our minds, according to the same Image of God, in
holiness and righteousness. And again the Apostle tells us, We have a
High Priest which is entered into Heaven, even Jesus the Son of God
(Therefore says he) let us hold fast our profession, etc. And let us go
boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace
Christus est sacerdos, sacrificium, deus cui, templum in quo reconciliamur.
to help in the time of need, Heb. 4. 14, 16. For Christ is (as one says) the
Priest, the Sacrifice, the God, and the Temple; the Priest by whom, the
Sacrifice through whom, the God to whom, and the Temple in whom we are
reconciled. Thus for the first branch of the exhortation. The second follows
in adding these words.

Let me hear thy voice.
Let me hear) or, cause me to hear thy voice: towit, (...)
the voice of his own spirit speaking in the Spouse, by prayers, praises, and
thanksgivings. Christ calls for the voice of the Spouse, like to the joyous,
sweet, mourning note of the Dove in the absence of her Mate.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is so affected with the sweet Dove-like voice of his Church, as
that he entreats his Church to cause him to hear it. He calls for the voice of
preaching his glorious works, the joy and gladness from his Church: and he
calls for the voice of prayer, Psalm. 50. 15. Call on me in the day of trouble,
etc. Though Christ should seem sometime to neglect his people, as not to hear
them: yet he would not have them to cease to call upon him, but would have them
pray continually, like the poor Widow in the Gospel that importuned the
judge: because when he seems not to hear his Spouse, he looks on her with the
greatest delectation. So far the second branch of the exhortation. The reason
of the one and the other follows.

For sweet is thy voice, and thy Countenance is comely.
Thy voice is sweet) or pleasing, delightful: that is, (...) Miscuit.
commiscuit, per metaphorum, jucundus, dulcis (...).
acceptable and welcome, being uttered by faith it must needs delight, because
it is sweet, melodious, and piercing; and no marvel, seeing it is the voice of
his own Spirit, and therefore cannot be but very sweet and delightsome.

Hence Observe,

That the voice of Christ's own spirit in his Saints, is very sweet and
pleasant unto him. Would Christ so call and earnestly seek for the voice of
his Spouse, if it were not a sweet Sacrifice unto him? According as it is
written, that the Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem were sweet unto the Lord,
Mal. 3. 4. And Noah's Sacrifice had a sweet savor unto the Lord. Whereas the
Lord says of the wicked, Your Burnt-Offrings are not acceptable, nor your
Sacrifices sweet unto me, Jer. 6. 20. The second reason follows.

And thy Countenance is comely.
Comely) or desirable, beautiful: the countenance of the faithful must needs
be glorious: for the wisdom (...) Cupivit, desideravit, affectavit.
of a man (says Solomon) does make his face to shine, and the strength of his
face shall be changed, Eccles. 8. 1. This is spoken of heavenly wisdom, which
causes the souls face to shine; causing a right strong heart to change its
complexion from evil to good, of deformed, becoming comely. These praises of
the Church are spiritual, and according unto the esteem and high account that
God has of her, and not as she is esteemed by man. Hence Observe,

That the Spouse is comely and desirable in Christ's account. It is most true
that Christ himself, in respect of worldly reputation; had his visage and
form so marred, that many were astonished at him; he had no form nor
comeliness, Isa. 52. 14. 53. 2. but Christ is highly prized by the Father, and
is in high account with the Saints: So the Spouse is black and deformed in
respect of her outward form and visage, as she appears to the carnal eye,
but in Christ's esteem she is fair and beautiful, comely and desirable.
Grace in the Saints carries with it the most transcendent good, and the
excellency of all beauties, for what is grace but the beams of the divine
nature, which is the fountain of beauty, and spring of glory? So that all must
be fair that comes from the fountain of beauty, and all must be glorious that
comes from glory it self. It follows.

VERSE. 15.
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines: for our Vines have
tender grapes.
HEre the Church repeateth a speech of Christ which concerns his care over
the faithful, that' should walk up in a close communion with himself. The
parts are these two.

First, A commandment for taking and apprehending the adversaries, great and
small, laid down under the term of Foxes, Take us the Foxes, etc.

Secondly, A reason thereof, and this is drawn.

First from the nature of the Foxes, which is to devour, That spoil the Vines
etc.

Secondly, From the time of the Vines weakness, when it is said, For our Vines
have tender grapes, etc.

Take us the Foxes, etc.
Christ's command is to restrain (the foxes, the little foxes) the enemies of
the Church, of greater or lesser power: Hence observe, Christ's care over his
Church, he is careful that it be not spoiled by devouring beasts: he keeps his
Vineyard in his own hand, and will see that it shall not run to utter ruin.

The Foxes, the little Foxes, etc.
By Foxes, we may understand, either sins, or persons, because both of them
are hurtful unto the Spouse.

First, Every sin may well be compared to a Fox.

1. As Foxes hide in the holes of the earth, Matthew. 8. 20. So are sins hidden
in the deceitful heart of man. 2. As the Fox is both subtle and harmefull:
so is sin.
Secondly, Personal adversaries of the Church may well be compared to foxes,
those who labor the ruin of the Church, and these are either false teachers
or bloody Tyrants.

First, False Prophets, and false Teachers are so compared by the Prophet,
Ezekiel. 13. 4. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Deserts. And such
are by Christ likned to Wolves, Matthew. 7. 12. such as these may well be called
Foxes.

First, For craft and subtlety; the Apostle tells us, They tuansforme
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13. Such Apostles (says he)
are deceitful workers; that is, who seem to labor in the Vineyard of Christ,
and seem to be zealous, as if they sought nothing but Gods glory, when they
seek their own gain and advantage most of all.

Secondly, In respect of their crooked and perverse ways; for so a Fox is
noted, for his rolling in and out with turnings and windings; and thus David
speaks of the wicked, and those that are enemies of the Church, But these
(says he) that turn aside by their crooked ways, lead them forth with the
workers of iniquitic, etc. Psalm. 125. 5. Such as Apostate from the truth, or,
such as are ignorantly zealous, that think they do God good service, to
destroy the Saints; Such I say turn aside, and walk in crooked ways, wasting
and destroying the Vines of Christ.

Secondly, Bloody and cruel Tyrants are compared to a Fox, as Christ called
Herod a Fox, Luke 13. 32. because of his subtlety, and fraudulent
disposition. In like manner the Apostle tells us, that he was Delivered out of
the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4. 17. Some by the Lion understand the Emperor
Nero, so called for his rage and cruelty, as for the most part, Tyrants and
powerful enemies of the Church are called: As the Mother of the Princes of
Israel is said to be a Lioness: And she lies down among Lions, and she
nourishes her whelps (to wit, tyrannical Kings) among young Lions, Ezekiel. 19.
2. that is, the mother of the Kings, to wit, the people of the Jews, and
Jerusalem, which have brought them forth, has been full of blood and violence,
and has brought forth Kings of the same nature. The powerful enemies of the
Church are often called Lions, as in Psalm. 35. 17. and 91. 13 Pro. 28. Jer. 2.
15. and 4. 7. And Marsyas certifying his Patron at Rome, of the death of
Tyberius, uses this phrase, the Li^n is dead; as Josephus reports. Joseph.
aniiq. lib. 18. cap 6.
In Rev. 19. 20. we^ read of the Beast and the false Prophet, by which Beast,
some understand to be the persecuting magistrate, as the false Prophet to be
the persecuting Priest.

The Pope is a kind of a mixed Fox, having power civil and ecclesiastical,
usurping both swords, the temporal sword over all Princes, and the spiritual
sword over all Churches. Besides all these, we may come nearer home, and see
many of these mystical foxes, in every Town and City, persecuting the
Saints, and spoiling the tender vines of Christ.

Now we pass to the reasons of this command, and first from the devouring
nature of these adversaries in the words following.

That spoil our Vines.
Spoil, or, corrupt our Vine-yards, that is, by devouring the grapes: as Foxes
spoil and destroy the Vines; so false Prophets, oppressors, and Tyrants
destroy the Church: of the first sort the Apostle speaks of, and says, their
word eats as the Canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. And of such the Lord complains, Many
Pastors have corrupted my Vineyard, Jer. 12. 10. In this place Pastors may be
applied unto false Prophets, or unto the tyrannical Kings and Princes of
Babylon.

The last reason is taken from the fruitfulness of the Vine, in these words.

For our Vines have tender grapes.
For, in the Hebrew and, which word is often used instead of for, as in Psalm.
60. 13. And in Genesis 12. 19.

Our Vines, or, our Vineyards: By the Vinyard and Vine, is understood the
Church of Christ, and the Gospel: The Prophet says, I will sing to my
well-beloved, a song of my beloved, of his Vineyard, Isa. 5. 1. and the
Vineyard of the Lord is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant,
etc. chap. 5. 7. But now we must know, that there are two sorts of Vines, the
one of Jerusalem, the other of sodom, as Moses speaks, For their Vine is the
Vine of sodom, and of the Vines of Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of gaul,
their clusters be bitter, their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel
gaul of Aspes, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Therefore it must not be the Vine of sodom,
but the Vine of Jerusalem, which we are to understand here. This Vine is the
Spouse of Christ, and all the faithful are laborers in the Lords Vineyard.

Tender grapes, which do but begin to bud, and show themselves, even in the
beginnings of the fruits of religion: Foxes labor to destroy these, as Herod
sought to destroy Christ at the beginning of his days, and Pharaoh the men.
Children of Israel at their birth, that so Israel might be no more a Nation.
These Foxes therefore both great and small, must therefore be taken and
destroyed. The words being thus unfolded, let us take notice of these
observations.

First, Observe.

That the Spouse of Christ is always troubled with some enemies.

There are always those of greater or lesser power to afflict the Church,
there will always be some San-ballat or Tobiah, or some such to nible at the
Vines of Christ of this, the Scripture is full of testimonies.

Secondly, Observe.

That these enemies of the Spouse, are of a devouring nature.

That spoil our Vines, etc. Foxes are hurtful to the labor of the
husbandman. samson being wronged by the Philistims, took three hundred Foxes,
and with their tails set on fire, burnt their corn, with their Vineyards and
Olives. There have been always false Teachers, as in Moses time, their stood
up Jannes and Jambres; and how many of Baals Prophets were there in the time of
Elias? and when was the Spouse of Christ free from persecution of tyrannical
Kings and Princes? This is then the Churches portion, and therefore not to be
wondered at.

Thirdly, Observe.

That Christ does cherish the least buddings of grace in his Saints.

For our Vines have tender grapes: When a Vine brings forth wild grapes, Christ
will take away the hedge of his vineyard, and it shall be eaten up, Isa. 5. 4.
But on the contrary, Christ tells us, that every branch that bears fruit,
shall be purged, that it may bring forth more fruit Joh. 15. 1, 2. so that
Christ has great care to preserve young and tender fruit.

Fourthly, Observe.

That such as would by subtlety and tyranny destroy the tender plants of
Christ are to be restrained. Take us the Foxes.

First, for false Prophets, they are to be discovered, and refused of their
error, and after all, judged, and cast out of the Church; he that will deny
the doctrine of the Gospel, we must not receive him, neither bid him
God-speed, Joh. 2. 10. But in the end, Christ himself will restrain both the
Beast and the false Prophet, as in Revel. 19. 20. And the Beast was taken, and
with him the false Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, etc. These were
both cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone. Therefore let all
persecuting emperors, Kings, and Priests know, that the time will come that
Christ will take them and chain, them up, or else destroy them, and in that he
says, these shall be taken alive: it notes out unto us, the great and horrible
torments, that they shall endure, and that is called the Lake of fire, to wit,
an exquisite torment thereby resembled.

VERSE. 16, 17.
My beloved is mine, and I am his; he feeds among the Lilies.

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away; turn my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe, or young heart upon the mountains of Bether.


THe Church having finished Christ's speech, she now concludes this divine act
with a kind of a triumphant acclamation upon the former passages, for now she
begins to feel some comfort from Christ's drawing near unto her, after her
soule-sicknes: Hence she breaks out.

First, With praise, verse 16.

Secondly, With prayer, verse 17.

First, We have the praise of Messiahs love, and feeding: his love is laid
down.

First, In the gift of himself to his Spouse, expressed in these words, My
beloved is mine, etc.

Secondly, In that she was made his: And I am his. He being hers, she therefore
became his.

Lastly, She praises his feeding, affirming that to be among the Lilies.

In these words, My Beloved is mine, and I am his: there is a mutual
intercourse and vicissitude of claiming interest betwixt Christ and his Church;
the Church indeed glories in this, but not so much in her self, as in her
beloved, according to that of the Apostle, He that glories, let him glory in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 31. And observe what it is she glories in, namely, in that
communion which is between her and Christ, and this she declares by a
passionate expression of comfort, and that from the highest pitch of affection,
from a heart enflamed with love, saying, I am my Beloveds, and my beloved is
mine.

First, Note from these words, My beloved is mine, etc. That there is a union
between Christ and his Saints, from whence arises all sweet communion.

Christ is the head of his Spouse, and she by the Spirit united unto him as his
mystical body: he is Christ the giver of all spiritual influence to his
Church: Christ is also the Churches, as by marriage, if the person of the
Husbands be the wives, his goods, and titles of honors are hers also, he
having passed over the right of his own body unto her: so is it in the
mystical marriage between Christ and the Spouse, that union and conjunction
of persons between them, does entitle the Church in the communion of all his
graces.

Now from this union of persons, comes a communion of all good things: so that
the Church can say if Christ be mine, all that he has is mine, what he has
done, and what he has suffered is mine, and why? because he is mine, for union
is the foundation of all blessed communion. And so again on the other side the
Church can say, I am his, my person, my life, and strength, and all is his, to
glorify him: so there is a union and communion mutually between Christ and
his Church. The original and spring hereof is Christ's uniting and
communicating himself first to his Church, for the Spring begins to the
stream, what has the stream, but it first was in the Spring? Now there is an
evidence of right and propriety that Christ does communicate unto his Saints,
whereby they have a comfortable interest in him.

First, In all his works and performances, they are in a peculiar respect for
every Saint, his making of the world, settling of policies and governments,
rooting up of Kingdoms, executing of judgments in the earth, rewarding some,
and punishing others, and the like, all these, and in all other general
providentiall works of Christ, the Saints have a kind of interest and
propriety in; next unto his own glory, Christ aimed at the good of his
Church in all these things, and does always make them isntrumental for her
welfare, in which sense are the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All
things are yours, (says he) whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all is yours.

Secondly, The Saints have a claim also in the dignities and honors of
Christ. There is a reciprocation (as it were) between him and his people; they
are mutually and interchangeably glorified in one another: as Christ is
glorified in them, Joh. 17. 10. so they are unspeakably dignisied, and graced
by him. The glory of Children (says Solomon) are their Fathers, Prove. 17. 6.
If the father be heroical, or any way excellent, this is the Sons glory,
unless he degenerate: now the Saints are called the Seed and the Children of
Christ, whatsoever therefore he excels in, it is their dignity, and their
glory: Besides, Christ does impart of his glory and honor to them, making
them like himself: Is Christ a son, and heir of all? so are thy sons, and
heirs, and Coheirs with Christ; shall he judge the World? So shall they in
some sort: Does he break in pieces the Nations with a rod of Iron? so do
they: is he ascended into glory? so shall they ascend: there is not any whit of
his glory, unless it be that which is utterly incommunicable, but they have a
touch of it, if I may so say; yea, and that which is incommunicable, redounds
to their glory also.

Thirdly, the Saints have interest in the Offices of Christ. Every Saint may
say of Christ, he is my Prophet and Teacher, he is my Priest and Reconciler, he
is my King and Governor: yea, the Saints have such an interest in these
Offices of Christ, that virtue comes out of him to make them even Prophets, and
Priests, and Kings also. Prophets in some measure, to teach themselves and
others, Priests to offer spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ;
and Kings to rule over their own lusts and corruptions.

Fourthly, the Saints have interest in the graces of Christ: he that has the
field has also the treasure that is hid in it. It was the greatest consolation
and joy of the Spouse that she could say, My Beloved is mine. So all that is
in Christ a Believer may appropriate to himself; he may say, his riches, his
love, his goodness, his greatness, his power, and all that is his, is mine; I
have interest in all those transcendent graces of his, his mercy, his truth,
his promises, they are all mine. Thus the Saints have a peculiarity and right
in Christ, which is as the Spring of all mutual love between them.

Now to join the words together (My Beloved is mine and I am his) they imply,

1. A mutual interest; as Psalm. 73. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and what
is there in Earth in comparison of thee? He is mine, yea, and I am his, there
is propriety with peculiarity and interest.

2. The words imply a mutual love; Christ is the object of the Saints best
affections, and the Spouse is the very Center of Christ's love, his love rests
on the Church, and scatters not to other objects. Thus the Apostle applies the
love of Christ, saying, He loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. And
we love him because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. So that the Church may
say, Christ is mine, and his love is mine, and I am Christ's, he has my soul,
my affections, and all that I have, is his, he has my love to the uttermost.

3. The words do also imply mutual familiarity; Christ is my familiar, my
fellow-friend, and Companion; he discovers himself unto me in the secrets of
his love: So the Saints have a spirit of fellowship and familiarity with God in
Christ, so that they can unbosome and let open their hearts to him upon all
occasions, as unto a familiar.

4. And lastly, they employ complacency or resting one in the other. Christ
has a complacency and resting in his Spouse, he is well pleased in her, taking
the greatest satisfaction and content in her that possible can be thought on.
So the Church has a complacency or well-pleasednesse in her beloved, whereby
she does approve and like of all that is in him, resting in his goodness, as
in the most lovely and desirable object in the World. Hence she says in
Chap. 1. Verse 1, 2. Thy love is better then Wine. Because of the savor of thy
good Ointments powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. This shows
what a pleasing and delightful object Christ is to a believer: what more
acceptable to the taste then fragrant wine? Christ is far more acceptable to a
Saint. What more pleasing to the smell then sweet Ointments of an exquisite
composition? Christ is the same, and far sweeter to the heart of a believer, so
that the Saints, from this complacency and wel-pleasednesse in Christ, do
sweetly acquiesce and rest in him, as in the loveliest object in the world.

Having spoken of the union and communion betwixt Christ and his Church, where
was set forth the mutual interest and owning between Christ and the Church.
Now it will be necessary that I speak something of the order of this union.
Christ is first ours, then we are his, My beloved is mine, and I am his.

Hence Note,

That Christ is first ours, and then we are his because he is ours. For this
there are four grounds.

1. Christ is the wellspring of all grace in us, our grace comes from his
grace, and our love from his love, as appears, 1 John 4. 10. 9.

2. Because the less is first beloved of the greater; the nature of love is
first to descend, the superior first loves the inferior; as the love of a
Father discends to his Child first, then the Child's love ascends back to the
Father: So Christ first condiscends to love us, then we ascend in our love to
him again.

3. From the attractivenesse of Christ's love Magnes amoris est amor: love is
the attractive loadstone of love: now our nature is such, that we will love
only where we are first loved; as the heat of the Sunbeams reflect from a
wall: so Christ's love to us cannot but cause a reflection of ours upon him; our
love is but a spark of his. We loved him (says the Apostle) because he loved
us first: when he reveals his love to us such a fire must needs kindle and
melt our affections, without which our hearts will be key-cold and frozen.

4. It must be the same spirit that tells our souls that Christ loves us, that
must make us give up our affections to Christ. The spirit of Christ does
sweetly display before the soul, the rich, free, and liberal love of Christ,
and also with the discovery of his love, causes the soul to love him again.

The next thing to be enquired into, is,

1. How Christ comes to be ours. 2. How we come to be Christ's.
Christ becomes ours by such means as these.

1. Christ is ours by the free donation and gift of the Father, as appears,
Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

2. Christ freely gave himself unto us; so that Christ is ours by his own
consent, he has, as it were passed over himself unto us. The Apostle says,
Christ loved me and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. As the Father freely gave
his Son unto us, so Christ freely and spontaneously gave his consent to be
ours.

3. Christ has passed himself over unto his Church by Marriage; although we
had nothing to bring to him but poverty and misery, yet he took upon him our
nature to discharge all, that he might marry us, and so pass over himself
unto us, as a husband passes over himself unto his wife. Hence it is that the
Lord says, I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a City, and two
of a Family, and I will bring you to Zion, Jeremiah, Chap. 3. Verse 14.

4. And lastly, Christ is ours by communicating o his own Spirit to us: for
the Spirit is given for thaf end, to show us all things that are given us of
God, whereof Christ is the chief: this is that the Apostle tells us, when he
says, No man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God. Now (says he)
we have not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given us of God; and thus we have the
mind of Christ, 1 Corinthians. 2. 11. 12. 16.

Having declared how Christ is ours, and that he is ours in the first place,
before we can be his. It follows that we speak of the reflection on the other
hand, and show how we become Christ's.

The Saints are Christ's these four ways.

1. Christ has propriety in us by the donation of the Father. God has made
him both Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. And has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. And now
says Christ, behold, I and the Children whom thou have given me, Heb. 2. Thine
they were, and thou gave them to me, John 17. 6. For as in respect of Gods
justice we were bought by Christ in our redemption, so in regard of his love we
were given unto Christ in our Election, that he might Redeem us.

2. We are Christ's by Choice: I have chosen you out of the World, says Christ,
John 15. 19. And the Saints are said to be chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. And
they are called chosen, and faithful, Revel. 17. 14.

3. The Saints are Christ's by Purchase: we were in the hand of our Enemies, and
could not free our selves from the bondage of the Law, therefore Christ
redeemed us from under the Law, Gal. 4. 6. And the Apostle says, we were
bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. He was our surety, and stood in our stead,
and was set forth to declare the righteousness of God, Romans 3. 26. So then, we
are Christ's by right of redemption.

4. And lastly, We are Christ's by combination and Covenant. I entered into
Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8. That is, I did make a
solemn Covenant or stipulation with thee, that I would take thee to be my
people.

Thus much for the mutual union and communion, and for that mutual interest
and propriety between Christ and his Church. Now it follows, that the Church
commends Christ's feeding.

He feeds among the Lilies.
After the Church had extolled Christ for his love, she praises his feeding,
affirming that to be among Lilies. These words are diversely Interpreted,
because the Hebrew word may be taken either actively, or passively. If it be
taken passively, it may be meant of Christ's feeding himself. Or, we may take
it actively of Christ's feeding, Viz. his Flock, among Lilies. Or we may take it
for Christ's feeding of himself and his Church: he feeds his Church among
Lilies, and delights himself to be there, the one follows the other, but
especially it is meant of the Church, those that are his Saints, he feeds them
among the Lilies.

Lilies are such kind of flowers as require a great deal of nourishment, and
they flourish, and prosper best in Valleys and low ground, where the soil is
most fat, and therefore when she says, He feeds among Lilies, the meaning is,
he feeds his Church and people in sweet, pleasant, soft, and well-smelling
pasture, he plentifully and pleasantly entreats those that are his; for
Lilies we know are fair, sweet, soft, and pleasant, and therefore the Church
says, that her beloved seedeth his flock among the Lilies, which is to let us
understand that he feeds her with most excellent things. And it is most sure,
that there is nothing under Heaven that can be esteemed as a full shadow and
resemblance of the Heavenly Manna, wherewith Christ feeds the souls of his.

Hence Observe,

That Christ feeds his Church and people fully, sweetly, and comfortably. He
feeds among Lilies. Agreeable to this is that in Psalm. 23. 1, 2. etc. The Lord
is my Shepherd (says David) or my feeder, my Pastor, and what is the use he
makes of it? I shall not want: How is this made good? why says he, He makes
me to lie down in green pastures, or in the budding grass. That is, in
pleasant pastures where green and tender Herbs do spring, he makes me to lie
down and refresh my self. And he adds, He leads me beside the still
waters, or, he gently leads me unto the waters of rest. That is, he does
comfortably guide me, with sustaining my infirmity, he nourishes me by the
refreshing waters of his Spirit.

The like place we have, Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd,
he shall gather the Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and
shall gently lead those that are with young. So Christ leads his people, as it
were among Lilies, and feeds them plentifully, with sweet and pleasant things:
and in his bosom he carries them, softly, and tenderly, that such as are weak
may not be wronged.

Another place suitable to this purpose is Ezekiel. 34. 14. I will feed them in
good pastures, upon the high mountains of Israel, there shall their fold be,
there shall they lie in a good fold, in a fat pasture will I feed my flock,
and cause them to lie down, says the Lord God. I will seek that which is
lost, and bring back that which is driven away. I will bind up that which is
broken, and strengthen that which is sick, and destroy the fat and the strong,
and feed them with judgment. Thus the Lord does plentifully, comfortably, and
sweetly feed his people, as among Lilies. Thus he feeds us, and with us, he
feeds us as a Father, but feeds with us as a brother also: yea, as an
husband and amiable lover. Now follows the Churches prayer.

Verse. 17.
Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: Return my Beloved, and be
thou like a Roe or young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether.
In these words we have the Churches Prayer, which is set forth by the matter,
that Christ would return often and visit and comfort his Church, Turn my
beloved, etc.

This is declared first by the time, Until the day break, and the shadows
flee away. Secondly, by the swiftness of his coming, And be thou like a Roe
or young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether.

Turn my Beloved etc.
Turn, or, turn about, to wit, to comfort and succor me. It is a request of
comfort from Christ, as in Psalm. (...) Circum^^it.
71. 21. David says, Thou did much increase my greatness, and did turn
about, and comfort me, in the night and shadows of darkness and ignorance.

Hence Observe.

That the Church desires comfort and succor from Christ in the times of
darkness and affliction.

The day is a time of knowledge, peace, and comfort, the dawning of the day, is
the sense and feeling of this comfort, by the inward working of the Spirit, as
the Apostle exhorts us to take heed to the sure word of prophecy, as unto
light that shines into a dark place, Until the day dawne, and the day star
arise in our heart, 2 Pet. 1. 19. that is, until a spiritual discovery of
Christ be made in the soul, which is as the rising of the morning star.

Now this desire of the Churches is declared first, in respect of the time.

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away.
Until the day dawne, or, until the day blow, or breath (...) Flavit,
spiravit, suspiravit.
forth, to wit, light, as appears by the fleeing of the shadows, which use to
be dispelled by the morning wind; as on the contrary, when the day goes away;
the shadows of the evening are said to be strethed forth, Jer. 6. 4.

Now for the day, and departing of the shadows, we may understand it, of the
time of the Law preceding Christ's incarnation, which Law was nothing else but a
shadow of good things to come: Or, we may nnderstand it of the cloudy dark
time in this world, and that after Christ's appearing in the flesh. I shall
speak a word to both these.

As Christ was the Son coming forth gloriously as a Bridegroom: So the Law
was a shadow of good things to come, the body whereof was Christ, Heb. 10. 1.
Col. 2. 17. wherein the Apostle may well allude to the shadow (accompanying a
man's body) which sometimes is before, sometimes behind, as occasion is
ministered by the Suns course: even as shadows went before Christ's coming in
the flesh, some other followed after. And as the Apostle calls all a shadow:
so Solomon here uses the plural, shadows, as comprehending all types and
shadows.

Now for divine shadows, they may be considered as personal, or as
sacramental.

First, For personal shadows; Adam was the first, called the first man, being
a shadow of Christ, called the second man, or Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Adam was
first in execution, but Christ first in intention: the first was but a type of
the second. The Second Henochs, whose name (in English, taught or dedicated)
holds forth Christ, taught of the Father, and dedicated to his fathers will;
and he increased in wisdom and stature, whereby he was one with Henoch.
Melchisedech was another eminent type of Messiah, who was first King of
righteousness, and King of peace, shadowing forth him, who was the fountain
of all justice and righteousness, and the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. Aaron,
whose name signifies a high mountain: shadowed for Christ, who is set on the
top of mountains and exalted above the hills, Isa. 2. 2. Thus I might show how
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samson, with many other Prophets,
Priests, Kings, and other of the men of God, they were all but types and
shadows of the Messiah.

And as for sacramental shadows: as the sacrifices shadowed forth Christ's
mediation for his people. Circumcision was a type of the blood of Christ,
without which blood is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. The striking of the blood of
the Lamb on the Posts of the doors, where the Israelites dwelt was a token and
assurance to them, that the destroying Angel should pass over them, and smite
only the first borne of the Egyptians: now what else did that blood presigure,
but the blood of Christ? wherewith the Saints being sprinkled, the destroyer
cannot hurt them. The Pillar of the cloud by day, and of fire by night was the
type of Christ, leading and guiding his people continually. The water of the
Rock, and the Manna in the Wilderness were signs, that Christ should
spiritually feed and refresh his people. The Serpent of brass lifted up by
Moses, signified that he should be their Physician and healer. In a word, all
the sacrifices under the Law did typisie, that Christ should make atonement
for believers.

Now all these were dark, sacramental resemblances, wherein God did appear
unto his people of old, therefore they desired the nearest approach of his unto
them, until these ceremonial shadows should vanish away.

Now concerning the new Testaments shadows, they are baptism, and breaking of
bread: and unto these two it was that the Ancients had respect, when as they
said, the side of Christ was pierced, that so the door of life there might be
set open, from whence the Churches sacraments have issued; understanding by
water, baptism; and by blood, the Lords supper. Now for these, they are but
outward resemblances, which lead unto Christ; so that when Christ which is our
light shall appear in the glorious discoveries of himself, and as it were
swallow up his people in spirit and glory, then these shadows must also vanish
away, because when the truth it self appears, the figure and outward
resemblance must cease: even as an Emperors image has authority in his
absence, but being present, the Image has no such power: Therefore we are to
make use of the shadows, so far as Christ is absent from us: and again, so
far as we have the substance, we need not catch after outward
representations and shadows. Thus much for the coming of Christ, declared by
the time: Until the daybreake, and shadows flee away, etc.

Now follows in the second place the manner of his coming, by his swiftnes.

And be thou like a young Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.
Here are two things observable.

Frst, The Creature whereto he is resembled, namely, a Roe, or young Heart.

Secondly, The place of his abode, that is, the mountains of Bether.

Of the Roe, and Hind, we have spoken of before in verse 7. 9. But concerning
the mountains of Bether something is to be spoken.

Bether is here taken by some for the proper name of a place so called: of
others it is taken appellatively, and so it signifies, the mountains of
division. If we take it for a place, it is called Bithron, which was on the
outside of Jordan, 2 Samuel 2. 29. called partition, because it parted by the
River Jordan, from the Land of Judea: And on those mountains, Hearts and Roes
used to runn, as appears by the Scripture. Now we must understand by these
mountains, mystically to be the partition wall, which divided between Jew and
Gentile, until the coming of Christ, who then of two were made one. Or else
we may understand the mountains of division, by that sin, or ignorance whereby
we are hindered from the full fruition of Jesus Christ, for not only the
Churches sacramental shadows shall vanish; but also the night of sin, the
works of darkness, the scale of ignorance, and blindness, and the shadow of
death, shall flee away.

From this verse thus opened observe.

That the Saints here are overclouded with many mists and shadows, much
ignorance of God, and the like.

Christ's discovery to the people of the Jews, was but under veiles, and
types, there light was an obscure and glimmering lights to our: now Christ has
flowed in upon his people in greater abundance of revelation then before his
coming in the flesh; yet our light is that we see now but (...) through a
glass darkely, for what we shall do hereafter.

Secondly Observe.

That it is the desire of the Saints to have close communion with Christ, while
they are under shadows.

Hence it was, that the Church desired Christ to draw near unto her, and to
come swiftly whilst she was under the ceremonial shadows, and that he would be
with her, until they did vanish away: even so the Church now desires, while
she is in the wilderness, that he would come swiftly unto her, to comfort her in
all her blindness and tribulation.

Thirdly, and lastly, Observe.

That the glorious morning of Christ's coming to his people, will expel the
darkness of the night of sin, and ignorance.

This the Apostle testifies, when he says, But when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. When the
substance is come, there is no need of the shadow, and therefore so far as
the Lord shall discover himself unto us in spirit; outward resemblances shall
vanish away. So ends the second Chapter.

CANTICLES Chap. III.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
By night on my bed, I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I
found him not.

I will rise now and go about the City in the streets, and in the broad
ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not.

The watchmen that go about the City, found me; to whom I said, saw ye him
whom my soul loves.

It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul
loves, I held him, and would not let him go, until I brought him into my
mothers house, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me.

I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the Field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.


IN the first Chapter of this song, we heard the fervent suit of the Church,
for obtaining the presence of her beloved, whereunto she received a comfortable
answer. And after there was a nearer communion between them, they fell into
mutual praises one of another.

In the second Chapter, Christ provokes his Church to make some returns of
his love, and this he does, by speaking excellent things of himself, and also
commending his Spouse. Whereupon the Spouse is drawn forth to speak excellent
things of her beloved. Afterward, Christ in a most kind manner sought and
called her up again, and again, to arise, and come forth unto him, to the end
she might have communion with him, until all shadows were vanished away.

Now in this Chapter the Church declares, how she sought after her beloved,
and how studious she was to find him, being absent; as also for retaining of
Christ being found: But after she had found her beloved, and was fully assured
of his excellency and glory, she declares that it is much better and
profitable for her, not to stay her Spouse here, but to ascend with him into
his heavenly bride-chamber.

This Chapter may be divided into two parts.

In the first, the Church setteh forth the fervent desire she has to take hold
of Christ, and to possess him, which appears in this, that she seeks him by
day, and by night, at home, and abroad, in the fields, and in the City, she
being wonderfully inflamed with his love, and this reaches from verse 1. to
the end of the 5.

In the second part, she does as it were correct herself, desiring rather that
he should take hold of her, and that she might abide with him, whereupon she
enters into a commendation of his glory, sweetness, etc. And not only
comparing it with Solomon's, but preferring it before it, and that by many
degrees, and this reaches from Verse 6. unto the end of the Chapter.

First, the Churches search after Jesus is couched in the first three verses.
And in the first of these three is laid down her first search, together with
the event.

This search is declared from the circumstances, which be two.

1. Of the time, and that was in the Night. 2. Of the place, and that was in
her Bed.
Lastly, touching the effect of this search of hers, it is not availing, for
she found him not.

By night on my Bed I sought him, etc.
The night is a time of solitary and earnest meditation, as in Isa. 26. 9. With
my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea, with my spirit within me, will I
seek thee early. And sometime grievous afflictions are signified by the night,
as appears, Psalm. 17. 3. and 30. 5. 77. 2.

By the Bed some understand the Bed of ease and sloth; and that the Church was
now under deadness and security, thinking that Christ had been present with
her, when it was no such matter. But this is not likely to be the meaning of
the Bed, for what ease could the Church take in the absence of Christ.

The Bed sometimes signifies tribulation, as in Rev. 2. 22. which may be
employed here, that the Church sought and waited for the Lord in the way of his
judgments, as in Isa. 26. 8. Yea, in the way of thy judgments O Lord have we
waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance
of thee.

Or, we may take the Bed here for the place and duties of Gods worship, the
Temple and the Ordinances, as in Chap. 1. 16. where it is said, Our Bed is
green, meaning the place and means of bringing forth converts unto Christ.

I sought him whom my soul loves.
The Hebrew word Translated Sought, signifies to seek by suing and praying, by
asking direction and (...) Quaesvit, requisivit, postulavit, petijt, siuduit,
conatus est.
counsel, and by making a strict inquiry after the thing seeked for. So that
the Church sought by much prayer, study, and meditation, she made a diligent
search after her beloved.

Whom my soul loves, towit Christ whom she called her beloved, Chap. 1. 7.
The Church using this Periphrasis, instead of a proper name, does nothing else
but express the force of her love, and the earnestness thereof. It was the
strong affection of love, that set the Church on seeking Christ; she could not
endure his absence, nor sit down contented without him. Thus the Church sought
Christ in his absence: her success follows, which for the present is non
availing, for she says,

But I found him not.
I found him not, towit, presently, or I did not sufficiently perceive him, to
be present with me, according to my hearts desire: I find not such sweet
discoveries of his love, nor such glorious apprehensions of him, as my soul
desires. This was the Churches success for the present. The verse being thus
opened; let us take notice of some Observations from it.

First Observe, That Christ may sometimes be absent from his dearest Saints.
This is employed by the Churches seeking Christ, for inquisition implies
absence. Christ may, and does many times veil himself for a time, and
withdraw his light and comfort from the soul: but we must know also, that he
takes not away his love, but only suspends the acts of it: he does but seem
to frown when he does abscond, and eclipse himself from the soul, so that
the soul loses the sense of his love and favor, so that Christ seems to
be altogether absent, or at a great distance from the soul.

Secondly Observe, That when Christ is absent from the Saints, they are in
great unquietness of mind, for want of the feeling of his presence. Hence the
Church says, she sought Christ upon the bed of tribulation and sorrow, in the
night of solitariness and affliction: for when Christ is gone from a Believer
in his apprehension, then the comfort and assurance of his love is gone, joy
and light is gone: O how dejected, how disconsolate is the soul then! So far as
a man is spiritual, the flame of love to Christ is kindled in him, and then he
cannot sit down without him. He is the Fountain of all supply, he is the
staff of strength, the support of joy, and the very life of the soul: O that
I might see him (says the Christian) O that I might live in his presence!
Nothing in the world will content him, neither honor, nor riches, nor
pleasures, nor friends, nor any thing else will content him, till he find the
Lord Jesus Christ his Beloved, whom formerly with unspeakable pleasure he
enjoyed.

Thirdly Observe, That the Church makes earnest inquisition and dilligent
search after Christ when he is absent. I sought him, etc. She seeks Christ
with meditation, study, and strong endeavors, she seeks him diligently, as
appears in the Verses following, she never gives off until she finds her
beloved. All the Ordinances wherein she seeks Christ are (as I may say) a
walk wherein he meets his people: therefore the Saints put themselves upon
that way, but if they find not Christ present, their spirits fail, but when
Christ is to be found by them, it is as life from the dead.

Fourthly Observe, That the principle from which a believer seeks Christ, is
love. I sought him whom my soul loves. The love of iChrist cannot be
concealed: a man may sooner keep in the wind with his fist, or stay the
Ointment of his light hand from bewraying it self (as the Wise man peaks,
Prove. 27. 16.): then not utter his love to Christ. Love is such a fire as will
break forth, it is the strongest affection of the soul, and cannot be
satisfied without the enjoyment of the thing beloved.

Lastly Observe, That Christ is not always to be found in our sense and
feeling, though we use all good means to attain it. This is from the Curches
success in that she says, I found him not. Christ is not always found on
the sudden, he may a good while suspend the acts of his love from a soul, to
the end he may make it earnest in seeking after him, and with endurance wait
for his return. and this effect we see in the following words, wherein she
persists in her Narration, thus.

Verss. 2.
I will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets and in the broad ways
I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.
In this Verse we have the Church stirred up to make a farther search after her
beloved. And herein observe.

First, her resolution to make farther inquiry after Christ. I will rise now,
etc. This resolution was enforced from her not availing in her former search.

Secondly, her action of so seeking, and that is, she goes,

1. Into the City. 2. Into the Streets, and broad places.
Lastly, we have the effect of her further search, it is as the former, nothing
at all availing, for, says she, I sought him, but I found him not.

I will arise now, etc.
In the words the Church declares her increase of grace, of faith, love,
zeal, and fervency of spirit, as if she had said, I will not delay my
searching after my beloved no longer (for all these are the words of the
Spouse, speaking unto her self, and as it were, declaring the consultations
which she had within her self, and resolving what she were best to do)
therefore now says she, I am resolved diligently to seek him: now I will
leave my former seeking in bed, and I will seek him in the City, etc. Thus we
have the Churches resolution. Now follows her action in seeking.

And go about the City, in the streets and broad places. etc.
I will go about the City, towit, to seek my beloved, for I will leave no
place unsought, as if she had said, which showed her earnest desire to obtain
that which she looked for. By the City we may understand Jerusalem the holy
City, where the Temple was seated, and the practice of all the Ordinances,
whither all Israel repaired thrice every year, which was a figure of the
Church, as appears, Isa. 26. 1. In that day shall be sung in the Land of Judah,
we have a strong City, etc. This is spoken of the Church under the Gospel, for
whom the Lord would appoint salvation for walls and bulwarks. So that the
Church sought her beloved among the people of God, and among his Ordinances and
word, that by this means her soul might find comfort in him.

In the streets and broad places, or, narrow streets, and broad streets, for
both words are used for the streets of a City: and the latter for such broad
places, as oftentimes people meet together in, as in Nehem. 8. 1. So that this
notes an exquisite and narrow search, as in another case it is said, Run ye
too and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek
in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, etc. Jer. 5. 1. And wisdom utters her voice in the
streets, Prove. 1. 20. Now the Church is said to seek her Beloved in the
streets, because she will leave no place unsought, until she have found her
beloved.

I sought him, but I found him not.
Look how she resolved, so she acted; yet, notwithstanding her success was
fruitless as before, I found him not. The Spouse utters these words
mournfully, not so much for the pains she took, as that she could not meet
with him whom she so tenderly loved, and carefully sought. And when she
says, She found him not: she means, not so sufficiently as she would, and
as her heart desired, as may appear by the former Verse.

Hence Observe,

That no repulse or impediment can hinder the Saints from seeking after Christ.
Here the Spouse not finding Christ at one place seeks him in another; and if
she find him not at one time, she seeks at another: she sought him on her
Bed, and he was not found there; then she renews her resolution, saying, I
will rise now, and go into the City, etc. Like the woman in the Gospel, that
would take no denial; and Jacob, who would not let the Lord go, until he had
got the blessing. The Israelites in the Wilderness thirsted for water, as the
Spouse here desires the company of her beloved: when Moses had cried to the
Lord, he answered, Go before the people, and take with thee the Elders of
Israel, and thy Rod, wherewith thou smotest the River, take in thy hand and
go: Behold, I will stand before thee upon the Rock in Horeb, and thou shall
smite on the Rock, and water shall come out of it, that the people may drink.
And Moses did so in the sight of all the Elders of Israel. There at the first
smiting of the Rock water issued out. But here the Spouse seeks Christ, and
finds him not: what is then to be done? In another place Moses struck the
Rock, and at the first time no water came out, Numb. 20. 11. yet he did not so
desist, but smote the Rock the second time, and the waters gushed out
abundantly. So the Spouse not finding Christ upon her first seeking of him, she
seeks him the second time, and yet sindeth him not: she asks for him in the
City, among her friends and acquaintance, which have been assaulted by the
like temptations, they give her no comfort: yet for all that, the Spouse does
not give over, but sought the third time as follows.

VERSE. 3.
The watchmen that go about the City, found me: to whom I said, saw ye him
whom my soul loves?
As before we heard of the Spouses seeking Christ, in the City, among her
friends and companions: so in this verse, we are to note her proceedings with
the Governors of the City. Where note:

First, A description of these Governors.

Secondly, Her way of proceedings with them.

The Governors are described,

First by a title appropriate to their duty, and that is, Watchmen.

Secondly, By their exercise and work they did.

First, They circuited the City.

Secondly, They found her as unawares.

Lastly, We have the way of the Churches proceedings with them, and that lies
only in a question, in these words, saw ye him whom my soue loves.

The Watchmen that go about the City, etc.
By watchmen are often meant, the Ministers of the Church: Such were the
Priests and Levites under the Law, who kept the watch or charge of the Lord,
Numb. 3. 7, 8. and so it is said in Isa. 62. 6. I have set Watchmen upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night, etc. And
the Lord said to the Prophet Ezekiel, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman
over the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 3. 17. And the Apostle says, Obey them which
have the oversight of you, and submit your selves to them, for they watch over
your souls, Heb. 13. 14. and in Isa. 52. 8. it is said, Thy watchmen shall
lift up the voice, etc.

These watchmen were employed, and in action, because they were such as went
too and fro the City: so that whosoever these watchmen were, it seems they
were vigilant and painful in their generation, in so much that the Church
says, these watchmen found her.

Found me, etc.
It is not said that the Church made any inquiry after these watch men; but
that they found her: which thing does the rather argue diligence on their part,
then on the Churches. Now the Watchmen having found her, let us see what use
she makes of them: she only proposes a question.

Saw ye him whom my soul loves.
Here she inquires of them for her beloved; but here is no mention of any
answer or resolution they give unto her concerning Christ; and its probable by
the next verse, that they gave her no answer to her demand. The Church makes
trial of their knowledge, if happily they could relieve her ignorance: but it
seems these were blind watchmen, and enemies to divine revelation: of which
the Prophet speaks, and says, they are blind watchmen, and dumb dogs, Isa.
56. 10. It falls out often, that the Pastors are ignorant, and not such as
we may rely on for instruction and comfort, as where it is said, Night shall
be to them for a vision, darkness for a divination, the Sun shall go down
over the Prophets, the day shall be dark over them, Mich. 3. 6. This is the
third time of the Churches inquiry after Christ.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints seek Christ diligently, and constantly.

The Spouse sought Christ so diligently, as that she left no means unattempted
to gain communion with him: she seeks him in every Ordinance, and way where
he uses to be found; neither will she give over her search, and enquire,
until she has found him. The Church also sought Christ constantly, she sought
him without intermission or ceasing. First, she sought him in her bed by night,
and there she had no good success: Then she sought him in the streets and
broad places of the City. and yet she found him not; neither is she
contented, but she seeks him again, she asks the Watchmen for him; such as
intended to be in superintendencie and ministry: such as pretend to have the
greatest care over her; but even they satisfy her not: therefore she goes
further, waiting patiently for the revelation of Christ: and so at length has
blessed success, which was, as follows.

VERSE. 4.
It was but a little, that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul
loves: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me.
In this verse is contained the happy success of the Churches search after
Christ, and this is manifested.

First, In that she finds her beloved.

Secondly, In that she does retain him.

The Church declares not what comfort or counsel she had at the watchmens
hands, which perhaps was little or nothing at all, such blind watchmen there
are may times; but she proceeds to declare what issue her diligent search
had, namely, that she was scarce gone from them, but she found her beloved; as
in the following words.

It was but a little that I passed from them.
A little, or a very little: The Hebrew word signifies either a little while,
as in Psalm. 37. 10. Yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: this is
meant of a little time, or the word is used for a little deal, as in Psalm. 37.
16. A little that the righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked: that is, in respect of quantity, but in Psalm. 8. 6. it signifies a
little, or ashort time. It matters not much, whether we take it for time, or
distance of place.

I passed from them, to wit, from those watchmen, spoken of in the former
verse; she stayed not with them, because her beloved was not among them, but
continued seeking other where: for it is neither the society of Brethren, or
Church, or Ministers, can comfort an affiicted conscience, unless Christ be
there displaying the beams of his love and favor to the soul.

But I found him whom my soul loves.
I found, or Until I had found him Here after much seeking and waiting, the
Church finds her Beloved: it is not lost labor to seek and wait for Christ
constantly and perseveringly: such labor in the Lord shall never be in vain;
for at the end of their seeking they shall have blessed success.

Hence note.

First, That Christ gives in comforts to his people, when in man's judgment all
helps are past.

When the Church had sought Christ in all the means before spoken, as on her
bed, in the City, and streets, and last of all enquires of the watchmen of the
City, but in all this seeking finds not her beloved: but now a little after,
when she had left all outward means, and only waited for her Beloved, then
Christ makes out to her the sweet manifestations of his grace and love; it is
Christ's usual course, to let all outward and humane helps fail, before he
gives comfort: as he suffered his Disciples on the Seas to be almost drowned,
before he would help them, Matthew 14. 26. Christ does also many times work
without means, that the praise might not be ascribed to men, but to himself:
As he gave Abraham a Child when he was old, and it ceased to be with Sarah,
after the manner of women, Genesis 18. 12. So the Lord brought his people out of
Babylon, when they were in man's judgment as far from returning home again,
as the dead which were buried in their graves, yet then the Lord commanded
Ezekiel to Prophecy to the dead bones, showing thereby, that the people should
rise out of the grave of captivity in Babylon, and return again unto
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 37. And thus Christ did, when he was to raise Lazarus, he lets
him lie in the grave four days, and then raises him to life, Joh. 11. 39. And
thus Peter's deliverance was deserred to the last night, before the Lord sent an
Angel to set him at liberty, Act 12. Thus Christ does defer his comforts to
the last, but he comes in due time to those that wait on him.

Secondly Observe.

That those that seek and wait for Christ constantly and perseveringly shall
at last find Christ. Si non hodie, cras, si non cras, perendino die; ut qui
piscatus die toanihil cepit, sub noctem abire putans, capto qui ipsum toto die
fefellit, pisce discedit.


The Church had sought Christ with much diligence, and waited for him with much
patience, and at length she has blessed success, and says, I found him whom
my soul loves. A Father has this saying, if not to day, yet to morrow; if
not to morrow, yet the next day after it: as he which having fished all the day
caught nothing, and at night did think to give over, yet cast his net again,
and caught the fish. We should not faint in spiritual things, for the promise
is, Seek and ye shall find, Matthew. 7. 7. And we shall reap if we faint
not. And the Apostle tells us, We have need of patience, that after we have
done the will of God, we might receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36.

But now the question may be, whether ever Christ be absent from his Spouse?

The answer is, no, but only in the manifestations of grace, and in discoveries
of himself: but he is really in the soul of a believer still, and so he was
now present with the Spouse, even then when she sought after him. What is that
stirred her up to seek Christ so diligently? and what was it that kindled her
affections toward him, as to call him her beloved? surely it was Christ by his
Spirit acting in her, and quickening up her affections: Christ had not so
withdrawn, but he left the droppings of divine grace behind him, he withdrew
himself in manifestation only, not in the realitie of workings of his Spirit:
her heart was never so dead, but she could seek after her beloved, yea, and
wait upon him, until she had fresh discoveries of his love manifested unto her.

So much for the Churches success.

Now follows her prudentiall care in keeping of Christ when found.

I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers
house, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me.
In which retentation we may take notice of.

First, The Churches apprehending Christ.

Secondly, Her drwing him into her Mothers house or mansion.

I held him, and would not let him go, etc.
I held him, towit, firmly and closely: the Hebrew word signifies to join or
fasten together, or to unite (...) Cepit, apprehendit, haesit, cohaesit,
adjunxit. in niph. captus, detentus fuit.
by cleaving together, or a knitting together, as two pieces of Timber are knit
together by a joint. And indeed the matter here urged can signify no less
then a close cleaving of the Spouse unto her beloved.

Hence Observe,

That it is the nature of faith to take fast hold of Christ. It was by faith
(questionless) that the Spouse did thus apprehend Christ, and with such an
apprehension as implies a union; yea, and such a union as is in the Sicut vir
and Mulier urum sunt pernaturam, ita Christus and ecclesia unum intilligantur,
esse per fidem.
natural body, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 5. 30. so that thereby the
faithful become members of his body mystical. As a Father says, as a man and
a woman are one by nature, so Christ and his Church must be understood to be
one through faith. Now Christ is said to dwell in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. Now the Spouse does as well retain Christ, as take hold of him.

I would not let him go, or leave him.
Herein the Church declares her resolution to retain her beloved, as Jacob when
he wrestled with the Angel, Genes. 32. 26. I will not let thee go except thou
bless me. The Spouse having now obtained her beloved, was loath to part with
him again, upon any terms whatsoever.

Hence Observe,

That the soul that has once got Christ, will surely keep Christ. The Spouse
was not only diligent in seeking her beloved, but she had also a prudentiall
care to keep Christ when found. I would not let him go, says the Church, she
came by him hardly, therefore she will not part with him lightly; she
obtained him with much hazard and danger, much loss and suffering, and
therefore she will not part with him for the greatest advantage in the world.
She knows nothing in this great and wide universe, though never so lovely or
desirable, can be equivalent to such a Jewel: she knows that with him is the
wellspring of life and all blessing; and therefore she cannot be induced or
persuaded upon any terms to part with him. Many of Christ's followers forsook
him, and went no more with him: but, will ye also forsake me, says he to his
Apostles? Peter answers for himself, and the rest, Lord whither shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal life, John 6. 68. As if he should have said,
Lord, if we leave thee, we leave our life and our comfort, we forsake our own
mercy: it was motive enough to stay by him, and to keep close to him, to
consider that eternal life, and consequently the very quintessence of all
happiness was with him. The Merchant that found a treasure of great price,
went and hid it, and joyfully sold all that he had to purchase it, and
therefore he will not part with it for any good. The Merchant man is an Emblem
or figure of a Beleiver, who when he has found Christ, will not forgo him by
any means; no, but will say of him, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And on
Earth there is none that I desire in comparison of thee. Christ is the strength
of his heart, and his portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. It is the voice of
the Church, The Lord is my portion, says the soul, not only her tongue
without, but even her soul and her Spirit within speaks it with unconceiveable
joy and delight, she was in deep affliction when she spoke it, Lam. 3. 24.
yet the apprehension of such a portion as the Lord, was solace and refreshing
enough to her. And David is in the same mood too, The Lord is my portion and
mine inheritance (says he) The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; yea,
I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. He alludes to the manner of dividing
the Land of Canaan to the Children of Israel, which was done by line. Now
unspeakable happy are all those that have such an heritage: can we think they
will part with it? No verily, they will not so dote on any thing in the world
as to leave heaven for earth, infinite and eternal joys for a short blaze, or
a little flash of mirth: they will not part with such an inheritance as Christ
is, rich, fat, always fruitful, and never decaying. An inheritance where
there is no dirt, no winter or withering, no dying or decaying of fruits, but
ever green, ever flourishing, ever bearing, infinitely profitable and
delightful to the Possessors of it.

Naboth would not part with the heritage of his Fathers, no more will the
Saints part with theirs. Thus for the Churches taking hold of, and keeping her
beloved. Now follows her drawing of him into her Mothers mansion.

Until I had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the Chamber of her
that conceived me.
These words declare how effectually the Church did lay hold upon Christ, that
so she retained him to dwell with her for ever. The expression which the
Church uses here, My Mothers house, etc. signifies a chief City, or solemn
place of assembly.

But now it may be demanded, What Mother has the Church? And who is she that
conceived her? Is there any Spouse of Christ but one?

I answer, there is but one mystical body of Christ, and one Spouse: but
always that part of the Church on Earth, is called the Daughter of the Church
of former times: and Christians do beget Christians and the new Church came
forth of the old Church. Or, the whole Church is the Mother of each part, as in
the usual phrase of Hebrew speech. Now of old, the Temple and Sanctuary might
be the Chamber of her that conceived; that is, the place where they of the
former Church did meet. So now Jerusalem that is above, is called the Mother of
us all, Gal. 3. which was figured by Sarah the free woman, and signifies the
Covenant of grace, Gal. 4. 24. Now the house and Chamber wherein we are
conceived, by the Gospel of the Covenant of grace, is outwardly the Church, but
inwardly the heart where faith dwells, Romans 10. 10. Now into this house the
Church says she will lead her beloved; we may take it either.

1. For her leading of him into the Church, and displaying of Christ's goodness
manifested to her soul, to others. Or,

2. For her leading Christ down into her own soul; enlarging her own
affections by dilating upon the copious theme of his divine love, delighting in
a close and near communion with him.

From the first of these Interpretations, Observe,

That he Saints having received consolation from Christ, do labor to make
others partakers of the same comfort. Here the Spouse having found her beloved,
manifesting his love and favor to her, says, I will bring him into my Mothers
house, towit, into the Church, and assembly of Saints, to spread all his
goodness discovered unto me. She brings her beloved home, that so he may
not only dwell with her, but also be a solace to her Mothers Children; she
does labor to communicate the comfort of Gods Spirit unto others, that so they
may rejoice with her. Thus Philip, who finding Nathanael, did with much joy
manifest the finding of Christ, John 1. 45. Thus was the Woman of Samaria, who
having found the Messiah, could not but cast her Pitchar aside, and go into
the City, to reveal that comfort to others, John 4. 28, 29. Nor can there be
any soul that finds the sweet discoveries of Christ's love, but there is
likewise a strong desire to acquaint others with their souls comfort. It is an
easier thing to carry fire in the bosom, then to conceal spiritual comfort.
We cannot (says the Apostle) but speak the things which we have seen and
heard, Acts 4. 20. As it does much lessen our comfort to conceal the thing we
know, so it does much increase and enlarge our comfort, to make known our
enjoyments to others.

From the second Interpretation, towit, that the Spouse entertaineth him to
dwell in her heart: Observe,

That it does not content the Saints to have some slight apprehension of
Christ, but they desire to lead him into the inner Chambers of their minds,
that he may dwell in their hearts. So the Spouse here had apprehended her
beloved, and she does not satisfy her self until she has led him down
into the inmost corner of her heart. Then it is that the Spouse lives, or
Christ lives in her, Gal. 2. 20. the Church is called upon by the holy Ghost
to open the Gates, and everlasting doors, (that is, the doors of their hearts)
And (Christ) the King of glory shall come in, Psalm. 24. She does open the
gates and the doors and leads him in. What good thing can be wanting where
the King of glory shall enter in to dwell? He is the Lord of Hosts who is
strong and mighty in Battle, who will subdue sin, and put the Prince of
darkness to flight; yea, he will chase away all evil where he dwells. No
marvel then that the Church will not let him go, but leads him into the
Chambers of her that conceived her.

Lastly, in that the Church is called the Mother of the Church.

Hence Observe,

That the Church does nourish her own Members. Saints are nourished and
cherished among Saints: Hence they are bid to rejoice with Jerusalem, etc. That
they may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her consolation, that they
may milk out, and be delighted with the brightness of her glory, Isa. 66. 11.
And to the Church of beleivers pertains all the glorious privileges which
did of old pertain to Israel, as the Apostle tells us in Romans 9. 4, 5. To
whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving
of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: of whom are the Fathers,
and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever. Amen. It follows.

VERSE. 5.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and Hinds of the
field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please.
THe Spouse having long sought her beloved, and now having found him, and
brought him home unto her Mothers house, and resolved to retain him there,
renews her contestation and charge to the Daughters of Jerusalem, not to
awake or disquiet her beloved.

These words being the same with the words in Chap. 2. 7. I shall not stand
upon repetitions, but only mind you of the occasion of the repetition of them.

1. Consider the Church having found her beloved, and is very willing to keep
him, and to enjoy sweet fellowship with him; she gives this straight charge
to the Daughters, that they do not provoke him by sin, and so grieve his holy
Spirit, and thereby cause him to depart from his Church again. For as Moses
said unto Israel, If ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave
them in the Wilderness, and ye shall destroy all this people, Numb. 32. 15.
And the like place we have in Exodus 23. 20, 21. Behold (says the Lord) I send
an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place
which I have prepared: beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for
he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name is in him. The Angel here
spoken of, is Christ, as appears by this, that he has power to pardon sin, and
Gods name is in him: for Gods name and attributes are his very essence. Thus
the Apostle wills us not to provoke Christ, when he says, Grieve not the
holy Spirit, and withal adds this reason, Because (says he) by it ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. So on the other hand, we must
please the Spirit, by being acted by it, least we turn away the seal or
assurance of our salvation. Or,

2. We may take it thus, the Daughters were charged to wait patiently for
Christ's coming in the flesh, and to be contented with their present enjoyment
of Christ, that they should not stir him up, or provoke him by murmuring, or
otherwise, through fear or unbelief: neither was she to be discontent to
suffer affliction, as being under the Law, being shut up unto the faith that
should be revealed, which Law was a School master unto Christ, Gal. 3. 23. for
the Saints were under Governors, until the appointed time of the Father, Gal.
4. 1, 2.

So much for the Charge.

VERSE. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant.

Behold his Bed which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it, of the
valiant of Israel.

They all hold Swords, being expert in war, every man has his Sword upon his
Thigh, because of fear in the night.

King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

He made the pillars thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the
covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
Daughters of Jerusalem.

Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown
wherewith his mother Crowned him in the day of his Espousalls, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart.


IN the former part of the Chapter the Church sought Christ, and never gave
over seeking until she had found him, and brought him home into her Mothers
house, and into the Chambers of her that conceived her. Christ discovers
himself sweetly unto his Spouse, but not that his Spouse should be content
with her present apprehension of him, but that she should ascend higher and
higher, even unto the Chambers of his heavenly Palace, for to that end and
purpose does he come down unto her. Here therefore is showed the effect of
this her finding and laying hold of him, namely, that he has perfumed her with
his sweet graces, and made her fit and meet to ascend up with him unto his
royal place, which is here described in the sequel of the Chapter.

Christ himself is here introduced, as admiring and wondering at his Churches
appearance, and coming out of the Wilderness. Hereupon his Spouse takes
occasion to speak of his excellency, by way of praise and wonderment.

For the 6. ver. it utters a description of the Church,

1. In respect of her low condition. 2. In respect of her heavenly
qualification.
Her despised and low condition is laid down in these words, Who is she that
comes out of the Wilderness.

Her qualification, in the other part of the verse.

First, In respect of the form of her appearance, which is said to be like
Pillars of smoke.

Secondly, In respect of her odoriferous ointment, and perfume, in these words,
Perfumed with myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant.

Who is this, etc.
Some understand this of the Churches admiring of her self, as if she should
say, who is this, to wit, beside my self, that does thus ascend? and that she
does, as it were correct her self, in respect of her former speech, speaking
thus, what should I cause him to remain with me? nay rather I should strive to
enter into his Palace, who has all things most fair, and well furnished, and
exceeding sweet, and well smelling, yea, whose very Bed, and Bedchamber is
much more glorious, then all Solomon's royalty, which she afterward commends.

Or, we may take it, for Christ's admiring his own graces in his Spouse; as if
he skonld say, who is this, but my Spouse, that seeks me with such eagerness,
and is so impatient of my absence, and so revived at my presence; and that
holds me so fast, as not to let me go? This is usual with Christ, to bestow
his own graces, and stamp his own image upon us: and then to admire his
image and graces in us.

Again, Others take it to be meant of a new Company or state of a Church
rising up in the world: and so admired of the old Church. The description of
the Church follows.

That comes out of the Wilderness, etc.
Comes, or ascends, as it is said of Jerusalem, They went up to Jerusalem,
and of Egypt, they went down (...) Ascendit.
to Egypt, Genesis 42. 2. So that the Spouse ascends upward, The way of
wisdom is on high to the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath, Prove.
15. 24. Grace, glory, and comfort come from above, and draw our minds upward,
and our desires to be above, so as to sit together with Christ in heavenly
places, as the Apostle says, and to have our conversation in heaven.

From the Wilderness.
The Wilderness of the Land of Egypt, was a figure of the world; as appears
in Ezekiel. 20. 35, 36. And I will bring you into the Wilderness of the people,
and there will I plead with you face to face, like as I pleaded with your
fathers in the wilderness of the Land of Egypt, etc. That is, as if the Lord
had said, I will drive you into the most solitary and savage places of the
world, for a fullness of misery.

Now this world may aptly be compared to a Wilnesse, because as it is commonly
full of hurtful and noisome things, so is the world. Also we may apply it to
the corrupt nature of man, and his miserable estate thereby. In a Wildernesset
here is not illing, no sowing, no planting, no dressing; but all lies wast,
barren and desolate: Even so it is with all mankind, by nature there is
nothing but barrenness.

Hence Observe.

First, That the World is like a Wilderness.

God planteth, tilleth and dresseth his Church, for she is (as the Apostle
says) Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 2. she is made fruitful to the Lord: but the
whole world beside, out of which she ascends, does remain as a most desolate
and barren Wilderness; there grows in it not any good thing, nothing that
has sweetness or savor with it; but all noisome and unsavourie weeds grow
there: A Wilderness is clothed with no beauty at al, it is no place of
habitation, but only for wild beasts.

Secondly Observe.

That it is a hard thing to leave the world with its vanities, and to lift up
our minds and affection unto heaven.

So here the Church is taken up into admiration, for her leaving of the world,
and ascending upward, who is this that comes out of the Wilderness? etc.
that can forsake the world and lusts, to ascend up unto me? as if Christ had
said so: when Christ came riding unto Jerusalem, all the City was moved
saying, who is this? Matthew. 21. 10. The people admired him. So the Spouse is
here, as it were admired, that she can forsak al her carnal lusts and
corruptions, and wordly all in joyments, and ascend up to Jesus Christ. Now
follows her qualifications, and first in respect of her appearance, which is
said to be.

Like Pillars of smoke.
The Pillars of smoke here mentioned, may be taken from the fiery pillar of
the night, and the cloudy pillar of the day, by which the Israelites were
conducted through the Wilderness, from Egypt to Canaan: And in that it is
said Pillars of smoke meaning that the Saints ascend up directly and upright,
like pillars of smoke, and so are called by comparison.

Again, as smoke is dark, and hinders the clear sight of any thing, as the
cloudy pillar was dark to the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 20. so is the glory and
beauty of the Spouse to the carnal eye, and she is very obscure to the world,
because of her afflictions in this life, which were resembled unto Abraham by a
smoking Oven, Genesis 15. 17.

Or, lastly, by Pillars of smoke may be meant the sanctity and holiness of
the Spouse: and then the expression is taken from the sacrifice under the Law,
of which the earthly matter was turned into ashes, and the other part ascended
up in a flame of fire, as appears, Levit. 1. 16. 4. 12. 6 10. So the Spiritual
sacrifice of the Spouse, ascends up to God, on the Altar Christ, by the
flaming fire of the Spirit, resolving the earthly matter to ashes remaining
beneath, and the other to smoke ascending up to God. Thus the Spouse ascends
like Pillars of smoke: her qualification in respect of odor and perfume
follows.

Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, withal the powders of the Merchant.
Perfumed, or, becensed with myrrh, to wit, perfumed with the sweet graces of
the Spirit, and made a sweet odor by Christ unto God. The Spouses appearance
is sweetly set down under precious aromatic odours, wherewith she is perfumed:
but indeed she receives this from her divine head, who is the fountain of all
spiritual odours, as appears in Psalm. 45. 8. Now these odours are no other
then the sweet graces of Christ's Spirit, communicated with his Members,
wherewith Christ (as by the reflection of his own Spirit) is infinitely
delighted.

And frankincense, Myrrh was one of the first ingredients that was used in the
holy oil, and frankincense in sweet perfume, Exodus 30. 23, 34. which perfume,
prefigured the mediation of Christ, the Angel that offered much incense with
the prayers of the Saints: that is, he mixeth the precious odours of his
merits, with the sacrifices of the Saints, making their prayers and praises
find acceptance with God, as Acts 10. 4. 31. And thus is the Church also made,
through the intercession of Christ, to be sweet and savourie, as it is said in
Psalm. 45. All her garments are Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia. The Saints then are
very redolent, and savourie through Christ.

It is added.

With all powders of the Merchant.
With all powder, or, above all dust (that is dust or powder of spices) of the
Merchant. The word translated Merchant, signifies such a one, as sells all
sorts of sweet smelling things. Our Grossers here among us, but especially our
Apothecaries, have their shopps stuffed with such savours, and are most often
in the compounding of such things for smell, and therefore the word would not
be ill turned Apothecarie, or Ointment maker. Such were the Priests under the
Law which made the ointment of Spices, 1 Chronicles. 9. 30.

Now if we take the words thus, above all powder, etc. then the meaning is,
that those sweet and heavenly graces wherewith Christ does perfume his Saints,
are far more comfortable and refreshing, then all the sweet powders or spices
of the Merchant or Apothecarie.

Now from this qualification of the Churches, Observe.

First, That the Saints in their approaches to God directly ascend by the
golden Censer of our high Priest Jesus, unto God the Father.

The Appearance of the Spouse in her approach to Christ, was like unto Pillars
of smoke, which had resemblance with the cloud of incense, which erected it
self in the (staight) form of a plame-tree, as it ascended from the Altar.
The Jews were of opinion, that the smoke of the incense would not decline by
any wind or blast, but ascend directly toward heaven: so the sacrifice of the
godly, will ascend directly to God, by Jesus Christ.

Secondly Observe.

The Sacrifices of the Saints have a sweet acceptance with the Lord. Perfumed
with myrrh and fankincense, etc.

Thus Noths sacrifice smelled of sweet rest, and it is said of the Gentiles,
They shall come up with acceptance on his Altar, and he will glorify the house
of his glory, Isa. 60. 7. And again he says, Their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, Isa. 56. 6. The Apostle tells
us in Romans 8. 26, 27. That the Spiait helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered, and he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God, So that God
cannot but accept the prayer, which by the Spirit of his Son is sent into our
hearts, Gal. 4. 6. of such heavenly odor is such prayer.

Thirdly, Observe.

That the heavenly perfume of the Spirit of grace, is far above and excels
all sweet spices.

Above all the powders of the Merchant. All the most delightful things in the
world, such as are the sweet spices of the ointment maker, are not so
odoriferous, as the Spiritual graces of the Saints; nor as Christ, in whom are
all the treasures of God, Col. 1. 19. And as in respect of whom, all things in
the world, are to be accounted, but as loss and dung, Phil. 3. 8.

VERSE. 7.
Behold his bed, that is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it, of the
valiant of Israel.
THe Church enters into a commendation of Christ's glory, and safety: and she
does not only compare it with Solomans, but preferring it far before it, and
that by many degrees, as it will further appear in the following words.

The Spouse amplifieth the excellency of the bed of Christ and his Church, by
comparing it with Solomon's.

First, she commends it for the safety and security thereof, in this verse,
and verse. 8.

Secondly, she commends his Chariot and rich furniture of the same, verse.
9, 10.

Lastly, She enters into a commendation of Christ's person, not only to set
forth the glory of her Husband, but also that thereby she might stir up her
affections the more toward him, that was of such great state and magnificence.

In this 7. verse Christ is introduced (under the name of Solomon his type)
circum-guarded on his bed, wherein we may Observe.

First, The bed he coucheth on.

Secondly, The guard placed about it.

The posture of this guard, and the end of their watching is contained in the
verse following.

Behold his bed, which is Solomon's.
Some read the words thus, Behold the Bed which is above, or better then that,
which is Solomon's.

Solomon being derived of shalam, does signify a man that is peaceable, yea,
complete for peace: and herein was a type of Christ, who was the Prince of
peace, Isa. 9. 6. And is called our peace, Ephesians. 2. through faith in him, we
have peace with God the Father. Solomon, as in his name, so in his Kingly
Office, wisdom, and royalty, was a figure of the Messiah.

By the Bed, we may understand the hearts of the Saints, for there Christ does
use to rest and repose himself, as in a bed; he is said to lie all night
betwixt the breasts of the Spouse, Cant. 1 13. And Christ dwells in the heart by
faith, Ephesians. 3. 7. there he takes up his habitation and lodging, as in the
Temple and Tabernacle of old; which were types of the spiritual Temple of
Christ. The shadow is taken from the bed, and Bride-chamber of King Solomon,
who was a figure of him, that was to come; even our Prince of peace, who does
rest in his Saints, as in a bed, and makes his Saints like wise rest in him.

Hence Observe,

That Christ and his Church do mutually rest and repose one in another. Behold
his bed, etc. A Bed is for rest and sleep; now Christ does inhabit in the
Saints, as in 2 Cor. 6. I will dwell in them, and walk in them. He will dwell
in the soul by his Spirit, and the soul does rest and repose in the beloved.
Now the Guard about this bed is described.

Threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.
This guard is described,

1. By the number, the number is three score, which is twice so many as David
had for his ordinary guard, as appears, 2 Samuel 23. 13. 22. and this argues the
double safety of all those with whom Christ rests.

2. This guard is described by the quallifications of those that watch; and
this is done two ways.

First, From accidents Internal.

Secondly, External.

The internal is the fortitude of the Guarders, expressed in the words strong,
and valiant, which in the Original is all one word.

The word in the Hebrew signifies prevailing strong, (...) Praevaluit, invaluit.
insomuch as Gebber is sometimes turned a man, as the Latins term him, vir of
virago. The Greeks often turn it by (...) vir, and sometimes by (...) Homo,
man, or mighty one, Psalm. 18. 26. Man is called Gebber by the Hebrews, because
of his strength, and valor, and superiority, as in 2 Samuel 22. 26. man is
called Gibbor, that is, a strong Champion, and a mighty man, Psalm. 19. 6. So
Nimrod was called Gibbor, Genes. 10. 8. that is, mighty on the Earth. Now
further, these are declared to be the valiant of Israel.

Israel signifies a prevailer with the strong God, it was (...) Componitar ex
(...) principatum obtinutt and (...) Deustest igitur
the name given to Jacob, because he prevailed with God. Now what mighty
valiants were in Israel, appears by those worthies that followed David, and
engaged with him in his wars, of whom we read in 1 Chronicles. 11. 47. These figured
out the strength and agility of the Saints, who should be able to resist (...)
Prin^eps dei, aut qui principalem potentiam obtinuit a deo. Hor. 12. 3.
temptation, and, as the Apostle says, shall abide in him, and overcome the
wickedone, 1 John 2. 14.

Some understand these mighty strong men to be the Prophets and Ministers of
God, such as he called to be watchmen over the house of Israel, in whom the
Lord dwelt mightily by his Spirit, and they were deputed to watch over the
Church of God.

But I most of all think it is meant of the safety of the Saints resting in
Christ. It was and is the manner that Kings had a Guard about their lodgings,
that they might be secured from harms. It appears by these words that King
Solomon had every night threescore valiant men for his Guard, expert in
Battle, that did keep the watch, that so he might sleep in safety. Here is
also mention made that they are the valiant of Israel, they were such as might
be trusted. Now Solomon's Bed was Guarded by these valiant men of Israel,
whereby is figured that the Saints rest free from danger and fear, in Christ.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints rest securely in Christ, and are strongly guarded against all
dangers whatsoever. There be many enemies that seek to destroy the Spouse, all
the infernal powers are set against her; all cruel and bloody Tyrants breath
out threatenings and terror, as if they would utterly destroy her, but having
found her beloved, she finds rest and peace in him. There can no enemy come
near the Spouse to hurt her, neither can any evil come near her. Hence it is,
when Christ comfort his Disciples against the persecution of the world, he
says, These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in
the world you shall have afflictions, but be of good comfort, for I have
overcome the world, John 16. 33. then however the case stands with the Saints
here in the world, they rest securely in Christ. This Guard is further
described in the following words.

VERSE. 8.
They all hold Swords, being expert in war, every man has his Sword upon his
Thigh, because of the fear of the night.
IN this Verse these men of the guard are described by a second qualification,
and that is external. This is denoted by their hands holding the Sword, by
which posture they show themselves to be expert in war, and their readiness to
fight, having every man his Sword upon his thigh. And lastly, the end of all
this watching, because of the fear of the night.

They all hold Swords, etc.
They hold) or, are apprehended of the Sword: that is, girded about with it:
what this Sword is, may appear from Heb. 4. 12. namely, the living power of
the word of God, and is called in Revel. 1. 16. A two edged Sword; and the
Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. And hence the Apostle uses the term of
holding forth the word of life, Phil. 2. 16.

Being expert in war.
Expert, or taught, God is said to teach the fingers of his people to war, and
their hands to fight. So they are taught of God to use the Sword of the Spirit,
that so they wax skillful in the Lords Battles, and have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil; Heb. 5. 14. That is; they that are tried
of God, and have experience, are such as have their senses exercised, or
Schooled, as the Greek word signifies. So that here the Saints are commended
for their skill and dexterity.

Now follows their readiness to fight.

Every man has his Sword upon his thigh.
This was the manner and custom of the people of the Jews, to stand with their
swords, as appears in that it is said unto Christ, Gird thy Sword upon thy
Thigh, O mighty one, Psalm. 45. 4. This denotes readiness in the Spouse to
fight against all her enemies, in the use of all her spiritual weapons. Thus
the Lord appointed the Children of Israel to put every man his Sword by his
side, and to go in and out from gate to gate, throughout the Camp, and slay
every man his Brother, and every man his Companion, and every man his
Neighbor. So the Saints are ready (as with Swords upon their thighs) to stand
against, and resist their spiritual adversaries.

Now follows the end, or the reason of this strict Guard.

Because of the fear of the night.
Fear, or terror in the night. The night is a time of the greatest fear and
dread, and the time of most evil and cruel actions: Christ compares his last
coming to a Thief in the night, because it will be sudden and dreadful to
some. The greatest dangers are for the most part by night, as the Disciples
were in peril of drowning in the fourth watch of the night, Matthew. 14. 25. And
at night the Angel smote the firstborn of Egypt, Exodus 11. And as for
Thefts, Murders, and other such like mischiefs, they are often done in the
night, as appears, Job 24. 14. The murderer rising with the light, kills the
poor and needy, and in the night is as a Thief. And the enemies of Judah
said, Let us go up by night, and destroy her Palaces, Jer. 6. 5. Therefore
the night is a time wherein we need to stand armed, and to be ready upon our
watch, as we have example in Nehem. 4. 22. Those that labored in the day, were
a Guard in the night. So the Saints are to fight with the Prince of darkness,
and to withstand the powers of the world, and against spiritual wickednesses
in high places: therefore it is needful, that they stand upon their Guard,
putting on the whole Armor of God, that they may be able to stand in the evil
day: we must therefore stand with our loins girt about with truth, having on
the Breast Plate of righteousness, Ephesians. 6. 12. 14.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints are always to keep a spiritual Guard about them. They are
always to take hold of the Sword of the Spitit: he that wants his material
Sword is not fit for the field of this world, no more is he for the regiment of
Christ, that wants his spiritual Sword. And then Christians had need be expert
and skillful in applying of the Sword of the Spirit, and not only expert, but
always ready, having their loins girt, that is, being filled with strength and
valor, because of spiritual wickednesses that war against them, and seek to
destroy them. It follows.

VERSE. 9.
King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
AS the former Verse, so this and the following Verse. must be taken for the
speech of the Spouse; or at least an Apostrophe of the Spirit to a Christian
hearer. It delivers a narration touching some glorious frame made by Solomon,
who was a type of our Mystical Solomon. What this building may properly be
called, is hard to say: the Hebrew word Apirion is not found elsewhere in
Scripture, it seems to be derived of Parah, which signifies to flourish, and
bring forth fruit. Some take it to be meant of some stately Palace built by
Solomon. Some turn it, a Horse-litter, or Chariot, and so it signifies any
thing that is carried in pomp and state; and herein it seems to be helped by
the Greek, where it is Phoreion, which is an instrument to carry, as a
Horse-litter, or the like.

Arius Montanus turns it a Bedchamber, namely, such a one as is prepared for
the Bride and the Bridegroom to lodge in; so that according to this version it
must be meant of the royal and sumptuous Bride-chamber, which Solomon built in
his own Palace, which was for the Daughter of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, whom
Solomon married, and for whom he built Vi^e, Rab. Silomoth, and Rab. Abraham.
an house, as appears, 1. Kings 9. 24.

The Jews that knew not Christ, applied this to the Tabernacle, others to the
Temple, unto which the Church of the Jews were called, after they came out of
Egypt, through the Wilderness. But however the Temple was a figure of Christ,
unto whom we must refer it, in respect of the spiritual mystery thereof. The
Chariot here then is meant, of the Spouse the mystical body of Christ, which
by the preaching and profession of the Gospel, carries Christ up and down,
as in a Chariot, in the midst whereof Christ sits, to teach, direct, and
govern: So that Christ rides up and down gloriously in his Saints, who hold
forth the word of truth, and profess his name before men, and glorify him on
Earth.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints by holding forth the word of truth, do carry Christ
gloriously as in a Chariot. The Saints are called Christ's garments in Psalm.
45. All thy Garments smell of myrre, etc. Christ would be as it were naked in
the world, were it not for his Saints: so he does only ride gloriously, and
prosper in his Saints, riding and triumphing in their souls, as in his Chariot
of state, wherein he is glorified. Now follows the external matter of this
building.

Of the wood of Lebanon.
Trees of Lebanon, that is, of Cedar-wood that grew on Lebanon: these Trees
were Cedars, an uncorrupting wood, well representing the Spouse in her
regenerate estate, and therein Christ tryumpheth. Every believer is a Cedar
growing in the Courts of God, Psalm. 92. 12. The Cedar coveteth to grow on the
Mountains, and especially they grow upon the high Mountain of Lebanon: which
word Lebanon of Laban, signifies white, it may be from gum or frankincenses
whiteness, issuing from the Trees of that Mountain. All which may resemble
the purity and righteousness of the Saints. The Saints are like the Cedars of
Lebanon, which bring forth fruit in their age, growing from strength to
strength; in comparison of whom, all the men of the world are but shrubs. It
was of Cedar that Solomon built the Temple, and all his glorious buildings: So
it is of Saints that Christ makes his Temple, his Bed, his Chariot, he rides
glorious in the hearts and mouths of his Saints, by the word of truth and
righteousness. Now follows a particular description of all the parts of this
Chariot.

VERSE. 10.
He made the Pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the
covering of it of purple: the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
Daughters of Jerusalem.
AS the Spouse had in the verse before, spoken of Christ's Chariot in general:
so now she comes to describe it by peece-meale, as it were, affirming that
the pillars were of silver, the bottom Gold, etc. all which is taken from the
glory of Solomon's Chariot, which must needs excel in outward glory. This
Chariot is the Church wherein Christ rides in triumph and glory: Or else by
the Chariot, we may understand that with which he carries his Saints up and
down in the world.

He made the Pillars thereof of silver.
There were two Pillars in the Temple, the one called Jachin, the other Boaz,
as much as to say, stabilitie, and strength, and so in the Church of the
New Testament, James, Cephas and John, are called Pillars, Gal. 2. 9. because
by preaching the doctrine of Christ, they did, as it were sustain the Chariot
of the Church, by the word of truth. So in Prove. 9.

Wisdom built her house, and hewed out her seven Pillars: The truths of
Christ are as so many pillars to sustain the Church.

Hence Observe.

That the Truths of Christ, are the Pillars of the Church.

The word of God is likened to refined silver, in Psalm. 12. and here to Pillars
of silver, to bear up and sustain the Chariot of Christ; to wit, his Church.
There are many contentions in the world, and most strive for Mastership, but he
is most like to prevail, that has truth on his side; for truth is a strong
Pillar, and more able to uphold us, then we are to uphold it. She goes on
further to desCribe the Chariot.

The bottom thereof of gold.
This bottom; or seat of gold, seems to have reference to the golden mercy
seat, over the Arc in the Temple, on which God is said to sit, Psalm. 80. 2.
As on the Cherubims, which were upon the Arc of the Covenant, in the
Sanctuary from whence God gave Oracles to his people, when they sought unto
him, as appears, Exodus 25. 22. So here the bottom or seat of this Chariot,
on which the Saints do rest on, may be taken for the doctrines, faith and
grace, whereon they rest, as on a sure foundation.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints rest upon a sure foundation.

The Covenant of grace apprehended by faith, is more precious than gold and
silver, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The Saints rest on a bottom of gold, to wit, the sure
word of God, which the Apostle calls a sure word of prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And
the Apostle tells us, that Christ is our only foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And in
verse 12. he says, Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver,
precious stone, etc. By these are signified solid, precious, divine truths and
revelations of God, pure doctrines, and the like. The Prophet Isaiah, and so
John in his revelation tells us, that the heavenly City, the new Jerusalem was
to be built of gold, silver, and precious stones.

A third description of this Chariot follows.

The covering of it of purple.
By the covering may be meant the ornaments or hangings about the Chariot.
Purple, was the garment of the virtuous woman, to wit, the Church in Prove. 31.
22. and purple was the garment also of the fornicatrix, to wit, the false
Church, Revel. 17. 4. Purple was a Kingly clothing, for in such clothing the
Jews put Christ, when they would declare him King, though with their
affections derided him. And as the false Church would be accounted honorable
and glorious, so she puts upon her the royal colors of Christ. Purple is a
certain juice had from a shel-fish of that names of which fishes it is said,
Cum vita succum eum evomunt, together with their lives loss, they do evomite
that purple juice. Upon which consideration it has its Plin. lib. 9. cap. 36.
color of blood. This princely color denotes unto us the heavenly glory of
the Saints, as also the blood and death of Christ, in the participation whereof
a Christian becomes beautiful and glorious.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints, by participating in the blood of Christ, and being clothed
with his righteousness, are made very glorious.

Christ is said to have washed us in his blood; and to make us Kings and
Priests unto God, etc. Revel. 1. 5, 6. And in Revel. 7. 14. The Saints are they
which Came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. It is the greatest dignity and glory of
believers, that they are made clean and pure by the blood of the Lamb.

Thus the Chariot of Christ is made up.

First, Of the silver Pillars of his word and truth.

Secondly, Of the Covenant of grace, as on the bottom of gold, whereon the
Saints rest.

And lastly, Of the purple and glorious ornaments, which is given the Saints
through his blood. It follows.

The midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.
The midst, is to be taken for the inmost part of the Chariot, which is said
to be paved with love, that is, wrought with lovely works, whereby the
daughters of Jerusalem (to wit, the elect of God) are drawn unto God himself,
by the feeling of his love toward them.

Hence Observe.

That Christ draws his people unto himself by a principle of love.

Hence it is, That the Chariot wherein Christ carries his people in, is paved
with love. Christ does so affectionately love his Spouse, that he does ingrave
her on the palms of his hands, Isa. 49. 16. and carries her upon his heart, as
the high Priest bare the names of the Children of Isarel, on his pectorall or
breast plate, to wit on his heart, Exodus 28. 29. Christ does display the banner
of love over the soul, and so draws it after himself. Such as is the love
of Christ, is the pavement of his Coach. Thus far the description of Christ's
chariot.

Now followoweth the description of his person.

VERSE. 11.
Go forth O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown
wherewith his Mother Crowned him in the day of his Espousalls, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart.
SOlomon being advanced, the people of Jerusalem are called forth to behold his
glory, but under this, Christ and his people are most intended: the Saints are
only fit to contemplate upon Jesus Christ, and Christ only affords matter of
heavenly speculation. For the better understanding of these words, observe,

First, The persons called out, and they be the daughters of Zion, Come forth O
ye daughters of Zion, etc.

Secondly, The end of their being so called out, and that is, to Behold or
contemplate on King Solomon.

Thirdly, The description of Solomon, and this is done, by introducing him
crowned.

The Crown is made excellent.

First, In respect of the person that crowns him, and that is his mother.

Secondly, In respect of the time of his coronation: and that is the time,

First, Of his marriage.

Secondly, Of his hearts rejoicing.

Come forth O ye daughters of Zion, etc.
Zion, was a glorious Fort, seated in an upper place of Jerusalem, inhabited of
the Jebusites, before David surprised it: but afterward it was called the City
of David, 2 Samuel 5. 7. The word in English signifies a Looking-glass, or a
prospective sign: a term well befiitting it, because it was a watch Tower
over Jerusalem. It was called the holy City, and the Lords mountain, Isa. 5.
2. Joel. 3. 17. because the Temple was built there.

The Daughters of Zion, were the women dwelling therein, but all men and women
are comprised in the phrase; so were all Towns and Cities called daughters to
the Mother Zion. The Daughters figured out the Saints of God, which are also
called. Virgins, and do follow the Lamb, Revel. 14. 14. These Daughters are
called forth to a further degree of knowledge, and out of their former estate.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are called out of their dark estate, they are in by nature,
unto a state of more knowledge by the Spirit of Christ.

Ye are called out of darkness into marveilous light, says the Apostle, 1
Pet. 2. 9. And so says the Prophet, The people that sat in darkness have
seen a great light, they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, upon
them has light shined, Isa, 9. 2.

Now follows the end for which the Daughters of Zion are thus called out.

And behold King Solomon, with his Crown, etc.
Under Solomon is meant Christ (whom Solomon figured in his Kingdom) crowned
with glory and honor in his Church. The Daughters of Zion are called forth to
behold his glory and dignity, his worth and excellency, even with his Crown
or diadem, wherewith he was invested. Thus it was said to John, Come and see,
Revel. 1. And again, Tell ye the daughters of Zion, Behold thy King comes,
Matt. 21. 15. So here behold King Solomon with his Crown of glory, and
dominion and victory.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are called forth to behold and contemplate the excellencies of
Christ.

If Shebaes Queen came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to behold
Solomon's glory? how much more should we come forth of our lusts, and from the
world, to contemplate on his glory, who is far greater then Solomon, Matthew.
12. 42. for by so Beholding him though as in a mirror, we are changed into his
image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But
how shall the natural man behold Christ in his glory, when as he perceives
not the things of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discernd, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Then let the
Daughters of Zion come forth, for they only can contemplate on the spiritual
glory of Christ, and can judge a right thereof.

Now follows the description of our Solomon, to wit, Christ, and this is by
introducing him crowned. This Crown is made excellent, First, In respect of
the person that crowns him.

The Crown wherewith his Mother crowned him.
Christ's mystical Mother is the Church of the faithful, that with the
Apostle, travaileth till Christ be formed in her. The Saints by faith, do
spiritually conceive and bring forth Christ, Gal. 4. 19. And Christ says, they
that do his will, are his Sisters and Mothers, Mat. 12. 50. It is most true
that God has advanced Christ, and set the crown of glory and dominion upon
him, Psalm. 8. Heb. 2. 9. but yet withal, his Mother does also after a sort,
set the Crown of glory upon his head. Seeing the Spouse is the fulness of
him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 2. and the Church is said sometimes to
be the Mother of Christ, Rev, 12.

As for the Crown it is a sign of victory and dominion, Psalm. 21. And when
Christ fights with his enemies, He has on his head many crowns or diadems,
Revel. 19. 11. 12. So when Christ rules over the Saints, they by their
submission do put a Crown upon his head, acknowledging his power.

Hence Observe.

First, That Christ is invested with a Crown of sovereignty and power. He is
crowned with glory and honor, Psalm. 8. 5. The Father has exalted him, and
put all things under his feet, Heb. 2. and has given all things into his
hands, John 3. 35.

Secondly Observe.

That Christ is crowned with honor and dignity by his Church.

As the Father has honored his Son, by setting a Crown upon his head, and
putting a Scepter into his hand: so the Saints by submitting unto his Law, and
authority, do honor him also, acknowledging all his dignity, that the Father
has put upon him. Thus it is said of the Church of the Gentiles, that they
should be a Crown in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of
God, Isa. 62. 3. The Apostle calls such, as he had gained by the preaching of
the Gospel, his Crown and glory, Phil. 4. 1. How much more may Christ
himself account his Church, which he has purchased by his own blood, his
crown and glory. This Crown is also made excellent from the circumstance of
time.

In the day of his espousals, etc.
This must needs be meant of the time, when Christ was espoused to his Church;
even the day of the Covenant made betwixt Christ and his people, Ezekiel. 16. 8.
And the Lord says unto Jerusalem: I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth,
the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness,
Jer. 22.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are espoused unto Christ. This is that which the Apostle tells
the Corinthians, when he says, For I have espoused you unto one Husband, that
I might present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. And the Lord
says, I will betroth thee unto me, etc. Hos. 2. 19. that is, I will establish
my Covenant of grace with thee to forgive thy sins, and to take no notice of
thy unworthiness. Now follows the second circumstance of time

And in the day of the gladness of his heart.
These words plainly intimate, that Christ did not only marry himself unto
his Spouse, but also that he did it freely with a gladsome spirit.

Hence Observe.

That the espousing of the Saints unto Christ, is matter of great joy unto him.
Thus it is said in the Prophet, As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so
shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa. 62. 5. So that look with what kind
imbracings, and what great affection, a bridegroom receives his Bride, with
the same, and greater does Christ receive his people. So much for the third
Chapter.

CANTICLES Chap. IIII.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes
within thy locks, thy hair is as a flock of Goats, that appear from Mount
Gilead.

Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which come up from
the washing: whereof every one bare twins, and none is barren among them.

Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely, thy temples
are like a piece of pomgranate within thy locks.

Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon there hang
a thousand bucklers, all sheilds of mighty men.

Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, which feed among the
Lilies.


TO the end that the Church might well know and feel, that her love toward
Christ, and her seeking after him, was not lost, as also she did not commend
him in vain, all which things were largely handled in the former Chapter: it
pleases Jesus Christ the bridegroom and head of his Spouse in this Chapter,
to commend the excellency of his Church, as in sundry special parts of the
same: and also delareth his singular love to her again. and does as it were
assure her of the same.

This Chapter may be divided in two parts.

The First is a singular comendation, that Christ gives to the Church, which
begins at the first verse, and so holds on to the 14. wherein also there
are three parts.

First, An excellent and singular description (handled allegorically) of the
parts and Members of the Church, he putting down seven in number, this is
contained in the five first verses of the Chapter.

Secondly, Christ professes his great and wonderful love toward the Church,
making large promises, and also descrbing notable ways unto her, verse. 6, 7,
8, 9.

Thirdly, Christ again returns to commend his Spouse, with all those
excellent graces, that were so sweet, delightful, and pleasurable in her, from
verse 10. to verse 14.

The second part of the Chapter contains an excellent speech of the Church,
with Christ's answer to the same, verse 15, 16, 17.

In the Churches speech, there is,

First, A commendation of her head Christ, uers. 15.

Secondly, A desire of all good things to flow down from her head Christ unto
her self, acknowledging all her enjoyments to be from him, verse. 16.

In Christ's answer, there is contained a promise of his most gracious
acceptance of such fruits, as his Spouse should yield unto him.

VERSE. 1.
Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair, etc.
HEre begins Christ's commendations of his Church, and first he commends
her beauty in general, in the words, Behold, thou art fair my love, etc. And
afterward he enters into a particular commendation of her several parts and
members. And

1. Of her Eyes, verse. 1. 2. Of her Hair, verse. 1. 3. Of her Teeth, verse. 2.
4. Of her Lips, verse. 3. 5. Of her Temples, verse. 3 6. Of her Neck, verse. 4.
7. Of her Breasts, ver. 5.
Thus Christ enumerates and reckons up all the parts of the Church, which
shows, what a pleasant harmony and specious consent of parts she has,
whereby she is exceeding beautiful. But first, of the praise in general.

Behold thou art fair my Love, thou art fair.
When the Scripture does prefix this word (Behold) to any sentence, it notes
for the most part a thing to be wondered at, as was noted in Chap. 1. 15.

Fair) or beautiful, not only in color, but in comely (...) Puliher,
elegans, venustus, decorus fuit.
proportion and elegancy, such as draws love and liking. This is meant of the
graces of the spirit, and that spiritual beauty wherewith God in Christ has
beautified his beloved Spouse.

My love) or, my fellow-friend, my Companion: so named (...) Pavit, comedit.
med of feeding together, and so participating each of others good or evil.
This title Christ often gives to his Spouse in this Song, as in Chap. 1. 15.
and 2. 10. and 5. 2. etc.

The doubling of the word by an usual Hebraisme, implies, that she was
exceeding beautiful, and eminently glorious: it does not only set forth the
vehemence of Christ's affection and love toward his Spouse, but also the
excellency of the Church it self, in that Christ can, as it were, find no
words sufficient to express the same, her beauty being so great, both outward
and inward, and also excellent in both respects. This beauty and fairness of
the Church has been spoken of in Chap. 1. 15. therefore I shall speak but
briefly of it, only something to the present occasion of repetition.

The Church was called forth in the former Chapter to behold her Kings
Coronation and Nuptials, and here is prevented of an Objection which secretly
might be made on her part. The Objection is this, Should I, one that am so
poor and unworthy, come into the presence of such a stately King as Christ,
who was typified by Solomon in respect of his glory? This Objection Christ
takes away in saying, Behold thou art fair my love.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints have a peerlesse beauty and purity, communicated to them from
Jesus Christ. By the communication of this beauty and grace they are the
Jerusalem (spoken of in Revel. 21. 2.) which comes down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband, and is free with her
Children, Gal. 4. 26. into the communion whereof there can really enter no
unclean thing, neither whatsoever works abomination or lies, Revel. 21. 27.
By this grace the Saints are Temples of the holy Spirit, the Tabernacle of God
with men. The Spouse of Christ is fair, and the fairest; grace is a
transcendent. good, all the excellency of civility and morality is nothing in
comparison of it. The Church is fair in her head Christ, being his mystical
body, and therefore is of a pure composition, made holy and gracious by the
spirit of grace.

It will be Objected, How can this be spoken of the Church here on Earth, in
which condition even the best have great deformities?

I Answer, The Lord looks upon his Church not only as she is, but also as he
means to make her hereafter, even all glorious and beautiful. Again, he
looks on her, not only as she is in her self, but as she is in himself,
that is, washed and cleansed from all impurity, and also decked with his glory.
Thus we have the praise in general: now it follows to consider of the
praises in particular.

We have the praises of the Church in particular, by describing a peerlesse, or
matchless woman, from the face to the breast part. He mentions seven
particulars, the Eyes, Hair, Teeth, Lips, Temples, Neck, and Breast. The
number of seven, is often the number of perfection, as appears, Rev. 5. 6.
where Christ is likened to a Lamb with seven horns, and seven eyes, which
are the seven spirits of Grd. Now by the seven parts thus enumerated, are
meant the manifold and plentiful measure of graces bestowed on the Saints,
they being made partakers of all heavenly blessings in Christ, as the Apostle
says.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints have a complete and full supply of all grace and beauty from
Christ. This is that for which the Apostle gives thanks in behalf of the
Corinthians, namely, that they were enriched by Christ, and came behind in no
gift, 1 Cor. 1. 5. 7. We must know, that all the Saints are knit together by
one spirit, and do make but one mystical body in Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 13. So
then, as there be in the natural body of a man, diverse Members, which
according to their several gifts, have diverse functions and operations: so
the holy Spirit ascribes the like to the mystical body, as the Apostle
shows at large, 1 Cor. 12.

Secondly Observe,

That the Saints are beautiful in all parts. Christ does particularize every
part, giving praise to every member. That beauty must needs be very rare and
excellent, which arises from the comeliness of all parts. If one part be
comely, and another deformed, then there is no perfect beauty; but the Church
justified and sanctified in Christ, is glorious in all parts.

Now follows the particular parts. The first and second particulars do lie
in the following part of this verse. The first uttering the state of her Eyes,
the second showing the condition of her Locks.

Thou have Doves eyes within thy Locks, etc.
Now the eyes of the Spouse are here commended, by comparing them to the eyes
of Doves, which are chaste, full, clear, beautiful to look upon, and the
like. Some understand by these eyes the Pastors and Teachers of the Church,
because they are to give light to the whole body, through the Heavenly and pure
doctrine, and so it may be taken here, for in the old Testament the Prophets
were called Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9. but I rather take it in this place, that the
eyes are the faith of the Saints, for by faith they look up to the Lord, and
behold things invisible, Heb. 11. 27. And they have by faith the eyes of their
understanding opened, to know what is the hope of their calling, Ephesians. 1. 18.

Hence Observe,

That the eye of faith is very chaste, simple, and beautiful in the eyes of
Christ. The Apostle tells us it is impossible to please God without faith, Heb.
11. 6. Therefore with the eye of faith he is much delighted. By faith the soul
sees him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. The eye of faith has respect to the
holy one of Israel, Isa. 17. 7. And it does observe the ways of the Lord,
according to that saying in Prove. 23. 26. My Son, give me thine heart, and
let thine eyes observe my ways. Who would not be glad to cast up such an eye
to the Lord, as he may be delighted withal, as with an eye that is simple,
chaste, and beautiful. The next clause follows.

Within thy Locks.
Some read it, from within, or, through thy Locks, (...) Inde niphil, quod
significat, ligatus, conjunctus: Inde. (...) Per metaphoram atque id in pihel
tantum, de pilis eapitis and barbae.
which are so called in the Hebrew of binding, because women's locks are seemly
and modestly bound up and covered. The covering of women was a sign of their
subjection to their Husbands, 1 Cor. 11. It is also a sign of modesty and
shamefastness. Some would have the words signify, that the locks of Hair
hang down, so as the eyes do appear from within them. And others are of the
mind that he says, Beside thy locks: or, as it were thy locks removed. However
we take it, this is most certain, that the Spouse is here commended from the
manner of the attire which chaste. Virgins did wear about their Hair for
modesty and comeliness. Now in that the eye of faith is said to look from
within, or through the locks of modesty and chastity.

Hence Observe,

That faith is a very modest grace. Hence it is that God does so often in
Scripture attribute to it so much of justification and sanctification, because
faith attributes so little to it self, and so much to Christ. Faith is (as I
may call it) a modest grace, and will attribute nothing to it self: and hence
it is that the Lord declares so much affection to this grace of faith. Hence it
is, the Apostle attributes our justification to faith, Lest (says he) any man
should boast. So much for the first particular, towit, the Eyes, the second
follows, towit, the Hair.

Thy hair is as a flockof Goats that appear from Mount Gilead.
Some of the Hebrews expound the eyes to signify the Prophets, which were
called Seers, and the hair to be meant of the Nazarites which were not to cut
their hair, Numb. 6. 5.

Some understand by the eyes, pastors and Teachers, and by the hair the
Congregation of Saints, and so take the hair for the multitude of Believers,
as by hair the people of Israel was signified, Ezekiel 5. 1, 2.

But I rather understand both the eyes and the hair to be Ornaments of the
whole Church, and of every particular member: Hair is an Ornament for the
covering of the head, and it proceeds from the moisture of the Brain, and
strength of nature: and hereby is signified the thoughts and counsels of the
heart, the wisdom and council of Christ is signified by his hair, in Chap.
5. 11. And the Prophet Daniel makes mention of thoughts on his bed, and of
visions of his head, Dan. 4. 5. and 7. 15. So the meaning according to this
must be, that all the thoughts and purposes of the heart, guided and directed
by the Lord are prosperous and glorious, like a flock of Goats that appear
from Mount Gilead.

That appear from Mount Gilead.
Arius Montanus renders it, they sheare, or cast their hair: the word Galash,
is found but twice in Scripture, Quae depilarum se. Arius Mont.
it seems to signify to discover, or, reveal. Some turn it, look down,
because the hair of these Goats depended and hung down, from whence the
comparison is taken.

Mount Gilead was in the Tribe of Gad, 1 Chronicles. 6. 80. of the portion on this
side Jordan, where Gad, Reuben, and half Manasses were seated: it is recorded
in Number. 32. 1. to be a place of good pasture, and fit to feed Cattle,
especially the flocks. The term Gilead was first given by Jacob, Genes. 31.
47. It is derived of Gal, an heap or hill, such as was there made of stones,
and of Gnedh a witness, because that heap of stones was a witness between
Laban and Jacob, concerning that Covenant of peace made between them.

If we understand by these words the Congregation of Saints, Then Observe,

That the assembling of Saints together is a glorious and beautiful thing in
the eyes of Christ. Here the Saints are compared to the Goats feeding in a good
pasture, whose hair hangs down and smooth, etc. The Lord loves the Gates of
Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob, as says the Psalmist.

Secondly, if we understand it of the thoughts and purposes of the heart,
Observe,

That those thoughts and purposes are beautiful, that are ordered by the Lord.
When we receive our visions of the head from the Lord (which is here set forth
by the hair) how glorious will those visions be? when a man's heart and
cogitations are ordered by the Lord, there must needs be holy purposes, and
glorious resolutions. David says, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and
after bring me to glory, Psalm. 73. 24. where the Lord shall direct and guide
the mind, there all the thoughts and counsels of that soul must needs shine
forth, and glister, like the hair of Goats, that are fat and smooth, by
feeding in a good pasture, such a one as Mount Gilead was. It follows,

VERSE. 2.
Thy Teeth are like a ^lock of Sheep, that are even shorn, which come up from
the washing: whereof every one bear Twins, and none is barren among them.
CHrist goes on in the commendation of his Spouse, and that by propounding some
other particulars. In this Verse is introduced her Teeth, compared to a flock,
towit, of Sheep, or Ewes, which is here to be understood, because it is not
expressed in the Hebrew.

This flock unto which the Teeth of the Spouse are likened, is set forth in
four particulars.

1. They are in good order like sheep even shorn, etc. 2. They are cleansed,
which come up from the washing. 3. They are twinned, whereof every one bears
Twins. 4. They be not barren, none is barren among them.
Thy Teeth are like a flock of Sheep, etc.
The first commendations of the teeth is, that they are like a flock of Sheep
that are even shorn, that is, that are made even, or equal, of the same size,
that stand in good (...) Incidit praecidit, succidit, decurtavit.
order. The Hebrew word Ketsoboth, turned even, shorn, or, good order, of
Ketsab, to cut, to size or make equal (as of one size the Cherubs were made in
1 Kings 6. 25.) it must signify such an even-nesse, or good order, as
follows in things a like sized and carved. And here (as a Rabbin observes)
it signifies such a flock of animalls, as are so orderly equal, as if one
were cut or sized by another. This is the first praise of these mystical teeth
of the Church, that they are cut of equal height, or of equal bigness, not
one longer then another, which would be unseemly, and an hindrance to the well
eating and chewing of her spiritual food. The second commendation follows.

Which come up from the washing.
Sheep that are newly washed are white and clean, being cleansed by water from
filth and dust. As it is a commendation to the teeth to be orderly proportioned
and seated, so to be clear and white as Lambs going up from the washing. It
was a part of Judah's blessing, that his Teeth should be white with milk, Genesis
49. 12. This term of washing, whereby the Teeth are set out to be clear,
white, and beauteous, seems to be taken from the sacramental washings of the
Jews, and may signify the purity of that spiritual food, wherewith the
Church is fed and nourished: or else the cleanness of the soul that receives
such spiritual food. The third commendation of the teeth follows.

Whereof every one bear twins.
As fruifull Ewes sometimes bring forth twins of equal bigness, so the teeth
are set in equal ranks one answerable to another. Some of the Rabbis read
Mathimoth passively, to avoid tautoligie in the next (...) Gemmus fuit,
congeminatus est.
clause, thus, Every one whereof is twinned, or paired, that is, like as sheep
going from the washing by couples, whereby is plainly set forth the equal
correspondence of upper and lower teeth, each one orderly answering the other,
as cut and sized by couples. This may denote the unity and fellowship of
believers, that feed on the spiritual food of Jesus Christ. The Saints are fed
and nourished together by the heavenly Manna, even as Sheep go up in couples
from the washing. The fourth and last commendation of these teeth follows.

And none is barren among them.
None is barren, or, as the word Shacculah, imports, none amongst them
aborts, that is, brings forth before the time, or none is bereaved or robbed of
the young, by miscarrying, or the like. That which is barren is that which
bears not, as appears in Isaiah 64. 1. Sing O barren thou that bear not,
etc. but here the word signifies either miscarrying in the birth, or loss of
that which is brought forth, by robbery, death or the like: so this denotes
the steadfastness of every tooth in his place, after it is brought forth: as if
it were said, there is no tooth wanting in their order and place but even and
steadfast, as sheep yiedling twins, and never miscarrying: so has the Church
her teeth.

Some understand these teeth, the pastors and teachers of the Church, because
they were such as did Cut and divide the word of truth aright unto the people,
as the Apostle says: but I rather understand it of the Churches judging,
discerning, and applying the word of God, to the comfort and nourishing of her
own soul, feeding by faith upon the promises of God. The spiritual food of
the soul is Christ, and therefore is called, The bread of life, that came
down from heaven, Joh. 6. And the word is called the food of our souls, the
Apostle wills us, As newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the word,
1 Pet. 2. 2. And Paul tells the Corinths, That they were carnal, even babes
in Christ, and that he gave them milk to drink, and not strong meat, 1 Cor.
3. Now by the teeth of the Church is meant that esteem, discerning and
applying of the word of God, that she has for her own comfort and nourishment.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints do comfortably feed on Christ and his word, as on the
heavenly food of their souls.

It is said in Psalm. 22. 26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, and in
Psalm. 132. 15. the meek and needy shall have enough. And Luke 1. 53. God
fills the hungry with good things. that is, they shall be satisfied and
filled with the good things of the Gospel. And thus wisdom inviteth the
simple, To eat of her bread, and drink of her wine, Prove. 9. 5. Thus Jesus
tells the Jews, that he was the bread of life, Joh. 6. now it is upon Christ,
and on the sweet promises, that the soul is nourished; and it is the believer
only can feed upon this spiritual food, judging and discerning it aright. So
much for the commendation of the Churches teeth. It follows.

VERSE. 3.
Thy teeth are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely, thy Temples
are like a piece of pomegranate within thy locks.
UNto the three former, now other two particulars of praise do follow in this
third verse, viz. the lips, and the Temples. Touching the first he says.

Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely.
The instruments of speech, and the chiefest grace of the countenance are the
lips, and therefore the speech is commended by the instruments thereof, which
are the lips.

Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, etc.
Here are two things commended in the lips.

First, They are small, in as much as they are resembled by a thread or line.

Secondly, They be red of color, and therefore he mentions Scarlet: a red
color of a double die.

Now if a Virgin be never so beautiful, if her speech be rude and unpleasant,
it disgraceth all, therefore he adds.

Thy speech is comely.
Comely, gracious, and to be desired. The Hebrew Nava, signifies comely,
beatifull, amiable, and to be desired. (...) Cupivit, concupivit, affectavit,
in Niph. (...) Desiderabilis, and per metalepsin, pulcher, decorus, conveniens
fuit.
The Greek translateth it goodly, fair, beautiful. This comeliness of the
Spouse is in her sight, countenance and speech.

Now by the lips of the Church are commended her prayers and praises, her
doctrines and thanksgivings, which are all uttered with her lips. The Spouse
utters these not with swelling words of vanity, or taught by humane
wisdom, but by the Spirit of the Lord, which pours grace and utterance into
the soul. Now in that the Church is commended for her speech, and that from
the beauty of her lips.

Hence Observe.

That the spiritual prayers and praises of the Church are gracious and comely.

Hence it is, that the very lips that are but the instruments of her speech,
are commended for their beauty. The speech of man declares what is in the
heart, for Christ says, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
And a good man out of the good treasnre of his heart brings forth good
things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil things. By nature, there is nothing in man's heart, but that which is
corrupt and abominable, and so in all men, as the the Apostle says, The
poison of Aspes is under their lips, Romans 3. But by the operation of the holy
Spirit, the hearts of the Saints are filled with faith and love, and then the
speech is gracious. Such speech as proceeds from a heart spiritualized,
wins love and likeing. It was said of Christ, that he was fairer then the
Children of Adam, Grace was powered out of his lips, Psalm. 45. And the Apostle
prays, that a door of utterance may be opened unto him. Let a man be never
so learned, if the door of utterance be shut up, his speech shall profit
little. It was falsely objected against Paul, as a reproach unto him, that he
was rude in speaking, 2 Cor. 11. 6. The truth is, he willingly avoided that
painted kind of eloquence, which carnal men, and such as have itching ears,
do commonly delight in, but he wanted no kind of utterance which was fit for
the preaching of the Gospel, to wit, the plain evidence and demonstration of
the Spirit.

So much for the praise of the Churches speech, set forth by the beauty of her
lips. The next particular follows.

Thy Temples are like a piece of pomgranate within thy locks.
He describes another part of the countenance or face, viz. the temples of the
head, speaking also of them according to the custom then used, women suffering
their hair to hang about their temples, because it is said, within thy locks.

By Temples are meant, each of the temples of the head, and hereby may be meant
the cheeks also, which are joined to the temples: Now by the temples or
cheeks, is commended the beauty and modesty of the Church.

The Pomgranate was of use in the old Tabernacle and Temple: Aarons Coat was
hanged with Pomegranates and bells: Bells for the sound of doctrine and prayer,
and pomegranate for restraining and healing the distempers, and diseases of the
people. The Pomgranate when it is broken in pieces has many grains and
kernels in it, and also much juice, whereby it is medicinable. These are
commended for repressing the heat of the choler, and the malignity of fevers,
and also for comforting and strengthening the stomach and bowels, keeping from
fainting and the like. Now some do apply this to the Pastors of the Church, and
the similitude of the Pomgranate, to denote the fruit and benefit that comes
by such. But I rather take it to be meant of the spiritual beauty of the
Church; for, the Pomgranate being broken or cut, is of a glorious or ruddie
color, like unto Roses: So that the temples or cheeks of the Spouse is
commended for beauty, that together with fair and white, there is a mixture
of red.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse of Christ is very beautiful and glorious.

The chiefest grace of the countenance lying in the Temples, they are set forth
by a comparison taken from the Pomegranate, and also her temples shine forth at
her locks, beyond her hair, that so the beauty of the Spouse is so natural
unto her, that it needs not vain and wanton adorning: I do not mean that
her beauty is a natural beauty, yet though it be supernatural it is made
connaturall unto her: so that the Spouse need not seek after worldly glory to
beautify her spiritual beauty withal, for her glory far surpasses all
the glory of the world; the glory of the world is but an outside, painted
excellency, there is no substantial glory in it; but the glory and
excellency of the Spouse, is a real and divine excellency and beauty. The
Spouse is beautiful in respect of her spiritual graces received from Christ.
A deformed person, of a mean complexion and constitution, yet notwithstanding
when he shall show himself to be of a lovely, gracious, and sweet disposition,
this breeds love and likeing toward such a one, though we see nothing in the
outward man to be lovely: so though the Saints are clothed with no outward
beauty, yet in respect of that spiritual wisdom, goodness, and love that
is in them, they are very excellent and desirable.

So much for the commendation of the first particular.

The sixth follows.

VERSE. 4.
Thy neck is like to the Tower of David, builded for an armourie, whereon there
hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.
THe eyes, the hair, the teeth, the lips, and temples have been spoken of. Now
follows a sixth particular to be considered in this verse, and that is the
Churches neck, and this is done by a comparison, to alcertaine Tower of King
David's, ordained for a martial purpose.

The neck of the Spouse is set forth by an excellent comparison, to wit, from
David's Tower, Thy neck is like the Tower of David, etc.

The excellency of this Tower is set forth,

First, For its defense, builded for defense, or for armorie.

Secondly, In that it was a treasure, or house of store for ammunition, in that
it is said, Whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

Thy neck is like the Tower of David, etc.
It is the neck that joyneth the head and the body together: so faith joyneth
Christ and his Members into one, whereby the Members become strong and valiant,
and therefore fitly compared to the Tower of David, which he built at the end
of his own house upon Mount Zion for a defense, of which we read somewhat,
in Neh. 3. 19. 25. And we read of David's taking of the strong hold of Zion,
in 2 Samuel 5. 7. and he built a Fort upon it verse 9.

By the neck some understand the Pastors of the (...) Collum, sic dictum quod
oneribus arctatur and premitur. (...) Magnus fuit, vel ^factus est. Inde (...)
Turris, a magnitudine seu celsitudine.
Church, as before. But rather we may understand it of the strength of the
Church, being joined to Christ by faith, as the body is joined to the head by
the neck, for the neck it is named in Hebrew, Tsauvaar of strength and
firmness: and the Tower is here named Migdall, which signifies a building
great and high, as appears Isa. 2. 15. The same word is used for a Pulpit, or
Tower of wood, whereon the Scribe stood, Neh. 8. 4. This denotes the
magnanimity, and courage of the Spouse, whilst she being by faith united unto
Christ her head, she is now able to encounter with all her spiritual
adversaries, by the strength she receives from her beloved.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse being joined by faith unto her head Christ, becomes
magnanimous and valiant, to encounter with all her spiritual enemies.

The neck of the Spouse is like the Tower of David for strength and firmness;
it is also like the neck of the horse clothed with Thunder, as Job speaks of,
Job. 39. 19. The Apostle tells, that the weapons of (the Churches) warfare, are
not carnal, but mighty through God, for the pulling down of strong holds, etc.
that is, the means, by which she fights against sin, are not carnal, such
as natural men have recourse unto, and gain authority withal, and do great
things, as namely, riches, friends, honor, eloquence, or the like; but on the
contrary; poverty, weakness, infamy, rudeness, and plainness of speech;
and foolishness in the worlds account: These weapons are made mighty through
Gods power, who by infamy confounds honor; and by weakness confounds
power, and confounds wisdom, by that the world accounts folly. In the
original it is (...), the great warrier, the Lord of Hosts, that manageth this
war for the Church. The Apostle in another place tells us, that we are more
then Conquerours, through him that loves us; that is, through Christ, the
Captain of the Lords host: the neck of the Spouse being thus described: it
follows the end and use of this Tower, and that is double.

First, For defense.

Secondly, For hanging therein shields and targets.

Builded for an armory, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of
mighty men.
Builded for an armorie, or defense. The Hebrew word Talpijoth, is turned by
some for defense, of some others for an Armory: of some others for teaching or
instructions, namely of passengers. The difference arises from the Hebrew
word, it being of rare use, and I think not to be found in any other place of
Scripture. But it seems to be derived of Thalah, to hang, and pijoth, two
edged Swords. So we may conclude it to be a place where they did hang swords,
and other weapons of war, even all instruments to offend the enemy, and
defend themselves. It follows.

Whereon there hang a thousand Fucklers.
Whereon they hang, or are hanged, a thousand Bucklers: (...) Clypeus protectio.
a certain number is put for an uncertain, as we find often in Scripture.

The Hebrew word Hammagen, signifies protection, or defense. Thus by the Tower
of David is the excellency of the Church set forth, it being marvailously well
armed with armor and munition; yea, with armor that is pollished and prepared
for most necessary uses: the hanging up of these Bucklers and Shields, was a
sign of victory and glory, as appears, Ezekiel. 27. 11. These instruments of war
are farther commended in that it is added,

All shields of mighty men.
The praise of these shields is, that they are meet for mighty and noble men,
they are so good and excellent; they are no base things, nor such as belong
(...) Dominatus est potestatem habuit. (...) Dominator, potesta tem habeus.
to mean men, but unto Nobles, and Captains of Armies, and the like. The
Hebrew word Shiltei, Translated Shields, has the signification of power, or
dominion, as being used of great and mighty men. It also signifies a Ruler,
such a one as has power in his own hand.

Of mighty men) or of strong, valiant men. The Hebrew word Grbbor, signifies a
Champion, a mighty man, or, man of valor, and strength, and of superiority,
these mighty men have reference to David's worthies who stood faithfully with
him, and did many heroical actions, as appears, 1 Chronicles. 11. 10. Now in that
David's tower was thus furnished with all convenient weapons of war, both to
offend the enemy, and also for defense of those with David, this did prefigure
the mighty men of God, which by the shield of faith shall be able to do great
things: for which purpose they have given them shields and bucklers to defend
themselves. In the former part of the Verse, the strength and victory of the
Spouse was set forth by her Neck, being compared to David's Tower, now here are
her weapons described by which she shall overcome.

Hence Observe,

That the Spouse is furnished with all spiritual weapons to withstand her
enemies, and defend her self from wrong. The Spouse has such spiritual
weapons, as she is able to defend her self, and discomfit all her enemies, as
appears, Ephesians. 6. 11. 17. where the Apostle exhorts to put on the whole
armor of God, that is, to be armed with all spiritual graces, and gives a
reason of his exhortation, That ye may be able to stand against the wi les of
the Devil, etc. that is, that you may keep your station, not being put to
flight, but to overcome and get victories over enemies, namely, to overcome the
Devil in all his assaults, and to wrestle against principalities, rulers of
darkness, and spiritual wickednesses, etc. And that they might be ready for
this great encounter, they were to have their loins girt about with truth, with
Christ who is the way and truth, John 14. 6. Having on the Breast Plate of
righteousness, to keep the heart and Conscience whole. And their feet shod
with the preparation of the Gospel, being ready prepared to profess the truth
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, to take hold of the shield of faith, by
confidence in the power and goodness of God in Christ, to take the helmet of
salvation, towit, the hope of the mercy and redemption purchased by Christ: and
lastly, the sword of the spirit, which will cut off all the temptations of
Satan, and lusts of the flesh. And thus the faithful soul is furnished with
the complete armor of God, whereby it is made victorious. So much for the
commendations of the Churches Neck, being compared to the Tower of David, etc.
it being the sixth particular. The seveanth and last particular here commended
in the Spouse is as follows.

VERSE. 5.
Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, which feed among the
Lilies.
HEre the Breasts of the Church are introduced.

1. As beautiful and comely, in that they are likened to young Roes that are
twins, to young Roes for pleasantness and smallness, and to Twins for
equalizing, for in these things lies the beauty of the breast. The beauty of
the Church is elsewhere set forth by her breasts, when it is said, Thou art come
to excellent Ornaments, thy Breasts are fashioned, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 7.

2. The Breasts of the Spouse are set forth to be very useful, in that it is
said, which feed among lilies. Lilies prosper best in low and fruitful places,
so they that feed among lilies are in good pasture, and therefore are full of
milk: so then the Breasts of the Church being full of milk and wholesome
nourishment, her members may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 66. 11.

Hence Observe,

That the Spouse of Christ does feed her members with sweet and wholesome food.
Hence it is said in Cant. 5. 13 that the lips of Christ, are like lilies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh. Such are all the doctrines of Christ, dispensed
by the Spouse unto her members: she gives them to such of the sincere milk of
the word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. The Spouse will not feed her Children with humane
traditions, and inventions of men, but with pure, divine truths, such as she
has received from Christ her head. In the Tabernacle was always the Candle
burning, the Table of perfume senting, and the Shewbread standing before the
Priest, to intimate, that in the Church, which is Gods house, should always be
the light of Christ and his truth, and the bread of life dispensed unto the
Saints. So much of the particulars, whereby Christ has made good his former
praise, delivered in that general, Behold thou art fair.

It follows.

VERSE. 6.
Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
mountains of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
CHrist having in the former five verses, set out the praise of the Spouse.

First, In that general speech, Thou art fair, And

Secondly, In particular proofs drawn from the parts and effects of her
nature: he now comes to give an answer to a former request, which she had
made before in chap. 2. 17. There she desired him to draw near unto her, and
let her enjoy communion with him, though it were a time of darkness and
shadows ^here he answers, Until the day break, etc. I will go into the
mountains of myrrh, etc.

In which answer Observe.

First, The time specified, Until the day break, etc.

Secondly, The place of Christ's appearing, I will get me to the mountains of
myrrh, etc.

Until the day break, and shadows flee away.
By the dawning of the day, is meant the breaking forth of light and glory,
when Christ shall gloriously discover himself to be the Son of
righteousness in his brightness.

By the shadows, as it respects the Jewish Church, are meant all the shadows of
Mosaicall ceremonies and types: but as it respects the Church in general, it
is meant of all ignorances, infirmities, and troubles whatsoever. For the words
see them expounded at large before in Chap. 2. 17. there being only this
difference, between this and that place, that there the Church desires a
sweet communion with Christ during the time of those shadows and darkness she
was under: and here Christ promises her his presence, so long as she should
remain in that condition. I shall not stand now to open, what these shadows
are, having spoken of them already, in chap. 2. 17. But to proceed to the
promise of Christ, which is as follows.

I will get me to the mountains of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
What may be that mountain, and this hill? according to the letter, it must be
such a mountain as has his name of myrr, and such an hill as has his
denomination from incense, either because there it was gathered, or else
offered unto God; what mountain in Israel brought forth myrrh, is hardly
known, except it were Moriah, which at first might be so called of the Hebrew
word Mor, in english myr, in Greek Myrrh. What hill is that that brought
forth incense or frankincense, it is evident from many places, and even from
this text, where the word translated incense, is in the original Lebonah,
which may be termed Lebanon: so Moriah and Lebanon, may be the places here
meant, according to the letter.

But according to the mystery, Moriah may be both the one and and the other,
because the Temple was builded on Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. and there myrrh and
incens ewere daily offered up to the Lord. It was on this mountain, that
Abraham offered up his Son Isaac for a sacrifice, for it was said, In the
mountain of the Lord, it shall be seen, Genesis 22. 2. 14.

Now if we take the words for the litterall Temple of Solomon, with all the
mystical adjuncts of divine service, namely, from the odours daily burned
there, then we may understand Messiahs speech better in more words thus: O my
beloved Spouse, thou longest to see my appearance in the flesh: satisfy thy
self for a season, for in the fullness of time thou shall see me, but till a
certain time determined of my Father, that must not be. In the mean time I
will walk under types and shadows, under Mosaicall ceremonies, and spiritually
make my residence at Jerusalem, where sweet odours are continually burned, and
offered up unto me.

Again, If we take it for the spiritual Temple, towit, the Saints under the
New Testament, who are the house of God and Temple of his Spirit: then Christ's
speech may be thus resolved: Sweet Spouse, thou art willing to loose my bodily
presence, for it is appointed of my Father, that I go unto him, and ye shall
see me no more, but the comforter shall come, and teach you all things, bring
all things to your remembrance, and lead you into all truth: and though I am
absent in respect of my humane nature, yet I will always be present in my
divine nature.

Thus, take the speech of Messiah to be delivered unto the ancient Church
before Christ, longing after his incarnation; or take it to be his Speech to
the Church under the Gospel since the assumption of our flesh, they yield us
this observation.

That Christ does spiritually appear unto his people, under every dispensation
of his unto them.

Christ was seen spiritually, by his people of old under the lowest
dispensation, under legal types and shadows, under oblations and sacrifices of
burnt offerings. The Lord appeared to the Israelites in the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness, which was made by the direction of God given to Moses. This was a
type.

First of Christ, who is said to pitch his Tabernacle among us, Joh. 1. 14.

And Secondly, The Church is called the Tabernacle of God, Revel. 21. 3. The
Lord went out of his Tabernacle into the Temple, which was built according to
the direction of God given to Solomon. This was a type of Christ's body, as
appears by his own words, destroy this Temple, etc. and also the Church is
called The Temple of the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 21. After this the Lord appeared in
the ministry of John Baptist, who was Christ's fore runner to prepare the way,
he came baptising with water, which baptism had a near resemblance to the
legal washings under his Law. But after all this God appears in his Son, in
whom all fullness was, as appears, Col. 2. 9. Christ was full of the divine
annointings of the Father. Now when Christ was to go out of the world, he
makes a supply of his corporal absence, by return of his Spirit, and
therefore he says, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. When
the world sees me not, yet ye see me. This notes the presence of Christ by
his Spirit with his Church: but there is more then a presence, there is an
inhabitation. At that time you shall know, that I am in the Father, and you in
me, and I in you, Joh. 14. 18. 20. This is the most glorious manifestation of
Christ, namely, in the spiritual discoveries of himself unto his Saints. I
intend not to enlarge on these things but proceed to the next words.

VERSE. 7.
Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
IN these words we have another commendation of the Churches beauty: so that
though Christ did not name all particular parts of his Spouse, to give them
their several commendation, as he did in diverse, yet he ascribes a full
perfection of beauty unto them all, when he says, Thouart all fair, etc.

The beauty of the Church is described.

First, By the adjunct, that it is, whole and perfect, Thou art all fair my
love.

Secondly, By the contrary: There is no spot in thee.

Thou art all fair, etc.
The Spouse was called fair, before in chap. 1. 15. and in chap. 4. 1. That
which is added here is that Christ says, she is all fair, that is, her
beauty is perfect, and complete. And it also signifies she is fair in every
part. Christ commended her in several Members, and therefore instead of naming
the rest, he sums up all in one word saying, Thou art all fair, etc. And he
adds.

There is no spot in thee.
The word translated spot, is mum, from whence the Greek (...), which
signifies any blemish in the body, as blind, lame, or deformed in any limb
or part, Levit. 21. 17. 18. And it is applied to the blemishes of the soul,
namely, those vices and sins, that Christ is said to purge his people from,
as in Revel. 1. 15. He has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own
blood. Christ himself is called the Lamb, 1 Pet. 1. 19. that is, without spot.
The word properly signifies one without fault or blemish, Th is commendation
Christ gives the Church she is not culpable or blame worthy such is that
perfect beauty, that Christ does cloth his Spouse withal, that he sees no
deformity at all in her.

Hence Observe.

That Christ does cloth his Spouse with perfect beauty.

The Church is made beautiful with the cloathings of Gods own righteousness,
and that must needs be complete beauty: Hence it is, that those that stand
with the Lamb on Mount Zion, are said to be without blemish before the Throne
of God, Revel. 14. 1. 5. And thus the Apostle says, that Christ gave himself
for his Church, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by washing of water
through the word: that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy without
blame' Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. By these spots here mentioned, we may understand them
of any sinful work, or greater sort of sins, and by wrinkle, lesser sins,
and those infirmity, which are some blemish to our spiritual beauty: So that
Christ cleanses his people from all sin, according as it is said, in 1 John
1. 7. Thus Christ is said to have reconciled his people unto God, through
faith, in the body of his flesh, that he might present them holy, and without
blemish, and unreprovable in his sight, Col. 1 21, 22. But here it will be
said, how agrees this with her own speech in the first Chapter, where she
says, I am black, etc. and that she was fun burnt? And how does it agree with
all those places of Scripture, which testify so plainly, that all the Saints
while they live here, be full of spots and deformities? The answer is, That the
Spouse is not to be considered, as she is in her self, after the flesh, and
corrupted nature: but as she stands perfectly justified in her head Christ: So
that though the Spouse be not freed from personal imperfection, arising from
the flesh; yet as she stands clothed with the righteousness of God, made out
to her through Christ; so she is perfectly righteous and holy, and without spot
or wrinkle in Christ's sight.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: look from the top
of Amana, from the top of Shever, and Hermon, from the Lions dens, from the
mountains of the Leopards.

Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my
heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse! how much better is thy love then
wine! and the smell of thine ointments then all spices!

Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honeycomb, honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

A garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse: a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.

Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, Camphire,
with Spikenard.

Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all the Trees of
frankincense, myrrh, and aloes, with all the chief Spices.


ALL these verses that I have read unto you, are the words of Christ, wherein
he goes on in commending and comforting his beloved Spouse. Christ having in
the former verses of the Chapter commended his Spouse in her several Members,
concluding with a general praise of her perfect beauty, now he calls her to
a higher pitch of glory and dignity, in this eighth verse. And in these
following verses, he declares how deeply he stands affected toward his Church.

VERSE. 8.
Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, etc.
In this Verse Observe.

First, the sweet term of relation, given by Christ unto his Church, calling
her by the name of Spouse, My Spouse, etc.

Secondly, his gracious invitation, or calling of her unto himself.

First, He calls her from all quarters of the World, in these words, Come with
me from Lebanon, from Amana, Shenir, and Hermon.

Secondly, He calls her from danger, from the company of wicked men, by adding,
and from the Dens of Lions, and the hills of Leopards.

My Spouse, etc.
This is the first time that Christ calls his Church by the name of Spouse,
which yet notwithstanding sundry times after he gives her the same title, as
verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. of this Chapter, also Chap. 5. 1. The Spouse or Bride, is
named in Hebrew Callah, of Callal, to perfect, from the perfection of her
attire, Ornaments, and beauty, as appears, Jer. 2. 32. Christ having before
declared his Church to be all fair, and without spot, having washed her, and
cleansed her, and presented her glorious unto himself: now he calls her by the
name of Spouse.

Hence Observe,

That the Church in respect of her spiritual beauty, is made the Spouse of
Christ. She is called his glorious Spouse, Ephesians. 5. 26. And the Bride, the
Lambs wife, who is prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, Rev. 21. 2. 9.

Now follows his invitation.

Come with me from Lebanon, etc.
These words import not only a bare invitation, but also a promise; we may
read, Thou shall come with me, etc. (...)
with me, towit, myself. Christ does assure his Spouse of his continual
presence, and also that he will wholly gather it, that none of his that come
unto him, shall either be taken out of his hand, or perish, etc. as it is in
John 17. 12.

From Lebanon. He means thereby a most pleasant and most fruitful place,
where were many sweet tall, and excellent Cedar Trees, as appears, Song 3. 9.
It was a Mountain bordering on the North part of the Land of Canaan, possessed
of old by the Hivites, which are said to dwell thereon, Judge. 3. 3. This
Mountain in comparison to other places was very fruitful, was called a
Forest or Wilderness, Isa. 29. 17. But in respect of the goodly Cedars that
grew there, it is used to signify glorious things, as appears, Chap. 3. 9. and
Deuteronomy. 3. 25. So the meaning is here, that none of these things should hinder
the Spouse from coming to Christ, for to enjoy communion with him.

Come with me, or, Thou shall come with me from Lebanon. These words are
doubled, both for the vehemence of him that speaks, as also for the more
certainty of the thing spoken: so that no let or impediment whatsoever should
hinder the Spouse from the enjoyment of Christ's continual presence and sweet
communion. He adds,

Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir, and Hermon, etc.
Look, or thou shall look: from the top, or, from the (...)
head of Amana. Some think this to be a Mountain in that patt of Cilicia,
that bordered upon the Land of Israel. Some of the Rabbis hold it to be a
Mountain in the borders of Jury, lying on the North side thereof. But it is
most likely to be meant the Mountain of Syria, the Valley and River in it was
likewise called Amunah, and Abanah, in 2 Kings 5. 12. It follows.

From the top of Shenir and Hermon.
Both these seems to be meant of one Mountain. This Hermon was a goodly
Mountain, possessed of Og King of Bashan, from whom it was taken by the
Israelites: and the Amorites called it Shenir, the Sidonians, Shirion, as
appears, Deuteronomy. 3. 9. Wherefore it may be thought strange that Solomon in this
place makes them diverse. For the clearing whereof this would be observed,
that at the first one and the self-same thing might be called by many names, as
in respect of diverse people dwelling nigh unto the same, and the several
proprieties of their tongues which they used: and yet notwithstanding in
process of time, and multitudes of people increasing, some of those names
applied to the whole, might be attributed to some part of it. By this the
Spirit would have us understand, that Christ should gather his people from all
the Quarters of the world, and they should behold his glory. Now he tells,
that they should not only be gathered, but should be safely brought home to
Christ through all dangers, as appears in the next words.

And from the Lions Dens, from the Mountains of the Leopards.
These places seem, as most commonly Mountains and such solitary places, to
abound with wild and hurtful beasts, by which is denoted, that Christ would
set his Spouse free from dangers. The effect of the words may import thus much,
that Christ promises to bring his Spouse out of Lebanon, and to effect thus
much for her, that from the top of most high Mountains she should behold her
proud enemies subjected under her feet. And here we must consider that in all
these allusions to the Land of promise, it is taken from those places by which
the Israelites first entered into the same, and from whence they might behold
that goodly Country. Shenir and Hermon were high Mountains on the farther side
of Jordan, from whence they might behold the Land of promise. Lebanon, as also
Amanah, as it should seem, were on this side Jordan, but yet in the borders of
the Land of Canaan toward the North. Now we must understand that there is a
mystical Interpretation of these words, then forasmuch as in all this Song
Lebanon is taken for a place of pleasure and fruitfulness: and on the other
side the Amorites and other enemies dwelt in Hermon, and Shenir; the holy
Spirit does hint out unto us under these shadows, that as from Lebanon and
other Mountains Situated on the borders of the Land of promise, they did
behold the whole Country, and at last came into the promised Land: So when they
come unto Christ they should have a glorious view of the divine and heavenly
mysteries of God in Christ; from the attainment whereof, neither the pleasures
of Lebanon, nor the Dens of Lions and wild Beasts, should hinder them, but in
the midst of dangers and fears, they should have free access thereunto. The
words being thus explained, let us from hence Observe.

First, That Christ does gather his people from all parts of the World to
behold his glory. This is here figured out unto us, that as the Lord did
promise to show his people the Land of Promise, so he would draw his Spouse
from all places of the world unto himself, and discover his glory unto her.
However the Spouse may be scattered among the Nations of the world, yet he will
take her unto himself; for he will gather his elect from the four winds, and
from the uttermost parts of the Earth. Thus the Lord promises to bring the
seed of his Spouse from the East, and gather it from the west: And he will say
to the North give up, and to the South keep not back: bring my Sons from
far, and my Daughters from the end of the Earth, Isa. 43. 5, 6. And it is
said in Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ does gather his Saints to himself in the midst of persecutions
and dangers. And therefore it is he says, From the Dens of Lions, and from the
Monntaines of Leopards. For the Spouse dwells here in the world among cruel
and savage beasts, which would utterly destroy her: but Christ preserves her
in the midst of fears and dangers, and says, she shall come with him from
among them that would devour her. And hence it is said, The Lord draws his
out of great tribulation, Rev. 7. 14. When the Spouse is in great danger as
David, when he said, My soul is among Lions, Psalm. 57. 4. then Christ delivers
her from the peril she is under. This is the dignity that Christ brings his
people unto, namely, to come to him, to behold his glory from all parts of the
world, and to be safe in their passage unto him. It follows,

VERSE. 9.
Thou have revished my heart my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart
with one of thine eyes, with one Chain of thy Neck.
IN this verse, as also in those that follow, is set down and declared how
deeply Christ stands affected toward his Spouse, and how much his heart is
taken with her.

Christ's singular love to his Church, which he declares with a marvailous
earnest affection, is set forth with grave and weighty exclamations.

1. By that simpathy of like mind and affection, which is between them, from
that strong impression which her beauty had made upon him, whereby she had (as
it were) wounded and pierced his heart, in these words, Thou have ravished my
heart, etc. which expression is doubled, to show the vehemence of his affection
toward her.

2. His affection is declared by showing how near she is unto him, for which
in nature he binds himself to love her.

First, by the bond of consanguinity, she is his Sister.

Secondly, by the bond of conjugall amity, she is his Spouse.

3. His affection is expressed by the commendable things which he saw in her,
which made him so fix and ground his affection, the comeliness of her person,
and the Ornament wherewith she was decked.

1. Her beauty is described, With one of thine eyes. 2. Her Ornaments set
forth, by adding, With one Chain of thy Neck.
Thou have ravished my heart, thou have ravished my heart.
Such repetitions as these imply in the Hebrew phrase a superlative excellency,
and hereby is set forth how exceedingly Christ's heart and affections were
overcome with the love of his Spouse. It is the manner of the Hebrews to
repeat the same things again, in prayers, to manifest the zeal of him that
prays, as where Christ says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Matthew. 26. And in Prophecies, to snew the certainty of performance of that
which is revealed. In simple narrations the same words are repeated to confirm
and assure men's hearts that the matter is true.

This phrase does admit of diverse readings. Some read it, Thou have snacht or
taken away my heart, as it were, by violence and force. Others read thus, Thou
have pierced or wounded my heart. The Chaldee (says Master Ainsworth)
Expounds it, Thy love is fixed in the Table of mine heart. The Hebrew is but
one word, and used only in this place, and signifies a most ravishing (...)
In pihil: Incordiastime, and rapuisti animum meum, vel. traxisti animummeum.
and delightful drawing of the heart by love. I cannot express it nearer the
Original word, then to say, Thou have unhearted me, that is in effect thus,
Thou have wounded, or, taken away my heart from me, thou have even ravished and
overcome me with thy love. Christ speaks here to his Spouse as a man overcome
with love, for it does exceedingly set forth the passion of love when the
Bridegroom shall tell his Bride that she has gotten away his heart. Hereby
appears the super-abounding love of Christ toward his Spouse, in that there
be not any words sufficient fully to express the same.

Hence Observe,

That Christ's heart and affections are exceedingly taken with his people. Hence
it is said that the Lord will rejoice over his people as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, Isa. 62. 5. Like unto this is that where the Lord
says in Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will
save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy
over thee with singing: That is, he will rest well-pleased, and much delighted
in his love, and he will rejoice over his Spouse with the highest pitch of joy;
yea, he will rejoice with singing, which is the highest expression of joy and
delight. So then, the heart of Christ being thus taken, is meant his exceeding
love whereby he rejoices over his people, according as it is said in Isa. 43.
4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee, etc.

Thus Christ has declared how near and dear his Spouse is unto him, by the
simpathy of like mind and affection, which is between him and his Church. Now
it follows, that he shows how nearly they are related one to the other, by
the band and consanguinity, and conjugall amity.

My Sister, my Spouse.
My Sister, so Christ calls his Church out of that respect and love he bears
unto her. We are told in Heb. 2. 11. That both he that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified, are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them brethren. This term needs no explanation, but let us observe hence.

That Christ stands nearly related to his people, as a Brother, etc. This
relation of brotherhood between Christ and his people, is twofold.

1. By the right of nature, as the Apostle says, Forasmuch as the Children
were partakers of flesh and blood, he also likewise took part with them, that
he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, which is the
Devil; for he in no sort took on him the nature of Angels, but he took the
seed of Abraham, wherefore it became him in all things to be made like his
Brethren, Heb. 2. 14. 16. So that Christ took our nature, and was clothed
with our flesh, to be made like unto us his brethren, and in the same flesh.

The second right is of adoption; for it is said, when the fullness of time
came, God sent his son, made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he
might redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption
of Sons, Gal. 4. 45. And again the Apostle says, As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are sons of God To. 8. 14. whence the Apostle reasons thus, If
we be Children, we are also heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8. 17. So that
the Saints lay claim to the riches and treasures of glory, by right of
adoption, and brotherhood with Christ.

Thus much for the band of consanguinitie. That of conjugall amity follows.

My Spouse.
Christ calls his Church, Spouse, named in Hebrew Callath, of the perfection
of her attire and ornaments; as was intimated in verse 7. of this Chap. The
Spouse is one, that is already married unto her husband: so that this title of
Spouse, shows how the Church is to Christ. The Spouse is most dear to her
husband (says Solomon) for she is the crown of his head, Prove. 12.

Hence Observe.

That the Church is the Spouse of Christ.
Hence it is that she is called the bride, the Lambs wife; who is prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband, Revel. 21. 2. 9. And the Lord says, I have
married thee to my self, in righteousness, judgment, mercy and compassion,
Hos. 2. 19. We are not to take the words in a carnal sense, but that God has
framed words to our capacity only, for what terms could be more effectual to
express his love, then the names of Sister and Spouse?

The last thing in this verse, wherewith Christ was so much taken in his
affections with his Spouse, is by the commendable things which he saw in her,
which made him so to fix and ground his affection.

First, The comeliness of her person.

Secondly, The ornaments wherewith she is decked.

With one of thine eyes, and the chain of thy neck.
With one of thine eyes, or one look from thine eyes. The eyes of the Spouse
were commended in verse 1. where they were likned to Doves eyes, for being
simple, chaste, pure: by this is meant the chaste eye of faith, whereby the
Saints look up to Christ.

Hence Observe.

That Christ is much taken with the least look of faith from his Saints.

For Christ's beholding of the faith of the Spouse, it makes such deep
impressions in him of her idea and form of beauty, that his affection is so
rooted in her heart, that it cannot be removed nor concealed. It is added.

And the chain of thy neck. The chain of the neck is an ornament added to
natural beauty: and does often signify Gods Laws and Ordinances, as
appears, Pro. 10. 9. and also signifies the graces of the Spirit, and fruits
of faith, as was opened at large in chap. 1. 10. So he means by the chain of
the neck, the ornaments of the Spirit, and of grace, which is the Law of Christ
in the inner man.

Hence Observe.

That it is Christ's own graces in the soul, that he is so much affected with
in his Saints.

God cannot delight in any thing, besides himself, and therefore it is, the
manifestation of himself in his Saints, that draws such high expressions of
love and delight in him toward them. Therefore he indueth his Church with
gifts of his own spirit, to make her seem beautiful, where he says, I have
clothed thee with broidered work, shod thee with badgers skins, girded thee
with fine linen, covered thee with silk, decked thee with ornaments, put
bracelets on thy hands, and a chain upon thy neck, Ezekiel. 6. 10. By these
outward ornaments are meant the inward graces of the Spirit, which proceed Si
ergo dona dei sint bona merita, non deus coronat merita tua tanquam tua, (...)
sed tanquam dona sua; August. de gratia et lib. arbit. cap. 7. Dona sua coronat
deus, non merita tua. cap. 6.
from God, and not from the Spouse: according as a Father says, if the good
things which be in us, are the gifts of God, God crowns those good things not
as ours, but as his own. And again he says, God crowns his own gifts, not
thy deservings. And therefore we have the Prophet saying. Thy name was spread
among the Heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect through my beauty, which
I had set upon thee, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 14.

Lastly, in that he says with one eye, and one chain. Observe, That where
Christ sees the least grace, he is much taken with it. It is, as if Christ had
said, if I see but one of thine eyes, to wit, one single, chaste, pure look of
faith; and if I see but one chain, to wit, one spiritual discovery of my
self, it is enough for ever to take up my heart and affections.

Now Christ proceeds to show the ground of his deep affection toward his
Spouse, and that by a discovery of the properties of her beauty and
goodness, all which is expressed with a vehement and passionate crying out,
and repetition of the former title; saying

VERSE. 10.
How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse! how much better is thy love then
wine! and the smell of thine ointments then all spices.
IN this verse, Christ shows how delightso me and pleasant the love of his
Spouse is unto him: he does express it by way of admiration, how fair is thy
love! etc.

The love of the Spouse is set forth,

First, By the fairness of it, How fair is thy love, etc.

Secondly, By the strength, sweetness, cheerefulnes, in that it is preferred
above wine: How much better is thy love then wine!

Secondly, the divine anointings of the Spouse is commmended, in that the
graces of the spirit in her, are set forth by fragrant and odoriferous
ointment: And the smell of thine ointments then all spices.

How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse!
Sister, and Spouse, are the same titles, as we had in verse 9. and carry the
same affection as there.

How fair, or how beautiful, how gracious are thy loves! Her love is fair,
because in her there is no blemish, as was before delivered. It is, as if
Christ should say, how glorious and excellent, yea, and full of delight are
these sound affections, that thou carriest toward me, by which also I am
moved, even to love thee again: and he speaks of them in the plural number,
not only thereby to express the multitude of them, but the excellency also.

Or, we may understand by loves, not only those gracious affections of the
Spouse, but also her holy actions, which proceed from love, as the fruits
thereof, as faith, hope, and the like: these are also goodly and fair in the
eyes of Christ.

Hence Observe,

That the gracious affection of love, with all the fruits flowing from them,
are gracious and lovely in Christ's sight. Hence it is, that Christ commends
her love, even to admiration, saying, How fair is thy love, etc. The Spouse
being washed and cleansed by Christ, and clothed with his beauty, whereby she
became fair in his sight, without spot or wrinkle, all her affections of love
and delight toward Christ, must needs be very acceptable.

It follows.

How much better is thy love then wine!
In the former clause, as the love of the Spouse was set forth, by its
fairness and beauty; so here for its fragrancy and sweetness, in that it is
preferred before wine.

How much better, or, how good are thy loves, better then wine; that is, they
are better and more delightful by much, then the most fragrant wine. It was
noted (...) Quam boni sunt. Arius Mont.
in Chapter 1. 2. that wine is put for all dainty things in a Banquet, where
the Church speaking of Christ's love, did manifest that his love was exceeding
pleasant, sweet and comfortable: here Christ returns the like expression
concerning the love of his Spouse toward him, rendering as it were like for
like, which is an usual manner among lovers, and particularly in their words
and speeches one of them unto another. Hereby then is set forth unto us, how
marveilous acceptable and well pleasing the love of the Spouse is unto Christ,
the heavenly bridegroom.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is exceedingly delighted and wel-pleased with the fruits and
graces of his own Spirit in his Saints.

Christ cannot but delight in his own image and grace: hence it is said, that
God delights in his Spouse, and rejoices over her, as a Bridegroom
rejoices over his Bride, Isa. 62. 4, 5. There is nothing more pleasant and
refreshing to the nature of man, then sweet and fragrant wine: no more is any
thing more delightful and acceptable to Christ, then the graces of his own
Spirit in the Saints. Now follows the high commendations of the Spouse, in
respect of her divine anointings by the Spirit.

And the smell of thine ointments then all spices!
By the smell of the Spouses ointments, is meant, the sweet and pleasant smell
of such graces, as she has received from Christ.

The pleasantness that is in ointments, we may see in Prove. 27. 9. And Psalm.
133. 2. Under these earthly things, understanding the Spiritual graces before
mentioned, is set forth the excellency of the divine anointings of the Spirit
in the Spouse, for it is usual in the Scriptures, by oil, ointment,
anointing, etc. to undestand the graces, and anointings of the Spirit in the
Saints. See Psalm. 89. 20. also 45. 7. and 1 John 2. 20. 27. we may remember,
that the Spouse did commend Christ's ointments, for the sweet savor of them in
Song. 1. 3. Here Christ returns the same conditions unto the Spouse in respect
of her anointings. And he adds.

Then all spices, or before all spices, viz. though they be never so costly and
dear, because there is no spice without some dust: as gold cannot be tried; so
spice cannot be brayed in the mortar without some loss. The anointing-oyle, of
which we read of, in Exodus 30. 23. was made of sweet smelling spices; and with
such, sometime women were purified, Esth. 2. 12. and the dead imbalmed, 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. They were meet presents for Kings, as appears, 2 Chronicles. 9. 1.
9. Now all earthly ointments were confected, and made sweet smelling and costly
spices; but here it is meant of divine and heavenly ointments of the Spirit.

Hence Observe.

That the divine anointings of the Spouse is full suavity and sweetness.

Christ does here prefer the annointings of the spirit in his Spouse, before
any earthly confection whatsoever, though made of never so sweet and costly
spices. What is more pleasing to the smell, then sweet ointments of an exquisite
composition? such and much more is the Spirit and its graces in the Saints unto
Christ.

The judgment that Christ has of the spiritual anointing of his Spouse, is,
that it far excels all delightful and sweet smelling odours in the world,
synecdochically signified by ointment of sweet spices, one pleasant spicies or
kind for all the rest. Christ proceeds in the commendations of his Spouse,
saying.

VERSE. 11.
Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honey-combe: honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
HEre are in this verse two things highly praised in the Spouse.

First, Her speech.

Secondly, Her sweet savor.

Her speech is compared.

First, To the sweet droppings that distill from the honey-combs, in these
words, Thy lips drop as the honey-combs.

Secondly, Her speech is not only most sweet, but wholesome and nourishing,
which is expressed in these words, Honey and milk are under thy tongue.

Lastly, The sweet savor of the Spouse is commended, in that it is added, And
the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

Thy lips drop as the honey-combe, etc.
By the lips of the Spouse, is meant her speech, both private and public,
whereby she utters most sweet and delightful words, to wit, of faith and
holiness: such words of preaching his doctrines, extolling his praises are as
pleasing to Christ's ears, as the honeycomb it self is pleasant to the taste.
And he puts the lips which are some of the instruments wherewith a natural
voice is framed, and words are uttered, for the speech it self, or things
spoken. By this similitude of the honey-combe, the word of God is praised, in
Psalm. 19. 10. where it is said, that the judgments of the Lord are sweeter
then the Honeycomb, or the droppings of the Honeycomb: that is, that which
comes forth without pressing, and is counted the sweetest and purest honey.
Now by this comparison is meant, that as the sweet drops of Honey that distill
from the Honey-combs, so be the words that come from her mouth.

Hence Observe,

That the speech of the Saints in their prayers and praises are sweet and
gracious. Christ tells us, That out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, and a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things, etc. The language of Canaan is a pure language, and lips that are
pure drop forth pure words. When the heart is clean, the mouth speaks pure
things. Where there are lying, slandrous words, taunts, and revilings, and much
vain babbling, these proceed from the evil treasure in man's heart. But they
whose lips drop as the Honey-combs, have their Speech always gracious,
powdered with salt, to know how to answer every man, Collos. 4. 6. Even such as
minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29. As grace was powered into the lips
of Christ, Psalm. 45. 2. So by the communication of his grace, the speech of his
people is made gracious. The Prophet complained, That he was a man of polluted
lips, then the Seraphin flew unto him with a hot coal in his hand, which he
had taken from the Altar with the Tongs, and touched his mouth, and said, lo
this has touched thy lips, thine inquity shall be taken away, and thy sin
purged. Isa. 6. 5, 6, 7. All our sufficiency is of God, as says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 3. 5. And therefore all holy speech proceeds from him, for none can say
Jesus is the Lord, but by the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. 1. But now further, the
speech of the spouse is not only most sweet, but wholesome and nourishing,
which is expressed in the following words.

Honey and milk are under thy Tongue.
Honey and milk are for nourishment; it is said of Christ in his Childhood,
Butter and Honey shall he eat, until he have knowledge to refuse evil and
do good, Isa. 7. 15. The Land of Canaan is called in sundry places of the
Scripture, a Land that flows with Milk and Honey meaning that it had
abundance of all things, profitable and pleasant for this life; understanding
by Milk things of necessary and profitable use, and by Honey things of
pleasure and delight, and so the holy Spirit here does mean, the sweet,
comfortable, and nourishing words of faith, love, and the like. Also we may
understand fit food for all sorts of Christians, both for strong ones and weak
ones. Milk most properly belongs to children, as appears, 1 Cor. 3. 2. and
Heb. 5. 12, 13. And Honey to them of more strength, as examples of the
Scripture, and reason it self teaches in Jonathan, Saul's Son, 1 Samuel 14.
27. And in John Baptist, Mat. 3. 4. Thus it pleases God in the Scripture to
compare the doctrine of the Gospel, which proceeds out of the mouth of the
Spouse to Milk, to Honey, to Wine, to Water, and many such like things. See
Isa. 55. 1. and Psalm. 19. 10.

By under the tongue, seems to be meant the secret and inward parts, as the
mind and heart. Thus David is said to exalt God under his tongue, Psalm. 66. 17.
declaring his uprightness and sincerity thereby. It is said in Prove. 5. 3. The
lips of a strange woman drop as an Honeycomb, and her mouth is more smooth
then Oil. Now by this she is said to entice men to folly, and as it follows
in the next verse, The end of her is bitter as worm wood, sharp as a two-edged
Sword her feet go down to death, etc. And the Apostle says, that some by
good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18.
And the Psalmist speaks thus, The words of his mouth were sweeter then
Butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer then Oil, yet were
they drawn Swords, Psalm. 55. 21. And Adders poison is under their lips, Psalm.
140. 3. Of the wicked it is said, Their throat is an open Sepulcher, they have
used their tongues to deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, their
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. By these speeches are meant the
deceitfullnesse of the wicked. So on the contrary, when it is said, Honey and
milk are under her lips, it is meant of the sincerity of her graces. So that
the words of faith and holiness, which proceed from sincerity and uprightness
of heart, are very comfortable and nourishing words.

Hence Observe,

That the words of the Spouse, which proceed from faith and sincerity, are not
only gracious, but nourishing words. The Apostle Peter desires the Saints to
drink of the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby, 1 Pet.
2. 2. That is, the word of the Spirit, given out by the Saints. The plenty of
grace in the times of the Gospel is promised under the simily of abundanee of
milk, and that every one should eat butter and honey, Isa. 7. 22. Gracious and
heavenly words proceeding from the Spirit of God in the Saints, such administer
grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29. So much for the sweet, wholesome; and
nourishing Speech of the Spouse: now follows the praise of her sweet savor.

And the smell of thy Garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
Lebanon was a place where grew most sweet Trees, and Herbs, concerning the
pleasantness whereof, we have spoken before. The Lord promises his people
that their smell should be as Lebanon, through the dew of his grace, Hos. 14.
5, 6, 7. As Lebanon was more sweet then all other woods, so is the grace of the
Spouse above all worldly graces. Now in that he says, Thy Garments smell, etc.
he seems to allude to a Speech borrowed from Isaac when he blessed Jacob, where
it is written, He came near and kissed him, then he smelled the savor of his
garments, and blessed him, and said, behold, the smell of my Son is as the
smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed, Genes. 27. 27. So here, he
commends the smell of the Garments of the Spouse, meaning, that the graces
and gifts wherewith he had adorned the Church, as particularly her faith,
doctrine, and conversation, and administrations were the same, as in respect of
pleasant delight, yea, more to him by much, then sweet smelling Garments were,
to join lovers together.

Hence Observe,

That the Spouse is perfumed with such graces, that all her Garments have a
smell of sweet odours. This is not meant of bodily clothing, for many of the
Saints have lived in poverty, clothed in simple apparel: but it is to be
understood of the spiritual clothing, where the filthy rags of the old man
are put off, and the new man put on, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created him, Col. 3. 9, 10. This is the clothing, of which
it is said, Thou have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their
Garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3.
4. He was cast forth from the marriage that wanted the wedding Garment, Mat.
22. for the Garments of the Bride are sweet, even as the savor of Lebanon,
where pleasant and odouriferous Trees, Herbs, and Spices grew in abundance. The
Garments of Zion are called beautiful, Isa. 52. 1. And the righteousness of
the Saints is said to be of White linen, clean and bright, Revel. 19. 8. for
they have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. God makes manifest the savor of his
knowledge (by them) in every place, for they are unto God a sweet savor in
Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15. But as Jacob was clothed with the Garments of Esau,
his elder Brother, which gave such a sent, by which he got the blessing; so the
Spouse is clothed, not with his own Garments of fleshly wisdom, or legal
righteousness, but with the glorious Garments of Christ, being clothed with
the anointed: so that in commending her Garments, he commends but his own
anointings in the Spouse, wherewith she is clothed. Thus have we seen very
great commendations of the Church, but yet here are further, for it follows.

VERSE. 12.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.
CHrist being about to commend the fruits which he caused the Church to bring
forth, does first set forth her aptness thereto in this verse, and in the two
following verses does also commend the fruits themselves by numbering up their
sorts.

The aptness of the Church to bring forth fruits, as are mentioned in the next
verses, is set forth by two similitudes, both which set forth her praise.

1. She is compared to a Garden enclosed. 2. She is likened to a Spring or
Fountain, shut up and sealed.
The first comparison sets forth the praise of the Spouse. 1. In her safe
protection in Christ. 2. Her faithfulness and chastity to him, for she is as
a Garden enclosed.

Secondly, she is highly extolled in that Christ is as a spring of living
waters unto her, and she alone partaketh of his heavenly treasures. In that it
is said, she is a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. So that though many in
the world are made partakers of many outward privileges, yet only the Saints
are made partakers of the sweet waters of life

A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, etc.
If we observe the foregoing words we may read, Thou art a Garden. This word
Garden notes the comeliness of the Church, and the pleasure that Christ took
therein. It has its name in Hebrew of Protection, and preservation, because
great care is taken of a (...) Hortus, a rad. (...) Operuit, protexit,
defendit, conservavit.
Garden. The Church is here so called, as in verse. 13. an Orchard, or, as it is
in the Hebrew a Paradise, as if it were the only Eden of delight. All the
world is a wilderness or wild field in comparison unto it.

Hence Note,

That the Spouse is Christ's Garden of delight. So Christ compares his Church
to a Vineyard. Now will I sing to my Beloved, a song of my Beloved touching his
Vineyard: My Beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill, he hedged it, and
gathered out the stones, planted it with the best plants, built a Tower in the
midst thereof, and also made a Wine Press therein, Isa. 5. 1, 2. The Church is
Gods Garden or Orchard, and that in these respects.

1. The Garden is severed from all the rest of the ground, from the field and
from the wilderness. So the Saints are severed to be elect vessels of honor,
from the other Clay which is o(...)ed to make vessels of wrath. Jacob and
h(...)ity was separated being Children of the Promise, from Esau and his
Posterity, which are according to the flesh. Paul was separated to the Gospel,
Romans 1. 1. And which is more, he was separated from his Mothers womb, and
called him by his grace to receive his Son in him, Gallath. 1. 15.

2. In a Garden are all manner of pleasant and wholesome Herbs and Trees
growing: So in the Church are all manner of useful spirits springing up as the
Trees of righteousness, to the praise of God.

3. A Garden is a place of pleasure where men use to refresh themselves, and
take pleasure to walk in. So Christ takes pleasure in his Church, where he
says, Thou art all fair, etc. yea, Christ does walk delightfully in this
Garden, and calls his friends thither to walk with him.

4. In a Garden is abundance of pains taken, to plant and dress, and the
like. So Christ works in his Garden, where he says, Know ye not that I must
go about my Fathers business, Luke 2: 49 He says, he has finished the work
which the Father gave him to do, John 17. 4. And what could I have done more
for my Vineyard, which I have not done.

5. A Garden is commonly planted with the best plants, as God planted Eden, and
the Master of the Vineyard did the like in his Vineyard, Isa. 5. 1. 80 that the
Trees of the Garden grow not naturally, as those in the Wilderness, which
bear no fruit, but are planted by the labor of the husbandman. Thus David
says, The just man shall be like a Tree planted by the water side, which shall
bring forth his fruit in due season, Psalm. 1. 3. All the Frees in Christ's
Vineyard are planted by God, as Christ faith, Every plant which my Father has
not planted, shall be rooted up, Mat. 15. 13.

6. All plants in a Garden are not of one kind, neither do they bring forth
the same fruits, but diverse according to their kind: So in the Church, the
whole body is but one, but it has many members, and all of the same body,
which is one: now all these members have several operations and functions: and
the members must have the same care one of another, as the Apostle treats on
at large, in 1 Cor. 12.

Again, as Jerusalem is builded as a City compact within it self: So the
Spouse is not only compared to a Garden, but,

A Garden enclosed.
The Hebrew word signifies locked, or barred, that is, (...) Clausit,
observavit, pessulum obdidit.
close shut up, safe, free from danger, and the like. The word is used for
bolting of a door, 2 Samuel 13. 17, 18. Hence Note,

That the Church is an enclosed Garden. And it is an enclosure for three causes.

1. For distinction from other grounds. 2. For defense and safety. 3. Propriety
for the owners own use.
1. The Church as a Garden is enclosed for distinction-sake, because it is
separated from all other people, as a Garden is separated from the wilderness
or common field. As the light was separated from the darkness in the Creation
of the world, as the Jews were separated from the Gentiles by the
partition wall, and the most holy place from the Sanctuary, by the veil of the
Temple: So the Lord has separated and chosen his people from among all
Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, forasmuch as this foundation remains sure,
the Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And as the Prophet says, The Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish, Psalm.
1. 6.

2. This Garden is enclosed also for defense, God hedgeth it on every side that
the wild Boar may do it no hurt. For walls, doors, locks and bars, are means
of defense and safety: thus Jerusalem was fortified with locks, and Bars,
Nehem. 3. 3. 13. And when such fences are wanting, all things lie to the
spoil, as in Isa. 5. 5. Psalm. 80. 12. Thus the Lord makes his Church as a
Town walled about for defense against the enemies, that it cannot be
conquered; as Jerusalem was compassed about with hills. They that trust in the
Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be moved, but stands for ever: the
hills compass Jerusalem round about, so is the Lord round about his people,
from henceforth, for evermore, Psalm. 125. 1, 2. It is built upon a rock, that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. And God has
promised to be a wall of fire round about Jerusalem. Zech. 2. 5. And
strengthens the bars of her gates, Psalm. 147. 13. He keeps his Vineyard night
and day, ^ast any should hurt it, Isa. 27. 3.

3. This enclosure of the Church does intimate the owners propriety, because it
belongs only to him, he has it for his own use. Here is noted the chastity
of the Spouse, she goes not a whoring after other Gods, she is not like the
Harlot which sits at the door, and calls to her the comers by, and
says, stolen water is sweet, Prove. 9. 17. But the Spouse of Christ is
careful to keep her self and all her plants and fruits holy, chaste, pure unto
her beloved only: she opens the gates that the righteous Nation may enter
in, which keeps the truth Isa. 26. 2. But she labors to withstand the
invasion of the unclean and abominable, that it enter not in, Revel. 21. 27.
The Apostle was jealous over the Corinthians with a godly jealousy, and has
prepared them for one Husband, to present them as a pure Virgin to Christ, 2
Cor. 11. 2. The Spouse says, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, Song 2.
16. So much for the first comparison, wherein the Spouse was compared to a
Garden enclosed. It follows.

My Sister, my Spouse.
These words were expounded verse 9. of this Chapter, therefore I will not
stand here on repetition, but proceed to the second comparison, which is
expressed in these words.

A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
Here we see are joined together a Garden full of sweet plants, and a spring
and fountain of living waters. If the plants in a Garden be not watered, all
will wither and be fruitless. By this comparison is inferred, that the Spouse
is not dry and barren, but a fruitful Garden, it is never without water, and
therefore called

A spring, a fountain.
A spring has its name in Hebrew Gal, of the root Galal, which signifies the
rolling and waving of the waters. Springs and fountains are never dry, but
send forth streams of water continually. So that this signifies the abundance
of waters that the Church is supplied with, it is as a Spring able to water all
parts of the Garden.

Hence Observe,

That the garden of Christ's Church is plentifully watered by his spirit and
grace, and so made fruitful. This garden is therefore well watered, there is a
spring of living waters, which always do flow, wherewith every herb and
precious plant is watered. Thus Christ himself testifies, saying, He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water, John 7. 38. And when the Lord promises a full supply of his
Spirit, he says, I will power water upon the dry ground, and floods upon him
that is thirsty, Isa. 44. 3. This water fructifieth the barrenness, molifieth
the hardness, and cools the hot distempers, and moistneth the dryness of
the hearts of the Saints, and so makes them fruitful Trees of righteousness
to Gods praise. Water is comfortable to a thirsty land; so is the supply of the
Spirit to a thirsty soul, hence says David, My soul gaspeth after thee as a
thirsty land, Psalm. 143. 6. A River in Paradise was called Euphrares of (...)
because it makes glad, so does the overflowings of the Spirit of Christ into
the soul, refresh it, and make it glad and lightsome. It is said that the joy
of the Captives returning from Babylon, was like the waters of the South, Psalm.
126. 4. Intimating, that the South parts of the world thirsted after water in a
dry Summer. Such is the joy of the dry and thirsty soul, when God causes his
spirit to return upon it, and refresh it with heavenly supplies. It is
promised, the Lord will satisfy thy soul in droughts, and make fat thy Bones,
and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose
waters fail not, Isa. 58. 11. Thus the Spouse is a spring and a fountain, not
because she is the fountain of grace, but because Christ's being in it, it is
the only wellspring or fountain of the waters of life unto all. But now it
is added.

A Fountain shut up.
Shut up) or locked, barred: that is, kept close from enemies: So that though
these waters abound, yet do they flow only in Christ's garden, no other
gardens or plants are watered by them. It is so shut up that none can take of
these waters, but by Christ's consent. These waters are waters of the Sanctuary,
and therefore not common to all, none are partakers of these waters, but the
Spouse, the Bride, the Lambs wife. It is added.

A Fountain sealed.
The confirmation of a thing is signified by the sealing of it; so is the
confirmation of the Spirit and grace of God, as appears, John 3. 3. and Ephesians.
1. 13. Now when a thing is sealed, it is concealed from another: so this grace
is not communicated to the wicked. Hence it is said, Bind up the testimony,
seal the Law among my Disciples, Isa. 8. 16. But it is hid from the world,
none of them can come and take thereof. This speech tends to the same end
that the former similitude did: all being spoken according to the manner of
their Country, wherein water was not only skanty, and therefore a good blessing
to enjoy it: but also there was much ado to keep it to themselves, See Genesis
21. 25. also Genesis 26. 17, 18, 19, etc.

Now in that the Spouse is compared to a fountain shut up, and sealed: it does
impart diverse things.

First, note.

That those precious waters, by which the Spouse is refreshed, are pure and
wholesome waters. For what else should it be a fountain sealed, but to preserve
it pure and wholesome? This spiritual fountain is not bitter, as the waters of
Marah, where the Children of Israel could not drink. The traditions of men may
be compared to such waters, which are filthy and corrupt waters; waters which
stand open, are sometimes infected by poison, or other noisome things falling
in, as where it is written: there fell a great star from heaven, burning as a
Torch, into the third part of the Rivers, and fountains of water, the name of
the star is wormwood, and the third part of the wateers became bitter, and
many men dyed of the waters, Revel. 8. 10. And again in chap. 16. 14. The
Angel powered out his viol upon the Rivers and fountains of water, and they
became blood: Thus at the general Apostacy many of the waters were corrupted,
made bitter, and turned into blood. But the fountain of the Spouse is sealed,
no such star can fall into it, to make it bitter: no such viol can be powered
into it to turn it into blood.

Secondly, note.

That this Spring and fountain of living water is only to refresh the Spouse.

These waters, although they abound, yet they flow not forth of the garden,
they be shut up and sealed, none other garden or plants are watered by them.
Now some may object, that the doctrine of the Gospel is published to all
promiscuously, how is it then a fountain sealed up? I answer, that the word
does in a sort flow forth to all, which are not the true plants of the Lord;
but it does not water them, they have not lively, spiritual, and effectual
working of it, to make them grow and bear fruit. It is with them, as water
falling upon a Rock, which does only wet the outside and not soften the rock
or stone within, So that though the outward, litterall, and historical part of
the word be common to many, yet the spiritual part, and the lively efficacy
thereof, is peculiar to the Spouse alone: She only is refreshed with these
fountains of living water, her plants be watered all with them, and made
fruitful. Thirdly Observe.

That the Spouse is chaste unto Christ.

She will bring forth fruit only unto him, and waters no plants but her own:
when Solomon would teach spiritual chastity, he does thus express it: Drink
water out of thine own Cisterne, and running waters out of thine own well:
let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of water in the streets: let
them be only thine own, and not strangers with thee: let thy fountain be
blessed, and rejoice with the Wife of thy, etc. Prove. 5. 15. 18. Thus the
Spouse here is a fountain sealed up, she is not for strangers and such as
pass by, her care is to keep her self holy, pure, and chaste unto her
beloved, she waters only her own plants, she keeps watch, least any
unclean thing should enter, she opens her gates, that only the righteous
Nation may enter in, as it is in Isa. 26. 2. Thus we have the Spouse set forth
as a well watered garden apt to bear fruit: now what store of all sorts of
precious fruits she brought forth, the two next verses do show, for here are
reckoned up all manner of the best plants.

VERSE. 13, 14.
Thy plants are an Orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, camphire,
with Spikenard.

Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all the Trees of
frankincense, myrrh, and aloes, with all the chief Spices.


HEre is the goodliest garden, that ever was heard of, which is not only a
garden enclosed, and sealed; but is also full of all sweet plants, here be
sweet fruits, here be all the chief spices, and sweet incense, here is
whatsoever is delectable and precious. Christ in his commendations of his
Spouse, does enumerate and reckon up all manner of the best plants, saying.

Thy plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranates, etc.
Thy Plants, or thy offspring, that is, thy Children or Members, all that are
set or planted in thee. The Hebrew (...) Misit, emisit, inde (...) Propagines.
word translated plants, comes of sending forth, that is, of growing, and
bringing forth fruit: hereby is shown, how full of pleasant plants the Lords
garden is, it is not only senced in, and well watered, but also replenished
with wholesome, sweet and precious Plants.

Are as an Orchard, or P^cadise: so called of the Hebrew word Pardes, a place
set with pleasant plants, and Trees, as appears, Eccles. 2. 5. As it were the
garden (...) Paradisus.
of Eden, to which all the world is but as a wild Field or Widernesse.

Of pomegranates, or pomegranate-Apples, so Arius Mont. render it; they are so
called, because they were full of grains or kernels, these were very dear and
precious, (...) punicorum malorum.
yea very healthful and good: for they were good to repress the heat of
choler, and malignitie of Fevers, they also comfort the stomach and belly, and
prevent faintings and swoonings.

With pleasant fruits, that is, abounding with sweet fruits, and pleasant
things; such as these were part of Joseph's blessing, as we may read, Deuteronomy. 33.
13. of the precious fruits put forth by the Sun and Moon: so that beside the
Pomegranate, there were all other pleasant fruits, and precious things, some
particulars where of he reckons in this verse, and in the verse following.

Camphire, or Camphire fruits, or Cipres berries, for the word is of the
plural number. Camphire is a sweet (...) Cyptei.
gum, but Cypres is a tree, very pleasant and well smelling. The Hebrew
Copher, (from whence the Cypres tree seems to be derived) signifies
Atonement and propitiation. Camphire with its sweetness does much refresh the
Spirits, and cheereth up the mind. See this more explained, in Chap. 1. 14.

With Spikenard, or nards, this word is also in the plural number, though in
the next verse it is used singularly: the plural Spikenards, seems to imply
all sorts of nards: for there are diverse sorts: that which is of the true nard,
is of exceeding sweet and pleasant smell, by which it stays distillations of
the head, and digesteth cold humors, and the like. It was preoious and costly,
as appears Mark. 14. 3. Also Joh. 12. 3. And it grows in India, Syria, and
other places thereabouts. The word Spikenard is framed of the Hebrew word nerd,
whence the Greeks call it Nardos, and the Latins Nardus. See it more
explained in Chapter 1. 14.

Verse. 14.
Spikenard and Saffron, etc.
Spikenard, this is spoken of already in the former verse. And saffron, a thing
precious, and profitable to comfort the heart, and helps digestion, etc.
Saffron has its name in Hebrew, ^arcom, because of its yellow color.

Calanius, or Cane, or reed, it is like this is meant of that which is called
Calanius Aroniaticois, or odoratus, for the excellent smell it had; and was wont
to be brought out of Arabia felix, into Judeah, and was appointed to be used in
the confection of the holy oil, Exodus 30. 23. It helps the passages of urine,
and also the womb in conception.

This word Calamus has its name after the Greek, in Hebrew Caneh, it is a
sweet reed, bought and brought out of far Countries, as apeares, by Jer. 2.
20. And also Isa. 43. 24.

Cynamon, This is also farrefetcht, and of great price and excellency, This
aromaticall Cynamou, comes of the Hebrew name Kinemon, and it is the bark of
a Tree, used for sweet odours: This was also used in the confection of the holy
Oil, Exodus 30. 23.

With all the Trees of Frankincense, that is, all Trees bearing incense, or
matter that yeildeth a sweet smell or savor, whereof also he recites two in
the following words, as myrrh and Aloes. Frankicense, was used in the holy
perfume or incense, Exodus 30. 34, 35. And is good to help and restrain ulcers,
gouts and fluxes of blood, etc.

Myrrh, This was of an excellent savor, as appears, Psalm. 45. 8. Myrrh is
the sweet gum that issues from the myrrh Tree: it was one of the first of
the chief spices that was put into the holy Ointment, which was made, Exodus
30. 23. It has its name of the Hebrew Mor: no gum is preferred before it,
Pliu. hist. lib. 12. cap. 15.
says Pliny. With myrre the dead body of Christ was embalmed, John 19. 39.
And with it the wise men honored him at his birth, Mat. 2. See this more
largely opened in Chap. 1. 13.

And Aloes, this is a certain kind of sweet and precious wood, which, in
regard of its fragrancy is put with Myrrh, in Psalm. 45. 8. And is also used to
anoint dead bodies, John 19. 30. 40. Aloes comes of the Hebrew Ahaloth, it was
such a sweet wood wherewith perfumes were also made. It is a tree growing in
Arabia, and India which gives a very sweet odor, and is like the thine wood
spoken of in Revel. 18. 12. He concludes by adding,

With all the chief spices.
In the Hebrew it is, with all the heads of spices, that is, with all most
costly, sweet, and precious things, the principal, and most excellent of
spices: See the like (...) Cum omnibus capitibus aromatum, Arius Mont.
in Ezekiel. 27. 22. Now by these fruits are signified the spiritual graces of
the Saints, which are precious and sweet before God, and man, such are the
fruits of the Spirit, mentioned in Gal. 5. 22. 23.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse, Christ's garden is full of sweet and pleasant fruit.

Hence the graces in her are compared to every sweet Tree, and to every rare
and costly thing. The Saints are the goodly plants of the Lords, and they do
bear all these sweet and delectable fruits before mentioned; what a goodly
garden has the Lord planted to himself, where all pleasants grow? never had
any earthly Prince such a garden with plants of pomegranates, with sweet
fruits, as Camphire, Spikenard, sweet Calamus, and Cynamon, with all the Trees
of incense, myrrh, and Aloes, and all chief spices: All this tends to the
commendations after this sort. That as those gardens be most excellent, and
worthy to be beloved and esteemed, that have the most rare, best, and precious
things grow in them: so these excellent graces and fruits of the Church, do
commend the same to God and men, and make Christ the Bridegroom (as it were)
inamoured with the love thereof. The Church then as the Spouse of Christ is
beautified and adorned with the gifts and graces of the Spirit, even as a
plentiful and pleasant garden, with infinite numbers of rare and pleasant
simples, as they call them, or fruits, whereby she is made commendable,
spreading her same far and nigh, insomuch that Christ her husband is even, as
it were, ravished with her love: yet notwithstanding she has nothing of her
own to move him to that affection, but all that she has comes from him, as
appears in Ezekiel. 16. 14. So much for the first part of the Chapter, wherein
Christ did so highly commend the Spouse: the second part follows, wherein the
Spouse makes some returns of Christ's praises to him.

VERSE. 15, 16, 17.
A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

Awake, O north-wnide, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may slow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits.

I am come into my garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with
my spice, I have eaten my honeycombe with my honey, I have drunk my wine with
my milk, eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved!


HAving dispatched the first part of the Chapter: now follows the second part
thereof, wherein we may Observe.

First, the prayer of the Spouse, verse 15, 16.

Secondly, the answer of Christ, verse 17.

The prayer of the Spouse, desires the presence of Christ, who does indeed
minister power to her to be a garden, and water, to water her withal:
therefore first, she sets forth Christ under these similitudes, which are
agreeable to such things, as cause fruitfulness in the garden.

First, That he is the fountain of the garden, a well of living waters, the
very flood of God excelling the waters which flow from Lebanon.

Secondly, That he is all the winds, both hot and cold, binding and opening,
North, and South, fit for every season, to make the garden prosper. Then she
sets down the parts of her prayer, for his presence, in two respects.

First, To minister unto her the cause of all fruitfulness, both for wind and
weather, and nourishment of water, all which is meant in these words, Arise
North, and come South, and blow on my garden, let the waters of his spirit
overflow all my spices.

Secondly, To accept from the Church the pleasant fruits of holy services, the
oblation of men renewed by the Spirit, the fruits of the lips in praise and
thanksgiving, etc. in saying, Let my beloved come into his garden and eat his
pleasant fruit.

A fountain of gardens, etc.
This seems to be the speech of the Spouse unto Christ, O thou fountain,
etc. Now whereas the Lord had commended the Spouse in the former verse, to be a
sweet garden, so well watered, and of such precious plants: she now ascribes
all the praise thereof unto him, as if she had said thus: I humbly acknowledge
the things to be in me, that thou have said, howbeit I confess, that they are
not of my self, but from thee, the fountain of all good things, and though
that I do perform the duty of a fountain toward mine, yet thou art he, to
whom indeed the name of fountain and living waters, yea of life it self does
only appertain: yea, thou art the only fountain, and I do but water others
as from thee, O fountain of gardens, etc. It is from the fonntaine, that all
the Rivers flow, (in Psalm. 104. 10.) which water the gardens and plants in
them, so making them green and fruitful. The Prophet Ezekiel, speaking of the
glory of Assiria, comparing him to the Cedars of Lebanon, with fair branches,
says The waters made him great; the deep set him on high, with her rivers
running about his plants, etc. Ezekiel. 31. 4, 5. And so when desolation is
threatened to the Church of the Jews, it is likened to a garden that has no
water, Isa. 1. 30. It is to be noted also, that the universal Church is but
one garden, and all the particular Churches be gardens, so that her speech and
his do not differ, when he calls her a garden, and she calls him a
fountain of gardens, when he calls her a fountain sealed up, which does
water all the plants, she does acknowledge the truth thereof unto his praise,
affirming that he is the fountain of the gardens: that is, look whatsoever
waters of life be in her, yea, in all particular Churches, they flow from him,
he is the fountain.

Hence Observe.

That Christ is an overflowing fountain of living water, refreshing the garden
of his Church, with streams of his fullness.

The Spouse does acknowledge all her supplies from him, in one word, when she
calls him, a fountain of gardens. It pleased the Father, that in him should
all falnesse dwell, Col. 1. 19. And in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. Now of his fullness have we all received, and grace
for grace, Joh. 1. 16 And he he is made unto us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ by his
Spirit does refresh his Churches, and all their plants, satisfies their soul
in drought, and makes fat their bones: that their soul is Like a watered
garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all, Jer. 31. 12. She adds.

A well of living waters.
The Spouse means by this word, continual waters, and such as cannot be
drawn dry: thus the well that Isaacs servants diged in the valley, is called
a well of springing waters, Genesis 26. 19. in the Hebrew it is, living waters,
that is, such as springs continually, and dries not up: so that by living
water here is meant, springing and running water, such as is not dry with heat,
neither putrifies, but is always wholesome, and gives life continually.

Hence Observe.

That Christ is a continual spring of living water to refresh and comfort his
Church with all supplies.

The graces, and waters of life, which do flow from Christ upon his Church,
are such as can never be dried up, they flow from a bottomless fountain, albeit
he bestows his graces and gifts from time to time, in never so great
abundance, yet they be not diminished. Christ is a fountain never drawn dry,
though he communicate never so much, yet he has never the less in himself:
so Christ gives water of life, of which, whosoever drinks, It shall be in
him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life, Joh. 4. 14. And
again, speaking of the Spirit, which they that believe on him, should receive,
he says, He that believes on me, etc. out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water, Joh. 7. 38. Christ is an everlasting spring, always sending
forth waters of life to refresh his Saints: the supply that he gives is
constant: it is not like a winter-bourne, that fails, and dries up in the
Summer: but like an ever springing fountain, whose streams are never dry.
Now she still proceeds in the commendations of her beloved, and says.

And streams from Lebanon.
Streams, running, or flowing from Lebanon, the water that came from Lebanon,
was pure and clear water, yea, Jordan it self watering the Land of Israel,
came after a sort from thence, and no doubt but the water of Lebanon, tasted of
that sweetness, that is mentioned before, in vese 11. of this Chapter Lebanon
being a place of so many sweet Trees and Plants, the streams flowing thence
must needs be sweet also: even as the waters that flow out of the hills, where
Cinnamon, and Cloves grow, do also partak of the sweetness thereof. Then the
sum of all is thus much; the Spouse commends Christ, first, for the
fullness and plenitude of all graces, in that she calls him, The fountain of
gardens.

Secondly, For the perpetuity of the graces, in that she calls him, The well
of living waters.

And lastly, For the sweetness and pleasantness of the same, in that she
resembles him to the most sweet and pleasant waters, flowing from Lebanon.

Hence Observe.

That the water of life flowing from Christ to his Saints, is very sweet and
plevsant.

David says, Thou leadest me by the still waters. In the Hebrew it is, Waters
of rest, that is, most quiet, calm, and still waters, such as give rest and
refreshing. Christ which is in the midst of the throne of God, shall lead his
Saints to the (sweet, pleasant, and) lively fountains of waters, Revel. 7. 16.
17. This water is excellently resembled by the water of the sanctuary, spoken
of in Ezekiel. 47. 6. 10. where waters issuing out of the Sanctuary, ran along
Galilce, and to the plain, and into the Sea, etc. and every living thing that
moves whithersoever the Rivers come, shall live, etc. and every thing shall
live whither the River comes. So in Revel. 22. 1. Out of the Throne of God,
and of the Lamb, a pure River of water of life proceeds. Water of life must
needs be such as does cheer and refresh the spirits. This living water flowing
from Christ does give life, and preserve life in all those that drink it. And
it is said to be clear as Crystal, Rev. 22. 1. that is, transparent, and
exceeding all Fountains in cleernesse, most pleasant to the eye, as showing
all that is therein to the very bottom; and most pleasant to the taste, as free
from mud and filth.

Now we shall proceed to the other part of the Spouses speech, which is
expressed in the next verse, wherein she makes earnest prayer, saying,

VERSE. 16.
Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out: Let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
fruit.
IN these words the Spouse entreats graces from her head and husband Christ,
to make her fruitful withal. It is a notable turning of her speech to the
winds and quarters of the world, attributing sense unto things without life,
which is also common to Poets and lovers, especially in their Love-songs.

There be two parts of this prayer.

1. She craveth the inspiration and gracious gifts of the spirit, by turning
her speech to the winds to blow upon his Garden in these words, Arise, O North
wind, etc. She gives a reason of her desire, That the spices thereof may flow
out.

2. She entreats Christ's presence, inviting him to come into his Garden
speaking thus, Let my beloved come into his Garden, together also with the end
thereof, To eat his pleasant fruits.

Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, etc.
Awake) or arise, or raise up (thy self) thou North wind. He means the North
quarter, because it is cold and moist, as being far removed from the Sun, (...)
Vigilavit, evigilavit, transitive, excitavit vel suscitavit.
and this is spoken, as having regard to the daytime, and hot Country of the
Land of Judea.

And come thou South: This quarter is hot and dry, and both these winds are
joined together; So that though the North and South winds be of contrary
qualities, as cold, and hot, moist, and dry, yet are they both fitting for her
estate, which sometime needs sharp reproof, like the nipping North wind, and
sometime sweet and gentle consolation, like unto the South wind, sweet, and
cherishing. Now under these quarters, and by such an equal mixture of the
winds, no doubt, but is meant such means whereby Christ does refresh the Garden
of his Church, to cleanse the air of it, and make it more fruitful; and
withal by the contrary course of winds, purges the air, and gives sometimes
clear, and sometimes dropping seasons, as may serve most for the benefit of
the Garden. Now that she may have the full benefit of these winds, she adds,

And blow upon my Garden.
Blow, that is, even as it were by blasts or blowing from sundry quarters:
work that which thou see to be good and profitable for me. Blow upon my
Garden, that is, cause the wind to blow upon me. It is the Lord that brings
forth the winds out of his treasure, Psalm. 135. 7. and speaks unto them to
blow. Hereby is signified the quickening efficacy of the spirit of Christ, as it
is in Ezekiel. 37. 9. the Prophet was willed to Prophecy to the Wind, and say
thereunto, Come from the four winds, O wind, and blow upon these slain, that
they may live. And ag^ine the efficacy of the spirit of God is resembled by the
wind in John 3. 8. So on the contrary, the restraining of Gods spirit, let out
by the Gospel, is signified by four Angels holding the four winds of the
Earth, That the wind should not blow on the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any
Tree, Revel. 7. 1. Now it is something dark in that the Church calls it,

My Garden.
The Spouse does not call it her Garden, as having any thing of her self; for
whatsoever Ornaments, Flowers, Plants, etc. she has, she has them from
Christ, but by reason of the nigh conjunction which is between Christ and his
Church, she being flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5. 30. yea,
and the titles of the one and the other, being indifferently attributed to the
one and the other, as where the Church is called by the name of Christ, 1 Cor.
12. 12. Now from the first part of the Churches prayer, Observe,

First, from the comparison fetched from the wind, attributing sense to things
without life, in general note.

That Christ has the command of all creatures. He calls for the winds out of
his treasures when he pleases, and restrains them again at his will. This
drew the Disciples in admiration to say, What manner of man is this, that even
the winds and the Seas obey him? Mat. 8. 27.

Secondly, we see here, that Christ speaks to contrary winds, both in respect
of their quality and quarters from whence they blow.

Hence Note,

That Christ can bring good things to his Church by contrary means.

A cold nipping North wind, and a pleasant cherishing South wind, may both be
suitable for the Garden of Christ. The Spouse may sometimes stand in need of
purging, and sometimes of cherishing, from whence it is the spirit of God
carries it self suitable to both conditions: and the Saints may be sure, that
all the winds blow them good. Thus we have the Apostle testifying, That all
things work together for good to us that love God, Romans 8. 28. And that all
things are ours, Paul, Apollo, Cephas, things present, and to come, life,
death, etc. 1 Cor. 3. 21.

Thirdly Observe,

That the Spouse desires the heavenly breathing of Christ's spirit to come upon
her. It is not the North wind, and the South wind which blow upon the Trees,
and that are felt of our bodies, that are meant here, which blow upon these
heavenly plants: but it is an heavenly breathing which she here requires, even
the inspiration of the spirit God, which is called the spirit of
Sanctification, the spirit of adoption, etc. Now this Spirit of God may well be
resembled to wind, and that in such respects as these.

1. The nature of the wind is to blow where it lists, John 3. 8. So the
Spirit of the Lord blows freely, and opens the heart, pouring in abundance of
grace: it does awaken and draw forth all the affections to Christ.

2. The wind is of a prevailing force, it beats down all before it: so the
Spirit is mighty in operation, it brings down high Mountains and hills, that
be exalted against Christ, and lays them level: no man can prevail against
the spirit of God.

3. A man receives his breath and life naturally from the air, a man cannot
live without wind: no more can a regenerate man live without the spirit of God:
for by the breathings of the spirit the soul of a Christian lives.

4. The wind is of a cooling nature: so the spirit does cool the hot
distempers in the soul; allaying all unnatural heats, and brings the soul
into a good frame and temper.

5. The wind is of a cleansing nature, it purges the air and the water, and
keeps them from infections: So the spirit of God purges the heart from dead
works, to serve the living God in newness of life.

6. The wind has a cherishing, and a fructifying force with it: so the Spirit
quickneth and cherishes the soul, it makes the heart that was as a barren
wilderness, to become a fruitful Garden.

For these respects and the like, the sweet gale of the spirit is compared to
wind. Hence it is, that the Spouse desires that the winds may

Blow upon his Garden.
Hence Observe, Fourthly,

That the Spouse always stands in need of the blowings of the Spirit. The Spouse
has no power to any thing naturally, but is very dead and dull, and therefore
stands in need always to be quickened by the blowing of the spirit. All the
beginnings of the work of God in us, growth, and ending, is from mere grace,
and nothing else but grace. Therefore we must acknowledge all the actings of
Christ's spirit in us: and though Solomon Observes, it will be hindrance to
observe the winds, Eccles. 7. 4. yet here it will be our wisdom to observe
the gales of the Spirit, and to be acted by it.

Lastly Observe,

That the Spouse is the Garden of Christ. The Prophet Isaiah shows, That the
Vineyard of the Lord of Epists is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are
his pleasant plants, Isa. 5. 7. God does plant it, visit, protect, and water
it, yea, he takes pleasure in his Spouse, as in his pleasant Garden. But I
shall not stand on this point, because it was largely treated on in Verse 12.
of this Chapter. But I shall proceed to the reason or ground of this request,
which is as follows.

That the spices thereof may flow out.
By Spices here are meant all manner of graces: and by flowing out, she
means continual abode and increase in the same, and that she may be more
and more fruitful, that her fruits may ripen, and be abundant, for by the
gracious gifts of the spirit, breathing upon the Spouse, her soul is refreshed
and comforted, and all her graces do increase: so that we see to what end she
desires the wind of the spirit to blow, that the spices thereof may flow out:
for those good things in her would else lie dead, and bound up, unless the
spirit let them out.

Hence Observe, First,

As it is the Spirit that must first quicken us, so it is the spirit that draws
forth that life and grace that we have. It is the spirit that must first kindle
the fire of the Spirit, life, and glory in our souls, and then increase the
flame thereof. First, the wind of the spirit blows, then the spices of grace
flow out.

Secondly Note,

That the goodness of the Saints must be an overflowing goodness. The graces
of the Saints must abound, not only in themselves, but flow out to others: as
it was said of John, he was a burning, and a shining light. The Spirit of God
in his people is like the box of Ointment that Mary powered out, which perfumes
all the whole house with its savor.

A Christian never thinks he has received enough of the spirit, unless it
makes him to abound in himself, and flow out to others; unless it be always
making new discoveries of God and Christ to the soul, and new revelations of
the bosom of the Father, whereby the soul is refresht, and the fragrancy of
all his graces drawn out to his own comfort, and the good of others. As the
Sun draws forth the fragrancy and sweetness that is in the flowers of the
Earth, when it shines upon them; and as the wind does convey those sweet smells
unto us: so does the spirit draw forth the savor of grace, and convey the
smell thereof to our own souls and to others, whereby we come to have the
benefit thereof. Thus far of the first part of her prayer, desiring the North
and South wind to awake and blow upon his Garden, that the Spices thereof may
flow out. In the next place we have the Spouses invitation of Christ to come
into his Garden, with the end thereof, in these words.

Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
Let my beloved come, etc. In these words the Spouse desires Christ's presence,
meaning, that she would have him come and dwell in her, even as he had
promised in the sixth Verse of this Chapter. Thus she invites Christ to come
into her, as into his House or Temple, calling him Beloved, because the stream
of her affections run toward him. Christ was (no question) in his Church
before, but she desires a farther manifestation of his presence, glory, and
life in her.

Hence Observe,

That where there is the least appearance of Christ in the soul of any, there
is further desire of Christ's presence and glory, to be manifested.

The Spouse never thinks she is near enough her Beloved, until she come to
the full enjoyment of him. They always wait for a farther revelation of the
Lord from Heaven, and cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Revel. 22. 17. That
is, come manifest thy self more and more in the revelation of thy self and
glory. It is from the Spirit that we desire a greater measure of the Spirit,
and it is from some discovery of Christ in us, that we desire a more perfect
revelation of him.

Now follows the end and Reason wherefore the Spouse desires Christ to come
into his Garden, which is,

To eat his pleasant fruits.
The end of the Churches prayer is, that Christ might receive honor and
glory, by that spirit of grace given out by him unto her, she would have
Christ come in, and accept his own graces, which she calls pleasant fruits;
or fruits of his precious things. The word translated pleasant is of the
pluarall number, and may be rendered sweetnesses, and may note unto us two
things.

First, The plenitude and fullness of grace in the Saints, they are full of
sweet things, to wit, the graces of the Spirit.

Secondly, It does denote and set out the excellency of grace, it does far
exceed in excellency all the glorious things in the world. Now is it not fit
that Christ should eat the fruit of his own Vine, have comfort of his own
garden, taste of his own fruits? The greatest delight that Christ has in the
world, is in the garden of his Church: therefore, that he might take a full
delight therein, he makes it fruitful, stored with precious fruits, as growing
from Plants, set by his own hand, relished of his own spirit, and so fitted for
his taste.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are made fruitful by the breathings in of Christ's spirit upon
them.

When the wind of the Spirit blows upon the garden of the soul, the graces of
the Spirit, as sweet spices flow out in abundance. So that now the Spouse is
not like Israel of old, an empty Vine, Hos. 10. 1. neither does she bear Wild
grapes, even grapes of gall, and bitter clusters, as in Isa. 5. 2. but she is
filled with the fruits of righteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1. 11.
And is fruitful in every good work, Col. 1. 10. And has her fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. The Spouse does abound in
fruitfulness, and her fruit does exceed in the excellency thereof.

Secondly Observe.

That the fruits of the Spirit in the Saints, are very pleasing and acceptable
unto Christ.

They are called his pleasant fruits, as being those he takes much delight in.
Christ cannot but delight in the graces of his own Spirit, with which, and for
which he is to be honored. The holy actions of the Saints are called fruits,
Joh. 15. now fruits do not only signify an issuing from the root, but also
pleasure and delight. The acceptance of those fruits, and the communication of
farther grace, is signified by mutual supping together, Revel. 3. 20. Now we
must know that the fruits springing from our natures, that relish of the old
man, are not thus pleasing to Christ; but the fruits that proceed from the
Spirit, or new man: such as these are acceptable, being perfumed with sweet
odor, spoken of Rev. 8. 3. Christ besprinkles our persons, prayers, and
praises with his own blood, and so makes them acceptable to God, Heb. 9. 13.

Thirdly, Observe.

That the Spouse does ascribe all her good things to be Christ's.

His pleasant fruits, says the Church, all these graces are his, the garden is
his, the fruit is his, yea, and all the pleasantness and preciousnesse of the
fruit his: so that as David said, Of thine own Lord I give thee, etc. so does
the Spouse ascribe whatever is good in her to be from Christ. The Apostle
ascribes his spiritual life to Christ, Gal. 2. 20. I live (says he) yet not
I, but Christ lives in me: least it might seem too high for the Apostle to say,
I live, he does as it were correct himself by saying, yet it is Christ lives
in me.

Now upon the Churches request, for Christ to come into his garden, follows his
gracious answer unto the Churches desire, being ready to fulfill the desire of
them that fear him, in the next Verse: saying.

VERSE. 17.
I am come into my garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with
my Spice, I have eaten my honeycombe with my honey; I have drunk my wine with
my milk; eat O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly O beloved.
THe effect of the Churches prayer was, that Christ would accept from her the
fruits of service, praise and thanksgiving. In this place he makes answer,
wherein we may Observe.

First, Christ's condescending to his Churches request, he is present in his
garden, and perfometh those Offices she prayed for, I am come into my garden.

Secondly, A sweet compellation given to the Church, My Sister, my Spouse.

Thirdly, Christ declares the works he does, being come into his garden,
receives the fruits, with acceptance to himself, I have gathered my myrrh
with my Spices, I eat my honeycomb with my honey, I drank my wine with my
milk. Then

Fourthly, He inviteth others to the participation of this divine and
magnificent banquet, in saying, Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly,
O beloved.

I am come into my garden, etc.
I am come, or, I have come: but the Hebrews often use the time passed for the
time present, what is meant by garden, you have already heard in verse 12. and
16.

Now here is the gracious answer of Christ, that his Church can no sooner pray
for his presence, but he says, I am come into my garden. Now God is said to
come into his garden, when he manifests his presence there: so the Lord is said
to come down to deliver his people out of Egypt, that is, by the manifesting
of power and wisdom in their deliverie, Exodus 3. 7, 8. and so the Lord is
said to come down to see the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11. 5. that is, he came in a
manifestation of his judgment upon it: So here when he says, I am come into
my garden, it is his manifesting of himself in grace and acceptance, to make
sweet discoveries of himself, in the communication of all good things, in
keeping of a heavenly banquet of divine dainties, wherein he expresses his own
delight, and the comfort and blessing of the Spouse. Now in that these words
are in answer to the prayer of the Church in the former verse;

Observe.

That God answers the desires of his own Spirit in his Saints.

God does sometimes hear, and answer the natural desires of men, that pray or
cry to him as creatures, as the Ninivites, and the Children, and Beasts of
that City: for out of his mercy and goodness, he makes his Sun to shine upon
the just and unjust. How much more will he answer the voice of his own spirit,
when it shall prepare the heart to pray, as it is in Psa. 10. 17. Thou have
heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their hearts, thou will make
thine care to hear. So in Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps our infirmities; for
we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings that cannot be uttered: that is, we of our
selves know not what to ask, but the spirit reveals to us the will of God, by
its sweet manifestation of God, which cannot so well be uttered by the flesh:
and the Spirit makes intercession according to the will of God, or according
to God, (as the Greek has it) and so asking, According to his will, he
hears us, 1 John 5. 14.

Again, In that Christ is thus ready to come into his garden, in a larger
manifestation of love and grace then before, and that upon the Churches
invitation.

Hence observe, Secondly.

That Christ does more and more manifest himself to be present with his
people, upon their desires after him.

The Lord has been always present with his people in some appearance or
other: the Arc, Tabernacle, and Temple were all signs of his presence: but
his glorious presence in the flesh of Christ did exceed all the former shadows:
and after Christ's departure, he is present by the returns of his spirit, and
this presence has with it, life, light, comfort, strength and all. Thus the
Lord does reveal himself, from grace, to grace, from glory, to glory.

Lastly, In that he says, I am come into my garden, he declares how much
delight he takes to appear in his Saints, and make his Tabernacle with men.

Hence observe, Thirdly.

That Christ takes pleasure in manifesting of himself in his Saints.

A man takes much delight and pleasure in walking in his garden: so does
Christ in making out of his presence in his garden of the Church: we have many
scriptures tending this way, as it is witten, The Lord loves the gates of
Zion, above all the inhabitants of Jacob, glorious things are spoken of thee, O
thou City of God, Psalm. 7. 8. 2. 3. And The Lord has chosen Sion, and loved
to dwell in it, this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have delight
therein, Psalm. 132. 13. 14. Again, Mount Zion lying Northward, is fair in
situation, it is the joy of the whole earth, and the City of the great King,
Psalm. 48. 23. And, as God takes delight there, so must men also, because God
is there. David says, He shall lead me into the paths of life, in his
presence is fullness of joy, at his right hand is pleasure for evermore, Psalm.
16. 11. Now follows the description of the Church, and the sweet compellation
which Christ gives her.

My Sister, my Spouse.
Here is both affinity, and consanguinitie, all the nearest bonds of relation,
that may bind Christ and his Spouse fast together. This has been spoken of
already in the 9. verse of this Chapter, and therefore I shall not stand on it
now: only thus much, this shows the excellency of the Spouse, in that she is
nearly related unto Christ, that she is his Sister by blood, (as I may so
speak) having one nature, one Spirit, and one father; hence it is, Christ
says to his Disciples, I go to my Father, and to your Father, to my God and
to your God, Joh. 20. 17. Christ became our Brother by incarnation, bone of our
bone, and flesh of our flesh. And we are made his Brethren by adoption, having
received of the same spirit with him, crying, Abba Father: Hence it is, he is
not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2. For we are with him, made partakers
of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And again, by marriage we are his Spouse,
and that by gift of the Father, and also by his own consent: so that there is
a sweet conjunction and union, a sweet intercourse of love and communion
between Christ and the Spouse: so that by this mystical union, and sweet
communion, Christ is to his Spouse a friend, a head, a Brother, and a Husband.
So much for the compellation.

Now follows the actions of Christ, being come into his garden.

I have gathered my myrrh with my Spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my
honey, I have drank my wine with my milk.
The Spouse before entreated Christ to come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruit: he accordingly comes in, even to her desire, and did not only
feast on the Churches provision, but also brought more with him.

I have gathered my myrrh with my Spice, etc.
For myrrh, it was one of the chief spices (as you have heard) used in the
composition of the sweet ointments, Exodus 30. 23. with such ointments they used
to anoint their friends at feasts; this was more largely expounded in Chapter 1.
verse 13.

With my spice, that is, with my other spices, or aromaticall fruits, meaning
all the several fruits of the spirit, which are all sw^eaed by an influence
from the Spirit: As in nature there is one common influence from heaven; but
yet variety of flowers and sweet spices in their several kind, with a
different kind of sweetness: so all graces have their original from a common
influence of Christ's spirit, though they differ one from another, and are all
accepted of God, from whence they come.

I have eaten my honeycomb, etc.
The word and doctrine of Christ, which flow from his Spirit, are likned to
honey, and the honeycomb, to wine and milk, Psalm. 19. 11. and 119. 103. Isa.
5. 51. 1 Pet. 2. 2. for as milk and honey nourish and strengthen, and wine
increases spirits: so the doctrine of the Gospel, the spirit of Christ, and
the sense of his love, is far more comfortable and sweeter to the soul. Under
these several sorts he means still, the sweet, pleasant, and profitable
fruits that the Church did yield unto him, declaring thereby, that he did most
favorably accept his own graces in his Spouse, and that he was much delighted
therewith, yea, more then any man is, or can be in gathering most sweet and
smelling herbs and spices, or in eating honey, yea, though he eat it so
greedily, that he do withal devour the comb, or in drinking the best wine
and purest milk.

Hence observe.

First, That God accepts of his own graces in his Saints, and delights in them.

God must needs accept of such graces that are his own, and delight in such
services that come from love. God first accepts of Christ, and then of us, and
what comes from us in him. The Apostle wills us, To offer up our selves a
holy and acceptable sacrifice to God, Romans 12. 1. God does not only accept, but
he delights in the graces of his Spouse; hence it is he comes with new supplies
of grace, enlarging his love and benefits, as it is in Matthew. 25. 29. To him
that has shall be given. And in Rev. 22. 12. I come, and my reward is with me.
Christ never comes into the soul, but he brings rewards with him, of the
increasings of those graces that were in the soul before. Thus we see that
Christ upon the desire of the Spouse does come unto her, with acceptance of
the fruits of his own spirit in her, and with new increasings thereof.

Secondly, Observe.

That Christ does accept of, delight in, and increase the least of his own
graces in the Saints.

All the graces of the Spouse, though never so little or small are accepted,
not only her honey, but her honeycomb: not only her wine but her milk; her
weak services as well as her strong, because the spirit flowing from Christ
unto her, sweetneth all. Christ does extol his own grace, O woman! great is
thy faith, Matthew. 15. 28.

Now follows Christ's invitation of others unto this banquet, in these words.

Eat O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O Beloved.
In these words Christ speaks, as at a Feast, chearing up his friends, as
partaker with him of all those divine graces, and fruits of the spirit before
mentioned. Christ is the Master of this heavenly banquet, and it is he that
here cheereth up his guests. It was the custom of the Jews to power ointment
on their guests, to show their welcome, and cheer them up: So Christ does
power out the ointment of his grace and spirit, to welcome and cheer up his
Saints, as appears in these words, Eat O friends, etc.

Hence Observe.

That there is a mutual feasting between Christ and his people.

Christ provides a heavenly banquet of all spiritual dainties, Of fat things,
and the marrow of fatness, wine, and wine on the Lees, Isa. 25. 6. and then
calls his Saints (as his friends) to partake of those dainties. Christ is the
fountain, streaming it self forth, to refresh the City of God.

Secondly Observe.

That Christ does abundantly satisfy his people with all good things. Eat,
yea, drink abundantly, etc. that is, be ye plenteously filled with my grace
and spirit; no man goes hungry from a feast: in Christ there is not only
abundance, but a redundancy and overflowing of all good things; Christ is able,
yea is willing to do for us far more abundantly then we are able to think
or speak, Ephesians. 3. 20. Christ does not bestow some small measure of grace,
life, peace, etc. on his people, but he gives it in abundance. It follows.

O friends, O beloved!
Christ out of the abundance of his affections does multiply new titles for his
Spouse, calling her, friend, and beloved. They that do his commandments, are
his friends, Joh. 15. 14. Abraham is called the friend of God, Isa. 41. 8.
friendship is the sweetness and strength of love, therefore he adds, O
beloved! so plentiful and kind hearted is the Lord, that he cannot keep his
joy within himself, but stirs up his friends and companions, to eat, and
drink, and rejoice with him. Those good things, that neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, that are above our reach to conceive of, are for those that
love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Now in that Christ does invite his Spouse to this
heavenly banquet, by new Titles of love and friendship.

Hence Observe.

That there is sweet love and friendship, between Chaist and his Saints.

All kinds of love and friendship, meet in Christ toward his Spouse, and so
again, in the Spouse toward him, here is the friendship of all relations in
the world, as of husband, brother, friend, etc. here is a free opening his
bosom to the Saints, and they again opening of their hearts to him. Here Is
mutual delight in one another good and happiness: Christ is much delighted
in all the good and happiness of the Spouse, and she is as much delighted in
the happiness and glory of Christ. So much for the fourth Chapter.

CANTICLES. CHAP. V.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my Beloved that knocks,
saying, open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled: for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my Feet, how
shall I defile them?

My Beloved put in his hand by the hole of the Door, and my bowels were moved
for him.

I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.

I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone:
My soul failed when he spoke, I sought him, but I could not find him, I called
him, but he gave me no answer,

The Watchmen that go about the City, found me, they smote me, they wounded
me: the keepers of the walls took away the Veil from me.


WE had in the former Chapter almost nothing but the praises and commendations
which Christ gives to his Church: so highly, and with so many speeches does he
magnify and extol her beauty and her glory and excellency. Here in this
Chapter we have another manner of song, even an accusing, and a bewailing Song:
for here she accuses her self, and bewaileth her own unkindnesse and
undutifullnesse, which she showed to her most kind and loving Spouse, reporting
also the great affliction and calamity that came upon her by that means. And
after all this, we have the means whereby she recovers her self again.

In this Chapter observe two things.

First, a complaint of the Spouse, which she makes, accusing her self for
some negligences toward her beloved, and this is contained in the six first
Verses. Wherein also there are two especial matters delivered unto us.

First, an open acknowledgment of her offense committed, Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, a recital of the miseries that fell upon her by means of her
neglect, Verse. 5, 6.

The second thing set forth unto us in this Chapter, is, a familiar parley had
between the Spouse, and such as were her friends and acquaintance, who
demanding some questions of her, the Church instructs them concerning the
state, dwelling, and mutual fellowship that is betwixt her and Christ. This
matter begins at Verse. 7. and reaches to the end of the Chapter. The
questions with the answers thereto, concern two things.

1. There is something demanded about Christ himself in Verse. 8. whereunto
there is a large answer, beginning at the 9. Verse. and holds to the 15.
wherein the Spouse does set forth her beloved by many elegant expressions: the
issue whereof was, that the daughters of Jerusalem became likewise enamored
with him, and therefore question the place of his abode: the question being
contained in Verse. 16. and the answer in the two last verses: the occasion both
of the one, and of the other, was that vehement charge that the Spouse gives
her friends, in the seventh verse, both concerning Christ himself, and the
place where they should find him.

The first thing that offers it self to our consideration, is, the Churches
complaint, accusing of her self, saying,

I sleep, but my heart waketh, etc.
Here is a description of the Churches temptation, which is worldly drowsinesse
and security, wherein to the godly sometimes fall. She had enjoyed a
comfortable intercourse with Christ, but now she falls into a deep
temptation, from the strength and prevalency of corruption.

Hence Observe in the general.

That the Spouse is not always in one and the same temper. It was not long
ago that the Spouse was in a sweet, lovely, gracious temper; and now on the
sudden she falls into a fit of drowsiness and security. Thus it was with
Abraham, sometimes strong in faith, and sometimes fearful, as when he denied his
wife. David was sometimes full of confidence and boldness, triumphing in the
Lord, saying, Whom shall I fear? And sometimes again, I shall one day fall by
the hand of Saul. So Peter, sometimes confident, and again, sometimes overcome
with fear. But to come to the words in particular.

I sleep, but my heart waketh.
The words contain,

1. A Confession, I sleep. 2. An acknowledgement, But my heart waketh.
These words declare a twofold condition of the Spouse. The one is a sleepy,
drowsy estate, which proceeds from the flesh and unregenerate part: the
other, a waking or watchful condition, which proceeds from the spirit of
Christ within her.

I sleep, or I sleeping, as it is in the Original: these are the words of the
Spouse, declaring what befell her in the night season while she slept. The
sleep of the body is a deading and benuming of the outward senses, insomuch
that it is the very image of death, and it is dangerous, because when man
sleeps, his enemy watches, as in the parable of the seed, When the
husbandman slept, the envious man sowed Tares, Matthew. 13. 25.

Now we must consider here three things especially.

1. What this sleep is. 2. Whence it proceeds. 3. What the effects thereof
be.
1. We cannot understand this of a bodily or natural sleep; for the Spouse is
considered according to her heavenly and spiritual birth, and therefore must
needs be meant of a spiritual slumber, even a drowsiness in the heart and
mind, touching Heavenly things.

2. As natural sleep proceeds from weariness, and want of spirits, or from
sloathfullnesse and want of exercise: so spiritual sleep arises from want of
exercise in spiritual things, and from a spiritual weariness that comes from
the too much expense of the strength of the soul upon matters of the world. So
that spiritual slumber is from the fleshly part, and the remnants of the old
man remaining in the godly. The flesh (says the Apostle) lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit is against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would, Gal. 5. 17. When
the flesh does much prevail, then there is a damping of the spiritual graces,
even as it were a slumber that falls upon the mind.

3. The effects of sleep is deadness and darkness; men when they sleep love
to be in the dark: there is also a cessation of joy and delight, of all
activity and the like: so in a Christians spiritual sleep, faith has not its
full and lively operation, love shows not her zeal and heat, the joy and
activity of the soul is much decayed, etc.

Now though sleep be often meant in Scripture in a good sense, for the repose
and rest that the Saints have in God, Psalm. 3. 5. and Psalm. 4. 8. yet here, and
in many other places, it signifies neglect of holiness, and spiritual
security and drowsinesse; as in Isa. 56. 10. and Romans 13. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6, 7.
This sleep proceeds from affliction, or weariness, as in Luke 22. 45. Isa.
5. 27. The Spouse having eaten, and drank largely of Christ's dainties, begins
to be negligent, being pressed thereunto by the remnants of the flesh, she gave
place to this carnal ease and drowsiness.

Hence Observe,

First, That the Spouse of Christ is ingenuous to lay open her own defects. We
have large examples of this in David, and Paul with many other eminent persons
in Scripture. Herein the Saints yield unto God his chief prerogatives, as the
honor of his power and authority over us; his wisdom in knowing our secrets,
and his mercy in sparing of us, and the like.

Secondly Observe,

That the Spouse of Christ may sometimes fall into a spiritual languor.
Sometimes weakness and drowsinesse may overtake the most eminent Saints; as
Solomon, David, Peter, and the rest. The flesh that is always opposed to the
spirit, may sometimes for a season prevail, as to sleepiness and distemper.
And this the Apostle testifies in Romans 7. 14. when he says, The Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. That is, the Law requires a
heavenly life and disposition: But I am carnal, in part, or in regard of the
remainders of flesh that are in me: so that the godly themselves in respect of
some weakness that is yet remaining in them, may be called carnal: sold under
sin, not willingly, but as one that is yet detained, though his ransom be paid.

But we must note here, that the Spouse was not in such a dead sleep, as that
she was without any life or stirring at all; though there be flesh opposing the
spirit, yet there is spirit opposing the flesh; and therefore she does not
only confess her defect, but also acknowledge her life and excellency, by
adding,

But my heart waketh.
My heart waketh) or watches: that is, is lively and active still: meaning
thereby, that howsoever she was (...) Vigilavit, excitatus fuit.
overtaken in the outward man, or corruption of flesh, and of the members
thereof, yet she could not but in her heart and spiritual affections, think
upon her head and Spouse.

The heart is taken for the whole soul, for the understanding, will, men ory,
and affections: so it includes all the powers of the soul. The Apostle
calls it the inward man, the spirit, or regenerate man, opposed to the flesh
or outward man, Romans 2. 28, 29. This flesh and spirit lusts oue against
another, even in the Saints, as the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 17. And when the
spirit is willing the flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41. So then, in that the Spouse
says, My heart waketh, it signified, that though she had given her self to
fleshly case and security, yet her heart and spirit was otherwise disposed. The
heart is the last part which lives and moves in the body, and in it life and
sense first begins, and therefore it is the most principal part, it is like
Primum mobile inter sphaeras, the first sphere celestial which is moved, and
by it others are moved: It is like the Sun among the Planets, which by its
luster gives light unto the rest: it is like the Center from which the lines
are first defixed and derived from it to the circumference, all the lines being
deducted are of equal distance. But here by the heart is not understood the
substance, but the quality of the heart; where David says, Create in me a new
heart, Psalm. 51. 10. We must not understand it of the substance, for that is
still the same, but the quality of the heart, with its integrity. But now the
Church makes a difference between her self and her heart, as if her self and
her heart were not the same, where she says, I sleep, she speaks in the
person of her outward man, of the flesh, not of the spirit: but where she
speaks of her heart she speaks of her inward man, there was readiness of
spirit.

Hence Observe. First,

That there is an antithesis or contrariety between the flesh and the spirit,
in the Saints. The Saints have a fleshly backwardness, but there is still a
readiness of spirit, but the outward man, which is flesh, perishes, but the
inward man that is spirit, is renewed day by day. So the Apostle comparing
himself with himself is not himself, where he says, I am carnal, sold
under sin: for in me, (that is in my flesh) there dwells no good, but I allow
not that which I do. I find a law in my members rebelling against the law of
my mind. There the flesh sleeps, But to will is present with me, and I
delight in the Law of God, there is the inward man, or the spirit waking.
Secondly Observe,

That the Saints cannot fall from grace. Though they sleep, yet their heart is
awake. The work of the new birth, or Spirit, can never be quite put out, or
extinguished. The Saints may many times fall into great security, but yet the
heart waketh, there remains somewhat within, the sleep is not deadly. The
Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Church and Saints of God, says, It shall be as
a Tree, as an Oak, whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves,
Isa. 6. 13. This is also testified by the Apostle John, where he says,
Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither
can he sin, because he is borne of God, 1 John 3. 9. So that here is still life
in the root, The seed remains in them; from whence it is, that when the Spouse
sleeps, her heart waketh: and from hence it is, that she cannot lose the
work of God in her, that she is borne of God, who is immortal and
unchangeable. And it is written, Every branch that bears fruit, he purges,
that it may bear more fruit, John 15. No fruitful branch shall be cut off.

Thirdly Observe,

That the Saints should as well acknowledge that which is good, as that which
is evil in their spirits. It is common with some Christians to be ever
complaining of that evil they see in themselves, but very seldom acknowledge
any of that good they have received: whereas we ought to acknowledge all the
good we have received, to the praise of the giver.

Fourthly Observe,

That a Christian is what he is in spirit. A believer is not to value himself
acording to what he is in the outward man, or in the flesh, but as he is in the
inward man, or spirit. So the Church values her self by the disposition and
temper of her spirit. My heart waketh, thus has the Spouse in few words set
forth her estate, according to flesh and spirit: and now she sets forth in
the next place the great care and love of Christ, who seeks to awake, and to
raise her out of this dangerous sleep, in these words.

It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, open to me my Sister, my
Love, my Dove, my Undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with
the drops of the night.
In the former part of the verse we heard of the Churches security of the
flesh, where she says, I sleep, and yet she was not in such a dead sleep but
her heart awoke, her delight in Christ was not utterly lost. It was like the
sleep of the wise Virgins, which slumbred as well as the foolish virgins, yet
had their Lamps trimmed, and Oil in them, which the foolish had not. Now
Christ comes to her to awake her by knocking: she notwithstanding her
drowsiness was sensible of all his sweet words and allurements, whereby he
pressed her to open unto him, saying, Open to me my Sister, my love, my Dove,
my undefiled, which is set forth by the sufferings of Christ in waiting for her
return, For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night. All which aggravates her negligence, and his patience in waiting for
admission into her heart by his spirit.

In the words observe two things.

1. The Churches discerning of Christ's voice. 2. Christ's carriage toward his
Church.
First, the Churches discerning of Christ's voice, set down in these words, It
is the voice of my beloved.

Secondly, we have Christ's carriage toward his Church; which is amplified.

1. By a friendly compellation, My Love, my Dove, my undefiled. 2. By his
action, He knocks, etc. 3. By his suffering unworthy things for her sake, For
my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.
It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, etc.
Christ uses good means to awaken his Spouse, and to raise her up from that
carnal security she was in, and therefore he calls her by his voice, and he
no sooner speaks, but she hears it, saying, It is the voice of my beloved,
etc. She speaks as if it were one that being waked out of sleep and slumber,
should say, that it was such, or such a one, that called, or spoke. Many being
so well acquainted with men, that they can certainly, as it were, discern them
by their words.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints may discern Christ's voice, even in a sleepy condition. Here
the Spouse, though she was sleepy and drousie, yet her heart was so far awake,
that she discerned Christ's voice. Christ's Sheep are said, To hear Christ's
voice, John 10. And to taste words by the ear, as it is said, Job 12. 11. they
have a spiritual taste and relish with them. The voice of Christ is spirit and
life, and has in it, a self-discovering property, it carries along with it,
its own evidence: it has such majesty and power, such evidence and life in
it, that the Spouse cannot but hear and discern it, even in a sleepy and
slumbring temper.

Secondly Observe,

That no temptation that befalls the Spouse can separate her affections from
Christ. She acknowledges Christ to be her Beloved still, there remained so much
conjugall amity and friendship, though she was untoward, sleepy, and drousie,
that with a Spouse-like affection she says, It is the voice of my beloved. So
that take a Saint at the worst condition, when he is a sleep, he loves Christ,
and lets out the streams of his affections toward him. Thus much for the
Churches taking notice of Christ's voice: we come to Christ's carriage toward
her, which is set forth, first, by his action, He knocks, etc.

It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, open (...) Pulsavit,
impetum fecit. The Septuagi. turns it by (...) Vrge^, and by (...) Pulso.
unto me, etc.
That knocks, or, that beats: the word in the Hebrew fignifies to knock, or
beat vehemently, to be very earnest, or provoking. In general, it is taken for
any knocking, but here, for knocking at the door. This does intimate Christ's
earnestness for an entrance, to come in and awake his Spouse. And thus Christ
is said to knock at the door of the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3. 19, 20.
Christ has several kinds of knockings, as that of his word, his mercy, his
Spirit, and sometimes his Rod, Mic. 6. 9. yea, all the means that Christ uses
to draw us nearer to himself, as his works, spirit, word, and the conscience
too, these are the knockings of Christ at our hearts. Now Christ does not only
knock, but he is most earnest for an entrance, saying,

Open unto me.
Here the heart is compared to the gates or doors of a City; for as in Cities,
the strength of the City is in the gates, there was their seats of justice in
those days, and there was Munition stored up for war, so that open the gates to
an enemy, and you give him all. So when Christ has the heart, he has the
whole man. The heart is the way of entrance of God into the soul, or into the
whole man, and hence it is said, The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, Acts 16.
14. That was it, at which Christ knocked. When God bestows his blessings on
us, he is said to open doors unto us, as in Psa. 78. 23, 24. and in Isa. 45. 1,
2, 3. The Apostle calls the grace of ministry, The door of utterance, Col.
4. 3. So when we yield unto Christ, and his Spirit, and accept of his grace,
and the like, it is to open the door unto him, as in Revel. 3. 20. Now the
knockings of Christ show how earnest he is of entrance into his Spouse, saying
open unto me, etc.

Hence Observe,

That Christ desires a nearer and nearer fellowship with his Spouse.

Hence it is, that he knocks for a farther entrance and communion, he had
communion before, but he comes to renew and enlarge it. Christ does not delight
in strangeness, but makes forth abundance of love to the souls of his Saints,
that so he might have a further entrance into their hearts and affections. You
know what he says to the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3. 20. Behold I stand at
the door and knock. So here, It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, etc.

But some may object, Christ has power to open to himself, why does he stand
knocking, man has no power to open of himself, etc.

The answer is.

First, Here Christ speaks to the Spouse, that had the spirit of God, by which
she could open to her beloved: for the Saints are first acted by the Spirit,
and then they act by it, not in their own power; but in the power of the
spirit. But

Secondly, When Christ comes for an entrance at conversion: then there goes a
power, that shall open: for his knockings are effectual: his words are
operative words, such as was in the creation, Let there be light, and there was
light, Genes. 1. 3. And such wherewith he raised Lazarus, saying, Come forth of
the grave, etc. Joh 11. 43. So Christ by his Spirit, clothes his words with
majesty, and power, his words are spirit and life, and when he speaks
effectually, he opens and unlocks the heart with the power of his voice.

Now follows the particular compellations, which are as so many motives
Christ uses to move and stir the affections of his Spouse.

Open to me my Sister my love, my dove, my undefiled.
These things are spoken after the manner of earthly lovers, who come in the
night season some times to visit their friends, and provoke them as it were by
fair speeches, to open unto them when they knock, to which end Christ uses
these alluring titles, saying, My Sister, my Love, etc.

My Sister.
Christ is our elder Brother, and the first borne of many Brethren, and what
nearer bond of consanguinitie, than a Sister? So that whatsoever is strong in
any bond, Christ knits us to him by it: and therefore styles himself in all
the sweetest relations, to show that he has the love of all relations toward
his Spouse. Will a Sister shut a Brother out of doors, and that when a Brother
comes to visit her, and to show kindness unto her? Thus Christ comes to make
out his love unto us, calling us by the name of Sister. See this more expounded
in Chap. 4. 9.

My love.
Christ loves all his creatures with a general love, and lets the beams of
his goodness scatter out to them, because there is some beams of his
excellency in every creature; but his Spouse is his beloved in a more peculiar
and eminent way then any other: and though the beams of his general love, are
scattered out to al his creatures, yet his especial love is united and fixed
only upon his Church. See this more largely opened in Chap. 1. 9. Christ cannot
but love what he sees of himself in us, he loves his own Image. It follows.

My Dove.
The Church is resembled to a Dove, in respect of the disposition that is or
should be in her, resembling that creature. A Dove is of a meek disposition,
without guile, faithful to her Mate, and of neat and cleanly feeding, and the
like. So the Saints are called The meek of the earth, Zeph. 2. 1. 2. And are
accounted to be without fraud, or duplicitie in the soul, Jam. 1. 8. They are
faithful and follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes, they have not defiled
themselves with women, Revel. 14. 4. And they feed upon Christ, and spiritual
things. In these, and many more things, there is an apt resemblance betwixt a
Christian and a Dove. But this has been largely spoken of in Chap. 2. 14.

My undefiled.
Some read it my per sect one. The Hebrew word signifies most properly, and
most commonly perfect, (...) Integer, perfectus corpore vel animo, absolutus,
completus, consum matus. Graecis. (...).
and sound, of a religious, honest, and simple disposition, without guile or
wickedness. The Greeks translate it unfeigned. This word undefiled is an
expression of Christ, which he applies to his Church. But now in this
expression we are to consider Christ and his Spouse one: the Spouse having the
field, she has the Pearl also: having Christ, she has his righteousness and
perfection: so the Spouse is perfect and complete in her head, there being a
near conjunction between the head and the Members. Again, the spouse is
undefiled in respect of that disposition in her, which tends to perfection: and
Christ respects her according to what she shall be in her perfection and glory.

Now in that Christ comes thus to awak his Church and by such sweet words to
persuade her, alleging the unity of her nature, which is, she is his Sister,
her fellowship with him, she is his love; her chastity, she is his Dove, her
sincerity, she is his undefiled: and all these sweet words are to melt the
heart of the Spouse.

Hence Observe.

That Christ uses all the sweetest words and actions in drawing his Spouse
near to himself.

Here he uses (as it were) all heavenly Rhetoric; to persuade and move the
affections of the Spouse. Thus Christ draws his Spouse by the bands of love,
calling of her by the name of love, Dove, undefiled: making out his love to her
in the sweetest Titles, and terms of relation; yea, notwithstanding her
infirmity and drowsiness (before mentioned) she is highly esteemed of him, he
imputes not her sins unto her, but looks upon her graces, which he has endued
her withal, as if she were perfect and undefiled.

It follows.

For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.
In these words we have declared the patience and sufferings of Christ, which
he under went, in waiting for the return of his Spouse. The reason why he
would have the door opened, and be let in is, because he had refused no
hardship or incommoditie, but undertook all for the good of his Spouse, as
appears, in that he says:

For my head is full of dew, etc.
The head of Christ being filled with dew, seems to mean his manifold
troubles and calamities which he suffered for her sake, which sufferings of his
are of two sorts: In himself, in his people: In his own person, what did he
endure? how hid he undergo the contradictions of sinners, while he was upon
earth? and at his death, his head was not only filled with drops of dew, but
also with drops of blood, besides the anguish of his Spirit, by losing the
sense of his fathers love. And then what he suffers in his Members, who are
often Troubled on every side, perplexed, persecuted, cast down, always bearing
about in body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 9, 10. Thus
Christ comes in the dark night to awake his Spouse, and communicate good
things unto her: the cold dews of the night, especially in those hot Countries,
were neither good nor wholesome for the people.

It Is added.

And my locks with the drops of the night.
Christ being described as a Nazarite, whose head might not be shaven, is said
to have the cold drops of the night upon his head. Drops signify afflictions
and troubles, Amos 6. 11. Some understand here by the dew and rain, the
spiritual blessing wherewith Christ does enrich his Church, as he promised (in
Hos. 14. 5.) to be, as dew upon Israel, etc. But I rather understand by the
dew, and drops, the sufferings of Christ, as aforesaid, noting chiefly one
thing, viz. that Christ stood as a watchman, and that not one night, but many,
waiting to have entrance, and could have none, and yet stands it out, until the
drops of the night fall upon his locks.

Hence observe.

That Christ does exercise abundance of patience in bringing home people to
himself.

How patient has Christ been toward many of us, in waiting for our
conversion? And how long does he wait for the giving up our souls to him. It
is said, That Christ by his spirit preached in the days of Noah, to the souls
now in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. He waited then a hundred and twenty years, upon
the old world. Now mark how unkind and undutifull the Spouse showed her
self; for she does ingeniously confess against her self; she was warm in
the bed of security, and carnal ease, she was very loath to arise out of it,
therefore she makes these excuses.

VERSE. 2.
I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them.
THe Spouse does here acknowledge, that notwithstanding all the former sweet
drawings of Christ, yet she draws back, and that upon some ground of pretense,
I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on, etc. As if she had said; I have
put off my garments and apparel, and am ready as it were to go to bed, and
therefore, how should I put it on? there is no reason I should do so now. I
havi washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I will not come upon the foul
ground to defile my feet, that I have so cleansed, neither^ is there any
reason, seeing they are clean already, that they should be defiled again.
Both the similitudes tend to one purpose, viz. to express the denial of the
Spouse in opening to Christ, and to let him in, for even as they that be
undressed are loath to put on their clothes again till the morning, that they
must needs rise, and as they that have washed their feet, are unwilling to
foul them, and many times allege these things for excuses, that so they may
with the more safety neglect their duties: even so does the Spouse here. It Is a
metaphor taken from those that are gone to bed, and are loath to rise for any
man's pleasure, and the meaning may be this, that she had now shaken off many
fears and troubles; she was free from perfecution, and delivered from many
afflictions and miseries formerly endured; she had now thrown off these
things, as one going to bed does his garments; she had washed them off, as in
the Eastern countries, travailers were wont to wash off the soil of their
feet, when they went to their rest, and she was now in the bed of fleshly ease,
and worldly contentment, loath to disrest her self, loath to rise and be
pincht with cold again, loath to set her feet into the dirt of former
sufferings, though in her heart she preferred Christ above all; yet so sweet
were those earthly accomodations, that she would rather forbear intercourse
with him for a while, then lose her share in those fleshly enjoyments. Hence
she faith, how shall I put it on? that is, I cannot put it on, without trouble
and reluctation of my flesh. The like phrase God used in Hos. 11. 8. How shall
I give thee up, Ephraim, etc. how shall I make thee as Admah, etc. that is, I
cannot destroy thee, as I did other Cities, that rebelled against me, such is
my comiseration and p^rtic toward thee. Now such are the worthless excuses,
that our flesh does allege, the time is unseasonable, the night is cold, the
weather wet, so that we cannot arise to entetaine Christ without much trouble
and reluctition of the flesh.

Those that understand by putting off her garments, the renouncing of the old
man, and by washing of her feet, the sanctification of her affections, are much
mistaken, for the more she had of either the one or the other, the nearer she
was to Christ, and the more soon she might have entertained him; but the true
natural sense is as before. In sum, she means, that she reasoned to and fro
in her heart, and that her faith did greatly waver, yea, that her own
weakness did so far prevail with her, as not only to think, but to say,
that she could not without some pain of clothing herself again, or without
some hurt by the cold, if she came without her apparel, or without some
discommoditie of fowling her fair feet, as she thought, rise up, and to open
the doors, and let Christ in: yea, unwise, as she was, she more esteemed so
small a discommoditie, in doing and executing of her duty, then the
unspeakeable pleasures she might have had by Christ, who willingly for her
sake, had taken upon him many inconveniences, and sufferings.

Hence Observe.

That a great hinderance of our communion with Christ is, the false pretenses,
reasons, and excuses of the flesh.

The flesh never wants excuses and pretenses, there was never any sinful
course, but the flesh would seem to justify it by one reason or other. Thus
the friend answers (in Luke 11. 7.) Trouble me not, the door is now shut,
and my Children are now with me in bed, I cannot rise and give thee. Therefore
as it is good to know the truths of God, as they are revealed in Jesus, so it
is also to know the falsenesse and deceitfullnesse of our own fleshly and
carnal spirits, they are both mysteries almost alike, hard to be known. It is
true, God made man right, but since the fall he has sought out many
inventions. Carnal wit serves the carnal will, and carnal lusts never want
an advocate to plead for them, namely, carnal reason. There is a Lion in the
way (says the sluggard) a Lion is in the streets, Prove. 26. 3. And the
sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold, Prove. 20. 4. So the people that
dwelt in their seiled houses, said, The time is not come that the Lords house
should be built, Hag. 1. 4. Such kind of shifting there is in lost man, since
the fall, having lost the image of God in holy wisdom and knowledge. Corrupt
courses never want fleshly excuses. Hence it is, Paul says, I consulted not
with flesh and blood, that is, he consulted not with the reasonings of the
flesh, and the carnal will, but was obedient to the heavenly revelation. Thus
Peter consulted with the flesh, when he counseled Christ, saying, Master pity
thy self. Now therefore we should arm our selves with resolution, and say
with Christ, Get thee behind me Satan, etc. Mat. 16. 23. And with Paul, when he
says, We are no more debtors to the flesh, etc. Romans 8. as if he had said, we
owe nothing to the flesh, as to yield obedience and subjection unto it.

But we shall now see in the next Verse, what becomes of all those excuses, and
backwardness of the Spouse, whereby she delays and puts off Christ.

VERSE. 3, 4.
My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved
for him.

I rose to open to my beloved, etc.


IN these and the 3. following Verses, we have the issue of the Spouses
negligence, that Christ absented and withdrew himself. There are three things
set down of what befell the Spouse.

1. Christ's withdrawing of himself, he leaves her for a time to her self,
and to her own ways; but it is said, My beloved put in his hand by the hole
of the door. Christ did not wholly leave his Spouse though he did withdraw:
and therefore,

2. We have Christ's gracious dealing with her, not wholly withdrawing himself,
but puts his finger into the hole of the door, and thereby leaves some
sweetness behind him before his departure, So that her hands dropped down
Myrrh, etc.

3. The success of Christ's departure, and withdrawing of himself, Her bowels
were moved in her, which were hard before, whereupon she opens to her beloved,
as now being willing to receive him, but he is not at her call ready to be
found, he was gone and past, not indeed, but according to her sense and
feeling, and that only for a time. After this, like one that falls into a
swoone, she is void of inward comfort, and sense of Christ's presence, where she
says, My soul failed when he spoke, that is, when I remembered the words which
he did speak.

And lastly, she cannot find her beloved, she then enquires of the Watchmen of
the City, but she receives no comfort from them, but they are like Jobs
friends, of whom it is said, Cold comforters are you all, Job 16. 2. for they
wound her conscience, and disgracefully use her, where it is said, They took
away her Veil from her. So in her present apprehension, she passes all means
of recovery, yet in the following verses, she does recover her self again,
because Christ left her not wholly, but leaves some of his sweetness behind
him before he departed from her.

My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door.

The Spouse is no sooner fallen into this spiritual languor and drowsiness,
making excuses for her sloth and security, but Christ comes to rouse her up,
and that first by withdrawing himself after a sort from her, but yet he will
first leave that behind him, that shall both raise her up to seek after him,
and support her in her afflictions. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of
the door, etc.

My beloved put in) or, (as it is in the Hebrew) sent his hand, or, put it
forth: the putting forth of the hand (...) Misit, emi sit, demisis, im misit.
usually signifies the effecting of some work; as in Genesis 3. 22. and 12. 10.
Hereby is noted, that Christ had some enterprise on the Spouse, he was not
willing she should be at ease in her fleshly and carnal condition.

His hand, that is, his spirit, by which he moved upon her, by which he went to
awake her. For as the finger of God (in Luke 11. 20.) means the Spirit of
God, so does his Hand. Hence it is said, that when the Spirit of the Lord went
out with the ministry of the Disciples, The hand of the Lord was with them, and
a great number believed, and turned to the Lord, Acts 11. 19. So in that it is
said, Christ put in his hand it is meant, he did inwardly move upon her heart,
by the sweet and secret opperation of his glorious Spirit.

In at the hole) or, down by the hole, towit, of the door, as it is added in
our Translation. The similitude is taken from hence, when a door is locked,
yet there is a keyhole at which one may put in his hand, or look in, and so
here, when the hearts of the faithful be after a sort locked up, and Christ
stands at the door of the heart, and calls, and knocks, yet they do not
open unto him, but make excuses, he finds some little entrance or hole, as
through the door, to put in his hand of spirit, to touch the inward parts of
the heart; that so he might leave some print of his fingers before he did
depart.

Hence Observe,

That Christ never leaves his Spouse so, but that he leaves some prints of his
spirit and grace behind him, upon her soul. Hence it is, the soul does so
linger after him, when he has withdrawn himself, and never rests until it
finds him again. There is never a final desertion, as we see here. Christ
puts his hand in at the door, he leaves some inward workings of his gracious
spirit, to quicken the soul to seek after him, and also to support it in its
affliction. Christ stands at the door, and leaves Myrrh behind him, something
in the heart that causes a restless longing after Christ, as appears by that
which follows this touch of his Spirit.

And my bowels were moved for him.
Some read the words thus, My heart was affectioned toward him. Master
Ainsworth thus, My bowels made a troubled noise, or sounded within me. Whereby
is meant, that all the inward affections and powers of the mind, are moved with
grief and sorrow. Now she is grieved and displeased with her self, now she
lamenteth her own folly, that she was so undutifull toward her beloved, now
her heart is again wrapped with love of him, now she will entertain him. Hereby
is signified then all her disquietnesse and sorrow of heart for her beloved,
whom she had so neglected, and put from her, when he desired to come in. Thus
the Prophet declares his sorrow, by saying, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained
at my very heart, my heart makes a noise, I cannot hold my peace, Jer. 4. 19.
And so God himself, in pity of Ephraims calamity, faith, My bowels sounded (or
were troubled) for him, I will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord, Jer.
31. 20. So here, the Spouse, by the sounding of her bowels, shows the grief
and sorrow of her heart, her mourning and languishing after her beloved.

Hence Observe,

First, That the power of Christ's Spirit makes a great change in those into
whom it comes. Behold here the power of the Spirit, what an alteration it makes
in men, how far it changes them from that which they were before: down goes
the power of the flesh where it comes. An example of it you may see in the
Apostles of Christ: how weak and how fearful were they at Christ's sufferings,
but after the holy Ghost came down upon them in the day of Pentecost, of a
company of weak and trembling Lambs, they became so many mighty Lions, they
feared not the whole world. So it is with all Saints, they be heavy, and
lumpish and dull, when the flesh has the stroke, and bears the sway, every
small impediment is a hinderance, and ministers some excuse to keep them back,
and the excuses seem also to be reasonable, but when the touch of the holy
Spirit comes, that Christ put in his hand at the hole of the door, then
there is a quickness, a life and moving, then nothing can let, but they will
seek Christ. It is a wonderful change and alteration that the Lord makes in
man, when he puts down the flesh, and reigns himself by the power of his
Spirit. We remain dull, slow, fearful, weak and negligent, because we rest
in our own power so much, and in the power of the spirit so little.

Object. But some will say, Does not Christ dwell always in the hearts of his
people? How then is it said that Christ knocks to have them open unto him,
and let him in, and they make excuses to put him off? Or how is it then that he
touches them with his spirit now, which they had before?

Answ. We must note, that there be degrees of the measure of the gifts of the
Spirit. The Apostles had the spirit before Christ's ascension, but not in that
measure as afterward: so also Christ dwells in all the Saints, even in those
that have the least spark of true light, but he knoketh to have them open the
doors of their hearts wider, and to receive him after a more full manner. And
thus we have the Psalmist, saying, Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift
up ye everlasting dooes, and the King of glory shall come in, Psalm. 24. we
must set our hearts wide open, that Christ may come in, and reign over us, and
wholly sway us by the Scepter of his Spirit.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ never so deserts his Spouse, but leaves something behind him which
makes her sensible of his absence, and restless in her desires after him.
Hence the Spouse is troubled in spirit, sorrow and calamity presently fell upon
her, when she faith, My bowels were moved for him. That is, my heart was
affectioned toward him, all my inward affections and powers of my mind were
moved with grief and sorrow, I was restless in my spirit after him, nothing
in the world would content me but the enjoyment of my beloved, and communion
with him, whom once I enjoyed with unspeakable delight. These, and such like
affections was the Spouse moved withal. The Spouse is not only affected
inwardly in her mind, but she is also stirred up to seek after her beloved, as
appears in the following verse.

VERSE. 4.
I rose to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers
with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.
THe Spouse stays not in bare motions of the mind (as many have some touch
off, but they vanish again) but she arises to open the door unto her
beloved: it is not now grievous to her to put on her Coat, and to put her feet
into the dirt, being quickened by the Spirit of Christ.

In this Verse we have,

First, a gracious action of the Spouse, she arises to open to her beloved.

Secondly, the grace that follows this action, her fingers drop pure Myrrh,
etc.

I rose up to open, etc. or, I my self rose up. She is no more negligent and
sluggish, but active and stirring to open to her beloved: she acts now, because
she is acted by the Spirit of Christ.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints are very active for Christ, when they act in the power of the
Spirit. Its like the Spouse had much stirring with flesh and blood before, but
she was never able to arise and open to her beloved, till she moved in the
strength of the Spirit of Christ. Christ tells his Disciples, The flesh is
weak, but the spirit is (strong) and willing. Nothing but the power of the
spirit can make us open our hearts wide for Christ the King of glory to come
in. In the next words she magnifieth the graces of her beloved, saying,

And my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh,
upon the handles of the lock.
She could touch nothing with her hands, nor lay her fingers upon nothing,
where he had put in his hand, but all did drop with Myrrh, even with pure
Myrrh: for her meaning is this, that her beloved did but put in his hand, and
yet he had left even by his touch, such abundance of sweet graces, that
wheresoever she touches, her hands drop with the same.

My hands dropped Myrrh, or, the Oil of Myrrh, which distilleth out of the
Myrrh tree. What Myrrh is, has been showed before in Chap. 1. 13. She
means, that Christ left such a plentiful and pleasant smell behind him, that
even she coming after his departure, had such abundance of it, as if she had
such store of Myrrh, as would have made her hands to drop.

And my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, or, passing (...) Transivit.
myrrh, that is, thin and pure myrrh, that is, more fragrant and sweet: by
this passing or pure myrrh, is commended the excellency of Christ's graces, as
that before the abundance of them. This seems to denote the sweet odor of her
services, that her longing and seeking after her beloved was acceptable with
the Lord, and of sweet smell in his nostrils; for by her hands we may
understand her holy actions, anointed with the oil of myrrh, that is, the
spirit of Christ, as the holy in the Sanctuary was made of pure myrrh, which
did presigure the same, Exodus 30. 23. or we may understand it of the grace of
Christ, which he left behind him, as a sweet odor, to draw her to himself,
when he put in his hand at the hole of the door, which she is now sensible of.

Upon the handles of the lock, that is, those fleshly locks or bars, which
kept out Christ from entering, which are now beaten down by the power of the
spirit, and of those divine anointings of Christ, her heart being anointed by
Christ, all those bars of opposition, that the flesh with all its reason and
wisdom, are now beaten down and subdued: so that Christ may freely enter and
come in, and take the whole command of all the affections of the soul, and
reign as Lord and King: this is the virtue and power of the Spirit.

Hence Observe.

First, That the Spirit and its graces, are very sweet and fragrant.

They are pleasant and sweet, and therefore compared here to myrrh. The graces
and prayers of the Saints are said to be sweet, as it is, Revel. 8. 4. Christ
ming leth them with his own sweet odours, and so perfumes them before his
Father. The wicked are abomination to the Lord, because he abhorrs them, their
services, and whatsoever in them is; but, the righteous man is his delight,
Prove. 15. 8. Christ will burn up sin, and consume all the dross of his
Saints, and accept that which is sweet of his own spirit in in them. All the
actions of the flesh are nothing but sinful works, but the actions wrought by
the hand of Christ, the finger of God, and power of Spirit: these actions are
sweet, holy, and gracious.

Secondly Observe.

That the sweetness of the Saints proceeds from Christ's sweetness.

Christ first leaves myrrh, and the fingers of the Spouse drop myrrh. He was
anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows: and out of the fullness
of his divine annointings we receive, and grace for grace. The head being
anointed, the oil ran down to the skirts of Aarons garment, we have all
from our head, grace for his grace, love for his love, privilege for his
privilege, he is a son, so are we sons, we are heirs of heaven, as he is
heir of God, all his dignities, offices, privileges, graces, and
preferrements are ours: So that look whatsoever grace or privilege is in the
head, it descends down to the Members, who share with the head in every
virtue; so that all our graces are from his grace, our life from his life, our
myrrh from his myrrh.

It follows in the next verse.

VERSE. 5.
I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone:
my soul failed when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him, I
called him, but he gave me no answer.
HEre we see the troubles and sorrows which befall the Spouse, because of her
former negligence and security, Christ will not let her lie asleep on her bed
of ease, but will come to awaken her.

In the verse we have.

First, The action of the Spouse, I opened to my beloved.

Secondly, The discouragements of the Spouse, and they are three.

First, Christ's leaving of her, My beloved had withdrawn himself.

Secondly, Her inward grief and sorrow, My soul failed, etc.

Thirdly, She had no answer, notwithstanding all her seeking: I sought him but
he gave me no answer, etc.

I opened, or, I my self opened to my beloved, as before, this notes a
further degree of grace in the Spouse, that she did not only rise up, but
opened the door, gives up the strength and power of heart and affections unto
him, willing that the everlasting King of glory should come in, and reign
there.

Hence Observe.

That gracious affections, produce gracious actions.

Where there is the truth of affection, it will discover it self in holy
action: after her affections were moved, she presently opens to her beloved:
The will, mind and understanding, guide the outward man; therefore if these be
touched and wrought upon, it will quickly appear in outward action: as soon
as her bowels were moved, and that her fingers dropped myrrh, she shows the
truth of her affection in opening unto, and making after her beloved.

Thus much for the action of the Spouse; her discouragements follow.

But my beloved had withdrawn himself.
Withdrawn, or, passed away, to wit, secretly and quietly, (...) Transivit.
particularly also, putting up the great injury, of refusal, that she had
offered him, passed by, to wit, the doors and so went away. The doubling of
the complaint for his departure, shows her passion and grief, in that she
thought he had been at the door, when she opened, but now he was gone, she
could not enjoy his presence and favor, as formerly she had, to her
unspeakeable comfort. This is strange, that he calls and knocks, when she
was asleep and lay in her bed, and now when she is risen out of her bed, and
opens the door to let him in, he withdraws himself, and will not be
seen; her unkind dealing did deserve this.

Hence Observe.

That Christ does sometimes withdraw himself from his Saints, according to
their sense and apprehension.

So God did withdraw from Christ, when he cried out, My God; my God, why have
thou forsaken me? but yet at that time, God was near him, and did uphold him
by his power: and so for the Saints, such desertions as these, proceed from
love from him that does withdraw himself: he does it of purpose for their
good, and that out of a singular love: but seeing Christ does always dwell in
the Saints, how can it be said, that he does withdraw himself out of their
sight, especially when he has made their hands to drop with myrrh? This is
out of question, that Christ is always present in the souls of the faithful,
and yet to their thinking and apprehension he seems to be absent. He does
still support them by his power and spirit, and yet they have not the lively
and comfortable feeling of his presence which they desire, and sometimes
happily did enjoy. Then the heart is troubled, then they mourn, then they
seek and call after him, for she says.

My soul failed when he spoke.
My soul went forth, or it left me and was gone, it failed, and fainted within
me, I was as one without life, even as one dead through fear and grief. The
departure of the soul from the body is death, she was now as it were, in a
swoone, or half dead for the time. Alas, now she is afraid that her unkind
dealing should cause him to forsake her. Who is able to express the grief and
sorrow the godly soul has, when it seeks to feel the consolation of
Christ, and he hides his face. True it is, that the Spouse could not lament,
she could not open the door, seeking and calling after him, unless he were
present, and did work these things in her; for, all these things proceed from
his grace, but yet he does seem to be absent; which makes her cry out, my
soul, my strength, my life, my comfort is departed from me.

When he spoke.
When he spoke, or, while he was speaking, or, rather because of his Speech to
me which I had neglected: for, however the Hebrew will bear both, yet I think
the latter, most agreeable with the purpose of the Spouse, which is to agravate
her offense, and also to show the miseries that she fell into for so great
neglect: So the sense is, My soul failed, because of speech, or, for the
words, which he had used, when he so lovingly called unto me, as before in
verse 2. saying, Open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my
head is full of dew, etc. Now when the Spirit had moved upon her heart and
affections, then she remembered the words of her beloved.

Hence Observe, First.

That Christ's words makes after impressions in the hearts of the Saints,
though they seem to be lost at the first.

Christ's words are that immortal seed, that will never dye, but live and grow,
and be effectual. This word will be effectual through the Spirit. Christ
spoke many things to his Disciples, which they forgot; but when the Spirit,
that comforter was come, it brought those things to their remembrance again,
John. 14. 26. The seed that is sown in the Saints, perhaps will not grow up
presently; but it shall afterward grow and revive again, as the Corn.

Secondly, Observe.

That Christ is so much withdrawn in the souls apprehension, that it even
fails because of his absence.

So it was with the Church in Lam. 3. 1. Thus it was often with David. The
soul that is spiritual will be in a swoone, and deliquium, upon Christ's
withdrawing, if God look with an angry countenance upon the soul, it causes
the Spirits to fail: If any any one has a friend, on whom he had much
dependence, to see his countenance withdrawn, and not to show his face as
before, it will daunt and dismay such a one: much more will the soul be
dismayed, when Christ shall withdraw his pleasant face. It follows.

I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no
answer.
Now the Spouse is in great perplexity, and distress of mind, because of her
former negligence, in that she refused to open to her beloved, when he knocked
for entrance. This is one of the greatest temptations, that God seems not to
hear the prayers of his people; when he shuts out their prayer, as it is,
Lam. 3. 8. But the Spouse here receives like, for like of Christ, because she
would not hearken, she also calls, and has no answer.

But this seems to contradict other Scriptures, which promise, that those that
seek shall find. It is true, they that seek shall find, but not presently,
but by degrees: nay in some sort, he is found before he is sought, for he is in
the soul, to stir up desires of seeking him; he breathes in desires into us,
and answers us before we pray, when he prepares the heart, and hears the
prayer, as the Psalmist speaks: therefore it is a spiritual deceit, when we
think Christ is not in us, and we are neglected of him, when he breathes in
desires after him into our souls.

Hence Observe.

That when the soul earnestly breathes and seeks after Christ, and seems
not to find him, yet Christ is in that soul.

Christ did not enter so fully into his Spouse at once, that she does perceive
it, and yet in the end she finds, that he is come into his garden: she
finds, that her rising out of her sleep, and from her bed, her opening the
door, seeking and calling after him, was not in vain. Jonas, in his greatest
distress, when he said, I am cast out of thy presence, (yet he says)
notwithstanding I will look toward thy holy Temple, Jon. 2. And David, in
Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my have I am cast out of thy sight, yet notwithstanding
thou heardest the voice of my prayer. And afterward he says, it was in his
have, that he thought God had cast him off, he was surprised on a sudden, I
said it is my infirmity, says he, in Psalm. 73. many seek, and because they
find not, even according to their desire at the first, they faint and give
over; but we must know, that where there is any seeking or breathing after
him, Christ is there, and will make himself manifest at the last. And now to
the last verse which I did read.

VERSE. 6.
The watchmen that went about the City found me, they they smot me, they
wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my vale from me.
THere is contained in this verse, the third calmity of the Church, viz. that
Christ her head being absent from her, and she laboring to seek him, falls
in to sundry dangers and distresses: yea, all become noy some and hurtful
unto her, even those that should have kept and preserved her, from all violence
and injuric, they did abuse and beat her, vea, cruelly wound her, and deal
fraudulently with her, as the particulars show.

The injuries that the Spouse did here undergo are two.

First, She is beaten and wounded. Secondly, Her veil is taken from her.
The instruments of her affliction are described to be.

First, The watchmen of the City. Secondly, The keepers of the wall.
The Watchmen that went about the City found me, etc.

These watchmen are said to be such as go about the City, which notes their
painfullnesse and diligence, as of those that watch and ward in the City day
and night, meaning the officers of the Church, as before was noted, in Chap. 3.
3. where the selfsame thing is put down, saving that there is no mention
made of their abusing of her, but only of her demand, who thereby could tell
where he was that her soul loved. Now we have the carriage of these watchmen.

They smote me, they wounded me.
They smote me. That is, with reproaches and evil speeches; for smiting is
sometimes with the Tongue, as in Jer. 18. 18. Come let us smite him with the
tongue. To smite is to hurt or afflict by any means whatsoever; it is said of
Christ in respect of his sufferings, that he was stricken, smitten, and
afflicted of God, Isa. 53. 4. Now in that these watchmen smite the Spouse, they
appear more cruel and enraged then before, in Chap. 3. 3. neither does the
Church enquire of these watchmen after her beloved, but they find her seeking
of Christ, out of their way and course, and therefore they abuse her, they
discourage her, they take her as an evil doer, they deal injuriously with
her. She adds.

They wounded me.
In that she speaks thus without a particle to join them (which manner of
speech the Rhetoritians call Asyndeton) she does it, both to show her own
vehemeney, and the quick dispatch that these evil Watchmen made in so ill
entreating of her: and therefore in that she adds that word wounding, after
smiting, she does, as it were, by a gradation, paint out their wickedness and
her own misery, because many may faint and be smitten, and yet not be wounded,
for wounding is to draw blood, a further degree of hurt then smiting, as
appears in 1 Kings 20. 37. where it is said, a certain man smote one of the
Sons of the Prophets so, that in smiting of him he wounded him. So the
husbandmen wounded the Lords servant. By this wounding of the Spouse is then
meant the highest degree of afflicting of her, the worst dealing of the
Watchmen with her.

It follows.

The keepers of the wall took away my Veil from me.
The keepers, or, the Watchmen of the walls, to wit, such as had a continual
standing allowed them, both to descry the enemies, and to repel them also, if
they can: neither the running watch, nor the standing watch favored me; but
both sorts cruelly entreated me. These Watchmen are meant the Ministers of the
Church and City of God; for the Priests and Levites kept of old the watch or
charge of the Lord, as appears in Numb. 3. 7, 8. And it is said in Isa. 62. 6.
I have set Watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their
peace day nor night, etc. But these Watchmen here seems to be such as are
spoken of in Isa. 56. 10. Blind watchmen, and dumb dogs, such as could do
nothing but rend and tear the flock of Christ.

Some understand by the Watchmen the Ministers of the Church, and by the
keepers of the wall, Magistrates, such as are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. And
these many times direct the point of the sword against the Church. Ministers
and Magistrates, when they are filled with envy and malice at the graces of the
Spirit in the Saints, are both alike persecutors.

Now what it was that these watchmen performed against the Spouse, and what
their carriage was toward her, is declared in the words following.

They took away the Veil from me.
The Hebrew word here Translated Veil, or Scarf, has its name of spreading,
because women spread (...) Inde. Hiphill. (...) Extendit, expandit.
them over their heads to cover them: and it has its signification also of
thinness, because it was made of the finest and purest linen that could be
gotten. Such Vails were worn of women in a double respect.

First, For ornament and adorning, as appears in Isa. 3. 23.

Secondly, In token of subjection and obedience, for this see Genesis 20. 16. Also
Genesis 24. 65. 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6, 7.

Then, the taking away of the Veil notes 2. things.

1. As it was an ornament, as in the Old Testament, a Veil was that which
covered women for modesty, so it was an honorable Ornament. They took away
the Veil. That is, that wherewith the Spouse was covered, they took away that
which made her comely, and laid her open, and as it were naked, by calumnies
and reproaches, casting all the mire and dirt they could upon her. They took
away the Veil of the Spouse, when they took away her credit and esteem, when
they lay open her infirmities and weaknesses. So she was spoiled of her good
name, and reputation, and counted among the light (...) lewd women, for so they
used to deal with dishonest women, disfiguring their faces, stripping them out
of their clothes, and taking away their fair Jewels, as appears by Ezekiel. 23.
25, 26.

2. As the Veil is a token of subjection, it is taken away when they draw the
Spouse from Christ, and her subjection to him, by false doctrines and humane
traditions and inventions of men, by pressing humane devices upon the Spouse,
and so take her off from observing those things that Christ has given her in
trust to observe. Those that desire to sit high in the consciences of people,
and so make them undutifull, they take away the Veil of subjection from them,
making them to observe humane traditions more then Christ's Commandments.

Now in that the Spouse is thus vexed and afflicted by these evil watchmen,
who were such as seemed to be in place of superintendency and ministry, such as
pretended at least to have the greatest care of her, for these to smite her,
wound her, and take away her Veil: this was most savage dealing, and the very
highest of persecution.

Hence Observe,

That those that seem to be of great esteem, and of the highest Office in the
Church, preve many times the bitterest enemies of the Church. Who were more
bitter enemies in Christ's time then the Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests? And
who were the greatest enemies of the Church in the time of the Prophets, but
false Priests and Prophets. The persecuting Magistrate pretends he is in Gods
stead, as they are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. They should govern as God
himself would govern; but al^s, woeful experience tells us that they do
conerary to the truth. As for Ministers, they call themselves the Ambassadors
of Christ, and therefore strengthen the feeble knees, and bind up the broken
hearted, and the like: But alas, we see many of these turn the edge of the
sword against the Saints. The Prophets of God do complain of the wicked
Priests in the time of the Law, how they did afflict the godly: And may not the
same complaint be made still? even now in the days of the Gospel, how are the
Saints still vexed with many of that Tribe. What is the cause they be so much
dlspleased? Surely because the Saints seek after Christ, and that out of their
way and order: they will bear any disorder saving that: men may be carnal,
formal, yea, and profane too, and such are no trouble to their spirits; like
the blind Pharisoes, if there be any excess of riot, these watchmen can bear
it well enough, but if any seek acquaintance with Christ, and not in their
way, that is intolerable, that is to their disgrace, upon such they fall, they
beat and wound them; yea, they take away their Veil: they do deface and
dishonor them all they can, for they make them as odious as they can; they
term them that be Saints, and seek after Christ, Heretics, Scihsmaticks,
Elasphemers, and the like: they lay all the most vile reproaches upon them they
can devise. Now for the Saints, this need not trouble them, when these things
come to pass, that such as pretend to have office, and superintendency over
the Church, do beat, wound, and disgrace her. Did not the builders refuse
Christ himself, the head corner stone? What marvel then, though they beat
his Servants and vex his people. How was Christ judged of the Priests and
Pharisees in his time? And this has been the lot of the Church in all ages,
the Saints were called Heretics, and Schismatics, the Veil was taken off. O
what cruelty is this? What savage men are these that thus beat and wound the
Spouse of Christ? Yea, mark well how they be: They be the watchmen that
pretend to be Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ for to feed his flock, who of
all others should chiefly defend and comfort them: now for these to beat and
wound the Spouse, and take away her Veil, this is intolerable wickedness,
this is the highest impiety.

To conclude, truth has always a saracht face; falsehood, and formality for
the most part go under glorious attire, as that of decency and uniformity, and
the like. There is no question, that such as are carnal Formalists,
Pharisaicall Professors, would persecute Christ if he were in the flesh, as now
they persecute his imageand spirit in his Saints, when they smite and wound and
take away their Veil from them. Thus much for this time.

VERSE. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. to the end of the Chapter.
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell
him that I am sick of love.

What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women?
What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge us.

My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

His head is as the most fine Gold, etc.


IN the former part of the Chapter, we have heard how the Bridegroom calling
and knocking to raise his Spouse out of her sleep, even from her carnal
security, what excuses she made, how unkindly and undutifully she dealt with
him. Moreover we have heard how he for the same unkindnesse, did withdraw
himself from her; she seeks after him, and falls into the hands of the
watchmen, even into the hands of false Pastors, which dealt with her very
cruelly, they beat her, they wounded her, and took away her Veil from her.
But what does the Spouse now? Does she give over seeking her beloved? No
verily, she goes on in her search still, and is more vehement then before:
when she was under the power of the flesh, she thought it somewhat unreasonable
to seek after her beloved, and began to excuse her self, saying, I have put
off my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile
them? Christ seems to require that at her hands which was without all reason,
but after he had touched her inwardly by his spirit, she does not say, I have
sought him, and by seeking him have been beaten, wounded, and disgraced, how
shall I seek him any longer? There is now a fire kindled in her which none can
quench, the flesh now with all the excuses which it can make, is put to silence.

Hence Observe in the general.

That the Saints do never more prise Christ, nor seek after him with more
affection, then in the time of hot persecution. The practice of the Spouse here
does plainly demonstrate this, beside all experience shows the same. It was
to this purpose that Christ put in his hand at the hole of the door, and left
that sweet myrrh with which his fingers did drop. The truth is, that though
Christ seemed to withdraw, and to absent himself from his Spouse, yet by the
inward workings of his spirit, by putting in his hand, he is very near unto
them, and does by his wisdom, power, and goodness, exceedingly support and
comfort them. Now let us descend down to the particulars themselves. And first
take a general resolution of this latter part of the Chapter.

The Spouse having thus long sought her beloved, and not finding him, no not
among the watchmen that should have given her best instruction; yet because of
that never dying affection in her, she does nor let her beloved go altogether,
but still seeks him, even among such friends as know him not so well as her
self, as one that will refuse no means to find him. So at last by degrees,
first uttering her earnest desire, and making diligent search after him, she
finds comfort in her self.

In these words we have therefore.

First, the Spouse enquiring among her acquaintance, for her beloved, verse. 7.

Secondly, they make answer, as if they knew him not, verse. 8.

Thirdly, she makes unto them a description of him, how he might be known
from other men. This description is made.

First, In general, My beloved is white and ruddy, etc. verse. 9.

Secondly, She descends down to that which is more particular, setting him
forth by all the members and lineaments of his body; and does set him forth (as
we use to say) from top to toe, beginning at his head, which is the most
eminent part of the body, saying, His head is as most fine gold, etc. verse 10.
etc. and so to verse 15. and so concludes in a general commendations of him,
showing that he was precious and amiable in his whole self; saying, He is
altogether lovely, or, he is lovely in all parts, yea, he is all over lovely,
he is wholly delectable, crying out with an exclamation? This is my beloved,
and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

Fourthly, These Daughters of Jerusalem are inamored with Christ, as well as
the Spouse herself, and desire to join with her in seeking him out, as
appears in the following words, Whither is thy beloved gone, that we may
seek him with thee?

Fifthly, and lastly, it was made known to her at length, where he is to be
found: My beloved is gone down into his garden, etc.

Now to the first verse that I read.

I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye
tell him that I am sick of love.

In these words observe.

First, A charge given, I charge you.

Secondly, The Persons charged, The daughters of Jerusalem.

Thirdly, The particular thing wherewith they are charged, that is, if they
find Christ, to tell him, she is sick of love.

But first of the charge given.

I charge you
The Spouse having escaped the injurious watchmen, now meetteth with her
friend, The Daughters of Jerusalem, lays this weighty charge upon them,
saying, I charge you, that is, by oath, or, I adjure you: that is, I lay a very
strict and weighty charge on you, as it were by an Oath, which form also the
Spouse uses, both to testify her unfeined love toward her head Christ, and
to provoke them, with whom she deals, to deal faithfully in doing her
message. Now from the charge, or manner of the speech of the Spouse, Observe.

That the Saints are real and serious in their affections toward Jesus
Christ.

Here the Spouse lays a weight upon the daughters of Jerusalem, saying, I
charge you, etc. She was very real and cordial in her affections, and in this
weighty charge, she does but breath out by hearty expressions, that those in
ward affections of her soul were. Thus much for the charge it self: The next
thing is the parties charged.

O daughters of Jerusalem.
The Spouse was ill entreated of her enemies, as appears verse 6. therefore
now she speaks unto her friends, looking to find favor and courtesy amongst
them: the daughters of Jerusalem were her felllow-members, of whom we have
spoken of largely from chap. 2. 7. And also chap. 3. 5. Now this verse being
the beginning of the second part of the Chapter, containing a dialogue between
the Spouse, and the damsels or daughters of Jerusalem; which shows that the
Spouse leaves the watchmen, and enquires for her beloved among her own
friends, her own Members.

Hence Observe.

That the Lord does many times convey comfort and satisfaction to his people,
by poor, weak, despised instruments.

The Spouse expected more help from these poor despised daughters of
Jerusalem, her own members, then from the watchmen of the walls. What comfort
could the Saints receive from the false Priests and Prophets in the time of the
Law? or, what satisfaction may the godly receive from the Scribes and Pharisees
in Christ's time? and as little may the Saints expect now from many, that
pretend to the Office of Priesthood, or ministry. Surely, many a Saint knows by
experience, that more satisfaction and comfort is to be had from many a poor
despised Member of their congregation, then from the great Rabbis and Doctors
of the world: and no marvel; for, God ordains strength out of the mouths
of babes and sucklings, Psalm. 8. And he has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the things that are mighty: and the base things of the
world, and things that are despised, has God chosen, yea, and things which are
not, to bring to naught things that are: That no flesh should glory in his
presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. No fleshly nor carnal man shall boast in Gods
sight; and therefore by his wisdom and power he will overturne the wisdom
and power of flesh: that his own spirit, wisdom, power, and righteousness
might be exalted in his Saints. Now follows the thing it self given the
charge.

If ye find my beloved, tell him that I am sick of love.

If ye find my beloved, which shows they had but little knowledge of
Christ, they had not the clear manifestation of his love and favor; they
apprehended him but darkely, being ignorant almost of him, as appears by their
answer in the next verse.

Hence Observe.

That many Saints know but little of Christ.

Hence the Spouse says here, if ye find him, that is, if you come to a more
clear knowledge and revelation of him: many Christians know Christ after the
flesh, and after the letter, but how few know him after the Spirit? many know
Christ, as he is set forth in the history of the Gospel, to be crucified and
risen, but few know Christ found in them by the spirit. It follows.

Tell ye him that I am sick of love.
Tell ye him, or, as it is in the Hebrew, What shall ye tell him?
interogatively, which he speaks shortly, (...) Id est quid indicabilis ci.
as many times lovers do, and yet the interogation contains more vehemence
in it, and serves to beautify the speech also: It is an earnest and
passionate kind of speech, showing her earnest affection after her beloved.
Would you know what you should tell him? even that which follows.

That I am sick of love.
She cannot conceal the heat and vehemency of her love, but even after the
manner of lovers, declares the same, who the more they be absent one of them
from another, the more their love increases, and the more greatly do they
desire to be joined together. The truth is, that the Spouse is so far off,
from keeping closse her love toward her beloved, that she does not only
reveal it to them, but entreats them rather freely to open it, and declare
the same, especially to her beloved. But what will ye tell him? This demanding
question, shows that her love did so appear, that they must needs if they
tell him any thing, tell him:

That she is sick of love.
The Greek rendereth it, wounded with love: that is, with languishing desires
after him. This is exceeding great love, that she comes to be lovesick, as
one ready to languish, and faint away with love, here is a sickness, but not
unto death, but unto life, a sickness that still brings comfort and
satisfaction with it, a sickness that shall be cured with Christ, the great
Physician.

Hence Observe.

First, That true affections toward Christ, will desire inenlargement from
others.

The Spouse here desires these daughters to tell Christ of her affection
toward him; to the end, that Christ might more and more discover his love and
favor unto her. The Apostle desired that the Thessolonians would pray for him,
That he might be delivered from unreasonable men, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2.

Secondly, Observe.

That there is a distemper and unquietness in the affections of the Saints, in
the want of the full enjoyment of Christ.

There is no contentment without union, and enjoyment, and the more excellent
the thing is that is loved, the more contentment there is in communion with it,
and where it is hindered in the least degree or measure, there is disquietnesse;
such as is the contentment in enjoying, such is the sorrow and sickness in
parting. The greatest happiness of the Spouse was in the enjoyment of her
beloved; and the greatest of her sorrow and sickness is in parting with him.
But now if the flesh had borne sway, that would have reasoned after another
way, as thus: I opened the door, and he withdrew himself, and by that
occasion I have suffered great calamity, therefore I have small cause to love
him: seeing he does hide himself from me, and cause me to be thus stricken and
wounded, why should I set my heart upon him? The flesh I say would minister
such kind of reasons, but the Saints are not led by the flesh and its wisdom,
but by the Spirit which teaches them, the more they suffer for Christ, the
more to love him. This is a thing beyond the reach of humane reason, the Spouse
having fallen into so great affliction by seeking after her head Christ, is
thereupon sick of love. The Saints rejoice in tribulation, and count it their
honor to suffer for Christ, and the more they suffer in his name, he does so
strengthen them, and work in them by the Spirit, that the more they love him.
Thus having heard, what the Spouse says to the daughters of Jerusalem: let us
now see what answer they do make.

VERSE. 8.
What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women?
What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge us.
THe same words of well-beloved, are repeated again and again, to show, that
the stronger is love. But by the answer of the daughters of Jerusalem, in which
they seemed not yet to know Christ fully, as is apparent by their answer, for
instead of giving satisfaction to her, they reply with asking new questions,
saying, What is thy beloved more then another beloved, etc.

In this answer here are two parts.

First, A sweet and loving compellation, O thou fairest among women.

Secondly, The question is doubled, What is thy beloved, more then another
beloved? And again, What is thy beloved, etc. that thou do so charge us? As
if these Daughters had said, there is some great matter in it; there is some
excellency superhumane, that thou layest such a charge upon us, that thou do
so enquire after him.

But first of the compellation.

O thou fairest among women.
The Spouse is the fairest among women in the judgment of Christ himself, so
he calls her, O thou fairest among women, Cant. 1. 8. And here the
Fellow Members of the Church, term her so too, fair, and the fairest, yea,
incomparable fair.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse is surpassing fair and beautiful, not only in the eyes of
Christ, but also in the judgment of her own members, and that in the time of
her greatest perplexities and sorrows.

Here the Spouse, though persecuted and abused by wicked watchmen, who beat
her, wounded her, and took away her veil from her, is not withstanding
discerned, and acknowledged to be fair and glorious, by such as are the
faithful of Jesus Christ. Thus Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. And the Thessalonians
received the Gospel, with joy; though in much affliction, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. It
was because they saw greater glory, and richces in Christ, then evil in all
afflictions whatsoever. And though the Spouse may be in great affliction and
misery, yet her glory does far surmount that, so that she appears to the
godly, to be the fairest of all, though under much trouble and persecution.
Afflictions do make base and contemptible to the outward show: but the beauty
of the Spouse is not outward in things of this life, but in spiritual
ornaments, which are not diminished or dimmed by afflictions, but do then
indeed shine brightest of all, for the times of the greatest persecutions, when
the Saints are imprisoned, racked, and tormented: you shall behold their
steadfast faith and patience, their contempt of the world, with many other
virtues: for which the daughters of Jerusalem, even the weaker sort, which are
not as yet fully come to Christ, do commend the Spouse to be the fairest among
women: and indeed the Church cannot be otherwise then fair, and the fairest,
being clothed with the Sun, as it is in Revel. 12. that is, being clothed
with Christ, as Christ was clothed with the glory of the Father: in respect
of which, All flesh is as grass, and as the flower of the grass, Isa. 40. 6.
that is, a I worldly excellency is as the flower of the grass, that withers
and fades away: but the spirit, life, and glory of God, which is the Churches
clothing remains and abides for ever. Thus much for the compellation. Now to
the question.

What is thy beloved more then another beloved? what is thy beloved, more then
another beloved, that thou do socharge us?

Here is a question, and a question answered by a question, wherein the
Daughters of Jerusalem seem to be as much inquisitive after Christ, as the
Spouse herself, They double the question, for the more vehemency, as also for
the strangeness of the matter.

What is thy beloved more then another; to wit, any other Gods: for, when
Christ is preached, the wicked take occasion to cry up and magnify other
Gods, But the Saints desire to be informed further in the truth, and to know
the difference between Christ and false Christ's, between Christ and Antichrist,
as appears in Acts 18. 19. 34. etc.

What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge us?
Viz. So hardly, and straightly, and even as it were, by virtue of an Oath.
Something there is in the matter that thou layest so hard a burden, and
straight charge upon us, or else thou would not do it. This is the first
question moved to the Church, concerning the person of her beloved, they
marvelling, as it were, what excellency should be in him, that she should so
highly esteem of him, by occasion of which demand she enters into a notable
description of Christ, as in the verses following. These words being somewhat
plain, need no further explication; but let us take notice of some
Observations from them. First Observe,

That the earnest seeking of the faithful after Christ, is a means to stir up
others to inquire what he is, or what there is in him. Common reason will lead
men thus far, when they see that no threatenings, no affliction, bonds, tortures
nor sufferings whatsoever, can prevail, but that the Saints do become more
earnest in seeking Christ, to say within themselves, it is out of question there
is some great thing that carries these men, it is no small benefit for which
they will endure all these things. Hereupon these daughters begin to inquire
what Christ is, What is thy beloved more then another beloved, etc. What is he
more excellent then others, that are called Gods? Surely there is some
excellency super-humane in him. That thou do so charge us. What an excellent
thing is it therefore to be earnest in seeking after Jesus Christ? O it wins
souls to enter into the consideration, what Christ is, and what excellencies
there be in him, when they see that others be bent, and cannot by no means be
driven back from seeking after him. And therefore know, that whosoever he be,
though mean in the world, that with earnestness and meekness does seek the
Lord, he shall be a means to win others to the seeking of him also.

Secondly Observe,

That many that profess Christ know but little of him. What is thy beloved
more then another beloved? Wherein does he excel other Lords, that the men of
the world do trust in? By this answer, the daughters of Jerusalem seemed to
know little of Christ. It is true, that David says, God is known in Judah,
and his name is great in Israel, for in Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling place in Zion, Psalm. 77. 1, 2. yet he is not sufficiently known among
some in Judah, as he should be, but he ought yet to be better known in Judah,
and his name to be greater in Israel. I confess many Christians know Christ in
the History and letter of the Gospel, many know him after the flesh, but how
few know Christ after the Spirit? How few know the dying, resurrection, and
ascension of Christ in them? Many know a Christ dying upon the Cross, without
them, but how few know Christ within them. Truly I fear, that in many
Congregations where the name of Christ is professed, there be such ignorant
ones among them, which like the Athenians, erect an Altar to the unknown God,
as we read, Acts 17. 23. That is, take upon them to worship God whom they know
not. But O Christians! This is not your work, to go on in blind devotion, but
to be strenthned by the Spirit of God in the inner man, that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith, that being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, length, depth, height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge; that they may be filled with
all the fulness of God, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians, Chap. 3. 16,
17, 18, 19.

Thirdly Observe,

That it is an excellent thing for Saints to confer one with another. The
excellency of holy conference is seen here in the Spouse, coming to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, speaking of her beloved, and telling them, that she was
sick of love, etc. upon this the daughters of Jerusal: grow very inquisitive to
know more of Christ, till at length they begin to be warmed and kindled with
the consideration of his excellency. This demand of the Spouse, I charge you,
if ye find my beloved, to tell him that I am sick of love, breeds questions in
the daughters of Jerusalem, what is thy beloved, etc. whence upon the
description of her beloved, their hearts are kindled and enflamed with love to
Christ, and they become earnest seekers of him. Thus it was with the Disciples,
when they were in a damp for the loss of Christ, after he comes and meets
them, and opens the things of the Kingdom of God unto them, Their hearts begun
to burn within them, Luke 24. 32. We should be very inquisitive after Christ,
his ways, his Kingdom: questions many times end in resolutions: the soul
rests and injoyes in satisfaction. Thus much for the answer of the daughters of
Jerusalem, which was by way of question or demand, What is thy beloved more
then another beloved? etc. Now follows the description which the Spouse makes
of her beloved; and first in general, she describes him thus.

VERSE. 9.
My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand.
The Spouse in her reply to the Daughters of Jerusalem, makes a lively
description of Christ.

First, before we enter upon the particulars, we may consider in general, how
she sets forth here the riches, the dignity, the glory and beauty of Christ.
When the daughters of Jerusalem, are so inquisitive for to know him: she
describes him at large, to the end, that it may appear there is good cause to
move so earnestly after him, and that it might be known what a rich Jewel they
obtain, that do find him. So that indeed, notwithstanding her great
distraction of mind, her speeches are still godly, and her whole communication
is nothing else but a kind of Sermon, or preaching of the goodness, merit, and
worthiness of Jesus Christ.

Hence Observe in the general.

That no persecution can silence the Spouse, so as to hinder and keep her back
from publishing and declaring the glory and the praise of her wel-beloved. It
is an usual thing for the world to storm, to gnash their teeth, yea, to fret,
and rage, when Christ is laid open in the rich treasures of his grace and
glory; yet for all their fury and rage, the Saints will not be silent, but
describe him and lay him forth in his highest glory and excellency. Then
however the Spouse was persecuted and abused by the watchmen, she proceeds to
set forth her beloved, saying.

My beloved is white and ruddy, etc.
First, the Spouse describes her beloved in general, saying, My beloved is
white and ruddy, etc.

Secondly, she sets him forth in particular, and does enumerate and reckon up
all his parts, from top to toe (as we use to say) setting him forth by all the
members of his body, as the following verses show.

In general she describes Christ two ways.

1. Positively, My beloved is white and ruddy. 2. Comparatively, The chief
among ten thousand.
My beloved is white and ruddy, etc.
The Spouse describes Christ unto the daughters of Jerusalem, by his
surpassing beauty and comeliness, to the end, she may attract and draw forth,
both her own affections, and theirs also after him. Christ is here set forth,
as a goodly young man, whose image is pourtrayed by his visible qualities, his
colors, and by the members of his body. But this is not meant of the aspect
and face, of the outward lineaments and proportion of his body: although his
comeliness in that behalf need not to be doubted of: but of his spiritual
beauty and gracefulness.

My beloved is white and ruddy, says she, the mixture of these two colors
makes a beautiful and good complexion. White and red, as they show the best
temparature in man, so here it may denote in Christ his divine nature, and his
humane nature: for white is like the appearance of God, as we may see in the
Vision in Dan. 7. 9. he appeared all white as snow, and pure as fine wool. And
man had his name Adam, of Adamah, the red mould of the Earth, out of which he
was taken, Genesis 2. 7. Christ is called the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45. And was
partaker of our flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14.

Or, we may understand by Christ's whiteness, his righteousness and innocence,
as he was without spot, without sin, being the immaculate Lamb, free from all
defilements: And thus the Saints are said to be clothed in white raiment,
which is their righteousness, Revel. 19. 14. So that these words may allude to
the Candidus and rubicundus, Christus esse perhibetur, quia nullum omnino
peccatum faciens justitiae plenitudinem ex integro tenuit, and famen, tanquam
peccator esset, ad mortis passionem accessit. Greg. in Cant. 5.
Prophets description of the Nazarite, whom, that he may figure the glory of
Christ, he describes him to be more white then milk, more pure then snow,
more ruddy then the Carbuncle, more orient then the Sapphire, Lam. 4. 7. By
which outward beauty is understood in ward holiness. And then by his redness
we may understand his bloody sufferings, for we are said to be washed and
cleansed by his blood, as the Apostle John says, The blood of Christ cleanses
us from all sin, 1 John 1.

Again lastly, we may understand by his whiteness, his administrations, and
then it denotes his grace, mercy, meekness, and patience, he is very mild and
gentle in all his ways. And likewise by his redness his vengeance and justice
on his enemies: for he is said to have his Garments dipped in blood, Isa. 63. 1,
2. Now this temparament, and mingling of white and red after such a mystical
manner in Christ, denotes his surpassing beauty, makes him of high account to
his Saints, and enflames their affections to embrace him, and follow him; for
these two colors together do show a right excellent constitution of body, and
also a very perfect beauty. This ruddy or sanguine complexion is commended in
David, 1 Samuel 16. 12. And both these colors of white and red are joined
together, the whiteness makes the redness more fresh and fair, and the
redness discerns the whiteness from palenesse of face, or phlegmatic
complexion: both which colors, if they concur in any earthly creature,
especially such as be young, make the same to be most of all liked: how much
more then should they, considered spiritually in Christ (in respect of whom all
earthly things are but a shadow) not only be excellent in him, but draw us to
be enamoured with him.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is one in whom is rare beauty. The Psalmist describes him to be
so, when he says, Thou art fairer then the Children of Adam, Psalm. 45. 3. The
Apostles beheld his glory as the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth, John 1. 16. By the only begotten is meant, he that came from the
bosom of God, with the glory of the Father upon him. And Christ in his glory
had his face shining as the Sun, Mat. 17. 2. For he was full of his Fathers
glory, In him dwellt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. It
was God appeared gloriously in our flesh, shining forth in his glorious beams
through his Son: So that Christ is glorious by the indwellings of God, by his
righteousness, wisdom, power, goodness, glorious in all his offices and
administration, dealing in much meekness and gentleness with his people, and
in as great justice and wrath with his enemies. Thus Christ is described
positively to be all glorious and fair, in that it is said he is white and
ruddy. It follows, that his glory is farther set forth, comparatively.

The chief among ten thousand.
As Christ is glorious and excellent, so he does excel (...) Vexillavit, Vnde.
(...) Vexillatus.
all others, all creatures whatsoever, even men and Angels, and therefore she
says, He is the chief of ten thousand: Or, as the words are in the Hebrew,
Having the banner of above ten thousand. Christ is the Standard Bearer of ten
thousand, that excells all other creatures in the world. The Spouse uses a
metaphor taken from the war, as also puts a number certain for an
uncertain, to express the commendations of her beloved. Now the Banner or
Ensign is a warlike instrument, and commonly the bearer thereof, one of the
chiefest, and tallest, and mightiest men: and among ten thousand men a man may
find many goodly countenances, but yet says she, for found and natural
moisture, and for a most temperate and beautiful color: Look among infinite
numbers of people, yea, among all the Sons of Adam, you shall not find one or
any, any way matchable with my beloved. The Standard or Ensign is that, under
which the whole Army do encamp, as appears, Number. 2. Here Christ is set forth
above all, to be Gods Standard Bearer, to be set up for an Ensign of the
Nations, Isa. 11. 10. And all the Armies in Heaven and Earth follow him, Rev.
19. 10. The Saints worship him, Angels they adore him, for he is the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah; the first borne of God, set above all the Kings of the
Earth, as the Psalmist speaks.

Now in that Christ is set forth comparatively, to be more excellent then ten
thousand.

Hence Observe.

That as Christ is glorious and beautiful: so he is incomparable beyond all
others.

Take the very quintessence and perfection of all creatures, and extract all
the glory out of them, and it will be nothing in comparison to Christ's glory.
Adam in innocence in his first created glory, and moral righteousness, was but
a type, a figure of the son of God. Indeed Adam had the perfection of all
creatures; but Christ had all the perfections of God himself, his wisdom,
power, goodness, and glory, Christ is that second Adam, the Lord from heaven,
the Lord of glory, the brightness of Gods face and glory, the express image
of his person, the invisible God, the life manifested, the word of God, the
Alpha and Omega, this is he that is Immanuel, or God with us. Thus much for the
general description of Christ. Now follows that which is more particular.

VERSE. 10.
His head is as fine gold, his locks as bushie, and black as a Raven.
THere are two things that concur to make a perfect beauty.

First, A good complexion, and healthy constitution.

Secondly, A just Symmetrie or proportion of parts. The Spouse therefore does
not think it sufficient in general to set out Christ thus, to say he is white
and ruddie, etc. that he is of very good complexion and temperature: but also,
she shows, that there is in him also a comely proportion of parts: from the
corespondencie and agreement of parts arises a feature completely beautiful
and lovely. The Spouse enumerates and reckons up all his parts, and therefore
borrows phrases and comparisons, from things that are most excellent, to set
forth the excellency of Christ above all other things.

Hence Observe in the general.

That a Christians heart is large in affections to Jesus Christ.

See here the Spouse, though she was ill entreated of the watchmen; and in some
sort deserted of Christ himself, yet she goes on, and sets out a particular
commendations of her beloved. Now whence is it that the faith and graces of the
Saints are so impregnable? whence is it that their hope is so indefatigable,
and nevever out of breath? whence is it, that no storms or tempests of
tentation can break their spirits, and make them give out; but that largeness
of affection, that they have toward Christ: An example we have in Peter, Lord,
(says he) if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water; So it is with the
Saints, they refuse not to venture even upon boistrious storms, and dangers to
go to Christ. Hence was Jobs resolution, Though thou kill me, yet will I trust
in thee. Hence also it is, That the Children of God, though they walk in
darkness, and have no light all, yet they will trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay themselves upon their God, Isa. 5. 10. Now because Christ has not
one, but many excellencyes; every thing in him is excellent, inward, and
outward; from his head to his feet, etc. for indeed beauty consists not only in
color and complexion, but in affinity and proportion of all parts. Now to
come to the particulars, and first she begins with his head, saying.

His head is as fine gold.
The Spouse begins to set out the excellency of the chief part, viz. the head.
Now the head of Christ is God, as the Apostle says in 1 Cor. 11. 3. That
Christ is the head of every man, that the man is the head of the woman, and
that God is the head of Christ. The head has an eminency above all other
parts, and also an influence upon all the Members, we may understand this of
God, who is the head of Christ, as the Apostle says, in 2 Cor. 12. 13. or, we
may understand it of the headship of Christ over his Church, that his
administrations, government, and headship is most glorious and excellent, most
splendent and shining, as pure gold.

As fine gold, or the solid gold. Two names of the best gold are here joined
together. The first name in the Hebrew is Cethem, that is, fine shining gold:
the second is Paz, that is, strong and solid gold, or gold that is purified:
hereby the Spouse sets forth how excellent, how glorious, how rich and
shining the head of Christ is: for among earthly things what is comparable to
the fine gold, it is held of all metals most precious, and of all treasures the
richest. And as gold is precious: so it is durable metal, which shows, that
Christ's headship and dignity is everlasting and durable, it is divine and
heavenly, and of a a glorious extent.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is eminent and glorious, in respect of his head-ship.

God is the head of Christ, and Christ is the head of Saints. In Christ were
hidden all the treasures of divine wisdom, for in him dwelt the fulness of
God; he was the express image of the Fathers person, and the brightness of
his Fathers glory. Christ lived in the knowledge, counsel, wisdom, and bosom
of the Father, and therefore was an excellent head, a golden head: neither is
he compared to every kind of gold, but to that which is most pure and solid, he
is eminent, glorious, and shining in all the excellencies of his father, and
does administer to his Spouse, that he receives from God: so that his Members
are golden members, from his influence, who is a golden head: therefore the
seven Churches are styled the seven golden candlesticks, Revel. 1. Every thing
in the Tabernacle was gold, to show, that every thing in the Spouse is
excellent. It is most certain, that there is much false gold in the world:
natural and carnal men have golden images of their own, but it will be found
at the best to be but guilt, and external paintings: but Christ only is a head
of gold, not only his Crown gold, but his very head is gold, pure gold,
refined, and all gold, and nothing but gold, all shining and glorious.

Thus much for the commendation of Christ's head.

Now she proceeds to his hair.

His locks are bushie, and black as a Raven.
His locks are bushie, or, curled. The curling of the locks shows that the
hair is soft, which argues in a natural body, a gentle disposition. His
hairie locks, of which before he complains in verse 2. that they were filled
with the drops of the night, here they are commended for being curled, or on
heaps, bushie, and hanging down. The Nazarites according to the Law, did wear
long hair as appears by Samson, though they did wear it after a most grave
and sober manner. She describes his hair, not only to be bushie, and curled,
but to be: Black, etc.

The blackness of the hair, makes the beauty of the skin more shining and
glimmering in the eyes of men. The blackness of the hair then was no unseemly
color, especially in men's hair, and the rather if we have regard to the
people inhabiting in the Land of Judah, which is very hot and parching. She
adds.

And black as a Raven.
In that she compares it, by the blackness of a Raven, she shows, that it
was a natural and pure black of it self, which is far more excellent, both
in black and all other colors, then any that is made so by art.

Now for curled and black hair, it is a sign of a hot brain, and argues in
nature quickness and dexterity of wit, and strength, and courage in him that
it grows upon. This denotes unto us all that spiritual wisdom, vigor, and
strength of Christ, the depth of all his understanding, and counsels.

Hence note.

That Christ was sitly qualified for all his administrations. He was gentle and
mild, he would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax until
he bring forth judgment unto truth, etc. Isa. 42. 3. He was full of wisdom,
counsel, justice, and gravity, therefore called the Ancient of days, Dan. 7.
22. All his counsels, thoughts, and purposes were in the hidden mysteries of
God: he was privy to the heart and bosom of his father, living in the
knowledge and secrets of God, in that light which no creature can approach
unto. He is called the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. Now she passes from the head, and from
the hair, to the eyes, saying

VERSE. 11.
His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, by the rivers of water, washed with milk,
and fitly fit.
SHe now describes his eyes, by the sober comelines and beauty of them, they
being full of innocence, singlenes, and chastity, which he means to
express, by comparing them to Doves eyes. The Spouse attributes it here unto
Christ, which he before attributed unto her, Chap. 1. 15. Also Chap. 4. 1.

His eyes are as the eyes of Doves.
The eye of the Dove (as has been said before) is a beautiful eye, chaste, and
single. To the Doves eyes therefore she likeneth the eyes of her beloved: but
she does not compare them to Doves eyes, that is, to every sort of Doves eyes,
but to such as be most beautiful and clear, which may appear by the words
following.

By the Rivers of waters.
By the Rivers, streams, or currents of water, that run violently, such
waters as are pure and clean; that is, like such Doves, as haunt and abide by
the Rivers of waters, where they have plenty of water, to wash themselves and
their eyes, to make them clear and fresh, we know that running water is good
to fresh and clear the sight. And therefore the clearenes and beauty of these
Doves eyes are set forth, in that they are mentioned to be such Doves, as
delight to be by the Rivers of clear waters.

Then farther she says.

They be washed with milk.
This expression declares a further brightness in Christ's eyes: so that if it
be not sufficient to resemble them to Doves, that use the clear streams: then
let them be compared to such, as for the clearencs and freshness of their
eyes, wash themselves in milk, that so they may appear, and be judged white
and comely, shining with clear brightness. She adds.

And fitly set.
Fitly set, or sitting in fullness, or they remain upon the fullness. This
expression may admit of a double interpretation.

First, If the similitude of waters be continued, then we may understand, full
Channels of water, by which, Doves delight to fit, and therefore some render
the words, They remain upon the full vessels: and so the meaning would be,
That as Doves eyes be full of moisture, that remain and continue by full
Vessels: so is Christ the head of the Spouse, of whose fulness the members
receive grace for grace. But there is no speech of Vessellsin the Hebrew Text,
but the words stand thus. They remain upon the fulness.

And here we must know, that the word here Translated fulness, does signify
the hollow place in which a precious stone is set, as a Diamond, or precious
stone in a Ring is made meet and fit to fill up the hollow place of the Ring.
So the precious stones set upon Rings or rows upon the golden Ephod, Exodus 25.
7. had their hollow places in which they were cunningly set, and so were called
the stones of fullness, because they did in so fit sort fill their hollow
places. So that as a precious stone is made fit for the hollow of the Ring: So
the commendation of the eyes is, that they are fitted for the holes of the
head. And as stones thus fitted and cunningly set in the Ring are seemly and
beautiful, so it is a special commendation of the eyes of man or woman, to
stand even; for if the eyes do stand forth too much, it is a deformity, as we
use to say, goggle eyed: and likewise if they be sunk in too deep, then they
be, as we use to term them, hollow eyed. Now Christ's eyes are neither of
these, his pure eyes are as precious stones that are fitly set in their places:
he is not goggled eyed, his eyes are steady and firm, they be as a stone in a
gold Ring, which cannot be turned out of their place: his eyes are evermore
guiding his sight to look perfectly into all things, into the depth of man's
heart, and into the depth of Gods secrets and counsels.

Hence Note,

That Christ's eyes are pure, clear, and comely. His eyes are as a flame of
fire, Revel. 1. 14. And as Lamps of fire, Dan. 10. 6. That is, his eyes are
bright, lightsome, and piercing: implying his omniscience, whereby he is able
to disperse all the dark clouds of sin and ignorance, to clear and enlighten
all his Saints: and he is able to pry into all the corners of men's hearts, and
discry the privy plots and contrivances of all his adversaries, as in Jer. 16.
17. Prove. 15. 11. Job 34. 21, 22. Heb. 4. 12. 13. And his eyes are not full of
light, but full of purity and cleanness, like Doves: he is of more pure eyes
then to behold iniquity, Habuk. 1. 13. His eyes are also full of grace and
mercy, tenderness and pity, yea, full of commiseration to all his Saints, his
eyes are always upon them for good, as in Deuteronomy. 11. 12. Psalm. 34. 15. The
Spouse passes from the commendations of his Eyes to his Cheeks.

VERSE. 12.
His Cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his Lips like Lillies
dropping sweet smelling Myrrh.
IN this Verse we have two parts commended.

1. His Cheeks. 2. His Lips.

His Cheeks are a bed of spices, as sweet flowers.
Cheeks are the grace and beauty of the face, they are here used to denote
Christ's presence and heavenly countenance, which is sweet, as spices and
flowers. The Cheeks are set forth by a double comparison. 1. They are likened
to a bed of Spice, meaning a Garden bed, wherein spice aromaticall is set. The
comedinesse of his Cheeks is set forth in the word Bed, and the sweetness of
them in the word Spice, for beds set out Gardens, and Spices we know smell
well, and are very fragrant. She adds.

And sweet flowers.
Sweet flowers) or, Grown plants, so named of being grown great: The word
also may be Translated Towers, which have their names of greatness. If we
should Expound the words then after the usual signification, we should say, As
the Towers of those which make sweet Ointments, but we may more fitly take them
to be grown Plants of those that deal with spices and sweet Ointments, seeing
the proper signification of the word is of greatness. By these Cheeks the
comeliness and grace of Christ is set forth.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is full of grace and comeliness to all that behold him.

His Cheeks (which is the grace of the face) is for comeliness like a Bed, and
for sweetness like Spice, and Grown plants. Christ's comeliness and gravity,
shines forth to all that behold him: all his graces are sweet, and his fight
and countenance has a transforming virtue, it makes those that behold him to
be like unto him, while others behold his glory, they are transformed into the
same image of his glory, from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3. 18. Thus much for the commendations of his Cheeks, that of his Lips
follows.

His Lips are like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh.
The Lillies are very glorious, beautiful, and fair to behold, for that
flower amongst others, is of a goodly color, and fair to look upon. This
flower is commended in many places of this Song, as whereunto the Spouse her
self is compared in respect of her beauty, Chap. 2. 2. And in the same
Chapter, verse. 16. it is attributed to Christ also. See Chap. 4. 5. This flower
is not only beautiful, but of a pleasant smell, and of good and tall growth,
all which tends still to the expressing of the glory and beauty of Christ,
and to the sweet and pleasant smells that are to be found in him. Now the
Lillies are fragrant and sweet of themselves, yet she adds.

They drop pure Myrrh.
Pure, or passing Myrrh, such as will pass, and is vendible among Merchants,
as in Verse. 5. it is meant the Ode of Myrrh, which is the sweetest of all. Now
the Lips, here compared to Lillies, and sweet Myrrh, we know are the
instrument of speech, and therefore this is to be referred unto the holy,
heavenly, sweet and gracious doctrine of Christ. Honey and Myrrh, that is,
grace, love, goodness, and mercy, did flow out of Christ's mouth. In this
respect the Spouse said before that her lips did drop as the Honeycomb: and
now she says that his lips do drop pure Myrrh.

Hence Observe,

That the gracious, holy, and heavenly doctrines that proceed from Christ, are
very sweet and savory. The words which Christ spoke when he was in the flesh,
are said to be gracious words, Luke 4. 22. And in Psalm. 45. 3. Grace was powered
out of his lips. The sweetness of his words are here set out by the similitude
of the pleasant Lilly, and the sweet Oil of Myrrh: Such is the sweetness of
the Gospel in the hearts of believers. The word of God is full of sweetness,
and all manner of delight, it rejoices the heart, as the Prophet says, Psalm.
19. 6. spreading abroad the savor thereof, even far and near, after the manner
of the pleasant Lillies, and most precious, pure, and sweet Myrrh. Christ
says, That out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Now Christ's
heart being a treasure of good things, the dropping of his lips must needs be
sweet, that utter and spread abroad those good things. Christ speaks from the
excellency of his Spirit, and from hearty affections dyed in love: his lips
then must needs drop sweetness, they must needs have a pleasant taste.

It follows.

VERSE. 13.
His Hands are as Gold Rings set with the Berrill, his Belly is as bright Ivory
overlaid with Saphires.
AS the Lips are the instruments of speech, so are the hands for action. Christ
was not only mighty in words, but also in deeds before God and all the people,
Luke 24. 19. Therefore it is that Christ's hands are likened to Gold rings, or,
that his hands were adorned with Gold rings. Now Rings were counted precious in
those days, they were great Ornaments and deckings, Isa. 3. 21. Luke 15. 22.
Neither does she say simple rings, but rings of Gold: that is, glorious and
precious, shining like gold. And to express the glory of it more, she adds.

Set with the Berrill.
The Hebrew word Tharshish, is a precious stone, spoken of, Exodus 28. 20. It is
something uncertain what stone it was, and therefore some render it by the
word Chrisolite, others turn it Berrill, of the Sea The Chrisolite is reported
of some to be a very rich, precious stone, that comes out of Ethiopia,
glistering as gold, and that it is of Seagreen color. The Berrill is reported
to be another stone that grows in India, it self being, as they suppose, an
Indian word, and given by the people as a name to that stone.

Some write, that this stone in former times was usually set in such Rings as
Lovers did use to give one to another; or in Marriage Rings: because of the
power that was thought to be in it, to procure and continue love one toward
another. But to come to the word it self, sometimes it is used for the name of
a man, as Genes. 10. 4. sometimes for the name of a City or place, as in
Cilicia, Jonah 1. 3. sometimes it is used for the name of a precious stone, as
here. However we take it, thus much it signifies, that all the works of Christ's
hands are most rare, precious, and glorious: for we must understand by his
Hands, not only his strength and power, but also all his works, because
Christ's power is in the performance of them. Thus his hands are set forth, with
all Ornaments and precious stones, and shining Rings of gold.

Hence Observe,

That all Christ's actions are exceeding glorious. Hands are instruments of
actions, all Christ's actions are precious. It was said in the days of his
flesh he did all things well, for by laying hands upon them that were diseased,
he healed them. He laid his hand upon the Leeper, and healed him, saying, I
will be thou clean, Mark 1. 41. So here, his works are as glorious still, yea,
and more glorious now, though we cannot see the excellency of them in the new
Creature, and in reigning in our hearts, he works gloriously, he has a hand,
there, a golden, and a precious hand. The works of God are pure and beautiful,
yea, most precious, and that beyond Gold and precious stones, yea, more
glorious then numbers of Rings, filled with all manner of precious stones.
Hence it is, that when David would express the wonderful works of God, he
says, If I would declare and speak of them, they are more in number then I
can express, Psalm. 40. 5. And the Psalmist speaks by way of admiration,
saying, When I consider the Heavens, the works of thy hands, the Moon, and the
Stars, which thou have ordained, what is man? etc. Psalm. 8. And then
concludes, O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the Earth! These words are
meant of the new creation of the soul, as we may see in Heb. 2. though the
form of words are borrowed from the first creation. And truly the works of
Christ are admirable and full of majesty, if we do but consider them in the
course of the Creatures, in the Sun, Moon, Stars, in the growth of Herbs,
and Plants; so in all the Creation, in Gubernation, and Government, in
ordering the event of all things, and the like. Now as all the Government of
Egypt went through the hands of Joseph; so all the works of God, go through
the hands of Christ. The Father has committed all judgment to the hands of
his Son, glorious therefore are the works which he does perform in Heaven
and Earth. It follows.

His Belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires.
His belly) or Breast: she puts a part for the whole body, and by this she
means his bowels, or his inward parts. In Hebrew it is used for inward
affections, so the heart is said to be among the Bowels, in Psalm. 22. 15. The
Liver is joined with the bowels, in Lam. 2. 11. by these are meant the inward
affections of the soul. To explain this more, she says, that his belly is
overlaid with bright Ivory, or with the brightness of Ivory, she means, that
he was as comely and clear as the Ivory, which is a thing very white and
bright: made (as some say) of an Elephants tuske, which kind of Beasts are
only in Africa, naturally as some hold: neither does she simply compare it to
Ivory, but adds, overlaid, or covered with Saphires, that is, that which has
most rich and sumptuous cost bestowed upon it. Ivory of it self, because it is
a thing rare, and far brought, must needs be very costly, how much more then
when it is beset with precious stones, yea, with most costly and precious
stones, such as Saphires are. Some of the Jewish writers take these Saphires to
be such precious stones as are of the color of the air: some take it to be a
white stone, some a red stone, some take it to be an Adamant, some think it to
be of a bluish color, intermixed with purple, having certain sparks, as it
were like Gold. The best sort of these stones are among the Medes in Media:
whatever the stone be, the meaning of the Spouse is to show, that Christ her
head, was not only most comely adorned, but also most sumptuously and costly,
even as Ivory beset with Pearls and most precious stones. The bowels of
Christ, like burnisht Ivory, decked with Saphires, signify his inward bowels
of affection, that tender mercy, and pitiful commiseration of his, toward his
Saints and Children.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is full of tender, sweet, inward, and heavenly affections toward
his people.

Christ's affections toward his Saints, are pure affections, like Saphires, or
precious stones: they are pure like the pure water in a Crystal glass, that
may be stirred but without any filth appearing in the bottom, it is pure
without any dregs at all mixed with it. Such are Christ's affections, such are
his bowels. The Apostles great longing after the Saints is said to be in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, Phillip. 1. 8. Christ is the most merciful, the most
pitiful, and the most compassionate High Priest that ever was: and therefore
it was that he was made like unto us, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh,
subject to hunger, thirst, cold, weariness, tentation, and the like, as we.
The Apostle says in Heb. 2. 17. that this was behovefull, That he ought in all
things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful
High Priest in things pertaining God, etc. And again says the Apostle, We
have not a High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin,
Heb. 4. 15. So that there was never any Priest so mild, so gentle, so gracious,
so loviug, so tenderly affectionate, and so regardfull of our condition, as
Christ was. Christ is one that can bear with our weakness, overcome our
corruption, and give sentence of victory over sin and Satan, as we may see in
Isa. 63. 9. and 40. 11.

In the Law we read, that the High Priest was to bear the names of the
Children of Israel in his Pectorall, or Breast Plate, upon his heart: ^now this
did figure and shadow out unto us, the tender love and pity Christ bears to
his people, guiding the blind, feeding the hungry, comforting the comfortless,
restoring such as are out of joint: all is mercy and love, and sweetness, and
more then motherly affection that comes from him. Hence Christ has this title
(...). one of many commiserations, Jam. 5. 11. It follows.

VERSE. 14.
His legs are as Pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.
IN this verse two parts are commended in Christ.

First, his legs. Secondly, his. countenance.
His legs are as Pillars of marble, etc.
Legs, and Thighs, may both be here comprehended: The legs are instruments to
go withal, and to bear and sustain the body, and to carry it from place to
place: so the legs of man are mentioned (in Psalm. 147. 10.) to signify man's
strength and swiftnes. This denotes, that Christ's ways are full of majesty and
power, and therefore she says, that his legs are as pillars of marble: that is,
constant and firm, durable as marble. In Rev. 1. he is set out, as having legs
of brass to trample his enemies in pieces: but here in respect of his constant
truth and goodness toward his Saints, his legs are said to be as Pillars of
marble, by which she does not only note his strength, but aso his comelines.
For marble (though there be sundry sorts thereof) are counted such stones, as
are commended for several colors and spots in the same, and has its name in
the Greek tongue, for a certain kind of glittering green. She adds.

Set upon sockets of fine gold.
Christ's feet, as they are like marble: so they have sockets of gold, to
sustain them and bear them up: whereby he walks safly, and his foot stumbleth
not, as in Prove. 3. 23. with these feet of justice he treads down his
enemies, Psalm. 110. 1. Also with these he brings glad tidings of peace unto
his people, Nah. 1. 15. Thus Christ in his ways of truth and goodness toward
his people, is sound, strong, constant and durable: for so is marble amongst
stones, and fine gold amongst other metals: so that Christ's feet being
compared to marble and gold, signify, that they never turn back, but are
steadfast and sure, he halteth not in his proceedings, neither does he tread
awry: he is not subject to change, but without shadow of turning, whereas men
are variable and uncertain in all their projects and designs.

Hence Observe.

That Christ's ways of truth and righteousness toward his people are firm
and stable,

All Christ's passages and ways are constant and firm, even as Pillars of
marble, that have sockets of gold to sustain them. He is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, which was, which is, and which is to come, Revel. 1.
8. He is yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 12. 8. He is not
like the image, which Nebuchadnezzar dreamedof, Whose head was gold, breast and
arms silver, belly and thighs brass, legs of Iron, and feet part of Iron, and
part of clay, Dan, 2. 32. That Image stood upon a weak foundation, the
kingdoms figured by that image, were not of long continuance, but the Kingdom
of Christ is everlasting.

It follows.

His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

As his feet were beautiful in bringing glad tidings of peace: so his
countenance is most pleasant and delightful. By his countenance is meant the
appearance and form of his person, he is like, in stature and tallnesse, to
the Cedars of Lebanon: for it is, as if she should have said, look upon my
beloved, view his stature, which is like the goodly tall Cedars of Lebanon.

Lebanon was a goodly mountain in the North part of the Land of Canaan, see
the same mentioned in chap. 4. 8. He is not only set out by this goodly
mountain; but also by the excellent Cedars that grew there. Christ is choice,
excellent, as the Cedars, that is, goodly, excellent, flourishing, and
continuing in vigor: as it is said, the just man grows as a Cedar in
Lebanon, Psalm. 92. 13. This notes the presence and majesty of Christ.

Hence note.

That the sight and presence of Christ is full of majesty and glory.

The sight of Christ is full of glory to the Saints, as in John 1. 14. We saw
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten, full of grace and truth: for,
indeed he was the brightness of Gods glory, Heb. 1. It was the glory of God,
that shined through Christ. It was God manifest in the flesh, and took our
nature to discover his glory by it. Now this sight and presence of Christ, as
its glorious to the Saints; so it is full of majesty to the wicked: when God
was pleased to let out some of his glory through Christ, men were not able to
bear it, as those that came to apprehend him, when he said, I am he, they fell
down backward, his countenance was too dreadful for them to behold it. So the
Psalmist speaks, when God appears, The mountains flow down, and the hills
melt at his presence; that is, the great mountains of flesh, and great ones of
the world, are not able to stand before him.

It follows.

VERSE. 15.
His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely: this is my beloved, and
this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem.
HIs mouth or his palate, is sweet or sweetness, that is, his mouth is as
sweet things: or, we may read it, The roof of his mouth is most sweet, for
there comes nothing out of his mouth, but that which is sweet. The mouth is
an instrument of nature, whereby the voice is formed, viz. the roof of the
mouth, even the voice it self, and the words uttered there with: and by
sweetness, which she uses in the plural number, she means both the
pleasantness of his word, which as David says, was more sweet unto his taste,
then the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. and also the abundance, and
wonderful plenty thereof. Now the Spouse doubleth this commmendation, she had
said before, his lips were as lilies dropping sweet myrrh, hereshe says again
of his mouth, it is most sweet, to show, that this is the chief loving thing
in Christ. By the mouth, we must understand the same as by his lips, to wit,
the sweet, gracious, and heavenly doctrines of Christ, the word of eternal
life, that proceeds out of his lips, only the repetition of this part,
shows the excellency thereof.

Hence Observe.

That the heart and affections of Christ, uttered by his mouth is most sweet
unto the Saints

It is Christ himself that says, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, and that which comes out of Christ's mouth, is nothing but the
opening of his heart, and the unbosoming of himself unto his Saints: it is
God, speaking his own affections through Christ unto his people: this must
needs be sweet and the sweetest, when many of Christ's followers left him, he
turns to his Disciples, and says, will ye also forsake me? Peter answers for
himself and the rest, Lord, whither shall we go, thou have the words of
eternal life, Joh. 6. 68. as if he had said, Lord, if we forsake thee, we
forsake our own happiness, our own comfort. The Spouse having commended the
several parts of her beloved, she now adds a general commendation of him,
by saying.

He is altogether lovely.
He is altogether, or, all of him is desires, that is, most to be desired, he
is wholly delectable; as if she should say, I will not stand to prosecute every
part, but he is altogether from top to toe (as we use to say) amiable,
desirable and lovely, he is all glorious and excellent.

Hence Observe.

That as Christ is lovely in all parts, so he is lovely in his whole self.
There is not any thing in Christ, but its lovely, he is lovely in particular,
and he is lovely in general, he is lovely in all parts, and altogether, yea he
is altogther lovely: as if the Spouse should say, what shall I say more of my
beloved? he is all over, and altogether lovely. Christ is lovely to God, to
Angels, to Saints: he is lovely as God, and as Mediator, being Prophet, Priest,
and King, in all offices, and graces, in all the operations of his Spirit: he
is the brightness of Gods glory, the shining of Gods face, he must needs then
be most excellent, most glorious. Therefore if we do but take a view of all
the high perfections, and supereminent excellencies of Christ; if we do
anatomise him in every particular, and particularise him in every excellency,
we shall find him to be lovely in all parts, to be altogether lovely, to be
wholly delectable. Now the Spouse having thus described her beloved, both in
general and particluar, she concludes with an exclamation.

This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
This being the close of her commendations of her beloved, I shall not stand on
it, because we had occasion to speak of the same terms before. She says,
This is my beloved, viz. that I have described unto you, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, and this is my friend: as if she should say, he is such a one, as I
have painted out unto you, in this excellent show and beauty, that ye may
easily know him in and among others. And this doubling of the words, that are
here used, was not only profitable to express her earnest affection toward
him, but also to move them, with whom she talked, both to the loving, and
liking of him. And by calling him her beloved and friend, she means, that as
Christ had discovered his affection to her; so she retu(...) love for his love,
making him (as it were) her (...) ling and best beloved, on whom she could
(...) heart, and bestow all her affections, and her (...) self upon. Now in
the Spouses thus ending (...) phatically, with such an exclamation, This is
(...) etc. she gives us to understand, that not being able by any figures,
phrases, metaphors, similitudes, words or speech to describe him to the full,
she would in a word, as it were, shut up all, that he himself within and
without, both generally, and every part of him, was altogether amiable, and
exceeding worthy to be affected, both of her self, and also of all those, that
either should hear of him, or see him. The Spouse having such a lover as this,
whom she has described, has she not good cause to seek after him, yea, to be
sick of love for him? This is my beloved, etc.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse is exceeding large in her affections, in setting forth the
high praises of her beloved.

The Spouse being entered in a commendation, knows not how to make an end: she
begins in general, and from thence descends down to particular parts, and
thinking not that enough, she also concludes with a general commendation, and
at last shuts up all with a repetition of all again, saying, This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. The Spouse is now
setting forth the excellencies of her beloved, and her tongue is as the pen of
a ready writer, her heart and affections are enlarged, she is now dilating upon
a copious Theme, and therefore she cannot tell where to break off, or make an
end. The Spouse is willing to show, that there was some cause of her seeking
and searching after her beloved, and why? she was sick of love; it was for one
that was most worthy, most excellent. This is my beloved, and this is my
friend, etc.

But when we shall see the success of this excellent commendations of the
Spouse, concerning Christ, it will appear it is not all in vain: for, hereby
she does abundantly draw out the affections of the daughters of Jerusalem, and
therefore to whet their affections the more, she shows what an excellent person
Christ was in his Government, counsels, purity, sweetness, inward affections,
in all his ways, actions, and administrations, he was holy, just, and
righteous, etc. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of
Jerusalem. The success of this excellent discourse, follows in the next
Verse.

VERSE. 16.
Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? Whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.
THese Daughters hearing of such a high commendation of Christ from the Spouse
of her beloved, hearing of his riches and glory, of his beauty, and excellency,
they are enflamed with desire to seek Christ also, and this is the effect which
her speech in commendations of Christ wrought.

The first question propounded by the Daughters of Jerusalem, was before, when
they demanded, What is thy beloved? etc. whereupon the Spouse describes him to
be very excellent, closing up her discourse with this exclamation, This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, etc.

Now here is a second question put by the Daughters of Jerusalem, saying,
Whither is thy beloved gone? At first they were ignorant what Christ is, and
here they enquire where Christ is: and truly, if people did know the worth and
excellency of Christ, they could not sit down in quiet without him, but would
say, Whither is he gone, where might we seek him? where might we find him?

Hence Observe, That it is the knowledge of Christ makes men seek and search
after him. See here, after the Spouse had painted out her beloved to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, and had described his complexion, members, speech, and
other excellent virtues, qualities, and graces in him, that if they had but
either seen him, or heard him speak, they might have known him: the effect
whereof is here seen in their hearts, namely, it so enflamed them with an
earnest love toward him, that presently they will be companions with her in
seeking of him. Now then, what a worthy thing is it, to open the riches, and
spread the glory of Christ before men, for hereby they may draw men to know,
and to seek Christ.

Here the Ministers of the Gospel may learn what their chief duty is, and
what is their work, but chiefly to draw men to love and seek after Christ. O
then! display all the riches and treasures of Christ's grace, and that
splendent, shining glory of his, that men may be allured and drawn to Christ.
Who will seek after that which he knows not off? and who will not seek after a
precious Jewel? Then tell where this Jewel, this Pearl, this treasure is,
that so men may seek and search, and become Merchants for to adventure all for
Jesus Christ.

Whither is thy beloved gone? etc.
The Daughters do not now enquire what he is, for by that glorious description
which the Spouse made unto her, of her beloved, has given her to understand
what he is. We see these Daughters are better instructed now, they know what
Christ is, and therefore desire to know where he is, that they may be joined to
him, and enjoy his presence and communion: now from this further degree of
desires in the Daughters, Observe

That where there are the least desires after Christ in the soul, those small
desires are increased by Christ. Here we see there was a growth of desire in
the Daughters of Jerusalem, they have ceased to ask what Christ is, and
enquire where Christ is, where they may find him, where they may enjoy his
presence. Christ will cherish the least desires or breathings in the soul after
him. He will not break the bruised Reed (though never so weak) neither will
he quench the smoking flax, (but will rather increase it into a flame) until
he has brought judgment unto victory. That is, until the blindness and
enmity of the carnal mind be wholly brought under.

There is nothing less then grace at the first: the Kingdom of Heaven is
compared to a grain of Mustard seed, that is, as well the work of grace in the
soul, as the word of grace in the Gospel, is small and contemptible. Here
those breathings and desires in the Daughters after Christ at the first, were
like a grain of Mustard seed, when they enquire, what is thy beloved? But now
these sparks are turned into flames, when she says, Whither is thy beloved
gone?

Again, Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? From this
appellation, Observe,

That if we would be instruments of good to others, we should show forth our
selves to be holy and gracious. O thou fairest among women? The Daughters had a
good conceit of the Spouse, and thought her to be gracious and holy, and
therefore her speech took the more with them.

The Daughters double the question, Whither is thy beloved gone? Whither is thy
beloved turned aside? As the Spouse before doubled her description, This is my
beloved, and this is my friend.

Hence Observe,

That those that kindle others, must be enflamed in their own hearts. Those
that speak with experience and confidence, do often make impressions upon the
hearers. The Apostle John, in the beginning of his Epistle, to persuade others
to embrace his doctrine, he affirms, That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled of the word of life, he delivered to them. That
which comes from the heart, often goes to the heart, and that which comes from
the affections, many times reaches the affections.

The Apostle Peter says, We followed not deceiveable fables, when we preached
unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we
saw his majesty, 1 Pet. 1. 16. O beloved! It is an excellent thing to speak of
the excellency of Christ, from knowledge and experience, and this many
Christians can do: but the watchmen beforementioned (Chap. 3. 3. and 5. 7.)
had no such knowledge or experience, but in them the saying was fulfilled, The
Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, they shall not
prosper, Jer. 10. 21.

Lastly, in that she says, Whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may
seek him with thee? Towit, with thee his Spouse.

Hence Observe,

That the right way to seek Christ, and the only way to find him, is to seek
him with his Saints. Here the Daughters enquire for Christ of the Spouse, and
to seek him with her, for so it is said, That we may seek him with thee. We
do not know how God has appointed us, though weak instruments, yet as
profitable means to further one another in the knowledge of Christ. When the
two Disciples went to Emaus, they talking together of Christ, it came to pass,
that as they communed together, Jesus himself drew nigh, and went with them,
Luke 24. 13. Though their eyes were holden for a time that they could not know
him, yet after further communication he lodged with them; and sitting at the
Table, at length caused their eyes to be open, and he manifested himself unto
them: And so it is in this place, on a sudden it is revealed to the Spouse,
where he is whom she seeks. Thus much for the question propounded by the
Daughters of Jerusalem: Now the resolution of the Spouse follows in the next
words.

VERSE. 17.
My beloved is gone down into his Garden, to the bed of spices, to feed in the
Gardens, and to gather Lillies.
THe question in the former verse, was not slightly propounded by the
Daughters, neither was it a bare desire of satisfaction, but from strong
affections of seeking Christ. So the Spouse here does not return any slight
answer, she is not wanting, but directly answers to the question: for there is
no envy in spiritual things, because all may share alike: therefore she gives
a punctual answer, saying.

My beloved is gone into his Garden, to the bed of Spices, etc.
In the answer of the Spouse observe two things. First a declaration whither
Christ is gone, where he is to be sought and found. My beloved is gone into his
Garden, to the bed of spices.

Secondly, the end of his going down is also declared, and that is, To feed in
the Gardens, and to gather Lillies.

My beloved is gone down into his Garden, etc.
The Garden of Christ is his Church, as in Chap. 4. 16. and 5. 1. The
Catholic Church is his Garden, and the particular Churches are his Gardens
and beds of spices, where companies of believers grow, in whose hearts are
sown the precious seed of the spirit, which the Apostle John calls, The seed
of God: So the Saints become as a bed of spices in the Garden, comely, and
sweet smelling, in whom Christ's soul delights, as in sweet spices. Now the
Spouse comes to know that Christ is in her, he was there present all the time
of her seeking, but she perceived him not, but now he was manifest to her.
Hence Observe,

That Christ is never absent from his Saints, though they cannot sometimes
discern his presence. Christ was with his Spouse when she fainted for want of
his presence, when she was sick of love, and when she made such a diligent
search and enquiry after him, but she discerned him not all that while, but now
he manifests himself unto her, so that now she has a plain discovery of
him, when she says, My beloved is gone into his Garden, to the bed of spices,
etc. Christ is near his Spouse, as well when she has not, as when she has the
manifestation of his presence. God was never nearer Christ, upholding him by
his divine power, then when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? So the Lord is near, yea, in the midst of his people,
afflicting, strengthening, and supporting them, when they have little or no
sight, or apprehension of his presence. Secondly Observe.

That Christ does not long together hide his divine presence from his Spouse.
It is true, he may veil himself for a while, and withdraw his light and
comfort from the soul; though he take not away his love, yet he may suspend the
acts of it: he may seem to frown, and to hide, and eclipse himself, that the
soul for a while loses sense, and feels not its own happiness. Now when it
is thus with a believer, Christ is gone, the comfort and assurance of his love
is gone, joy, and love, and delight, and all is gone. O how disconsolate and
sad is the soul then: this is very irksome to the soul that is indeared to
Christ, and desires his communion: yet notwithstanding these things are but
short, Christ will not be long absent from his Saints, his great delight and
affection toward them will constrain him to manifest himself. Joseph
concealed himself for a while, but he was much straightened in his spirit,
until he had made himself known unto his brethren: So it is with Christ, he
may keep at at a distance from his people for a while, but it will not be long
before he return again, and manifest himself unto his Spouse. Now follows
the end of Christ's going down into his Garden. Viz.

To feed in the Gardens, to gather Lillies.
First, Christ's end in going down into his Garden is to feed there, that is,
to associate himself, and communicate with his people in the graces of his
own spirit, eating his own pleasant fruits, as in Chap. 4. 16. And also to
Feast and refresh his people with divine things, giving them of the heavenly
Manna to eat, and of the River of life to drink: he does impart unto his
Saints the graces of his spirit: he does refresh his Gardens, Viz. All his
particular Churches, with all variety of Heavenly dainties.

Hence Observe,

That Christ does associate himself with his people, abundantly satisfying
their souls with his sweetness. He feeds in the Gardens, by communicating of
himself and his glory unto his Saints. You may remember in Chap. 5. 1. Christ
declares that he had eaten his honey with his honeycomb; and here he feeds
in the Gardens. The Prophet says, He shall seed his flock like a Shepherd, he
shall gather the Lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall
gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40. 11. So that Christ does
plentifully, and sweetly, and that with the greatest care that possible can be,
feed and refresh his people. Another place parallel to this, is in Ezekiel. 34.
14. I will feed them in good pastures upon the high Mountains of Israel, there
shall their fold be, there shall they lie in a good field, in a fat pasture, I
will feed my slocke, and cause them to lie down, says the Lord God. I will
seek that which was lost, and bring back that which was driven away; I will
bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which is sick, and destroy
the fat and the strong, and feed them with judgment. Here is store of all
supply, yea, suitable supply for every want: a fit salve for every soar. Thus
we see Christ does feed in his Gardens, he does communicate himself, his
spirit, and makes a comfortable supply to all our wants.

Secondly, Christ's end in going into his Garden is to gather Lillies: that is,
to accept the sweet smelling fruits of his own graces, growing in his
Churches: or, to gather his people to himself, which are as Lillies among
thorns. Christians are compared to Lillies, for their purity and whiteness,
being clean through the word, as the Apostle says; that is, through Christ
who is the word. The Lilly, as it is white and glorious, so it is a very tall,
goodly plant, therefore the Spouse is compared to it: Other men are compared to
thorns because they are noxious and hurtful, they are good for nothing but to
cumber the ground, and to be offensive, and to be burned. So the wicked are
compared to such, because they are hurtful and offensive, but the Saints are
compared to Lillies, for beauty and fairness. Hence Observe.

That the Saints are beautiful persons. Here they are compared to the glorious
and beautiful Lilly. God cloatheth Lillies of the field with excellent
beauty, their glory is brought into competition with Solomon's, whose glory came
far short of the Lillies whiteness and beauty; and if God take care for
Lillies will he not take care for you, O ye of little faith? Mat. 6. 29. Does
God care for Lillies, that are to day, and to morrow are cast into the Oven,
and shall he not care for these living holy Lillies? Yes, undoubtedly he will.
Christ's argument is undeniable, he that puts such a beauty upon the poor
plants, that flourish to day in the morning, and wither before night, he that
puts such beauty upon the grass of the field, will he not put more excellency
upon his Saints? Without question he will. The Saints are as fair, and much
fairer in Gods eye, then all the Lillies of the field. The Church is said to be
clothed with the Sun, in Revel. 12. 1. That is, she was clothed with God, and
with Christ, with the Spirit, with the white robes of his righteousness, and
therefore she must needs be glorious. And the Armies in Heaven, which are the
Saints that follow Christ, are said to be Clothed in fine linen, white and
clean, Rev. 19. 14. The Saints are a chosen people, to be holy, and without
blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. God looks upon the Saints without blame,
not as concerning the flesh, and the carnal mind, which is enmity against God,
but according to the Spirit, and the new man, which is created of God, after
his own image. And thus Christ is said, To wash and cleanse his Church, by the
washing of water, and the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. This is the pure, holy, and
glorious condition of the Spouse. The Saints are Lillies, being clothed with
the white Garments of Christ's righteousness, not having any natural or
fleshly glory of their own: The whiteness and purity of the Saints is
borrowed, as the Moon borrows all her light from the Sun, so the Saints
derive their glory and excellency from Christ.

Lastly, in that she says, the end of Christ's going into his Garden is, to
gather Lillies. Hence Observe, That Christ does graciously accept of the fruits
of his own Spirit. Christ planteth a Vineyard, and delights to eat the fruit
thereof; and so in Chap. 4. 16. Let my beloved come in, and eat his pleasant
fruits. That is, let him accept of, and partake of all the fruits of his: own
spirit, fruits of union and fruits of communion when Christ becomes as a dew
upon Israel, Israel becomes his pleasant plant, and is found to be fruitful in
returns to Christ again: now Christ will accept of all those returns of his
own spirit, from his own people, he comes into his garden to gather Lilies,
to accept of the returns of his own spirit.

The Spouse having thus resolved the daughters of Jerusalem, she begins to
feel some comfort and refreshing from Christ, who had before estranged
himself from her, and therefore she now concludes with a kind of triumphant
acclamation upon all the former passages, both of her ill dealing with Christ,
and Christ's withdrawing from her: notwithstanding all former passages, she does
as it were glory in her union and communion with Christ, as follows in the
next verse, whereshe says.

VERSE. 18
I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, he feeds among the Lilies.
THis is the conclusion of the whole Chapter, and of all the speech that the
Spouse has with the daughters of Jerusalem, wherein she openly professes that
whatsoever may be done against her, that her affections are still the same
toward Christ, and is also persuaded of his good will toward her: I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine. The Spouse boasts and glories in the
renewed peace made between Christ and her, and their mutual union and
communion by the Spirit, notwithstanding her former infirmities and
afflictions. We had the same words before in Chap. 2. 16. only here they
differ in respect of the order of them: That first there, is last here: Here in
the order of the words the Spouse says, I am my beloveds. and afterward, my
beloved is mine: but however in order of the words, the Church says, I am my
beloveds first; yet in order of nature, Christ is ours first, though not in
order of discovery. The cause is known by the effect, though the cause be
first in being, yet the effect is sometimes first in discovery: so it is here,
Christ's love and goodness is the cause of ours: yet many times we see our own
before we see his. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. In these words
you see a mutual interest and an owning between Christ and his Spouse, as if
the Spouse had said, as he will not have another, but will content and delight
himself wholly with me. Who feeds among the Lilies; that is, who lives most
pleasantly and sweetly, as they that eat their meat among Lilies, and other
flowers, cannot but live in pleasure; but I shall not enlarge on this, having
spoken largely of it in chap. 2. 16. So ends the fifth chapter.

CANTICLES. CHAP. VI.
VERSE. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
Army with banners.

Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a
flock of Goats, that appear from Gilead.

Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, which go up from the washing, whereof every
one bears twins, and there is not one barren among them.

As a piece of a pomegranate are thy Temples within thy locks.

There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines and Virgins without
number. etc.


AS in the former Chapter, and especially toward the end thereof, the Spouse
had very highly commended Christ her head, and that not only to stir up
others to love, and embrace him that was so excellent, but also to raise up and
increase the fervencie of her affection toward him: so in this Chapter, Christ
again on the other side does likewise exceedingly praise her, not only thereby
to express his great affection toward her, and to let her know, that no love
or commendation bestowed upon him is lost, but when that shall be requited to
the full: but also to draw on others in a gracious affection to join
themselves unto her, whom both he so tenderly loves, and highly magnifieth.
Now Christ having praised the Spouse greatly in the fourth Chapter, it may be
demanded, why he does again, and that in the same manner, give such a high and
singular commendation unto her, and to testify to her so much of his love and
hearty affection. This indeed may be demanded, least we might imagine that
here is a tedious and a needless repetition. The truth is, that this
comendation is not superfluous, but comes very fitly for the comfort of the
Spouse: for you have seen in the beginning of the former Chapter, how unkindly
she dealt with Christ, how he withdrew himself, as one displeased, so that she
fell into great affliction, being tossed to and fro, with doubtings, least
Christ for her unkind dealing, should utterly depart from her, she bewaileth
her offense, and seeks after her beloved with much sorrow and trouble: and
now least it might seem; that by her offense, or by her affliction she had
lost that former beauty and commendation, yea, least there might seem to
remain some blot, or that her former liking was diminished, he does give her
the same, or rather greater commendations then before, and this is the reason,
why Christ does renew the commendations of his Spouse, because in the former
Chapter the Spouse was full of mourning, grief and sickness, for her
negligence and carelessness toward her beloved, now he comfort and assures
her, that notwithstanding the same, she is and shall be as dear unto him, as
ever she same, she was before: which thing also that she might be the better
persuaded of, he does give her a large and unfeigned commeudation.

In this Chapter Observe three parts.

First, Christ assures his Spouse of his love, which he does by describing of
her beauty.

First, In general, in verse 1. the Spouse is likened to be.

1. As Tirzah. 2. As Jerusalem. 3. As an army with banners.
Secondly, The Spouse is set forth in particular, by the parts and members of
her body. verse 2, 3, 4.

1. Her Eyes. 2. Her Hair. 3. Her Teeth. 4. Her Temples.
The second part of this Chapter is, that Christ does clear, by way of
preoccupation and doubt, which the Spouse might object, out of her own
weakness: that there be many assemblies in which religion is professed, which
by their outward peace and prosperity, whch they enjoy, do seem to be more
in Christ's favor then she is, and to be more beautiful in his eyes then she,
for they are described to be.

1. As Queens, 60. 2. As Concubines, 80. 3. As Virgins without number, Verse
5. To which he answers, that the Church is more excellent.
First, To Christ she is,

1. As a Dove. 2. Undefiled. 2. An only one.
Secondly, to others, she was.

1. Blessed by the daughters. 2. Praised by the Queens and Concubines, verse 6.
In the last place, least she should fear, that Christ having once forsaken
her, might forsake her again, he excuses his absence from her heretofore, by
which he in her sense and feeling only to have forsaken her, when as indeed he
was near unto her, and this is employed in the residue of the Chapter.

And thus much being said, both for the connection and division of the Chapter,
into the chief parts and members, we come now to the sense of the words of the
text as they lie:

Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
Army with banners.

In this general description of the glory of the Spouse, by which Christ
makes her glorious unto himself, he does commend her by comparing her to two
goodly Cities,

1. To Tirzah. 2. To Jerusalem.
In the next place he does commend her terrible fortitude, when he says, She
is terrible as an Army with banners.

Thou art beautiful O my love.
Christ having met with his Spouse, who labored and sought to find him, does
after the manner of lovers, declaring his great affections, marveilously
commend her beauty: we must understand this in a spiritual sense, for the
Spouse has no beauty, but she receives it from Christ: so that Christ does but
commend his own beauty in the Spouse. Now as this respects Christ, it
propounds unto us the manifestation of his unfeined and continual love
toward his Spouse. Or if we respect the Spouse herself, then this
commendation is for her comfort; as if Christ should say, think not that that
surpassing beauty of thine is decayed, or that I have cast off my love and
liking toward thee, by reason of thy former discourtesies, and negligence, I
do not disdain and scorn thee for thy spots, and defilements, but as I said
before, in chap. 4. 1, 2. So I even now affirm the same still, thy beauty and
thy favor is most acceptable and delightful to me.

Hence Observe, first.

That Christ's love toward his Saints, is a beautiful, and continual love.

Christ does not sometimes love, and sometimes hate, but whom he loves once, he
loves to the end. Although the Saints offend Christ often, yet he loves them
still: he only purges them, and heales them of their spiritual maladies, which
cannot be done without some smart; but he does not a whit lessen, or detract
his love from them, though his people come upon him every day for new favors
and new supplies; yet his goodness is never wearied or tired out. The love of
Christ toward his Saints never decays or waxes cold, like the stone
Asbestos, of which Solinus writes of, that being once hot, it can never be
cooled again. The love of Christ is like a fountain overflowing, and never
Jul. Solin. Poly histor. Cap. 12.
dried up: yea, though thousands, millions of his Saints press upon him at
once, yet he has enough for them all, for the fountain of his love is never
emptyed.

Secondly note.

That Christ's love toward his Saints, is not only everlasting, but an
exceeding great and magnificent love.

Here behold the greatness of the love of Christ, who does quite forget all
offenses committed against him, as if they had never been, he does not so much
as once upbraid his Spouse for her unkind dealing; it is without question the
Saints having experience how sweet the Lord is being made partakers of his
great benefits, when the flesh prevails upon them, are much dismayed, fearing
that now they cannot be beautiful and dear in his sight. Now they have
deformed themselves, how should he love, and delight in them? Here is therefore
a special comfort ministered, that those breathing after his presence, he does
refresh them, he does embrace them, he does love them, he does commend them,
and delight in them, even as if they had never done evil against him: what a
sweet gracious and exceeding love is here? who can express the riches of this
grace, who can be able any way to set forth this bountifulness of the Lord?

Now this beauty which is thus set forth in general, whereby the Spouse is
commended, by comparing her in respect of her glory, to two famous Cities.

1. To Tirzah. 2. To Jerusalem.
Thou art fair as Tirzah.
Tirzah, is the name of a most pleasant City in the coasts of Israel,
situated upon the River Euphates, where after that the Kingdom of Israel was
rent from the house of David, Jeroboam the King of Israel, built his Palace or
dwelling house there, it being the most pleasant place in all the borders of
Israel: of this City you may read, 1 Kings 14. 17. also 15. 21. and 16. 6,
etc. This City was the dwelling place of one of the 31. Kings whom Joshua
conquered, Josh. 12. 24. It has its name of pleasantness, or wel-pleasednesse
(being derived of a word that signifies to accept, or like of) because it did
by (...) Voluit, been volus, delectatus, placatus, reconciliatus fuit,
acceptavit, contentus fuit.
the pleasantenesse and beauty thereof, draw all men, as it were, to the liking
thereof, which shows it to be a goodly pleasant place; such as Kings delight to
dwell in. A like beauty is here ascribed to the Spouse, being made fair and
beautiful in her beloved, by the indwellings of God, and his glorious spirit,
the Father, Son, and Spirit, these take up the soul for a Palace, or
delightful place to dwell in, so that the souls of the Saints are made
glorious by the indwellings of God, when he sets up his Throne there, and does
administer life, spirit, and glory. It Is added.

Comely as Jerusalem.
As for the beauty of this City, we have it much commended in Scripture, where
it is called the praise of the whole Earth, Isa. 62. 7. See also Psalm. 122. 3.
and 48. 2, 3, etc. It was the place where the Lord chose to dwell, and had his
Temple built there, on Mount Sion, and the Church under the New Testament is
called Jerusalem, holy, and heavenly, Revel. 21. Besides foreign Writers
report it to be the most famous See Plln. Hist. Lib. 5. cap. 14.
City in the East. Jerusalem signifies in the Hebrew, the sight of peace. Thus
we see the beauty and glory of the Spouse set out unto us by Earthly
similitudes. And though it be true indeed, that none of these things can
sufficiently declare the same unto us, yet we may perceive that the Scripture
has not only taken the most excellent things of the Land of Judah and Israel,
but of the whole world, to set forth the same unto us, that so under these
earthly resemblances, he might the better make us (who are very gross and dull)
to conceive of heavenly and spiritual things. Now in that the beauty, glory,
and splendor of the Spouse is set forth by these two pleasant and famous
Cities, which were both places of renown. So then, comparing the Spouse to
Tirzah, which was the Kings Palace, it is as much as if he had said, I will
dwell in my Church, I will be near her, and make her the place of my residence.
And as for Jerusalem, she is not only commended for her sanctity, that she is
the holy City, but also for her peace and glory above other places. Hence
Observe,

That the Spouse is made glorious by the presence of Christ, and by that peace
and tranquillity that accompanies the same. The Spouse is glorious by the
presence and indwellings of Christ; this appears in that it is said, The Lord
has chosen Sion to be an Habitation for himself, he has longed for her, this
shall be my rest for ever, herewill I dwell, for I have delight herein, Psalm.
122. 14, 15. When the Lord comes to reside in the soul, to delight, and take up
his rest there, to advance his Scepter, and reign there, how glorious and
beautiful must the reign there, how glorious and beautiful must the soul
needs be. Again it is said, The Lord has chosen Jacob to himself, and Israel
for his own Possession, Psalm. 135. 4. Meaning his Church, not only of the
Jews, but also of the Gentills. And the glory and peace of the Spouse is
figured out by Jerusalem, where it is said, She is builded like a City which is
at unity within her self, thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the
Lord, to testify unto Israel, and to give thanks unto the name of the Lord;
there is the seat of judgment, even the seat of the house of David: peace be
within thy walls, etc. Psalm. 122. 3, 4. So that here he does promise inward and
outward peace, according to that of the Apostle, As many as walk according to
this rule, peace shall be unto them, and mercy, and to the Israel of God, Gal. 6.
16. There can be nothing but peace, goodness, delight and glory, where Christ
does inhabit. Thus much for Christ's assuring the Spouse of his love, by
describing of her beauty: Now follows his commendations of her fortitude and
strength.

Terrible as an Army with banners.
In these words the valor and fortitude of the Spouse is set forth; but one
would think that this should be no great commendations, especially because the
Church is resembled to a woman; neither does it agree to that sex, neither is
it praiseworthy in them, (as some suppose) to strike terror into others. But
for answer, its commendable for a woman, even by her gravity and sobriety, to
strike terror and fear into such as would make them disloyal to their
husbands, which thing might aptly agree to the Spouse here, and that in a
double respect; to wit,

1. When as in respect of her Majesty, she so terrifieth her adversaries,
especially false teachers, such as would corrupt her by false doctrine. Or,

2. When as in regard of her disobedient Children, she wounds them by the
word and discipline for a while; neither does the Lord mean this only, by
resembling his Spouse to Armies with many Ensigns or banners, but also to set
out unto us thereby, the good order and invincible force of the same. Hereby
Christ does strengthen his Spouse inwardly against temptations and the flesh:
for as it is an impossible thing to prevail upon an Army, consisting of
innumerable and valiant people: so it is as hard, yea, altogether impossible to
prevail against the Church, she is of such strength, power, and courage, that
though she may be assaulted, yet she can never be overcome.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints are full of fortitude and valor.

Here the Spouse is commended for one that is terrible as an Army with banners:
and in Chap. 1. she is likened to a Troop of Horses in the Charriots of
Pharaoh, she is strong and prompt to the battle: for she is as one that has
put on the whole armor of God, she stands in the spiritual battle, and
puts her enemies to flight. The strength of the Church was typified in that
speech where it is said, when Israel abode in his Tents, according to their
Tribes, encamping in the Wilderness, his Tents were goodly, his strength was
as an Unicornes, he couched as a courageous Lion, whom none durst stir up,
Numb. 24. 2. 5. Thus we see why he says she is terrible as an Army with
banners: an Army that is strong, and marches with Banners or Ensigns, is very
terrible to their adversaries to behold; even so is the Spouse unto the whole
Army of spiritual enemies: but we must note, that the Saints are not thus
strong of themselves, but in the power of God, in the power of the spirit. The
Apostle teaches, that we stand in the invincible power of his, by putting on
the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. Thus Christ commends his Spouse in the
general: Now follows his particular commendations of her in the next words.

VERSE. 2.
Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: Thy hair is as a
slocke of Goats that appear from Gilead.
IN this verse we have a description of two parts or members: towit, her Eyes
and her Hair. But first of her eyes, in which part we may take notice.

1. Of Christ's request to his Spouse, in these words, Turn away thine eyes,
etc. 2. The reason of the request, For they have overcome me.
Turn away thine eyes from me, etc.
The words may be read two ways: for sometimes the word is used for turning
toward, as in 1 Chronicles. 12. 23. sometimes for turning away, as in Ezekiel. 7. 22.
But here it is most likely to be meant in the first sense, and then we must
read the words thus, Turn thine eyes over against me: that is, look upon me,
and regard me, though thou be past, yet turn thine eyes back again, that thou
may behold me, that so I may receive comfort in the sight of thee.

There be some that turn the phrase otherwise, as thus, Turn away thine eyes
from me, for they are too strong for me, or, they overcome me: giving also this
sense, that Christ would have the Spouse to cast her eyefrom him, because he
could hardly keep himself from showing again most manifest tokens of his
love, etc. But the former sense seems to be the most plain and simple
interpretation, not only agreeing best with the circumstances and occasion of
the place, and purpose of Christ, but also standing well with the meaning of
the Hebrew word, which may, and does as well signify to turn to, as turn
from. Then the meaning is, Turn thine eyes toward me, towit, that I may be
comforted and refreshed, for such is the reason here added.

For they have overcome me.
In the Hebrew these words run thus, For they have lifted me up: that is, they
have lifted me up with comfort, and courage, and strength, etc. as in Psa. 138.
3. Thou have encouraged me, or lifted me up. The Greek Translateth it, For they
have made me fly: towit, as with wings. Then the sense is thus much, as if
Christ had said to the Spouse, be of good comfort, look up to me, that so I my
self also, who am in some sort cast down with thy heaviness, may receive
both comfort and glory by thy faith and beauty: for no question, that since the
union and conjunction is so great betwixt Christ and his Spouse, as the Apostle
says in 1 Cor. 12. 12. There is also a sympathy and fellowfeeling or
suffering together, as it were. Christ being afflicted with his Church, and
rejoices at the joy thereof. So that these words declare how much Christ is
ravished, and lifted up with joy and gladness with her looks. The Spouse had
twice before declared, that she was, as it were, sick and faint through love,
as in Chap. 2. 5. Also Chap. 5. 7. So Christ declares the same strength and
power of love, to be in him toward her, that so she might know there was no
love lost, and therefore he uses another speech, but to the same effect, when
he says, that she had plucked away his heart with one of her eyes, Chap. 4. 9.
That is, she, with the beauty, simplicity, and chastity of her eyes, had even
won his heart; it expresses a vehement affection of love toward her. Even so
in this place, the beauty of her eyes does affect him in a wonderful manner.
Hence Observe,

That the beauty of the Spouse is exceeding great in Christ's eyes. Here he does
very highly commend the glorious beauty of the eye of faith, and that in such a
kind of speech that does in the highest sort that can be, express how much the
beauty of her eyes does delight him: for even, as she said before, she was sick
of love, so he says here, that he is, as it were, overcome with love. Faith is
the eye of the soul, and how excellent is the beauty thereof in the eyes of the
Lord, yea, it does as it were, ravish, and overcome him with the sight thereof.
Thus much for the commendations of her Eyes: That of her Hair follows.

Thy hair is as a flock of Goats that appear from Gilead.
The Hair of the Spouse in a spiritual way may be meant of the multitude of
believers, or the abundance of graces bestowed upon the Church. But rather by
the commendations of her hair, is meant, that her thoughts, counsels,
purposes, etc. are orderly composed by the Lord, whereby they are like the
Hair of Goats. But having spoken largely of these words in Chap. 4. 1. I shall
pass them by here. It follows.

VERSE. 3.
Thy Teeth are as a flock of Sheep which go up from the washing, whereof every
one bears Twins, and there is none barren among them.
THe spiritual Teeth of the Spouse, wherewith she eats the spiritual
dainties, and is nourished with the food, towit, the word of Christ, are as a
flock of Sheep which go up from the washing, that is, white, pure, and clean:
All which bring Twins, that is, they are all even and equal in bigness, as
commonly Twins are: And there is none barren among them. He means, that they
were all full, and none wanting; for as Teeth answering evenly one to another,
as in respect of the upper and nether jaw is comely, when one tooth stands
not farther out then another, but are all of an equal height or evennesse, it
is sometimes a beauty to the Countenance; so it was with the Spouse. But I
shall not enlarge my self on this, because it is Expounded before in Chap. 4.
2. where Christ speaks the same things of the Spouse. He proceeds from the
commendations of the Teeth to the Temples.

VERSE. 4.
As a piece of Pomegranate are thy Temples within thy locks.
THy Temples, towit, of thy head, between thy locks, he speaks of the Spouse
according to the manner of women, who were wont to wear their locks out, yet
so, that their Temples, notwithstanding the same, and the beauty thereof might
be seen. And these are said to be like a piece of Pomegranate, that is, of a
ruddy and beautiful color. Now under this similitude is set forth the
modesty, shamefastness, and chastity of the Spouse. This also has been
Expounded before in Chap. 4. 3. but we must know this is no vain or idle
repetition, but as having regard to the Spouse, and that in a double
consideration. The first is to show her, that notwithstanding her offense he
loves her still as before, which also causes him to use the same words here
as before. Secondly, because he knew how hard a thing it was for the Spouse to
believe, and therefore for the strengthening of her weakness she doubleth the
words by way of repetition. Thus much for Christ's commending his Spouse for her
beauty: Now he proceeds to commend her by comparing her with others, in the
next verse.

VERSE. 5.
There are threescore Queens, and four score Concubines, and Virgins without
number.
IN these words we have a more ample declaration of the glorious beauty and
rich deckings of the Spouse, and that not only in respect of her self, but in
comparison above all others. Those to whom she is compared, are 1. Queens 60.
2. Concubines 80. 3. Virgins without number.

This declaration of the Churches beauty by way of comparison, is least she
might seem to be disquieted in her mind, doubting that she is not in such
special favor with Christ, as he has professed unto her, because there are a
multitude of other assemblies in the world, which by their outward, flourishing
estate and freedom from all such terrors, both outward and inward, seem to be
respected above her, and may seem in comparison of them to be less beautiful.
His answer is for her better satisfaction, that there are indeed so many Queens
and Concubines, and Damsels, yet she alone is acceptable unto him, he regards
not them nor their beauty, but the Spouse is that only one that is gracious in
his sight, she is his Dove and chaste Spouse, she is his Undefiled, being
cleansed and washed.

There are three score Queens, etc.
We may understand these words affirmatively, They are sixty, or by
supposition, Be there sixty Queens? that is, though there were sixty Queens,
and eighty Concubines, etc. yet my Dove is but one, as it follows. And for
the numbers, threescore and fourscore, it is not certain whether the allusion
be to Solomon's wives and concubines which he took at first, before he
increased them to seven hundred wives, and three hundred concubines, as in 1
Kings 11. 3. as we heard in Chap. 3. 7. where mention was made of threescore
mighty men of Israel, that stand about Solomon's bed. Or rather, whither a
certain number be not put for an uncertain, meaning many Queens, more
concubines and innumerable Demosels, as seven Shepherds, and eight Princes, in
Mic. 5. 5. So six and seven troubles, in Job. 5. 19. signify many, and no
definite number.

Queens were such, as were the chief wives of Princes, which they took into
fellowship by solemn stip lation, and with consent and solemn rejoicing of
friends: these bring dowries to their Husbands, and are such as have the
government of the house with their husbands, and the like.

Concubines were secondary wives, taken for propagation of Children, but they
bare no rule in the family as wives, neither had their Children such right to
inherit, as the others had, but were sent away with gifts, as is apparent by
Abraham's practice, Genesis 25. 5. 6. The Hebrew word pilegesh, (whereof the Greek
Palakis, and Latin pellex is borrowed, which we call a Concubine) signifies a
half wife, or a divided and secondary Wife, which was a wife only for the bed,
but not for honor and government, and which were married without any
solemnity, or betrothing of matrimony. Solomon's wives were Princesses, and so
were not his Concubines, 1 Kings 11. 3. Such a Concubine was Hagar to Abraham,
and Keturah his second wife is caled a Concubine, Genesis 25. 6. And Bilha, and
Zilpha, were Concubines to Jacob, Genesis 35. 22. And many other men of note had
Concubines, as Caleb, Manasses, Gideon, David, Rohoboam, with many others.

Damsels were such, as were not married at all, but accompany and attend upon
Queens, and other great women, as in Ps. 45. 15. The Virgins are called the
companions, to wit, of the Queen See Est. 2. 9. Suppose now that these Queens
and Concubines, and their Maids of honor attending upon them, were as a man
would say, without number or innumerable, yet should they not be able to match
the Spouse for beauty, comelines, and glory, but should even of their own
accord, give her place before them all: yea, though there be many Queens of
great dignity, and attyred with costly things, and Concubines that were
beautiful, and in rich attire according to the glory of Princes, and these
with their Maids of honor attending upon them: so that set all these together
in all their glory, beauty, riches, yet they are nothing comparable to the
Spouse whose beauty and glory far excels them all, for, it is added in
the next verse, My Dove is but one, etc.

Hence Observe.

That all outward and worldly glory is not comparable to the spiritual
excellency and glory of the Saints.

The Birth or the honor of the Queens, the beauty and deckings of the
Concubines, and virgins, is great and of high esteem in the world; but it is
not comparable to the honor, beauty, and rich ornaments of the Spouse of
Christ; for she is clothed with the glorious spirit of God, she stands adorned
with the robes of his righteousness and glory. The particulars of the honor
and glory of the Spouse, are mentioned in the next verse.

VERSE. 6
My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her Mother, she is
the choice one of her that bear her; the daughters saw her, and blessed her,
yea, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her.
IN this verse Christ gives a particular description of the several
excellencies of the Spouse, and how she is incomparable honorable,
beautiful, and glorious above all others, and this is declared,

First, What she is to Christ.

1. A Dove. 2. Undefiled. 3. She is but one.
Secondly, To her Mother, she is,

1. Her only one. 2. Her choice one.
Thirdly, What she was to others, to wit, the Queens and Concubines above
mentioned.

1. The Daughters blessed her. 2. The Queens and Concubines commended her.
My Dove, my undefiled is one, etc.
A Dove has been noted for chastity, and mildnes, or innocence; but in what
sense the Spouse is compared to a Dove, has been often times declared before:
as in Chap. 2. 14. And Chap. 5. 1. So that we need not stand upon it here. Its
added.

My Undefiled, or, my perfect one: that is, one that is washed and cleansed,
and made complete in Christ. See this also expounded in Chap. 5. 2. But the
next commendation is,

She is but one.
She is one, or, There is (but) one my Dove, and so this only one, is opposed
to the many Queens and Concubines forementioned, though it were the glory of
the other to be many; yet the glory of the Spouse is, that she is Christ's only
one.

The Spouse is said to be alone, as we say in our speech, an odd one, both
because she was chosen by God, out of all the people and Nations of the world,
and was most dear unto him: and also because compared with others, none of
them could come nigh her to match with her.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse is that only one, whom Christ does prefer before the
multitude of others, which in the worlds esteem seem never so glorious.

It is common in the world, for the wicked to magnify themselves, as in Revel.
18. 7. where it is said, Babylon did much glorify her self, and lived
deliciously, for she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and
shall see no sorrow, therefore shall her plagues in one day, death, mourning,
and famine, etc. See also Isa. 47. 7. But the Spouse she is that one, that only
one whom Christ has respect unto. Thus it was said of Israel. And who is like
thy people, like Israel, one Nation in the earth Whom God went to redeem for a
people to himself, etc. 2 Samuel 7. 23. And the Lord in respect of the Covenant
he made with them, speaks thus, If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant; then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, above all peoples, for
all the earth is mine, Exodus 19. 5. Thus it is with the Spouse; as there is one
body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, etc. So there is but one
Spouse, who is only glorious, who is only chosen and beloved, who is only dear
and precious in Christ's eyes. So much for the glory of the Spouse, as in
relation to Christ. It follows.

She is the only one of her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bear her.
She is the only one of her Mother, or, one she is to her Mother, by which is
meant, she is most tenderly beloved, as only Children are, see Judge. 11. 34.
And Luke 8. 42. And also that she had or should have a most rich and precious
portion, as the only Child or heir of her mother. By her Mother, here is meant
the heavenly Jerusalem, mentioned Gal. 4. 26. which was prefigured by Sarah the
free woman, the only wife of Abraham, of whom he had his only Son Isaac, the
child of promise; and though he had other Children by his Concubines, Agar and
Keturah, unto whom he gave gifts, and sent them away, yet unto Isaac he gave
all that he had, Genesis 25. 5, 6. Now Agar typified Mount Sinai, law, letter, and
bondage, for she is in bondage with her Children, Gal. 4. 25. but Sarah was a
type of the new Testament, and of Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is
the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. And therefore in Isaac, the Son of the free
woman, was Abraham's seed called, of whom are the Children of the promise, and
heirs of salvation, Gal. 4. 22. Now in that here is mention made of the mother
of the Spouse, we may remember as I have heretofore told you, that in the
Hebrew phrase, the whole is called the mother, and the parts or members are
called the Daughters: So the new Jerusalem, the Church of the first borne is
called the mother, and the Members and branches thereof are called the
Daughters: the holy seed is likened to a daughter, espoused to Christ,
belonging to the heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of the faithful only. It Is
added.

She is the choice one of her that bear her.
The choice one, or the clear (the pure) one, as the word is rendered in the
next verse, clear as the Sun. The Hebrew word Barah, signifies, pure and
clean from filthiness, purged, polished, separated, and select from others:
the word is used for choice, in 1 Chronicles. 7. 40. And also for purging by
affliction, in Dan. 11. 35. and 12. 10. so that we may read it, even that
pure, that clean, or that chosen one, to her that bear her. This denotes,
that the Spouse is only beloved, as only Children are, that she is high and
honorable in her birth, that she is heir to a rich and glorious portion.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints are rich and glorious in their parentage.

The birth, or honor touching the parentage of Queens, and the beauty and
deckings of Concubines, and Virgins, is great and highly esteemed in the
world, but it is not comparable to the honor, beauty, and rich ornaments of
the Spouse, she stands alone in all excellency. It is a thing of great
account in the world, to be daughter of a mighty Prince: but what is the
dignity of their birth, if it be compared with the dignity and honor of the
birth of the Spouse? It is a divine and heavenly birth, the Saints are borne of
God, and receive honor from him. The Spouse is the only one of her mother, to
wit, Jerusalem that is from above, who is the mother of all the Saints in the
world, and unto none else, all that be the Children of the most high. Thus we
see, how for dignity and honor in birth, she far excels all the Queens
in the world. But now the Spouse is not only excellent to Christ, as a Dove,
undefiled, and his only one, and that she is one, pure, and chosen of her
Mother, the heavenly Jerusalem: but also she is excellent to others that be
strangers, as appears in the next words.

The daughters saw her and blessed her; yea, the Queens, and the Concubines,
and they praised her.
The daughters saw her, or, so soon as the daughters saw her. By Daughters
here are meant the Virgins or Damsels forementioned in the former verse, and
such as were spoken of in Chap. 2. 2. He means by this speech, that the
beauty of the Spouse is so excellent, that even at the first sight and
beholding, they were constrained to confess her, to be the most excellent and
beautiful of the world: for its added.

They blessed her, or, they called her blessed: that is, accounted her happy,
as one endued with rare and wonderful graces, even for the things which they
saw at the first sight and blush in her. The like phrase we have in Luke 1.
48. And all generations shall call me blessed, And in Jam. 5. 11. We count
them happy which endure, etc. To bless is more then to praise, praise is the
acknowledging any good thing in her, but blessing is the acknowledgment. It
follows.

The Queens and the concubines and they praised her.

Even the Queens and Concubines, to wit, mentioned in the former verse,
praised her, to wit, for the exellent grace sand parts that were in her.

The Virgins that he spoke of, that do behold the beauty of the Queens and
Concubines, yea, and they look upon their own attire and riches: and they
account these, great things: but so soon as ever they behold the Spouse, she
so dimmeth all their beauty and glory, so that they set their eyes upon her,
and pronounce her blessed: yea, the Queens and Concubines also, which glory
in their own pomp and glory, tool her.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints being clothed with the Spirit and glory of Christ, are the
admiration of the world. Such is the privilege of the Saints, that many times
profane worldlings are forced to perferre the state of the godly before their
own, and to wish they were like unto them. As Saul, Pharaoh, Ealaam, and
others: sometimes the Saints have been made so honorable, by the appearance of
God among them, even in the sight of men, that the very heathen Nations have
confessed that they were happy, God had done great things for them; thus Israel
of old was praised and accounted happy, for the manifold blessings of God upon
her, whom he has made high, above all Nations which he has made, in praise,
and in name, and in honor, Deuteronomy, 26. 19. And again Moses faith, in Genesis 4. 6.
This is your wisdom, and your nnderstanding, in the eyes of the people; which
shall hear al these Stalutes and say, surely this great Nation, is a wise and
understanding people. And the people are said to magnify the Disciples, in
Act. 5. 13.

Now for the particulars wherein these do so much praise and commend the
Spouse, are expressed in the next words.

VERSE. 7.
Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners.
HEre the praises forespoken of, are set forth most gloriously, or a new state
of the Church is described. They propound this Question, saying,

Who is she, etc.
They were not ignorant, or in doubt who she was, but by this manner of speech
is noted her excellency. See the like demand in Psalm. 24. 8. Also Psalm. 77. 13.
where they demand thus, Who is so great a God as our God? And so it was said of
Christ, What manner of man is this? Mark 4. 41. and Mat. 8. 27. So here, Who is
she? She is so beautiful and glorious that we know not what to resemble her
unto. And this glory of the Spouse is set forth by four excellent comparisons.

1. As the Morning for her beauty and freshness. 2. As the Moon for fairness
and light. 3. As the Sun for her brightness and clearness. 4. As an Army
with terrible banners, for fortitude.
1. The Spouse is resembled to the morning, Who is this looks forth as the
morning, that is, lightsom, bright, and cheerful. The morning we know is fresh
and comfortable, also glorious and beautiful, as in respect of the lively and
clear colors thereof, and does, as a man would say, more and more increase in
light; so that the Spouse is not compared, neither to the night, nor to the
dawing of the day, or day break, but even to the glory and beauty of the
morning it self. As the morning is comfortable after the dark night, so is the
divine presence of Christ to the soul, after the dark night of sin, ignorance,
and affliction.

Hence Note,

That divine presence in the souls of the Saints, is very sweet and
comfortable. It is like the breaking forth of the morning, after a dark stormy
night. When the soul has been in darkness without light, in affliction,
sorrow, ignorance, and blindness, and then to be filled with the divine
presence of Christ, for the Lord to break forth then in light and glory; how
sweet, how comfortable, how glorious will such an appearance of God be to the
soul? thus it is said to the Church, Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, and the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising, Isa. 60. 1. 3. The Prophet
does here allude to that glory that sometimes appeared upon the Mount, Exodus
24. 15. And upon the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 32. And the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 11.
So that when darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross darkness the people,
the presence of God with his people shall be life, light, and glory unto them.
When the Lord promises prosperity to his people he says, Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, Isa. 58. 8. So much for the first comparison: The
second follows.

Fair as the Moon.
The Moon in her full, or most glorious show, seems to be a most glorious
Creature indeed: i'ts called in Hebrew Lebanah, of her whiteness and glorious
bright, shining. When abundance of glory and light is promised to the Church,
God says, Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw
it self, Isa. 60. 20. And the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven fold, Isa. 30. 26. The Moon
is fair and light by that beauty and brightness communicated to her from the
Sun. In the Suns brightness she has her light.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints are beautiful, and shine in the glory and light of God. As
the Moon receives all her light from the Sun, so do the Saints receive all
their life, light, and glory from Christ the anointed one of the Father. The
Apostles said of Christ, We saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father, John 1. 12. Christ shined in the glory of his Father, and the
Saints shine in the glory of Christ: they receive all their grace and light
from him. Of his fulness we all receive, and grace for grace, John 1. 16. As
Christ lived in his Fathers bosom, and council, acted in his power, and stood
in his righteousness: So the Saints live in the secrets of the Almighty, and
partake of the righteousness of God in Christ, they shine in the same glory
and excellency as Christ did. But now the Moon, though she be clear and
receive much light from the Sun, yet sometimes the light and glory of the Sun
is eclipsed from her: neither is she so perfectly clear, but sometimes she
has spots, therefore it is not only said, that the Spouse is fair as the
Moon, but it is added,

Clear as the Sun.
Here are the degrees of grace, the Spouse is made partaker of; her first light
is like the morning, or dawning of the day, the second beauty like the Moon,
which borrows her light of the Sun; the third degree like the Sun it
self in brightness. The Spouse is clear, or pure as the Sun, as it is
said. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more
until the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. He means not that the Spouse is alone,
and simply, as the Sun has not her light from any other, but that she is
glorious and wonderful of majesty, and that she stands in the same glory and
majesty as Christ did. In Christ's transfiguration it is said, that his face did
shine as the Sun, Mat. 17. 2. and Revel. 1. 16. It is said, that his face shone
as the Sun shines in his strength. In a word, under these speeches the holy
spirit would not only note the growth of the Spouse, by comparing her to the
morning, but the excellency and glory of her by resembling her to the Moon,
yea, to the Sun, the most excellent and glorious of all that heavenly
Creatures that we do behold. Christ himself is the Sun of righteousness,
in whose glory and excellency the Church shines. Hence Observe,

That the glory and excellency of the Saints is the same with the excellency
and glory of Christ.

The Spouse is not only like the joyful morning, pleasant and comfortable,
and like the Moon that receives light from another, but is also glorious and
excellent as the Sun of righteousness himself. The Saints are said to but on
Christ, Gal. 3. 27. And the woman (which is the Spouse) is clothed with the
Sun, Rev. 12. 1. That is, she is clothed with Christ, with his righteousness
and glory. Thus the Armies which were in Heaven following Christ, are said to
be clothed in fine linen, white and clean, Rev. 19. 14. They are clothed
with the same annointings, and the same spirit, that Christ is, as the Apostle
testifies, that as he is (to wit, Christ) So are we in this present world, 1
John 4. 17. The last commendations in the verse follows.

And terrible as an Army with banners.
The Spouse was glorious in her terror and fortitude, she was an amazement and
trembling to all her spiritual enemies, pulling down with spiritual weapons
Strong holds, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 4. The people of Israel were a type of the
spiritual Church, who were a people saved by the Lord the shield of their
help, and the Sword of their exceliency, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. God cast the dread of
them, and the fear of them upon the Nations under the whole Heaven, who heard
the report of them and trembled, Deuteronomy. 2. 25. The people heard and were afraid,
sorrow took hold on the Inhabitants of Palestina; the Dukes of Edom were
amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling, took hold upon them, all the
Inhabitants of Canaan melted away, fear and dread fell upon them, by the
greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone, etc. Exodus 15. 15,
16. Having spoken of this more largely in the first verse of this Chapter, I
shall pass it here, and proceed.

VERSE. 8.
I went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the Valley, and to
see whit her the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranate budded.
THese words contain an answer to an objection: The objection may be thus
framed according to the answer. How comes it then that you withdrew your
self from me, if not because you would forsake me for my former negligence?

His answer is, that he went for other ends.

1. To visit his Garden, and see the fruits of the Valley, etc. 2. To call her
back from her mourning and doleful wandering.
The first is declared.

First, By the place unto which Christ went: he did not altogether depart from
his Spouse, but went into the Garden, that is, into the Assemblies and meetings
of his Church.

Secondly, This is farther explained by the ends for which went down into his
Garden, which was,

First, to see the plants of the Valley, to wit, humble spirits, and such as
are nothing in themselves, but rely wholly upon grace.

Secondly, to see all the Members of his Church: both such as resemble the
Vine, if they were toward the fruits of righteousness, and also such as
resemble the Pomegranate Tree, if they were but budding forth, as it were.

I went down into the Garden of Nuts.
Christ makes mention of going down unto her; he speaks of a time past,
even that time which is mentioned in the former Chapter, when he found her a
sleep. The Spouse is called a Garden, I went down to the Garden. And here it
is Translated, The Garden of Nuts, being generally so taken by the Hebrew
Rabbis. The word Egoz is not found in all the Scripture, but in this place. We
may take it for those aromaticall Trees and fruits (such as Christ's Gardens are
planted with, Chap. 4. 12, 13.) and so it is to be understood of that fruit
which we call Nutmegs, and the like.

Or, we may take the words thus, I came down to the fair dressed Garden. For
Egoz which is taken to be the Nut, may be derived of Gazaz, which signifies to
cut, or sheare. And so it seems most fit to take it thus, and it rather
stands both with the etimology of the Hebrew word, and also most agreeable to
the circumstance of the place, because afterward he mentions Vines.
Pomegranates, and such like, with which men are wont to plant their Gardens,
and not so commonly with Nut Trees, which are not so much of account and
estimation. And so I say we may take it, I went down into the dressed Garden,
for by this speech may be understood all the cost and labor which the Lord
bestowed upon his Vineyard, by planting, watering, dressing, and bestowing all
manner of labor and cost upon it, that it might be fruitful: In this the Lord
showed that he did not out of loathsomeness and wrath desert from his Spouse,
but rather of a very earnest desire that he had to finish the heavenly marriage
between them, and therefore he comes down to make her as a well-dressed Garden.

Hence Observe,

That Christ does not withdraw from his Spouse in everlasting displeasure, but
rather to manifest his everlasting love unto her. Hence it is that Christ says
here, I am come down into my Garden, he speaks according to the manner of
men, who in the Summer time come to see their works thrive and prosper: so
that it is as much, as if Christ had said, Thou should not have been dismayed
(O my Spouse) that I departed from thee, for therein I deal but with thee, as
good Gardeners and Vine-dressers deal with Orchards, gardens, and vineyards,
who coming (perhaps before the time of fruit) to look for fruit, and finding
none depart, not for ever, but till another convenient season, when they may
receive fruit. So that Christ will not lose his lalabour and cost bestowed upon
his Spouse, owners of their gardens and orchards: but he will come expecting
fruit, and making fruitful, as the following words do farther hold forth,
where we have the end of Christ's going down to his garden; to wit:

To see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the Vine flourished, and
Pomegranates budded.
To see the fruits of the valley, etc. there had been much bestowed upon the
Spouse to make her fruitful, and now Christ takes a view of her fruitfulness,
to see whether show answered the labor and cost he did bestow upon her.

Fruits here properly mean, the green, or first ripe fruits, such as are come
to maturitie at the beginning of the year, or spring time; so that after the
cold stormy winter of darkness, ignorance, and tribulation, comes the
cheerful Spring of grace, and glory in the Church. But it is added.

The fruits of the valley
The Hebrew word here translated valley, signifies a River, or Brook, and a
Valley also, through which a River or Brook, did, or might run; because men
commonly plant there, as in a place they take to be most plentiful and
fruitful: so that the Church is situate low, as in a valley, or streams where
pools and streams of water are, to make them fruitful. It was the custom of
men in the hot eastern Countries, to plant gardens and Orchards near streams
and pooles of water, as we may see in Eccles. 2. 6. And Ezekiel. 31. 45. It
follows.

To see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded.
Those that plant Vineyards and Orchards, etc. they do not only look to see
the growth of their grafts and plants, but also their fruits, whether they were
then ripe: so he, speaking after the manner of men, did wait whether his Spouse
were glorious in fruitfulness, whereof he had forerunning signs, even as the
flourishing of the Vine, and budding of the Pomegranates, were tokens of the
winter past, and the Summer coming on: which order Christ observes, Mat. 24.
32. So the whole sum of this verse is thus much; that Christ visited his
Church, to this end to make her fruitful, and then comes expecting of fruit
from her, even fruits of union and communion.

Hence note.

First, That Christ uses all means to make his Church a fruitful Spouse.
For, he does visit her, and plants her in the valley, to wit, in the midst of
streams of living water.

Secondly note.

When Christ has used means to make his Spouse fruitful, he expects fruit
from her.

He come to his Spouse, and does observe the time, even the time of springing,
when the Plants and Trees sprout and bud, and their fruits begin to appear,
for both the observations, see Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3. But notwithstanding Christ did
thus expect fruit from his Spouse, yet sometimes she is faulty, and does not
answer Christ's expectation, and Christ seems to tell the Spouse, that by
reason of her former sleepie condition, there was no such flourishing of the
plants, as ought to have been, as appears by the next verse.

VERSE. 9
Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadab.
WE may take these words to be the continued speech of Christ,: or, (as some
think) to be spoken of the Spouse. If we take them for the words of Christ,
the sense will be thus.

Or, ever I was aware, or, I knew not, or, we may read When I perceived not
these things. viz. the Vine to flourish, and the Pomegranate to bud, etc. when
I perceived not such a flourishing of plants, as ought to have been: then
Christ puts in his helping hand, as in the following words.

My soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadab My soul made me, or my soul
put me; that is, my loving affection and tender heart, put me upon some means
to help my people. This manner of speech notes an earnest desire, and strong
affections, as my soul loves, Chap. 1. 7. and my soul hates, Isa. 1. 14. My
soul is joyful, Isa. 61. 10. And the like. Christ hereby declares with what
earnest affections he was stirred up to awake and help his Spouse: he does not
love to see her in a dark low condition, but makes have to comfort her, which
is expressed by the following metaphors.

My soul made me like the Chariots, etc.
Made me like, or, set me upon Chariots, that is, yielded me good and sure
means to be carried and borne up. The peoples conversion unto Christ, is
called a bringing of them Upon horses, and Chariots, for an offering unto the
Lord, Isa. 66. 20. So that Christ is as Chariots to his people, to help and
sustain them by his Spirit: Chariots were used in wars, Joshua 11. 4. and
when God threatens venegeance unto the wicked, he says, he will come with his
Chariots like a whrile-wind, to render his anger, etc. And the Propets of old,
were called, the horsemen and Chariots of Israel, 2 King. 2. 12. All which
notes that they were for strength and support, by these Christ is here said to
carry, sustain, and succor his people. Neither does this only note the
means of Christ's coming to help his Spouse but in the following words, the
speed that he made.

The Chariots of Amminadab.
The Hebrew Amminadab signifies my willing people, or, my princely and noble
people: that is, As they that be my bounteous, noble, and free, hearted people,
do the things that they do cheerfully, and therefore with the more expedition
and speed then others: so I came cheerfully, and with a ready mind, after I
had once resolved upon the matter, to see and comfort my Spouse. Thus Christ's
people are said to be a willing people in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3.
that is, they are sustained with a free or princely spirit. The verse being
opened, let us observe hence.

First, That Christ absenteth himself from his Spouse, no longer then it shall
be for her good. For here he says, When I perceived not those things, to wit,
the Vines to flourish, etc. My soul set me, etc. I was restless until I came
to visit my Spouse. It is with Christ, as it was with Joseph, who though he
refrained for a while from his Brethren, yet he could not long conceal, but he
must disclose himself unto them: so though Christ does sometime seem to withdraw
from his people for a while, and that for their good, yet he absents himself no
longer then needs he must, and after returns with lager manifestations of his
love and favor then before he showed.

Secondly, Observe.

When Christ comes to raise his people out of a low and dark condition, he
comes with power, strength and speed. My soul made me like the Chariots, etc.
Chariots are for strength and speed. Christ comes to comfort and support, as
with Chariots.

Thirdly, Christ's people are a bounteous, noble, willing, and free hearted
people.

These are they that follow the Lamb, and serve the Lord freely and willingly,
and not of necessity and constraint: so its said of Christ's Subjects, in Psalm.
110. 3. his people shall be willing in the day of his power, then there needs no
coaction or compulsion used to draw them, to the obedience of Christ, but they
are drawn by the Scepter of his Spirit, swaying their hearts by the sweet
drawing of his Spirit, and grace.

It follows, as before Christ had declared his purpose and resolution of his
returning to the Church to comfort her and support her: so now he shows what
he spoke, when he came to her, in the next verse.

VERSE. 10.
Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee:
what will ye seem the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies.
IN the former verse, Christ declared his earnest affection, and willingness
to visit, and comfort his people, which thing is made more manifest here in
this verse, by the description he makes of his recalling her, and of the
effects following.

Christ's recalling of the Spouse is declared.

1. By the manner. 2. By the matter.
In the manner we may note.

First, The earnest affections of Christ, in that he doubleth his expression,
saying, return, return, etc. and this doubled twice, to show the earnestness
and certainty of his desire.

Secondly, By the Epithet Christ is pleased to give his Spouse, calling her
Shulamite, which is from her peace and perfection.

As for the matter, it is, that the Spouse should return to her former feeling
and comfort in Christ, and this is declared by the end, to wit, That we may
look upon thee, that Christ and his friends, may behold the beauty and glory
of the Spouse.

Lastly, The effect of all is this, that Christ and his friends do admire her
glory, which admiration is expressed by a question, and an answer.

The Question is, What shall we see in the Shulamite?

The answer is, as it were the company of two Armies.

Return, return, etc.
These are the words of Christ, unto his Spouse, who in seeking of him, had, as
one would say, gone beyond him. And this calling of her back again, is
expressed unto us under the similitude of an earthly man, who as it were a
far off, calls and shouteth, even as loud as he can, by words and speech,
to bring back such as wander out of the right way, hereby is signified the
earnestness of Christ, to call home his Spouse unto himself.

Hence Observe.

First That Christ's voice is an effectual means to convert us unto himself.

Christ's voice speaks spirit and life to the hearers; for his words are spirit
and life. And therefore Christ himself says, in Joh. 5. 25, 28. That the
hour was coming, and then was, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live, and they that are in the graves
(of sin, ignorance, earth, and flesh) shall hear his voice and come forth, etc.

Secondly Observe.

When Christ calls any by his voice, to return unto him he calls earnestly and
effectually.

When Christ comes and calls at the doors of our hearts, he will take no
denial, he will not be put off with any delays or denials whatsoever: but
makes his voice to be heard, and calls aloud, until we hear, and return unto
him. Here he does as it were double and treble his speech, by repeating the
word return, four times. Now follows the title he gives the Spouse.

O. Shulamite.
Under this title, he declares the peace and perfection of the Spouse, as
Solomon (which in Hebrew Shelomoh) had his name of peace, because he was a
figure of Christ, the Prince of peace, and Jerusalem was also called Shalem, or
Salem, Psalm. 76. 3. which signifies peace, Heb. 7. 2. So here the Spouse,
called upon to return, is named shulamite, or Shulamitesse, of her peace with
God in Christ. Now because this has some reference to Jerusalem, some do
apply this to the calling of the Jews, as it is foretold, Romans 11. 25. But we
may apply it to the new Jerusalem, the general assembly, and Church of the
first borne. And then it notes the peace and perfections of the Spouse.

Hence observe.

That the Saints are perfect in peace and union with Christ.

Christ has raised his Saints, by the lively quickening voice of his spirit,
and has made them sit together with himself in heavenly places, Ephesians. 3. 6.
And the Saints are said to be, complete in Christ, Col. 2. 10. And to be
complete in the will of God, Col. 4. 12. Again.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ uses all manner of sweet and loving speeches, to persuade his
Spouse to return unto him.

Here he says, O my Shulamite, or, my perfect one, for all which see before in
Chap. 5. 1. where he says, my love, my dove, my undefiled, etc.

Thus much for the manner of Christ's speech. Now for the matter of it, that
she might return to feel her former comfort, which is declared by the end: to
wit.

That we may look upon thee.
That we may look upon thee, or, let us see (or view) thee: this means a
looking on with delight, and joy. Now Christ speaks this in his own name,
and the name of his friends whom he mentioned before, verse. 9, for he is
desirous that they also with himself, may be partakers of the beauty and glory
of the Spouse: this being also spoken, according to earthly customs, for as
the Bridegroom has his friends, whom he would make partakers of the glory of
his Bride, so the Bride has hers, whom she would be glad to have beholders of
her excellency and glory likewise. The friends of the Bride are her
fellow members, whom she would make partakers with her self, to behold the
majesty and glory of Christ her head. The Bridegroomes friends may be said to
be the same, whom he would have to behold the glory, riches, and inward beauty
of his Spouse. Thus the faithful are called the friends of Christ, in John 15.
15.

Hence Observe,

That Christ delights that himself and his friends, should behold the
excellency, riches, and beauty of his Saints. Return, that we may behold thee,
that we may see thy inward beauty and glory. It is sin that obscureth the
Saints, but it is the riches of grace and glory that Christ delights to see
in his Saints. The end of all this follows, towit, the admiring of the
Churches glory.

What shall we see in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two Armies.

Christ turns his speech to his friends, by asking of this question, What
shall we see, etc. or, would you look, etc. This question is only to stir up
attention and affection in the hearers, that they might be witnesses of the
Churches glory. This is expressed by way of demand, the answer is made by Christ
himself.

As it were the company of two Armies.
As the company, or, as the dance: that is, a company (...) Chorus dances, or
Flutes; sometime it signifies; the company it self of Dancers.
of dancers that leap and dance for joy. It is said concerning the peoples
spiritual deliverance, O Virgin of Israel, etc. thou shall go forth in the
dance of them that make merry: then shall the Virgins rejoice in a dance, Jer.
31. 4. 13. So it notes joy and rejoicing like the company, or dance of two
Armies.

Of two Armies.
The Hebrew Mahanaim signifies the company of two Armies, or, two Camps that
meet. When Jacob met Laban, Genes. 32. 1, 2. the Angels of God met him, and
when Jacob saw them, he said, This is the Lords Host, and called the place
Mahanaim. Unto this joyful meeting of these two Armies of Jacob, does Christ
liken his Spouse unto. Hence Note,

That the meeting of Christ and his Saints, is a joyful meeting. It Is like the
meeting of Jacob and his Army of Angels. The Spouse is set forth by an
excellent order, like a company of Armies pitching their Tents. The coming in
of the Saints unto Christ is like a troup of dancers, like unto that number,
and with the same joy, wherein the people returning to David, did receive him
with great joy and comfort, as he did comfortably entertain them; and all this
was done at Mahanaim, as appears, 2 Samuel 19. And thus Christ comfort his
Spouse, and rejoices himself by beholding of her holiness and glory: here is
a most joyful meeting, a glorious sight. Thus ends the sixth Chapter.

Canticles. Chap. 7.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
How beautiful are thy goings with Shoes, O Princes Daughter? The joints of
thy Thighs are like Jewels, the work of the hanas of a cunning Workman.

Thy Navell is like around Goblet, which wants not liquor: thy Belly is like
an heap of Wheat set about with Lillies.

Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes that are Twins.

Thy Neck is a Tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the Fish-pools in Heshbon; by
the gate of Bath-rabbim: Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, which looks
toward Damascus.

Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thy head like purple:
The King is held in the Galleries, etc.


HERE IS another commendation of the Spouse by her several parts: If it be
demanded why it is so, seeing there is no new thing fallen out between the
former commendation and this? The answer is this, here is a new occasion
notwithstanding, of praising the Spouse: for the former was to comfort her, and
to raise her up after her affliction and sorrow, by assuring her that she was
even as precious and beautiful in his eyes, as she was before her unkind
dealing. And now having in a short digression answered all the doubts that the
Spouse might make, showing that his withdrawing himself was for her good, even
to call her to a more near communion with himself. And now this commendations
which is from the feet to the head, shows how comely and delectable she was
in her returning unto him; so that here is declared the judgment that Christ
still retains of his Spouse, by prosecuting the commendation of her, in the
rest of her members: to wit, Her Feet, her Thighs, her Navell, her Belly, her
Breasts, her Neck, her Eyes, her Head, her Stature, her Mouth, and now her
heart is settled and established, she rests secured that Christ and she shall
never be separated, that she shall never fall from grace, neither will her
beloved fall from his love.

The particular members of the Spouse are here described in another order then
before, in Chap. 4. and Chap. 6. for there the commendations began at her head,
and so descended to her lower parts, even to her feet; but here it begins at
her feet, and to other parts upward unto her head.

Some think this description was made by the friends of the Spouse, spoken of
in the former Chapter, because Christ is spoken of as another or third person,
as in Verse. 5. and 9. but we may take it for the continued speech of Christ,
making an end of the commendations that he began in the former Chapter. Let us
come to the particulars themselves.

How beautiful are thy feet with Shoes, O Princes Daughter?
The Shulamite or Spouse of Christ is here admired for her beauty and
Ornaments, that her beloved has furnished her withal, and it is expressed thus.

How beautiful are thy feet, etc.
The feet are the instruments of walking too and fro, we may read, How
beautiful are thy goings, etc. Sometimes by the feet are meant sound
affections, as in Eccles. 4. but here we may take it for her obedience and
faith, and walking in the truth, being now set free by the Son, as in John 8.
32. walking in the liberty of Christ, Gal. 5. 1. And it is added,

How beautiful are thy feet with Shoes.
To go barefooted was a sign of Captivity and affliction, Isa. 20. 4. 2.
Sam. 15. 30. And when the Lord mentions his favors to the Church, he says, I
shod thee with Badgers skin, Ezekiel. 16. 10. The feet of those that preach the
Gospel are said to be beautiful, Romans 10. 15. So here, the Spouse in her
return to Christ, is said to be also beautiful, being as it were, shod with
the preparation of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 15. By the knowledge and obedience of
which, she is set in the way of Christ, whereby her feet and goings are
beautiful and glorious. Hence Observe,

That the Saints in their returning to, and walking in Christ, are very
beautiful and glorious in their goings. It is a glorious thing to walk in
Christ, to walk in the Spirit: those that thus walk are said To make straight
paths for their feet, Heb. 12. 13. Sin is called our own ways, and crooked
ways, that are not good, but to walk in Christ, and in the spirit, is to
walk in beautiful paths. When we walk in darkness and bondage, we walk as
it were, without shoes, barefooted, but when we walk in the knowledge and
counsel of God, then we walk, as it were, with shoes, being shod with the
preparation of the Gospel. Thus much for the glory of her walkings, her honor
is yet further set forth in that it is said,

O Princes Daughter!
The Hebrew Bath-nadeb, signifies Daughter of the beautiful, or, Of the
Prince or noble: then we may read, O bounteous Princes Daughter. Princes are
named bountiful, as being free, liberal, and willing to do good to others.
To be a Son of Belial, is to be of a wicked disposition, Deuteronomy. 13. 13. And to
be the Son of a Noble, is to be of an ingenuous and noble disposition,
Eccles. 10. 17. Hereby is noted, that the Spouse is of a Noble race, of a free
disposition, ready to communicate to others of the grace she has received.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints are of a noble parentage and disposition. These are they which
are not borne of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the flesh, but of God,
John 1. 13. The Spouse is called the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45. The word which
dwells in us, is called the word of the Kingdom, because it brings a
Kingdom with it: and the Saints are called Children of the Kingdom: The Kings
Daughter is to be borne, not according to the flesh, but according to the
promise: like Isaac, which was Heir to Abraham in his house, whereas Ishmael
and his Mother were cast out of doors. The Apostle affirms that the Saints
are not Children of the Servant, but of the free woman: And John says, We are
born of God, and his seed remains in us, 1 John 3. 9. As by seed man is borne
of carnal conception, so by the Spirit he is born of spiritual regeneration.
And as the Saints are of an honorable birth, so they are of a noble ingenuous
disposition, they are free and ready to communicate. When the restoration of
glory is promised to the Church, it is said, that (Nabal) the fool, or vile
person, should no more be called (Nadib) liberal, or bountiful, Isa. 32. 5.
That is, the fool or vile person shall no more be called a Prince, or one that
is bountiful, but he shall be called such as he appears to be in his Villainy.
Thus much for the commendations of the feet of the Spouse, with the Epithet
given her, O Princes Daughter: now follows the praise of her Thighs, in the
next words.

The joints of thy Thighs are like Jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning
workman.
The Original word here Translated joints, is not found elsewhere in
Scripture; it signifies turnings, or things that do compass about. Some
understand it of the Girdle wherewith the Spouse was girded, which they did use
to wear in old time, lower by much then we do, even upon their Thighs, as
appears by Psalm. 45. 3. Or about the loins, as Mat. 3. 4. And the Apostle
uses the same phrase, when he says, Gird up the loins of your mind, and be
sober, 1 Pet. 1. 13. And Paul exhorts to have Our loins girded about with
truth, Ephesians. 6. 14.

But we may rather take the Thighs to be the bones that turn and move in the
hollow of the Thighs: these may be taken for the whole Spouse, and all her
parts, every part having in it comeliness, beauty, glory and strength: noting
the upright, goodly, and glorious stature, and gesture of the Spouse, who
walks in a due and comely posture. These her Thighs,

Are like Jewels.
Jewels are very fine and costly: if we refer it to the Girdle, it shows the
finenesse and sumptuousness of it, but if to the Thighs, then it notes they
were neat, and comely. It Is added.

The work of the hands of a cunning workman.
The Hebrew Aman signifies fidelity and skillfullnesse in his workmanship: So
we may read it, The work of the hands of a cunning Artificer, or, faithful
Craftsman: this is added, to note the excellency of the work or frame of the
Spouse, even like unto Jewels that have most cunning and curious workmanship
bestowed upon them: such is the glory, comeliness, and beauty of the Spouse,
and of her particular members. Hence Observe,

That the frame and proportion of the Spouse, with all her particular members
is very beautiful and glorious. It Is like the curious workmanship of some
cunning Artificer in Jewels and precious stones, curiously cut and wrought
out. The Churches proportion, gesture, stature, walkings, and conversations, is
the divine and gracious workmanship of God, The work of his hands, Isa. 60.
21. So that God himself is the chief Artificer, to frame this heavenly work
upon the soul. As Bezaliel, and Aholiab, were filled with the Spirit of God, in
wisdom, understanding, knowledge, and Workmanship, to find out curious works,
to work in gold and silver, and the art to set stones, for the making of the
Tabernacle, and the Mercy-seat, and Aarons Garments. So the Lord by his
glorious Spirit, does make his Spouse a more beautiful frame then Aaron was,
by that divine work of Spirit, life and glory, that he frames and sets up in
the souls of his.

It follows.

VERSE. 2.
Thy Navell is like a round Goblet which wants not liquor: Thy Belly is like
an heap of Wheat, set about with Lillies.
THe Spouse being before commended for her walking in the Gospel, and in the
truth of Jesus: she is now further praised for her propagating the glorious
truth to others, and therefore she is here compared to a woman conceiving and
nourishing her Children. The Shulamite, or Spouse of Christ is first commended
by being likened to a woman with child, traveling with, and bringing forth
Children. And secondly, nursing them with the Breasts of her consolation, as
it is said, Isa. 66. 11. First it is said,

Thy Navell is like a round Goblet, etc.
The Navell is that by which the Child is nourished in the womb, and this is
set forth by the form of a round Goblet, or, cup of roundnesse, that is, very
comely and beautiful to the show, as we see Globe Glasses, or standing cups
are, that be made after that fashion. It Is added.

Which wants not liquor.
This shows the cup to be plentiful, that is, full to the top, and
overflowing, as David speaks, Psalm. 23. 5. Or, we may read the words thus, Let
not the liquor fail, as though in earnest affection of desire, there were a
wishing for a constant and full supply of grace, towit, that the womb of the
Spouse compared to a round cup, might never decay or be consumed, but rather
that it might be like the Widows pitener of Oil mentioned, 1 Kings 4. 2.

The word translated liquor, signifies mixture, that (...) Mixtio, commixtio,
complexio, Temperamentum: vinum aqua mixtum ita ut duae sint parts aquae una
vini tantum verbum (...) Misceretemperare.
is, liquor mixed, and so made fit for nourishment; for in the hot eastern
Country, they used to mix their wine, sometimes with water, and sometimes
with milk, to allay the heat thereof: so wisdom is said to mingle her wine,
Prove. 9. 2. And in Chap. 5. 1. Christ drank his wine with his milk. And there
is mention made of spiced wine, Chap. 8. 2. that is, mingled with spice to make
it the more refreshing and comfortable. The Navel therefore not wanting
mixture, denotes the abundance of supply of spiritual nourishment in his
Spouse, for the cherishing of her young ones: she is not destitute of food, etc.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse is supplied with abundance of divine grace, to nourish and
cherish her own Children.

The Lord by his Spirit and graces, does furnish the Spouse to feed and refresh
her own Members. She has wherewithal to nourish them, as it were in the
womb, and also strength to bring them forth. Hence it is, that the Apostle in
preaching the Gospel is likened to a Father that begets, as in 1 Cor. 4. 15.
For though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, (says he) yet have ye
not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.
And sometime he is likened to a Mother, where he says, My little Children of
whom I travel in birth, until Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. As if the
Apostle had said, ye are my children, whom with much pain and travel, I
formerly brought forth to Christ, but you have corrupted your selves again,
and fallen from your former profession; and therefore now I travel with you
again, till Christ be again formed in you, and you receive the right shape of
Christians. And again, sometimes the Apostle is compared to a Nurse that
cherishes her Children, when he says, We were gentle among you, even as a
Nurse cherishes her Children, 1 These. 2. 7. that is, we were tenderly
affected, as a Nurse that bears with a froward Child, and patiently takes
all pains with it, as if she were the mother. By all this, we see that the
Lord makes his Spouse as a Mother, or a tender Nurse, unto whom he communicateh
all good things, for the nourishment and refreshings of the Saints. It
follows.

Thy belly is like an heap of wheat, set about with Lilies.
The fruitfullnesse of the Spouse is resembled by an heap of wheat, and her
pleasant sweetness is resembled by the Lilies. A farther supply, and growth in
grace is here noted, by likning the belly of the Spouse to a heap of wheat:
for, in the harvest, they gathered their Corn together into heaps, Ruth. 3.
7. Mich. 4. 12. 13. now her belly likened to such a heap of wheat, denotes
the spiritual harvest being come, she was ready to bring forth abundance of
fruit, having great store of good issue, like a wheat heap; her belly is
farther praised, in that its said, it was

Set about with Lilies.
In Judea, their corn flooers were in open fields, and therefore were hedged
about for defense: so the belly of the Spouse being big and ready to bring
forth fruit, is beset with sweet and comfortable Lilies, for the increase of
her comfort and joy,: so that the Spouse is, as it were environed about with
grace and protection.

Hence note.

That the Spouse has not only the juice of grace abundantly to nourish her
Children; but is becompassed with sweet mercies and comforts.

It is said that the Harlots way is hedged with thorns, Hos. 2. 5. but the
Spouse is beset with sweet Lilies: God does comfort and protect his Spouse with
love, sweetness and mercy.

It follows.

VERSE. 3.
Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.
THis is a farther commendations of the Spouse, her breasts are set forth to be
fresh and lusty, whose milk is not consumed with age or years: for they are
said to be like the twins of a Roe-buck; that is, they are equals even, one of
them is not greater then the other. Equallitie in women's Breasts make much for
the beauty of them. These Breasts of the Spouse, are such as minister sweet
consolations and refreshings to such as are Babes in Christ, who suck the
sincere milk of the word, as it is in 1 Pet. 2. 2. So the Children of the
Church are said, To suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations,
and that they may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory,
Isa. 66. 11. See the words of this verse also expounded before, in Chap. 4. 5.
where the words, and also the sense are the same, as here in this resemblance;
wherefore I shall pass to that which follows.

VERSE. 4.
Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by
the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy nose is as the Tower of Lebanon; which looks
toward Damascus.
IN this verse there is commended three several parts of the Spouse, viz. her
neck, her eyes, her nose.

Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory.
This comparison does not much differ from that former, where he says, Thy
neck is as the Tower of David, built for an armorie: saving that there he
respects strength and force, making mention of the sheilds of mighty men: but
here by saying it was of Ivory, he means, that it was white and pure, as
being made of pure matter, and of a clear color, the Ivory being of a
cleareare white. The neck being compared to a Tower is meant straight and
upright: and as it was commended before for strength; so here for beauty. So
then we may understand by this comparison of the Shulamitesse, her neck being
likened to a Tower of Ivory, the power and glory of the Church, in respect of
the clearenesse and purity of her doctrine, and upright judgments, whereby
her Children are guided and governed, with sweetness, peace and liberty.

Hence Note.

That the Saints are glorious, in respect of those divine discoveries of truth,
that Christ does manifest unto them.

Christ tells the Jews, That if they would continue in his word, they should be
his Disciples indeed; and they should know the truth, and the truth should make
them free, Joh. 8. 31, 32. The knowledge of the truth is so excellent and
glorious, that it frees the Saints from the servitude of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
from the service of sin, Romans 6. 6. And therefore its promised that the Church
should be loosed from the bands of her neck, Isa. 52. 2. The people of Israel
in the time of their captivity, were such prisoners and captives, as were wont
to be fastened one to another, as beasts in a yoke, Lam. 1. 14. So the Saints
are yaoked and chained, until the spirit of truth come to set them free: and
when freedom is wrought, it is very glorious. It follows.

Thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim.
The eyes of the Spouse were commended before in that th ey were like to Doves
eyes, in chap. 4. 1 so here by fish-pooles is meant water of life: Now Christ
does not only note out hereby the pleasantnes of the eyes of the Spouse, as in
respect of the color and beauty, but also commends them for the necessary
use of them, even as fish-pooles, or pleasant waters were in those hot and dry
Countries; and pools have their name of blessing, Judge. 1. 15. because they
were filled with rain, the blessing of God, Ezekiel. 34. 26. and therefore these
Pooles are said to be in Heshbon.

Heshbon was a City beyond Jordan, in the County of Sihon King of Amorites,
where Sihon himself reigned, as appears, Josh. 9. 10. Also Josh. 13. 10. 21.
It was also situate in a goodly fertile Country, which the Rubenites
possessed, Numb. 32. 34. 37. Heshbon by interpretation signifies an
arteficiall devise, or computation: so that we may understand them of pooles
artificially made. It is added.

By the gate of Bath-rabbim.
The Hebrew Bath, is as much as to say the Daughter, and Rabbim is of many:
that is as much as to say the daughter of many, this seems to be meant of the
multitude, that should repair to the Spouse, even as great numbers came to
those fish-pooles: Here he alludes to the custom used in those days both of
the Judges and people, who did sit in the gates, Ruth. 4. 1. 2 Samuel 19. 8. Lam.
5. 14. wherefore these fish-pools may be thought to be near some gate of a
City, where many peopole assembled. Thus the Spouse is commended for her
clear discerning of the truths of God.

Hence Observe.

That the spouse is glorious in her spiritual sight and discernence of the
truths of Christ. She has light in her self and walks in the light: she is
also able to see into her own ways, and the ways of others. Christ is said
to be given for a light to the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. And so is the Spouse also,
in that its said, The Gentiles shall come to her light, and Kings to the
brightness of they rising, Isa. 60. 3. Thus the Spouse is not only clear and
pure in her own judgment and knowledge, like the pooles of Heshbon, but her
light and glory shines forth to others, even, as at the Gates of Bathrabbim,
to wit, at the greatest concourse of people. It follows.

Thy nose is like the Tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.
The nose is a principal ornament of the face the instrument of smelling and
drawing breath: sometimes it is put for the whole face. Now the beauty of her
nose is set forth by comparing it to the Tower of Lebanon.

The Tower of Lebanon was Solomon's house, he called it, the Forest of Lebanon,
1 Kings 7. 2. for the great abundance of Cedar tree, whereof it was made, so
that it was nothing but comeliness, beauty, and delight: so then as the nose
is a gace unto the countenance of a woman, so is the Spouse comely in the
faught of Christ her husband, and he has great pleasure in her beauty: but
its added.

Looking toward Damascus.
He means not as some have fantastically imagined that from Solomon's Tower,
men might behold the City of Damascus in Syria, but that Lebanon it self, and
therefore the house and Tower builded there, lay as it were over against
Damascus. Now Damascus was the chief City in Syria, Isa. 7. 8. called in
Hebrew Dammeseke, as 2 Kings 16. 10. in Greek its called Damascus, Acts 9. 20.
It was a goodly City of joy and praise, Jer. 49. 24. The Inhabitants were
commonly enemies to Israel, with whom they made war many times, as appears,
1 Kings 11. 24, 25. Isa. 7. 5. 8.

By the nose then we may in the first place understand the courage and strength
of the Spouse, and that she was careful to defend her self and Members,
against her enemies. As in times of danger, they set on Towers and high places
watchmen, to spy out any approaching danger, as in Isa. 21. 6. 9. And Ezekiel.
33. 2. 6. So in that the nose of the Spouse is likened to the Tower of Lebanon,
which was high and lofty: as the pride of the wicked is set forth by the
haughtiness of his Nose, Psalm. 10. 4. signifying his lofty, stout, and proud
carriage; and on the contrary, when the threatening to Jerusalem, he says, he
would take away her nose and her ears, etc. Ezekiel. 23. 24. So here in that the
Spouse is likened in her nose to the Tower of Lebanon, that is high and tall,
looking toward Damascus, that were full of enemies, it shows her courage and
care to defend herself against her adversaries.

Hence note the valor, strength, and courage of the Saints, they do as it
were outface their enemies, they look upon the face of Damascus: but having
spoken oftentimes of this thing, I shall pass it here. But,

Secondly, the Nose is the instrument of smelling and discerning: So that she
is declared to be able to discern and examine doctrine, as the Nose by sent
and smelling discerns between wholesome Ointments, and contagious sents and
smells.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints have a spiritual discerning of what is truth. They have not
only a spiritual sight and knowledge of truth, but they are able to search
into the bottom of it; they can Taste words by the ear, as Job speaks. Christ's
Sheep know his voice from the voice of strangers, so that the Spouse here is
very comely and seemly in discerning the doctrine of the Gospel by trial and
examination, as the Nose does Ointments by the smell. Thus the Noble Bereans
tried Paul's Doctrine, Acts 17. 11, 12. And thus the Apostle exhorts, to prove
all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. It follows,

VERSE. 5.
Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like Purple,
the King is held in the Galleries.
FIrst, here is the commendations of the head: Some read it, Thy head upon thee:
Others, In thine head: we may take it either for the head it self (which is
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22.) or it may be taken for the Ornament upon the head,
namely those graces wherewith Christ has adorned his Spouse. Now the
commendation of her head is, that it is said to be,

As Carmell.
The word Carmell is commonly taken for a place full of pastures, set also with
Trees, whereof it is likely that this place had it is name: Carmell was the name
of the Mountain where Elias killed Baals Priests, and praid for rain, 1 Kings
18. 19, 20. It seemed to be a very fruitful place, Nahum 1. 4. For a fruitful
place opposed to a barren Wilderness, is called Carmell. Isa. 32. 15. And
Chap. 29. 17. Now the head of the Spouse being thus likened to Carmell, a very
fruitful place, denotes the wisdom and knowledge of the Spouse. Hence Observe,

That the Saints are glorious in the wisdom and knowldge of God. VVhither we
take it for the Ornaments of the head, or for the head it self, it is all one
(for Christ is both the head and the Ornaments also) it shows how glorious the
Spouse is in wisdom and understanding, she is full of gravity, carrying her
self wisely in all her actions: her mind being filled with the counsel and
knowledge of God. Thus the Lord foretelling the glory of the Spouse, says, The
glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmell and Sharon,
etc. Isa. 35. 2. The meaning is, that whereas the Church in her former dark and
low condition, was like a wast wilderness, but when the Lord should shine upon
her with more light and glory, she should become a most plentiful and
beautiful place, even as Carmell and Sharon. The Hebrew Carmell is sometimes
taken for Crimson, or Scarlet-colour, 2 Chronicles. 3. 14. such colors were worn
of Princes and great persons, meaning thereby, that her head was adorned with
that which was costly and full of majesty, as that color is; but the other
Interpretation seems to be the most proper. It follows,

And the hair of thy head like Purple.
The hair, or, the bush of thine head. The word Dallath (which is only used
in this place) signifies slenderness or tenuity, such hair as is small and
slender: wherefore some take it for the hair of the head, for the smallness
of them, and some for the Laces that bind up the hair. Now in that it is said,
her hair is as purple, it is meant, that it is costly and dear, as which did
not belong to any but mighty men and Magistrates. See Luke 16. 19. Also Dan. 5.
16. which no doubt also they did wear as an attire of great comeliness and
beauty. By the hair some understand the multitude of believers, but rather we
may understand it of cogitations and purposes of the heart; and then Note.

That the Saints are glorious in the thoughts and purposes of their hearts.
Their thoughts are ordered by the Lord, and their minds are filled with
understanding. But I shall pass this, having spoken more largely of it in
Chap. 4. 1. where the Spouses hair was likened to a flock of Goats, that was
smooth and fair: So here it is likened to purple, dear and costly, it being
the comely and beautiful attire of great ones. Purple differs not much (as
some think) from Scarlet, in which respect they reconcile the Evangelists.
Matthew affirming, Chap. 27. 28. that they put upon Christ a Scarlet Robe. And
John 19. 2. As also Mark 15. 17. calling it a purple, or purple Garment. But I
pass this. It follows,

The King is held in the Galleries.
The beauty of the Spouse being thus described in all her parts, is now
amplified by two effects: the first is, that it works in the King a strong
desire, that he would always be bound unto the walking places with his love,
The King is held in the Galleries. The second effect is that which causes him
to utter with a great admiration at her beauty and sweetness, which is
declared by the matter, in all those parts that have been described, all which
is beautified with an exclamation, How fair, etc. as it follows in the next
verse. But first of the Kings desire to be bound unto the walking places of his
Spouse.

The King is held in the Galleries.
By the King here is meant Solomon, and under him Christ. The word Rehatim,
translated Galleries, is used for Gutters wherein waters run, for the flock to
drink, as in Genes. 30. 38. and Exodus 2. 16. but here it seems to be meant
of such Galleries as run along the house side, and are places to walk in. Some
render it thus, A King would be tied in his Galleries: as if he should say,
there is no King in the world so glorious or majesticall, that if he should
behold thy beauty and glory, it would cause him to stand amazed thereat; he
would no more look upon his own glory, but upon thine, so far does thine
excel all the glory of the world; so that he that beholds it would be, as it
were, with a continual desire to look upon thee, so highly would he esteem of
thy exceeding glory, before his own, or any earthly glory whatsoever: So then,
there is not the mightiest Prince in the world, but if he did see the beauty of
the Spouse, would desire to be tied or bound to any part or piece of it: yea,
to take up his continual abode there, that he might be satisfied with the
sight thereof, and continually to look upon the inward and spiritual beauty
of the Church. See this performed by David, Psalm. 27. 4. Also Psalm. 84.
throughout.

Or, rather we may take it thus: The King, towit, Christ himself, is held, or,
tied in his Galleries: towit, in his Spouse, in his Saints: So that he has a
fixed habitation in the house of his Church, where he is, as it were, bound by
the bands of amity and love: the Spouse being so excellent in all parts, so
glorious, so beautiful, that he cannot but Covet her beauty, as it is said in
Psalm. 45. 12.

Hence Observe,

That Christ is affected to be near his Spouse, and to behold her beauty and
comeliness. The Galleries and large rooms of Kings were hanged with goodly
Hangings of Purple, or of some rich stuff: unto such glorious rooms is the
Spouse likened, being glorious in all parts, whereby she draws the affections
of her beloved unto her: Hence it is, that it is said, The Lord delighted in
thee, and thy Land shall be married, Isa. 62. 4. And the glory of the Church is
set forth thus, My Servant David shall be their Prince for ever, and I will set
my Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore, and the name of the City from
that day shall be, the Lord is here, Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26. So that the presence of
God, manifesting of light, life, and glory, should be the excellency of the
heavenly City, the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven. And it is said in
Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, etc. And so it is said of
the new Jerusalem in Rev. 22. 3. 5. The Throne of God, and of the Lamb, shall
be in it, and his Servants shall serve him, and they shall reign for ever. So
that Christ is tied by bands of love to be present with his Church, manifesting
of divine presence to her, and beholding in her his own beauty and glory. So
much for the first effect of the Churches beauty and comeliness in all parts.
The second follows, where Christ does, as it were, break forth into
admiration and great wonderment at her beauty in the whole, or in all laid
together, saying,

VERSE. 6.
How fair and how pleasant art thou O love, for delights.
THis admiration of the Spouses beauty and pleasantness in all parts, shows
the ground of the former speech, why the King is held in his Galleries,
forasmuch as he was so exceedingly ravished and overcome with the beauty and
glory of his Spouse. This admiration of the Spouses glory is brought upon all
those former particulars, and therefore the words stand thus, as touching the
sense of them, O Love, or O my love, how fair art thou, and how pleasant art
thou in every respect, in all parts, or rather in all those heaped up together
in one? For as you see, he has gone by particulars from the foot to the head.
First, he commends her goings, as with shoes: then he likeneth the joints of
her Thighs to Jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman. After this
he mentions the Navell, which he compares to a round cup that wants not
liquour. And her belly to an heap of wheat compassed about with Lillies. Her
two Breasts are as two young Roes that are Twins. And so he ascends, and
says, her Neck is as a Tower of Ivory: her eyes like the fish-pools of
Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim. Her Nose as the Tower of Lebanon that
looks toward Damascus: her Head like Scarlet, and her hair like the Purple,
whereby the King is held in his Galleries. In sum, her beauty is wonderful
in all parts, she is comely throughout. True beauty consists in the symetrie
and consent of all parts: if there be a comely and pleasant face and not a
comely body: or if there be a comely body, but not so well favored a face: or
if the face and body be both comely, and yet some defect in one part or other,
there is not a complete beauty. But there is no such kind of deformity in the
Spouse, for she is beautiful in every part, she is wholly delectable and full
of glory. Hence it is that Christ uses such a vehement exclamation, saying,

How fair art thou.
As before in the first verse, when he began to commend his Spouse in her
several parts, he used a vehement exclamation, thereby to set out his great
love and liking of them, and the excellency thereof: so having finished that
particular praise, and beginning here generally to commend her, he uses the
like, saying, How fair, etc. That is, thou art so beautiful and fair, both
in every part of thee, and in the whole, that I know not what words to use, to
express the same, neither indeed can it be sufficiently declared. And it is
added.

And how pleasant art thou?
The word translated pleasant, does signify sweet, amiable, sweet, comely, and
gracious: he means nothing (...) Amaenus, jucundus, amabilis, pulcher,
decorus, gratus fuit.
else but that she was wholly and altogether declightufll.

O my love.
The Spouse is Christ's love, the only object of his delight: the substantive is
here put for the adjective, (...) Amavit, dilexit. verbum Ahab. diligendi esse
ardens and vehemens, and significare ali quid tenerum and affectione plenum, ut
sit is diligens justitiam, qui in ea sibi places and acquiescit eam exquirit
and persequitur. Rivet: in Psalm. 45. 8. The LXX. turn it frequently by (...)
diligo, amo: and by (...) amo: and by (...) gaudee.
to note both the exceeding great love of Christ toward her, as also all those
amiable, gracious parts in her, to move love and affection in others to her.
The word here is not the same that is used in Chap. 1. 9. 15. And Chap. 2. 2.
And 4. 1. which did signify loving society and friendship: but this word
signifies a sweet in ward affection, which is very strong and vehement: this
notes unto us, Christ's great exceeding affections to his Spouse: besides the
sweet compellation, the delightfulness of the Spouse is enlarged, by saying.

How pleasant art thou for delights?
For delight, or, in pleasures, or in these pleasures: viz. reckoned up before
in her particular commendation: meaning hereby, that she was full of all manner
of delight and pleasure: she was wholly, and every part and piece of her,
together with all her ornaments and attires, or whatsoever did generally or
particularly belong unto her, was glorious, excellent, sweet, pleasant,
beautiful, comely, delightful, etc. Now in that Christ does speak of this
beauty in a way of wonderment, from the heaping up of all those particulars
together in one.

Hence Observe.

First, That the beauty of the Saints is exceeding great and wonderful.

For, where there be many goodly things, and every one by its self to be
wondered at for beauty, how much may they be wondered at when they come
altogether, to be heaped up in one? The Lord does bestow many goodly things
upon his Spouse, he does deck her with many rich ornaments, every one of which
is to be wondered at for excellency, then how much more when they come
altogether? The glory of the Spouse is the more excellent, if we consider
the person that does thus admire her beauty: and that is Christ himself, who
cannot admire any low thing: lay all the glory of Kings before him, and it is,
but dross, he cannot wonder thereat: for what is that to his own glory and
excellency, with which the Saints are clothed? what is the glory and
excellency of the Sun, the Moon and Stars unto him? does he wonder at
them? Surely he wondereth at the glory and beauty of his Spouse, how excellent
then is her beauty and glory: we account those earthly things very rare and
excellent, that Princes upon earth do wonder at; how much more rare and
excellent must these things be, that Christ the King of Kings does wonder at?

Secondly Observe.

That Christ does not only wonder at, but exceedingly affect and delight in the
beauty and glory of his Saints. He does not only call her fair and pleasant;
but he also calls her his love, and not only his love, but his love in
pleasures, or in delights, or in the things which we esteem as dainties.
Surely, this does augmenut the matter, this is a very forcible speech to
declare his exceeding affection toward her. We know men may love things, and
take delight in them, but there be degrees in their love: they may love things
very well, yet that is the highest, when they take their chief pleasure and
delight in that which they love: So Christ shows here, that he takes delight
and pleasure in the beauty of his Spouse, she is exceeding precious and
amiable in his sight. And as she is matter of delight and pleasure to Christ,
so she is to all that behold her beauty; so that all that love her may rejoice
with her, and delight themselves in the brightness of her glory, as Isa. 66.
10. 11. It follows.

Verse. 7.
Thus thy stature is like a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of grapes.
Christ having commended the beauty of his Spouse by particular Members, and
as it were by piecemeale, declaring her to be fair, saying, How fair! joined
with pleasure, How pleasant art thou! yea so pleasant for all delicutes and
delights. Now he comes to set her forth in general, and that by the comely
stature of her whole body; declaring it to be strong, straight, and durable,
like the palm tree.

Thy stature or height, is like a palm tree, (or, a datetree) called in Hebrew
Thamar, being very tall and upright in stature. The just man's state is likened
to this tree, Psalm. 9. 13. And therefore there were set up in the Temple,
figures of the palme-trees, 1 Kings 6. 29. which did prefigure spiritual
graces of those of the spiritual Temple under the Gospel, as appears in Ezekiel.
41. 18, 19. Now the glory and excellency of the Spouse is fitly resembled and
set forth by the Palm Tree, and that in these particulars.

First, It is very fruitful, bringing forth dates sweet and delicious, like
unto which are those fruits of the spirit, as love, joy, and peace, etc.

Secondly, Its like unto the Children of Israel under the taskmasters of
Egypt, the more burdens are laid upon it, the better it grows: for its
reported of the Palm Tree, that it will not bow down, but grow straight
upright, though never so heavy burdens be laid upon it: Such is the spiritual
stature, and growth of the Spouse, that notwithstanding all her affliction,
oppression, and tribulation, she still grows upward, straight and upright; from
glory to glory, until she attain the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 13. The Kingdom of Isreal's
prosperous condition is likened to a Tree, whose stature was exalted among the
thick branches, Ezekiel. 19. 11. The happiness and prosperity of the Saints is,
to grow upward and straight upright under all pressures whatsoever.

Thirdly, It Is a sign used for victory, they which stood before the Throne
and the Lamb, representing the glory and reign of the Church, Were clothed
with long white robes, and had palms in their hands, Rev. 7. 9. So is the
Spouse made to prevail over flesh, and the powers of darkness.

Fourthly, Its always green; therefore David says, The just man shall
flourish as the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92. 12. They are always fresh and
flourishing, their fruit uever withers nor decays: so we see why the stature
of the Spouse is set forth by the palm tree: to show, that she is fresh and
flourishing, and stands upright: so that she was of most strong and straight
body. And as straightness of the body gives grace to women, so the Spouse is
graceful and excellent in respect of her flourishing condition. Now it
follows.

And thy breasts to clusters of grapes
As her stature is likened to the palm tree: so her breasts to clusters; which
must be meant of wine: so that her breasts were not only small and equal, as
verse the third, and well fashioned, as in Ezekiel. 16. 7. but full of milk, and
divine nourishment to satisfy her Children withal, which they that love her
may suck and be satisfied, Isa. 66. 7. Her breasts are like to clusters of
wine, a sweet and wholesome fruit, but much more sweet and refreshing is the
sweet wine of heavenly consolation, and the sincere milk of the word, by which
the faithful are nourished. The Spouse then having plentiful supplies of
divine nourishment, and heavenly sweetness, to supply all her Members withal,
for she has most firm and plentiful breasts, as those clusters of grapes,
that are thick set with grapes, indeed are. The Spouses condition is not, as
the complaint was made, there was no cluster to eat, Mich. 7. 1. but as when
new wine was found in the cluster, and he said, destroy it not for a blessing
is in it, Isa. 65. 8. We have spoken of this before, what the breasts are, and
what that sincere milk is, by which the faithful are nourished, and therefore
I shall not speak of this any more in this place.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
I said, I will go up to the palm tree; I will take hold of the boughs
thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the smell of
thy nose like apples.

And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.

Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field, etc.


WE have heard of the great praise and commendation which Christ gives to his
Spouse, by comforting her, declaring her beauty and comeliness. Now he comes
to make a sweet promise unto his Spouse, of what great things he will do for
her: and also the sweet effects, that she should thereby become very sweet and
precious. This is contained in verse 8. 9. Afterward we have the Spouse
returning answer, expressing her large affections toward Christ, that seeing
his kindness has been so great toward her, she does even as it were
dedicate or consecrate her self to him again, and this is contained in the
residue of the Chapter. But let us come to the words themselves.

I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof.
In these words contained in the 8, and 9. verses: Observe Christ's new promise
made to his Spouse, which is set down by the parts, and the effects. The parts
of the promise are two.

First, He will clime the palm tree.

Secondly, That he will take hold of the boughs thereof: both which shows,
that Christ will join himself nigh unto his Spouse, and cause her to bear
abundance of fruit.

The effects of this promise follow.

First, It makes the breasts of the Spouse to be as the clusters of the Vine..

Secondly, Her nose shall smell like apples.

Thirdly, The roof of her mouth like the best wine, etc. which wine is
described.

First, By the adjunct and the effect: it is of an excellent smell, it gooth
down sweetly, and makes those that are asleep to speak.

I said I will go up to the palm tree, and take hold of the boughs, etc.
These words, as you heard before, contain a promise of Christ to his Spouse,
wherein he does declare what he will do for her, what excellent things he will
perform and bring to pass for her.

First, The actions of Christ are declared, in these words, I will go up to
the palm tree, I will take hold of her boughs.

I said, that is, I do vehemently affirm, the speech contains, as it were, a
grave sentence: I give thee my promise, and look what I promise thee, I will
perform, etc.

I will go up into the palm tree: that is, I will draw nigh unto thee, I will
afford thee my presence. It Is added.

I will take hold of the boughs thereof: he means by this speech, that he
would purge it, that so he might not only perceive, but receive fruit of her,
even as the palme-trees the tender branches, are specially pruned and trimmed,
because they should yield blossoms, and buds for fruit. The Hebrew Sansinuim,
here translated boughs or branches, properly signifies the highest branches in
the Tree, and is not used in any place of Flin. lib. 13. cap. 4.
Scripture but in this, because the palm tree (as writers say) has not
boughs on the sides like other Trees, but does only at the top send forth such
long bows, and there also the fruit it self grows. In sum, this is
Christ's meaning, that he will go up into the palm tree, that is join himself
to his Spouse, (who before was resembled to the same) and will take hold of her
boughs: to the end he may prune and dress her, that she may bring forth
abundance of fruit, such as Christ himself may accept of.

Hence Observe.

First, That the Saints stand in need of pruning and loping, and to have their
superfluous branches taken off, to make them fruitful. Hence it is, that
Christ says here, I will get up into the Palm Tree, and take hold of her
branches: which does show he had the possession of his Spouse, his love, and
care was over her, to prune and dress her, to purge her, that she might bring
forth more fruit; as it is said of the Fathers purging of the Vine, that it
might bring forth more fruit, John 15. 1, 2.

Secondly Observe,

That it is only Christ's work to purge his Saints. Christ does elsewhere
compare himself to the Vine, but here to a Husbandman to prune and lop off the
superfluous branches of his Spouse: this is the proper work of Christ, and
none can do it besides him, for he says, Without me you can do nothing, John
15. 5. None is able to act, or any way purify himself, but by the spirit, and
life of Christ within him. Thus much for Christ's performance: the effects
follow.

Now also thy breasts shall be as the Clusters of the Vine and the smell of thy
Nose like Apples.
The Breasts of the Spouse were before compared to Clusters, but now to the
Clusters of the Vine. This denotes a greater measure of the sweet juice of the
Spirit to be powered out upon her, and does in a more plenteous manner draw
forth her breasts, and minister food and divine nourishment unto her Children.

Hence Note,

That Christ does fill the Spouse with the sweet juice of his spirit, whereby
she is able to nourish her Children. The Spouse does always minister food to
her members: but here her breasts are not only likened to Clusters, but to
clusters of the Vine, intimating that as Christ does more abundantly administer
unto her: so she does more plentifully administer unto others. The breasts of
the Spouse are then always like clusters of the Vine, there is in them a right
wholesome and sweet juice, but when the Lord powers forth upon her the
greatest measure of his spirit, then does she in a most plenteous manner draw
forth her Breasts, and minister food unto her Children. Now follows the
second effect, where he says,

And the smell of thy Nose like Apples.
The Nose of the Spouse was before commended for the comely form thereof, in
verse 4. which denoted her courage and behavior: now here it is commended for
the sweet breath that comes from it; it is said to be like the smell of
Apples, that is, like sweet and pleasant smells that come from Apples.

Hence Observe,

That Christ's divine presence with us, is so excellent, it makes us fragrant
to himself, sweet and comfortable unto others. The sweet odor of the Spouse,
is her fame spread abroad, and is comfortable to those that smell the sent
thereof. The Lord does manifest the savor of his knowledge by his people in
every place, 2 Cor. 2. 14. This savor is like the savor of Apples, which
refresh those that languish, and are sick of the love of Christ. The Spouse can
breath nothing but sweetness, all that approach near her, shall smell the
savor of her sweet breath. The breath of Antichrist is loath some to all that
can smell, but the breath of Christ through the Saints, is to the savor of
their Nose, as the savor of Apples. Therefore the sum of all is thus much, as
if Christ had spoke thus much to his Spouse, I will not only be present with
thee, satisfying my self, as it were in thy breasts and beauty, and delighting
in thy love continually, but I will also make thee strong, fresh, lively, yea,
sweet and pleasant to all such as shall come unto thee by means of such graces
as I shall indue thee withal; and to the same, effect tend the words of the
next verse.

VERSE. 9.
And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved that goes down
sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.
HEre is the last effect of Christ's approaching near his Spouse, namely, that
it makes the roof of her mouth like the best wine, which wine is amplified by
the effect of it, above other wine, in that first it is said To go down
sweetly. Secondly, It causes the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

The roof of thy mouth is like the best wine, etc.
The roof, or palate of the mouth is to discern and taste withal, as it is
said, Job 34. 3. The palate tastes meat. But in relation to others, it is the
instrument of speech, as in Prove. 8. 7. My palate shall speak truth. So that
by the roof of her mouth is here signified, that which proceeds out of her
mouth, towit, her holy word and doctrine, which she does declare and publish.
This lively word is here likened unto good wine, Viz. both for color,
strength, taste, and sweetness, for all these concur together in good wine,
meaning here by good wine, the best, most excellent, sweet, and wholesome wine,
that it shall smell well, and be most sweet and mighty in operation: and hence
it is, that this wine is commended for the goodness thereof, as it is
described in the next words, by the property, and by the effect.

-- For my beloved, that goes down sweetly.
By the beloved usually in this Song is meant Christ, by going down sweetly,
or straightly, or to righteousness: for so we may read the words, That goes to
my beloved, to righteousness. That is, straightly, or according to
righteousness: Hereby is signified the nature or quality of pure wine, which
shows the goodness thereof by moving and springing in the cup, whereby it is
discerned to be the best wine, and most pleasing to those that drink it. Like
to this is the phrase that Solomon uses in Prove. 23. 31. Look not on the wine
when it is red, when it gives his color in the Cup, when it moves it self
aright; Or, as we may read it, when it moves (or walks) in righteousness.
The nature of the best wine is thus described, whereby men are allured to
drink of it: so here, the wine of the Spouse, towit, that holy word, and pure
doctrine of hers, is declared to be pleasing and right in the eyes of Christ
her beloved. The Spouse is filled with the Spirit, and not with wine, as the
Apostle speaks: and this is that which is so pleasing unto Christ; it is such a
wine that the Spouse sends unto her beloved. The effect of this wine follows.

Causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.
Another commendation of the wine: it causes the lips to speak, or it makes
to speak, or it gives utterance to the lips of those that be asleep. The
Hebrew word Jashan, translated, asleep, signifies both to sleep, and to wax
old: therefore some Translations read it, Causing the lips of the ancient to
speak. Old folk many times be dull and heavy of speech, but this wine has
force in it, that it will open their mouths, and cause them to utter the
language of the Spirit of God. And the word may also be turned to sleep, this
wine is so strong that it quickneth up the heavy senses, and does after a sort,
as it were, refresh the mind, even of those that are asleep. This manner of
speech, though, as we respect the similitude, it may seem hyperbolical, or
very excessive, yea, more then true, yet if we respect the spiritual meaning,
we shall find it is truth it self: for what is Christ's purpose here, but that
his Spouse should be filled with the fulness of God, whereby she should be
able to speak of the things of God, in such power and delightfullnesse of
speech, that it shall raise men up from the dead: not only from natural
death, but from the sleep of death and sin. Hence Observe,

That the Saints declaring the Gospel of Christ from the fulness of God in
them, do raise men out of the sleep of death and sin, and makes them speak
with new tongues, the praise of the glory of God. The Saints are filled with
the Spirit, as with the best wine, whereby they declare the excellent things of
God (which we may understand by the roof of the mouth which is the principal
instrument of nature, given us to frame our voice by. See Chap. 5. 15.) this
excellency is pleasing to Christ, it is as wine for the beloved, it is such
wine as the Spouse can commend to her best friend, it is such as goes down
straightly, or in righteousness: it is so pure it allureth all that sees it,
to drink of the same. This wine is the immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. it is the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 16. By which we are quickened and raised up
together, and made to sit together in heavenly places with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 1.
6. This wine makes men talkative, Prove. 23. 29. it makes men utter the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God: as the Disciples, (when some thought they
were full of new wine) prophesied and spoke with other tongues the great works
of God, as the Spirit gave them utterance Acts 2. 4. 11. 12. etc. by this those
that are a sleep, yea, in a dead sleep of sin, it raises and quickneth such,
it causes their lips to praise God, which before had no power that way. When
sinners are awakened by the internal word of the Gospel, it is said, Awake
thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life,
Ephesians. 5. 14. And so it is prophesied, Thy dead men shall live, with my dead
body shall they arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, Isa. 26. 19.
And thus the dead bones of the house of Israel are said to be raised at the
Prophecy, Ezekiel. 37. And not only dead men that are asleep, but those that are
ancient, having their senses dulled, and are very slow to speak, this wine
shall revive the spirits of the aged, or such as are in a state of security (as
the Spouse acknowledges her self in Song 5. 2.) are enabled by this
spiritual wine, to speak, yea, The Tongue of the dumb shall sing, for in the
wilderness shall break forth waters, and streams in the desert, Isa. 35. 6.
when the Saints are filled with the streams of living waters, and made drunk
with the spiritual wine of the Kingdom of God, then they shall sing forth the
praise of God. Thus far we have had Christ's commendations of his Spouse, with
his promises unto her. Now follows the answer of the Spouse, or her return
of love unto Christ, in the residue of the Chapter.

VERSE. 10.
I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
CHrist having commended his Spouse before, to the end he might comfort her, by
leting her know that her blot was wholly taken away, and that her comeliness
and beauty was perfect and pleasing in his eyes. And having promised what he
would do for her, in uniting himself unto her, and also declared how
fruitful, sweet, and precious she should become thereby. Now the Church
answers, expressing at large her affection and duty toward Christ, that
seeing his kindness has been so great toward her, she does even, as it were,
dedicate, vow, and consecrate her self, and all that she has, unto him,
hasting in desire, and longing for a nearer communion with him. But to come to
her words.

I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
The conjunction of the words may be taken thus, Seeing, or because his
affection is toward me. For in the first clause of the sentence she
consecrateth her self wholly unto Christ, saying, I am my beloveds, and in the
latter clause she rendereth a reason, saying, Because his affection is toward
me. His kindness toward me wrought this effect, that she and all hers shall
be dedicated unto him. The cause always goes before the effect.

Here the Spouse then, as full of the wine of the Spirit, and consolation from
the Lord, testifies her assurance in him, and that she does in the right of a
ffiance and marriage belong unto him, in that she says, I am my beloveds. And
the ground of it is, For his desire is toward me. That is, he does desire me,
and in this affection most tenderly love me It is as if the Spouse had said,
there is a mutual love between us, as I love him, so he loves me, as I belong
to him, so he belongs to me, his love is the ground of mine, and my love to him
is the effect of his love. Hence Note,

That the manifestation of Christ's love to us, is the cause of our love unto
him. His love is as the cause preceding, and our love as the effect following
after: Thus the Apostle John testifies saying, We love him because he first
loved us. The Spouse declares the same here, the sum of her speech being
thus much in effect, seeing my beloved has set his affections so upon me, and
freely loved me when I was lost, and an enemy to him, as in Romans 5. when dead
in sin, Ephesians. 2. when I was altogether abominable, Romans 3. yea, that his
affection was toward me so, as that he has called me into the nearest
fellowship with himself, and does sweetly embrace me not withstanding all my
fleshly actings; is there not cause why I should be his? Such abundant love
does cause love again. As the desire of a woman is toward her husband, and
the desire of a man toward his wife: so Christ's love and affection is toward
his Spouse, her desire is also toward him. If the Spouse first apprehend the
love and affection of Christ, this love of Christ (as the Apostle speaks)
will constrain the Spouse to love Christ again. And now behold how forward
and ready the Bride is to draw near to Christ, and to have the day of the
marriage approach. She is not the woman that she was before in the fifth
Chapter, where she made excuses, and would not arise to open to Christ, for now
she calls unto him to come to her, and to walk with her, as in the next verse.

VERSE. 11.
Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us lodge in the
Villages.
THe Lord had promised in the former Verses, that he would go up into the
Palm Tree, and take hold of her boughs, he would dress and prune his Church,
and she thereupon should become most flourishing, fruitful, and delectable;
unto this here the Spouse offers her service. The Spouse does not name the
Palm Tree, but Cypres trees, and Vines, but the matter is all one, seeing the
Church is resembled by the one as well as by the other. Then thus it is, the
Lord promises to draw near his Spouse, and to dress and trim her, and she
offers her self most cheerfully thereunto. He will bestow his rich grace and
presence upon her, and she is brought to be on a flame of thirsting and
desiring after the same.

Come my beloved.
These are words of exhortation, and provoking, as it were, taken also from the
love of the Spouse toward Christ, more effectually to persuade the thing she
desires, because men willingly commit themselves to the company, and easily
yield to the requests of such as they take to be their best friends; hence she
uses this kind of exhortation or invitation, Come my Beloved.

Let us go forth into the fields.
Into the fields, or into the Country, a place of corn, Vines, fig trees,
Pomegranate trees, etc. as Joel 11. 12. The Spouse speaks this after the
manner of men, inhabiting Cities, and having their farme-houses abroad in the
Country, whither they may walk for recreation, and to see how forward the
Spring is, and whither the time of Summer or Harvest do draw nigh: but all
this must be understood spiritually and mystically, as if the Spouse should
say, I beseech thee, do not alone, and by thy self walk out into the field,
and retire thy self: but let us both walk together, and be retired from the
trouble and distraction of this world and flesh: and walk into the field of
sweet meditation and heavenly delight.

She adds.

Let us lodge in the Villages.
This part of the verse is diversely read, by reason of the diverse
significations of the words used therein: as the word turned lodge, signifies
also to remain or continue: also the word Cepharim, does not only signify
villages, but Cypresse-trees. So that the word is used in Scripture to signify
villages, and also the Cypres. The Greek turns it by villages: such common
villages are distinguished from such Towns or Cities, as are fenced in, 1 Samuel
618. Now in this that the Spouse does desire, to go with Christ and to lodge
with him the fields in and villages, does note unto us that the Spouse is
drawn off from all fleshly delight, and from sheltering her self in any
outward glory or strength.

Hence note.

That the soul brought up to live in the light of God, and in near fellowship
of Christ, is taken off from the continuance or trusting in any outward glory.

The Spouse desires not to go with Christ into the fenced Cities, and places
of worldly delight and pleasure: but into the Villages and fields, and to lodge
among the Cypres-trees, that she may rise up early to go to the Vines: She is
now wrapped and overcome with the desire and love of heavenly things, that her
mind and affections are carried out of the world, she will now lodge in a
continual meditation and delight of divine things, yea, she will daily raise
up her self to behold the fruit, that does spring from them. The case is
altered with the Spouse now, from what it was, when she was asleep in fleshly
security, and was loath to be raised up: even when the flesh had so much
prevailed upon her, then these things of Christ, these holy breathings out
after him seemed to lie buried: but now when the Spirit quickneth, and raises
her, herheart is drawn off from fleshly glory and prosperity, and she desires
to lodge continurlly with Christ in the large field of heavenly delights. Now
the Spouse is sweetly embracing of spiritual and heavenly things, now she can
stay among those heavenly joys and comforts of her beloved. And now behold how
the Spouse does proceed in this matter.

VERSE. 12.
Let us go up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine flourish, whither
the tender grape appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth: there I will give
thee my loves.
IN this verse, the Spouse declares, what the benefit she and her beloved
shall get, by remaining or lodging all night, in the Country Villages, or
amongst the sweet Cypres trees, out of the City, namely, that they shall be
ready early, to make trial of that, that they come and look for. Let us go
early to the Vineyards (says the Spouse) let us see whether the Vine
flourish, that is, what appearings or likelihood there is, of the approaching
of the time of marriage, or of a nearer communion and fellowship with her
beloved; she adds.

Whither the tender (or small) grape appear.

We may read the words thus: whither the first small grape open it self. The
first grape is that which is first in sprouting; and by opening it self, is
meant its appearance, whereby it has declared it self unto men, that it is now
become a grape, and grows, which at the first appearing of it, or, as it were
in bud, can hardly be discerned. It follows

Whither the Pomegranates flourish.
The nature and use of the Pomegranate has been spoken of in Chap. 4. 13. the
budding of this fruit (whereof also there was good store in those Countries)
was a sign of the Spring time, and the flourishing thereof, as it were of the
Summer at hand; by all these similitudes and comparisons, the Spouse declares
what the fruits of Christ's presence will be, that there will be nothing but
fruitfullnesse and flourishing, when Christ shall draw near: Christ comes not
empty to his Spouse, but he brings abundance of grace and sweetness with him.

Hence Observe.

That when Christ fills any soul with a divine presence, there is a great
flourishing and springing forth, of all divine grace and glory.

To this purpose is that in the Prophet Isa. 27. 3. 6. where it is said, He
causes them that come of Jacob to take root, Israel shall blossom and bud,
and fill the face of the world with fruit. And again, it is said in Isa. 56. 9.
And I will bring forth (says the Lord) a seed of Jacob, and out of Judah an
inheritor of my mountains, and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants
shall dwell there. And in Ezekiel. 20. 40. 41. There shall the house of Israel,
all of them in the Land serve me; there will I accept them, and there will I
require your offerings, and the first fruits of your oblations, with all your
holy things, I will accept you with your sweet savor, etc. by all these
similitudes, the excellency, beauty, sweetness, and glory of the Spouse is
set forth, and that she shall flourish by virtue of the divine presence of
God, and fellowship with Christ. This is further expressed in the last clause
of the verse.

There will I give thee my loves.
This is the return, that the Spouse makes to her beloved, namely, that she
will return Christ's loves upon him again, that is, she will manifest and
make an open declaration of her unfeigned affection toward him. And she
speaks of loves in the plural number, thereby to set out, both the
excellency of the same, and also the abundance and plenty thereof. When the
soul comes to be united to Christ, it is as it were swallowed up of love, and
does make evident manifestations thereof.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints do manifest most love to Christ, when he is manifesting most
of himself in them.

When the Spouse is made as a fruitful field, as a flourishing Vine and
Pomegranate, then she gives Christ her love, then her heart is full of divine
love, and she will let out the whole stream of her sweet affections toward
Christ.

In the next verse she mentions her fruits, and that she reserveth them
wholly to Christ her welbeloved.

VERSE. 13.
The mandrakes gave a swell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruits, new and old which I have laid up for thee my beloved.
THese are most commendable things, that the Spouse speaks of.

First, That she does so flourish and abound in sweet things, which are, all
the sweet fruits of the Spirit.

Secondly, That she keeps them only for the Lord, for the true Spouse is
chaste, and faithful unto Christ: Hence she says, My love, I have kept them
for thee.

Before we speak any thing of the sense of this verse, we will a little
look upon the words. The Hebrew Dudaim, is here turned Mandrakes, which is not
used in all the old Testament, but only in this place, and Genesis 30. 14, 15. in
which almost all Interpretours, both Jews and Christians, do turn it
Mandrakes: these Mandrakes have allusion in name to Dodim, loves forementioned:
and Dod that is, beloved, as she after calls Christ Some take the word more
generally, for, all amiable flowers, such as be fair and lovely: for the
Spouse is as a garden of sweet flowers. Mandrakes grew in the field, and were
found, in the days of wheat Harvest, as in Genesis 30. 14. etc. It appears by
Rachels desire of them, and by the smell here they are said to give, that they
were lovely and pleasant: these lovely flowers yiedling a savor shows, that
the Spouse had sweet things to smell unto, for the entertainment of her
beloved.

These Mandrakes are said to give a smell or sweet odor.

At our gates are all manner of sweet fruits.
The word signifies precious things. And by the gates or doors, which seems
to be opposed unto the fields, where Mandrakes grew: signifies, that both at
whom and abroad, near and far, the fame and odor of the Saints, spread it
self: or by the gates we may understand it, as an allusion unto customs and
orders, observed on marriage days, men being wont to strew their houses,
doors, yea, and streets and all, with sweet smelling herbs.

New and old.
There is great store and plenty of them, for this is an usual thing, by these
terms to express abundance: see the phrase in Matthew. 13. 52. where the
Kingdom of heaven is like the householder, which brings out of his treasury,
things new and old. New, and old, signifies variety and plenty, Leviticus 26.
10. And old fruits are often times better then new, as Luke 5. 39. Its added.

Which I have laid up for thee O beloved.
The Spouse declares that these things are for to welcome her beloved, she
desires that Christ may take pleasure and delight in them, she willingly
offers them all for his entertainment. Now from this verse thus opened.

Observe.

First, That the Spouse is as a garden, full of sweet flowers.

She is the Lords garden, the Lords field, where all kind of divine and
heavenly flowers grow, where is variety and abundance of all sweetness, and
fragrancie, she is an Orchard of Pomegranates, Camphire, and Spiknard, with the
Trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all the spices, the sweet Vine is
in her, and the Mandrakes of a goodly smell, with pleasant fruits new and old;
namely, all the sweet incomes of spirit and life from Christ, all the sweet
refreshing delights of the Spirit.

Observe, Secondly,

That the Spouse does entertain Christ with all her sweetness.

These are things (says she) that I have kept for my beloved. The Spouse
honors Christ with all her sweet, pleasant fruits. As the favor, love, and
goodness of God is great, which he has laid up for those that fear him,
Psalm. 31. 20. so all the goodness and fruits of spirit, and grace that flow from
them, are unto his honor and praise, consecrated unto his use and service,
thus says the Apostle, for of him, and through him, and for him are all
things, to him be glory for ever, Romans 11. 36. Israel is holiness, glory,
and honor to the Lord. So ends the seventh Chapter.

Canticles. Chap 8.
Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother, when I
should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.

I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would instruct
me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomegranate.

His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.

I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love
until he please.

Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? I
raised thee up under the Apple Tree: there thy Mother brought thee forth, there
she brought thee forth that bare thee.

Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm: for love is
strong as death, jealosie is cruel as the Grave, the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame.


WE have had in this Song the condition and state of the Spouse, which has
been variable, and after diverse sorts: as even now calling and crying out for
her well-beloved. Not long after, we have her, as it were, set down, and the
Bridegroom calling upon her to arise and come away; yea, sometimes she is not
only set down, but also she is laid down, and asleep: the Saints do not
continue always alike, but however they swarve for a time, yet they return,
and their end is commendable. And therefore the Church is here, even to the end
of the Song, declaring her faith, and good affection toward Christ.

But to come to the words themselves of this Chapter: First, in general, the
Spouse does declare what a great desire she has to be in his presence, and to
retain him with her, which arises from a vehement love, whose heat cannot be
quenched, as she expresses in the sequel of the Chapter. Christ and the
Spouse be of one family; as Brothers and Sisters do dwell together in
familiarity, each does usually know where to find the other. According to this
she says,

O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the Breasts of my Mother: when I
should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.
In this verse the Spouse declares her earnest affection unto Christ, wishing
that she might continually enjoy him as a most faithful friend. We have in
this verse,

First, an exclamation or wish, expressing her fervent desire, O that thou were
as my Brother. This wish is amplified, by saying, That sucked the breasts of my
Mother.

Secondly, the resolution of the Spouse in case she had obtained her desire, in
these words, When I should find thee without, I would kiss thee. This also is
amplified, wherein she does, as it were, set fear and shame a side, by adding,
Yet I should not be ashamed.

O that thou were as my Brother, etc.
Some read the words thus, O if some would give thee, or, who will give thee.
Such phrases are often used for forms of wishing in the Scripture, as in Psalm.
14. 7. Who shall give Salvation to Israel? That is, O that the Salvation of
Israel were come. The Apostle alludes to this form of speech, when he says,
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24. It is an
expression of an earnest wish or desire in the Spouse here, wherein she does
declare her earnest desire of the brotherhood, love, and fellowship of Christ,
whereby she might manifest her love to him again. Her desire of him is, that
he would be to her,

As a Brother.
That is, most faithful, friendly, and loving. See Genesis 13. 8. and Psalm. 133.
1. Brotherhood signifies some near conjunction and relation, either by nature,
or by Covenant, Zach. 11. 14. Such as are companions in like condition,
quality, or action, are called brethren, Prove. 18. 9. Genesis 49. 5. Now Christ is
not only the Brother of the Spouse in respect of his humanity, taking on him
the same flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14. but also by that oneness in fellowship
and communion in the Spirit, having one father, one blessedness and glory.
Thus Christ calls his Saints Brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12. in respect of that
spiritual union and fellowship between them. It Is added.

That sucked the breasts of my Mother.
The Spouse is not contented only to have Christ as a Brother, but as a most
natural, kind Brother, because many times it falls out, that brethren are at
great jarres, through the neglect or forgetfullnesse of those brotherly bonds
between them: therefore the Spouse desires that Christ may be a most natural,
kind-hearted brother to her, as one that sucked her Mother, for between
brethren of the same Mother, the love and affections are the most ardent, as is
testified by Joseph, in his affections toward his Brother Benjamin, Genesis 43.
29, 30. By the Mother here we may understand the heavenly Jerusalem, which is
above, which the Apostle calls, The Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. To suck the
breasts of this Mother is to partake, and enjoy the sweet refreshing comforts
of the Church, or assembly of the first borne, to be refreshed with the
fatness, and sweetness of Gods house, towit, the sweet consolations of the
Spirit, Isa. 66. 10. 11. Now we must know that Christ and his people make but
one body, and is mystically called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and therefore here,
where it is said, that Christ does suck these breasts, it is meant of Saints,
or Christ in the Saints is refreshed and comforted.

Hence Observe, First,

That the Spouse is very earnest and desirous of a near brotherhood and
communion with Christ. O that thou were as my Brother, etc. Nothing satisfies
the Saints but fellowship with the Father and the Son, nothing but a sweet
communion with Christ, in all his graces. The Saints are only delighted with
his love and sweetness, and continually desire in a most comfortable and
familiar way to enjoy his divine presence.

Secondly Observe,

That Christ is refreshed in his Saints refreshments. For as you heard before,
he and his Saints are one body, and hence it is, that when Saints are begotten
unto God, Christ is formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. and as they are nourished by
the sincere milk of the word, so is Christ also nourished, and grows more and
more in stature and fulness. For that which is properly the person of the
Saint, or the Saint-ship it self, is part of Christ: Christ is diffused into
all his Saints, and they all make but one complete body, and therefore as the
body is said to suck the breasts of spiritual consolation, Christ may also be
said to suck those breasts, for it is Christ in the Saints that is nourished:
so when the Saints increase, it is the increasings of the Lord, and the growth
of the Saints is the growth of Christ.

It follows.

When I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yet I should not be
despised.
Here is the resolution of the Spouse, When I find thee, or, though I find
thee in the streets, that is, in open and public place, as it were, See Luke
14. 21. This show; the readiness and willingness of the Spouse, both to go
forth and meet, and also to welcome and entertain Christ, it notes her
diligence and care to find, and to retain Christ, as in Song 3. 2. 4.

I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.
To Kiss is a sign of honor, love, and obedience, as was noted in Song 1. 2.
and the meaning is, that the Spouse would neither be ashamed, or afraid to
perform the office of love and affection toward him, neither should any
contemn or scorn her: that is, either they should not scorn her, having
obtained her beloved, or else she would not regard any scorn that should be
cast upon her.

Hence Observe,

First, That Saints are ready to entertain and welcome Christ.

Hence it is said here, that the Spouse would meet him, with all readiness to
take hold of him, and to embrace him. The Saints are impatient withont Christ,
and are most ready to give entertainment unto him. Secondly Observe,

That it is an honorable action, and worthy of much praise to entertain and
embrace Christ. It is true, the world is apt to vex, scorn, and contemn the
Saints, but yet they are never ashamed to own Christ: but she does meet,
kiss, and embrace him, even in the open streets. But though the blind world
should contemn the Saints, yet the Lord will honor them that honor him, 1 Samuel 20. 30. And if any man serve Christ, him will the Father honor, John 12.
26. The Saints shall appear in the brightness of Christ's glory, which is far
above the contempt of the world, and being thus clothed, they are not afraid
or ashamed of Christ, of professing his name and truth, in the open streets of
the world. Thus much for the Spouses wish, as also her resolution, in which she
does farther proceed in the next verse.

VERSE. 2.
I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would instruct
me, I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my
Pomegranate.
AFter the Spouse had expressed her wish, and what advantage she gained
thereby, she shows what return she would make unto Christ for granting her
desire. I would lead thee, and bring thee, etc.

We must understand in these words that the Spouse takes on her the person of
Christ, and speaks that of her self which belongs to him; and by declaring
what she would do unto her beloved, shows what she would have Christ do unto
her. And therefore we must consider the Spouse, together with her head Christ,
and so she is called Christ, in 1 Cor. 12. 12. That is, Christ mystical, or
Christ in a divine mystery. I would lead thee, I would bring thee, etc.

She doubleth the word, as it were, to show the joyfullnesse of her heart in
thinking of the matter she is now in speaking of. And in that she says, I
would lead thee, she means with all honor and solemnity, with joy and
gladness. Thus Kings and great ones are said to be lead and brought along,
Isa. 60. 11. Psalm. 45. 15, 16. So here, the Spouse speaking in the person of
Christ, declares what she desires he should do unto her, towit, that he would
lead and bring her into his holy Mountain, as in Psalm. 43. 3. that he would
comfortably lead her by the light of his Spirit.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints desire only to be led and directed by Christ. For the Spouse
here by declaring her resolution, shows what she desires Christ to do unto
her: it is true, that the Saints in some sense may be said to lead Christ by
seeking of his face, by stirring up themselves to take hold of his strength, as
in Isa. 64. 1. 7. yet most properly it is Christ that leads his people: his
truth, and the light of his Spirit is like the cloud of fire that led the
Children of Israel in the Wilderness, and does continually direct and guide
them. Now follows the place into which she would lead him.

Into the house of my Mother.
Here the Spouse alludeth to the custom in those days, which was to bring the
Bride and Bidegroome also, into the house of either of their Parents: See Genesis
24. 97. where Isaac is said to have brought Rebeckah into the Tent of Sarah his
Mother. It is the manner of the Hebrews (as has been noted heretofore in this
Song) to call some whole thing or body, by the name of Father or Mother, and
the parts derived from the same, by the names of Sons and Daughters. So here,
Christ and the Saints, making up one Church or body, which is called the new
Jerusalem, which comes down from God, out of which Christ and all Saints
spring: this new Jerusalem is called the Mother of us all, in Gal. 4. 26. But
of this we have spoken already in Chap. 3. verse. 4. and therefore I shall pass
this, and proceed to the next words. Who would instruct me.

This clause stands doubtful whither we shall Translate it, Thou shall teach
me, or, she shall teach me: for in the Hebrew tongue, in the future, the same
word stands for the third person feminine, that is for the second Masculine.
And so it stands in different here by the word, whither we say, thou shall
teach me, or, she shall teach me: true it is, that Christ is the teacher of his
Church, in a double respect. 1. In that he alone teaches by the light of his
Spirit. But the Church (who is the heavenly Jerusalem, and Mother of us all)
does as an instrument teach, and instruct her particular Members with the
heavenly doctrine of the Gospel. We may take it that she says to Christ, Thou
shall teach me, for so runs the new Covenant, That every man shall not teach
his neighbor, saying know the Lord, for they shall all know me, says the Lord.
So that the Saints should not depend upon man's teaching, but upon Christ's the
true Prophet.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints desire most of all, to be under the teachings of Christ.

This was the end of the Spouse, in bringing Christ in to her mothers house,
namely, that he might teach and instruct her by his Spirit. And thus it is
prophesied, how that in the last days, many people should say, Come, and let
us go up tothe house of the God Jacob, and will teach us of his ways, etc.
Isa. 2, 2, 3. See also Michah 4. 1, 2. Christ tells his Disciples in John 16.
25. That the time was coming, he would show them plainly of the Father, its
Christ that does unmaske and unvaile the face of his Father, and help us to a
manifestation and sight of it: Christ is the lively Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
He is the Brightnese of his glory, and the express Character of his person,
Heb. 1. 3. there is no excellency in the Father, which is not manifest in the
Son, and by the Son we may come to know it: so says the Apostle, God who
has commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 6. If there be such a bright vision of divine glory
manifested by Christ, how sweet, how comfortable, and how much to be desired
are the teachings of Christ then, who is as it were the beams and brightness
of Gods glory shining out upon us?

The effects of Christ's teaching is set forth in the next words.

I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomegranate.

According to the similitude in earthly things, the Spouse professes to
entertain Christ with a dainty banquet in her mothers house,, for that is
meant by spiced wine, and juice of the Pomegranate.

By Spiced wine, she means such we call Ipocras, which besides the nature
and strength of the wine it self, it is much strengthened by composition,
mixture or confection of many Spices with it: So that by the strength and
pleasantness of this composition of sweet spices, the heart is strengthened
and warmed, and the senses much refreshed and satisfied, with the pleasant
smell thereof: Such compositions as these, were put into the holy incense and
oil, Exodus 30. 24, 25. Such were also used for banqueting, as this place
manifests.

The juice of my Pomegranat.
Or, The sweet wine made of my Pomegranate: the word here turned juice, or
sweet wine, signifies generally al moisture, which either by expressing or
treading, is fetched from any fruit, for it is derived of a word, that
signifies to express or tread down, but because he adds Pomegranates, we
may take it for the moisture, juice, or liquor, that is or may be wrung from
them. In a word, she means, that if she might indeed be partaker of Christ,
and enjoy sweetness and fellowship with him, she would most comfortably and
joyfully entertain, and receive him, for under these metaphors, taken and
borrowed from an earthly banquet she means nothing else, but the spiritual
entertainment of her beloved, and that his teaching should not be fruitless in
her, but she would honor Christ with graces, and being sweetened with the
spices of his spirit, the fruit thereof should redound to him.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints honor Christ with the fruits of his own Spirit.

When Christ administreth to us by his Spirit, he gives us wine to drink, as
in Isa. 55. 1. 3. And when we bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, he
counts himself as refreshed with wine, as in Chap. 5. 10. This is the
spiritual entertainment, that the Spouse gives her beloved, she presents him
with a dainty banquet of spiced wine, the fruits of his own spirit, praise and
glory, which is very pleasing unto him, which is contrary to that cup in the
woman's hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication, to wit,
the fruits of the flesh and Antichrist, with which wine the inhabitants of the
earth were made drunk, Revel. 17. 2, 4. The fruits of divine presence, and of
the spirit of Christ in the Saints is sweet, comfortable, and pleasant, like to
spiced wine, and the juice of the Pomegranate, It follows in the next verse.

VERSE. 3.
His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.
AS before the Spouse had set out how she would receive and entertain her
beloved: so now she being privy to her own infirmities, and desirous of
strength from Christ, desires sustenance and strength of him, whose grace
would be sufficient for her, whose strength is made perfect in weakness, 2
Cor. 12. 9. we may understand the words prayer-wise, Let thine hand be under
my head, etc. she shows how he would comfort her, namely, that for her ease,
he would put his left hand under her head, as men commonly do to sick and
infirm persons. And his right hand does embrace me. viz. most comfortably and
lovingly as dearest friends do one another.

See this verse wholly expounded before in Chap. 2. 6. there being no
difference but, this, namely, that she affirms the thing in present action,
and hereby weighing the earnest love of Christ toward her she increases in
her hope and confidence in him, assuring her self, that if she may enjoy his
comfortable and continual presence, it would be a very happy thing.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints only rest satisfied in the arms of Christ.

Hence it is, that the Spouse does desire, that Christ should support, comfort
and uphold her with both his hands: were it not for the arms of Christ's love
and protection, the Spouse could not subsist; but Christ does as it were
comfort, embrace, and sustain his Church with both his arms.

These words having been spoken of before, I shall pass to the next verse.

VERSE. 4.
I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love, until he please.
THe Spouse enjoying these great mercies and blessings from Christ, charge
all her daughters, to wit, her fellow members, to walk so thankful and
fruitful, toward God, and lovingly and helpfully one toward another, that no
occasion be given of any alteration of their happiness, and in this Charge she
deals very seriously, saying.

I charge you, or, I adjure you; that is, by oath: that you grieve not this my
beloved Spouse, that may hinder our comfortable society one from another: and
this she speaks unto the daughters of Jerusalem, or fellow-friends of the
Spouse. See this expounded before, chap. 2. 7. Also chap. 3. 5. Why should ye
stir up, that is, do not stir up: there is no reason or cause why you
should deal so discourteously with him, since in his rest stands your own
good: or it will not be for your profit and ease, to disturb this my love,
whom I so tenderly affect.

Until he please: that is, till he himself will; and the Spouse uses this as
a reason to discourage them from awaking him: be not over confident to think
it will be good for him, and for you, that he should be raised up, or awaked
before he please, for he knows the best and fittest time.

Hence Observe.

That Christians should not go about to raise up Christ, till himself is
pleased to arise.

Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty, there is power to act indeed:
if the Lord be risen and awake in thee, there is life and activitie, and
therefore why should we awake the Lord till he please: there is so much
formalitie in Professors, as draws their resolutions into a method, as because
such a day, or such a time is come, I must do such or such a thing, and so
take up things by custom: and Christians must discourse and perform duties,
whither the Spirit says yea, or no, but God will bring judgment into victory,
and the Spirit of the Lord shall carry all before it: but we must stay till
the beloved please.

VERSE. 5.
Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? I
raised thee up under the apple tree, there thy mother brought thee forth, there
she brought thee forth that bear thee.
THE Church going about to declare the love she carried toward her head, and
husband Christ, does in this verse, in the first part of it, by way of demand,
speak of her self: and the latter part, taking upon her the person of Christ,
she shows what great favors and graces she had received from him. There is
nothing by the speech it self, that discovers whether Christ or his Spouse
uttered these words. But the Hebrew text declares it to be spoken by the
Spouse, because this clause, I raised thee up, etc. And also this.

Thy mother conceived thee: are spoken in the masculine gender, as to a man,
and not as unto a woman: and so we take them for the words of the Spouse,
setting forth the vehement and ardent loves of hers unto Christ, in respect of
those many favors she had received from him.

In the words then she sets forth the vehemency of her love.

First as it were by comparison, saying:

Who is this that comes up, etc.
Secondly the place from which she ascended: from the Wilderness.

Thirdly, The manner of her ascension, leaning upon her beloved.

Fourthly, the means of her ascension, I raised thee up under an Apple Tree,
there thy Mother brought thee forth etc.

Who is this, or, who is she (for so we may read the words) that comes up;
etc. some think that this speech implies the springing up of a new Church,
conducted by Christ through the Wilderness of this world, others understand it
to be the speech of the daughters of Jerusalem admiring at the increase of
faith and grace in the Spouse: but we may understand it of the Spouse her
self: admiring at her self, being filled with grace, and being clothed with
so many mercies by Christ, as if she should say, where is she to be found, that
has showed the like love to her welbeloved, that I have showed unto mine? that
has taken such travail, and endured so many afflictions, passed through so
many perils, to come to her beloved, as I have done to come unto mine? Hence
Observe.

That the Saints do admire their own ascension unto Christ.

It is their glory and Crown, it is their joy and boafting all the day: but
we must also know, that the boasting of the Saints, is not from any thing of
their own, they cannot so admire their own strength or parts, as in the power
and strength of Christ, by which they are brought up unto him. Now that then
which the Saints do so much admire is, that she should ascend up from the
earth, to live in Christ and that in the power and goodness of Christ.

Secondly, The place from whence she ascended is mentioned.

From the Wilderness.
The Wilderness is sometimes taken for the people of this world, out of which
the people of God are called and chosen, Ezekiel. 20. 35. John 15. 19. but we may
rather take it here for the former state of the Spouse, in the state of sin
and ignorance under the bondage of the powers of darkness, from which she
escaped by Christ; for the Wilderness was a dry and thirsty land, a land of
drought, and of the shadow of dearth, Ezekiel. 19. 13. Jer. 2. 6. The Wilderness
is clothed with no beauty, whereby men should delight in it, or desire to
dwell there, but it is rather a place of Dragons, Foxes, and Tigres, and all
wild ravenous Beasts.

Hence Observe.

That the Saints ascend up to Christ out of a low, dark, desolate Wilderness.

Their state is a Wilderness condition, desolate, lost and forlorn, till they
ascend up unto Christ: there be many dangers ina Wilderness: so the soul is in
a lost, dangerous condition, till it ascend unto Christ, the true Canaan, and
Land of plenty and rest. A man in a Wilderness knows not which way he goes:
whither forward or backward; no more does the soul, while it walks in the
Wilderness of darkness and confusion, under the power of hell and death,
surely, this must needs be a blessed ascension, to ascend out of a desolate
Wilderness unto Christ the true center and rest of the soul. It follows.

Leaning upon her beloved.
Here is set down the manner of the Spouses ascension, Leaning upon her
beloved, or, adjoining, associating her self with her beloved. The Spouse does
not use this speech only to note her love toward Christ, as it was the
custom for men to lean upon them whom they best liked, as appears, 2 Kings 5.
18. but also to set out the strength and comfort she had from him, without
whom, by reason of her own weakness, she had never been able to get out of
the Wilderness.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints ascend up unto Christ by the assistance of divine power from
Christ.

All the strength of the Spouse was in the power of Christ, who upheld her, and
sustained her steps, carrying her through all dangers and difficulties. The
Spouse is by Christ made perfect, stablished, strengthened, and settled, 1 Pet.
5. 10. This divine assistance was foretold by the Prophet, in Gods dealing with
the people of Israel, when he put his holy Spirit in his people, and led them
through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, they stumbled not; as a beast
goes down into the valley, the spirit of the Lord quietly led them: so did
thou lead thy people, to make thy self a glorious name, Isa. 63. 11. 13. 14.
So here, the Spouse acknowledges all her strength and stay to be from Christ,
and from the power of his might. It follows in the next verse.

I raised thee up under the Apple tree.
The Spouse is said sometimes to raise up Christ, as in Psalm. 44. 24. Stir up,
why sleep thou Lord? And the Saints are said to stir up themselves, and take
hold of his strength, in Isa. 64. 7. but the Spouse being but the instrument of
Gods power and goodness, she does as it were speak in the person of Christ:
and as Christ gives life to his people, so his people are said to give life to
him, and raise him up, as it were from sleep, and from death. This raising up
was under the Apple Tree, the tree of life and grace, whose shadow and fruit
had been delightful to her, to which tree Christ himself was likened Chap.
2. 3. So that the Spouse is said to raise up Christ in his own power, under
the Apple Tree, towit, under his shadow and fruit, whereby she her self was
comforted and refreshed. Hence Observe,

That Christ is raised up by, or in the Saints by his own power. Though the
Saints are said to raise up Christ, it is under the Apple Tree, it is in Christ's
own power: so it is no more but Christ's raising himself in the Saints: Christ
by the divine power raised himself out of the Grave, so by that divine power
he does rise in the Saints, by which power they are said to raise up Christ:
and therefore what Christ is said to do unto the Saints, they likewise are
said to do the same unto him, as to raise him up, etc. The Saintship, or the
proper person of the Saint is Christ, as he is given out, and distributed to
all Saints, who all make up the body of Christ: So that as Christ is said to
raise and stir up the Saints, so also they may be said to raise and quicken
Christ. It follows.

There thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare
thee.
It is the heavenly Jerusalem, the general assembly, and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in Heaven, that bring forth Christ into the
world, Christ is begotten, and brought forth in these: This heavenly Jerusalem,
or Church of the firstborn, is the Mother of Christ, this is she that brought
him forth into the world, or, as it may be rendered, That painefully brought
him forth: that is, did travel with much pain and sorrow: So that as there is
pain and sorrow in women that bring forth Children, so there is in the Spouse
in her bringing forth Christ.

Hence Observe,

First, That Christ is conceived and brought forth in all his Saints.

The Spouse is hereby Christ's mother, even all the faithful that travel with
Christ. The Apostle says in Gal. 4. 19. My little Children, of whom I travel
in birth until Christ be formed in you; so that Christ is formed and brought
forth in every Saint. And in Rev. 12. 2. the Church is compared to a woman with
child. The Prophet tells us, That unto us a Child is borne, Isa. 9. 6. So this
holy Child Jesus is begotten and brought forth in his divine appearance in all
the Saints.

Secondly Observe,

That the traveling with, and bringing forth of Christ into the world, is with
much trouble and pain.

Hence it is said in Rev. 12. the Church was in travel, and pained to be
delivered, for as Childbirth is accompanied with many pangs and sorrows, so is
the bringing forth of Christ in the hearts of men. There is outward sorrow and
trouble, according to the words of the Apostle, when he says, In much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tossings to and fro, in labors, in watchings, in fastings,
etc. 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5. And thus the Church declares, in Isa. 26. 17. Like as a
woman with Child, that draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain,
cries out in her pangs: so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. So there is
abundance of inward pain and trouble when Christ is formed in the mind and
spirit: there is a struggling and resisting, by all the powers of flesh and
darkness: this Dragon seeks to destroy the Child Jesus, there was a type of
this in Herod, when he sought to kill Christ, when he was borne upon the earth:
So the powers of flesh and darkness, set against this delivery, they hinder
what they can, but cannot destroy this Child; it is preserved still, though it
be in Egypt, yea, though it should be crucified in Egypt, it shall rise
again, and live and prevail. Now in the next verse the Spouse breaks forth
into a vehement request, that she may be joined more nearly unto her beloved,
and that he will always have her in mind, rendering a reason, that the
vehemence and strength of her love is such, as by no means it can be overcome:
this is set forth in this verse, and the next following: but first comes her
request in the first verse that follows.

VERSE. 6.
Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm: for love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame.
THe Spouse here desires a farther testimony and evidence of Christ's divine
love, to be given in unto her, that she may be the more confirmed in his love
toward her, that she may be firmly engraven, as the engraving of a Seal or
Signet upon his heart.

First, then we have the Spouses earnest desire of Christ's deep affection to
her, and continual remembrance of her, Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, as
a Seal upon thine arm. Which request of hers is urged by a motive taken from
the strength and depth of her affection to him, which she declares.

First, by comparing her affections to 3. things.

1. To Death, It Is strong as death. 2. To the Grave, It Is cruel as the grave.
3. To Fire, It has a most vehement flame.
Secondly, it is set forth by comparing her affections to two things, as less
then her affections, yet they be of great force: this is in the seventh verse.

1. Her affections are such, as many waters cannot quench them. 2. She prized
them to the whole substance of any man's house, which would be contemned if it
were offered for to withdraw her affections from her beloved. But first her
request.
Set me as a Seal upon thine heart, etc.
Set me, or, put me as a Seal, etc. That is, let me be deeply engraven, as a
Seal is, into thy heart and affections, let the love and remembrance of me,
take a deep impression in thee, yea, even as a Signet in thy heart and mind;
And as a Seal or Signet on thy Arm; that is, let it be continually in thy
sight and remembrance, and let me be as dear and precious unto thee, as the
Signet that thou carriest about thee; and how precious that was, and highly
esteemed, may appear in that Zerubabell had a promise made to him, that the
Lord would make him as a signet, Hag. 2. 24. And on the contrary side, in that
Jehoiakim is threatened, that if he were as the Signet of Gods right hand, yet
the Lord would pluck him from thence, Jer. 22. 24 The heart signifies inward
love and affection, and the arm signifies the remembrance or outward
manifestation of that love, by helping and sustaining, and therefore it is said,
Thou redeemest thy people with thy arm, Psalm. 77. 16. And also it is said, He
will feed his stock like a Shepherd, he will gather the Lambs with his arm,
and carry them in his bosom, Isa. 40. 10. 11. The sum is, that it is a
request full of affection and earnestness, which the Spouse makes unto her
beloved, as if she had said: Seeing I have yielded through thy goodness, such
testimonies and tokens of my unfeigned love, I beseech thee again on the other
side, to carry me continually in thy mind, to have me always in thy sight; to
be (as was promised to the Daughters of Zion) engraven upon the palms of his
hands, and continually before him, Isa. 49. 15, 16. that she might be always
before his eyes, on his hands and fingers, as men use to wear Jewels about
their necks, and upon their breasts, and put Rings, especially their Signets
and Seals, upon their fingers, both to have them always in readiness, and to
show the high account they made of them.

Hence Observe,

That the Saints earnestly desire to be nearest in Christ's heart, to be always
in Christ's mind. That which is in the heart of man is nearest unto him, and
that which he minds most he loves most: So the Spouse desires here to be
deep in Christ's heart and affection, to be engraven on his arms. The Spouse
would be nearly joined to Christ, as a precious Jewel, both in his heart, and
upon his hand, so that he may always mind her, and have her in his sight, for
we know, that whatsoever a man loves with the greatest love, that he desires
to be nearest unto, yea, fastened unto it. And the Spouses confidence in her
beloved, is, that he will esteem her as an unseparable Ornament of his glory:
so she is to him, as Aarons Pectorall unto his breast, and his stones of
remembrance upon his shoulders. In the Pectorall or Breast Plate were twelve
stones (like the ingravings of a Signet or Seal) in which were engraven the
names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, to show, that the High Priest should
carry about him a memorial of the people continually, Exodus 28. 21. The Priest
did not only bear the names of the Tribes upon his heart, but also upon his
shoulders, before the Lord, for a memorial, Exodus 28. 11. 12. So in like
manner here, the Spouse desires Christ to be her merciful high Priest in
things pertaining to God, Heb. 2. 17. That he would guide, feed, comfort her,
that he would be all mercy, love, and sweetness to her, and that he would show
unto her more then Motherly affection; according as his title is (...) One of
many commiserations, Jam. 5. 11. And now she rendereth the reason of her
desire, from the nature and force of love, in that she says,

For love is strong as death.
This is the first comparison whereby she does express the force of her love.

Death is exceeding strong, it seduceth all sorts of people, high and low,
young and old, and overcommeth the strongest man, Psalm. 89. 48. neither will it
accept of any compassion, nor yield to any opposition, we can make no agreement
with it, for if we consider the great might of Princes, of Kings, and of
Emperors, yea, of all the mighty Monarchs in the world, death has subdued
and cast them down. Who has been so strong as to resist death? where has
that might been found, that could ever eschew his stroke?

Hence Observe.

That the strong affection of a Saint toward Christ, cannot be subdued by any
trouble or force whatsoever

Christ has been ever welcome to the Saints, though they enjoyed him with the
greatest affliction: Peter would venture to go to Christ upon the boisterous
waves of the Sea: Lord (says he) if thon bid me come unto thee. The Saints
find abundance of sweetness in Christ, which does more then countervaile with
all the afflictions and troubles they meet withal for his sake: Hence was that
resolution of Job, though he kill me yet I will trust in him: such is the force
of that indeared affection of the Saints unto Christ, that though they walk in
the midst of fears and troubles, yet none of such things can take off the
edge of their affection toward him.

The second comparison of her love, follows in the next clause.

Jealousy is cruel as the grave.
Jealousy is a mixed affection of zeal, or servent love, and carries wrath and
rage with it, and it is sometimes used in a good, and sometimes in an evil
sense, In an evil sense its taken for envy, Acts 5. 17. sometimes for a
blind misguided zeal, Romans 10. 2. Sometimes for bitter zeal or envying, Jam.
3. 14. and lastly, for counterfeit jealousy or pretended love, Gal. 4. 17. But
in a good sense, zeal is taken for a godly jealousy, 2 Cor. 11. 2. for an
holy emulation, 1 Cor. 12. 31. and also for an extreme heat of all the
affections, toward one whom we esteem, burning in our love to him, our
desire of him, our joy in him, our indignation against any that speak any
thing against him: of such a jealousy we are to understand here, which the
Spouse says is,

Cruel, or hard as the grave.
She means, that this godly jealousy, wherewith her heart was so affected
toward Christ, could not be conquered any more then the grave, it being fierce
and inexorable as hell it self, which devoureth all that are cast into it.

Hence note.

That the love of jealousy and zeal in the Saints, is a consuming love.

So says Christ, the zeal of thy house has consumed me: it causes one to
spend all his strengh, for the person whom he thus loves: and so says the
Apostle in respect of his great love, I am ready to be spent for you, for the
love of Christ is a constraining love, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And the godly are eaten up
for Gods glory, Psalm. 69. 9. To the force of the grave, she compares the heat
and vehemency of her love, so that still she does show, that she must needs
covet to be joined as a signet most near unto her beloved. In the next clause
she says.

The coals thereof, are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

The Spouse compares her love to another thing, namely, to fire, not only
because it warmeth and makes hot, but also because it kindles and increases
to a burning flame.

In the first part of this speech it is said, the coals thereof are coals,
etc. that is, they are exceeding hot coals, fiery darts or arrows, the word
signifies that which flies and burns; and sometimes is applied to
judgments that fly abroad, as in Deuteronomy. 32. 24. And to arrows, Psalm. 76. 3.
Here it is taken for the burning coals of inflamed love, that pierce and
inflame the heart, and cannot be quenched, and that is the reason also why she
adds.

Which has a most vehement flame.
This declares it to be a great and wonderful flame: for in the Hebrew it is,
Shalhebeth-jah, the consuming flame of God, that is, excellent or extraordinary
flames, piercing and devouring lightning: for in scripture phrase the things of
God are transcendently excellent, as the Harpes of God, Revel. 15. 2. The Trees
of God, Psalm. 1. 3. And the mountains of God, Psalm. 36. 6. by this fire is
meant the fire of the Spirit, which is compared to fire, Matthew. 3. 11. So the
Spirit is as a fire in the Saints, that kindles a flame of divine love toward
God.

Hence Observe.

That the fire of divine love is kindled in us by the Spirit of God.

It is the peculiar work of the Spirit, to inflame our hearts to Christ, for
here the Spouse sets out the greatness of the effect, by the greatness of
the cause: so the flame of God is a most mighty flame: so the love of the
Spouse is most fitly compared unto a vehement fire, where there be hot burning
coals, and a great flame, because it is kindled by the divine flame of
everlasting burnings, where the soul feels the love of Christ, it is even
set on fire with love toward him, even with a hot burning love: this flame is
the flame of God, because it is kindled in the heart of a Saint by the Spirit.
These flames of God, these divine and vehement flames, being kindled by the
Spirit, cannot be quenched with earthly things, as it is declared in the next
verse.

VERSE. 7.
Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned.
THe Spouse proceeds in setting forth the earnestness of her affections
toward Christ, showing, that since her love was as a mighty and excellent fire
within, it could not be put out, no not with many afflictions, troubles and
persecutions

Many waters cannnot quench love, etc.
By waters, and floods is usually meant in Scripture of afflictions,
persecutions, troubles, and tentation, which accompany the Saints, and also of
persecutors themselves, who are often called waters, and floods of water, as
appears in Psalm. 69. 1. Also Rev. 17. 15. Psalm. 124. 4, 5. And Matthew. 7. 25.
27. Isa. 8. 7, 8. Dan. 9. 26. So here is signified, that the Love of Christ
wherewith the Saints are inflamed, is such as cannot be quenched with any
calamities or persecutions whatsoever.

Hene Observe.

That the love of the Saints toward Christ is an invincible love.

As it is written of Christ love, that nothing can separate his people from it:
so here the Spouse affirms, that her love toward him cannot be put out; we
may observe the frame of the Spouses speech according to her former
cocmparison, when she said, The coals thereof are coals, and the fire of the
flame of God: for what fire is there, but many waters will quench, at least if
floods of waters do overflow it? but this heavenly fire cannot be quenched,
the floods cannot put it out. The Dragon does cast a flood out of his mouth,
Revel. 12. but all in vain, for his love cannot be quenched. So the Apostle
teaches, when he says, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, the sword? as it
is written, for thy sake are we killed, all the day long, we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter, nevertheless in all these things, we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us, Romans 8. 35. There is one clause to come
wherein she says:

If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would be
utterly contemned.
If a man would give all his substance: as silver, gold, all wealth and riches,
it could not purchase this love; neither could the love of these, win the
heart of the Spouse from Christ, for she affirms here, that if all treasures
should be offered her, to draw her love from Christ, she would utterly contemn
them. So that if any man did think either to buy this love of her, or to get
it from her, it were nothing, it were but labor lost; and therefore she adds.

It would utterly be contemned, or as it is in the Hebrew, In contemning they
would contemn it. that is, they would certainly contemn it, or it would be
altogether wholly contemned; for this is the manner of the Hebrew tongue, when
they highly promise to double, and when they highly dispraise, to double the
word also: See chap. 1. verse. 1. In sum, she means by this verse, namely,
to declare, that her love was so firm and fast to Christ, that it could not be
be rent or pulled from her to any other, either by any force, or by fraud: nor
by flattery or fair promises.

Hence Observe.

That worldly riches cannot purchase divine love, nor get it away from those
that have it.

All the treasures, and pleasures, and credit, which the substance of any man's
house may procure, shall be of no reckoning, either to get or purchase the love
of Christ, or to withhold the Saints from loving him. The Spouse does so set
her heart upon Christ, that she desires to be near him, in his heart, upon his
arm: yea, she does so desire him, that she contemns all other things in
comparison of him: for, what is the glory, and the pomp, the riches, and
honors, and the pleasures of the world unto her, more then vile dross in
comparison of Christ? The nature of man is much addicted to love riches, and
the treasures of this world: yet there is not any thing of such force, to win
the heart from Christ; but the Spouse here affirms, that if all treasures
should be offered her to draw her love from Christ, she would utterly contemn
them. And as the Saints cannot be drawn off from the love of Christ, by any
worldly good: so no earthly treasure can get on purchase this love, for the
gifts of the Spirit cannot be bought with money, it being the free gift of God,
who bestows at his own pleasure, Act. 8. 18, 19, 20. And so it is said of
wisdom, that it cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for
its price, Job 28. 15.

Now a little to recapitulate. How excellent is this divine love? which carries
such an excellent description and denomination with it.

As first, That its as strong as death, which overcommeth all.

Secondly, That it is jealousy, which is love inflamed, and therefore cruel as
the grave, the bed of darkness, which is called Sheal, because it always
craveth, and is never satisfied, but it devoureth all.

Thirdly, Its hot as the fire, which not only withstandeth, but also burns
all things which stand against it.

Fourthly, Its everlasting, and victorious in all labors and sufferings, that
no troubles, terrors, nor persecutions can quench it, though whole floods of
water were cast upon it.

Fifthly, It is so precious, that no commodities or pleasures, can answer or
countervaile the value and estimation of it.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
We have a little Sister, and she has no Breasts: what shall we do for our
Sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?

If she be a wall, we will build upon her a Palace of silver: and if she be
a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.

I am a wall, and my Breasts like Towers: then was I in his eyes, as one that
found favor.

Solomon had a Vinyard at Baal-hamon, and let out the Vineyard unto keepers:
every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.

My Vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.

Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice: cause
me to hear it.

Make have, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
mountains of spices.


WE are come to the conclusion and shutting up of this Song. Here be three
special things to be handled in the close of all. As

First, Here is a motion, a consultation or demand of the old Church of the
Jews, concerning the calling of the Gentiles, declaring that it is part of her
spiritual joy, to see that they be called home unto Christ, and this is
contained in verse 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, Christ again on the other part, sets out his affection to the
Church, showing his care over her, by a comparison made between Solomon's
Vineyard, and the Church, and also by directing her to what should be best for
her, verse. 11, 12, 13.

Lastly, the Church does, as it were, take the words out of Christ's mouth, and
turns them into an earnest request and prayer, entreating his continual
presence, comfort, and assistance for ever, to lead her, and guide her into all
truth: and this is declared in the last Verse.

We have a little sister and she has no breasts, etc.
We must know when this Song was penned, before Christ's appearance in the
flesh, the Church was shut up and limited among the Jews: God suffered the
Gentiles to wander in the vanities of their own mind: but there were
prophecies and promises that the Gentiles should be brought in at the coming
of the Messiah, and there should be one body made up, both of Jews and
Gentiles. It is written of Christ, I have made thee a light of the Gentiles,
and the salvation to the ends of the earth. Also, ask of me and I will give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession. Now those that were faithful among the Jews,
understanding this, are very careful of them, saying, What shall we do for
our Sister, etc.

In this verse is described,

First, the relation of the Church of the Gentiles to the Church of the Jews;
she is her Sister.

Secondly, the condition of the Church of the Gentiles, and that is twofold.

1. She is Little. 2. She has no Breasts.
Thirdly, the care of the Church of the Jews over this new Church by way of
demand, What shall we do for our Sister?

Fourthly, the time when her care was such, In the day when she should be
spoken for, when she should be made manifest to the world.

We have a little Sister, etc.
The Jews and the Gentiles which believe, are Sisters and Brethren. Here the
Church of the Gentiles is called a Sister to the Church of the Jews, and to
Christ also, because they have both one common Father, Viz. the Lord, of whom
is named the whole Family, in Heaven and in Earth, Ephesians. 3. 15. All the Saints
are Sons and Daughters of God, whither Jews or Gentiles, through adoption
and grace, Romans 8. 16. and 2 Cor. 6. 18. Hence Observe.

That the Saints in the unity of faith become nearly related one to another, as
Sisters and Brethren. Christ and all Saints are of one Father and Lord, of one
Mother, viz. the heavenly Jerusalem. They are all Children, and of the seed of
Abraham, for so says the Apostle, If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and Heirs of the promise, Gal. 3. 29. All the Saints are Heirs of
Abraham, according to faith, and according to the promise. And the Apostle
says in Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the Sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ;
for all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither
Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are
all one in Jesus Christ. And though the Law was first given to the Jews only,
which were the peculiar people of God, to whom appertained the adoption and
glory, and the Covenants, and the service of God, and the promises, etc. Romans
9. 4. yet the Lord was pleased that the people that sat in darkness should
see a great light, and those that dwelt in the shadow of death, upon them has
the light shined, Isa. 9. 2. So that the Jews and Gentiles are now as
brethren, having both received the same spirit, God has put no difference
between Jews and Gentiles, after by faith he had purified their hearts, Acts
15. 9. Thus much for the relation between the Church of the Jews and the Church
of the Gentiles, they were as Brethren and Sisters. Now follows the state and
condition of the Church of the Gentiles, though she be a Sister to the Church
of the Jews, yet she is,

First, A little Sister. Secondly, She has no Breasts.
As the Church of the Gentiles was a Sister, so she was at that time but a
little Sister; there being only a few Proselytes brought in to believe in the
Messiah, she was little then in being, and also in her minority; for we must
observe, that this speech is formed according to the manner of the world. A
young Damsel is not presently married, until she grow up in years, she is
not for marriage until she has Breasts to nourish the Children that she shall
bring forth. So here she says, we have a little Sister, she is not grown up,
she is not come to ripeness of years, to be given in marriage, being a small
young Damsel. And it is added;

She has no Breasts.
This is added even to express her littleness or smallness, as before: she
is not yet marriageable, or fit for Christ, because she wanted those years and
that ripeness that the Lord had appointed with himself for her, and the
means also whereby she should come by it. So that this Church of the Gentiles
had no stablished ministry, so that her Children could not suck the breasts of
consolation, as in Isa. 66. 11. she was not come to the state of Israel, whose
Breasts were fashioned, Ezekiel. 16. So that the Gentiles that were Proselites to
the Jewish Religion, had their ministry among the Jews, and received
instruction from the Jewish Pastors.

Hence Observe.

That the Spouse in her nonage is under much weakness and frailty. Here the
Church of the Gentiles is very little and small, she has but only a few
Proselites, not one of a thousand, very few and scarce. And she had no breasts,
she had no spiritual nourishment for her Children, she was without the Oracles
of God: it is true, the Gentiles had many wise men of the world, great
Philosophers, and subtle disputers, but none of the doctrine of Christ, to
nourish the soul: there was the worship of Devils, and all manner of
superstition, there was great boasting of divine knowledge, that in respect of
the true wisdom was all nothing but foolishness; and hence she says, that
her little Sister had no Breasts. And what here is spoken of the Church of the
Gentiles, in respect of her nonage, the same may be applied to every particular
Saint in the time of his nonage and minority. Now follows the care that the
Spouse has for this her little Sister.

What shall we do for our Sister in the day that she shall be spoken for?
Christ and the Spouse are here brought in, as it were a man and his wife, or a
Brother and a Sister, debating what were best to be done with their youngest
Children or kindred, and which way they might most labor for their preferment:
they take up a consultation about the calling the Church of the Gentiles.

What shall we do? etc. That is, what furtherance or help shall we afford her,
to stablish and settle her in the truth?

In the day, she puts day a part of time, for the prefixed and set time with
God, wherein he would accomplish the calling of the Gentiles. And that is the
time that

She shall be spoken for.
When she shall be spoken of, or, wherein speech shall be of her: that is, when
the fame of her conversion shall come abroad into the world: this Hebrew
speech, to be had of her, or, in her, may be understood two ways. For, or
Against her. For her, that is, when any make honorable mention of her, does
praise or commend her, or the like. Against her, is when a people is turned to
God, the wicked of the world do presently oppose them, as the people spoke
against God, and against Moses, Number. 21. 5. Now from these words thus opened,
Observe.

First, It is the duty of strong Christians to assist and help those that are
weak. What shall we do? etc. What aid or furtherance shall we yield unto this
our little Sister? And thus should Saints do, when God has given them strong
evidences of his love, they should show their love unto other of their
brethren: and this was the charge Christ gave unto Peter, When thou art
converted, confirm thy Brethren. Secondly Observe.

That faith makes men famous. The Gentiles were not thus talked of among the
people of God, before their Conversion, though for Learning, Arts, Valor, they
were the men of name in the world, and accounted the honourablest of all the
earth: but it is a greater honor to be godly, to belong to the Spouse of
Christ, then to have all glory and praise in the world beside. True fame is
only to be had in godliness.

Thirdly Observe,

That when a people turn to God, they are the talk of the world. This is, if
we take it for speaking against the Spouse; it is said, the wicked set their
mouths against Heaven, and so against all the Saints: a people are never so
much made the byword and scorn of the world, as when there is any appearance
of God among them. The appearance of God in the Saints is the object of the
worlds hatred. Hitherto reaches the question, propounded, as it were, by way
of consultation and advise. Now follows the answer.

VERSE. 9.
If she be a wall we will build upon her a Palace of Silver, and if she be a
door we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.
THis Verse contains an answer unto the former question, in which is set out
unto us (yet metaphorically, and under figures) the resolution of Christ and
his Spouse, what they will do, and what way they will take, when the Gentiles
shall come in their fulness. And here they are brought in as men consulting
and taking advise, to place and plant great store of people and that they will
enlarge their rooms, and make their Situation glorious.

If she be a wall.
A wall is for strength and defense, and by the figure Synechdoche, is put for
Towns and Cities to which they belong: Cities are often described by walls,
gates, bars, etc. 2 Chronicles. 8. 5. and Revel. 21. 12. Hereby is meant the faith
and salvation of the Saints: as thou shall call thy walls salvation, Isa. 66.
18. And, we have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and
bulwarks, Isa. 26. 1.

We will build in it a Palace of Silver.
We, Christ and his Spouse, will build a Palace; that is, we will not only
enlarge our walls for their sakes, but we will provide all things for their
entertainment, as may be delightful unto them. Silver is a precious thing in
esteem, and here it notes the purity, excellency, and durablenesse of this
Palace, adorned with the Spirit, that so this glorious Palace might be
builded for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. And thus the
glory and excellency of the Spouse or New- Jerusalem is described by the
glorious City, in Revel. 21. It Is added.

And if she be a door, etc.
The door or gate of a City is for entrance, and sometimes signifies the
strength and safety of a City: and therefore it is added, We will enclose her
with boards of Cedar: that is, with durable strength, for Cedar will not rot or
worm-eat as Writers affirm: for the durablenesse thereof, see 2 Samuel 7. 2. 7.
So that if they fear any to hinder their entrance, or being entered fear any
annoyance from abroad, they need not fear, for they shall have strong and
pleasant walls, and mighty and durable gates safely to defend them.

Hence Observe,

That the Lord does make a glorious and plentiful supply for his Church in all
states and conditions. This indeed is the sum of the whole Verse, that
whereas the Church of the Gentiles seemed little, and to have no breasts, here
the Lord promises her to make her walls salvation, and that she should be
built the City of God, and a precious Palace for the King of glory to dwell
in, and be the Temple of the most high; she should be a glorious Palace of
Silver most excellent and pure, builded for an habitation for the Spirit, and
her gates should be sanctified (as in Nehem. 3.) and she should have a defense
round about her, being enclosed with Cedar, strong and durable, and very sweet.
Thus the Inhabitants of the holy City, the New Jerusalem, were guarded by
Angels, and conducted into the holy Temple, Revel. 21. 12. 27. Now follows
the reply that the Spouse makes to this.

VERSE. 10.
I am a wall, and my Breasts like Towers, then was I in his eyes as one that
found favor.
THe Church of the Jews was at that time when this Song was written a wall, or
indeed a City, the glorious City of the great King, and Breasts she had to
nourish her Children, and the Lord dwelt in the midst of her as in his Palace:
but she speaks here rather of the Gentiles, according to the promise of
Christ to them, for when those things should be performed toward the Gentiles,
as was promised, then they would be a glorious City, and her Breasts would be
as Towers. But if it be objected, how could the Church of the Jews speak this
of the Church of the Gentiles in the time past, or present, and not in the time
to come: why did she not say, then I shall be a wall, etc. This may be answered
two ways.

First, That the Hebrews do use the preterperfect tense, sometimes for the
future. Or,

Secondly, Thus, that in the certainty of faith, she speaks of that which
was to come, as if it had been come.

Here are three things which the Spouse glories in, concerning her happy
estate at the coming in of her little Sister, the Church of the Gentiles.

First, That she is then a wall, even a glorious City, and a silver Palace
built upon her.

Secondly, Her Breasts are as Towers.

Thirdly, That she found favor in his sight.

I am a wall.
I am, or I became a wall: that is, I grew up, and increased in the faith and
knowledge of Christ, for although the Church of the Jews were the City of God
before, yet now far more large by the multitude and glory of the Gentiles
coming in, and being made one body with her in Christ: but why does not the
Spouse say she is a wall, seeing it was spoken of her little Sister: but she
says, I am a wall? The reason is, that as they are several parts, they are
called Sisters, yet in Christ, joined in one, they be but one Church.

Hence Observe.

That all the Saints make but one body.

Christ is made up of all Saints, and the body is not complete till all the
Saints are brought in: so here, her little Sister is her self, being joined to
her in Christ: so in that respect she says, I am a wall, I my self am that
glorious City, that heavenly Palace, the Palace of the great King. So what
glory or privilege belongs to the whole Church, every particular Member may
apply it to himself, for what belongs to one, belongs to all, and what
appertains to the whole, belongs to every Member: and therefore the Church of
the Jews, does appropriate the glory of the Gentiles to her self, as being
interested in it. The second thing then is, that

Her breasts are as Towers.
Her Breasts now are fashioned, as it is in Ezekiel. 16. 7. now there is
nourishment in me to nourish all my Children, as if she had said: The
similitude of Towers, notes the strength, power, and glory of the
administration of the Gospel.

Hence Observe.

First, That the Spouse is glorious in her spiritual administration of the
Gospel.

It is her spiritual ministry, that gives the spiritual milk, whereby her
Children are nourished. Now the breasts of the Spouse are like Towers, there is
milk to nourish great multitudes of Children: for, when the word of the Lord
went forth from Jerusalem, and the Law out of Zion, unto the mighty Nations,
according as the Prophets foretold, it should come to pass, the Lord gave
great gifts of the Spirit, and great light in the knowledge of divine
mysteries, whereby the Saints were raised up in the knowledge of God, and
Christ. So that in the ministry of the Gospel, the breasts of the Spouse were
like great high Towers.

Secondly Observe.

That faith seeks things to come, as if they were present.

For, here long before the Gentiles were made a Church, the Spouse says, I am
a wall, and my breasts like Towers. We may see the same in David, in Psalm. 60.
6, 7. God has spoken in his holiness (says he) I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth: gilead is mine, and Manasseth is
mine, etc. yet though David thus spoke, he had not these in possession, but was
kept out of them: yet he acconnts them all his, as in possession, and why?
because God had spoken in his holmesse: he enjoyed them by faith in the
promise, and so did the Spouse here, when she says, I am a wall, etc. The last
thing follows, wherein the Spouse does glory.

Then was I in his eyes as one that found favor.
HEre the Spouse acknowledges not only that she was a glorious City: and that
she was glorious in her ministry andd divine nourishment: but also in favor
and peace, with comfort and joy in the holy Ghost.

Then shall I be in his eyes: that is, in his judgment or esteem: the eye
being the instrument to conveigh things to the understanding, here it is put
for the understanding it self: she therefore puts the eye for the judgment
that Christ will have of her.

As one that found favor, It is in the Hebrew, as one that finds peace, that
is, very dear and precious, full of delight and contentment, for even as that
man that has lived in long and great disquietnesse, not withstanding seeking
for peace, and finding it at length, has obtained his heats delight and joy,
yea, that which he prefers above al other enjoyments: so it was with the
Spouse, and in effect, the meaning is, when the Gentiles should come in
multitudes, and be added to the Church, when she should be so glorious in the
ministry of the Gospel, the knowldge of Christ should be spread abroad; she
should be filled with divine nourishment, this should fill her with favor and
in ward peace: she should be filled with the sweet evidences of divine glory.

Hence Observe.

The more fellowship we have with Christ, the more divine peace we have.

For here the Spouse says, when the Gentiles shall grow up to a full body, I
shall grow up with them, then shall I enjoy that quietness and blessedness of
Spirit, for which now I long and labor for. We in our natural or fleshly
condition are enemies to God, Romans 5. 10. But being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. This is the
peace of the Spirit, which directs the hearts and minds (of the Saint)
through Jesus Christ, Phil. 4. 7. The Soul is only at rest, and quietness in
the bosom of God, in the light and knowledge of him, in the assurance and
evidence of divine love: so The work of righteousness is peace, and the
effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. It
follows.

VERSE. 11, 12.
Solomon had a Vinyard at Baal-hamon, and let out the Vineyard unto keepers:
every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.

My Vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.


NOW we come to the second thing, which is the comparison between Solomon's
Vineyard and Christ's Vineyard. The Spouse is called a Vine, and a Vineyard, and
so the comparison is made between her and annother Vineyard. As Solomon did
exceed in all his glory and pomp; so all things that he had, did in their
kind excel. His Vinyard in Baal-hamon was a most excellent, fruitful Vineyard,
and of high account, but Christ's Vineyard did far excel it.

The comparison here is drawn between Christ's Vineyard and Solomon's; and
there is first a similitude or likeness. Secondly, There is a dissimilitude or
unlikenesse between them.

First, The similitude is,

1. Solomon had a Vineyard: so had Christ.

2. Solomon's Vineyard was fruitful: so was Christ's, as fruitful as ever
Solomon's was.

3. Solomon had a care of his Vineyard, he let it out to Keepers: so had Christ
as much and more care over his, for he kept it in his own hand, My Vineyard is
before me, says he. Bt then,

Secondly, The dissimilitude is

First, Solomon could not keep and dress his vineyard himself, but Christ
keeps his in his own hand.

Secondly, Solomon received not all the benefit, and fruit of his vineyard: but
Christ received all the fruits of his: those that kept Solomon's Vineyard, were
to have the fifth part of the fruit.

Solomon had a Vineyard, etc.
Solomon had all things excellent, and above others; and this notes the
excellency of Christ's Vineyard, in that it is compared to Solomon's: by the
Vineyard is meant the Church in general: for the house of Israel was the Lords
Vineyard Isa. 5. 7. this Vineyard is commended for it is situation.

At Baal-hamon.
Baal-hamon was not the proper name of a place, but signifies here a most
fruitful soil or place: for Baal, signifies a Lord, Master, or Owner: and
Hamon, a multitude; that is, the Lord of a multitude: so that is as much as to
say, in a place so plenteous, that it brings forth multitudes of Vines: and
therefore the Church being situate in a fertile place, is called, Bekeren ben
shamen, the horn of the Son of Oil; that is, a very fruitful hill. The
fruitfulness of Solomon's vineyard, does note out the fruitfullnesse of the
Spouse. The next thing shows Solomon's care over his Vineyard.

He let out the Vineyard unto keepers.
Though Solomon made great account of his Vineyard, yet he did not dwell in it,
and keep it himself. He was not so much delighted with it, as always to have
it in his presence, and never out of his sight: he let it out to keepers: that
is, he let it forth to hire, or for a certain rent to such as should keep,
dress, prune, cut, and trim the same. Herein there is a dissimilitude
between Christ's and Solomon's Vineyard, because Christ kept his in his own
hand, and it was always in his presence and sight. Now follows the benefit
that Solomon received by his Vineyard.

Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of Silver.
These keepers and dressers of the Vineyard must have their hire, and therefore
it is said that they bring every one a thousand pieces of Silver, that is, for
the fruit they have reaped from the Vineyard, or for the rent thereof they were
to bring a thousand pieces of Silver, that is, a very great sum, for he
puts a certain for an uncertain. Some read, shekles, which we may take for
common shekles, which was half so much as See Beza on Mat. 17. 18.
the shokles of the Sanctuary, and did amount (as some suppose) to the value of
twenty-pence. The commendations here of the Vineyard, is, that it was hired or
let at a great rent, which is an argument of the great fruitfullnesse thereof:
and in this Verse is contained the first part of the comparison: Now follows
the reddition.

VERSE. 12.
My Vineyard which is mine is before me: Thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand,
and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.
HEre is the dissimilitude, the Vineyard of Christ, even his dear Spouse,
which belongs only to him, and to none other, no man shall succeed him in
it, because he is the eternal Lord and heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. And
further he says, which is before me: that is before my face, so that I
continually look upon it, and have an eye over it, or watch over it for good:
noting his continual presence in his Church, as in Matthew. 28. 19. and also his
continual dressing and pruning of the same (as Husbandmen do their Vineyards)
that it may bring forth more fruit, as in Joh. 15. 2. And here Christ's Vineyard
is preferred before Solomon's: namely, because he is enforced to put forth his;
but Christ does as it were, with his own hands, prune and keep his own
Vineyard.

Thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand, etc.
There did belong a thousand sheckles of silver, or a thousand silverlings to
Solomon as hire or rent: this we had in the former verse: but here follows a
substraction or lessening of Solomon's profit, in the following words.

And those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.
There is a portion that appertains to those that dress this Vineyard, and
make it fruitful. This is spoken by way of concession or granting: thus I
yield to this, that thy Vineyard is worth a thousand pieces of silver: but out
of that, those that keep the fruit thereof, must have two hundred, which
arises to the fifth part of the gain. Now from this comparison thus drawn,
Observe.

First, That the Spouse is Christ's Vineyard. The house of Israel was the Lords
Vineyard, Isa. 5. 7. but of this we have spoken before in this Song.

Secondly, Christ's Vineyard is a fruitful Vineyard. King Solomon was excellent
in all things, and therefore his Vineyard could not be but fruitful, and it
being Situate in Baal-hamon, a fertile soil, by this is noted the
fruitfullnesse of Christ's Vineyard. Thirdly Observe.

That Christ injoys all the fruit of his own Vineyard. And this is held forth
to us in the dissimilitude between Solomon's Vineyard and Christ's. Solomon was
forced to give away the fifth part of the profit to his Keepers, but Christ
does reap all the fruit of the graces of his Saints, all the fruits of the
Spirit, as praise and thanksgiving, redound unto him.

Fourthly Observe, That Christ keeps the Vineyard of his Church in his own
hands. As he has the whole fruits of it, so his eyes are always upon it for
good. Christ appeared in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, which are
the seven Churches, Revel. 1. Christ is always himself in his Vineyard, to
dress it, and to prune it, and to make every Vine prosper. Let none therefore
think they have the domination over the Church, Christ only is Lord and head,
he stands in need of no Vicar or Vicegerent, which is one in the stead to do
that which Christ should do if he were present: this is Antichrist that takes
the very office of Christ, which is to sway in his Church alone.

But it may be demanded, does not Christ let forth his Vineyard to Dressers?
Did not Paul plant, and Apollo water? etc.

I answer, That the Prophets and Apostles as they were anointed to office and
dignity, they were in some fort called the dressers of Christ's Vine, but yet no
fart her but as instruments whom Christ uses; for he is present with them, and
in them, he works by them, and therefore he holds the seven Stars in his
right hand, which are the Angels of the seven Churches, Revel. 1. The Keepers
of Solomon's Vineyard do keep it in his absence, but the Keepers of Christ's
Vine can do nothing unless he be with them, and work by them. Christ then
will take care of his Church, and take it so into his own hands at last, that
even Leviathan, and the Dragon that is in the Sea shall be slain, and in that
day his Spouse shall sing, A Vineyard of new wine, Isa. 27. 1, 2. the Lord will
keep it, and water it every moment, least any hurt it, he will keep it night
and day, and at last free his Church from both it is oppressions, and
oppressors. All this shows how precious and how dear the Spouse was to Christ,
that he keeps it himself, and how faithful the Spouse is to him, that does
bring forth her fruits to none but him. Christ having thus declared the care he
had over his Church, he now lays a charge on her in the Verse following.

VERSE. 13.
O thou that dwell in the Gardens, the companions bearken to thy voice,
cause me to hear it.
AFter that Christ had extolled the excellency of this Vine, that is, of his
Church, he turns his speech unto her, giving her thereby, as it were, to
understand, that he had done all this, not only for her comfort, but also for
her instruction: for her comfort in that she was so highly, yet truly
commended: for her instruction, that she might learn thereby to extol him in
deed and in truth, that had been so liberal in her commendation.

O thou that dwell in the Gardens.
Christ gives a solemn charge, and prescribes a duty to be performed; which
is described, first, by the place of her abode, Among the Gardens, etc. The
Participle being of the Feminine Gender, shows that it is the Church, not
Christ that is here spoken to: we may render it, O inhabitresse: Christ speaks
to his Spouse dwelling in the Gardens, that is, in the Churches in which the
universal Church is after a sort resident, and a continual dweller, Christ
yet notwithstanding having care, both over the whole, and over every particular
one, pruning and dressing them, as appears by the particular Churches
mentioned, Revel. 1, 2, 3. Now in that the Churches are called the Gardens
Observe,

That the Churches of Christ are the several Gardens of the Lord. The whole
Church is called a Garden full of all sweet plants, as we had before in this
Song. The particular Churches which are parts of the whole, be called Gardens:
now in that the universal Church, even the Spouse of Christ, is spread over
all, she is said to dwell in Gardens, that is, in all the particular assemblies
which know and worship Christ aright, throughout the world. Her care is over
all, they be all her Children and her plants: and so she is said to dwell in
the Gardens, she dwells in her judgment, heart, and affections, in all the
Churches;

The companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear.
The Spouse is enjoined to publish adn preach the Gospel of Christ; and the
persons to whom shemust preach are her Companions. By Companions he seems to
mean her Fellow Christians, partakers of the same faith, and Spirit, and
grace, 2 Pet. 1. 1. These Companions or Fellows, do attend to the voice of
Christ, published by the Spouse. Now in that it is added, Make me to hear it,
our English Translation has the particle It added, which is not in the Hebrew
Text: the words are no more then, make me to hear, and it does signify to
Preach, because they that preach make those to hear whom they preach unto: so
that we may understand the words thus, Preach me, etc. for that is the great
office of the Church to preach and publish Christ: as if Christ had said,
Preach me to thy Companions and Fellow Christians, that attend to thy voice,
let thy doctrines be my Gospel, not men's traditions. Hence Observe,

First, That it is the Office of the Church and Saints to preach and publish
Christ. This the Apostle exhorts unto when he says, Let the word of God
dwell in you plentifully, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves
in Psalms and Hymmes, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts,
unto the Lord, Col. 3. 16. This preaching of Christ is a special argument of
the love of the Spouse unto her members, as appears by the words of Christ,
when he says, Peter love thou me, feed my Lambs, John 21. 15. As if he
should say, this is a great fruit of thy love which I require, preach me to my
people. So the Spouse professing that great abundance of her love to Christ, a
little before in this Chapter; Christ requires that she will manifest it, in
preaching him before the Saints. As if Christ should say, manifest thy love
unto me by preaching and publishing me, laying open the treasures of life and
salvation that are in me, unto those that hearken. Herein then lies the
performance of a great duty of the Spouse, and a singular declaration of her
love to Christ, that she preach him, that she publish and lay open all the
treasures of life and glory, that be in him.

Secondly, Observe,

That such as preach the Gospel to the Saints, must preach to them as to
fellow Christians. This implies, that those that preach to the people must not
Lord it over them; not as to be Lords over their faith (as the Apostle says)
but to be helpers of their joy. Paul thoughan Apostle, yet he was a Servant of
Jesus Christ, as in Romans 1. 1. The Angel said to John which would have fallen
down before him, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, Rev. 21. 9.
Those that preach the Gospel must preach as to fellow members of the same
body, companions in the faith and Spirit of Christ, they should communicate
unto them the things they have received from Christ, as unto brethren, and
fellow members of the same body.

Thirdly, Observe,

That the most precious treasures of the Gospel, should be especially,
discovered and preached to the Saints. So here, the companions are said to be
such as hear, and unto them the Spouse is enjoined to Preach Christ. It is
most true, that the Gospel is to be Preached to every creature under Heaven,
yet Christ says, Give not holy things to dogs, neither cast Pearls before
Swine. The precious treasure of the Gospel is to be communicated especially to
the Saints, and such as have a high esteem thereof, to those that have their
ears boared of God, and made to hear and receive those precious things. The
Apostle says, We preach Christ crucified, even to the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Gentiles foolishness, but unto them which are called, both of Jews
and Grecians, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1.
Cor. 1. 23. And again the Apostle says, I am not assamed of the Gospel, for
it is the power of God unto salvation, unto them that believe, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile, Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is most effectual to
the Saint, they are the companions that hearken to the doctrine of Christ.
Lastly, Observe,

That the Spouse is to preach Christ only, without mixture of men's traditions.
Cause me to hear, cause me, and none besides me to be heard: Preach not the
doctrines and traditions of men, but preach only the doctrines of my Gospel.
Christ condemned the Pharisees, for that they preached for doctrines the
traditions of men, and so neglected the doctrine and word of God. And now
follows the last verse.

VERSE. 14.
Make have my beloved, and be thou like a Roe or young Heart upon the Mountain
of spices.
HEre is the cocnclusion of the Song, wherein the Spouse does power forth a
vehement request or prayer unto her beloved: for as she began this Song with a
prayer, so likewise does she end it with prayer. The Spouse making acceptance
of the chcarge, towit, of preaching the Gospel committed unto her, whereby she
should procure many enemies: therefore she desires that Christ would not
absent himself from her, but that he would be always ready toassist and
comfort her.

Make have my beloved.
In these words the Spouse desires Christ's near approach unto her, though the
words seem to insinuate, as though the Spouse wished the removing of Christ,
especially as the words are rendered by some, Flee my beloved, but this
expression does rather intimate, that Christ should depart from those low and
earthly discoveries that he had appeared in, and that he would manifest
himself in a more glorious dispensation unto her.

And be like unto the Roe, or the young Heart.
To the end that the Spouse may the better express the speed or swiftness
that she would have Christ to use in coming toward her, she uses this double
similitude for the swiftness of these creatures: see that which is written,
Psalm. 18. 33. To which end tends the word young, because they are far more
Iusty and fresh, then when they grow to greater years. See more for this in
Chap. 2. 9. 17.

Upon the Mountains of Spices.
If we refer this as some do, to the Roe, or young Heart, then it means most
pleasant Hills or Mountains, abounding with all manner of pleasant Spices,
whither these Roes or young Hearts, flew for succor and relief. But if we
refer it to Christ, as it seems most agreeable, then it means a most heavenly
discovery of Christ, that he would come in a more glorious appearance then
formerly, which appearance of his is expressed by those things that are of the
greatest sweetness and delight, to wit, Mountains of Spices. In sum, this
is the meaning of this verse, that the Spouse imbraceing Christ's Commandment
touching the publishing and spreading abroad of his name, and knowing how hard
a thing it is to perform such a duty, as well by reason of the matter it
self, as also by reason of the great difficulties and dangers that accompany
such an action, does earnestly desire Christ's appearance in greater glory and
manifestation of his divine presence to lead her and guide her in the
performance of such a duty. Hence Observe.

That the Saints earnestly desire to be acted and carried forth by the
assistance of Christ's divine presence. The Spouse here desires that Christ
would enable her to manifest his name by his hasty approach unto her, in the
glorious diseoveries of himself, as upon the Mountains of Spices; and that he
would more and more manifest his divine presence to her, by which she might be
affisted and carried forth of all difficulties whatsoever. The Spouse earnestly
desires to see the King in his beauty, and to sit upon the Throne of his
glory: And thus as the Song begun with a desire of the knsses of Christ's mouth,
so she cocncludes also with a desire of his coming in glory. Thus is the end
of the Revelation. The Spirit and the Bride (even all that are faithful) say
come, and let him that hears, say come, etc. And Christ answers this request,
saying, Surely I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, Revel. 22. 17.
20. So let the Lord come upon the Mountain of Spices according to his good
pleasure.

So Ends this most excellent SONG OF SONGS.
A Table of the principle things contained in the foregoing Exposition.
A
Absent.
CHrist is sometimes absent from his people. page 398. When Christ is absent,
1. the soul fails 570. 2. Is unqiet. 399 Christ is never wholly absent from
his Spouse. 624 Christ is sought when absent. 399.
Admiration.
The glory of the Saints is the admiration of the world. 653.
Access.
Saints have access to God through Christ 367, 368.
Affections.
Christ wins the affetions of a Believer. 8. 149 All a Believers affections
are dedicated to Christ 78. Christ's affections toward his people are, 1. Large
and hearty 483. 2. Sweet and tender 611. Saints affections toward Christ are.
1. Exceeding worldly things 78 2. Inseparable 547, 3. Active 567. 4. Enlarged
585. 5. Insatiable ibid. 6. Unsubduable 741.
Affected.
Christ is affected with the least of his own graces, in the Saints 486, 487.
Actions.
All Christ actions are glorious 608, 609. Gracious affections produce gracious
actions. 567.
Affection.
Affliction is incident to the godly 111, 112 Saints rejoyee in affliction
page. 7 The afflictions of the Saints is sometimes the cause of stumbling to
weak ones 111 We ought not to triumph over our Brethren in affliction 107,
108. We ought not to be disheartened by the afflictions of the Saints 108, 109
There is no such evil in affliction, as to cause us to disdain those that are
under afflictions, or to be afraid of them our selves 109, 110. Christ is
nearest his people in afflictions 113, 114. Saints most prise Christ in
afflictions 579. No affliction can silence the Spouse from praising her beloved
592.
Afflict.
Those that afflict the Church most are such, 1. As pretend holiness 115. 2.
As have a form of godliness, 122
Ascend: Ascension.
Saints ascend to God by Christ 425. Saints admire their own ascension to
Christ 732. Saints ascend from a low condition to Christ. 733. Saints ascend to
Christ by a divine power 734.

B
Beauty
The Churches beauty is, 1. Inward 97. 2. Supernatural 157. 3. Excellent 229,
220. 448. 4. In Christ's esteem 370. 643. 5. In all parts 450. in eyes, hair,
teeth, lips, temples, neck, breast, from 450, unto 468. 6. Perfect 474, 475. 7.
Desirable 669. 627. 8. Glorious 694, 695. Christ's beauty is, 1. As a fountain
237. 2. Commendable and glorious 238. 257, 258. 3. Excellent above the World
279. 4. Rare beauty 595.
Body.
All Saints make but one body 757.
Beloved.
Christ is the Churches beloved in all estates 323. 279.

C
Cedars.
The Saints are compared to Cedars, in eight paticulars 250, 251.
chastity.
The chastity of the saints is very pleasing to Christ, 233, 234, 235. Christ's
Spouse is chaste 506.
Children.
Multitudes of Children born unto Christ, by the seed of the Word 243, 244. The
Church does plentifully nourish her own Children 679, 701.
Christ.
Christ's excellency set forth by a Rose in five things 259, 260, 261, 262, 263.
Christ compared to a Shepherd in that he does 1. Feed his Church, 129, 130,
131. 2. Refresh 132. 3. Guide 133. 4. Compassionate 134. Christ compared to
Lilies, in six things 271. Christ in his graces administered in the Gospel
compared to ointment in five things, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. Christ in his
love compared to wine in six particulars 34, 35. Christ is compared to an
Appletree in five things 276. the most excellent things in nature are but types
of Christ 40, 41. Believers will not easily part with Christ when they have got
him 411, 412, 413. The Church does ascribe all good things to Christ 534.
Church.
The Church compared to Jerusalem in six things, 309, 310, 311. The Church
compared to a Dove in eight particulars 360, 361, 362, 363. The Church compared
to a garden in six things, 498, 499, 500. The Church is a garden enclosed in
three respects 500, 501. The Church compared to a Palm Tree in four
particulars 696, 697. The Church is sustained with Pillars of truth 436.
Christians.
Strong Christians should strengthen those that are weak 99, 753. and feed them
with wholesome food. 168. The Lord takes care for young and tender Christians
167.
Comfort, Comforts.
All our comforts in Christ are sure 211, 112. Christ does comfort his Church.
1. By the ministry of his Sptrit 305. 2. By making have to help 328. 3. By his
presence of grace 305. 4. In the greatest straights 408. 5. By weak instruments
582. 6. By compassing his with mercy. 680. Comforts are peculiar 505.
Christians in distress are comforted by others 295. Saints labor to make
others partakers of their own comforts 414, 415.
Comlie, Comeliness.
Christ is comely to all Beholders. 605. Christ delights in the comeliness
of his people 690, 691. The praises and prayers of the Church are comely 459,
460.
Coming.
The cause of our coming is not from our selves, but from him 55, 56, 57, 58.
Contrary.
Christ brings good to his Church by contrary means 520.
Creatures
christ has command of all creatures 519. Unreasonable creatures are madet o
testify against unreasonable men 312, 313.
Communion.
Saints desire communion with Christ under shadows 392. Saints desire nearest
communion with Christ 721.
Crowned.
Christ is crowned with dignity by the Church 443.
Consolations.
The Consolations of the Gospel does abundantly refresh the fainting soul
298.
Confer.
It is an excellent thing for Saints to confer. 591.
Continuance.
saints have no long continuance in their present condition 169.

D
Danger.
Christ is a safeguard to his Saints in danger. 220, 221.
Saints are ingenuous to acknowledge their own defects 92. 54.
Deformed.
Saints are deformed to the view of the world. 93, 94.
Directed.
Saints desire to be directed by Christ 724, 725, 726.
Disquiet.
Saints ought not to disquiet Christ 317. By Sin 318. by Impatience 318, 319.
Dispensation.
Christ does appear to his people under every dispensation 724, 725, 726. The
dispensation of the Gospel glorious. 345.
Doctrine.
The Doctrine of Christ, and of the Gospel is sweet and defireable 27, 28, 606.
Desires.
The desires of the Saints are, 1. To have Christ's presence 415. 2. To be near
him 739, 740. 3. To be acted by him 772. Christ does increase and cherish the
least desire in his Saints after him 621. 2. Answers them 338, 528. 3.
Mainfests himself the more to his people upon them 529.

E
Enemes.
Those nearest to the Church are often her greatest enemies 113, 576, 577. 2.
Those that pretend most religion 113, 114. The Church is always troubled with
enemies 375. Her enemies are of a devouring nature 375. The churches enemies
ought to to be restrained 376. The Church is made magnanimous being endued with
power, and arms, with weapons to overcome all her enemies 177. 464. 466.
entertain.
Saints do willingly and honorably entertain Christ 723.
Esteem.
Christ has a high esteem of his people, beholding them as in himself 174,
214.
Evil.
It Is a great evil to neglect the things of God. 120. The evil of sin is
seen in its effects 121.
Eyes.
Christ's eyes are pure and clean 603, 604.
example.
The example of ancient Christians, are for direction unto succeeding ages 161,
162, 163. The example of the Church seeking Christ is a means to draw on
others to seek him 589.

F
Faith.
Its the nature of faith to hold fast Christ 411. Faith makes men famous 753,
754. Faith sees things to come, as if they were 759.
Fair.
The Church is exceeding fair in Christ's eyes, 340, 149. 2. When black in her
own account 95, 96. 151. 3. When opposed to her blackness 96. 4. When in
persecution 587.
fellowship.
The more fellowship we have with Christ, the more peace we have 760. Christ
desires the nearest fellowship with his Church 548, 549.
Feast.
Christ and his Church do mutually feast together. 534. This is amplified in
six particulars 197, 198, 199, 200.
Feed.
Christ does feed his Church 129. Comfortably 457. With satisfaction 626. The
Spouse does feed her Members 468.
Friendship.
There is a mutual Friendship between Christ and his Church 535
Fortitude.
Saints are full of fortitude 658.
Fruitful.
Saints are made fruitful. 1. By communion with Christ 242. 2. By the Gospel,
355. 3. By the Spirit 525. The fruitfulness of the Saints set forth by the
fig tree in three things 355, 356. And by the Vine in three particulars 356,
357.
Fruits.
Christ expects fruits from his people, after means 662, 663. 2. Accepts of
them 628. 3. Is honored by them 628. 4. Is pleased with them 526.
Foundation.
Saints rest upon a sure foundation 437.

G
Glorious.
Christ is glorious, 1. In his graces 98. 2. In his works of grace 181. 3. In
all parts of his body 599. unto 616. saints are glorious, 1. Above the world
447. 2. With outward glory 182. 3. Glorious in God 656. 4. Glorious in Christ
657, 438. 5. In their goings 674. 6. In their knowledge 682, 683. 7. In their
wisdom 687. 8. In their purposes 688. 9. In Gospel administrations 758. 10.
With an inward glory 710.
Gospel.
The Gospel is very redolent when displayed and published 43, 44. The Gospel
administration is more comfortable then that of the Law. 351, 345, 346. 25. The
Gospel is most comfortable when its applied 296, 297, 298. The Gospel makes men
fruitful 349. The Gospel fills men's hearts with joy 351. The Gospel gives men a
new language 705, 706. The precious things of the Gospel are to be preached to
the Saints 769. Saints are upright in a Gospel account 79.
Gather.
Christ does gather his people from all parts of the world 480. Christ does
gather his people in the midst of persecution 473.
Garments.
The garments of the Spouse are very sweet 496, 497.
Good.
Saints should as well acknowledge their good as their evil 545.
Graces.
Saints in respect of their graces, 1. Have supply from Christ 276. 277. 189.
450. 2. Are fragrant 349. 203, 204. 3. Are cherished by Christ 376. 533. 4. Well
pleasing to Christ 490. 532. 5. Proceed from Christ 186. 6. They cannot fall
from them 544 Christ's graces are, 1. Delightful to Saints 238. 2. Passing
sweet 426.

H.
Head.
Christ is a glorious head 599
House.
The Saints are Gods house, in four respects 249.

I
Idolatry.
To leave Christ and follow strangers is shameful Idolatry 140.
Ignorance.
The Saints are under much ignorance. 144, 145. Christ does bear with his
people in respect of their ignorance 146. Saints are not to sit down at rest
in their ignorance 158, 159. 160. Saints are under a cloud of ignorance 392.
Christ's approachings expel the ignorance upon the Saints 393
Impediment.
No impediment can hinder Christ's approaching near his Church 326, 327.
Neither the Saints seeking Christ 403.
Invite.
Christ invites his people to partake of his good things 342.
Joy.
Man's reconciliation with God is matter of great joy 7. Christ's approaches to
his people, is matter of great joy 324. Christ revealing himself to his Saints
causes in them unspeakeable joy 76. Christ espousing himself to his Saints is
matter of great joy 444. The Gospel fills men's hearts with joy 351.
Enjoy.
The Saints desire always to enjoy Christ's goodness

K.
Kingdom.
the Kingdom of Christ illustrated in five particulars 66, 67. 68, The
Knowledge of Christ makes men seek after him, 620.

L
Laws.
fie the observation of Christ's laws the Saints are, 1. Beautiful 181. 2.
Victorious. 182.
Lilies.
Christ and Saints like lilies 268
Love.
The love of God in Christ is manifold 31, 32, 33. Chists love to Saints is, 1.
Drawing love 24. 2. Gospel love. 25. 3. Pleasant 33, 34. 4. Peculiar 171, 172,
173, 339. 5. Everlasting 227. 935. 6. Increasing 288. 7. Overcomming 301. 8.
Magnificent 635. The Churches love to Christ is, 1. A memorial love 77, 78. 2.
Increasing love, 80. 3. Collective 126. 4. Ardent 127. 301. 5. Returned love
212. 6. Beautiful 489. 7. Invincible 745, 746. 8. Of jealousy and fire
kindled by the spirit of love 743, 744. The love of a Saint is caused 1. By a
principle of love 29, 439. 2. By the sweetness of Christ graces 47, 48. 3. By
Christ's love 291. 708. 4. By the manifest at ion of Christ to the soul 714.
Lovely.
Christ is all lovelie. 616.

M
Members.
The Spouse is glorious in her members 677. The Church does nourish her own
members 416.
Manifest.
Christ does manifest himself to his people upon their desires 529. 2. With
delight 530. 3. by degrees 333, 334.
Mutual
Christ and the Saints have mutual interest with each other. 1. In union four
ways 379, 380. 2. In communion four ways 381.
Mysteries.
Christ reveals hidden mysteries by the Gospel to the Saints 69, 70.

N.
Negligent.
To be negligent in the things of God is a great evil 120

O.
Ointment.
Christ's name, spirit and grace powered forth in the Gospel is compared to
ointment in five particulars 40, 41, 42, 45, 46.
Ordinances.
Gospel Ordinances more glorious then those of the Law 190, 191, 192, 193.

P.
Parentage.
The Saint are rich and glorious in their parentage 651. 675
Particular
The Saints apply the benefits of Christ to themselves in particular 213.
Patience.
Christ exercises abundance of patience toward his people 554.
Persecute.
False Brethren persecute the Church with great indignation 115, 116.
Pretenses.
the Spouse put off Christ with false pretenses 556, 557.
Presence.
Christ's presence with his people is, 1. Powerful 614. 712. 2. Comfortable
655, 702. 3. Desirable 524. 4. Everlasting 563. 5. Not long veiled 625. 6. He
is present, when seemingly absent 571.
Publish.
The Office of the Church is to publish Christ 768.
Propriety.
Saints have propriety in Christ four ways 383 Christ has propriety in
saints four ways 384, 385.
Pure.
Such only as love Christ are pure 49, 50.
Pruned.
The Church needs sometimes to be pruned 700. It is Christ alone can prune his
Church 701.
Principle.
Saints are drawn to Christ by a principle of love 29. 400
Profess.
Many profess Christ that know little of him 590.

Q
Qualified.
Christ is fitly qualified for the adminstration of his Church 601.

R.
Rose.
Christ's excellency set forth by a rose in six particulars 259, 260, 261, 262,
263.
Repose.
Christ does repose himself with his Saints 428.
Race.
The life of a Christian is the running of a race, illustrated in six
particulars, 61, 62, 63.
Raise.
Christians should not raise Christ until he please 730. Christ does raise up
himself in his Saints 735.
Refreshed.
Christ is refreshed in his Saints, 721,
Redemption.
The fruits of redemption are very delightful to the Saints 219.
Righteous.
Righteous men are only fit to mention Christ's love 79.
Related.
Christ stands related to his people 1. As a Brother 476. 2. As a Sister 477.
Those nearest related to the Spouse persecute her, 113. Saints are nearly
related one to another, 150.

S.
Saints are satisfied with all good things in Christ 284, 285. Saints are
satisfied in the arms of Christ 729. Christ does satisfy his people with
plenty. 534.
Saints.
Saints behold the excellency of Christ 442. Saints are serious in the things
of Christ 309. There remains corruption in Saints 341. Saints make their
approaches to God through Christ, 365. The sacrifice of Saints is acceptable
425 Saints must look to their guard 432. Saints are Christ's Chariot 434.
Saints should seek Christ toge(...) 622, 623. Saints are nearly related one
to another 750. Saints have flesh as well as Spirit, 544.
Sense.
Christ is not always present with his people according to sense, 400, 568.
secure.
The Saints are most secure in Christ 70, 71. 429, 430.
Shadow.
Christ is a shadow of protection to his people 282. The Saints are much
delighted with Chrsts shadow 282. 283.
Shepherd.
Christ is a most complete Shepherd. 129, 130.
scriptures.
The Scriptures are a perfect rule of life 164, 165. The Scriptures cannot be
understood, but by the spirit 166, 167.
Sin.
Sin darkens a Saints 91. The sense of sin causes soulsicknesse 299, 300.
Spouse.
The Church is Christ's Spouse 477. The Spouse is sometimes in a languor of
Spirit 542. Christ prefers his Spouse above all the world, 649.
Spirit.
The Spirit compared to wind in six things. 521. Saints have the Spirit of
Christ 1, To blow upon them 520. 2. To operate in them 286. 3. To put life into
them 523. 4. To enlighten them 441. 5. To spiritualise them 545. 6. To give
them divine impression upon their hearts 560. 7. To change their nature 561. 8.
To make them active 561. The Spouse is not always in one frame of Spirit 542.
She has flesh as well as Spirit 544.
Solomon.
Solomon a glorious type 13. Solomon a glorious Saint 14, 15.
Sweet
Christ is very sweeet. 1. In his communications 288. 2. In his pastures and
feeding 386. 3. In his Ministry 215. 4. In his graces 203. 552. 5. In his
dispensations 210, 211. 6. In his Spirit. 565.
Sweetness.
Christ's sweetness is, 1. Sensible only to Saints 222 2. Displayed in the
Gospel 49. 3. Of a drawing nature 68. 4. The cause of the sweetness in saints.
566. The Spouse is sweetness. 1. In her annointings 491. 2. In her perises and
prayers 493. 3. She is a garden of sweetness 716. 511. 4. she does entertain
Christ with all sweetness 716.
Seek.
Saints seek Christ, 1. Through all impediments 403. 2. Diligently 406. 3.
Constantly 408, 409.
Sorrow.
Christ is brought forth in the Saints with much sorrow 736 737.

T.
Truth.
Saints discern what is Truth 686. Truth is the Pillar of the Church 436.
Teachers.
It is a dangerous thing to be joined to false Teachers, and usurpers. 140
Thorns.
Wicked men compared to thorns in four respects 272, 273.

U
Violence.
false Brethren use violence to compel others to their way, which is grievous
to be borne, 116, 117.
Valor.
Saints are full of valor 640.
Vineyard.
The Church is Christ's vineyard 119. She is a fruitful vineyard 764. Christ
keeps his own vineyard and injoyes all the fruit 765.
Voice.
Christ's voice is by the Saints 1. Discerned from strangers 320, 321, 322, 323.
547. 2. Its comfortable 353. 3. Its powerful 667. The voice of the Spouse is,
1. Pleasing to Christ 369. 2. Delightful to him ibid.
Upright.
saints are upright in a Gospel account 79.

W
Ways.
Christ's ways are 1. Not easy to be found 125. 2. sought out by Saints 25. 3.
They are firm and stable 613.
Will.
The office of the will is, 1. To choose 2. To refuse 3. To suspend 59, 60.
Willing.
Christ's people are a willing people 665.
Water
Christ is a fountain of water, 1. To refresh his Spouse 514. 2. To make her
fruitful 504. 3. He is a living Spring 515. 4. He is water of life 516.
Win.
Saints ought to win others by their carriage 621, 622.
Wine.
Christ's love is compared to wine in six particulars 034, 035
Withdraw.
Christ does withdraw from his Spouse, 1. But for a time 660. 2. For her good
665.
Words.
Christ's words make deep impressions 570. The Spouse utters holy and gracious
words. 495.
World.
Is is a hard thing to leave the world. 422.


A Table of those Scriptures which are occasionally handled or briefly
illustrated in the foregoing Exposition, The first numberrelates to the
Chapter, the second to the verse, the third to the page.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 1. 1. 185. 8. 20. 204. Exodus. 23. 20. and 23 318.
417 28. 30. 75. 32. 25. 92. Joshua. 24. 27. 312. Nehemiah. 8. 10. and 12 26.
Job. 6. 12. 107. 12. 11. 547. Psalms. 8. 1. 609. 16. 5 and 6. 413. 18. 2. 220.
19. 10. 27. 23. 05. 132 and 200. 27. 05. 17. 36. 10. 52. 45. 02. 147. 3 38 7.
126. 13 and 14 182 60 03 101 73 24 454 77 03 214 20 133 92 14 242 119 32 and 60
62 Proverbs. 09 01 289 23 31 704 Isaiah. 01 23 198 02 2 and 3 346 05 1 and 2
119 25 06 35 and 130 30 26 192 35 1, 2, 6. 345, 225 03 6 706 31 54. 41 19 067
43 02 221 5, 6 480 48 1, 2 113 52 14 093 53 02 093 03 237 54 1, 2 243 55 05 053
60 1, 2 655 61 1, 23 198 63 009 134 Jeremiah. (...) 21 119 (...) 32 077
Ezekiel. 01 23, 29 90 6 10 487 Daniel. 02 32 613 04 5, 7, 15 453 Hosea. 02 09
444 11 04 008 Obadiah. 01 12 101 Zephaniab. 03 17 483 Zechariah. 02 05 219
Matthew. 13 52 715 Luke. 15 24 199 John. 01 16 14 18 366 04 13 131 06 55 197 07
38 515 08 31, 32 682 15 1, 2 119 09 17^ Acts. 05 10 117, 118 09 01 116 Romans.
05 03 111 06 14 026 07 14 542 08 26 529 10 15 080 Corinthians Epist. 1. 01 18,
19 166 01 27 583 02 14 55 and 166 04 13 094 07 07 049 08 13 099 Epist. 2. 14
24, 25 321 15 55, 56 109 01 24 116 02 15 204 03 18 333 04 06 366, 58 04 16 97,
100 06 9, 10 110 10 4, 5 322 12 04 252 12 9, 10 152 Galathians. 01 16 062 04 06
033 19 679 06 01 145 06 12, 13 118 Ephesians. 02 05 056. 04 07 049. 08 026. 05
19 006 25 444. 06 11, 14. 466 Collossians. 02 09 14 and 595 03 10 087
Thessalonians. Epist. 1. 02 07 215 Hebrews. 01 1, 2, 3 027 02 17, 18 146. 11 02
155. 12 12 158 12 18, 19, 20. 025 13 05 221 James. 05 07 319 Peter 1. Epist. 02
4, 5 250 02 21, 22 154 John Epist. 1. 02 1, 2. 261 03 9 675 05 13 075
Revelions. 01 05 069 03 18 092 08 10 505 12 01 150 14 04 50 22 01 517

THE PRINTER To the READER.
BY reason of the Authors absence there have diverse faults passed the Press,
which his eye would have prevented, but I hope thou will correct with thine
own Pen, what thou see amiss, and in so doing, shall do a kindness both
to the Author and to me, and or thy example, I shall only set down two or
three faults that come to mine eye.

ERRATA.
IN page 31. line 5. for manifest read manifold, in page 51. l. 18. for exalt
r. exult. page 171. l. 23. for their r. other. 238. l. 24. for them r. her. And
the like.

FINIS.

