EPISCOPAL GOVERNMENT INSTITUTED BY CHRIST, And confirmed by clear evidence of
Scripture, and invincible Reason.

Collected by the pains of R. R. Preacher of the Gospel.

DEVT. 42. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall
ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord
your God, which I command you.

REVEL. 22.18, 19 For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this book *

And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City,
and from the things that are written in this book.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1641.

Episcopal Government instituted by Christ.
The first Argument.
THat whatsoever degrees of Church Governors, as God established under the
Law, that Christ and his Apostles continued under the Gospel, and that has
governed the Christian Church since the days of Christ and his Apostles, They
are and must be of Divine Ordination.

But God established three degrees of Church Governors under the Law, Christ
and his Apostles continued three degrees under the Gospel, and three degrees
has governed the Christian Church since the days of Christ and his Apostles.

And therefore three degrees of Church Governors are and must be of Divine
Ordination.

The proposition I will take for granted, for I know no man will deny it. The
assumption I must prove, which has three branches: The first is, That God
established three degrees under the Law, the High Priest, inferior Priests,
and Levits; the High Priest to be in the first order, Inferior Priests in the
second, and Levits in the third: and this I hope will be granted. The second
branch of the Proposition, that Christ and his Apostles continued three degrees
under the Gospel, I prove thus: Christ chose Apostles for one order, and
Evangelists for another, called at the first the seventy Disciples, to
distinguish them from the other twelve, who were also called Disciples, as long
as Christ lived (for they were seldom before Christ his Resurrection
distinguished by their proper names) and Christ filled the room of the high
Priest himself, as long as he served in the Ministry of the Gospel: And after
his Ascension immediately, the Apostles by the direction of the Spirit made
choice of a third Order of Churchmen, whom they called by the name of Deacons,
Act. 6. so that the Apostles were appointed to be of the first Order after
Christ his Resurrection, at which time they were only endued with stolicall
authority, being before Christ's death in the order and rank of Evangelists,
and the Evangelists inferior to them, for the twelve were ever distinguished
from the seventy, both in Place and Estimation, as any man may perceive that
can read the Scriptures: but when Christ was to as^end up unto the Father, he
made the Apostles chief Governors of the Church, and put them in his own
place, and said to them, He that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me; after which time they were called by the name of
Apostles ordinarily, and the other seventy got the name of Evangelists, and
were the second order of Church Governors, and at all times remembered in the
second place; howsoever, the twelve Disciples were called Apostles, as chiefly
sent of God, although the other seventy were sent too, as we read, Luke 10.
yet they were not consecrate with so great solemnity as the other twelve, nor
got not so strict a charge, nor so great authority and power conferred upon
them; the truth of all this you will find in the last Chapter of Saint John's
Gospel, and the first of the Acts; so that since the twelve Disciples are thus
advanced, and not the seventie, it is more then evident, that Christ would have
the Seventie to be still inferior to the Twelve.

And this also appears by the election of Matthias, who was taken out of the
number of the seventie, and advanced to the Apostolical charge, if the twelve
had not been in degree above the seventy, to what end should this distinction
have been made? no man will say I hope, that the Twelve would have advanced
themselves, above the Seventy, if Christ himself had made no difference
before; for Christ no question if they had been wrong would have reproved
their arrogancy; but on the contrary, Christ gives testimony of his
approbation of that which they did, by consenting to Matthias election, yea, it
appears that they had a commandment so to do, for Peter says, Acts 1.22.
that one (must) be ordained, to be a witness with us of the Resurrection; the
word ((...),) in the 21 Verse is very emphaticall, so that it would seem, that
it was not left arbitrary to them, to do it, or not to do it, at their
pl^asure; but of necessity it behoved to be done, as being commanded by Christ
their Master.

Moreover, it is evident by the words of the 25 Verse, where the Apostle makes
a clear distinction between Apostles and Evangelists: That he may take part
(says he) of this Ministry and Apostleship; now the Apostle could not call it
this Ministry, except it had bin distinct from that which Matthias had before;
he was one of the Seventy Disciples before, and had power to preach the
Gospel of Christ: so that it is most sure, if the calling of the twelve, had
not been particularly differenced by Christ, from the calling of the seventy,
the Apostles would never have put a distinction between the one Ministry, and
the other. But the Apostle Peter adds yet a cleerer distinction, and he calls
the Ministry whereunto Matthias was advanced Apostleship (this Ministry, and
Apostleship says he) now the Ministry of the seventy Disciples was never
called Apostleship unto this day, as all men know.

Further this distinction appears, that the Apostle, with the consent of the
rest of the twelve, would have the number made up before the coming of the
Holy Ghost; for the Holy Ghost did not visibly descend upon any but upon the
twelve; well, they did always attend his coming, they could not tell how soon,
and therefore they thought it necessary, that Matthias should be elected
withal expedition, so that any man may conceive, if there had not been a wide
difference between the twelve Apostles and the seventy Disciples, the Apostle
would never have made such haste.

By the former doctrine we find, that our Savior differenced the 12, from the
seventy, thrice; in the time of his life once, for by taking the twelve to be
of his counsel (as it were) and guard of his body, he made a manifest
distinction, Luke 6.13. Next after his Resurrection he put a difference
between them, in that he enstalled them solemnly in their Apostolical charge,
which he did not unto the seventy; and thirdly, after his Ascension, he sent
the Holy Ghost chiefly to the twelve, and caused him to descend visibly even to
the view of all the beholders upon their heads in the likeness of cloven
tongues of fire, which, for any thing we read, he did not to the seventy.

In the thirteenth of the Acts, Verse 1. we may behold this distinction, with
our eyes; where Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, and Saul, are called Prophets
and Teachers, and not Apostles, for I think as yet Saul was not joined to the
number of Apostles, at least he was not accounted one: so Paul makes this
distinction, when he takes to himself the honor to plant the Gospel, and to
lay the foundation, and makes Apollos a waterer only, and a builder upon the
foundation, Paul plants, says he, Apollo waters, but God gives the increase,
1 Cor. 2.6.

Moreover, Acts 8. we see a manifest distinction, in Philip the Evangelist, who
converted the Samaritans, and baptized them, but Peter and John behoved to be
sent out of Jerusalem, to lay on hands and confer the Holy Ghost; but my
opponent may say, that Philip was a Deacon, and one of the seven mentioned,
Acts 6. I answer, we read of Philip the Apostle, and of Philip the Deacon, and
why not a third Philip an Evangelist? read Acts 21.8. he that was Deacon was
there after advanced to be an Evangelist. Always we gain thus much, that
Deacons must preach and administer the Sacrament of Baptism, and therefore
they are not Laymen.

That Deacons are not Laymen, but Preachers, and a third order of Church
Governors, it is evident, Acts 6. for as soon as there was any need of men of
that office (that was, when the number of the Disciples was multiplied) they
were chosen and elected by the Apostles, yea, they were elected too before the
Apostles went out of Jerusalem, and separated themselves to preach the Gospel
to all Nations; for they behoved to be helpers of the Apostles, and to assist
them in the work of Ministry, to have a care of the poor under them, and to
baptize new converts at their command; that so the Apostles might give
themselves to prayer, and the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6.4. The truth of
this may be seen, Acts 10.48. where the Apostle Peter gives commandment (no
question to the Deacons) to baptize Cornelius, and those who were with him; so
we may see, 1 Cor. 1. that the Apostle Paul attributes the care of Baptism to
others then the Apostles, where he says, that he was not sent to Baptize, it
being chiefly the charge of the Deacons, but to preach the Gospel; not that he
might not baptize, for we see the contrary in the words, but because the
Apostles gave themselves chiefly to Prayer and the Ministry of the Word, and
committed the care of Baptism to the Deacons, and the administration of the
Sacrament of the Supper to the Evangelists, called hereafter Elders, as may be
gathered out of 1 Cor. 10.11.

We see also Col. 1.1. a manifest distinction between Bishops and Deacons; for
the Apostle writes to them as their chief Bishop and Overseer, for as yet the
Apostle reserved the chief care of that Church to himself, although some think,
that Epaphroditus was chief Bishop of that place; howsoever, we see two Orders
here of Churchmen, and I hope none will deny but the Apostle was in order and
degree above them; we see them also made mention of in the Epistles of Paul to
Timothy, and Titus, over whom Timothy and Titus are placed as their chief
Governors, so that it is more then evident that Christ and the Apostles
continued three Orders of Church Governors under the Gospel.

But I know that it will be objected, that there should be but two Orders of
Church Governors now under the Gospel, because Christ himself appointed but
two, Apostles and Evangelists, both of them called at first Disciples, only
distinguished by their number, twelve, and seventie.

Answ. Christ appointed but two indeed, because he supplied the room of the
High Priest himself: neither would he have any more during his own Ministry;
he was chief Governor of the Church himself, and he would have no
Suffragans as long as he lived. Where the King is present himself, he needs not
a Commissioner, nor a Viceroy. Again, had Christ chosen three Orders in his
own time, then there should have been four Orders of Church Governors, all
the while of Christ his Ministry upon earth: First Christ himself (for I hope
no man will refuse Christ for one, and for the chief too) and the other 3
ordained by Christ. Now our blessed M. and Savior, because he would keep
Analogy (so far as I can conceive) with the number and degrees of Church
Governors under the Law, he would choose but two, and leave the third to be
added by the Apostles after his departure; which they did with all diligence,
as we may see, Acts 6.

That our Savior used this analogy in this, I will prove by other
particulars, wherein he observed the like analogy, and first in the number of
the Sacraments; as his Father appointed but two under the Law, Circumcision,
and the Paschall Lamb, so he appointed but two under the Gospel, Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord; the one to succeed in place of Circumcision, the
other in place of the Paschall Lamb. And again, as Circumcision did represent
unto us the guilt of sin, so our Savior would have Baptism to represent to us
remission of sins; And as the Passover represented to the people of Israel
their bodily deliverance from the bondage of Egypt, so our Savior would have
his last Supper to represent to us our spiritual deliverance from the bondage
of sin and Satan.

When our Savior instituted Baptism he devised no new Ceremony, but took
that Ceremony of Washing which the Jews used in their Purification, and
appointed it to represent our spiritual washing from sin. So likewise in the
Institution of the other Sacrament he did not devise any new Ceremony to
represent his Death and Passion, but took the last part of the Paschall Supper,
and appointed it for that us^e. The custom of the Jews was, after the Supper
was ended, and the Paschall Lamb caten, he that was Master of the Feast took
as many pieces of bread as there were people present at the eating of the Lamb
(and there behoved to be between the number of ten, and the number of twenty,
for there might not be fewer then ten, nor more then twenty) and gave every one
a piece, saying these words, This is the bread of affliction, which your
Fathers eat in the wilderness; and thereafter he took the Cup, and gave it to
them, saying, This is the cup of affliction, which your Fathers drank in the
wilderness. Now our Savior Christ reserved the same Ceremony; for the Text
says, that first he took bread, and after that He had given thanks, he brake
it, and gave to every one a portion, and said, This is my body which is broken
for you, Do this in remembrance of me; And in like manner, He took the Cup,
saying, this Cup is the new Testament and Covenant in my blood, drink ye all
hereof, and as often as you eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you show
the Lords death till he come, says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.

Moreover, Christ chose twelve Apostles in Analogy to the twelve Patriarchs,
that like as the whole people of God, under the Law, did proceed out of the
loins of the twelve Patriarchs, so also Gods children, under the Gospel,
should be begotten by the Ministry of the twelve Apostles, and their
Successors: He chose also seventy Disciples, in Analogy to the seventy Elders
of the Jews, whom Moses elected, to govern the people of Israel under himself;
so our Savior would have those seventy Disciples, and their Successors, to be
spiritual Governors of the people of God, under the Gospel. Moreover, Christ
fasted forty days in the wilderness, in reference to Moses, fasting forty days
upon Mount Sinai. Christ entered into his Ministry, in the thirtieth year of
his age, in similitude of the Priests and Levits entering in their several
Functions. So that there is nothing more probable in the Scriptures, then that
as Christ, by way of Analogy, did imitate the Jews in many things, so also
would he have as many degrees of Church Governors under the Gospel, as there
was under the Law, and that he would be chief Governor himself of both
Churches.

But that ye may believe the truth of these things the better, I will let you
see, that the Apostles also followed the example of their Master, in the
imitation of the Jews in many things: As in the use of Lots, conform to the
ancient custom of the Jews, Matthias is chosen to be an Apostle, so also they
continued the use of an holy Kiss at their meetings (yet if they had been as
precise, as many people now adays, they would have abolished that Ceremony,
because Judas betrayed his Master with a Kiss) and gave it in Commandment,
Greet one another with an holy Kiss, says the Apostle Paul: so also, the use
of Lovefeasts proceeded from the Jews, for, as after their Sacrifices, they
feasted one another, so after the celebration of the Lords Supper, they had
their Agapae, and Love Feasts, which the Apostle Paul did not discharge, but
forbad them in public, and licentiates them in their own private families;
Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God,
says he? The day of Celebration of the Sacrament of the Supper, was ever a
Festival day to them, but not a day of fasting, as it is with many now: So
also, the Custom, of laying on of Hands, was borrowed from the Jews, Numb. 8.
in these, and some other forms and Ceremonies, the Apostle did imitate the
Nation of the Jews, but let these serve for an example.

The Primitive Church also followed the example of Christ and his Apostles in
this Analogizing, and in particular, as in the Consecration of Priests, some
pieces of the Sacrifices were put in the Priests hands, Exodus 29.9. Even so,
they put the Bible in the hands of the Minister at his Ordination, this was
done both by the Jewish Church, and the Christian; to teach both, That no man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God: so also, they
erected a Motherchurch, wherever there was a Bishop, even as the Jews had but
one Mother Church, the Temple of Jerusalem, because they had but one High
Priest; and therefore in respect that Bishops succeeded in the room of the High
Priest in the government of the Church, where ever there was a Bishop, there
they built a Mother Church, and all the rest of the Churches of the Diocese
were but pendicles of her, as the Jewish Synagogues were to the Temple of
Jerusalem: yea and these Motherchurches, they built them according to the
similitude of the Temple of Jerusalem; for as the Temple had the Most holy
Place, Holy place, and atrium, called the Court of the Temple, or Sal. porch,
this for the people, the Holy place for the Priests, and the Most holy place
for the Lord of Hosts, to be as it were, the place of his habitation, to dwell
between the wings of the two Cherubims, there to give his Oracle; even so in
the Christian Churches, there was a place appointed for the people, another for
Churchmen, the third as the most holy place, where the Sacrament of the Supper
was celebrated, as the only memorial of his presence, left by himself under
the new Testament, as the Arc of the Covenant was under the Old. So then,
since both the Apostles and the Churches of Christ, in the Primitive Times, did
imitate the Jewish forms by way of Analogy, it seems to me that in so
doing, they followed the example of Christ, who kept an Analogy himself with
the Jewish Church, in many things, but in special in the number and degrees of
Church Governors.

Now I would ask my Author, by what reason he thinks Christ should have
diminished the number of Church Governors? was the number of three Typical,
or was the Church Government Typical? truly neither; the number of three is
mystical indeed, but not Typical, neither was the Government Typical, but as
necessary now under the Gospel, as it was under the Law; for, as Christ did not
govern his Church, immediately by his spirit, under the Law, so no more does he
govern his Church, immediately by his spirit, under the Gospel; but as he
committed the government, to certain Governors, under the Law, so has he
committed it, to certain Governors, under the Gospel. But it may be answered,
that he has not committed it, to so many degrees of Church Governors, now
under the Gospel, as he did under the Law; I persuade my self, that my opponent
shall never be able to prove, that Christ behoved to do this de jure, or show
me a reason, why it behoved to be so: yes, he will say, of necessity the
first degree behoved to be taken away, because the High Priest was a type and
figure of Christ; and all types and figures were abolished by Christ's coming.

Reply, I grant all types and figures were abolished, by Christ's coming; but I
deny that the High Priest was a type and figure of Christ, as he was chief
Governor of the Church: and that for these reasons.

First, because then, all Church Government should have been abrogated by
Christ's coming, for if Aarons Government, was a type and figure of Christ's
Government, then it will follow, that Christ now under the Gospel, should
govern his Church, immediately by himself, without any subordinate Governors;
for if Church Government, under the Law, was typical, and all types abrogate,
it follows necessarily that there should be no Church Government now, but
Christ's only.

Secondly, If Aaron, as he was chief Governor under the Law, was a type and
figure of Christ, then it will follow, that Christ was not Supreme Governor
of his Church under the Law: for Types are of things to come, and neither of
things present, nor bypast.

Thirdly, the High Priest, as he was chief Governor, he could not be a type
and figure of Christ, because if there had been but two ranks of Church
Governors, one of them behoved to be chief, and so still there should have
been a chief Governor.

And lastly, the order that was among Church Governors was not Ceremonial but
Moral, and as necessary for the Government of the Christian Church, as the
Jewish; for God is the God of Order now, I am sure, as well as he was then: now
nothing that was Moral, was typical, and therefore Aaron was not a type and
figure of Christ, as he was chief Governor of the Jews.

Now I will show you, in what respect he was a type and figure of Christ.
First, as the High Priest was one man, he did typifie Christ as the one High
Priest of our profession, and therefore Christ would not commit the chief
Government of the Church to one any more, but to many in one and the same rank
and order. Next, the High Priest his offering of one Sacrifice, once in the
year within the Veil, was a Type of that only one propitiatory Sacrifice once
offered up for the sins of the quick and the dead, by our Savior Christ:
Thirdly, the High Priest his once in the year only entering within the Veil,
was a type of our Savior his once entering into Heaven, to make intercession
for us: For these respects then, AARON was a type and figure of Christ, but no
ways in relation to his Government, for the Reasons before alleged.

I have another Reason yet that moves me to think that there can be no fewer
then three Ranks of Church Governors now under the Gospel: and it is this.
The number of Three is mystical, as is evident by many examples, both in
Scripture, things above Nature, Natural things, and Spiritual things. In
Supernatural things we see the truth of this assertion, in the Divine
Essence, which subsists in the number of three Persons, which is the mystery
of all mysteries: in the Divine Essence also, there are three Communicable
properties, Goodness, Power, and Wisdom, to these three all the rest may be
referred, as Life, Love, Justice, etc. three incommunicable properties,
Simplicity, Eternity, Ubiquitie, of These no creature is capable. According
to this similitude, the faculties of the Soul were formed by God himself; for
the Soul has three chief faculties, Judgment, Memory, and Will, yea, the
renewed mind consists of three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, which are the three dimensions of every Christian soul: the bodily
Substences of all creatures are composed of Three, Longitude, Latitude, and
Profunditie; without the which the Creatures can have no Subsistence: There are
also three degrees of Life, Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational, and all these
in analogy to the three Persons of the Godhead; it were easy to show you
diverse resemblances between them, if it were necessary, and to the purpose. It
was more then the light of Nature that taught Aristotle to esteem the number
of three to be the perfectest number of all numbers, yea to be all in all; Qui
dicit tria (says he) dicit omnia, and qui dicit ter, dicit omnifariam; He
that says three, says all, and he that says thrice, says always.

But to come to the Scriptures: says not John (1 John 5.7, 8) that there are
three things that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one: and that there are three things that bear
witness on earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood; and these three agree
in one. Christ loved three Disciples above all the rest, with whom he conversed
most familiarly, Peter James, and John, to them he showed himself in his
glory, at the Transfiguration, and also in his greatest agony and humiliation
in the Garden of Gethsemanie. Our Savior fulfilled his Ministry, in the space
of three years; he lay three days in the Grave, three times appearred to the
eleven, after his Resurrection; and many mo then these are to be found in the
New Testament. In the Old Testament, you shall find many numbers of three,
wherein some mystery may be found; we read of three only that went to Heaven
bodily, Enoch, Elias, and Christ: to teach us that salvation both in body and
soul is obtained under all the three kinds of Church Government; for God has
governed his Church three several ways since the Creation, one way before the
Law, another way under the Law, and a third way under the Gospel. The Worship
of God has been also of three several forms, according to the several ages
of the World; Three men saved in the flood of Noah, of whom the World has been
replenished the second time, Sem, Ham, and Japhet; Three great Patriarchs, out
of whose loins the Church of God did spring; Three great Sabbaths, the seven
days Sabbath, the seven years Sabbath, and the year of Jubilee; Three great
Feasts, the Feast of Tabernacles, Easter, and Pentecost; Three ranks of Church
Governors, the high Priest, inferior Priests, and Levits, and a number more;
so that I say, if there be any number mystical, it is the number of Three, we
have not so great reason to call Seven Mystical, as for Nine, it is only
thought Mystical, because it contains thrice three.

But here my opponents will reply, That they keep this analogy of three, for
they also maintain three Degrees of Churchmen, preaching Elders, Lay Elders,
and Deacons, who are all Governors of the Church, and preaching Elders the
chief Governors. I answer, if preaching Elders be the chief Governors, then
according to the Replyers opinion (who maintains that the High Priest was a
Type and figure of Christ, as he was chief Governor of the Church) they must
be cashiered; for we cannot have chief Governors now under the Gospel,
according to my opposites tenet, and so it will follow, we must have no public
Ministry at all, nor no public Government neither, but private in every man
his own Family, or rather every man must do according as he is moved by the
spirit. I answer further that those three Orders are neither Christ's, nor his
Apostles Ordinance, for any evidence that I can see in Scripture, no not so
much as any show, or appearance. As for Lay Elders, I can not find them once
named in all the Scripture, although the Apostle Paul does particularly make
mention of all Church Governors, under the Apostolical Order, in his Epistles
to Timothy and Titus he particularly declares what preaching Elders and Deacons
must be, how they must be qualified before they enter into holy Orders, but
never one word of Lay Elders: Deacons indeed he nominates, but not Lay Deacons,
but such as must preach the Gospel, and baptize, at their Superiors direction,
and therefore the Apostle Paul requires that Deacons keep the mystery of
Faith, in a pure conscience, which cannot be required of Lay men; such a
measure of knowledge as is understood by the mystery of Faith, is not requisite
in these, to whom is only committed the oversight of the poor.

More yet, Lay Elders cannot answer to the Priests, because the Priests
sacrificed as well as the High Priest; and there was no difference between
them, in regard of their office of sacrificing, except that the High Priest was
only appointed by God, to offer sacrifice within the Veil once in the year,
for his own sins, and the sins of the people; but the High Priest, and the
inferior Priests, agreed in these particulars, They both burnt Incense and
offered Sacrifice, 1 Chronicles. 6.49. They both sounded the Trumpets, Numbers 10,
and they both slew the Sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 29.22. They both instructed the
people, Malachie 2.5. They both judged of Leprosy, Leviticus 13.2. So that if
Lay Elders will needs succeed in place of inferior Priests, and be the second
degree of Church Governors, they must preach and administer the Sacraments,
and so turn Pastors and Doctors, and then the Preaching Elders must be Bishops,
for they must be a degree above them.

Now follows to show you the truth of the last branch of the Assumption, That
three Ranks of Church Governors have governed the Church of God, since the
days of Christ and his Apostles, but because it would take up much time and
paper, and might be wearisome to the Reader, I refer him to the Writings of
many learned Divines, who have proved that point to the full. I dare say, we
may as well deny all the humane Histories that ever were written, as deny the
clear evidence of so many Histories, whereby Episcopal Government is
defended, and accounted by all the Ancients, except Aerius (who is enrolled
among Heretics, by Augustine and Epiphanius, for his pains) for the first
order of Church Government, having always two subordinate to it, inferior
Bishops and Deacons.

But here I know it will be said, that I confound Apostles and the chief
Bishops together, and Evangelists and Inferior Bishops; whereas Apostles and
Evangelists were extraordinary callings, and ceased with themselves.

Ans. Truly this mistake is the cause of all our dissenting one from another in
this point; for if we did hold the callings of Apostles and Evangelists, to be
appointed by Christ, to continue in the Christian Church, for the Government
thereof, until the end of the World, as they are indeed, this division that is
amongst us had never been: And therefore I will endeavor by Gods grace, to
prove both by Reason and Scripture, that these callings are ordinary, and
cannot without high sacrilege be cast out of Gods Church. I will show you then
in what respects their calling was ordinary, and perpetually necessary for the
Government of the Church, and for what respects it is called extraordinary. It
is ordinary and perpetually necessary, in regard of that power which Christ
conferred upon them, to preach the Word and Administer the Sacraments, and also
in regard of the power of Absolution and Excommunication, Ordination, and
Jurisdiction spiritual, which our Savior also granted unto them, as all men
confess: and in regard of all those parts of the Episcopal Function to be
continued until the second coming of our Savior, and I think no man should
deny this neither. It is called extraordinary for these respects following;
First, because they were extraordinary persons, not being of the Tribe of
Levi, who had only ordinary power in those days, to be instruments of Gods
public Worship, and to serve at the Altar. Next because their gifts were
extraordinary: for Christ, who was anointed with the oil of gladness above
his fellows, and had the spirit in super-abundance, he gave his Apostles an
abundant measure of the spirit; but to after-ages he imparted only a certain
Sufficiency, Grace for Grace. Thirdly, the extent of their charge was
extraordinary, they were tied to no settled Residence, but the whole World was
their Diocese: Go ye unto all the World, says our Savior. Fourthly, The
manner of their calling was extraordinary, without Education, Trial, or
Ordination. Fifthly, they had the infallibility of the Spirit, in matters of
Faith they could not err. And lastly, their calling was extraordinary, quo ad
ante, ^ut not, quo ad post, even in respect of the ordinary parts of the
Ministerial Function; quo ad ante, because the calling of Churchmen in those
days, was to offer up Sacrifices unto God, of Bullocks, Rams and Lambs, and
other Creatures, and to burn incense into him; but so was not the calling of
Apostles; Their calling was to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments,
open the Gates of Heaven to the Penitent, and shut them upon the impenitent,
etc. and so I may say, Their Calling in Analogy to the Priests calling under
the Law, is to offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer, Praise, and Thanksgiving to
God, and to teach every man to present their bodies in a living, holy, and
acceptable Sacrifice. Quo ad post, it was not extraordinary, because Christ
established that government for the Christian Church in all Ages to come, or
else none at all, for other we see not, but this is manifest: yea, our Savior
continued the Apostolical and Episcopal calling in regard of the substance of
it, in the full latitude of Apostolical Authority; and all this I will prove
after this manner: and first,

If the callings of the High Priest, Priests, and Levits, was not extraordinary
quo ad post, in the days of Moses: then the callings of Apostles, Evangelists,
and Deacons, was not extraordinary quo ad post, in the days of Christ.

But the first is true, and therefore the second.

The reason of the connection of the Proposition is this, because those callings
of Priests and Levits were newly established in the House of God, and the
Church was not so governed before, and so although they were extraordinary, quo
ad ante, in regard of the time bypast, yet not in regard of the time to come;
so I think that these callings established by Christ, for the Government of
the Church under the Gospel, although they were extraordinary in regard of the
time past, yet not in regard of the time to come, more then the callings of the
Priests and Levits under the Law. For why shall these Governors instituted by
Christ in the insancie of the Church, cease to be of that Dignity and
Authority in after ages, that they were of in the first Constitution, more
then those Governors which his Father appointed to rule the Church of the Jews
at the first promulgation of the Law? I would feign have my opposite to show
me a reason for the one more then the other, Truly those who took offense at
the Superiority of Church Governors under the Law, might have alleged, that
after the days of Moses and Aaron, Churchmen were all to be of equal
Authority, because their calling was extraordinary in regard of the time past.
But I am confident, that as God the Father appointed the one government to
remain until his sons coming in the flesh, so God the Son appointed the
other to continue until his second coming to judgment, and both to remain in
that same case, for Dignity and Authority, wherein they were first
established.

My second Argument is this.

If the callings of the Apostles, etc. cannot be called extraordinary, quo ad
post, neither in regard of their extraordinary gifts, nor extraordinary manner
of calling, nor the extent of their charge, nor their infallibility of Spirit,
then it is not extraordinary at all, in regard of the time to come.

But for none of these foresaid respects, can their calling be called
extraordinary, in regard of the time to come.

And therefore it was not extraordinary, in regard of the time to come.

I prove the Assumption, and first that their calling cannot be called
extraordinary, in regard of their extraordinary gifts, the gift of Prophecy,
and the gift of Miracles, etc. for then, if it shall please God to bestow
extraordinary gifts upon ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, their calling should
cease any longer to be ordinary, which is absurd to say; for it is evident in
Scripture, That ordinary Ministers both of the Law and the Gospel have had
extraordinary gifts: as Samuel who was a Priest, which was an ordinary calling
(for although Samuel was not of the Tribe of Levi, yet he was a Nazarite, who
might by Gods own appointment serve at the Altar) and yet he had extraordinary
gifts, 1 Samuel 1.11. Zachary was a Priest, and yet he had the gift of Prophecy,
John 11.50, 51. so the Apostle James says, That Elders in his time had the
gift of Healing, Iam. 5.14, 15. and yet no man will say that the calling of an
Elder was extraordinary other then are now: so the calling of a King is an
ordinary calling, and yet David King of Israel was a Prophet as well as a King,
and in a word, we read in ancient Histories, That many Churchmen have had
extraordinary gifts, and yet their callings were ordinary, and so I conclude,
that extraordinary gifts do not make an extraordinary calling.

Next the extent of their charge does not make their calling extraordinary,
because necessity requires that it should be so, until the time that the
Gospel should be propagated to the ends of the earth, so that if there be any
Nation yet unconverted (as without doubt, there are too many) the Governors of
the Church are bound so far as they are able to labor their conversion to the
faith of Jesus Christ; for I think no man will say, but that, that charge
given to the Apostles (go teach all Nations, etc.) remayns still in force.

Thirdly, as for the manner of their calling, being without Education, Trial,
and Ordination, it makes it extraordinary, in regard of the time past, but not
in regard of the time to come; for the High Priest and Priests under the Law,
the manner of their calling was extraordinary, in regard of the time past, and
without both Trial and Education, and yet notwithstanding their calling was
Ordinary in regard of the time to come, and to be continued in the Church
until Christ his coming in the flesh.

And lastly, infallibility of Spirit, which the Apostles had, makes not their
calling extraordinary, for they behoved to be infallibly guided, because they
were to lay the foundation whereupon others were to Build, they were to Plant,
others only to Water that which they had planted, they were to establish the
Faith, which all ages to come are bound to profess, and so it was most
necessary, that they should be infallibly guided by the Spirit. Further Christ's
promise is, not only to be with his Apostles, but with them and their
Successors until the end of the World, And lo, I am with you, says he,
until, etc.

Now I will prove by evidence of Scripture, That the calling of the Apostles
was an ordinary calling, and to be continued until the second coming of our
Savior, with the same Power and Authority both for Ordination and
Jurisdiction which they had themselves.

My first testimony is in Mat. 28.19. out of which I form this argument.

They that were commanded to teach and baptize all Nations until the end of
the World, their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of the
World.

But the Apostles were commanded to teach and baptize all Nations, until the
end of the World.

And therefore their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of
the World.

The reason of the Proposition is this, because the Apostles were not other
ways able to keep this Commandment, but in their Successors in the
Generations to come: if it had pleased God by his Omnipotent Power to preserve
them alive, and keep them in health of body, and strength of Mind, for that
end, I think none would have been more able then they, but it pleased him not
to do so, and therefore it is most evident, that this Commandment must be
kept in their Successors, and consequently, That the calling of the Apostles
was ordinary, in regard of the time to come.

My second Testimony is in Mark 16.15. The Argument is this.

They who were commanded by Christ to preach the Gospel to every creature, that
is to all men without exception, until the end of the World, their calling was
ordinary, and to continue until the end of the World.

But the Apostles were commanded by Christ to preach the Gospel to all men
without exception, until the end of the World.

And therefore their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of
the World.

This Argument is of that same force with the former, for if they to whom our
Savior gives this charge, were to preach the Gospel to all and every man
without exception, then the Apostles being not able to do it themselves, were
bound to deliver that commandment to faithful men, and they again to others,
and so from age to age to be traduced, as long as there is men upon earth, to
whom the Gospel must be preached; and so still, The calling of the Apostles
must be ordinary, and to be continued until the end of the World.

The third Testimony is in Matthew 18.18. and John 20.23. The Argument is this.

They to whom our Savior Christ gave the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, their
calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of the World.

But our Savior Christ gave to his Apostles the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And therefore their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of
the World.

This has ever been constantly maintained, That our Savior Christ gave the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to the Apostles and their Successors, to this
end, that as long as there were sinners upon earth, the gates of Heaven might
be opened to the Penitent, and shut upon the impenitent * so as long as there
is a Sinner upon earth to repent, or a penitent Sinner to be pardoned, as long
must there be men endued with Apostolical power, to preach Repentance to all
Sinners, and pronounce Remission of Sins to all Penitent souls.

The fourth Testimony is in Matthew. 28.20. and John 14.16. the Argument I frame
thus.

They with whom Christ promised to be always, until the end of the World,
Their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of the World.

But Christ promised to be with his Apostles always, until the end of the
World.

And therefore their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of
the World.

Of necessity then, Christ his promise here, is not only made to his Apostles,
because they were not to continue until the end of the world, but to their
Successors in all the Ages and Generations to come, for John says, 14.16. That
the Comforter would abide with them for ever, that is, to the end of the world;
and so with their successors as well as themselves.

The fifth Testimony is in Matthew. 5.14. the Argument is this.

They whom Christ appointed only to be the light of the World, their calling
was ordinary, and to continue until the end of the World.

But Christ appointed his Apostles to be the light of the World.

And therefore their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of
the World.

Although the Apostles themselves may in some respect be called, the light of
the World, because by their Ministry chiefly the World was first enlightened
with the light of the Gospel, yet in respect that this light might be in danger
to go out, there behoved others to succeed the Apostles in the ages to come, to
keep in this light, and still to hold it out as a Lantern, in the Ministry
of the Word, and the exercise of the other parts of that Spiritual and
Heavenly Function, that all men might see, how to walk in that narrow way that
leads to life eternal: The fire in the Temple of Jerusalem, which the Priests
were daily to attend, that it went not out, was a Type and figure of this
spiritual and heavenly fire of Grace, which must be preserved by the Ministry
and continual attendance of the Apostles and their Successors.

The sixth Testimony is in Matthew. 10.40. and Luke 10.16. The argument is this.

Whomsoever all men are bound to hear and receive in Christ's stead, their
calling was ordinary, and to be continued until the end of the World.

But to hear and receive the Apostles in Christ's stead, all men are bound.

And therefore the calling of the Apostles was ordinary, and to continue until
the end of the World.

By all men here we must not understand only all those men that lived in the
Apostles times, but all men in all Ages following, and not genera singulorum
neither, but singula generum; for as the Apostles were commanded to preach the
Gospel to all and every man without exception, so all and every man is bound
to hear them and receive them; now none could bear the Apostles but those
that lived in their days, and therefore necessarily our Savior did understand
the Apostles and their Successors in all Ages and Generations following; for
they that hear not the Successors of the Apostles, hear not Christ, and they
that receive not them, neither do they receive Christ, and they that hear
them, and receive them, receive Christ.

The seventh testimony is in Matthew. 24.42. and Mark 13.35. The Argument is
this.

They who are commanded by Watching and Prayer to attend the second coming of
our Savior, their calling was ordinary, and to continue until the end of the
World.

But the Apostles were commanded by Watching and Prayer to attend the second
coming of our Savior.

And therefore the Apostles calling was ordinary, and to continue until the
end of the World.

No man will say that our Savior did mean here, that the Apostles in their
proper persons behoved to attend his second coming, for Christ knew well
enough, that the Apostles were not to live until that time, but his meaning
is, that they and their Successors in all Ages and Generations to come, and in
general all men, in all Ages following, should thus attend their Masters
coming; and therefore Christ says, Mark 13.37. What I say unto you I say
unto all men (watch:) so that our Savior speaks principally to the chief
Governors of the Church, who should still be going about their Masters
business, that when he comes he may find them well employed: so that I may
unanswerably conclude by the clear evidence of all these former Texts, and many
more then these, registered in the Book of God, That the calling of the Apostles
was ordinary, and to be continued until the end of the world.

Now for further strengthening of this Doctrine, I will use two Arguments,
which naturally flow from the former Doctrine.

By the first, I prove, That these Commandments set down in these texts of
Scripture, are not only given to the apostles.

By the second, I prove affirmatively, That these directions are given to the
apostles and their Successors in all the following Generations.

The first Argument is this.

That which the Apostles were not able to do by themselves alone, Christ would
not command them to do it by themselves alone.

But the apostles were not able to keep these Commandments by themselves alone.

And therefore Christ would not command them to keep them by themselves alone.

I prove the Assumption, because the Apostles could not live unto the end of
the World, and so it was impossible to them to keep these Commandments by
themselves: They might keep them during their own life, but no longer, all that
they were able to do was, to commit them to other faithful men, to be
propagated unto the end of the World, and so my conclusion is good, That these
Commandments were not only given to the Apostles.

The second Argument is affirmative, and proves, That these Commandments were
given to the apostles and their Successors in all ages and Generations to come.

That which Christ knew was only possible to the Apostles and their Successors,
Christ gave it in Commandment to the Apostles and their Successors.

But Christ knew, that it was only possible to the Apostles and their
Successors to keep these Commandments.

And therefore Christ gave these Commandments to the Apostles and their
successors.

This argument is a plain demonstration a causa ad effectum, the strength
whereof none that will oppose me shall ever be able to evade: for the cause why
these Commandments are not only given to the Apostles, but to them and their
Successors, is, because Christ knew that only they and their Successors were
able to keep them.

Now to end this point, I will here affirm, That I am so confident of the
strength of these Reasons, that no Divine is able to answer, or rebate the
force of them: their only Refugium must be this, That inferior Bishops or
Presbyters are the Apostles Successors, by which we obtain at first, That the
calling of the Apostles is an ordinary calling, and not extraordinary, which
they before maintained; but I shall prove by Gods grace, That inferior Bishops
cannot be the Apostles Successors; first by Scripture, and next by
demonstrative Reasons. Beside many other places of Scripture, read but Acts
15.2.4.6.22.23. where ye shall find Apostles and Elders clearly
distinguished, I entreat you to see the places, and I doubt not but ye shall
receive satisfaction: and farther I remember not that ever I heard any Divine
affirm, Elders and inferior Bishops to be in rank and degree with the
Apostles, but that all Divines, ancient and modern accounted Elders to be
inferior in degree to the Apostles: but I will prove by three unanswerable
Reasons, That Presbyters did not succeed the Apostles.

My first Reason, I will form thus.

They that were inferior in degree to the apostles, were not the apostles
successors in that same order and degree.

But Presbyters were inferior in degree to the apostles.

And therefore Presbyters were not the apostles successors in that same order
and degree.

The Proposition I take for granted, for I hope no man will deny it, I prove
the assumption first by the consent of all the divines that ever were in this
World, next by the clear evidence of Scripture, throughout all the book of God,
where the Apostles, who were chief Bishops and Overseers both of the Pastors
and the people are clearly distinguished from inferior Bishops, who only have
the oversight of the people, as is evident by the Apostle Paul his directions
to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.

My second Reason I will form thus.

If Elders be the Apostles Successors, then that same power and authority
necessary for the government of the Church, is committed to them by the
Apostles, as amply as they themselves had it.

But that same power and authority necessary for the government of the Church,
is not committed unto Elders, as amply as the Apostles themselves had it.

And therefore Elders are not the Successors of the Apostles.

If any man deny the Proposition, I will ask him, how it can be possible that
Elders can be the Apostles Successors, unless they succeed them in that same
Power and Authority? Truly it is beyond my capacity to conceive and
understand it; I know they cannot succeed them in those things that are
extraordinary, but in their ordinary power and authority, and that which is
perpetually necessary for the Government of the Church of Christ under the
Gospel, they must succeed them, and they be their successors.

I prove the Assumption. Any one of the Apostles might ordain Elders, so Paul
ordained twelve Elders at one time at Ephesus, Acts 19. any one might ordain
Bishops, so Paul ordained Timothy and Titus Bishops of Ephesus and Creet, for
Timothy it is clear, 2 Timothy 1.6. any one of the Apostles might command Elders
and Deacons to preach the Gospel any where, as is evident throughout all Paul's
Epistles, and in the Acts of the Apostles, and which I think no Divine will
deny; any one of them might prescribe Rules and Laws to inferior Elders, so
did the Apostle Paul to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20. to Archippus, Col.
4.17. who by the declaration of all the Ancients was Bishop, and so superior
to an Elder; any one of Apostles might Command, Rebuke, Censure, and correct
Elders, at their own pleasure, as is most evident in Scriptures, and in
particular in Saint Paul his Epistles, now those things no Elder can do by
himself, and therefore, That some ordinary and necessary power which the
Apostles had, is not committed to inferior Bishops, but to Superior.

Here it may be objected, That by this Reason, Bishops Superior cannot be the
Apostles Successors, because they do not exercise their power and authority
without the concurrence of the inferior Bishops, they join with them in the
Ordination of Ministers, so they should also in the exercise of Jurisdiction.

Answer. There is no warrant for this in the Scripture; it is true, we read
the Apostles took the concurrence of Ministers in decision of doubts and
controversies, and also in Ordination, so Paul says that Timothy was ordained
by the Presbytery, but there was no direction from Christ for so doing, it
pleased the Apostles to take their concurrence, which they needed not to have
done, and therefore they did sometimes exercise their Episcopal power by
themselves alone, as we may see in the Acts of the Apostles, and 2 Timothy 1.6.
and many other places of Scripture, and did very seldom crave the concurrence
of Presbyters; so that Bishops do not exercise their power without the
concurrence of Presbyters, it is not because they are commanded so to do by
Christ and his Apostles, but their own voluntary yielding of their right, and
submitting of themselves to their own Ecclesiastic Laws, and Canons of ancient
Councels; it is as clear as the Sun, That an Elder has no power of Ordination
or Jurisdiction granted to him in the Scriptures, what he has it is but by
humane Ordination, and he has not in any ways Supreme Power granted him by
any ancient Council; This is most certain, That a Bishops Ordination is valid
and good without a Presbyter, and has warrant from the example of the
Apostles; but a Presbyter to ordain without the command of a Bishop, is not
warranted by any example in Scripture, nor the Canon of any ancient Council:
and so my conclusion stands good, That inferior Bishops are not the Successors
of the Apostles.

My third Reason is this.

They who were inferior to those in dignity and degree, who were inferior to
the apostles in place and estimation, were not the apostles Successors in all
the parts of the Ministerial Function.

But Presbyters were inferior in dignity and degree to those who were
inferior to the apostles in place and estimation.

And therefore Presbyters were not Successors to the Apostles in all the parts
of the Ministerial Function.

The Proposition I know will be granted; I prove the assumption, That
Presbyters were inferior in dignity and degree to those who were inferior to
the Apostles in place and estimation. Timothy and Titus were inferior to the
Apostles in place and estimation, so were all the Evangelists, as all Divines
acknowledge, and yet those were Superior in dignity and degree even in the
judgment of those who oppose the doctrine delivered in this Treatise. That
Timothy and Titus were superior to Presbyters, I shall prove it by and by: but
I will use one Argument yet for the ordinary callings of Apostles and
Evangelists, and this it is briefly.

Either the callings of the Apostles and Evangelists were ordinary callings, or
else we have no ordinary Ministers of the Gospel by Christ's institution.

But this were absurd to say, that we had not ordinary Ministers of the Gospel
by Christ's institution.

And therefore it is as absurd to say, that the callings of Apostles and
Evangelists are not ordinary callings.

I desire all those who oppose this doctrine to loose this knot. Now it
remains to prove that the Bishops succeeded in place of the Apostles, and in
place of Evangelists inferior Presbyters, and I will begin with this Argument.

Either Bishops are the Successors of the Apostles, or the Apostles have no
Successors at all.

But that the Apostles have no Successors at all, it is false, as I have in my
judgment unanswerably proved.

And therefore Bishops are their Successors, for I have proved also that
Presbyters cannot be their Successors.

My next argument is this.

Timothy and Titus were Bishopt.

Timothy and Titus succeeded unto the Apostles.

And therefore Bishops succeeded to the Apostles.

I prove the proposition by this argument, that is, That Timothy and Titus were
Bishops.

They whose calling was ordinary, and had the power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction over Presbyters, were Bishops.

But Timothy and Titus their calling was ordinary, and had the power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction over Presbyters.

And therefore Timothy and Titus were Bishops.

The proposition will be granted, I prove the assumption, and first that
Timothy and Titus Calling was ordinary.

They who had the only Ordinary parts of the Ministerial Function, their
Calling was ordinary.

But Timothy and Titus had the only ordinary parts of the Ministerial Function.

And therefore the Calling of Timothy and Titus was ordinary.

The proposition will be granted, I prove the assumption.

They who had only power to preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments,
etc. had only the ordinary parts of the Ministerial Function.

But Timothy and Titus had only power to preach the Word, and administer the
Sacraments, etc.

And therefore Timothy and Titus had the only ordinary parts of the
Ministerial Function.

I prove the assumption thus; Tim. and Tit. had neither the gift of Miracles,
nor the gift of Prophecy, nor the gift of Tongues, nor the gift of Healing,
nor any extraordinary gift at all for any thing we read; neither were they
infallibly guided by the Spirit; for if they had had the infallible assistance
of the Spirit, the Apostle Paul would not have bin so earnest to exhort them to
do their duty in their calling; Timothy is exhorted to war a good warfare,
holding faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. and to be an example of
Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. and to give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine and Meditation, and not to neglect the gift that was given him by
Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15. Titus had also the like exhortations, so that
it is most certain, neither of them had the spirit of infallibility, nor no
extraordinary gift of the Spirit, but the only ordinary parts of the
Ministerial Function, and consequently their calling was ordinary.

Next I prove their calling was ordinary by this argument.

They whose calling was by Education, Trial, and Ordination, their calling was
ordinary.

But Timothy and Titus their calling was by Education, Trial, and Ordination.

And therefore their calling was ordinary.

The Proposition needs no probation, for they who are called to be Preachers of
the Gospel, by ordinary means, without all question their calling was
ordinary: for Tim. it is clear, for he had his education under his Grandmother
Lois, and his Mother Eunice, he was tried by the Apostle, and he had the
approbation and commendation of the Brethren who were at Listra and Iconium,
before he would receive him in his company, thereafter he had his breeding,
for a greater progress in knowledge, under the Apostle Paul, before he was made
a Presbyter, much more before he was made a Bishop, for this cause Paul says
to him, Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in
Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus; as for his ordination, it is without
all question most clear and evident; all this also may be said of Titus, and
therefore I conclude both their callings to be ordinary, Titus his calling as
well as Timothies.

Thirdly I prove their calling to be ordinary by this Argument.

That calling which was to continue unto the end of the World was an ordinary
calling.

But Timothy and Titus calling was to continue unto the end of the World,

And therefore Timothy and Titus calling was an ordinary Calling.

I prove the Assumption.

That which was to be propagated until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ
in the Persons of Tim. and Tit. successors, was to continue unto the end of the
World.

But Timothy and Titus calling was to be propagated in the persons of Tim. and
Titus successors until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore Timothy and Titus calling was to continue until the end of the
World.

The Proposition will be granted, I prove the assumption.

That which must be kept until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, must be
propagated by Timothy and Titus successors until his appearing.

But the calling of Tim. and Tit. (in all the particular parts of it) must be
kept until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore their calling was to be propagated in the persons of their
successors until his appearing.

The Proposition is evident, because the parts of the Ministerial function
cannot be otherwise kept but by propagation; and for this cause, the Apostle
commands Timothy to propagate 2 Timothy 2.2. The things that thou have heard of
me (says he) before many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men,
who shall be able to teach others.

The Assumption is also manifest by that strict charge which he gives unto
Timothy in the latter end of the first Epistle cap. 6.13.14. I charge thee
(says he) in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ
Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep
this Commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now this Commandment that he would have Timothy to keep does comprehend all
the particulars contained in his Epistle, both concerning Doctrine and
Government, and in particular the whole parts of the Episcopal function, which
is most obvious to any reader, and so still my conclusion stands good, That the
calling of Timothy and Titus is to be propagated in the persons of their
successors until the second coming of our Savior, and consequently their
calling was an ordinary calling.

It rests to prove the second part of the assumption of the principal
argument, that Tim. and Titus had the power of ordination and jurisdiction over
presbyters; and first I will use this argument ad hominem, for all the opposers
of Episcopacie maintain That Tim. was an Evangelist, and that his power was
Apostolical, and so in order and degree above Presbyters; and thus upon these
grounds I reason after this manner.

They whose function was Apostolical had the power of ordination and
jurisdiction over Presbyters.

But Tim. and Titus function was Apostolical.

And therefore they had the power of ordination and jurisdiction over
Presbyters.

Next I will prove Timothy and Titus to have the power of ordination of
Presbyters; This is the Argument.

They who are commanded to ordain Elders have the power of ordination.

Timothy and Titus are commanded to Ordain Elders.

And therefore Tim. and Tit. had the power of Ordination.

The Proposition cannot in reason be denied, for Paul would never have
commanded them to do that which they had not power to do, yea the same power
of ordination is a part of that Commandment which he is bidden commit to
faithful men, to be kept and propagated until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Assumption is manifest 1. Tim. 5.22. and Tit. 1.5.

That they had the power of jurisdiction is proved thus.

They who are commanded to rebuke, censure, and correct, with all authority,
and not suffer themselves to be despised, to stay foolish questions and vain
bablings, to excommunicate the obstinate, to try and prove those who desire the
office of a Bishop, and either to admit or reject them according to their
weakness or ability, have the power of jurisdiction spiritual.

But Timothy and Titus are commanded to do all these things 1 Timothy 4.11, 12.
1 Timothy 3.9.17.19.20. 1 Timothy 6.17. Tit. 1.11.13. and Tit. 3.10.

And therefore Timothy and Titus have the power of jurisdiction spiritual.

The strength of this Argument I refer to the consideration of the learned for
I hope no wise man will say, that these privileges can be divided from the
power of jurisdiction. Now I will use one Argument yet, to prove that Timothy
and Titus had the power of ordination and jurisdiction jointly.

If those Bishops of whom the Apostle Paul speaks in his Epistles to Timothy
and Titus received the power of ordination and jurisdiction, by those
instructions and precepts which the Apostle Paul sets down in those Epistles,
then Timothy and Titus much more received the power of ordination and
jurisdiction by those instructions of the Apostle Paul set down in those
Epistles. But the first is true, and therefore the second is true also.

The connection of the proposition is valid enough, for if inferior Bishops
(whom the Apostle calls also Elders in that place) received the power of
ordination and jurisdiction (as is asserted by all the opposers of Episcopacie)
by the Apostles injunctions in those Epistles, much more have superior Bishops
(as Timothy and Titus were) this twofold power by those injunctions: this is an
argument strong enough ad hominem, although I confess, That properly Timothy
and Titus have not this twofold power here by the Apostle Paul, but only are
commanded to put that power in execution which the Apostle Paul before had
conferred upon them at their ordination, which also they are commanded to
propagate and transmit unto others, for the preservation of the calling, and
propagation of the Gospel of Christ until his second coming to judgment.

Now for the better clearing of this Doctrine, I will prove, That Presbyters or
inferior Bishops have no ways the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction. I
desire any Opponent to show me the place where it is recorded in the
Scripture: in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus they find it not; Tim. and Tit.
are commanded to put all the parts of the Apostolical power in execution, but
not those Elders and Deacons of whom the Apostle speaks there, they get no
Commandment to use that power; for it is more then evident, That all the
injunctions set down in those Epistles are given to Timothy and Titus, and all
those who were to succeed them in that same order and degree, yea to them as
they are singular men, and as Superior in Order and Degree to all those
toward whom they are to exercise that power, and the reason is this, because
one man in that same Order and Degree cannot have power over an other in that
same rank and order, one Bishop cannot have power over an other, one Presbyter
cannot have power over another; That man that has power over an other must be
superior unto him in degree, or he can have no authority over him, that is his
own properly, delegate he may have, but that is not his, it is his in whose
name he exercises that power.

But it will be replied, That this power is given to a company of Presbyters,
and not to one in particular. Answer. This power is given here to Timothy and
Titus as singular persons, and therefore I will make the matter manifest by a
formal argument.

That power which is committed to certain particular and singular men in the
Ministry, is not committed to a representative body of Ministers.

But the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction is committed to certain
particular and singular men in the Ministry.

And therefore it is not committed to a representative body of Ministers.

The proposition cannot be denied, for that which is committed to one singular
man in a calling, cannot be said to be committed to the whole company and
trade indefinitely: for example, that power which is committed to one Alderman
in the City, to wit the Master, or Lord Major, is not committed to the whole
council of Aldermen, he has a different and superior power to all the rest.

As to the assumption, That this power was committed to certain singular men,
as to Timothy and Titus, and all those who were to succeed them in the same
rank and order, it is more then evident. Now to note this by the way, since
Presbyters do not succeed to Timothy and Titus, in that same order and degree,
the power of Ordination cannot be committed unto them.

Furthermore, If the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction be committed to
Presbyters, as they are singular men, then every Presbyter has alike power and
authority within his own Charge, every one is Pope in his own Parish, and may
command, rule, and govern as he thinks good: for who can control him? none
of his brethren have any more power over him, then he has over them, for
every one has equal power and authority transinitted unto them, and this is
downright Brownisme.

But it may be replied, That the Presbytery has power over all particular
Ministers.

Answ. Who has given them this power? It is not given them by Christ, nor his
Apostles.

If you reply, it is agreed upon by common consent. I Answer. Then at least,
Presbyteriall Government is not of divine Ordination; But I would ask this
question, what if I should refuse to give my consent to such a government, or
to subject my self to it, how can I be forced to obey their Canons and Laws, by
whose authority? the representative Church (such as the Presbytery is) cannot
compel me, before I subject my self to her authority, the civil Magistrate
cannot do it neither, by the doctrine of all my opposites; and some would say
if any should usurp authority, and compel by violence, it should be the
destroying of our Christian Liberty, and tying us whom Christ has made free,
and in a word the demolishing of that platform of government, which Christ
himself did establish, any defender of Parochial government may reason in
this kind.

But it will be again replied, That this authority is given to a company of
Presbyters, Acts 8.14. and 11.22. and 15.6, 7, 8. to the 30. and 1 Cor. 5.3, 4,
5.

Answer. These things were done in the infancy of the Church, before the
Government was established, and so can be no rule for after ages, some will so
answer.

I answer further; there is not a word there that will confirm Presbyteriall
government, for none of the meetings spoken of in those places consist of
persons having the like and equal authority, but all that was done in them
was done by Apostolical power, by the power of the Apostles they were convened
together, by the Apostles moderation those meetings were governed, by their
authority all things were concluded, they had full and absolute power in their
own hands, although it pleased them to do nothing without the consent of their
Brethren of an inferior Order; ye will find all that I have said true, if ye
will be pleased to see the places.

But most clearly it appears, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. where the Apostle, by his
power and authority, commands the Corinthian Ministers to excommunicate the
incestuous person in an open assembly, or rather to intimate that
excommunication which he had already pronounced, for thus he speaks: For I
verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as
though I were present, concerning him that has done this deed; In the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. I hope this meeting was enjoined by the Apostle upon an extraordinary
occasion, and nothing was done but by his special appointment. Here is nothing
to warrant the authority of Presbyteriall Government, there seems something to
be in the words for Parochial; If there had been Parishes, and Lay Elders in
those days, and truly, if I were not of that judgment, That the Calling of the
Apostles were an ordinary Calling, and to be continued with the same latitude
of power and authority in their Successors until the end of the World, I
might easily be moved to approve of Parochial Government, but never of
Presbyteriall; and truly, if the Callings of the Apostles and Evangelists be
not acknowledged to be instituted by Christ for the perpetual Government of
Gods Church, Parochial Government is that which has greatest show of warrant
in the Scriptures; as for Presbyteriall, it has not so much as any show at all
in the whole book of God.

Now follows, that I clear the doubts, and first I know it will be objected,
That by this doctrine I condemn all the Churches of Christ that are governed
after that manner.

Ans. I condemn not the Churches, but the Government. Some perhaps may reply,
That since I make Episcopal government to be Christ's institution, I charge them
with a very gross error. I answer, Let them see to that, I cannot call evil
good, nor good evil, unless I make my self liable to the curse pronounced;
neither will any thing excuse them except necessity, for both Gods Law and man's
Law does dispense with it, but because there is no necessity, let men beware,
for, Ego liberavi animam meam.

Furthermore, it will be alleged, That Timothy and Titus, and the Bishops of
old, were not like our Bishops, They had not that power and authority, nor
that Lordly Government that Bishops have now, They were not Barons, Lords,
Earls, Princes, in such kind as they are now, They had not power over the
bodies and estates of offenders, as Bishops have now, They might not punish
with the Civil Sword as well as the Spiritual.

Ans. In Episcopal Government there are two things, The one is Spiritual, and
de jure divino, by divine right: The other is Civil, and de dono humano, of
humane gift, and by the donation of Kings and Princes, That is, their Civil
Honor, their Civil Power, their Temporalities, their Revenues, as to be
Barons in Parliament, to judge in causes Temporal, to inflict temporal
punishment, all these they have by the free gift of Kings and Princes, and many
Kings have been very liberal in this kind to Churchmen, and not without
warrant from God neither, according to that of the Apostle, The Elders that
rule well are worthy of double honor, and in special they that labor in the
Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.

And why should any man be offended to see Honor given to Churchmen? May not
Kings and Princes give honor to any subject they please? or are not Churchmen
capable of Civil Honor and Power now under the Gospel, as well as they were
under the Law? As to the first, I think no man will deny but Kings and Princes
may advance such of their Subjects as they please, it is their special
prerogative, I make no question of it.

And truly I see no more reason that any man should make question of the other,
but that Churchmen are as capable of Civil Honor and Power now under the
Gospel, as they were under the Law, it is forbidden in no part of the New
Testament I am sure: has God forbidden Ministers to give their advice to Kings
and Princes, for the better correcting of Vice and Sin, and for managing all
things in the State, so that God thereby may be the more glorified, and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ advanced? or has God forbidden Princes to crave their
advice? It was well said of a Divive, That it is well with the Church, when
godly Prophets hang as precious Earings at the Princes ears. Erasmus said well
in an Epistle to John Alasco, If we had more Bishops like Ambrose, we should
have more Emperors like Theodosius.

But I would ask any man this question, Have not Christian Kings as great need
of the concurrent Counsel, and Assistance, of the Governors of the Church
now, as the Kings of Israel had under the Law? and was there ever any religious
King among the Jews, who had not con^inually the High priest to second him in
all his affairs? was not Aaron next unto Moses? was not Eleazar next unto
Joshua? Had not David, Zador, and Abiather, continually in his company? Was not
Azariah next unto Solomon? and did not Ioash that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, as long as Iehoida lived? and was not Hilkia chief Counselor to
Iosia, and Amaria chief Judge under Jehosaphat? Truly I hold this for a sure
ground, That what ever was done under the Law, not being commanded by God then,
it is as lawful for us now under the Gospel to do the same except it be
forbidden us, and we need not doubt, but it will be as well approved by God
now, as it was then.

But which is more yet, If any thing be commanded by God under the Law, which
is not ceremonial and typical, it is then much more lawful I think for us to
do now. Did not the Lord himself command the people of Israel Deuteronomy. 17. to go
to the Priests and Levits, and the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask,
and they would show them the sentence of judgment, yea did not both these
Offices to be Judge and Priest jump in one man many times? before the Law we
read that Melchizedec was both King and Priest, Genesis 14. Heb. 7. and it is
constantly believed also that the eldest Sons of the Patriarks were both Kings
and Priests; was not Eli both high Priest and Judge of the People for the space
of 40. years, and Samuel for the space of thirty years, and it is well known
that the Macabees after the captivity were Rulers both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical causes.

Truly I will say thus much, If the civil places of Churchmen be unlawful
now, it is either because Princes now stand not in so much need of the counsel
and advice of the Messengers of God as Princes did the^, or God does not enable
now his Ambassadors with such a measure of wisdom and understanding as he did
the Priests under the Law: Truly to say the first, were to derogate from the
wisdom and religion of the Godly and religious Kings in those days, and to
say the second, were to derogate from the providence, favor, and goodness of
God, most abundantly bestowed upon his servants under the Gospel.

There is but one place in all the new Testament that seems to oppose the
Doctrine I have delivered, viz, the words of our Savior, Mat. 20.25. The Lords
of the Gentiles (says he) have dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise Authority over them; but it shall not be so among you, etc. Ans. The
best interpreters both ancient and modern understand the words so as is
forbidden all greedy desire of governing, and tyrannical dominion, and the
word (...) signifies to bear rule Tyranically, according to the interpretation
of most learned Divines, but al sort of power is not forbidden here, a
paternall is not forbidden; the truth of this will appear to any man that will
but take a strict view of the words; for first ye see Christ forbids such
domination as the Lords of the Gentiles exercised toward their inferiors, and
not that moderate and lawful power exercised by Churchmen under the Law: for
if Christ had meant of the Priestly jurisdiction, he^ would have said out of
all question, I will not have degrees and ranks among you, one above another,
as it is between the High Priest, in feriour Priests, and Levits, no, I will
have you all of alike power and authority.

Again, our Savior says, that they that are great exercise authority over
their subjects, that is, great and mighty men, proud men, they domineere over
their inferiors, and make slaves of them, but says our Savior, It must not
be so among you, ye must not domineere in that kind but he (says he) that
will be great among you, let him be servant to the rest, that is, Let him so
demean himself, that ye may be defended, maintained protected, and cared for
both in Soul and body, so that in my judgment, these words do necessarily
imply a Superiority, and that not in dignity, but in all Authority, Power, and
Jurisdiction, lawful and laudable; and therefore this text was never used by
any Divine, but against the tyrannical power of the Church of Rome, and the
Popes usurped authority, who takes upon him to depose Kings, and translate
Kingdoms, and tyrannize over men's consciences. Would to God that such doings
might not also be laid to the charge of some others, who pretend greater
humility and loyalty.

Moreover, we see in the New Testament, that the Apostles did no^ denude
themselves of all civil employment, for the Scripture says that many fold
their Land and came and laid the moneys down at the Apostles feet, whereof no
doubt they had a special care that it was well employed, and distributed
according to every ones necessity; s^ that it would seem that the civil power
of Churchmen is not altogether unlawful; truly in my judgment, it is as
unlawful for a Minister to take the charge of a House and Family, for it
carries with it as great distraction, yea, more worldly encumbrances, more
troubles and turmoyles, then to be a Counselor of State. And so I may reason,
If that charg which involves a man in infinite worldly cares, troubles, and
perplexities, be no sin to a Minister to take upon him, then far less is it a
sin to a Minister to take upon him a charge and employment which does not
involve him in any intricate or distracting cares and businesses, as to be a
Counselor of State, a Justice of Peace, a Judge of Controversies between
brother and brother: Well, Calvin and Beza both thought it not unlawful to be
chief Counselors of Geneva, and that mirror of Religion and Learning S. Aug.
many hundred years before them, thought it not unlawful neither, yea, not to
be burdened with civil encumbrances, hear what he says, and I will end with
it. I call the Lord Jesus to witness (says he) upon my soul, in whose name I
boldly utter these words, that touching my own commodity, I had much rather
every day work something with my own hands, as it is appointed in well governed
Monasteries, and to have the hours free to read and to pray, and to do some
exercise in the holy Scriptures, then to suffer the tumultuous perplexities of
other men's causes, touching Secular affairs, either in determining them by
judging, or in cutting them off by entreaties. To which molestations the
Apostle tied us, not by his own judgment, but by his judgment who spoke in
him: which troubles for all that, himself did not undergo, because his course
Apostolical had another respect: which labor, notwithstanding, we endure with
consolation in the Lord, for the hope of eternal life, that we may bring
forth fruit with patience: for we are servants of the Church, and especially to
the weak members, how mean members soever we are in the same body. I refer
to the consideration of the learned and religious Reader the weight and
authority of this Fathers Testimony.

Further, if our Savior Christ understands an equality of Churchmen in these
words, It must be understood only to be among the Apostles, whom our Savior
Christ would have all of the same rank and degree, but they cannot be so
understood as importing an equality betwixt them and the other 70. whom he so
manifestly distinguished from the 12. as I have told you before. Lastly, was
not Christ himself superior to the 12? and yet no man will say that Christ
did transgress that Commandment which he gave unto them. Christ did exercise
paternall authority over them, and the same authority he committed unto them
over other inferior Ministers, yea, and the same also they exercised over
them, for the which cause our Savior Christ said to them, He that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you despises me; he committed to them his
own place in the chief government of the Church, and gave chiefly unto them
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he said not to the 70. whose sins ye
remit shall be remitted, and whose sins ye retain shall be retained, but to
the 12. They had all power granted them immediately from Christ, and they
committed that power to others according to their own pleasure.

Now I say no more, but these reasons have prevailed with me, to sway and
settle my judgment in the points before discussed, which I commend to the
consideration of the judicious and imprejudicate reader, for no reason can
prevail against prejudice, and I pray God to enlighten the eyes of our
understanding, and to remove all prejudices of flesh and blood, and of this
deceitful World, that we may more and more perceive the hidden truths of
Scriptures, and Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

