A LETTER, DISCOVERING The Cause of GODS continuing wrath against the Nation,
notwithstanding the present endeavors of Reformation: DIRECTING To the Means
of appeasing that wrath; And Encouraging to Constancy in those Endeavors:
Written with much Judgment and Pious affection,

By Mr Nathaniel Rogers,

A godly and Learned Divine now in New England, To a worthy Member of the
Honorable House of Commons, bearing Date, December. 17, 1643.

Imprimatur EDMUND CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard, M.DC.XLIV.

Honored Sir:
OH that I had, or could sanctify the Lord according to his manifold, and
great administrations of late days in England our dear mother. It Is not long
since we were as men that dreamed dreams when we here at once heard of that
which might have been the work of many years, such a Parliament once more
chosen and assembled: such liberties granted unto it, such acts done by it, for
Scotland (whose peace and liberty procured by your counsels, and Englands
willing charges, I hope shall not be wiped off from your account in the behalf
of the Land) against enemies of God, Religion, Church, State, such tall cedars
felled, etc. But how suddenly did the Lord bring a black cloud over the Nation,
and a new presentment of it had we, as lying in blood, rent with division (even
such as scarce any cause but the Gospel uses to make) filled with alarmes,
the mart of all rich commodities, made the shop of artillery; the garden of
pleasure, the stage of war in one part of the Country and another: some
Worthies already fallen, besides diverse (no question) though of less name on
earth, yet of precious account in Heaven: some pined in prisons, others spoiled
of their estates, (not to mention miserable Ireland made a very slaughterhouse,
whiles your home-affaires filling your heads and hands, and emptying your
purses, give advantage to those blood-thirsty sons of that scarlet-whore to
execute that cruel rage, that cries to Heaven) In the midst of all these sad
calamities, your selves, whom God has honored to serve him at such a time, in
that high Court, as Pilots and Mariners toyling night and day in a storm
(longer then that Paul was in) to save that precious Bark from shipwreck and
utter submersion, with all that rich treasure that God has stored it with,
especially of precious Saints, more precious then the fine gold, though
accounted as earthen pitchers: It has been matter of admiration unto me often,
to see how the Lord upholds that House it self from dissolution in many
respects, that you know better, but that its He that hangs the earth upon
nothing ( Job 26.7.) and those whose hearts are faithful, and close to the
work, how their heads have held, and their spirits not been exhaust, and
hearts with weatinesse failed, and given over, who have so many various,
weighty, unusual cases to attend: who were sufficient for these things without
divine assistance? But not to seem to forget what I write by troubling you
with long writing, be pleased to understand hereby our due respect to and
remembrance daily, and almost continually of the great and high work that you
have in hand: and our labors and travailing thoughts and desires (according to
our condition and measure) to promote that Cause, which you have the heaviest
end of at present lying upon your hands: and we say and desire the Lord daily
to speak to your hearts, what he often did to his Worthies in their great
employment: Fear not, but be cou^agious; you serve a great Lord, that is
higher then the Kings of the earth, and shall reign in Sion: in a victorious
cause, however often oppressed; and for a people that are dear unto God, his
Israel, which he will deliver, his Saints that shall reign with Christ Jesus.
But why then are all these things befallen us, and where are all his miracles?
etc. [ Judge. 6.13.] I confess its a case worthy enquiry, and the Lord give an
answer of peace unto his servants. It Is true, that Antichrist will not down
with case: not the woman bring forth the man-child, that should rule all
nations with a rod of iron, a son of the Church to reign, without the
painful throws, and bloody sufferings of many Martyrs: Pharaoh would not
easily let the people go: We our selves inherited the Gospel with a merciful
Reformation, not without the ashes of many faithful witnesses in those Marian
days: yea how long was the Church in her painful breeding, and bringing
forth the Truth in the years and from under the tyranny of the Romish mystery
of iniquity in the bitter persecutions, and innumerable slaughters of the
Waldenses and others of the same Religion, though of several names: The two
witnesses were slain after their sad prophesyings in sackcloth, before they
are taken up to Heaven: yet we must seek a blameable reason from sinful sons
of men, as of the taking away the Truth, so of the withholding it from them:
And it is no uncharitable guess to say, that the hearts of the people of
England are not prepared for the receiving Christ Jesus in his kingdom. This
is obvious: yet the case sticks, for the neerenesse of England to this mercy,
and the sudden withdrawing of it again, increases the darkness of it: Does
the Lord use to refuse zealous Reformation especially in the hands of men of
authority, that has made such promises, if there were but one such, etc. Ier.
5.1. Yes! it is not without president. Israel would correct Benjamins unnatural
wickedness defended with diabolical pride and impenitence, yet they loose
40000. before they all can punish one such Tribe, as vengeance it self would
not suffer to live. Josiah is zealous in purging and restoring Gods worship,
his heart of a most choice temper, his actions almost all non-paraile,
matchless and superlative, yet it stands not: there were sins before which God
would not pardon, [2 King. 24.4.] no not to the accessaries, though they were
to the principal, Manasseh I mean, but it was that those repented not, but
their hearts hung idolward. What remedy then? Truly you are the Body
representative, and there are many of the body personally, yea some of all
ranks, whose sincerity of Repentance, I am persuaded the Lord would not
refuse. And I know your Fasts are many, and your care great that all the people
of the Land should observe them: Blessed be God! Only be pleased to give me
leave to suggest one question, which, it may be you can readily assoyle, though
my distance keeps me ignorant: Has that Honorable House, which has begun to
cast out, the persons, and things that have so much offended God, and good men;
has it confessed the guilt of neglecting such Reformation in former
Parliaments, yea the rejecting of motions presented that way: and justifying
the then present state of the Church, as being pure, etc? Has there been any
public testimony of acknowledgement of the great sin of the Land in
worshipping Christ after the manner of Antichrist, and shutting out the
Ordinances of Christ, and polluting Gods service with men's superstitions? Ezra
began that zealous divorcement of strange wives, which Shecaniah advised him to
attempt, with his deep abasement for that great trespass, which in a most
humble and affectionate confession he acknowledged they had been in so long
unto the just bringing and continuing all those evils that lay upon them. That
amendment that is without confession and conviction has not depth and bottom
enough for the Lord to say much upon. If they be ashamed of their ways then
show them the ways of my house, Ezekiel 43.11. God knows not what to do with
Israel, unless by stripping themselves of their ornaments they show they were
ashamed of what they had done, Exodus 33. God leaves Ephraim to his troubles,
till he should become guilty, Hos. 5.15. Is that Reformation pleasing to God
that is not of evil condemned by God? if so: the guilt should first be
yielded, before the practice removed: It Is the deceit of many a soul in his
personal estate, to be zealous in casting off such corrupt customs, as his
soul never abhorred it self for former defilements thereby: and the truth is,
the deceit lies in imperfection of conviction, humiliation, yea of
mortification: and that evil which a man leaves without acknowledgement and
sense of his former offensivenesse in such way, does but reserve to himself a
liberty in case of more easy taking up, that which he laid down. Were that
Truth duly stated, by which Episcopacy, Ceremonies, etc. are condemned, then
should God be duly justified, the sinfulness of former aberrations perceived,
yielded, censured and condemned, and a sure standard, and inflexible rule be
laid for a perfect repairing and regulating future work. It was alleged by a
learned man in the Council of Trent, when they were disallowing some things
(as I remember) that there is nothing false but because it erres from somewhat
that is true. If it were no offense to God to worship him, and dispense the
things of his house as they were: and yet it is good to remove them, and have
them otherwise: then the government of his Church, and the manner of his
worship is a matter indifferent, and indeterminate: and then Christ has gained
nothing: but the royal prerogative of his Kingdom is as much abased as it was
before: and then he will say, Obedience is better then sacrifice. But perhaps,
what I write is needless: however, my boldness coming from sincere desire of
your best success and honor, and special confidence of your pious candor,
will be pardoned. My desire and prayer is, that the Lord will rebuke Satan, and
take away any defiled garments from Ioshuah and Zerubbabel, that should hinder
acceptance or success: yea so I write as one that acknowledge my self to have
had a share in those provocations and pollutions, and want yet an heart to be
meetly sensible of the wrong done to the Lord Jesus therein, though the
Scripture shows example, and argument plentiful in that kind. Wherefore,
Honored Sir, if all be not right therein, improve I beseech you, that zeal
which God has enkindled in your breast, and that interest that so long
experience of your fidelity to the Cause of God has bred you in the hearts of
those Noble spirits, whom I hope God has raised up to be the repairers of
breaches, the restorers of paths to dwell in, to draw as many as you may unto
such a due humiliation before the Lord, not for other abominations, and crying
wickednesses of the Land alone, but this which was the cause of the rest, and
of higher nature then the rest, that the Lord Jesus has not been set up in his
throne, but iniquity established therein by a Law: and that so as scarce any
reformed Church has done besides, and contrary to the testimony of many most
able, worthy Confessors, Cartwrights, Brightmans, etc. by their pens and
sufferings: prevailing against that precious blood of holy Bates and others in
prisons, the impoverishing families, and obscuring of men of choice abilities,
in learning, preaching, writing, cast aside for rotten trash, the starving of
many Congregations, robbed of their profitable and painful pastors, and
infinite wrong to souls, bodies, estates of Saints, and dishonor to Christ,
and that though by Bb. yet through either power conferred, or not taken away by
Parliaments: the very Religion of the greatest part of England being but
formality and blind devotion standing with gross profaneness: the best
Congregations forced to prostrate themselves to the tyranny of men over their
consciences, and the most sacred parts of his worship corrupted with
superstitious mixtures: Oh what Repentance, and what public testimonies of
self-condemning Repentance does the holy God expect, when as England has been
a scandal to other Churches for these things: which being meetly performed, I
hope the Lord would not be long absent from counsels and endeavors for his own
honor. David himself that was fetching up the Arc with so much zeal, met
with a terrible check: and though he was displeased at the breach, yet he was
feign to confess the sin of not seeking God after the right manner before he
could prosper in his most pious attempt. How many of the Bethshemittes fell,
that yet went to bid the Arc welcome among them: Well perhaps this Perizuzza,
and this slaughter of the Bethshemites was to prepare David and the people to
sanctify the Lord in their hearts, and say, who is able to stand before this
holy Lord God?

Truly Sir, our eyes are looking up, waiting and hoping, that the Lord is doing
some great work by you in these days: It Is no small joy to think how many now
look upon that truth with patience and inquisition, that thought it a note of
pride or hypocrisy to be meddling withal: and that now pens and tongues do
justify that, which erewhile it was scarce tolerable to be practiced here: you
know what great things are expected of a long time from the Revelation, and I
hope some of them are at the door: But then what manner of persons ought we to
be, not only that shall (...), but shall bring forth such things unto the
world: Truly, God is to be feared for his mercies, and if fearful in praises,
when Christ came to redeem as a Son of Righteousness, yet who might abide the
day of his coming? When the Lord appeared to Moses in a vision, portending
deliverance, and preparing him to be the deliverer of Israel out of Egyptian
bondage, he bad Moses put off his shoes, for the place where he stood was holy
ground, Exodus, 3. When Ioshuah saw a man with his sword drawn, and understood,
that he was the Angel of the Lords host, for them, not against them, he fell
on his face and worshipped: and was told that ground was holy, and bidden to
put off his shoe. Now the Lord, that has chosen England to save it, help his
Moseses, and his Ioshuahs to such a peculiar holiness that he requires of
those whom he will delight to work by: It Is not by might, nor wit, but my
Spirit: the barley cake tumbles down Midians tents, that is, Gideon humbled
with such a description made of him in that divine dream. Now the time is for
such as Nehemiah was, to repair Ierusalems walls, men of faith, that will not
be daunted, men of innocence and goodness, that cannot be blemished, men of
zeal that can neither endure Gods honor to be profaned, nor peoples poverty
to be oppressed by the greatest whatsoever. And who but Nehemiah's could do
your work, and act your part at this day? who could have endured such labors
and discouragements? His enemies scoff: at length they conspire to be upon him
from every part: his own people complain of the difficulty of the work, their
weary shoulders with carrying burdens, the abundance of rubbish still
remaining, never like to be overcome, Neh, 4, 3, 8, 10. yet he encourages the
people, puts himself and his upon the hardest taskes, puts not off his
clothes, watches, works, prays, and is at great charges instead of taking
the wonted allowance of men in his place. Truly, when God has such work to
do, he raises men of such extraordinary spirits: Blessed be our God, that
has raised up such, and upheld their hearts in that Honorable House of
invincible courage, and patience, and labors, whatever is become of others,
whom the Lord deligts not in, to honor them with such choice work, as his
Temple-work is. Be you assured that the hearts of the faithful in Israel are
toward the governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the
people, bless ye the Lord, Judge. 6. The poor despised of Christ's flock here
do pray, whiles you watch and work, and in the sense of the weight of your
charge would gladly be putting stones under your arms, whiles with Moses you
are stretching out the rod of your authority and deliverance, and others are
fighting against Amalck. And the good Lord stir up the hearts of the people
of the Land to cleave unto you, that as God has made you as the two hundred
heads of Issachar, men that had understanding of the times, and what Israel
ought to do, and their brethren were at their commandment, 1 Chro. 12.32. so
you may be able to say as the Governors of Judah, The inhabitants of Jerusalem
are our strength in the Lord of hosts their God, Zech. 12.5. And certainly the
true inhabitants of Jerusalem they are a great strengthening (though very few)
not in themselves indeed, but in their God who is the Lord of hosts: you are
the Vindices or Judges of Gods Israel, a people precious unto him: who should
be afraid to be the keeper of Gods sheep: Ioab bid be of good courage, and
behave themselves valiantly for their people, and the Cities of their God, 1
Chro. 19.13. He that keeps the Church of Christ keeps that which will keep him:
yea it is the Ark of the Lord which you are guarding, which guards them that
carry it: as sometimes when it was sent homewards in a Cart by the Philistines,
it was both auriga and onus, as Theodoret observes: Esther need not shrink to
speak for the saving of that people, whose safety without her, was surer, then
her own without speaking for them, as Mordecai told her. And though it is not
the least part of your temptation that the success depends much upon people,
who are generally as unstable as waters: who may do much either way, but are
doubtful whether: yet both these are in the hands of the Lord, who if he touch
their hearts, they shall as one man flow and stick close unto you: and
doubtless the faithful in the Land, who are not of a double heart close with
your godly aims and endeavors, and one of them is better then a thousand
others, and the Saints shall prevail though it be by their death to bring
forth the Cause of the Lord Jesus in his own time. But oh that I might aspire
farther in hop^, that the Lord, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, would
give you the heart and hand of his Anointed, to join with his Nobles and
people to bring back the Ark with David to its place: and that He would at
length say, that which I am persuaded he might say in his very heart, The
inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord their God: and alas! that
in the mean time his soul dwells among those, who are Apollyonists, children
of the curse, and the generation of Gods wrath, of whom we might say, Depart
from their Tents, least, etc. and with Iaacob, o my soul come not into their
secret: The Lord persuade. As for your selves, whom the Lord has hitherto
maintained constant, and faithful to his Cause, though with the extreme
hazard of your persons, families, estates, etc. in the midst of such
multitudes of your rank that follow the wind, yea a body of people, which
through ignorance and profaneness, are enemies to the pure and exact ways of
our Lord Jesus, the Lord remember you, and wipe not out any of your kindnesses
to the house of your God; yea the Lord is with you, and you are laying that
stone, which has seven eyes, which run through the whole earth, to watch for
you, and most wisely and prosperously to carry on your work about it to
perfection in his season: Fear not, but let your hands be strong, you fight
the battles of the Lord, and (I trust) evil has not been found in your (no
not in your hearts toward his Anointed) He shall bind up your souls in the
bundle of life, but the souls of the Cavalieres shall be flung out as out of
the midst of a sling. Only may I humbly suggest my suite, that no unbeleeving
fears, nor ensnaring flatteries of men wise according to the flesh, cause you
to make haste, or turn aside short, or into any crooked ways: but make through
work, as tender hearted Josiah, and listen not to Samaritan worshippers any
more, as formerly others have: Placet mirum in modum nostrae carni (says P.
Martyr on 1 Cor. 5.) in duas parts claudicar^: quod est Deo, quam
odiosissimum. Civiles homines, quod in Reformatione leniter agere volint,
causam adducunt, quod tumultus horrent, atque seditiones. Ideo ubique suadent
ad multa connivendum esse: Caterum alia est severitas verbi Dei. Moses was so
strict, and yet it was but faithfulness, as to stay 600000. men, then leave
one hoof behind him, for that it might be for sacrifice in service of the
Lord. It Is true, Prudence directs quibus medijs, to press and put on the work
of the Lord: but Piety admits not of any fitting of Religion or the Kingdom of
Christ to times, places or persons: His worship and Kingdom is not one framed
for the plain or persecuting times of the Apostles: and another for the
stately frames of Christian polities be they never so great: All States must
conform to the Church, all Kingdoms unto Christ's: Ecclesiam ad mundi normam
Regnorum and Statuum componere, est mere Domum tapetibus accommodare. I know,
the contrary has been the professed judgment of many, and I fear the
practice and way of more inclines thereunto: But once I hope Christ shall in
England be acknowledged All, and only in his Church, and it shall be the
greatest honor unto him to accept him in every of his laws and privileges:
And give me leave to use the like argumentation that Bucer (whose piety in his
works de Regno Christi, is worth the reading and observing at this time) to
King Edward, you will not suffer any Parliament privileges, or rights and
liberties of subjects to be taken away, but will rather hazard the loss of
all: shall not zeal and punctualnesse here be much more seasonable and
warrantable. I do not think all will be seen at once, yet this shall be
acceptable service and honor to the Lord Jesus our King, if you aim at that
one way, wherein he will be served, and weigh all in the balances of the
sanctuary, and prefer the wisdom and authority of his word therein above
civil policy, humane reason, yea universality or antiquity of any practice
since the first and normall pattern prescribed in the doctrine, and recorded
in the history of the sacred Scriptures. And I am persuaded thus much being
asserted, for truth, and sincerely professed as your scope, and aimed at in
endeavors, it shall be acceptable unto the Lord, and a blessing to his people.
Pardon my boldness good Sir, if I present to your wisest consideration, the
unhallowed passages that come forth in Mercurius Britanicus, of scornful
dishonor put upon the Name and Person of Him, who is by you acknowledged the
Lords Anointed: It Is very aimeable to read terms of honor put upon his
Majesty, though so far stirred up against you: It Is that which I meddle not
with, what is cast upon those that are about the King: I deem just to make
Remonstrances, as things stand, wherein even the actions of his Majesty may be
complained of for your justification: but to put bitter and most contemptuous
scoffs upon His royal Person, is that which David's heart could not bear: nor
will your selves if you take notice of it, I am assured, and know the offender.
It Is against not only the course of Scripture, but one Article of the late
Covenant. Though I am thus bold to mention what flies about; yet I am not so
bold as to accuse any of that Honorable House herein, who may be far from
the knowledge hereof. Since my setting pen to paper; we heard so sad news as
made me lay aside my pen, fearing no passage would be to you: but since again,
much better, blessed be the God of our mercy, that would not let us sink in
sorrow: and the comfort of our comfort is in the religious and blessed Covenant
made by you and the Scottish: which He who has wrought it graciously accept
it, and scale it in all hearts, and give us all with you not to make the
emphasis of our Joy, that it is made with the Scottish, but that its made by
them and you with the great God of Heaven: that sin is so humbly
acknowledged, so holily disavowed and divorced, and Gods truth and service so
zealously avowed and professed. It Is the way whereby Kings have sought and
found the Lord: and whereby Nehemiah settled the peace of a troubled State. You
have to all the world avouched the Lord for your God, now we look for Him to
avouch you for His people in the sight of the world: And now our hearts have
gotten some good hold to wrestle with the Lord, which we poor worthless
worms desire to do, so, as your expectations may not be failed of us: nor our
duties toward you, on whom the eyes of the world are set: and in whose hands
is the Cause of God, and the great action of this age for his Church: and in
this purpose and posture I shall humbly take leave, and with all due service
and honor to your self, and worthy Mr M.C. the only one, that I have had
acquaintance with, in that Honorable House, which has now some years been
more your house, then your own home where that worthy and virtuous consort, and
sweet hopeful children were wont to accompany you, to whom with most
affectionate respect I desire to be remembered, I commit you to the God of the
spirits of all flesh, who has honored you with his highest work, and will
crown you with an immortal reward through Christ Jesus, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

Ipsw. December. 17, 1643. Your Worships obliged, but especially in the Cause of
our Lord Jesus, NATH. ROGERS.

FINIS.

