The Fast Friend: OR A Friend at Midnight.

Set forth in an EXPOSITION ON THAT PARABLE

Luke 11.5.-11. Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go unto him at
Midnight, etc.

By Nehemiah Rogers, Minister of the Gospel.

Humble thy self and make sure thy Friend,

Prove. 6.3. Thine own Friend, and thy Fathers Friend forsake not,

Prove. 27.10. LONDON: Printed for Geo. Sawbridge, at the Bible, on Ludgate Hill
MDCLVIII.

Reader,
There is lately Reprinted an Exposition on that Parable, Luke 7. ver. 40-51.
etc. There was a certain Creditor, which had two Debtors, etc.

By Nehemiah Rogers, Preacher of the Gospel.

Also, on that Parable, Luke 10. V. 30-38. A certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst Thieves, etc.

By the same Author.

To be sold by Geo: Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate -Hill.

TO My ever Honored, and most deserving Friend, and Patron, Edward Herrys, of
Much Badow, in Essex, Esquire.
Increase of all Outward and Inward Blessings.
Worthy Sir,
FEw Writers but are ambitious of some high and honorable Patronage for their
Labors; their Inscriptions run thus To the Right Honorable, -- and, My ever
Honored Lord --.And who so reads their Epistles Dedicatory, wou^d think, that
St. Paul was out, when he said, Not many mighty, not many noble are called. 1
Cor. 1.26.
And that the most part of the great Ones of the Wor^^ were such Religious and
worthy Patriots, as that nothing more could be desired, when as an unbias'd man
that well knows their persons cannot read (as one truly says) their gross
flatteries without blushing: Robins. Essay, Obs. 42.
This one style of Honored and deserving Friend, countervails all the other
(in my Judgment). I am sure that a Friend which sticks closer then a Brother,
Prove. 1^.24.
sounds better in my Ears, and has yielded a sweeter refreshing to my bowels,
Prove. 27.9
then Honored Lord. And with that style at this time (and that without
flattery) I make bold to salute you.

Your friendly favors I may not bury, in a kind of tacit acknowledgment; but
I must needs acquaint the World with a part of them. Under God, you were the
principal means of obtaining my liberty for the exercising of my Ministerial
Function (and that in such a time when it was thought scarce feiseable) you
labored it, you engaged your friends in it and were at cost about it and (at
length) effected it to my great comfort and content; who having served my Lord
and Master six full Prentiships in the works of the Gospel, could not but be
much troubled now in my old Age, to be turned out of my service, and have my
Indentures torn before Death brought me my Freedom; which I daily expect,
wanting but few of those years, Psalm. 90.10.
which David allows in common account to the age of Man.

This being done, yet you had not done; but were pleased (having the power in
your hand) to remove me from that place where I was, from which (I must
confess) I was drawn with much unwillingness) and present me to a Living then
vacant, and in your power to dispose of, where (with the general desire, and
good liking of the people) as yet I am: And shall desire (seeing God by his
good Providence has so disposed, and if He so see good) to keep my Stall, and
thereon to labor with the Be, which, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 6.
as the Natural Historian tells us, after Beans do blossom, works hard and
loses not a day, nor plays one whit, if the Weather hinder not. I have not
been altogether idle in my younger time, no nor in a tempestuous season (to the
glory of God, who has enabled me, I speak it) albeit I see great cause, now
that my Almond-tree does bloom, and the Weather serves, Eccles. 12.5.
to double my diligence, that my last works may be more then the first. Rev.
2.19.


As a Monument of my thankfulness to you, whose obligations are thus strong
upon me for these great favors, I presume to Dedicate this poor part of my
Labors; and do further promise to be your Solicitour unto

And TO The Religious, and Well affected Gentlewoman, Mrs. Bridget Herrys, his
worthy Confort, and my Honored Patroness
Increase of all Outward and Inward Blessings.
Good Mrs. Herrys,
IF it be a fault to join you both in this one Dedication, excuse it; seeing
God has joined you together by his own Ordinance, and knit your hearts
together with the Bands of Love: And both, as one have manifested your good
Affections unto me, in conferring that Rectory upon me where I now (at present)
am, and whereof you both are the true and undoubted Patrons.

The same cause (than) I have, of respective thankfulness to the one, as well
as to the other; and no other way have I really to express this thankefulness
(be side my Prayers) than by sending forth these Papers, under your Names, the
poor Present of an ever remaining Debtor, wishing they were as worthy of
respect from you, as in many respects they do belong unto you.

I send them not clothed, (as the Mother of Cyrus willed, that the words of
those who spoke unto her Son should be) in Silk; but in a homely Country
dress, such as they were clad withal, in the first delivery; I may truly say
with Moses, I am not eloquent, Exodus 1.10.
neither at any time have been. And yet I should be loath to deliver my Masters
Message, with irreverent, and uncircumcised lips; but in such a Language, as
may beseem his service regarding more that my words be full of sense, then of
sound, 1 Cor. 2.4.
and such was the Apostles speech; might my preaching be like his, then I
should think I were rightly eloquent.

The Eye, indeed, is a stricter and more curious Examiner, then the Ear* and a
severer Judge: Life puts a working luster upon the meanest Language being
spoken, (and that generally the Hearer is much affected with); but that luster
is lost in writing which our words had in the delivery. And being but as dead
in the letter, the Reader expects that the phrase and style should be pleasing
and adorned (as a dead Corpse used to be) with Flowers of Eloquence and
Oratory; which yet (unless the matter be sound and sacred) cannot keep men's
Writings from rottenness and putrefaction. However, this my labor, in respect
of the style and phrase, may be judged by a curious Eye to be simple, plain,
and popular, and in that respect contemptible; yet I assure you, that the
Subject Matter of the Book is Divine and sacred, and in that respect not
despicable; but such as may exercise the Devotion of the best Lady in the Land.
Good Mrs. Herrys, that God, Job 7.1^.
who does visit man every morning, and try him every night, has visited you
with infirmity of Body, whereby you are often disabled from attendance on his
Public Ordinances, to your great grief (I doubt not): Be pleased under this
your restraint, to have some serious and private conference with this Friend,
which I here present unto you, (as a thankeful testimonial of that duty which I
owe you) and I am assured it will speak a word in season to your heart, and
furnish you with some comfortable Cordial, to revive your fainting spirits, in
the saddest condition that you can be under. For it is only the assurance of
God's friendly love and favor, that gives the Godly satisfaction in their
soarest Afflictions. Nor shall I be wanting, whilst I am in this Earthly
Tabernacle, to assist you with my poor Prayers: Beseeching

The Father of all Blessings, that He would bless you, both with the Blessings
of the Throne, and of the Footstool, and enable you so to glorify him in this
life, that you may be glorified of him in the next. Desiring still to be
esteemed one that is

Devoted, in any Christian Duty, to serve you, Nehemiah Rogers.

To the Reader; And more especially to the Inhabitants of Chich, St. O^yth in
Essex, with the Neighborhood thereof, Mr. Benjamin Rouse, Mr. Gregory Rouse,
Mr. William Jeffery, Mr. Longly, Mr. Owls, Mr. Will: Scot, (and diverse others
unnam'd) with their good Wives, my Christian Friends, and constant Auditors;
Peace be to you all.
Friendly Reader,
THere are two principal Organs of Sense, the Ear and the Eye, and by the wise
Exercise of both, our gracious God brings us to the knowledge of Himself, and
other Mysteries of salvation: The pre-eminence is given to the Ear, Romans 10.1^.
as being the principal Organ to derive Salvation to the Soul (in which regard,
it is conceived, that when our Savior commanded the Abscission, Mark 9.43.
of the offending member, he mentions the Hand, the Foot, and Eye, but not the
Ear): Yet, in some other respects, the Eye has the pre-eminence of the Ear;
and in this more particularly, in that it is a surer Friend to Memory. For,
albeit words spoken, move very much for the present, in the lively delivery of
them; Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet.
yet ordinarily they fly, and dye: No sooner are they spoken, but they vanish
like a sound in the Air, and are forgotten; when as this loss of the Ear is
restored by the Eye, in the reading of things written, insomuch, that when we
read a Sermon printed, that formerly we heard preached, we have a conceit that
we hear the Preacher preaching the same again unto us, that formerly we heard,
in as lively a manner as he did at the first delivery; and, by this means,
things formerly taught, become better secuted in our minds. See here, good
Reader, (if thou be one of those that were my Auditors) I now present unto
thy Eye, what formerly was presented to thine Ear (and therein have satisfied
the desires of some) rejoicing much if I may any way be serviceable to you in
the furthering of your Souls salvation.

Whilst God was pleased to cast out my lot amongst you, at St. Osyth (for the
space of six years and upward) I can comfortably use the Apostles words, Gal.
4.19. 2 Cor. 12.14.
I traveled in pain that Christ might be formed in you: Nor did I seek yours,
but you (you your selves are my witnesses) desiring to spend those Talents
which God had entrusted me withal, and be spent in the laying of them forth
for your Souls benefit: St. Paul goes further, and tells the Corinthians that,
Verse. 15.
notwithstanding this, yet, the more abundantly he loved, the less he was
beloved of them; but that was not my case, and it was a great part of my
happiness that it was not; (for it is many a good Minister's Case). I found
you (for the generality) at my first coming amongst you, to be a most loving
and willing People, and so you continued (so many as God continued life unto)
even unto the time of my departure from you: You prevented me with your
abundant courtesies, nor could I modestly desire any thing of you that was not
readily granted. To which if I should ad the great encouragements that I had from
those Honorable Persons now residing amongst you, both in countenancing of my
Ministry, and other great Favors received, it may raise a wonder how it came
about that I deserted you. But I was not at my own dispose, for had I been
(albeit I saw not that fruit of my Labors which I could have wished, both for
my comfort, and yours) yet I should have followed the Apostle's rule, ^ Tim.
2.25, 26.
and with patience have instructed them who did oppose themselves, if God
peradventure would give them Repentance, that they might recover themselves out
of the snares of the Devil, who were taken by him at his will.

But (God having otherwise disposed) And now that I am removed from you, I
cannot forget you; and my desire is that I may not be forgotten of you. That I
remember you, these few lines may let you understand: And that I may not be
forgotten of you, my hearty desire is, that my labors amongst you (whereof I
have sent you here a part to stir you up by way of remembrance) may live in
your hearts and lives; and that those beginnings of Grace, 2 Pet. 3.1.
and inward stirrings, and workings, which were wrought in any of you, by my
Ministry, may not be quenched, nor stifled, but nourished, and enkindled,
through your own industry, (being accompanied with the labors of those whom
God shall please to place amongst you, and set over you,) and the workings of
his holy Spirit, and that you may be filled with the Knowledge of Gods will in
all Wisdom and spiritual understanding, fruitful in every good work, Colos.
2.9, 10, 11.
strengthened with all Might according to his glorious Power, that you may not
be led away with the Error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3 17. Heb. 10.38.
and so fall from your own Steadfastness: For if any one draw back, my Soul
shall have no pleasure in him (says God.)

And so Brethren I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified, Act. 20.32. (being the last Text that was preached amongst you, by
him who is)

Dodinghurst July 22. 1658. A Servant to you all for the furtherance of your
Souls Salvation. Nehemiah Rogers.

The Text. Luke Chap. 11. Verse. 5.-11.
Verse. 5. ANd he said unto them, Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go
unto him at Midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves.

6. For a Friend of mine, in his journey, is come to me, and I have nothing to
set before him.

7. And he from within shall answer, and say, Trouble me not, the door is now
shut, and my Children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.

8. I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his
Friend; yet because of his Importunity, he will rise, and give him as many as he
needs.

9. And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: Seek, and you shall
find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

10. For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened.

A Summary of all the Principal Doctrines (both Literal and Mystical) Collected
and Illustrated in this Commentary, upon the Parable, of a Friend going to his
Friend at Midnight. With the several Uses and Applications thereof made.
Verse. 5. And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go
unto him at Midnight, and say unto him Friend lend me three loaves.

Doct. 1 PRescribers should exemplify their Prescripts by their own Practice.
Page 9. Use 1 Thence Ministers are directed how to preach profitably. Page 10
Use 2 And all Superiors advised to go before Inferiors, in Christian Duties.
Page 11 Use 3 And all Exhorted to be Practical, as well as Verbal. Page 12
Doct. 2 Christ makes choice of tractable Spirits to teach and instruct in the
ways of Piety. Page 13 Use. Thence, such as have tractable Spirits may be
encouraged to attend unto the Word. Page 14
Doct. 3 Our principal Care should be of our own Cure. Page 15. Reas. 1 For
that God's honor is thereby most advanced. Page 16. Reas. 2 The good estate of
the Church and State furthered. Ibid. Reas. 3 Our own comfort and profit is
thereby enlarged. Page 17, 18. Reas. 4 And that love which we owe to those
under our Charge, manifested. Page 19.
Use 1 Therefore, the want of this Care in Governors is to be lamented. Page
19. Use 2 And all Governors of Families persuaded to set up Religion in their
Houses. Page 22 Use 3 And Inferiors exhorted to submit to a Religious
Government. Page 30.

Doct. 4 It is a profitable way of Teaching, to administer Instruction by way
of Interrogation. Page 31 Use. Therefore, the want of this kind of Teaching is
to be much lamented. Ibid.
Doct. 5 Matters weighty, should be pressed upon the Conscience, after the best
manner. Page 32 Use. And thence Ministers persuaded so to Preach, as that their
Hearers may be best edified and affected. Page 33
Doct. 6 A fast Friend is hard to find. Page 33 Reas. 1 For that true
Friendship is only amongst the good. Page 34 Reas. 2 Few are of the same
disposition and likeness. Ibid. Reas. 3 And the present times are more corrupt
then ever. Page 35.
Use 1 Therefore, many are much mistaken in point of Friendship. Page 35 Use 2
And those that have Friends, admonished to prize them. Page 41 Use 3 And it
makes much to our shame, that there is so little true Friendship amongst us.
Page 42 Use 4 Nor should we much wonder at it, that we find few Friends
faithful. Page 43

Doct. 7 None but may find the want of a friend. Page 44 Reas. 1 For, that man
is like a Be, and cannot live alone. Ibid. Use 1 Thence the pride of some
men's spirits is reproved. Page 45 Use 2 And all adwised to make fure of a
Friend. Ibid.

Doct. 8 It is a sad case to be in want. Page 53 Use 1 Therefore, such should
be pitied and relieved. Page 54 Use 2 And all advised, not heedlesly to bring
themselves into it. Ibid. Use. 3 And above all other wants; the Soul's want is
most to be lamented. Page 55.
Doct. 9 God is the good man's Friend. Page 56. Reas. 1 For he has entered
into a league of Friend-ship with them, Page 57. Reas. 2 The same Communion
that is betwixt Friends, is betwixt God and them. Ibid. Reas. 3 He is always
ready to hear them, and pleasure them. Page 58.
Use. 1 Thence we may be informed of the Honor that God has put upon the
godly. Page 59. Use. 2 And directed, whither to go, to find a Friend. Ibid.
Use. 3 And such as have God for their Friend may be comforted. Page 63. Use. 4
And all admonished; to take heed of wronging the Friends of God, Page 70.

Doct. 10 A Man that has a Friend, may notwithstanding be in want. Page 71.
Reas. 1 For that there is a great narrowness of Affection in the Best. Ibid.
Reas. 2 And a great narrowness of Power, in Friends to help. Ibid. Reas. 3 And
a great narrowness of Discretion in helping Ibid.
Use 1 Therefore none should think all such friendlesse, as be in want. Ibid.
Use 2 Nor should any put too much confidence in earthly Friends. Page 72.

Doct. 11 Gods own Friends may be in a necessitous Condition. Ibid. Reas. 1 For
that all earthly things are mutable, and inconstant. Page 73. Reas. 2 It may so
fall out, through Sathan's malice. Ibid. Reas. 3 But principally through Gods
providentiall Administration. Ibid. Reas. 4 God has an Eye herein, to his own
Glory. Page 75.
Use. 1 Therefore let such as are full be admonished, not to be secure. Page
78. Use. 2 And the Hearts of such be supported as are in a needy condition.
Page 82.

Doct. 12 Want of Bread is a great want. Page 88. Reas. 1 For that of all
Blessings given for sustentation of this life, none is more necessary. Page 89.
Reas. 2 Nor does the Want of any other temporal Blessing bring into the like
distress. Page 90.
Use. 1 Therefore from hence the necessity of Tillage may be inferred. Ibid.
Use 2 And those who have a hand in bringing a want of Bread on themselves, or
Narion, reproved. Page 91. Use 3 And we be stirred up to bless God for our
present plenty. Page 96. Use 4 And convinced of the necessity of Bread for the
Soul. Page 100.

Doct. 13 A faithful Friend is a sure Harbor. Page 101. Reas. 1 For a Friend
that is near is better then a Brother far off. Page 102. Reas. 2 A Friend
loves at all times, and is born for adversity. Page 102.
Use. 1 Wherefore, desire God to raise us up some Friend in the day of
Adversity. Page 103. Use. 2 And learn what use to make of Friends in our
Calamity. Ibid. Use. 3 And such as pretend Friendship would be exhorted to be
faithful. Page 105.

Doct. 14 God is the Friend, to whom the godly address themselves in trouble.
Page 107. Reas. 1 For his Name is a strong Tower, and sure defense. Page 108.
Use. 1 Therefore such are to be reproved as withdraw their Hearts from God.
Page 110. Use. 2 And, we directed, to fly to God alone in all our wants. Page
112. Use. 3 And the godly comforted, who have such a God to fly unto. Page 115.

Doct. 15 Diligence must be used in Distress, for Redress. Page 116. Reas. 1
For God, and the means enjoined to be used, may not be severed. Ibid. Reas. 2
The Promise is made only to such as use their endeavors. Ibid.
Use. 1 Wherefore, those who think careless Christians to be the choicest
Christians, are much mistaken. Page 116. Use. 2 And we better advised them to
fit still in the time of trouble. Page 117.

Doct. 16 Prayer is the best Remedy in the day of our Calamity. Page 118. Reas.
1 For it is sanctified by God, as the means of our good. Ibid. Reas. 2 It has
to do above from whence our help comes. Ibid. Reas. 3 It is a general Remedy
for every malady. Page 119. Reas. 4 It is the speediest Remedy. Ibid. Reas. 5
And it is an approved Remedy. Ibid.
Use. 1 Therefore, such as neglect Prayer, neglect their own good. Ibid. Use. 2
And such as have the Spirit of Prayer, may be comforted and encougaged. Page
120.

Doct. 17 Love is not lazy. Page 121. Use. 1 Thence, the great want of Love
both to God and man may be discovered. Page 123. Use. 2 And it should provoke
us to show the truth of Love by Labor. Page 125.
Doct. 18 God is a Friend to whom we may resort by Night as well as well as by
Day. Page 127. Reas. 1 For, the Night is his, as well as the Day. Ibid. Reas. 2
And his Spirit is ready to assist us as well by Night as day. Ibid.
Use. 1 Wherefore, want of Time is no good Plea for the omission of that Duty.
Ibid. Use. 2 And the godly may be comforted who have God to go unto in the
darkest Night. Page 129. Use. 3 And further stirred up, to make use of that
privilege. Page 130.

Doct. 19 God is to be sought unto, in our greatest Necessities. Page 134.
Reas. 1 For, that, he is both able, and willing, to help. Ibid. Use. 1
Therefore, they are to be blamed, that are disheartened in respect of extremity
of Affliction, from seeking of God. Page 134. Use. 2 And such as are in a dark
and sad condition encouraged to seek unto him. Page 135.

Doct. 20 Honest Motions may not want the help of artificial Insinuations.
Page 136. Use 1 Wherefore, those, who think all fair Expressions to be no
better then Flatteries, are blameworthy. Page 137. Use. 2 And, in all our
Addresses unto God, let us make him glorious in his Titles. Page 138.
Doct. 21 He that lends us befriends us. Page 142. Use. 1 Then, there are but
few friendly, in that kind. Page 144. Use. 2 But, we ought to be friendly one
to another, in lending freely. Page 146. Use. 3 And, Borrowers should
acknowledge it a Favor to be lent unto. Page 151.
Doct. 22 Temporal things are but borrowed for a time. Page 154. Use. 1
Therefore, those are mistaken who boast that what they have is their own. Page
156. Use. 2 And it informs us of difference; first, betwixt God and Satan, in
the disposing of things of this life; secondly, of Gods dispensation, of
Blessings Temporal and Spiritual. Page 157. Use. 3 And from thence we are
exhorted to many Christian Duties. Page 158. 159.
Doct. 23 Friends may not overburthen Friends with suits. Page 159. Use. 1 They
are much faulty (then) that do so. Page 160. Use. 2 And we are to see that all
our Requests, to heaven, be Christian, and modest. Page 161.
Doct. 24 Bread is good fare at a Friends Board. Page 163. Use. 1 Which makes
against the Voluptuousness of this Age. Page 164. Use. 2 And, advises us to
Sobriety, in reference to our invitations. Page 167.
Doct. 25 In the entertainment of Friends it is lawful to exceed the bounds of
ordinary Provision. Page 169. Use. 1 Therefore, a pinching Niggardliness
becomes not a Friends Table. Page 170. Use. 2 And it advises us, to use our
liberty therein wisely. Ibid.
Doct. 26 The Soul's Nourishment is to be sought after. Page 172. Reas. 1 For,
the Soul has her decays as well as the Body. Page 173. Use. 1 Therefore, the
great neglect of many therein is reproved. Ibid. Use. 2 And all exhorted to be
as sensible of the want of the Soul, as they are of the Body. Page 174.

Doct. 27 The Desires of a Christian should be kept within limits. Page 176.
Reas. 1 For, else they will prove very unruly. Page 177. Use. 1 Therefore, the
insatiable desires of many are reproved. Ibid. Use. 2 And all exhorted to keep
their desires within compass. Page 178.


Verse 6. For a Friend of mine in his Journey is come unto me, and I have
nothing to set before.

Doct. 1 Necessity is a forcible Argument. Page 183. Reas. 1 For, it has the
force of a Law, and it is above Law. Ibid. Use. 1 Which should teach us to make
a right use of it, in reasoning. Page 184. Use. 2 And, suffer our Brethrens
Necessit yes to prevayl with us. Page 185.

Doct. 2 A true Friend makes his Friend's Case his own. Page 186. Use. 1 The
Friendship we pretend to bear to God, or Man, may thereby be tried. Page 187.
Use. 2 And, thence may the godly be comforted, in that there are some who will
lay to heart their sufferings. Ibid.
Doct. 3 It is a friendly part to visit, (albeit we go somewhat out of our way
to do it). Page 188. Reas. 1 For, things of like nature, desire Union. Ibid.
Use 1 Therefore, this duty would not be neglected, nor miss interpreted. Ibid.
Doct. 4 Love amongst Friends is reciprocal. Page 189. Reas. 1 For, the
Foundation of it, is in a similitude of Manners, and Dispositions. Page 191.
Use. 1 Hence, the want of true love is discovered, amongst pretended Friends.
Ibid. Use. 2 And we advised to return love for love, kindness for kindness.
Ibid. Use. 3 And directed, in a ready way, how to get love. Page 194. Use. 4
And exhorted, to love God who has loved us first. Page 195
Doct. 5 Sense of want is that which makes us to seek out. Page 196 Reas. 1
For, Nature is proud, and loath to seek out till needs must. Ibid. Reas. 2 Life
is dear, and Nature forcible. Ibid. Use. 1 Thence we see that some good comes
by want, and so not to be despised, Page 196
Doct. 6 Whilst we are in the Body we are in our journey, Page 198 Use. 1 Which
Informs us, both of our present and future condition. Page 199 Use. 2 And
directs us for the ordering of our Conversation aright, ibid.
Doct. 7 God is to be sought unto, in the behalf of those we love, Page 201
Use. 1 So then, we love not those we pray not for, Page 203 Use. 2 Wherefore
pray heartily for those we pretend to love, Page 204 Use. 3 And let such as
pray for us, be truly affected of us, Ibid. Use. 4 And the Godly may be
comforted, who have many that pray for them, Page 205
Doct. 8 Afflictions drive to God, Page 206 Use. 1 Their case must needs be
sad, that are not bettered by them, Page 207 Use. 2 And it should encourage us
to bear Afflictions patiently Page 208

Verse. 7. And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door is
now shut, and my Children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.

Doct. 1 A Friend within may for a while keep his Friend without, Page 214 Use.
1 Thence, a double error in point of Friendship, is reproved, ibid.
Doct. 2 God is a Friend, always within call, Page 217 Use. 1 Therefore such
as neglect this Friend, are inexcusable, Page 220 Use. 2 Hence may we be
encouraged to seek to him in trouble, Page 221 Use. 3 It makes for the comfort
of the Godly, that God is so, Page 223
Doct. 3 Though God be always within, yet he does not always grant the Godly
their desires at the first call, Page 224 Reas. 1 For, that, God has an eye
therein, to his own glory, Page 225 Reas. 2 He respects his Childrens good,
which is thereby many ways furthered, and effected, ibid. Use. 1 From whence
the wicked have cause to fear that God will never hear them, Page 228 Use. 2
And the Godly are blamed, who take delays for denyalls, Page 229
Doct. 4 Sloth is not Shiftlesse. Page 234 Reas. 1 For that carnal Will, has
carnal Wit, o attend it. Page 235 Use 1 It should humble the best of us, for
those sophistical shifts of our corrupt Nature. Ibid.
Doct. 5 Unwilling Minds count it a trouble to be moved to Christian Duties.
Page 237 Reas. 1 For, every good service, is hard, or easy, as men's minds are
inclined. Page 238 Use. 1 Whence, we may see that the World is much mistaken in
judging of turbulent Persons. Ibid. Use. 2 And learn to omit no christian duty
under pretense of trouble. Page 241 Use. 3 And, so to live as that we be
neither troubled, nor troublesome. Page 242
Doct. 6 God may sometimes seemingly give a frowning Answer to his Childrens
Prayers, Page 243 Use 1 Yet let us hope in an estate hopeless, Page 247
Doct. 7 The Door is to be shut against dangers, ibid. Use. 1 Too blame then,
are those that prevent them not, what may be, ibid.
Doct. 8 Good duties are many times omitted under the pretense of an unfitting
season to do them in, Page 249 Use. 1 The best have cause to be humbled, for
this corruption, Page 251 Use. 2 And be stirred up to a redeeming of their
time, Page 254
Doct. 9 When the Door is shut, Prayer is not so speeding, as when it stands
open, Page 259 Use. 1 Think not [then] that one time may be as good as another
to seek God in. Page 261
Doct. 10 Natural Affection is a great let many times to Christian duty. Page
264 Reas. 1 For they greatly blind, and corrupt the judgment, Ibid. Use. 1
Therefore be wary how you let loose the raines unto them, Page 265
Doct. 11 Whilst God is in Bed no Child he has is up to help us, Page 268 Use.
1 Therefore it is a folly to expect comfort from any Creature, whilst the
Creator hides his face, Page 270 Use. 2 And be careful to awake God if we
would find help, Page 271
Doct. 12 Innocence sleeps quietly and securely, Page 271 Reas. 1 For, God has
promised, that it shall so do, ibid. Reas. 2 He takes such, into his
protection, ibid. Reas. 3 And furnishes Innocence with a soft bed, ibid. Reas.
4 He pitcheth a strong guard, about them, Page 272 Reas. 5 And frees their
hearts from slavish fears, ibid. Use. 1 Thence, we insert that the benefit of
a quiet Conscience is very great. Page 272
Doct. 13 God is not willing that his Children being in Bed should be
disquieted. Page 273 Use. 1 Therefore, such as do disquiet them, must answer
for it, Page 277 Use. 2 And great cause we have to lament the Churches present
condition, Page 282 Use 3 And to endeavor by all good means, to settle the
peace of it. Page 283
Doct. 14 What man will not do, that he excuses, with I cannot do Page 291
Reas. 1 For, I cannot; is a more modest put-off, then, I will not. Page 292
Use. 1 Showing that we are deeply guilty of this fault, both in works of
Piety, and Mercy, Page 292 Use. 2 And, we should endeavor to mend the Will,
and then all would be amended, Page 294
Doct. 15 Gods Will does not always permit his Power, to bring into act, what
it could, Page 294 Use. 1 To Reason therefore, from Gods power, to his Will, is
not safe Page 298 Use. 2 It reproves such, as tempt God, about his power, ibid.
Use. 3 And exhorts, to make sure Gods Will, that we may comfortably rest upon
his power, Page 299
Doct. 16 Gods Friends should not be kept from seeking to God, notwithstanding
all discouragements, Page 302 Reas. 1 For true Faith, overlookes all
difficultyes, Page 307 Use. 1 Such therefore as are kept from the duty, upon
every little discouragement, are faulty, Page 308 Use. 2 And, we exhorted to
overlook all difficultyes in a discharge of the duty, ibid.

Verse 8. I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is
his Friend; yet because of his Importunity, he will rise and give him as many
as he needs.

Doct. 1 Christ is an excellent Casuist, He can resolve cases as well as put
them. Page 309 Reas. 1 For, he is a greater, and wiser then Solomon. Page 310
Use. 1 Therefore, in all scruples, resort we to him, for satisfaction, ibid.
Doct. 2 Christ's [I say] his bare testimony is sufficient prooff, Page 313
Reas. 1 For, he is the only faithful, and true witness, ibid. Use 1 Then,
those that will not accept of it, without other humane testimony, are
reprooved, Page 315 Use. 2 And, much more such, as do absolutely reject it,
Page 317 Use. 3 Let us therefore give Christ this honor, as to believe him on
his bare word, Page 318 Use. 4 Much comfort may the Godly gather from hence,
Page 319
Doct. 3 The Ministers duty is to apply himself unto his Auditory. Page 320
Reas. 1 For, they are his Text which he must keep unto, ibid. Reas. 2 And, the
life of Doctrine is in the Application of it, ibid. Use. 1 Therefore they are
no wise Stewards that apply not, Page 321 Use. 2 Nor they wise Hearers that
make not, what is delivered their own, by sound Application, ibid.
Doct. 4 No want to a willing mind, Page 322 Reas. 1 For, the Will, is Queen
Regent in the soul, Page 325 Use. 1 So then, the principal want, appears to be
in the Will, ibid. Use. 2 Therefore see that you get the will rectifyed, Page
329 Use. 3 And let those that have a willing mind bless God for it, Page 321
Doct. 5 Friendship well awaked will be yielding. page 332 Use. 1 Wherefore,
conclude not against Friendship, when it yields not, but rather awaken it, Page
335
Doct. 6 In works of mercy, respect must be had to our bretherens necessityes,
Page 336 Use. 1 Therefore, they are faulty that have no regard that way, Page
337 Use. 2 And, all exhorted, wisely to consider of the poor, and needy, Page
338
Doct. 7 God is never so in Bed, but being awaked by fervent and faithful
Prayer, he will arise and help his Friends, Page 339 Use. 1 Wherefore, let not
the wicked triumph, for God will arise, and then his enemies shall be scattered
Page 342 Use. 2 Nor let the Godly be disheartened under their greatest
pressures, Page 343
Doct. 8 God in giving has an eye unto the necessityes of his Servants, Page
345 Reas. 1 For, he answers Prayer according to the meaning of his own Spirit,
Page 346 Use. 1 Then we may not put up our Prayers to him, in an absolute way,
for all things, Page 347 Use. 2 And if we have not those particulars granted
which we desired, yet we ought to rest satisfied, ibid.
Doct. 9 God is many times larger in his gifts then we are in our desires, Page
348. Reas. 1 For he is of a liberal disposition, and gives like a King, Page
349 Use. 1 Therefore we should not be discourage in our greatest suites, ibid.
Use. 2 And learn to measure unto God as he measures unto us, Page 350
Doct. 10 All liberality and bounty, is not Friendly, Page 350 Use. 1 And
therefore all liberal persons should not be extolled, Page 353 Use. 2 And we
wary, that we be not ensnared by the bounty of any, Page 354
Doct. 11 God does not always give where he loves, Page 354 Use. 1 No cause
then, to be overjoyed, when God so hears us as to let us have what we desire,
Page 355
Doct. 12 Importunity is the prevayling Argument with many, Page 355 Use. 1 In
all honest suits (therefore) hold out, and be not weary, Page 356 Use. 2 But in
evil suits, arm your selves against Importunity, ibid.
Doct. 13 Importunate, Prayer is prevayling with God, Page 356 Use. 1 This
informs us, whence it is that our prayer prevail not, Page 359 Use. 2 And may
stir us up to be more Importunate, and zealous in Prayer, then we have been,
Page 360

Verse 9. And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; Seek and ye
shall find: Knock and it shall be opened unto you.

Doct. 1 Prayer is a warrantable work, Page 366 Reas. 1 For the Saints in all
ages have practiced it, ibid. Reas. 2 And many promises are made unto it, ibid.
Reas. 3 And the whole Trinity concur in the discharge of it, ibid. Use. 1
Therefore we have great cause to be humbled for our neglect, Page 367 Use. 2 And
to be encouraged, to set upon the duty with chearfullnesse, Page 368
Doct. 2 Prayer is a work of general concernment, Page 369 Reas. 1 For Prayer
is a moral precept, Page 370 Reas. 2 And we are all Gods Creatures, and bound
to worship him, ibid. Reas. 3 Nor is there any but stands in need of his
blessing, ibid. Reas. 4 And there is none but holds something of him, and so
stands bound to do suite, and service, ibid. Use. 1 Wherefore all should make
conscience of the doing of it, Page 371 Use. 2 And those sin highly that
neglect it, Page 372
Doct. 3 Prayer is a difficult work, Page 372 Reas. 1 And that in respect of
its own nature, being very spiritual; ibid, Reas. 2 And for that many
essential circumstances are required in it, Page 373 Reas. 3 And the many
letts we are sure to meet with, when we go about it, Page 375 Use. 1 Thence we
may be informed of the holiness and excellency of the duty, Page 377 Use. 2
And the error of those discovered, that think the task easy, ibid. Use. 3
Their labor of Love should be acknowledged, that pray for us, Page 378 Use. 4
And when we go about it, to enter upon it, as upon a work of great difficultye,
ibid. Use. 5 And it may comfort those who have ability given them in any
comfortable manner, or measure to discharge it, Page 384
Doct. 4 God expects that our desires should be expressed by word of mouth,
Page 390 Reas. 1 That others may join with us in the duty, ibid. Reas. 2 And
that our Affections may be the better stirred up unto the duty, ibid. Use. 1
Then such as content themselves with short ejaculations, and neglect to use the
tongue in Prayer are faulty, Page 390 Doct. 5 True Prayer must be accompanied
with a sense of the want of those things we crave, Page 391 Reas. 1 For that
puts us into a praying condition, ibid. Use. 1 Wherefore, take we notice of our
particular wants, Page 393 Use. 2 And be sensible of them when we go about the
duty, Page 394
Doct. 6 What we would have, we must crave in the form of Beggars, Page 395
Reas. 1 For it is Alms that we live by, Page 396 Use. 1 The Church of Rome,
herein is failing, ibid. Use. 2 We may be hence informed of our states and
conditions, ibid. Use. 3 And learn something from Beggars in praying, ibid.
Doct. 7 Asking must go before giving, Page 399 Reas. 1 For God stands no
further engaged to us by promise, Page 400 Reas. 2 And he delights to have his
favors sued for, ibid. Reas. 3 Else he might give to them that needed not,
ibid. Use. 1 Those who think to have without asking will be deceived, Page 401
Use. 2 And let us Examine how we came by what we have, ibid. Use. 3 And be
warned not to be tongue-tyed, ibid.
Doct. 8 Upon fervent Prayer is no denial, Page 402 Reas. 1 For God cannot
forget his own name, Page 403 Reas. 2 Christ intercedeth for such as so Pray,
ibid. Reas. 3 The Father himself loves such, ibid. Use. 1 Seeing it is but ask
and have, let it encourage us to call upon God, ibid.
Doct. 9 What we obtain by asking, is not of our deserving, Page 406 Reas. 1
For (being but beggars) we can deserve nothing, ibid. Reas. 2 Gods blessings
are of more worth then to be bought, ibid Use. 1 By this the Doctrine of merit
is overthrown, Page 407 Use. 2 And we informed that all we hold is in Frank
Almoigne, Page 407 Use. 3 And encouraged to come to God, notwithstanding our
unworthiness, ibid.
Doct. 10 All are at a loss, Page 411 Reas. 1 For Adam lost all through his
defection, Page 412 Reas. 2 And we his posterity, through our own actual
transgression, ibid. Use. 1 Then their condition is sad, who are not hereof
sensible, Page 413 Use. 2 And all prevayled with, to forbear the practice of
sin, ibid.
Doct. 11 It is not enough to sue by Prayer, unless we pursue by endeavor,
Page 415 Romans 1 For otherwise God is but mocked, Page 416 Romans 2 Nor will our
seeking be availeable, ibid. Use 1 Then such as neglect Endeavor, are to be
blamed Ibid Use 2 And, all exhorted, to get up, and be doing Page 417
Doct. 12 Such as seek faithfully, shall find infallibly. Page 419 Reas. 1 For
else God should with-stand his own glory. Page 420 Reas. 2 And his Servants be
disheartened. Page 420 Use 1 Wherefore, let such as seek, and find not, blame
themselves. Page 424 Use 2 And all be exhorted to seek God aright. Ibid.
Doct. 13 Heaven has a Door. Page 425. Reas. 1 The High Priest has opened our
passage. Page 426 Use 1 Then they are deceived that think, All may enter Ibid.
Use 2 And we exhorted, to magnify God's mercy to the Sons of men Page 428,
Doct. 14 An holy violence is to be offered at the Gates of Heaven. Page 429
Use 1 It were happy for us, if we were more violent this way. Page 430 Use 2
And should be provoked, to use our hands, as well as Tongues, in Prayer. Page
431
Doct. 15 Such is the power of Prayer, that the Gates of Heaven cannot stand
shut against it. Page 432 Use 1 This (if nothing else) should bring us in love
with the duty. Page 433
Doct. 16 Evangelical Promises are propounded with Iffs and Ands. Page 437 Use
1 Therefore, they sin presumptuously, who put asunder what God has joined.
Page 439 Use 2 And desperate is their Dejection, who think it is in vain to
serve the Lord. Ibid. Use 3 And, we directed, to take the Promises by the right
handle. Page 440

Verse. 10. For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks finds;
and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Doct. 1 Repetition of Divine Truths, is useful and warrantable. Page 442 Reas.
1 For thereby, the Point taught, is the better urged. Page 442 Reas. 2 And the
Teacher sooner believed. Page 443 Reas. 3 And the Hearer much be tered. Page
444 Use 1 Therefore, it is a fault (both in Minister and People) to be therein
over nice. Page 444
Doct. 2 God is of a liberal disposition. Page 445 Reas. 1 For He is Good, and
that cannot but communicate it self. Page 447 Reas. 2 And He is All-sufficient,
and stands in need of nothing. Page 447 Reas. 3 He is large in Love and
Affection. Page 447 Reas. 4 And great in Majesty. Page 448 Use 1 Therefore, our
horrible Ingratitude, toward so bountiful a God, is to be bewailed. Page 448
Use 2 And we, from thence, be stirred up to sundry Duties. Page 450
Doct. 3 Arguments drawn from Experience, are very weighty. Page 453 Reas. 1
For God is still the same, without change or alteration. Page 454 Reas. 2
Experience is got by sense, and that easily errs not. Page 455 Use 1 Therefore,
such as slight Experience, are to be reproved. Page 455 Use 2 And all exhorted
to this point of Prudence, To learn from Experience. Page 456
Doct. 4 General Acts of Orace, are to be made our own, by particular
Application. Page 460 Reas 1 For God proceeds still by the same Rule. Page 461
Reas. 2 And all God's Children are in the same Covenant. Page Ibid. Reas. 3 Nor
is God any Respecter of Persons. Page Ibid Use 1 Therefore, the Papist, who
rejects particular Faith, because a particular word is wanting, is to learn
better. Page 461 Use. 2 Those likewise, who scruple the applying of General
Acts of Grace to themselves, upon the same Popish ground. Page 462 Use. 3 And
the Godly exhorted, to apply to themselves those gracious Promises that are
made to others. Ibid. Use. 4 And further stirred up to acquaint others with
God's gracious dealing with themselves. Page 463

COurteous Reader; thou can not expect that Books should be without faults,
whilst Men have them; As we say of Men, so may we say of Books, with their
Errata's, Every one mend one, and so all will be soon amended. I should
trouble both thee and my self in setting down every mistake that has passed
the Press: Those which are most material and wrong the sense are these that
follow, which I would desire thee to amend with thy Pen.

Page. Line. Error. Correction. 68 10. Grove. Grave. 77 4 like men like means.
101 25 Neighbor Harbor. 109 16 Prion Prison. 125 25 Thirsty Thrifty. 178 21
Gods: Benjamins the Colon being misplaced. God's Benjamins. 234 17 Inhabitation
Inhibition. Ibid. 20 Inhabited Inhibited. Ibid. 25 Inhabited Inhibited. 313 24
(...) (...) 334 26 out of he out of. 461 5. Particulars Particularly. Ibid
Particularly Particulars.

Other mistakes thou may find, many, both literal, and punctual, but if
thou be Judicious, thou art likewise Ingenuous; And Ingenuity, like Charity,
will cover a multitude of faults. And so once more, Farewell.

A Friend at Midnight.
The Text, Luke 11.5,- 11. And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a
friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him; Friend, Lend me
three Loaves; for a Friend of mine in his journey, is come unto me, and I have
nothing to set before him, etc.


THe occasion of propounding this parable, The Occasion.
is intimated in the beginning of this Chapter, so it was that as Christ was
praying in a certain place, when he ceased one of his Disciples said unto him,
Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples. They who followed
Christ, could not but take notice, how abundant he was in that duty; and
thereupon conceived, that Prayer was a business of great importance, otherwise
Christ would not have been so often at it: whereupon no sooner had he made an
end, (for they would not interrupt him, whilst he was at his devotions) but one
of them in the name of the rest, as being all privy to their own infirmities,
not knowing what to ask, nor how to ask, as they should; desires Christ to
teach them how to pray: that is, to give them a form of prayer, to the end,
that they might not fail either in the matter or manner of prayer: which
request they urge from John's example, who (as it seems) had given his disciples
a platform of prayer, John 1.37.
[and this they spoke from their own experience, for some of them had been
before times Disciples unto John.]

This request of theirs, Christ is pleased presently to grant, Verse 2, 3, 4.
and prescribes a form, verse 2, 3, 4. This he wills them to use, and that
not only as a perfect and genuine Rule of prayer, whereby they were to frame
all prayers that they made to God, (which is the opinion of the Anabaptists,
and other Sectaries grounded on Math. 6.9.) but as a prayer, even word for
word; use it, when you pray, say; say what? even these words which now I put
into your Mouths. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. A^beit we may not think
that it was the intent of Christ, to bind us strictly to that form of words,
(so that we must always use them and no other) but to the matter and
affections of this prayer, we are principally tied; and if we compare these two
Evangelists together, it will appear that both this very form may be used, and
that other forms also may be framed, answerable to this.

The Scope.
The Platform being given, our Savior proceeds to press the Use; Assuring
them of good success, if they do not faint nor flagg in the performance of
that duty: and to that purpose propounds two Parables; the one now read,
wherein God is presented to us, as a friend, who is ready at all times to
supply the wants of his friends for friendship sake, the other of a Father who
will not be wanting to his Child, in supplying of his need as occasion serves,
verse 11.12, 13. In both he argues from the less unto the greater, If a friend
will do thus and thus for his friend; and an Earthly Father so and so for his
Child; then doubt not but God who is both you friend and father, (and you
dearer to him then any friend can be unto his friend, or Son to an Earthly
Parent) will give you audience (come when you will) and supply your wants, (be
they what they will be): for God loves not his friends and his Children less
then men do theirs, but far more abundantly.

In this Parable of a friend coming to his friend at Midnight, Analysis.
we have considerable, the praeface to it, and then the body of it.

The Praeface in these words, [and he said unto them]. Wherein is notifyed,
first, the Person speaking, [he said.] He who had before, both by doctrine and
example taught them to pray. Secondly, The Persons spoken unto, [unto them]
that is those who had before desired him to teach them how to pray, and to whom
he had prescribed a platform, even to them who were his own Disciples.

The Body of the Parable follows, and contains in it a Propounding, and an
Applying part.

The part P^opounding is contained in those words, Which of you shall have a
Friend, etc. to verse 9. And therein we have a case Put, and Resolved.

The case is put verse 5.6, 7. And there we may take notice, both of the manner
of proposing it, and the matter proposed.

The manner of proposing, it is by way of Interrogation, intimating the
seriousness of the matter; and by way of Supposition, importing the Rarity of
the thing.

The matter proposed is the case it self [which of you shall have a Friend and
shall go unto him at Midnight, etc.] And there we are informed whose case it
was, and what it was.

Whose it was, it was a friend's case in General, but the Disciples case, in
Special [which of you] q. d. it concerns you all.

What it was, we find it to be a case of necessity, or want (a pittyfull case
indeed) as will appear, if we take notice, first of the Indigent, or person in
want, he was such a one as had a friend, he was not friendlesse, and yet in
want; secondly his Exigent, and that shows us

First the thing wanted [Bread] which is one of the greatest wants that can
befall a man.

Secondly the Course he was enforced to take for the supplying of that his
want, He goes unto his friend at Midnight, etc.

Where take notice first of the Address he made verse 5, 6. Secondly of the
Repulse that he received, verse 7.

In his Address observe, first to whom he makes it, he addresseth himself unto
his friend, and to no other. Secondly, in what manner he does it, intimated
both in that he did, and by that he said.

First, in that he did, [he goes to him at Mid-night]; where, his Action, he
goes, he sitts not still, under a sense of that his want, he sends not a
servant to seek out for supply, but gets out adoores himself, and goes unto his
friend. And the Amplification, from the Circumstance of Time, it was at
Midnight, when one would think fitter for him to be in bed, then out of doors.

Secondly, By that he said, [Friend lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine,
etc.] And there we have his suit first Propounded, and then Prosecuted.

It is Proposed and made known in those words, [Friend lend me three loaves]
and there the manner and the matter is considerable.

For the Manner he proposes it Rhetorically, by way of insinuation, prefacing
it with a loving Compellation, [friend] as if he should have said, I hold you
for my friend, and that Emboldens me at this time to trouble you.

The Matter [lend me three Loaves]: And there we have the thing desired, which
was to Lend, [Lend me] he desires not any thing of gift, he would only
borrow, and so repay again; and then the facility of it (covertly used as a
motive); he desired not to borrow of him gold or silver, but three loaves of
bread; Bread for Quality, and three Loaves for Quantity. Lend me three Loaves.

This Request is Prosecuted and Pressed, verse 6. [For a friend of mine in his
journey is come unto me, etc.] And here the Impulsive cause is unfolded of his
coming to borrow at such a time of night, Necessity compelled him to do it, and
that partly in respect of his guest, and partly of himself.

In respect of his guest, [A friend of mine in his journey is come unto me]:
Where observe; first the Relation that his guest had unto him, he was a friend
of his; secondly, the Man^festation of that friendship, by the fruit thereof,
in coming out of his way to visit him.

In respect of Himself, [I have nothing to set before him] as if he should have
said, I ought to show my self friendly to my friend, and give him courteous
entertainment, who comes thus in a friendly way to visit me: but alas such is
my condition, that I have not so much as bread to set before him; had I of mine
own, I would not at this time be troublesome unto thee, but want is the cause
(at present) of my putting you to this trouble.

The Repulse that he received in his suit, follows verse 7. [And he from
within shall answer, and say, Trouble me not, etc.] Where observe, first by
whom his suite is answered, [He from within shall answer] that is, the friend
he had addressed himself unto: Secondly, the Answer it self that was given,
containing in it an Inhibition and Resolution.

The Inhibition [trouble me not now]; where the thing Inhibited, trouble me
not, i. e. do not vex me nor molest me at this time of night. Secondly, the
Reasons-rendered, first the door was shut, and so not safe to open it;
secondly, his Children all abed, and quiet, and not fit that they should be
disturbed so unseasonably.

Secondly, His Resolution upon the former grounds and reasons, [I cannot rise
and give thee] which was as much as to say, I will not: thus he concludes,
^ound^y, and resolutely; and so we have the case put and stated.

It is Resolved, verse 8. [I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give
him, etc. where first the Person Resolving [I say] and Resolved [you] my
Disciples.

Secondly; the Resolution it self [though he will not rise and give him, etc.].
There we have, first, a Concession, Grant it be so (for ^o it may be, as before
was said) he will not presently arise and give; Secondly, an Assertion [yet
because of his importunity he will arise and give,] where first the thing
Asserted, and Affirmed: Secondly, the Grounds and Reasons rendered.

The thing Asserted is [he will arise and give him as many as he needeth].
Where first his Vigilancie, he shakes of sloth at last being well awaked, and
rises up: Secondly; his bounty in giving more then was desired. He gives [not
lends] not three loaves only but supplyeth his necessity, giving him as many as
he stands in need of.

The Grounds and Reasons, are laid down first, Negatively; secondly,
Affirmatively. Negatively [not because he is his fr^end,] Albeit that were
enough to move him to condisend to his Request. Affirmatively [because of his
importunity] that was the prevailing Argument, and prevailed more then
friendship did.

The Apodosis or Applying part of the Parable follows [And I say unto you,
Ask* and it shall be given you, Seek and ye shall find, etc. verse 9.-14.]
therein first a Mandate, Secondly, the Motive to enforce it.

In the Mandate or Command we have, first, a Warrant [I say unto you];
secondly, the Duty it self or the work imposed, laid down in three several
terms, Ask, Seek, Knock: here are three Acts, but the Duty is one, and the
same; All is but Prayer.

The Motive, or Argument wherewith it is pressed, is taken from a Gracious
promise of Audience verse 9, 10. And that is Asserted, and then Amplified.

The Assertion is three fold, (according to the three fold urging of the Duty)
and enfolded with the Precept Ask and [it shall be given unto you] Seek and
[you shall finde] Knock and [it shall be opened unto you]. It is Amplified, and
enlarged, verse 10. [For every one that asks, receiveth]. And wherein we may
take notice, first, of the Extent of the Grant, it reaches to every one that
asks, and secondly of the Truth of the thing, for it is a known case, and
confirmed by Experience, none can deny it.

And thus you see, this Parable is like a goodly spreading tree; from the Body
whereof proceeds sundry Arms; from them, sundry Branches; each Branch has
its lesser twiggs; and not a Twigg, without some fruit growing on it,
notwithstanding we may not overreach our selves in the gathering; as for the
outboughs, a little shake shall serve; I may touch upon them, but not stand on
them: The Musician, in playing some Lessons upon his Instrument, tunes every
string, albeit some of them be scarce once struck, or touched in playing of the
Lesson; so in the opening of this Parable, diverse things for Method's sake are
brought into our Division, which needs not any large Prosecution: we look not
on every particular color in a well drawn Picture, but on the whole piece; it
is enough in opening of a Parable, to cast our eye principally upon the
general intention and scope, albeit we view not exactly every particular
Circumstance; As we say of curious Watches, so may we say of curious
Observations from Parables; Not one of many, that goes true.

Parables, are (by reverend Antiquity) resembled to that Role, Ezekiel. 2.10.
Hier. in cap. 2. Ezekiel.
which Ezekiel saw in a vision, spread before him; which was written intus, and
a tergo* within and without; without in the History, and within in the Mystery;
without, in verborum foliis; within, in radice rationis, (as Ierom elegantly
expresses it): the former is like the Golden pot; the latter, as the Manna
that was hid therein.

Now as those who deal in curious stuffs, that are wrought on both sides, view
the flowers as well in the inside as on the outside of it; so in our opening
and applying of this Parable, we are to take special notice of the inside,
which is the Mystical Reference, and not to fasten our eyes altogether upon
the outside, the Historical Relation. And so

Sense Mystical.
By the friend in want that seeks unto his friend, understand we every Christian
man and woman, with whom God has entered into to Covenant and League of
friendship, John 15.14, 15.

By the friend that is sought unto, understand we God himself who loves all,
and would the Salvation of all, (says Theophylact.) And thus much our Savior
gives us to understand in the Appliing part of this Parable.

By the Traveling friend, that came to visit his friend, Amicus enim meus
advenit, hoc est Angelus qui animam assumit, etc. Theoph. in Loc.
Theophylact understands the Angels of Heaven, who rejoice at the conversion
of a sinner, Luke 15.10.

Ego quidem amicumvenientem ad me non alium intelligo quam meipsum: nemo quippe
charitor mihi, nemo germanior est. Ad me ergo de via^ venit amicus, cum
transitoria deserens ad cor redeo, etc. Bern. Sermo in Rogat. de trib. pan.
But Bernards opinion is more approved, who by this friend understands man
himself, or the heart of every man; which when it returns from the Love of
sin, it comes out of the way, (wherein it naturally is,) to visit him; And thus
it is said of the Prodigal that he came unto himself, when he began to think
of leaving his feeding Hoggs and Swine, and of returning to his Fathers house,
Luke 15.17. and this is required of transgressors ut ad cor redeant, Isai.
46.8. that they return to their hearts again: for indeed sinners are men
without minds, their hearts are lost; and when they repent and turn, then
their hearts come to them again; as Nebuchadnezars did to him. And so Augustine
to the same purpo^e, Sermon. 5. de verb. Dom. Tom. 4. and Sermon. 27. Tom. 10. et
Quest. Evang. Lib. 2. cap. 21.

Theoph. in Loc. Aug. Quest. Evang. l. 2. c. 21. Sermon. 29. de verb. Dom. Vid.
Chemn. Harm. cap. 107. p. 1993. Qui sunt isti tres panes nisi Mysterii
coelestis alimentum? Amros in Loc.
By the Three loaves which his friend would borrow, some Mystically understand,
Faith in the holy and blessed Trinity: as, in the Fathers, power, to strengthen
our infirmities; In the Son's wisdom to enlighten our understandings; And in
the operation of the blessed Spirit to inflame our wills: Others understand
thereby Faith, Hope, and Charity* those three Cardinal virtues, or Graces, (as
they call them). Bernard understands thereby Truth, Charity, and Fortitude; The
first is necessary; that understanding what Truth is, we may do it: The second
necessary, that we may love God: The third necessary, for subduing of the
flesh. But we may herein be overcurious: our Savior seems to allude to the
ordinary custom of friends in entertaining of their Guests, who would have
sufficient, yet not superfluous: And hereby would give us to understand, that
our desires must be limited within the bounds of Piety, Equity, and
Conveniencie; both for soul and body, (other Mystery I conceive none to be
therein, save the nourishment of our souls with spiritual and di^ine graces.)

Mediam noctem quidem inquit esse extremum vitae, etc. Theophyl. in Loc. Nox
(...) denotare potest tempus necessitatis Chem. Harm. c. 107. p. 1^91.
By Midnight (the time mentioned of the friends coming to borrow) some
understand the end of a man's life; when a man hastens to God, and hopes to
receive good from him: Others the time of necessity, temptation, and trial,
and that is a time wherein we usually seek to God and fly to him for help: Isa.
26. [with my soul have I desired thee in the night] that is, says Chemnitius
in the time of my necessity and tribulation: Nox enim; omnis tentatio; media
autem nox, omnis tentationis fervor. Theophil. Hoc est ostium quod aperiri
sibi, etiam Paulus exposcit. Ambros. in Loc. Aug. quest. Evang. Lib. 2.21.
Colos. 4.3. Amos 8.11. Math. 25.16. Luke 13.25.
That time of night is mentioned, because then all are at rest, and none will
rise out of their bed without much calling: And it may intimate the strength of
temptation and trouble, under which we are.

By the Door shut, Ambrose understands that Door which St. Paul prayed might be
opened, that he might speak the Mystery of Christ, for which he was in bonds,
Colos. 4.3. So Austine understands it to be meant of the Famine of the word,
spoken of, Amos 8. It was shut to the Jews, when the Apostles turned to the
Gentiles; And afterward when bloody persecution did arise for preaching of the
Gospel. I conceive, we may understand it in a larger sense; for when any
opportunity is lost of doing good; the Door is said to be shut, by a Metaphor.

By the Children in bed, some would that the blessed estate of the Church
Triumphant in Heaven should be understood; there indeed all is quiet and at
rest, with Christ their Head. Others understand thereby the members of the
Church Militant here on Earth, Pueri autem, qui in lecto quiescunt, sunt hi qui
conve^si sunt and facti sunt pueri, and digni habiti sunt qui quiescerent cum
Domino. Theoph. Aug. Tom. 4. Quaest. Evang. Lib. 2. c. 22.
who are converted, and become as little Children: these are said to be in bed
with God, in regard of his care and protection over them, nor is he willing
that any of them should be disquieted of their rest and tranquillity of mind.
Others conceive that all Creatures in general are meant thereby, for God is
the Father of all, and they are a bed with him, being no way able to help and
succor us in our misery, if God does not arise to help us. And this seems
most Genuine.

By the Bread, Fish, Egg, mentioned in the Applying part of the Parable, some
are of opinion the same is meant that was before by the three loaves. Austine
understands by Bread, Charity; by the Fish Faith; by the Egg, Hope. It appears
that the Gifts of the Spirit are meant thereby, by what our Savior speaks,
verse 13. To all these particulars, we shall speak more fully in due place.

We begin with the preface or introduction [(...). And he said unto them.]

The Person teaching is Christ: the Persons taught, are his Disciples: his
Domestical servants, The twelve who were constantly with him and attending on
him: being of his family, to whom he had prescribed the former platform of
Prayer; and being now in a private place, and free from Company, [he said to
Them.]

The Analytical Table: OR, A View of the Method observed and followed in this
ensuing Exposition of that Parable, Which of you shall have a Friend, etc.
Luke 11.5.-11. In which Parable, we have considerable, The Preface to it, And
he said unto them, where The Person speaking [He said] The Persons spoken to
[unto them]
The Body of it; wherein The Protasis, or part propounding, verse. 5.-9. Wherein
A case put, verse. 5, 6, 7. And there The manner of proposing it, which is By
way of Interrogation [Which of you] By way of Supposition [Shall have a Friend]
The matter proposed showing Whose case it was A Friend's in general. The
Disciples in special.
What it was, a case of Necessity; where The Indigent, or person in want, who
was a Friend. His exigent, where to take notice of the Thing wanted The course
he takes to supply it, and there [Bread] His Address, And shall go unto him at
Midnight, etc. Where we see To whom he goes [unto him that is his friend] In
what manner he makes it seen. By what he did, he goes unto his friend at
Midnight, where His Action he sends not, but (He goes) The Amplification, from
the Circumstance of Time (at Midnight.)
By the Request he made which is Proposed, and there The manner of proposing
it, which was By way of Insinuation. With a respective compellation (Friend.)
The matter of it, where The thing desired (Lend me) The motive, it being an
easy request. Bread, for quality. Three loave for quantity.


Pressed from the compulsive ca^se, and that In respect of his Guest, where The
relation he had unto him he was his Friend. A Friend of mine. His friendly
visitation of him for Being in his j^^^n^y, he is come to me.

In respect of himself, who at that time was unprovided to entertain him. I
have nothing to set before him.




His Repulse, verse. 7. And he from within, etc. Where Who answers him, [He from
within.] What answer is given, Trouble me not, etc. where An Inhibition, and in
it The thing inhibited, Trouble me not now. The Reasons rendered, The Door is
now shut. My Children are with me in bed.

The Resolution I cannot rise, And give thee







Resolved, ver. 8. where The Persons Resolving [I say] Resolved [unto you]
The Determination, and in it A Concession, though he will not rise and give.
An Affirmative Attestation, where The thing attested, He will rise, etc. Either
His vigilance, for (he rises.) His Bounty seen, in that [He gives] not lends.
Not three loaves only, but [As many as he needs.]

The Reasons rendered Negative; Not because he is his Friend. Affirmative;
because of his Importunity.




The Apodosis, o^ the part applying, verse. 9, 10. containing in it A Mandare,
verse. 9. where The Warrant [I say] The work imposed, expressed by three Acts.
Ask Seek Knock

The motive from a gracious Promise of Audience, which is Enfolded with the
Duty It shall be given you You shall find It shall be opened unto you
And amplified, ver. 10. For every o^ ^e that asks, receives, etc. and there
The Extent of the Grant, which reaches to every one [Every one that asks,
etc.] The truth of the Thing; It being a tried Case [For every one]





[He said]

In his own Person; mouth to mouth; face to face; and not by his Servants and
Messengers (as he spoke in former times, nor as he speaks in these ^atter
times to us): but, Heb. 1.1.2.
as the best and highest Fourms are taught by the Master himself, so were these
by Christ, this duty of Prayer.

Had we no other Reason to embrace the Doctrine delivered in the Parable
propounde, and cause us to be in love with the Duty of Prayer therein pressed
this were enough, It is the voice of our wel-beloved that requires it, Christ
himself, whose lips are like Lillyes dropping sweet smelling m^rrhe. Cant. 5.5.
Cant. 5.5. he, who came from heaven out of the bosom of the Father, he puts
the meat into our mouths, teaches us how to pray, and encourages us in the
Duty.

{He said,}

verse. 1.) He it is who calls on them and encourages them to Prayer: stop we
here a little, and observe.

Praescribers should do well to exemplify their praescripts by their own
practice.

Be thou an example (says Paul to Timothy) in word and conversation, 1 Timothy
4.12.
in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, (the only way to preserve his
youth from contempt and scorn) 1 Timothy 4.12. Whilst our lives condemn our
Doctrine, or our Doctrine our lives; both our Persons, and Prae^^ripts, will
grow contemptible.

In all things show thy self a pattern of good works (says the same Apo^tle):
other Patterns Titus ^ight have propounded many, but that was not sufficient;
show thy self one. Tit. 2.7.

And thus St. Paul, propounds himself a Pattern to be followed, 1 Cor. 7.7.
Phil. 3.17. And yet no farther then he followed Christ. He is our best, and
most absolute Pattern, 1 Cor. 7.7. Phil. 3.17.
and has propounded his own example to be followed by us. Joh. 13.15. I have
Joh. 13.15.
given you an example that ye should do, Orig. in Math.
as I have done; Now there was not one point of Doctrine which he taught (as
Origin observes) that was not exemplified in himself: Blessed (says he) are
the poor in spirit: Math. 5.
Blessed are the meek: Blessed are the merciful: Blessed are the peacemakers
etc. And who so humble? who so meek? who so merciful? who such a Peacemaker as
he was? and hence it was, Math. 7 29.
that (as the Evangelist speaks) he taught (not as the Scribes and Pharisees
did, but) with Authority. Math. 7.29.

Jam. 3.1.
as would become teachers of others (and the world has many such; many
Masters, but few scholars). The only way to teach profitably; is to preach
methodically; and no method like to this of our Savior, who did first, do and
then teach, Acts 1.1.
as we find, Act. 1.1.

We that are in the Ministerial calling must observe this Method in our
Teaching. That wisdom praescribed by our Savior is rarely found in them that
heat us, All whatsoever they bid you, observe and do; but do not ye after their
works. Math. 23.3. Men are readier to live by sight and sense then faith, Math.
23.3.
unless they see (as Thomas in another case) they will not believe what we say.
John 20.25.
When they perceive a neglect of those duties in our selves, which we press on
others, they imagine that the duty is not so necessary, nor the sin so
dangerous as we would make them to believe. All seems but fabula that we teach
de inferno, de coelo^ at least they imagine, that we propound what is
impossible to be observed; Our actions speak louder then our Sermons; Our
preaching is our speech; Ou^ Good life, is our Eloquence; Our Doctrines are but
nakedly propounded, when our life is not answerable: Then there is life in our
doctrine, when there is doctrine in our life: Math. 12.15.
where these are severed, there is a Ministry divided; And (as Christ spoke of
a House or a Kingdom divided against it self that it cannot stand, so may we
say of such a Ministry,) it cannot prosper, for one hand pulls down, what the
other hand builds up: Rev. 1.16.
But when Doing and Teaching are rejoyned, then our Sermons are like that
two-edged sword, which proceeded out of the mouth of the Lamb, Heb. 4.12.
able to divide betwixt the marrow and the bone, betwixt the soul and the
darling corruption which we would have amended.

Paul disclaimes the Preaching of himself, 2 Cor. 4.5. and by denying it in his
own practice, 2 Cor. 4.5.
he seems to condemn it in all others; and is not this to preach a man's self,
to teach by our own example?

man's self is of another nature: To cry up our own parts, and excellencies, we
are forbidden; but thus far a man may and ought to preach himself, to preach
out of his own history, and by his own Example: Solomon did thus preach himself
to good purpose in his Ecclesiastes; Dr. Donn.
and in so preaching the best Arguments are raised to prove his salvation,
says a Reverend Divine.

And you that are Parents, Masters, and Governors of Families, this concerns
you, as well as it does us; for as the eye of the Church is upon the Pastor
thereof, so is the eye of the Family upon the Governor thereof: they learn
their Catechism by the eye, and do what they see done, framing to themselves
rules, by their superior's examples, (which are to them, Genesis 30.39.
like the speckled rods which Jacob laid in the watering troughs, according to
which the Goats conceived.) This Constantine knew full well, and therefore
caused the Image of himself, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. 4.15.
kneeling unto his God in Prayer, to be stamped upon his Coin. Other Emperors
were coined, triumphing in Chariots; or preparing for triumphs in battles,
and victiories: but he would be coined in that posture Praying, that he might
be an example to all his subjects, in that pious action: his coin he knew would
pass through every family; and to every family he desired to be an example of
piety: Every piece of single money was a Catechism, and taught every subject
Religion, and Devotion; And yet this Symbolicall Catechisticall coin of
Constantine, was not so convincing a testimony of his piety to his subjects,
(for he might be so coined praying, and yet never pray) as is thy actual,
real, daily, duly performance of such Christian duties in thy family. Judge.
7.17. Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, and before opere dicitur quam voce.
Leo papa de jejun. 1.


Wherefore as Gideon said unto his Soldiers, look on me and do likewise; As I
do, so shall you do: so say ye, that be governors of families* to all that are
under your charge. Think it not enough to give Praecepts; let them see the
force of the Rule in your Example. Of all proofs Demonstration is most
powerful, when an inferior has just reason to think that his Superiors
would have it thus, or thus, this is Music to his heart (for that he hopes in
so doing he shall please his Master) when he hears him say that he would have
it to be thus, or thus; this is as Rhetoric to his soul, and prevails with him
to be doing when he sees the Law of his Superior enjoining it, to be thus, or
thus; this is as Logic to his Conscience; he concludes accordingly, but when
an inferior sees his superior actually, and really, clearly, and constantly,
do thus or thus, this is as a Demonstration to him; the powerfullest proof, and
most prevailing.

It may be, thou reproovest swearing, lying, in thy child or servant, and yet
thou thy self art guilty. But when, think you, will a lewd servant be
dissuaded from licentious courses, by the word of a Licencious Master? or that
child prove chaste, that scarce can reckon up the Whoredoms and Adulteries of
his Parent, without a dozen of Stops and intermissions as one speaks? Dr.
Dunn.
What thou reprovest in another, amend first in thy self: and what good duty
thou requirest of an inferior, practice thy self: say not Go but come, (which
was the wont, says Tully, of Julius Caesar;) and remember, though the
Eloquence of Inferiors is in words, yet the Eloquence of superiors is in
Action.

In a word, Phil. 2.15.16.
there is none present but may make good use of the point delivered, (as is
enjoined, Phil. 2.15, 16.) Nor is it enough to give good advice, and counsel,
unless we take it; otherwise we shall (sometimes or other) be choked with
that Proverbiall speech, Luke 4.23. Physician, heal thy self: nor shall we ever
be able to make our peace with that same Text, Luke 4.23.
Math. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Phar^sees, Math. 5.20.
you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: The Pharisees were
verbal but not Practical; we must be both, if we hope for Heaven: In hearing
of the word, resorting to Gods house, we do outwardly celebrate the Sabbath;
but in practicing that we hear, and being examples to others, we turn all the
week into a Sabbath: and that is a savor of rest in the Nostrills of the Lord:
When the glass is runn we say the Sermon is ended, the Minister has now done,
but we mistake, it is not done till the week be done; nor may it be ended then
neither. If the Minister follow his own Doctrine that he delivered, and thou
that which thou heardst on the Sabbath enjoined; then that Sermon was a good
Sermon, and done indeed. Otherwise, that wherewith the Disciples were unjustly
charged, Acts 2.13. we may be justly charged withal, that we were in a manner
drunk upon the Sabbath day; for it is one sign of a drunken man to forget both
what he said, and heard. Thus much of the Person teaching: now of the Persons
taught (...).

[Unto them]

Scribes and Pharisees, who neither respected his Person, (for that they
derided,) nor praying, (for they scorned to be taught by him;) but to those he
spoke, who were willing to hear, and desirous to learn as appereas before by
the Request they made verse. 1. Lord teach us to pray: whence note,

Christ makes choice of tractable spirits to instruct and teach in the ways of
piety. Such as are of a tractable disposition, and willing to be instructed in
the wayer of salvation, shall be taught by Christ. These, and only these,
Christ makes choice of to reveal the Mysteries of the Kingdom unto, and
instruct in holy Duties.

When the High Priest questioned with our Savior about the destroying of the
Temple, and building it up again in three deies, he answered him nothing Mark
14.60. And when Herod questioned with him about many things, Mark. 14.60.
neither would our Savior make him any answer, Luke 23.9. So when Pilate asked
him what was truth, Luke 23.9.
our Savior (though he was not wont to smoother or suppress the truth,) yet
he did not instruct him therein, as appears, John 18.38.
John 18.38. He knew that these were not fit Auditors to hear of such matre^s;
but when his Disciples came unto him, and moved questions, about Religion, he
still instructs them, and satisfies them in all their doubts; for that he knew
them to be men of tractable minds, and spirits, Math. 13.11, 12, 36, 51.

Our Savior, did many things in Capernaum of his own accord, which he refused
to do in his own Country, (albeit earnestly requested) and the reason we have,
Luke 4.24.
Luke 4. verse 24. his own Country men were wayward and perverse, and would not
accept of a Prophet in his own Country; for father confirmation of the point
delivered, see, Psalm. 25.9. Isai. 2.3, and 28.9. Math. 11.25, 28.

ears, hearts, and Christ will find a mouth. There wants no ability in him to
reveal his fathers will unto thee, Joh. 1.18. Colos. 2.3. Joh. 17.8.
John 1.18. Colos. 2.3. Nor is there in him any want of will to instruct and
teach; he teaches freely, John 17.8. Would thou be made clean, (says Christ
to the Leper) why, Be thou clean; So would thou be instructed in the way to
Heaven, and mysteries of salvation, desire thou to know what the good will
and pleasure of the Lord is, that thou may obey it, and serve him, fear not
then, God will not be wanting to such, as are not wanting to themselves.

It is no matter what the Capacity, or incapacity of the Scholar be, when
there is such a teacher, for Christ does not only bring Doctrine, but he
brings, wit, grace, and ability to the inward man: Let none distrust if they be
tractable and will attend the means. But if thou bring a wayard, and
perverse spirit, an ill-affected heart to Gods Ordinances; God will then answer
thee according to the stumbling block of the iniquity that is in thee; Ezekiel.
14.3.
and hide those things from thee, that may make to the eternal good, and
welfare of thy soul. To conclude, think often on that parable, Prove. 10.8. The
wise in heart will receive Commandments: he that is desirous to hear, that he
may learn, such a one shall not want instruction; But a prating fool (such as
will quarrel with the Preacher, Object against his Doctrine, out of a
distempered affection) he shall fall into misery and trouble, Romans 2.8, 9.

[Unto them]

Whom, if we consider (yet again) as they stood in Relation unto Christ, being
of his own family, and household; then this may be further collected thence.

Our principal care ought to be of our own Cure; This we gather from Christ's
practice, whose greatest care, was over those whom he had special charge of.

Every action of Christ, is for our Instruction; but not ever for our
Imitation: we may not imitate him in works miraculous, and proper to him as
Mediator, otherwise then by Similitude, translating that to our spiritual life,
which he as Mediator did. (So as he dyed we must dye, and as he rose again, we
must arise likewise.) Nor may we imitate him in his Infirmities, as to be
hungry, thirsty, sleepy, weary, etc. For albeit they were not sinful, but only
natural, and so unblameable, and are in every one of us; yet we need not strive
the attainment of them. But we must imitate him in his imitable graces and
actions, as we are willed, 1 Pet. 2.9. show forth the virtues of him that has
called us, 1 Pet. 2.9. (...).
etc. we must preach them abroad (as the word signifies) so clearly practice
them, that our lives should be a Sermon upon Christ's life.

His life is a perfect Sampler, and every flower of virtue, that his hand has
pricked forth for us, we ought to take out after the best manner that we can:
And this is one amongst many other, fit for all that have charge of souls, in
any degree (whether he be Minister, or Governor of a Family). After his
example, we ought to teach and instruct our Families in necessary points of
piety and godliness.

This is a Duty frequently enjoined in Scripture, God commands his people,
Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. and 6, 7.20. and 11.19, 20.
that his Laws should be written upon the posts of their Houses and Gates, in
regard of those under Government. All that went in, and came out, were to be
instructed. There was an Act and Ordinance, Psalm. 81.5.6.
made to establish the practice of it.

And this was commended, in godly and Religious Governors from time to time,
as in Abraham, Genesis 18.19. In Jacob, Genesis ^5.2.3. in Josh. 24.15. in David,
Psalm. 101.2, 3. Prove. 4.4. in Bathsheba, Prove. 31.26.

In the new Testament; we have Examples, many: In Nobles, John 4.53. Act. 18.8.
Captains, as in Cornelius, Act. 10.2. in men of high place, Luke 19.9. In men
of mean rank, Act. 16.34. and in Women, Act. 16.18. All these, performed the
Duties of good and religious Governors, in seeking the Salvation of their
Families, and promoting their soul's welfare.

respect of God, whose honor above all things, we should endeavor to advance,
and what better course can be taken for it, then to set up his worship and
service in our Families? Isa. 38.19.
Isa 38.19. The living shall praise thee, etc.] And how shall they do this? The
(Father to Children shall make known thy Truth) which words are not to be
restrained to Natural Parents, but to those that are in the place of Parents,
Exodus 20.12. 2 King. 5.13.
(as all masters and Governors of Families are:) there is no way to win glory
to God, more then by winning souls unto him; Joh. 21.15.17.
no way of expressing our love to Christ more, then by feeding his sheep and
Lambs.

Secondly, in respect of the Church, (which, next to God and Christ his Son,
should be most dear unto us) care should be had, Dyke in Phil. Epist. Ded.
that our Families be religious. The Family, the Church, and the Common wealth,
Luther terms three Heavenly Hierarchies; but how is the Family heavenly, says
one, unless the Church be in it? without Religion be set up therein, it will
prove but a hellish Hierarchy, not a heavenly; and it will poison both the
other. A Family is the first Society of all other; the foundation of the rest:
now if the Fountain be poisoned, can the streams be sweet? if Families are
poisoned, how will Towns, Cities, Kingdoms flourish? your Families are the
Nurseries of the Church, and to be more regarded in that respect, than old
Trees; If they be nipt, or bitten young, if the Canker take them, what an
Orchard shall we have? if there be ignorance in our Families, profaneness in
our Families discord and contention in our Families; you shall soon find it in
a Church and State; for in the chain of Order, every link depends one upon
another, and begins below, albeit, it reach very high: let Inferiors in
Families, forget their duties to Superiors; Superiors to Magistrates, and
Ministers; Magistrates and Ministers, to Princes; in the end, all will forget
their duties unto God, who is above all: therefore as Elisha healed the naughty
waters, 2 King. 2.21.
by casting in Salt at the Spring head; so let us heal disorders in the Church
and Nation, by seasoning our Families with piety and Religion; then as the
Prophet said, will God say, I have healed these waters, there shall not be any
more, psalm. 78.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
from them, death or barren land. Never look to have the Church or State to
flourish, till our Families flourish in piety.

Thirdly, in a Self-respect, Governors of Families should make conscience of
this duty, For

Phil. verse. 11.
the Profit is great that comes unto you thereby. St. Paul writing to Philemon,
in the behalf of Onesimus (after his conversion) tells him, that however he
had bin before unprofitable, yet now he should find him a profitable Servant.
Those who are faithful to God, will be likewise faithful to Man: so was
Abraham's Servant, who being sent about his Masters business, (and a great
business too) to take a Wife for Isaac, his Masters Son, he begins his work
with Prayer, Genesis 24.12.
Genesis 24.12. Lord God of my Master Abraham, send me good speed. And when he saw
that God began to prosper what he had took in hand, he was at prayer again, and
rendered thanks for his good success, verse. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of my
Master Abraham, and how faithful he was to his Master, in the whole carriage of
the business, the story testifies. But in what Family was this Servant trained
up? out of what Family came he? why, out of a Religious Family, he was trained
up, under a godly and Religious Master, one that would command his Servants, to
walk after God. And you may, in the same Chapter, find a Son of the same
Family (too:) going into the Fields to pray and meditate, Sons and Servants,
in such Families as are religious, will go about their business, praying, and
meditating, and so have a blessing attend them; (without which early rising,
and late going to bed, is to no purpose,) when Servants that are untaught,
Psalm. 127.2.
and live in irreligious Families, go about their business, mumblingly and
mutteringly; railing, and reviling, cursing, and swearing, and so have the
curse of God following them, in all that they put their hands unto. There is no
such way to bring Servants and Children to obedience, as to endeavor, that the
fear of God may be planted in their hearts. That will cause them to do their
work for Conscience sake, to be faithful, as well in their Governors absence,
as presence; and stir them up to pray for good success upon their labors and
endeavors; and that is it, which brings the blessing of God upon a Family:
Genesis 39.2. Genesis 31.30.
Thus was Potiphars Family blessed for Joseph's sake, and Labans for Jacobs.

Secondly, it is a great honor to a Family, to be godly, and Religious, such
Families are Churches, and are dignified with that Title ( Romans 16.2.3. 1 Cor.
16.19. Col. 4.15. Philem. 2.) This is an honorable Appellation; Romans 16.2.3. 1
Cor. 16.19. Colos. 4.15. Philem. 2. Sirac. 10.2.
It honors the Governors themselves, who are best known by their Servants and
Children: (they being but as their shadows, Prove. 28.7. and 29.12.) And it
honors those, that are members of that Family* in that they are become the
Children of God, and Heirs of Grace.

Thirdly, it brings much comfort to Governors, when those under their charge
become Religious, 3 Epist. Joh. 4. Prove. 10.1. and 23, 24, 25. 1 These. 2.20.
the comfort and contentment of a man's life, lies much in his Family. Ye are
our joy, and Crown of rejoicing, said Paul, in another case, 1 These. 2.20. so
may Governors say of a Religious and well governed Family: But on the other
side, looseness and disorder in a Family, makes the lives of the Governors
thereof to be very uncomfortable (so the rude, and untoward behavior of the
Wives of profane Esau, Genesis 27.46.
did vex the souls of Isaac and Rebeckah, Genesis 27. ult. so Prove. 17.21. and
19.13. the same of Servants.)

Fourthly, the great account that Governors are to make to God, for the
neglect of their Duties herein, should make them the more careful. Our Servants
and our Children are not our own, Ezekiel. 16.20.
but Gods, Ezekiel. 16.20. they are born to him, and must be educated and brought
up for him. You are but Gods Deputies, and govern for him: All the power that
thou can challenge in thy Family, is subordinate; we trust our Servants with
our goods, and God trusts us with their souls; and he has given a strait
charge unto us, of every one that comes under our Roof, (not much unlike that
in the Parable, 1 King. 20.39. Look to this man, if by any means he be missing
thy life goes for his life: So) look to this thy Child, 1 King. 20.39.
thy Servant; if he be wanting, or missing, if his soul perish through thy
negligence, thy soul dies for his. Thus Ely was charged with the sins of his
Children, 1 Samuel 2.29.
1 Samuel 2.29. (And, as you know, many a man is undone by Suretiship): But if
you can say at the last day, Here am I O Lord, Isa. 8.18. Joh. 17.12.
and the Children that thou have given me: or as Christ in that Prayer of his,
I have lost none of them that thou have given me, but that Son of perdition
which was lost before, this will further our Account to our endless comfort.
And thus (in many respects) if we love our selves, we should teach our Families
to be Religious.

Fifthly and lastly, the tender love and compassion, that we bear at least
pretend to bear to those that are under our charge, should put us upon the
Duty. Ecclus. 33.29.
If thou have a faithful Servant (said the Son of Syrach,) let him be unto
thee as thy own soul. The soul is near and dear to us, (I am sure it ought to
be.) Now he that loves his soul, will have a care to teach and instruct that
soul; so should those Governors have a care to instruct and teach their
Families, that love their Families. Meat, Drink, Apparel, and other necessaries
of Nature, are not more needful for their bodies preservation, then holy
Instruction is for their souls salvation. Thus you see, what Reason you have to
do, as you from Christ's example are here taught to do, viz. to take care, that
those under your charge, be taught Religion, and instructed in the ways to
Heaven.

Cyprian brings in many Children, pitifully complaining against their Parents,
for want of Instruction: And the like complaint methinks in these days, I hear
sounding in mine ears, made by many Families against their Governors: Alas!
what have we done, that we are thus miserably tormented; The negligence, or
treachery, or misguided zeal of our Parents and Masters, have brought all this
misery upon us: They have proved our Murderers, who should have bin our
Instructers; they have deprived us of the wholesome nourishment of the word, and
gave us a Scorpion instead of a fish: they have plunged us in the mire of
sensual pleasures, when they should have dipped us in the sacred Laver of
Regeneration: they kept us from God our Father, and the Church our Mother. Had
they bin godly, we might have bin everlastingly happy.

The reason of this great neglect, arises partly from; Ignorance partly, from
Carelessness; partly from Pride* and partly from Profaneness. It is a true
saying, Ignorantia Judicis, est calamitas innocentis, and it is also true that
Ignorantia Domini, est calamitas servi; yet Ignorance is all the plea that some
have for the omission of their duty: call upon them to teach and instruct
their families, and break unto them the bread of life, they answer in effect as
the widow of Zarephta did Elijah when he asked of her a morsel of bread; 2
King. 17.17.
As the Lord lives I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruse, and behold I am gathering two sticks that I may go in
and dress it for me, and my son, that we may eat and dye. I can say the Lords
prayer, the Creed, the ten Commandments, and what I can say I teach them,
(albeit I understand not the meaning of them) as for other points of Religion,
I am to seek therein my self, how then should I instruct others? If this that I
do, will not serve the turn, they must dye, or do, as God shall please.

But as Christ said to Nicodemus, John 3.10.
so may I to thee, Art thou a Master in Israel and know not these things?
Have thou entered into a married estate? art thou become a father, or master of
a family? have thou children and servants under thy command, and yet art
ignorant of the first principles of Christian Religion? A shameful excuse:
Marriage was not ordained altogether for Procreation, but for Education and
Regeneration of Children. This world might be filled full enough of Children,
though there were no marriage; but Heaven could not be filled, nor the place of
fallen Angels supplied, without the care of religious Education, which from
parents (in lawful marriage) they are likelyest to receive, and God expects
that from them they should receive it. And art thou ignorant? This thou
speak to thy shame that so speak.

Others have knowledge (enough) themselves, and are able to instruct their
families; Acts 1^.17.
but they are of Gallio's opinion and temper, imagining that matters of
Religion belongs not to them to teach; but to Minister. To Church they bring
their family, and that is as much as is required of them, (as they think.)

And it is well done in doing so; ^ Sam. 1.21.
Elkanah did the like, 1 Samuel 1.21. and I could wish that more of us would do,
as much; but I must further tell you, that this is not enough: were this all
that is required of Household Governors, why did the Apostle send women to learn
at home of their Husbands? Believe it, every Governor of a family is as deeply
charged with the souls of those who are under his Government, Psalm. 78.5.
Ephesians. 6.4.
as any Pastor is with the souls of that Flock which is committed to his
Charge; Nor will the public Ministry become fruitful, if that seed which is
sown in public, be not watered in private, by Conference, Examination, and
good instruction, (as in these sad times Experience does verify.) Ministers in
these days are both Eloquently learned, and learnedly eloquent; mighty in
word, and deed, in doctrine and in life; and yet little good is done, by our
preaching: And to what can we impute the unprofitablenesse of our Ministry so
much, as to Parent's and Master's omission of family duties? Know then thus
much, that as you call our Congregations our charge, (and so they are); and cry
shame on us if we be dumb, and idle, (as well you may): so are your families
your care, which to neglect the instructing of, is no less sin, and shame for
you, then for us in the other case.

Others there are, that both can, and would (as they say) set up Religion in
their houses and perform Religious duties, but they think it a disgrace unto
them, a blemish to their Reputation to stoop so low.

Alas! that dust and ashes should be so proud, 2 Samuel 6.22.
as to think it any disparagement to worship at the Lords feet in the sight of
his Saints! Am I vile? I will yet be more vile said David to Michal (when she
scorned him for dancing before the Ark;) He knew no shame belonging to that,
nor is there to this. Eusebius. Lib. 4. de vita Constant.
Eusebius reports of Constantine's Palace that the form of a Church was in it,
where was reading of the word, prayer, singing of psalms, which he himself
usually would begin and set. Melanct. de Georg. Princ. Anthaltino in Praef. 5.
Tom. oper. Lutheri.
And Melancthon, of George Prince of Anhalt that his Chamber, was a Church, an
University, and a Court; for, besides the dispatch of civil business, there was
daily praying; reading; yea and preaching too. I spare to speak of other
Presidents, we have Christ's own example, who Catechized his family frequently;
said grace at meat, sung psalms with his disciples: prayed with them, taught
them to pray: And who art thou then, or what is thy fathers house, that thou
think thy self to good to serve thy God in the performance of such duties?
were thou an Angel, and had thou thy seat above the Clouds, yet would it be
no disparagement unto thee, to be sent down from thence to teach and instruct
thy inferiors in Religious matters, Dan. 9.21. Luke 1.19.

And yet there are a worser sort then these to be met withal, such are they as
are so far from teaching their Families to be Religious, Psalm. 123.4.
that if in case, any that comes under their Roof, be taught unto their hands,
they unteach them again, by disgracing prayer, singing, reading of the word,
and deriding them that use it. Let such scoffing Ismaels, and jeering Michals,
hear how the Apostle styles them; Children of the Devil, Enemies of
Righteousness, Act. 13.10.
and further charge them to be such as cease not to prevert the strait way of
God, Act. 13.10. But enough of Reproof: suffer now I beseech you the word of
Exhortation.

Dan. 2.31.32.
Otherwise your families will be but like Nebuchadzars Image; the head gold,
the shoulders silver, the arms brass, the legs iron, the feet clay; the lower
still the worser.

We have long looked for a Reformation both in Church and State, and promised
our selves, much that way; but the harvest is past, Jer. 8.20.
the summer is ended, and yet we are not saved: the Church is unreformed,
Religion is unsettled, Discipline neglected. To reform all, let us begin at
home. It Is a madness to think that our Congregations will not be reformed, so
long as our families are poisoned with ignorance, and prophannesse. Our
Congregations will not be pure Churches, till our families be turned into
Churches. Oh that we might live to see that day when we might send our
Salutations as St. Paul did Romans 16.5. (and else where) Salute such a one, and
such a one, with the Church, which is in thy house. That we could say of your
families, as was said of the family of Juliana, to whom St. Austine and Alipius
writes, Epist. 143.
domum vestram non parvam Christi Ecclesiam deputamus, we account your house no
small Church of Christ. So God will delight to dwell in your houses with you.
And very strangers coming under your Roofs will say as Jacob did of Bethel,
Surely God is in this place. Genesis 28.16.
Would you know how this may be done? Why then, let me make a little stop in my
way to tell you. See Mr. Daniel Dykes Platform of household Government in his
Expos. on the Epist. to Phil. verse. 2.
If in case you would that your houses should be Churches, and deserve that
honor to be so styled and esteemed, see that the form of Church Government, by
some praescribed; be by you observed.

First, care must be had in the Collecting and gathering of it, (what may be)
that none be admitted into your families whom God has not before admitted into
his: we may not hand over head entertain into our society all indifferently,
that offer themselves unto us, but such as are of the household of faith. The
members of a visible Church are the Saints, Prociel este prophani.
(at least so by outward profession.) Nor does the Church indifferently receive
all comers into her society; It admits not (by the Sacrament of Baptism)
Children of Turks and Infidels, but such as are of a holy seed; the offspring
of Religious Parents: The like care must be had by those who would have their
families baptized with the name of a Church. This care had David, Psalm. 101.6.7.
Psalm. 101.6, 7. His eyes were upon the faithful of the Land; that they might
dwell with him; such as walked in a perfect way should serve him; As for Liars,
flatterers, Drunkards, and deceitful workers, he would have none of them under
his Roof, (if known.) Which Psalm, Bishop Ridley read often over to his
family, hiring them to learn it by heart, that they might be an example to
others of holiness and virtue.

And surely here is a great failing in Householders in the choice of Servants:
most choose as Solomon did Jeroboam, 1 King. 11.28.
he saw that the young man was fit for the work, and so (without any more ado)
entertained him into his service: but it had been well for Solomon if a man of
more conscience, Mr. Dyke his Epist. Ded. to the Expos. on Phil.
though less skill had been retained; (as one says well): for he sought and
wrought the ruin of his house, and whole Family. Thus many Masters and
Governors of Families, look no further then to the outward abilities of those
they entertain. If they be fit for their service, meet for their work; if they
be good husbands, can plough well; thresh well, etc. Albeit they are very
Jeroboams otherwise, and of an unsound Religion, loose conversation, they shall
be entertained (with curse and all which follows them;) But is this the way
to have your Familes become Churches, in suffering them to be Receptacles for
Swearers, Drunkerds, and such like vicious persons? nay rather, Stables of
swine, and Cages of unclean birds (as the Holy Ghost speaks of Babylon, Rev.
18.2.) were our Houses Churches before; yea, such Metamorphise men, (as the
Jews did the Lords house, which of a house of Prayer they made a Denn of
Thieves.) And it brings the Prophets curse upon your Tabernacles, Isal.
13.21.22.
the Zim of Ochin do lodge there, and Satyrs, (unclean spirits) dance there.

Wherefore, it behooves you to be somewhat shy, and wary whom you entertain to
serve you: were you to plant an Orchard, you would not run to every hedge for
trees to plant it with, but send far and near for choicest fruit; much more
should care be taken in planting a Church in your Families, if you would have
it glorious.

When thou have gathered a Church and erected and set it up in thy Family, then
see that it be rightly ordered, and governed, as a Church should be. 1. Pet.
5.2.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; was the Pastoral charge given by St. Peter to the
Elders of the Church, 1 Pet. 5.2. The like charge, is laid on you that are the
Elders of a Family: first you are to discharge the duty of a Pastor in feeding
of your Family; that is, in well ordering and governing of it (for so the word
is used,) 2 Samuel 2.5. and 7, 7. Psalm. 78.71.) and in Instructing of it in the
things that pertain to life and godliness. Secondly, the office of a Bishop in
a careful observing of your flock, with a vigilant and watchful eye; that if
any disorders be ready to break in upon your Families, they may be speedily
prevented, or resisted:

You are to feed your Families, as the Pastor of the Church is to feed his
Flock. There are two Pastoral staffes that are spoken of, Zech. 11.7.
Zech. 11.7. ult. whereby Gods Flock was fed and guided; the one called
Beauty, which was a staff of mercy, and divine protection: The other called
Bands, which was the staff of unity, for the conjoyning of the Church; or of
Correction and just censure of Offenders. To these two staves we may resemble
Doctrine and Discipline: As these must be in a Pastor's hand for the well
governing of a Church; so must they be in the hand of that Governor of a
Family, that would govern it rightly, as it should be governed.

Doctrine, is a principal note of a true Church: Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9; 2 Timothy
3.15.
so is pious instruction to edification and profit, of a Godly Family. The
Scriptures must be read; Gods name called upon; Children and Servants,
Catechized in the principles of true Religion; and other Religious exercises
used, wherein whole Families ought to join together, (if it may be) resembling
therein our Church Assemblies, wherein the Worship and Service of God is
jointly performed by the Congregation, Neh. 8.1. 1 Cor. 11.33. The Pastor being
there the mouth of the rest, as the Governor of the Family must be here, 2
Kings 22.10. Neh. 8.6. Acts 27.35.

Oh that you governors had this care to see Religion flourish in your houses!
the want whereof is a cause that Gods blessing is wanting on all other cares
you take; and that your Children and Servants remain, the Children and
Servants of the Devil; you neglecting those means, whereby they should be
made the Children and Servants of God: Is he worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
who provides not food and raiment for his Family? What are you then who suffer
the sou'es of your Families to starve for want of Instruction; and to go naked
and ragged for want of that which should be unto them both food and clothing?

To Doctrine, Discipline must be joined; this though it be not of the Being of
a Church; yet it makes for the well being of it, without which a Church is
defective, and will soon corrupt and come to naught, so it is in your Families:
Discipline may be no more wanting in the house, then in the Church. That is the
Broom that sweeps the house, makes all fair, and clean for Gods entrance.
Luke 15.
It must resemble Church Discipline both in respect of Order and Censure.

Order, 1 Cor. 14.40.
must be in your Family, (for God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion.)
This is required of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.4. he must have his Children in
subjection, 1 Timothy 3.4.
with all gravity or comeliness, (as some render it.) Now every Governor is a
Bishop in his own house; and must see that there be a decorum kept, and
observed of all; each one carrying himself according to his place, for the good
of the whole: There is a comeliness, peculiar to the subjection of the Wife;
and a comeliness peculiar to the subjection of a Child; and a comeliness
peculiar to the subjection of a Servant; A comeliness of the inferior, in
obeying; a comeliness of the superior, likewise in commanding and ruling:
Where this comely Order is not maintained; (every one keeping his station, and
doing that which is proper to his Place,) there is no resemblance of the Church
(which is said to be beautiful, Cant. 6.4.
like an Army with Banners,) but of that Israeliticall Anarchie rather (spoken
of Judge. 17.) when every man did that which was good in his own eyes: 2 Samuel
17.23,
And who so neglects thus to Order his Family, may be thought worse then
Achitophell, who (albeit he hanged himself, yet) had a care to order his own
household before he destroyed himself.

As there must be household Order, so there must be household Censure: Math.
18.15, 16, 17.
And therein our Savior's direction would be followed, Math. 18.15, 16, 17.
Yet in Sins manifest, and public, we are not tied to this Order; but,
according to the nature, and quality of the offense, we must begin, sometimes
at the last (as was the proceeding with the incestuous Corinthian 1 Cor. 5.)
Sometimes with the second as 1 Timothy 5.20. But if less scandalous and private
the Order before prescribed, is to be observed.

First Offenders, must be Admonished and reproved in private; If that prevail
not, then let it be done more publicly before others; if no Reformation
follow, then must we proceed to Excommunication, and casting of them out, Psalm.
101.4, 5. Him that is such a one I will not, Psalm. 101.4, 5.
(that is, as is added by our Translators) suffer: such rotten members must be
cut off, lest the sound ones be infected by their contagion: If Ismael turn
Scoffer, out of doors with him, (though it be never so grievous to thee to do
it, Genesis 21.9.10.12.
as it was to Abraham.) Let that Servant be as thy right eye, or hand, very
useful and serviceable, yet if he endanger danger thy soul, or the souls of
thy Children, by lewd swearing, and open vitiousnesse; spare him not: Our
Saviors speech is peremptory, Erue, Abscinde, pull out, cut off; cast away
with indignation, Math. 5.29.30.
Math, 5, 29, 30. rather want both eye and hand, then suffer corruption in
either.

As thou must discharge the office of a Pastor to thy Family in Feeding of it,
so of a Bishop in visiting and overseeing it. Be dilligent to know the state of
thy Flocks, Pro. 27.23.
and look well to thy herds (says Solomon, Prove. 27.23.) Consider the
Condition of them, look to the Number of them, behold them with thine own eye.
This David professes and promises to do, Psalm. 32.8. he would keep a
watchful eye, over them whom he was to guide and govern, Psalm. 32.8.
lest they might be turned out of the way, wherein they should walk: such a
vigilant eye had Jacob over his Family, as appears, Genesis 35.2. the like had
Job over his, Genesis 35.2. Job 1.5.
Job. 1.5. The good Emperor Antoninus used every year to have his house thus
visited, he would strictly examine what disorders were in it; who were vicious;
And what order the Visitors did set down for Reformation, was presently put in
execution. This is to Bishop it aright, (...) ab (...) et (...).
as one speaks. And from this careful visiting and overseeing is the name
given, Act. 20.20.

The want of this Vigilancie in Governors, is the Fountain and original of
most disorders, in the best Families: Some are careful that there be no
iniquity found in their hands* Psalm. 7.3. but have little or no regard of the
iniquity of their heels; Psalm. 7.3.
Psalm. 49.5. Children and Servants may run where they list; Psalm. 49.5.
say what they list, do what they list; and little notice taken thereof,
(especially on the Sabbath): if they follow their business on the week days,
and keep close unto their work; then let them go where they will, or do what
they will, on the Lords day, they pass not. Were some of you (who are present
here this day) asked, Where are your Sons, your Daughters, Menservants, maid
Servants? You are here, but where are they; would it not be a posing question?
were you able to give a reasonable answer it to? Let them be out of your work,
but an hour in a day, there is examining, Where were you; what have you been
doing? then there is chiding, brawling, fighting, etc. But on this day, let
them make an Alehouse their Temple; Act. 20.7.
and the Pot their morning and evening Sacrifice, and continue drinking, as
long as Paul did preaching till Midnight: against such there is no law, no
threat, no reproose, no punishment (says an excellent Divine).

I beseech you, carry a more watchful eye, over your Families (even in that
respect) then heretofore you have done; God will certainly call you to an
account, for your not calling them unto it; what though you your selves
frequent Gods house; return thence home, stir not abroad, etc: yet Their
sins (through your neglect) run upon your scoare.

A Minister may be Pastorally Non-resident, Albeit he be not Personally so. If
he be a stranger to his Pulpit, though he be no stragler out of the bounds of
his own Parish, he resides not: (And indeed that is the worst Non-residencie of
the two). This may be thy case; thou may keep at home, but if thou behavest
not thy self there wisely in a perfect way, Psalm. 101.2.
but neglectest thy duty; thou art guilty of the sin of Non-residencie, and if
any of thy flock miscarry (through thy neglect) by the scab, fly, or rott, etc.
you must make it good to the great Shepherd of the sheep, at the day of
Reckoning.



It is with our Families as with our visible Congregations; Resp.
no Church on Earth is completely perfect: there will be a mixture of good and
bad, (especially in great Families); as in a great Herd it is a venture, if
there be not some Rascal dear to be found in it; Neither Noah nor Lot had all
their Servants in obedience to God, (yet they might seem good, and their
Masters might think well of them, because they could not discern the heart,
but God found them otherwise, as it is likely). Good Elisha had a lying
covetous and sacrilegious Gehezi to serve him; And in Christ's own Family there
was a Judas, (albeit he played his prize closely,): but none of these suffered
open vitiousnesse to abide under their Roofs, nor may we: Do you your duty, let
your care be that God may be honored, and worshipped, your Families well
ordered, Christian duties solemnly performed: and then though the success be
not answerable to your endeavors, that you cannot prevail with your Children
and Servants (as were to be wished) yet in doing your best endeavor to promote
Religion, in your Families; you shall have comfort and deliver your own souls.
Ezekiel. 3.19.
And albeit some (and the greatest some too) be rotten and unsound, yet your
houses shall be honored with the name of a Church, Prove. 12.7.14 11. Genesis 4.14.
from the better part (which always gives the denomination) as Adams house was
called the Face of God; albeit Cain a castaway was therein born, and brought
up, Genesis 4.14. And your Tabernacles shall stand long and flourish.



Bad Servants indeed will (it may be) rather leave thy service, then be drawn
to serve the Lord; Resp.
but if they be unwilling to keep the Commandments of God, their room is
better then their company: and this be sure of, that a few Servants fearing
God, will be better for you, and bring a greater blessing upon their labors,
then a many of wicked and deboist Servants will, or can: for they but corrupt
others, and speak of wicked blasphemy; vex the best; and perhaps bring a curse
upon the Family wherein they live.

Secondly, the world is not so bad and barren, but some good Servants may be
found, who will delight to dwell in Religious Families: Abraham was very strict
in seeing that his Servants served God; and yet he had so great a Family, Genesis
14.14.
that on a sudden he was able to arm 318. fighting men, Genesis 14.14. Nor did
Joshua, nor David, Hester, nor Cornelius want Servants, Albeit they did
carefully see, that their Servants were Religious; Doubt not then but if you
your selves be good, you shall meet with some Servants that are good.



Rather; Masters, Parents and Governors were better then, Resp.
than now, they used more means to bring Servants unto good, then now they do;
and God accordingly blessed their endeavors. Walk you in the same path, that
they did, and then complain if you have cause; see if you have not, as good
Children, and Servants, as they had: Teach them, pray for them, regard them,
reward them: and you shall have such, as will think it a happiness, to live
under your Roofes.

I conclude this Use, with a speech of Austine. Notwithstanding, my dear
Friends (says he), Aug. in Psalm. 50. page 596.
in so great a difference of manners, and such abominable corruptions, govern
your houses, govern your Children, govern your Families. As it behooves us to
speak to you in the Church, so it pertaines to you to do in your houses (which
is likewise, or ought to be, the house of God) that you may be able to give a
good account to God of those who are under you.

For three things (says the wise man Agur) the Earth is moved, Pro. 30.31.
and for the fourth it cannot sustain it self: and the first of the four is,
when a Servant will reign, Prove. 30.21. that is, when a Servant despises his
Masters Government, and follows his own ways. This disquiets the whole
Earth: Family, Town, City, Country, all are disquieted thereby, and especially
if you refuse to be tractable and submit to them that have the oversight of
you, in the ways of Religion. And yet such a licentious liberty do many
Servants affect, that (to choose) they will live in such Families, wherein all
things are lawful (except godliness:) Of all Masters they care not for living
with these Religious Masters; who if they call on them to hear the word, resort
to Gods houser, or to be Catechized, or conferred with about what they have
heard; then with the Prodigal, Luke 15.
in the Gospel, they will up and be gone, and choose rather to live where they
may feed with swine, and eat husks, then to live in such a house, where is
bread enough: But remember you that Exhortation, Prove. 1.8, 9.
Prove. 8, 9. my Son hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the
law of thy Mother, for they shall be an ornament of Grace unto thy head, and
chains about thy neck.

It was David's prayer, in the behalf of the prosperity of the Israelites,
that their Sonns and Daughters might be as corner stones pollished after the
similitude of a Palace, Psalm. 144.12.
upon which the structure of a fair and lasting pile might be raised; What
building so glorious as the house of God? Whilst thou art in thy natural
estate, thou art a rough and unpollished stone, and no way fit to be laid in
Gods Temple; be content (then) to be hewn and squared, by Doctrine and
Discipline, under a Religious Government, that you may be able to say, I am one
of the living stones, that help to the making up of the Church in this house.
And so Parents, Masters, Servants, Children, keeping house together in the
fear of God, shall hereafter keep house together, 2 Cor. 5.
in a house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens which is our
greatest happiness, Psalm. 144.15.

Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go unto him at Midnight, and say
unto him, Friend lend me three Loaves, etc.

I have been somewhat prolix in the prosecuting of this point: if it be a fault
bear with it, the necessity and usefulness of the point may excuse me. I
pass from the Praeface or Introduction, and come to the Narration.

Two parts we have considerable, in this Parable (as you have heard) the Part
propounded, from verse 5-9. and the Part applying from verse 9-14. In the
propounding part we have a Case put. 2ly. Resolved. As it is Put; we will take
notice, both of the Manner and Matter of it.

The Manner of proposing: which is first by way of Interrogation: 2ly. by way
of Supposition.

First of the Interrogation: (which of you?)

It is ordinary in Scripture, Obs. Math. 6.25.26, 27, 30.
this way to Minister instruction unto us; Christ did it frequently as we find
in that excellent Sermon of his preached upon the Mount ( Math. 6.25.26.27.30.)
Why and why do you so? So else where (as Math. 16.13.15.) Ipse Christus
Catechista (says one) Christ's preaching seems to be a Catechizing: when he was
but twelve years old, Canis.
we read, that he was in the Temple, sitting among the Doctors: Luke 2.45.
Ejusdem scientiae est scire quid interroges, quidve ^espondeas. Orig.
and audiens, and interrogans, both hearing and asking questions, Luke 2.45. He
heard what they would say, and he moved questions to hear what they could: It
is a testimony of as much knowledge to ask a pertinent question, as to give a
pertinent Answer.

But so it is (and it is to be much wondered at, that it should be so) that
this way and form of teaching, and instructing others, is grown quite out of
Credit with us: we love not to propound questions to others about Religious
matters; nor do we like to be questioned about them: Let one come unto us in
the meekest and most respective manner, and propound a question concerning some
fundamental point of Christian Religion, we are ready to answer (with another
cross one) as the Hebrew did Moses, Exodus 2.
Who made thee a Judge, or a man in Authority, to examine me?

Questions are suspected for Examinations; and men are afraid lest they should
have some secret picked, which they would not have discovered. Penitent Citizen,
on Luke 7.40.
This ought not to be; the Rule is, Be ready to give a Reason of your Faith to
him that asks. But of this point more has been said in another Parable, I
therefore pass it briefly.

The use of Interrogations is, either to inform the judgment, (as Genesis 3.9.
Revel. 7.13.) Or to press some matter of weight upon the Conscience, (as Deuteronomy.
10.1^. Isa. 5.3. Mich. 6.) Any thing propounded unto us after an Interrogatory
way, carries with it greater force and Emphasis. It stirrs up the hearer, not
only to Attention, but to a due Consideration of the matter, as if he were
presently to pass censure, and put in his Answer: Now in that our Savior
propounds this Parable after such a form and manner, it may instruct us, that
are his Ministers, to look as well to the Manner, as to the Matter of our
Preaching.

Serious Doctrine or matters weighty, must be pressed upon the conscience of
our Hearers, the best way we may. It is not enough to deliver what is sound,
and good, but we must so deliver it, that an edge be set upon it, and those
that hear us be stirred up to a communing with their own souls about that which
is taught.

The words of the wise ( says Solomon) are like Goads and Nails fastened by
the Master of Assemblies which are given from one Shepherd. Eccles. 12.11.
Salvian de prove. l. 1. c. 1.
He says not (says Salvian) that they are sweet powders, but medicines; not
Crisping pinnes to curie the hair, or locks, but Goades and Nayls, to enter
through the thick skin, and pierce the heart: such were the words of our
Savior, Math. 7. ult. and 21.44. and such must ours be, who are his Servants,
1 Cor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 14.24.25. Luke. 3.10. so forcible are right words. Job. 6.25.


Bernard loved, and always wished to hear that Minister, Am^vocem illius
pastoris quinon sibi plausum sell mihi planctum etc. Bern. in Cant.
at whose Sermons the people hemmed not, but sighed; clapped not their hands
(as at a Play,) but knocked their breasts, (as at a Funeral) who drew tears,
from the eyes of their people, rather then commendations from their tongues.

Chrysostom complains of the plaudite's, and the acclamations used by his
hearers; Non Theatrum Ecclesi^, the Church is not a Theater. What mean you by
these Plaudite's? what get I by them? I had rather have one soul, then all
these hands and eyes: The care of this reverend Father, was to deliver weighty
matter in terms, rather significant, than elegant; and and labored more for
force of Argument, then Ornament of speech; and yet the Preacher sought out for
acceptable words, Eccles. 12.10. Such words, as might procure, not only an
understanding, but willing and obedient attention: He delights to be heard, and
to be heard with delight. Austin does not only profess of himself, that he
studied at home to make his language sweet, and harmonious, and acceptable to
Gods people; but he believes also, that St. Paul himself, and all the Apostles
had a delight, and a holy melting of the bowels, when the Congregation liked
their Preaching. Oh that God would give you such Ministers; Oh that God would
be pleased to send us such Hearers! It was said of Luther, by some that heard
him, that he did preach as if he had been within a man: Lutherus me alloquitur
quasi me intra erat. 2 Cor. 3.6. Hebr, 4.12.
It is the life and excellency of Preaching, to be an able Minister of the
spirit, and where, were the spirit in it, if it should not discern the
spirits, and divide betwixt the Marrow and the bone? Thy own heart, and
conscience, is the subject wherein the virtue and efficacy of Preaching is to
be found: if that be moved to believe, and repent; such a one is a powerful
Preacher (at least to thee) and so esteem him.

As the Case is put by way of Interrogation (Which of you, etc?) so by way of
supposition (shall have a Friend] he speaks not positively, Quis vestrum and
qua^^ dicae pauci sunt. Salme^r^. Doct.
you my Disciples that have Friends, but, put the case you shall have one,
intimating by this manner of speech, that,

A fast and faithful friend is hard to find: He is so great a rarity, that it
may well be questioned, who has him? Job speaks to the point, Job. 5.15. He
compares his Friends to the Brooks, Job. 5.15.
by which the Merchants do travel; unto Teman frozen in Winter, and dried up
in Summer; In the time of rain, they overflow: surely says Job, you are very
like unto it, verse 21. In my prosperity you were my only Friends, when I had
no need of you; when I had showers of blessing from above, you overflowed with
kindness, but in my misery and drought, (when I had most need of refreshing,
Job. 16.20.
) you add affliction to affliction, so Job. 16.20. my friends scorn me; many
pretended love and friendship, but now in my calamity they will not own me;
they scorn me, when they should comfort me: The like complaint makes David,
Psalm. 38.11.41.9.
Psalm. 38.11. My Lovers and my Friends stand aloof from my soar. And
elsewhere, that his familiar Friend in whom he trusted, which did eat of his
bread, had lift up his heel against him, Psalm. 41.9. The Church of God laments
this; Lament. 1.2.
Lament. 1.2. All her Friends dealt treacherously with her. And Christ himself,
the head of the Church (who here puts the case to his Disciples) found it
experimentally true. I was wounded in the house of my Friends, Zach: 13.6.
Zach. 13.6. (The Prophet speaking there Prophetically, of the Passion of
Christ.)

There are three Reasons that may be rendered for this, why faithful Friends
are scarcely found.

1. Prove. 20.6. Vera amicitia tantum inter honos oritur, inter optimos
consummatur Cassiand^in Ps.
Divinity affords us this for one, there are few good amongst many. Every man
will proclaim his own goodness (says Solomon) but who shall find a faithful
man? that is, amongst those many, w^o shall find one faithful, and cordial?
Neither can true friendship be but amongst those that are good: Grace and
Virtue is the cement which conglutinates hearts, and makes true Friends (as
hereafter shall be showed.) Now the number of godly and virtuous men being
small, the number of faithful Friends cannot be great.

Moral Philosophy renders another, in telling us it is likeness of minds, 2.
Phil. 2.20.
and manners, that makes the true Love-knot of Friendship; when we find another
of the same disposition with our selves, Firmissimainter pares amicitia Q.
Curt. l. 2. Inter dispares mores, firma non potest esse amicitia. Aug de
amicitia, c. 14.
we find alter ego another self: the same soul as it were in a divided body.
And Nature that makes us love our selves, makes us (with the same reason) love
those that are like us: Now then, if to goodness and virtue, there must be
added a likeness of manners, temper, and disposition; it is no mervail if
there be so little friendship in the world, seeing it is with tempers, and
humors, as it is with faces, not two amongst many that agree in all points.

Experience furnishes us with a third: Friendship was ever rare to find, but
more rare then ever, by how much the world is more corrupt then ever.
Machiavells Tenants are more set by, (shall I say, then the Rules of Aristotle,
Plato or any Philosopher, nay) then the Tenants of Christ himself; His
Scholars have so well profited in his School, that many of them are able to
teach their Master; Profess (says he) Love and Friendship to thy Neighbor,
who if he be up to the knees in water, then lend him thy hand to pull him out;
Is he up to the Wast? do thy best then; to help him: but if he be up to the
chin, then thy hand upon his head, and duck him under, suffer him not to rise
any more: Such is the friendship of this age, wherein the habits of men's minds,
are as much changed, as the habit of their bodies. That friendship, and
honesty which in times past, had the hand on the Heart, now has it on the
Toe: Faithful, and Cordial dealing, is now grown clean out of fashion, and
nothing left but Cringes and Complements. Thus you have the Grounds, and
Reasons, of the point. Let us apply it.

Socrates, Oh! (...).
my Friends, there is no true Friend amongst you. The misery of Travelers is
the misery of Christ's Disciples, to find many Hosts, but few fast Friends
amongst them.

Keckerman relates a story of an old man, Ethic. p. 369. E.
who upon his death bed, asked his Son, What Friends he had: he answered him,
Very many: well, said the Father, I have lived so long in the world, and yet
have found but half a Friend: But this do, try thy Friends before thou need'st
them; Go kill a Calfe, put it into a sack, and pretend that it is a Child
which thou have untimely slain, desire their advice, and counsel, and that
they would conceal the fact: he did so, and upon trial, found, that all his
Friends deserted him; not one that stuck close unto him: Then by his Fathers
advice, he went unto his half-Friend, who presently assented to the burying of
it: in the mean time his other Friends, had accused him (for that supposed
fact) and had brought him to Execution; had not the matter been discovered.

Guecarra observes as much: By my own Experience (says he) if thou will
believe me, I know not any thing wherein thou may be sooner deceived, then in
this point of Friendship: Forty years (and more) with some judgment I remember
the world, in which time, I have found, such alteration in men's minds, and
manners, that if they should decline as fast from evil to worse, after forty
years more, it will be a hard matter to find a faithful Friend, or an honest
man.

For the better clearing, and fuller evincing of the point delivered unto you,
it will not be amiss to take notice, what friendship is; with the several
sorts and kinds of it: which when we rightly understand, it will appear that
we are much mistaken in the point of Friendship, and that amongst those many we
take for Friends, there is scarce a true Friend to be found amongst them all.

Freindship, what it is.
Friendship is by some described to be the sweetness, intimatenesse and
strength of Love; Or (as others) more large^y; A special obligation of Amity,
or good will: uniting the hearts of men together, in a greater neernesse and
dearnesse, then ordinarily is either required or to be found, amongst them.

By which it appears, Hart's. Caha. 21.
first, that Acquaintance is not Friendship; That is but the first draught of
it: that is (says one) as the Herd; Friendship is the Pair, that is taken or
chosen out of it: That (in ordinary use) is but a sharing of talk, news, meat,
complement: A thin^ easily created, once being in company does it: But
Friendship has Power, and Admittance into the inward parts of the soul. I may
have Great Acquaintance, and yet but Few Friends for all that.

Secondly, Galat. 1.18, 19.
there is a difference betwixt Good Will and Friendship Good will we should
bear to those we never saw, that know us not, (As St. Paul did to Peter, Jeams
and John, before he ever saw their faces) But we have Friendship only with
such men, as we have both seen, and known, and been conversant withal, and
taken great liking of.

Thirdly; betwixt Love and Friendship, there is a difference. A man may love
those, who love not him; but friendship is mutual. Seneca compares it to a
game at Tennis, wherein the ball is tossed, and not suffered to fall; if it do,
he forfeits who misseth the stroke? Or like two Lutes meeting in pitch and
neernesse, the striking of the one makes the other sound. So is it with true
Friends; And so it was between Jonathan and David, and between Basil and
Nazianzen, of whom it was said that anima una erat inclusa in duobus
corporibus; they seemed to have one soul, in two bodies: Yea many bodies and
many souls, are by Friendship made but one; for if a hundred men love together
as they ought, there is but one heart amongst them, Act. 4, 32. These things,
duly considered, Acts 4.32.
will evidently clear it, that many are mistaken in point of Friendship.

Secondly, let us distinguish (as Scripture does) of Friendship. A Friend is
taken sometimes, largely for a common or seeming Friend (as Prove. 14.20.) The
Rich has many Friends: This is Imperfect Friendship. Pro. 14.20.
Sometimes it is taken strictly for a faithful Friend indeed, (so Prove.
18.24.) There is a Friend that stieketh closer then a Brother. These Friends
that are fast and faithful, Prove. 18.24.
are joined together in the Truth of Affection and Religion, Tit. 3.15. Greet
them that love us in the Faith: And it arises from effectual good will of one
to another, Tit. 3.15.
and is grounded on moral goodness, this is perfect Friendship, and cannot be
but amongst the good. The other sort of Friends, false and fained, are such as
are not united to us by Religion, and true Affection, but for by, and sinister
ends; Vulgus amicitias utilitate prebat. Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides.
Pro. 19.6, 7.
grounding their Friendship on Profit Pleasure, and the like, as Prove. 19.6.
These are Friends by Accident: and their Friendship lives, and dies, as Profits
and Delights live and dye in us, Prove. 19.7. Of these sort of Friends there are
enough; but of fast Friends, few.

The Son of Sirach mentions diverse sorts of these counterfeit and feined
Friends in his Book of Ecclesiasticus, cap. 6.8, 9, 10. which we may do well to
take notice of.

First; A Time-serving Friend there is, who is a Friend for his own occasion,
and will not abide in the day of trouble: Ecclus. 6.8.
These are aptly resembled to the Dolphin, which in fair weather is never from
the sides of a ship, but when a storm arises, you have no more her company:
Or like the Swallow, which in Summer is chattering about your Windows, and in
your Chimneys, but in Winter takes her flight, and leaves nothing behind, but
dirt and dung, as a pledge of her Affection. They are like Mice in a Barn, or
Wasps about a Galley pot; they swarm about us whilst something may be had; So
long as we are in a flourishing estate, they will (as birds in Summer) build in
our boughs; but the leaves being fallen, they delight not in our shadow: Such
were Adoniahs Friends; no sooner had he usurped the Crown, and proclaimed
himself King, but many joined with him; As Joab the General of David's Army, 1
King. 1.7.
and most of the chief Captains, and Commanders; besides Abiathar the high
Priest: And yet (says the Text, verse. 8.
) the mighty men that belonged to David were not with him; He had not the
strength of the Army on his side (albeit he had most of the mighty Commanders
of Soldiers) for that they were not true unto him; For all the show that they
made, they did not respect Adoniah so much, as their own ends; therefore no
sooner was Solomon proclaimed, but they left Adoniah to himself, to make good
his own Title. Such Friends David found in his prosperity; Shemei was no
Railer, nor yet Achitophell a Traitor; 2 Samuel 15.31. 2 Samuel 16.5.13. Ester. 7,
8, 9.
but when the times turned, they could turn with them and prove both. Hamans
Friends, (who had before smiled in his face, and kissed his feet, now) finding
the King incensed against him, are ready to cover his head, and help him to the
halter. 2 Timothy 4.16.
And such Friends St. Paul found, many who pretended love, yet in his trouble
forsook him, and would not stand by him: If they follow him, it shall be with
Peter a far off, And such a Time-serving Friend, was Pompey to Cicero (as we
read in a story) who slipped out at a back door, when Cicero flew to him for
safeguard of his life, and so left him, to the mercy of his enemies. Such
Friends as these, you may have many who sing, to the tune of Fortune: (as they
say) they keep time, but ever sing the Base (says one), So that the case
(albeit these abound) may be still put unto you, Which of you shall have a
Friend?

Secondly; Ecclus. 6. Verse. 9. Pro. 26.23. Psalm. 118.12.
there is a Treacherous and a Perfidious Friend, that turns to enmity; and
takes part against thee, and in contention he will declare thy shame. Solomon
resembles these to Potsheds overlaid with silver dross, Prove. 26.23. David to
Bees, they come about me like Bees (says he, Psalm. 118.12.) The Be has both
honey, and a sting; so these have honey in their mouths, but gall in their
hearts. One compares these to silken halters; Mel in ore, Fell in cord.
to halters for that they will strangle and choke a man; to silken ones, for
that their words are smooth and soft, as David found, Psalm. 55.21. Others
resemble them to Hangmen, Diog. Laertius.
who with the one hand embrace a man, when with the other they pluck out his
bowels, Or to Butchers, who claw the Ox on the ^ibs, that they may have the
fairer blow at his head.

Of such Friends as these, Jeremiah gives warning, Jer. 9.4.8. Judge. 9.6.23. 1 Samuel 18.17. and 22.9.
cap. 9.4.8. Such Friends were the Sichemites to Abimelech, Judge. 9.6.23. Saul
and Doeg to David, 1 Samuel 18, 17. and 22.9. And such Friends to Christ, were
those spies, sent forth by the Scribes and Pharisees; who feined themselves to
be good men, that they might the sooner entrap him in his talk, Luke 20.20.
Cassius and Brutus (of whom the History makes mention) were such treacherous
Friends to Caesar: Ptolomie King of Egypt, to Pompey, Luke 20.20.
(whose head he sent to Caesar for a present), Antipater to Alexander, Zophyrus
to the Babylonians (who betrayed them to Darius.) And such a one was Banester,
who betrayed the Duke of Buckingham his Master, in the days of Richard the
third, (which treachery was revenged by God, both on him and his, as our
Chronicles mention.) These Friends are like Familiar Devils, which forsake
their Witches when they have brought them into fetters; or at best, but like
Moses-rod, they will seemingly be for a while, a staff to stay us; but anon of
a rodd, they are turned into a Serpent, mortally to sting us. Many such Friends
the world is full of, but not a true Friend is to be found amongst them all.

Thirdly; Verse. 10.11.18.
there is another kind of Friend (that the Son of Syrach makes mention of.) A
Back and Belly Friend, who is a Companion at our Tables, and will be, as we our
selves in prosperity. The heart of these Friends, are in our P^^ts, or Pockets;
Aes in praesenti perfectum format amorem.
find them somewhat to give, and they will find in their hearts to Love; These,
are like the Reflection of a Looking-glass, they will imitate any gesture that
you use: right Dotterell-catchers; if you smile, they will smile, if you frown
they will do so, if you make a stand, they will; if you spread out a wing, so
will they; if you hold the neck aside, they will do the like. (As did
Alexander's flatterers) if thou stoopest with thy shoulders so will they do as
did Plato's Scholars in imitation of their Master. As thou art, they will be;
as thou do, they will do.

Such Friends, were those spoken of, Hos. 7.3 -6. Hos. 7.3.6. John 6.26.
who make Princes glad with their lies and flatteries. And those the like, who
followed our Savior, for the Loaves and Fishes, more for the meat then for the
miracle: Hic dat epulis accumbere Divum.
They seemed to say with Aeolus in Virgil, this man keeps a good house, come we
will after him; whilst the pot boiles, their affections will. Many such there
are in the world, who like Flies come to the Honey pot; like Ants come to the
Wheat, yet, says Seneca, the Flies are no Friends to the Honey; nor the Ants
to the Wheat. Many of these Friends you may have, and yet the question may be
asked, Which of you shall have a Friend? As for true Friendship, we may say of
it, as sometimes the Duke of Buckingham said to Bishop Morton, in Richard the
third's days. It is gone on Pilgrimage, and no man knows when it will return.

Wherefore, Dan. Hist. 231.
be not deceived in point of Freindship; think not to find all them Friends,
that would be counted so; Julian the Apostate is not presently a Friend to
Basil, though in writing unto him, he styled himself (...), thou art my Friend
and beloved Brother. Scarce a lettter comes unto thee, but either the
superscription or subscription mentions a Loving Friend. But as it was said of
Adrian, by the multitude of Physicians the Emperor is dead; so it may be as
truly said by the multitude of Friends (such as pretend themselves to be so)
many a man is undone for want of a true Friend: In short; Esteem not every
hanger-by, that pretends Friendship to you in prosperity, a fast Friend, take
away the Idoll-gold, and then they will kick the Ass, which before they
worshipped for the Gold's sake: Esteem not them for Friends that flatter you;
their Ave, threaten a vae, like those in Aristophanes, that cry (...) good
good; when indeed it is bad, too bad: Nor those Friends that would seduce you:
I know not, said a scottish Martyr why they called themselves my Friends, which
so greatly labored to convert me, (or pervert me rather,) neither will I more
esteem them then the Midianites, Acts and mon. fol. 1153.
which in time past called the Children of Israel to do sacrifice to their
Idols.

admonish you that have a Friend indeed, to prize him; and take heed of losing
of him.

In finding such a one, Ecclus. 6.14.
(says the Son of Syrach) we have found a Treasure; the weight of gold and
silver, is not to be compared to the goodness of his Faith, nor ought he to be
changed for any thing in this world.

This caused Alexander, Am. Marcel. l. 25. Prove. 27.10.
when one desired to see his Treasure, to command his Servants to show him,
(not his Talents of silver, but) his friends: not (...) but (...). A true
Friend says Solomon, is nearer than a Brother; or any carnal Kindred:
therefore in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13.6. after Brother, Son, Daughter, and Wife of
the bosom, a Friend is placed, (who is said to be as our own soul) nearer and
dearer then all these unto us: And of such account, have fast Friends bin in
former times, that ancient Menander esteemed him a happy man, who had found but
a shadow of him: (And, well he might, for vix invenienda possessio, the
substance is not so soon had.) And a Soldier of Cyrus, having won a Race,
being asked by the King, what he would take for his Horse, answered, Not a
Kingdom, and yet said he, I would be content to part with him for a true
Friend, knew I where to find him. He is an Angel, says one, clothed with
flesh and blood: No sweeter contentment upon Earth; than a true Friend, (as
hereafter we shall show more fully.)

And the more precious the Treasure is, Amicus verus diu quaeritur, vix
invenitur, difficile servatur. Hier. Epist. ad Ru. l. 2. Epist. 11. Cassiod. de
Amicitia. Prove. 27.17. Dr. Jerm. in Loc. Qui loeditur, laedenti esse amicus non
desinit, etc. Cassiod.
the greater should be our care to preserve it: A true Friend is long sought
for, seldom found, and hardly kept: (says Hierom,) such a narrowness there is
of true Love in the very best. It is true, that Cassiodorus says of a true
Friend, he is hardly provoked, or made angry; and yet unkind usage may move
him, who is hardly moved: Hereto tends that of Solomon, Prove. 27.17. As Iron
sharpens Iron, so a man sharpneth the countenance of his Friend; rub Iron hard
often upon Iron, and it gives an edge unto it; so if a Friend be often rubbed,
and galled, by unkind usage, it will likewise sharpen his countenance to
discontent, and anger: And it is well observed, that Solomon in that Proverb,
says not so, A man's Friend sharpneth the countenance of his Friend; but so, A
man sharpeneth the countenance of his Friend, for he that is wronged, cease
not presently to be a Friend, to him that does the wrong; but he that does the
wrong to his Friend, is gone from a Friend, and is styled A man. It is the
wisdom and patience of a Friend, not to regard every small discourtesie, not to
be moved, till after a long forbearing; And it is the part of a friend, not
willingly to offer any discourtesie to his Friend; much less, to persist in
the provoking of him: Some injuries, are such as cannot stand with a friendly
heart; but do plainly argue an evil and envious Affection, (such were those
that David found from the hands of his pretended Friends.) Some again are such,
as may escape him that truly loves, through negligence, rashness, or other
infirmities: These, friendship should digest, and will: He that cease to
bear with me, cease to love me, says Austine: Qui desinit sustinere desinit
amare. Aug.
and who so in this kind, will bear more from others, then from their Friends,
are unworthy of Friends: Better to bear some kind of wrongs and injuries,
(which yet a true Friend will be loath to offer) then by taking every offense,
to imbitter our own hearts, and theirs, to the ruin of Friendship: wherefore
bear with some infirmities in thy Friend; forbear injuries, and beware of every
thing that may cause fraction, or division, between thy Friend and thee,
remembering what Solomon says, Prove. 18.19.
Prove. 18.19. Divisions amongst Friends, are oftentimes composed with more
difficulties, then contentions amongst others: Seldom do such piece together
again, as break, having b^n before intimate: the more strongly united any thing
is, being whole, when it is broken, it is farthest from being made whole again:
you see this between a stick of wax, and a stick of wood, the wax may be more
easily conjoined, then the wood. A twine thread, if it be broken, is more easily
knit together, then a Cable: And the hard Adamant, if broken with a Hammer,
flies into small dust, so that it is scarce discernable: so are the divisions
of Friends more hardly composed, then the divisions of strangers. Therefore
avoid all what may be, every thing that may cause fraction in friendship.

therein to have excelled us: we read of a Damon and Pythias; a Pylades and
Orestes, a Titus and Gisippus; of an Euryalus and Nisus; Scipio and Laelius,
Polystratus and Hippoclides; All famous for their Friendship, each to other in
their Generations, Examples not to be paralled amongst us, who profess better
things: Faithful friendship being in these days degenerated into Policy and
Flattery, and no other (amongst many) then vox artis, a word of Art, (and so in
no Praedicament.) The Ancients, painted Friendship, and resembled it, to a fair
young man, bare-headed, in a poor Garment: At the bottom, was written, Death
and Life above, Summer and Winter: his Bosom was open, (so that his heart might
be seen,) whereon was written, Long Prope, at hand, and a far off: But the
friendship that is now, has a smiling face, a Courtly Congye, a popular voice,
words fair and glorious, a Salutation more then superstitious: I am glad to see
you, I would I could serve you, I wish no longer to live, then to love you, are
the Mottoes. But put this Friend to the trial, then I am at your service in any
other matter, but in this I am necessitated to deny you. A handful of old
Friendship, is worth an armful of this new; (but of this, more hereafter.)



Or have thou not bin injurious to thy friends? undervalued him, or proved
false unto him in action, or intention? apprehended a discourtesie by a wrong
suspect, that was never intended by a willing act, or lent an ear to ill
tongues, and entertained false tales, slanderous reports against thy friend?
Prove. 16.18. Prove. 16.18.
If so, no marvail if thy Friend fail thee, who have failed in point of
friendship.

Or, on the other side, have thou not idolized thy Friend, and slayed thy heart
upon him? have not thy Applications bin more frequent to him, then thy
Addresses to thy Maker? Have thou not more loved his smiles, then feared
Heavens frowns? and his anger grieved thee more then thy sins? Wooden Pillars
will bow, Greenham, on Friendship.
or break, upon which you say too much weight: God is pleased in such a case,
to suffer Friends to fail us, that we may learn to trust in him alone, who will
never fail us, Mich. 7.5. 1 Timothy 5.5. Something or other, upon a strict
examination, thou will find to be amiss, which (thou have good cause to think,
that) God corrects in thee, by thy Friends unkindness, or unfaithfulness.
Labor for the future, Ecclus. 6.16, 17
to approve thy self in Gods presence, so shall thou ever have, or not need,
the friendship of man: And this is the way to profit by this Affliction. Now we
come from the manner of proposing, to the matter proposed.

Which of you shall have a Friend? etc.

And here consider, First, whose case it was, and who was concerned in it.
Secondly, What it was: The case is yours, [which of you] q. d. it concerns you
my Disciples, and every good man, as we^l as you: It seems then by this, There
is none, but may find the want of a true Friend. The men of Tire and Sidon,
found the need of one, when Herod was offended with them, and therefore made
Blastus their Friend, Acts 12.20. Genesis 38.12. 2 Samuel 13.3. and 15.37. 1 King. 4
5. Bacons Essay.
Act. 12.20. Judah was not without his Friend Hirah. Genesis 38.12. Ammon had his
Friend, Jonadab. 2. Sam. 13.3. David his Friend, Hushai. 2 Samuel 15.37. Solomon
his friend, Zadock, 1 King. 4.5. Kings, (one would think) stand in less need
of friends then any, and yet they have valued friendship at so high a rate,
that they have many times purchased it, at the hazard of their own safety, and
greatness.

Man, is like unto a Be; he cannot possibly live alone, his birth and bringing
up confirm it. No Creature has such need of friendly help, Socialis est homo
etc. Lactant. l. 5. c. 18.
Other Creatures do no sooner come into the world, but they are able by their
own proper strength, to raise themselves upon their feet, and help themselves;
but it is otherwise with man: from the work of the Midwife in bringing us out
of the womb of our Mother, even to the last work of him or her, that puts us
into the womb of the Earth, we must depend upon others: our being in this
world, is nothing else, but a mere dependency; 1 Cor. 12.12.
all stand in need of one another perfections (as the Apostle shows
excellently by a similitude from the body of a man, 1 Cor. 12. from the 12th to
the end.)

etc. The very Heathens could say, that a Friend, is more necessary then fire,
or water. If a fine were set upon the heads of such proud spirits, and they
forbid the use of fire and water; by the want of them, they would soon find the
worth of them: But what art thou, who thus boastest of thy self? Let thy
Mountain be never so strong for present, yet what assurance have thou, that
thou shall never be removed? That Shunamite, 2 King. 4.13. cap. 8.5. Judge. 11.6.
that once refused to be spoken for unto the King, by a Prophet, little
thought, that afterward she should stand in need to crave that courtesy of his
man Gehezi. And as little thought those Elders of Gilead, that had thrust out
Jeptha for a Bastard, that they should be compelled to seek unto him, and crave
his return: God oftentimes brings it so about, that those we scorn to be
beholding unto, in our prosperity, we are forced in our want, to seek unto for
help. The goodliest house, may sometimes stand in need of a little shore. It
is not our wealth, and fullness, which allows us the liberty of needing no man.
Those that stand fastest on Earth, have but slippery footing. No man can say,
that he shall not need a Frien^. There be infinite accidents belonging to
mortality, which either presently, or hereafter, may make us glad to find a
Friend.

make sure a Friend, Prove. 6.3.
Prove. 6.3. or (as the words in the Original will bear) to strengthen our
selves with Friends. Our Savior commends this point of wisdom to us in that
Parable, Luke 16.9.
Luke 16.9. from the example of the unjust Steward, who did the like. Now one
great point of wisdom is; in making of our selves Friends, to make a good
choice: Give me leave therefore, to show you: First, what Friends you are to
make choice of. Secondly, the means which you are to use, that you may obtain
them. Antisthenes used to wonder at those who were curious in buying but an
Earthen dish, and yet were careless in the choice of Friends: wherefore

In choosing of a Friend, let me show you, first, whom you are to avoid and take
heed of. Secondly, whom you are to pitch your affections upon, and enter into a
league of friendship with.

There are sundry sorts of men, that it is not wisdom to enter into serious
friendship withal. The first is the Angry man, make no friendship with an
angry man, Prove. 22.24.
(says Solomon) and with the furious man thou shall not go, Prove. 22.24. But
here we must distinguish of Anger. There is Anger mortified and subdued in a
man, and Anger reigning; with the former nothing hinders, but we may be
familiar friends. Some Friends may by Nature, be somewhat hasty: Friendship
with these may not be excluded, when through Gods grace, they bridle themselves
in some good measure. But with the latter, such a one, as is a man of Anger,
whose Anger is his Lord and Master, that cannot command his passion, but is in
bondage to it, make no friendship with him: the Reason the wise man renders,
verse. 29. lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. The love of
Friends will quickly breed, a love of their doings; and so instead of getting a
Friend, thou will get a snare unto thy soul, and fall into some evil, and
mischief, into which Anger and Fury drives men.

Secondly, the Covetous man is not fit to be entered withal into a league of
friendship; for that friendship is ill made, which is soon broken, Actum est de
amicitia. Prove. 1.19. 1 Timothy 6.10. 2 Samuel 16.3. 1 Samuel 25.10. 2 Timothy 4 10. Mat.
26.14, 15.
and no band of friendship or amity will hold with the covetous person, (if
ought may be gained by the breach of it. And such are the ways of every one
that is greedy of gain, he will not stick to take away life from the owner,
Prove. 1.19. Covetousness is the Root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. No sin so
barbarous as it, Experience verifieth this: It breaks all bands of amity,
nature, duty, as might be exemplified in Ziba, Nabal, Demas Judas: Love of
Lucre causes a man to betray the best Friend living. All the kindness of the
covetous, is but like the Fowlars shrap, wherein he casts meat, not our of
kindness to relieve the Birds, but treachery, to ensnare them.

Thirdly, the Drunkard is as unfit a piece of Timber for this Building, as
either of the former; for (besides the learning of his vices,) there is no
trusting him with our secrets: his mind and stomach are alike, neither can
retain what they receive. In his Cups, Friends and soes are alike: Familiars
and strangers are of equal esteem, Prove. 23.29. Who has contentions, Prove. 23
29. Nec verbosum arbitror eligendum. Aug. de amici^. c. 14.
who has bablings, etc. but the Drunkard? Alexander killed his friend in his
drunkenness. Any secret shall in drink be revealed of Friends, Wife, State,
through his much babbling; yea, his own heart shall come up, as easily as some
of his drink: no hope of a Drunkards secrecy, till his tongue be wormed.

Fourthly, The crafty, worldly, and carnal Politician, is held to be one of the
worst sort of men, to make a friend of. Subtle heads, have not the faithfulest
hearts; usually, where a politic head sowes, a false heart waters; and there
God gives no increase. An instance we have in Achitophel, who for worldly
wisdom and policy, was like the Oracle of God: 2 Samuel 16.23.
but he was like the Oracle of the Devil, for his deceitfulness, and treachery:
whilst David swayed the Scepter, who more loyal then Achitophel? but when
David was in banishment, who more perfidious, and false-hearted? Felth.
Resolves. page 256.
Policy in friendship (says one) is like Logic in Truth; it is somewhat too
subtle, it is too full of Cranks, and Angles, for the discovery of a plain
familiar. Seek not a friend amongst these; for they so often remove their
Habitation, that you will not know where to find them, when you stand in most
need.

Fifthly, Nor is one of noted duplicity, or double dealing, fit for friendship;
such David speaks of, Psalm. 12.2. he that is justly taxed with this aspersion,
that he is double-tongued, Psalm. 12.2.
or double-faced, he is not to be trusted; for although he speaks fair, believe
him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart, says Solomon, Prove.
26.25. Leave this Dipthong out of your Alphabit; much more out of your Creed.

Lastly, Ecclus. 12.10.12.
A reconciled Enemy, we are warned to take heed of, by the Son of Syrach. As
Iron rusteth, so does his wickedness: therefore set him not by thee, lest he
destroy thee. The very guilt of having done a wrong, has such deep Impression
in the injurer, as that he scarce ever after, will confide in the person
injured, nor treat with him in sincerity. He loves without trust, as if he
would one day hate, and his friendship is always startled with suspicion; for
being conscious of his own unfaithfulness, he will be always jealous of thine,
through his own guiltiness. And yet herein many circumstances are to be
weighed, and well considered, before we refuse to receive one into our former
friendship and favor, who has showed himself an enemy unto us, and dealt
falsely with us: As first, whether the wrong he did us, was out of weakness and
frailty, or out of envy and spite. Secondly, whether he has showed any tokens
or evidences of unfeigned sorrow, for the wrong done. Has he humbled himself,
and begged pardon of God and thee? If so, and that thou art persuaded of his
Repentance, nothing hinders, but that thou may embrace him again as a Friend:
(so dealt our Savior with Peter, Mark 16.7.
Mark 16.7.) But if he have offended maliciously, and showed no evident sign of
sorrow and Repentance, for his fault; put no confidence in him: He had need sit
sure, that backs that Horse, which has once cast his Rider. It was Sampsons
fault and folly, Judge. 16.8.12.17.
to trust Dalilah on her word, when he had bin once, and again, deceived by
her; well deserves he, to break his shins, that stumbles twice at one stone.
And thus you have heard, who are not fit to be made choice of, for intimate
friends: now for the Affirmative, whom we are to choose, and where.

A good and gracious man, Vera amicitia tantum inter bonos oritur, inter bones
profuit, inter optimos consummatur. Cassiodor. 5. Psalm.
is fit only to make a fast friend of.

There are that make three kinds of friendship.

1. Profitable, where profit is the bond. 2. Pleasant, where pleasure is the
linck of our Affections. 3. Honest, where virtue is the Lodestone. And the
praeeminence, (by the confession of the very Heathen) is given to the last,
which (they say) is the only perfect friendship: For besides, in this
friendship (above all other) there is a similitude of Manners and Affections.
The godly being quickened by the same Spirit, cannot but mind the same thing,
and affect the same thing; and what gracious Affections are in any of us, the
same are in others, which partake of the same spirit:) this praeeminence it
has that nothing can dissolve it; no Sword can cut this Gordian knot in two.
They love in the truth, and truth will abide for ever. For as Religion ties a
man to God, so inseparably, that all the Gates of Hell cannot sever him; so it
unites one Christian soul, to another, so firmly, that no outward occurrences,
no tortures, no torments, no temptations, can dissolve it: (as appears in the
Primitive and latter times, when Christians could not be brought one to betray
another, by any means that could be used.) But till Religion tie, and Faith
bind, all friendship whatsoever, is but (as Claudius spoke of Seneca's style
in writing) as Sand without Lime, or a Beesom unbound. No firmness can there be
in that love which is not founded on God, and godliness.
The Heathen, have much gloried in those golden payres of steadfast friends,
Cicero. lib. de amicitia.
who have bin ready to lay down their lives one for another (mentioned before.)
Howbeit, in all ages and times of the World, they were able to reckon up but
very few such; and those (for the most part) forged and counterfeit; rather to
teach what should be done, then what was truly done; And yet if such friendship
had bin ever practiced, and such friends ever extant, it had bin begun and
ended in the flesh, and therefore no other then corrupt and carnal: for where
God does not couple together, and tie the knot, and where the glory of his name
is not the mark we aim at, there the life of true friendship is wanting. The
former examples of supposed friends, being fastened together, without the glue
of Religion, and the true fear of God, (albeit, it made a goodly show of rare
love in the eyes of natural men,) yet it is not to be marched with that
friendship which is inter bonos, between those that are truly godly, and
religions, who have the bond of the spirit, and a good conscience, to join them
together. You are my old acquaintance, says Austin, to a friend of his; but
never my true friend, antequam Chrsti sanguine glutinati, before we were
caemented by the blood of Christ. And Constantine the great, was of this
Resolution, in the choice of friends and servants, that none could be true to
him that was not true to his God. It is grace that conglutinates hearts, and
ties them fast together: neither nature, education, benefits, nor any of these,
not all these together that can tie so strong a Love-knot, as Faith does, and
will do.

See then, that you get into the Communion of Saints, seek for a Friend in that
Society where men are joined together, in the unity of the Spirit, and ratified
by the bond of Faith. Common friendship we may and ought to have with others
(as to cat and drink, buy and sell, visit, and have civil commerce with them;)
but for this inward and strict friendship, whereby out hearts are united in
neerness and dearness; think not to find it any where, but in that Communion.
When other friends forsake us, they that are truly Religious, will stick
fastest to us: Say not then in choosing of thy Friend as Joram said to Jehu, 2
King. 9.22.
Is it peace Jehu? so, Is it wealth is it pleasure? is it honor? if thus, then
be thou my Friend: But is it Religion? is it grace? is it virtue? if so, then
as Jehu said to Jehonadab, the Son of Recab, Give me thy hand. 2 King 10.15.
It is Religion only, and godliness that unites souls.



Even in Christianity, Resp.
there is a difference of love. All the Saints are to be loved (as true
Christian friends) of us, yet our hearts may b^ enlarged to one, more then to
another: and the superlative of our Affection may be place on some (whom we
make our bosom friend) that is not on the rest; without any disparagement at
all to our discretion, or charity. Our blessed Savior, (whose Affections were
most pure,) had one Di^ciple, whom he loved above the rest, that leaned on his
bosom. Joh. 21.20. He loved all (except Judas, John 21.20.
) and that with an everlasting and endless love, yet John was the beloved one;
this special Affection of Christ toward him was holy, yet humane, and proves
the lawfulness of preferring one before another, in point of friendship.

Secondly, Friendship is aptly resembled unto marriage, in many respects;
amongst others this is not the least, As there must be some equality betwixt
those who are to be married, so there must be some equality betwixt those who
are intimate and bosom Friends: Every good man is not a fit march for every
good woman. It is not enough to be virtuous, and religious, but to be suitable.
There must be some parity, and equality, and fitness in Paires: (as is in a
pair of Gloves, or a pair of Shoes, so in a pair of Friends. Cavendum est
in ipsa electione vel dilectione, nenimis cito d^ligamus. Aug. de amicir. c:
15. Tu omnia cum omico delibera sed de ipso prius. Senec. de benif: lib. 6. c.
34.
) Him whom we take so near unto us for a serious friend, freely to communicate
our selves unto, we may not leightly make choice of, but either after long
experience of his fidelity, and wisdom or upon some singular motive, we are
wi^ely to judge, and freely to credit. And thus much of the choice of Friends,
for want of which wisdom there is so much complaining (as was said before.)
Now a word or two of the way how to get, and procure Friends.

It is an ill way that some men take to procure Friendship, and that is with
the price of some sin: So Abraham by fordid flatery stoal away the hearts of
his Fathers subjects, 2 Samuel 15.5. And Hezekiah endeavored to obtain
Senacheribs favor by sacrilege, 2 King 18.16. But the friendship thus
purchased was not long enjoined; 2 King. 18.16.
for Senacherib still persisted in his enmity against the Jews, as appears in
the words following. Yea, sometimes it falls out that Friends so procured with
hate us more then they loved us before; As Ammon did Thamar, after he had
defiled her, 2 Samuel 13.15. And Henry the fifth coming to the Crown repenting of
his riotous course in his youth, banished from the Court all those that had
seduced him.

And, there is a way which most of the world take to procure Friendship, by
large gifts and presents; of which Solomon speaks Prove. 19.4. But friendship
thus obtained (as one says) is but like a fire of straw, or stubble; Pro. 19.4.
which burns brightly whilst it has matter to feed upon, but that being
neglected, it is soon extinguished and comes to nothing. Gifts may be used to
continue friendship; But not to begin it. If thou gi^est any thing, let i^ be,
because he is thy Friend, not because thou would have him to be so.

And yet there is a good way of procuring friends by gifts and benefits (which
the world takes no notice of,) commended to us by our Savior, Luke 16.9.
Luke 16.9. Make you friends of unrighteous mammon ( i.e. of the wealth of the
world, which most men trust in,) that they (those Friends) may receive you into
everlasting habitions.

Those Friends especially there intended are the Fodly poor and needy. Alas
(you will say) what can such friends do? why more for thee (being godly) then
the greatest Prince in Christendom; by their prayers and testimony of thy
Charity. This is a Parodox to ^ich men, as it seems to be unto the Pharisees
who hearing our Savior give such Counsel, mocked him for his pains (which
caused him to propound that other Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus, verse.
14. clearly showing that such a friend as Lazarus might have been made, Luke
16.14.
by a few crumbs of bread, had been worth much.) For albeit the poor are able
to do little for us, yet in making them our friends we make many friends at
once. God will be our Friend, who has undertaken to recompense us, Prove. 19.17.
Prove. 19.17. (and if he be our Friend we can want none; he will raise up for
us Friends enough, Prove. 16.7.) Christ will be thy Friend; in that thou have
relieved him, in his poor and distressed members: and will acknowledge that
what thou did to them was done to himself, Math. 25.35.
Math. 25.35. (and such a Friend at Court is better then a penny in a man's
purse.) It is He that must judge us. The Angels will be our Friends, as they
were to Lazarus; and that both in life, and death, and after death, Heb. 1.14.
Luke 16.22. Mark. 13.27. Lastly thou will make thy self a friend unto thy self,
by laying up a good foundation in works of mercy against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. So that as David said of Goliah's sword, none to that, give it
me; 1 Samuel 21.9.
so we may say of this way, none like that, and that way I will take.

John the Baptist, And what shall we do then? Luke 3.10.

I can answer, as the Baptist did: He that has two coats let him impart to him
that has none; Resp. Math. 10.41.
and he that has meat let him do likewise. Heaven may be had for a Cup of cold
water, if rightly given (says Austin), for a morsel of bread, Cries. Sermon. 41.
says Chrysologus. If thou have not a Coat to give, Bread to spare; yet be
doing something for the needy and distress^d Christian, according to thy
ability. Every man (says a grave Divine) has not conserves, nor preserves, to
carry to the sick; Harris on the Beatitudes.
but the Poorest has a warden (at least;) or an Apple to take with them. God
will accept according to that we have, and not according to that we have not. 2
Cor. 8.12. as he did of the widows two mites, Animi qualitas potius soectatur,
quam Eleemosynae quantitas. Mark. 12.43, 44.
Mark. 12.43, 44. it was all she had, and that she cast into the treasury, and
in so doing she was richly liberal; and for so doing, she was highly honored
by our Savior, and her name Registered in the Gospel to her eternal praise.
It is fabled o^ Midas that whatsoever he touched was turned into Gold; but
whatsoever the hand of Christian Charity touches, be it but a crust of bread;
a cup of Adams Ale, (as one speaks) cold water; it turns the same (not into
Gold) but into Heaven it self, where the Almighty shall be thy gold, and thou
shall have silver of strength, Job 22.24, 25. Job 22.24, 25.
Other means of procuring Friends might be showed: but more of that, hereafter.

And so much of the Persons (literally considered) whom the case concerns. Now
a word or two of the Case it self, (before we come to speak of the mystical
Application.) It is evident enough by the whole Historical Narration, that it
is a Case of Necessity, and want that this Friend was in, he wanted wherewith
to entertain his Friend, he had not to set before him, and indeed,

It is a sad case to be in want.

Corporal and Spiritual: the former is of the Outward comforts of this life:
(as of health, strength, riches of the Earth.) And of this kind of want there
be two degrees, First Common want, when a man has to maintain life, but in
great scarcity, and penury, so, Desunt multa omnibus, omnia mulus. Seneca
Epest. 108.
Luke 21.2. Secondly Extreme want, when a man without relief from others cannot
possibly sustain his life, nor subsist: such was the want of that poor Beggar,
who lay at the Rich man's gate, Luke 16.20. It is a sad case, to be in such
want. Agur prays against it, Prove. 30.8. And it is threatened as a judgment to
the Rebellious, Prove. 30.8. Deuteronomy. 28.48.
and a disobedient, Deuteronomy. 28.48. But this seems not to be the case of him, this
Parable speaks of; he was in want; but his want was but a Common; or an
occasional want, he had not ( at this time) bread to set before his Friend,
who came to visit him; yet it was sad with him that he had it not.

Spir^tuall want, is of spiritual riches (as of the grace of God, favor of
Christ,) and this is of two sorts; In Truth as, Revel. 3.17. Jer. 5.4. Or in
Esteem only, (so the godly judge themselves to be, Isay 66.^.) When it is in
truth, it is a sad case indeed; for this kind of want is greater then the
other, and pincheth most at the last: But if it be want of the latter kind, it
is not sad (otherwi^e then to the sense) for a man is blessed under it. Matthew.
5.3.
Matthew. 5.3.

Genesis 21.16. 1 King. 19.4.
Then there is lamenting and mourning on all hands: (As Hagar did, when the
water was all spent, and the bottle empty; Or as Elijah, sitting under the
Juniper-tree hungry and weary,) Lord take away my life, I have lived long
enough; And if God stay not, strengthen not, how soon does such extreme want
draw on to shif^ing courses, and drive to indirect actions? Job.
Man that is in such want and misery, should be pitied of his Neighbors, but
that men have for saken the fear of the Almighty: little does the full belly
know, what the empty means.

2 Samuel 14.19.
Is not the hand of Jo^b in all this, said David to the wise woman of Tekoa? So
ask thy Conscience, if thou be in want: Is not the hand of Idleness in it?
Prove. 10.4. and 20.4. Prove. 23.21. Luk 15.14. Prove. 11.24. Luke 19, 20.26.
Prove. 10 4. and 13.11. and 21.6. and 22.16.
(as Prove. 10 4. and 20.4.) or the hand of wastfulness and prodigality? (as
Prove. 23.21.) wasters, will be wanters, as we find, Luke 15. Or the hand of
covetousness and niggardliness? (as Prove. 11.24.) He that hid his Taient, had
it taken from him. Luke 19.20.26. Or the hand of iujustice and wrongful
dealing? Prove. 10.4. and 13.11. and 21.6. and 22.16. They that think to prevent
want by sinful courses, will in the long run, meet that evil in the teeth,
which they hoped to escape: these are the paths which lead to pove^ty and want,
which who so walks in, shall meet with that armed man. Prove. 6.11. But if we
carefully avoid these ways, then if God do send it on any of us, he will
sanctify it unto us, Prove. 6.11.
(as he does other crosses and afflictions to the godly.) And indeed it may
befall the best, for the trial of their graces, as we shall discover to you
from the particulars, when we come unto them.

Luke 10.42. Luke 10.42.
Martha was cumbred about many things, Mary chose the better part, both were
Sisters, and lodged in one house, and were busy about Christ's entertainment.
But Mary was preferred for her care after her souls salvation. Thus the Body
and Soul are Sisters, both must be busy, and both are beloved of Christ. The
body is troubled about many things, curious feeding, wanton clothing, etc. but
if the soul want that one thing needful, (the care of its salvation) which it
ought to have, it is a sad case indeed, better you want all then that; yet we
prefer all before that: let this want of care be lamented of us.

Thus, having dispatched sundry inferior Observations (not to be neglected) we
come now to look into the mystical and more noble sense, which is by our
Savior principally intended? His scope is (as you have heard) to press upon
us, this so much neglected duty of prayer, upon the ground of assurance, to be
heard in all our necessities and wants, inasmuch as God is our Friend: And he
seems to reason thus.

It is an happy thing, when a man has a faithful Friend, to whom he may resort
in time of need, and break his mind, when his heart is troubled; But you have
God for your Friend. into whose bosom you may disburden your minds in Prayer,
and from whom you may expect help in your greatest wants, Sense spiritual.
and therefore you are happy; so then

God is the good man's Friend.

There is a special obligation of Amity between God, and the godly; this Christ
concludes upon, as undeniable.

I have acquainted you before, what friendship is, and showed you the kinds of
it, common and imperfect, or perfect and more peculiar. Such is the friendship
that God bears to mankind. Act. 17.27. Prove. 8.31. Romans 5.8.
He is a Friend to all, in a general and universal way of Friendship, As he is
near unto us, and has his delight with the Sons of men, and sent his Son to
die for us: In all which respects, we may say of God, as the Jews said of
Christ, (when he wept at the raising up of Lazarus) Behold, how he loved him;
So behold what a Friend God is become unto us, thus to love us, in giving his
own Son to bleed, Joh. 11.36.
to die for us; even then, when we were enemies to him. Romans 5.8. Luke 2.14.
And of this Friendship, the Angels sang at the birth of Christ, Good will
toward men, Luke 2.14. Thus those in the visible Church, are all Friends. Mat.
22.12.

Yet he is a Friend to the Godly, in a more special and peculiar manner: his
Friendship with them, is Perfect Friendship; Amity in the highest degree that
can be wrought, 1 Samuel 18.1.3.
established, and ratified, by solemn Covenant and promise. (As was the
Friendship betwixt Jonathan and David.)

Thus Abraham was Gods Friend; 2 Chronicles 20.7. Isa. 41.8. Jam. 2.23.
so he is styled (more then once) 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isa. 41.8. James 2.23. And the
Church in the Canticles, the Friend of Christ Cant. 5.1. Conjugall Friendship
is the sweetest, Joh. 15.14, 15
and most intimate Friendship of any other. Christ tells his Disciples, that
they were his Friends and that he had called them so, John 15.14 15. implying
that it was his usual manner of compellation, Luke 12.4. Joh. 11.11.
as appears, Luke 12.4. I say unto you my Friends, fear not. So John 11.11.
Our (Frica^^) Lazarus is dead. And that it is thus, may appear.

Genesis 15.18. and 17.1.2. Exodus 19.5. Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 37.26.
By his entering into a solemn League and Covenant with us, as he did with
Abraham, Genesis 15.18. and 17.1.2. and so afterward with the seed of Abraham,
Exodus 19.5. the sum and substance of which Covenant is, to become our God, and
take us for his peculiar people. Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 37.26. So the Apostle
rehearsing the Covenant, mentions the very words, wherein it was first made,
and often since renewed, Heb. 8.10. yea, it is a Matrimonial Covenant, Hos. 2.
So that he is ours, and we are his. Cant. 2.16. we have given up our selves to
him, and are no more our own: so has he given himself to us, and is become
ours,

Secondly, By the Comumnion he has with the Godly it may appear, he is their
Friend: look what Communion there is betwixt Friends, the same Communion is
betwixt God and the faithful.

First, Friends communicate their Counsels. and secret purposes one unto
another, (as appears by that speech of David, concerning him whom he took for
his familiar Friend, Psalm. 55.14.
Psalm. 55.14.) Friendship, does not so much open the purse, as it does open the
heart (as we may hereafter hear) in which regard, it is truly said, that Amicus
est animi custos, a friend, is the keeper of the soul of his Friend. Thus God
makes known his secrets unto the godly, Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32. Psalm. 25.1.
Prove. 3.3^.
So he did to Abraham, Lot, Moses, David, Samuel, Elijah, Elisha, Daniel,
Isaiah, and other, his Prophets and Friends according to that we read, Amos
3.6, 7.
Amos 3.6, 7. They are of his Cabinet Counsel. Thus did Christ unbosom himself
freely to his, Luke 8.10. Luke 8.10.
acquainting his Disciples with those secrets of the Kingdom, which he did not
to others. John 15.15. Joh. 15.15.
And all this (as Tiberius sometimes said to Trajanus, pro amicitia nostra non
occultavi) for Friendship sake. And the more perfect this Friendship is, the
more we know of Gods Counsel. John was the beloved Disciple, he leaned on
Christ's bosom, and he could fetch any thing out of it, that was fit to be
known: This Peter knew full well, when he beckned to him, that he would ask him
who it was that should betray him; as we read, John 13.25.26. and upon his
asking, Joh. 13.25, 26
it was told him, (albeit in his ear, for the rest of his Disciples heard it
not, verse. 28.29.) And after Christ's Ascension, there were more secrets
revealed unto him, then to all the rest of the Apostles, Revel. 1.1. A bosom
Friend shall have that whispered in his ear, which the world knows not of, 1
Cor. 2.12.16. and the nearer to Gods bosom, the deeper secrets shall be
discovered.

2. Friends love to walk and talk together, they delight to have Communion one
with another, in this kind: We walked together, Psalm. 55.14. Genesis 17.1.22. and
18 33.
(says David) in Company unto the House of God. Psalm. 55.14. Thus Abraham
being the Friend of God, walked with God* Genesis 17.1. and talked in Friendly
manner with him, verse. 22. and 18.33. And it is said of Moses, that God spoke
unto him, face to face, Exodus 33.11. Cant. 7.11.
as one speaks unto his Friend, Exodus 33.11. And thus Christ and his Church,
walk and talk together, Cant. 7.11. And the more refined the Friendship is, the
more familiar, is the talk, and parley.

3. Friends desire the presence of Friends, they delight to dwell together, to
eat and drink together; (however) they must often visit one another, 2 Samuel
19.33.
2 Samuel 19.33. God shows himself a Friend to the faithful, in this kind of
Communion; for although he dwell in the highest Heavens, yet he dwells also in
the godly, and makes his abode with them, Joh. 14.23. 1 Cor. 6.13. 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. Cant. 5.2. Revel. 3.20.
John 14.23. In which regard, our bodies are called the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. and so the Temples of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. And he is said
to eat and drink with them, Cant. 5.2. and to sup with them, Revel. 3.20. Thus
by this Communion, that God has with his, it appears, that he is their Friend.

Thirdly, The friendship of God toward the godly, appears by his readiness to
hear them, and to pleasure them, in any thing that they shall desire of him,
(as the Parable shows at large.) God is prevailed with by the faithful, as one
Friend is by another: You shall command me in any thing (says a Friend to his
Friend) Whatsoever thy soul desires of me, I will do it for thee, said Jonathan
to David, 1 Samuel 20.4. 2 Samuel 19.38.
1 Samuel 20.4. The like said David to Barzillah, Whatsoever thou shall require
of me, that will I do for thee. So God speaks to the faithful, in a friendly
Language: Command me (says he) Isa. 45.11. Oh! Isa. 45.11.
what a transcendent privilege is t^is? How ready God has bin, to be
commanded by Abraham, Moses, and other of his faithful Servants, we shall more
fully show you, if God give leave in the prosecution of this Parable, This may
suffice at present, for the Explanation and Confirmation of the point, now to
Application.

the Kings Friend. Eusebius the Historian, held it for an honor, 2 Samuel 15.37.
1 King. 4, 5.
to be the Friend of Pamphilus the Martyr; and would be called Eusebius
Pamphili, for the love that was betwixt them, (as Hierom testifies.) And the
old Lord Brook caused it to be engraven on his Tomb, as one of his Titles,
Friend to Sir Philip Sidney. Scylla sir-named Faelix, accounted it not the
least part of his happiness, that Metellus sir-named Pius, was his Friend? How
happy then is he, that has not only godliness, but God himself to be his
friend? yet such honor have all the Saints. A Title far above that of Son or
Servant. David boasted more, that he was a Servant of God, Psalm. 36. Title
Psalm. 116.16.
then that he was a King (as appears, Psalm. 36. the Title and so elsewhere.)
And St. Paul more, that he was a Servant of Jesus Christ, then that he was an
Apostle, Romans 1.1. Tit. 1.1. Joh. 15.15.
and therefore sets that in the first place in his Epistles, as a Title of
greatest honor. Yet remember what our Savior says, John 15.15. Henceforth I
call you not Servants, but Friends. So that it is a higher honor to be a
Friend, then to be a Servant.



The first deceitful Friend, to be taken heed of, is the World: whose
Friendship most are much affected with, because of the great Command it has,
and promises that it makes to those, who will take it for a Friend; But it is
but a Time-serving Friend, and its friendship is very brittle and changeable;
soon on, and soon off. It was said of Andronicus the Greek Emperor, whom but
yesterday, Turk Hist.
he had used most kindly, and entolled amongst his best friends, to day he
frowned upon, and tyrannized most cruelly over; so that you might have seen the
same man, the same day, to be graced and disgraced, crowned and beheaded: such
is the friendship of the world; in the love of it, there is no assurance: (as
was said of Tiberius, and of Mahomet, the first Emperor of the Turks): This
thousands have found by sad experience. Besides, the world is both angry, and
covetous. Angry it is, 1 Samuel 25.17.
so that nothing will please it, as Nabals Servant said of his Master, (we may
impute it to Age, for it is very old.) And if we add to this, the covetousness
of it, we must conclude, that the best friendship of it, is not worth the
whistling for. Of the friendship of it St. James speaks, Jam. 4.4.
Cap. 4.4. No man can be the Friend of God, and friend to It. If the World will
be needs our friend, then let us put it in the number of those friends, that
are rather to be used then trusted, as St. Paul did.

The flesh will needs enter into a league of friendship with us, 1 Cor. 7.30.
and will not (during life) be quite shaken off. It pleades more than ordinary
acquaintance, and familiarity, even Inherence; One house has held us, one
breath served us, one nutriment fed us, one conception bred us: It promises
much content, and delight unto us; but it is a Table Friend, a back, or
belly-friend. This has bin found to be deceitful, and of doubledealing. It
brings forth meat in a Lordly dish, as Jael did to Sisera, Judge. 5.25, 26.
and calls, Come in my Lord, come in. It presents delicates to our view, but
withal, it puts the hand to the n^yl, and workmans. Hammer, with the Hammer
smites she Sisera, she smites off his head, Romans 13.13. Gal. 5.21.
after she has pierced the Temples. And withal, it is given to drunkenness,
and excess; It will please the Appetite, what ever come of it; but if you cool
the por, the friendship of the flesh cools with it: make no choice therefore of
the flesh, for a friend, if you be wise.

The Devil pretends great friendship to us, Genesis 3.21. Math. 4.9.
as he did to our first Parents, You shall be as Gods: And so to our blessed
Savior, All this will I give thee: But he is a treacherous friend; his aim is
to betray us, and throw us down headlong from happiness. He is too subtle a
Politician, to be a true friend unto us, and being an enemy from the beginning,
it is no trusting of him, though he seemingly be reconciled; for his malice is
implacable. These are the three, you must avoid in point of Friendship.

is God himself; who is desirous to enter into a League of Friendship with us,
and sends forth his Ambassadors, (his Ministers,) for this end entreating us
to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. 2 Cor. 5.20.
There was a time when God and man were Friends, else reconciliation could not
be (for reconciliation is but the renewing of a former Friendship that has bin
interrupted and broken.) This Friendship God meant not to break, not had he
purpose to fall out with man, nor had he done any thing, by any purpose of his,
toward the violation of that Friendship; man did the wrong, yet he (continuing
his everlasting goodness to man) invites him to return, to his obedience, and
accept of the means of reconciliation and return to the same state of
friendship which he had at first; And such a reconciled Friend (as he is) will
be a Friend indeed unto us. Not to our wealth, not to our riches, he needs not
our Thousands of Rams, nor our ten thousand Rivers of oil, Mich. 6.7.
but it is for his own sake, that he sets his heart upon us, and for our sakes
too, that we may be e^erlastingly happy in his Friendship. Nor is his
Friendship sickle, but constant; not a Friend to day, and a Foe to morrow; but
a Friend for ever: he uses not his Friends, as we do our Ladders, bear them on
our shoulders whilst we hope to climb high by them, and then throw them down,
and lay them on the ground: nor as we do flowers, keep them in our bosom
whilst they be fresh, and when they fade, fling them on the Dunghill. Dent.
31.8. Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.5, 6. Psalm. 73.25.
He will never fail us nor forsake us, It we be not ashamed of him, he will not
be ashamed of us. Say then as David, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, whom desire I, for my friend but thee. None but Christ, none but Christ.
But how may I be so happy as to have God my Friend, what must be done to obtain
his Friendship, (seeing by nature we stand in a stare of Enmity?) Resp.


First, take the Course that the Tyrians and Sydonians did. Acts 12.20. (...),
Germen.
Acts 12.20. Herod was offended with them, they make a Friend at Court, Zarh.
3.8 and 6, 12. John 1.18. Zach. 13.7.
Blastus the Kings Chamberlain by whose mediation Herod was reconci ed: We
have a Blastus, that Germen, the Branch (as the Prophet calls him,) who is Gods
favorite or fellow-friend as he is termed. Zach. 13.7. a bosom friend, John
1.18. get him to medi^^e for thee, and then for his sake God will be
reconciled, and become thy friend. Shall Herod be appeased by Blastus his
Intercession, and not God by Christ's? Read 1 John 2.1, 2.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 5.18.
there is an Instrument of Reconciliation drawn betwixt God, and Man, which
you must subscribe and put your hands unto, 2 Cor. 5.18. This word of
Reconciliation is the Ministry of the Gospel; all that is required there, is
to Believe and Repent (which is the sum of all) this must be subscribed unto:
dip your pens in the blood of the Lamb, subscribe your names by acceptance of
the offers of Reconciliation, in the Gospel made; do but subscribe; accept; and
then God and Man will become Friends.

Thirdly; if thou woudlst have God to be thy Friend, see that thou be of his
acquaintance, converse often with him, and be often in his Company. It is true
(as before you have heard) Acquaintance is not friendship; yet without
Acquaintance no friendship can be had. Good will a man may bear to him that he
never saw; But perfect friendship cannot be had, betwixt such, as never had the
sight, nor enjoyed the Company each of other: It requires a mutual
frequentation, and familiar conversation. We read, 1 Samuel 18.1. that the soul
of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and that Jonathan loved David as
his own soul. How this came to pass the Text shows in the words foregoing. 1 Samuel 18.1.
It came to pass that as David had made an end of speaking unto Saul, etc.

Had not David bin in the presence of Jonathan; had he not heard David speak,
and seen his carriage, and spirit, he had never been so taken with him as be
was; but now being in his Company, and conversing with him, his heart was fast
knit, and glewed to him: And so it falls out betwixt God and us; If we come
into his presence, frequent his Ordinances, converse with him, speak frequently
by prayer unto him; then his heart will be knit unto us, and he will be our
friend, hereto to tends that of Eliphaz, Job 22.31. Job 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with him and be at peace; that is, by acquainting thy self
thus with him, a league of friendship will be made between you; whereby, good
shall come unto thy soul, so the Promise is Zach. 13.9.

Fourthly, Zach. 13.9. Similitudo mo^um par micitiam.
see that thou conform thy self to Gods will and Nature. Among men, there is
nothing so glewes and soders men's spirits as a similitude, and conformity of
manners, and disposition: when there is a sutableness of nature and
inc^ination, there will quickly be a closing; (as you have hear) so it is here.
He that loves pureness of heart for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his Friend, (says Solomon) Prove. 22 11. Prove. 22.11. Math. 5.48. Luke 6.36. 1
Per. 1.16.
Love pureness or heart and pureness of life; Be holy as God is holy:
merciful as God is merciful, etc. Strive to be like him (for likeness breeds
further love and likeing): labor to be made partaker of the Divine nature;
conform to his image, so thou shall have the King of Heaven for thy Friend, 2
Pet. 1.4.
he will ente^ into a league of friendship with thee, and become a fast Friend
unto thee for ever.

Again, if God be the good man Friend, it may afford singular comfort to the
godly, in that they have such a Friend ^o go unto: Usually none have more
enemies on earth then they, none fewer friends, and yet none better befriended,
having the great God of Heaven theirs; who will not be wanting in any point of
friendship to them, for he that inspires friendship into others, will
undoubtedly keep the laws of friendship himself and so esteem our friends his,
and our enemies his: He will instruct us and counsel us, protect us, and
provide for us. And as Jehosaphat said to Ahab, when they had entered into a
League of friendship eath with other, I am as thou art, 2 Chronicles. 18.3.
my people are as thy people, my horses as thy horses: so says God to his
friends my Angels are your Angels; my Hosts your Hosts; my servan s yours, my
Creatures yours; He makes a Covenant even with the Beasts of the field in the
behalf of the god y, Hos. 2.18. Job 5.21, 22, 23.
Job. 5.21, 22, 23. Indeed Satan and his Agents hate the Godly the more for
this, because they are the friends of God; but God will so dispose of their
malice, that they shall in hating of us, become friendly to us against their
wi^ls, Prove. 16.7.
Prove. 16.7. he will give a double triumph over their hatred, and over their
power. No reason then to be ca^^down with the want of Friends. 1 Samuel 1.
Am^not I better to thee then ten Sons, said Elkanah to Hannah, why weepest
thou? So may God say to us, why grievest thou, is not my Friendship better to
thee, then the Friendship of a thousand worlds?



thy Affections, whether they are w^olly for God; and suite with his. Do you
love what he loves? do you hate what he hates? As you find God to stand
affected, so do you exercise every Affection? If he be dishonored, reviled,
reproached; do you lay it to heart, as if the wrong were your own? Psalm. 69.7.9.
It was thus with David, Psalm. 69.7.9. If so, with thee, then rest assured God
is thy Friend, and thou his.

Secondly; True Friendship, excludes all Neutralls; and Corrivalls (it being
only between two, Unus mihi propopulo crit, et populus pro uno Senec.
according to Aristotle.) The Love of Charity, is due to all, but that
superlative Affection, that is placed on a Friend, cannot well be dispersed
amongst multitud^s. So there is a certain Love that we must give to the
Creature but there is a Love due to God, that no Creature must have besides
himself, neither Father, Mother, Wife, Child, nor ought else, must step betwixt
God and our hearts, Math. 16.24. Math. 16.24, 25. Luke 14.26. Psalm 44.17. Pro.
17.17. Ruth. 1.16. Revel. 2.10. Delicata estamiritia quae amico um sequitur
felicitatem. Hieron. Genesis 22.12.
If it be thus, then thou may conclude thou art the Friend of God, and he
thy Friend.

Thirdly; A true Friend is tried in Adversity, Prove. 17.17. It is prosperity
(says one) that gets Friends; but it is Adversity that tryes Friends, as Naomi
did Ruth. If thou be the Friend of God, thou will cleave close unto him in
the hour of Temptation. Thus Christ proved his Friendship unto us, and so we
must to him. God will fifth and search the stability of our Love, (as he did
Abraham's) and if we shrink at every storm, we are not Gods Friends, but
Hypocrites and Apostates. True Friends rejoice in their sufferings for the name
of Christ, as did Peter and John, Act. 5.40.41. Nay (says St. Paul,) we
(rejoice not only, Acts 5.40, 41.
but even) glory in our Afflictions, Romans 5.3.5. and that because of the Love
of God in Christ, Romans 5.35.39.
Romans 8.35.39. which is shed into our hearts, by the Spirit that is given us: 1
Cor. 2.12. 1 John 3.24.

Fourthly, a true Friend, is a Friend to his Friend's Friend; he will love his
Friend's Friend's, and his Friend's Children, for his Friend's sake: so David's
Friendship to Jonathan reached, 2 Samuel 9.1.
and extended to the Friends and Children of Jonathan. So it is here; if we be
the Friends of God, we will be the Friends of those that love God; we will
count his Friends ours, and his enemies ours as Iehosophat said to Ahab. 1
King. 22.4. Psalm. 26.2. and 139.21.
And thus David discovered himself to be the Friend of God, Psalm.
16.2.139.21.22.

Fifthly, and lastly, a true Friend disclaimes all self ends and interests, in
what he does; all that he aims at, is the good and welfare of his Friend,
which he desires to promote: Senec. Epist. 9. ad Lucil.
Seneca reproves such as would choose a Friend, that he might relieve them in
their wants, and visit them in sickness; this (says he) is but mercenary, I
will choose a Friend that I may have one to show Love unto, to visit if he be
sick to help if he be in want, etc. So for men to choose God to be a Friend
unto them, that they may be helped out of troubles, and have their estates
blessed; that they may get such and such things by him; This is warrantable,
and yet to make this the highest end of Gods Friendship is Mercenary; But to
choose God for my Friend, that I may worship him, serve him; love, honor, and
obey him for ever, this is right. See then that thou seek God, more then thy
self; 1 Cor. 10.24.
let his honor and glory be preferred in all thy undertakings. Jonathan was a
fast Friend to David, and he valued nothing of a Kingdom for David's sake; he
loved him, not that he expected good from him, but that he might have one to
whom he might show Love. Find these things in thy self, and then rest assured
that God is thy Friend, and thou the Friend of God.



We have told you before, that Gods Friendship is not fickle. Resp. Aug. l. de.
Amicitia, Prove. 17.17.
A true Friend (says Solomon) loves at all times, Prove. 17.17. By which
saying, Solomon declares plainly (says Austin) that true Friendship is
eternal; but if it cease at any time, it was never true. Gods Friendship is
eternal, and everlasting: whom he loves once, he always loves, John. 13.1.
But yet, as we heard before, (in speaking of humane Friendship) unkind usage
may sharpen the countenance of a Friend against us, Numb. 11.1. Deuteronomy. 1.37. 1
King. 11.9. and 8.46. 2 King. 17, 18. Psalm. 2.11. and 7.6.11. and 76.6.
as Iron sharpens Iron. God is of a wonderful patient, and forbearing nature,
slow to Anger, and of great kindness; yet by unkind usage, he may be provoked
to anger, and hide his face and favor from us, (as Gods Children have found by
sad experience). Wherefore let care be had; first to avoid all things that may
Alienate his affections from us; Secondly to do all that is required for the
continuance of his Friendship with us.

Things to be avoided by us, whereby his Affection may be alienated, are these.

First a jealousy and suspicion of him and his ways, as if he would not stick
fast unto us, Fidelem si putaveris, facies Senec. ep. 3. -- quem etiam si
metuimus jus officii laedimus Cicero. Orat. pro Roscio 1 Samuel 20.9. John.
21.17. 1 Cor. 13.7. Psalm. 78.18, 19, 20, 21. Exodus 4.13, 14.
or could not help us. Friends love not to be suspected: Jonathan was much
troubled when David seemed to be somewhat jealous of him, 1 Samuel 20.9. And
Peter was much grieved when Christ asked him the third time, if he loved him?
John. 21.17. Love believes all things, hops all things, says the Apostle;
so that suspicion arises from want of Love; God cannot endure that we should
be jealous of his promises, suspect his ways of power, and providence, Psalm.
78.18, 19, 20, 21. Can God furnish a Table? etc. They said not Positively, God
cannot do it, they only questioned it, yet that provoked the most high God
against them. So Exodus 4.13, 14. Moses before had made many excuses for not
going on God errand about Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, and being pressed
still to that service, he seems to give an utter denial, and that with some
kind of passion. Send by whom thou should send: At this the anger of the
Lord was kindled, for God's espied a jealousy in him, as if God would not
preserve him from them that sought his life (that was the reason of his
backwardness, whatever other pretense was made of his unfitness for the
service,) (as appears, by that God spoke afterward unto him, verse. 19. All
the men are dead which sought thy life. Numb. 20.11.
So Numb. 20.11. Moses seemed to suspect Gods power in bringing water out of
the Rock, as appears by his words and actions in smiting the Rock thrice,
which God was much offended with, as appears by that sharp reproof, verse 12.
God likes not that any Friend of his should be jealous of him, and suspect his
fidelity as hatred, so love and confidence are indivisibly united.

Secondly; murmuring at his Reproves and Corrections, makes a breach betwixt
God and his Friends. This appears by that we read, Number. 14.1, 2, 3. etc. This
provoked God against them, Numb. 14.1, 2, 3, 11, 12.
verse 11.12. insomuch, as he would have destroyed them had not Moses
interceded for them; and stood in the gap to turn away his wrath; However, this
sent them backwards the way they came, verse, 25. Beware of these
heart-boylings and murmurings against Gods proceedings. God is list of hearing,
and hears the very repinings of the soul.

Thirdly; Ingratitude in abusing former courtesies; in not walking answerable
to favors received: For this God was offended with Solomon, 1 King. 11.9. God
had appeared unto him twice, 1 King. 11.9.
and yet he transgressed; this makes a breach betwixt God and us. Ingratitude
is hateful to him, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Isay. 1.2. Jer. 22.-14 Jer. 3.20.
Deuteronomy. 32.6. So Ier. 22.-14. Isay. 1.2.

Fourthly; Treacherous and perfidious dealing with God. Of this God complains,
Jer. 3.20. A treacherous Friend he will scarce trust, John 2.24.

Fifthly; Associating our selves in a league of Amity with Gods enemies: For
this, God was highly offended with his Friend Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Indeed
every sin is an enemy to God, 1 Chronicles. 19.2.
and so to be avoided, especially known sins, and presumptuous sins, for
these grieve and vex his Spirit, Isay. 63.10. Isay. 63.16.
Oh take heed of them.

As these sins of Commission must be avoided; so, no good duty may be
omitted, whereby his Affection may in the least kind be alienated from us.

First: Observe him carefully, and study in all things to please him. It was
the saying of Antigona, Sophocles in Antig.
that she ought to please those with whom she hoped to remain for ever,
(meaning the Citizens of Heaven) how much more should we be careful to please
the God of Heaven, and harken to his Counsels, follow his advice, observe his
precepts and commands? Gods Friends will do thus, John 14.15, 21. and 15.14.
John 14.15, 21. and 15.14.
A Friend is grieved when he sees his Counsel is slighted, or when he is
thwarted or Crossed by his Friend.

Secondly, Beware of intermitting, and letting fall your ordinary and wonted
resorts unto him. Intermission of intercourse breeds strangeness amongst
friends, and indeed they are never well but when they are in Company, one with
another. A Friend will blame his Friend for visiting him no oftener. Thus,
resort frequently to his house, come often to his Table; for as this begets
friendship betwixt God and us, so it preserves it being once had.

Thirdly, Stand out for him; speak in his cause. No friend can delight to have
his ear the grove of his Friends good name, to hear his friend wronged and be
silent; Ecclus. 2.225.
Nature did work on the dumb Son of Croesus, when he saw his Father ready to be
slain, so that the strings of his tongue did break and he cried out, oh kill
not Croesus. And shall not grace work as powerfully in us when we see God
dishonored, Mal. 3.15, 16, 17.
See Math. 3.15, 16, 17.

Fourthly, Love such as are God's Friends. Friends account that that which is
done for a friend is done for themselves. So what is done for the godly, God
takes as done to him, God will be offended if they be not regarded, Math.
25.34, 35, 44, 45.
Math. 25.45.

Fifthly, Rejoice in God's friendship, above all things in the world: if you
would have it continued. A Heathen being asked where his Treasure was, Psalm.
4.6.7.
answered where Cyrus my friend is: make Gods love, and friendship your chief
Treasure. Thou Lord have promised all good things to them that love thee,
(says Austin) give me thy self and it suffices.

Sixthly and Lastly, keep your hearts, and affections loyal to him: thine own
friend and thy father's friend forsake thou not, says Solomon, Prove. 27.10.
Prove. 27.10. God is both, let nothing draw our affections from him, neither
world, flesh nor Devil, nor any way diminish it. Observing these rules, you may
rest assured that as God is your friend, so he will continue to be your friend,
if we forsake not him he will not forsake us; 2 Chro. 15.2.
he never breaks with us first.



Differences amongst friends may arise; Resp. Genesis 13.8. Act. 11.2, and 15, 39.
Gal. 2.11. Math. 16.22.
as did betwixt Abraham and Lot: Paul and Barnabas; Peter and Paul: Christ and
Peter; God and the Godly. As betwixt him and Moses, David, Solomon (as before
was said.) And it is very true that such differences as arise betwixt friends,
are many times composed with more difficulty, then the contentions that arise
amongst others, as have bin showed, (which should make us the more careful
that we break not) but however it falls out with Men yet it is otherwise with
God; he is hardly provoked, being provoked, he is soon reconciled, if we defire
it, and seek to him for it. Now the means to recover friendship again, in that
case, are these.

First give God a meeting: when friends fall out and keep aloof, and come not
near one another, they are not like to agree in haste.

This is required, Amos 4.12. Amos 4.12.
We must do herein as Jacob did when he went out to meet his Brother Esau,
divide our band into two troops, and send them before us with their presents:
Genesis 32.10, 33, 3.
Body and Soul must go out to meet the Lord, and neither empty hand: each power
of the soul, and part and member of the Body, must bring a present with it. And
when we come near we must bow our selves to the ground seven times, that is,
very often. And then says the Text, Esau ran to his Brother and embraced him,
and fell on his neck and kissed him: so will God much more, if we thus go forth
and meet him in his ways and ordinances.

Secondly; Let us confess our faults, and acknowledge our errors to God,
promising to amend. This our Savior enjoynes betwixt man, and man, Luke 17.3,
4. And such must be our Carriage toward God. Thus did that Prodigal as we
read, Luke 15.18, 20. and what followed thereupon? Luke 17.3, 4. Luke 15.18, 2.
The father saw him, and had compassion on him, and fell on his neck and kissed
him. Oh how quickly will God be good Friends with an humbled soul? when he sees
thee to droop, and mourn under a sense of thy faylings, he is ready to prevent
thee with his mercies.

Thirdly, come to God in the mediation of his son Jesus Christ; take him up in
thy arms as Themistocles did Alexander whereby he pacified King Philip the
father, who was offended with him. The story tells us (if we may believe it)
that Pilate, being called to Rome, to give an account unto the Emperor for
some misgovernment, and mas-administration, he put on the seamlesse Coat of
Christ, and all the time that he had that Coat upon his back, Caesar's fury was
abated: But the Sacred story tells us this (and we believe it) that if we
Cloth our selves with the Roabes of Christ's righteousness, and put them on
by a lively faith, we shall have no cause to fear the want of Gods love and
favor, we having such an advocate with the Father as Jesus Christ the
righteous who is the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.1, 2.
1 John 2.1, 2. Take this course, and doubt not but all breaches which have bin
made betwixt God and you, will be soon made up to your endless comfort. One
use, yet remains.

Admonition to every of you, that you take heed lest your wrong or offer injury
to any of the godly: How shy are we of wronging any, who has some great man to
take his part? Oh, say some, I will not meddle with such, or such a man, for he
is strongly backed; he has such a Lord, or such a Commander for his Friend,
who will not suffer him to suffer; should I stir against him, I am sure I
should suffer for it: so a great man said once to another of the Council in
King Henry the Eighth, his days, concerning Cramner, Let him alone for the King
will not suffer his finger to ache. And is it safe think you to provoke God
against us, by wronging any of his Friends. Whether were you not afraid (says
God) to speak against my servant Moses, Numb. 12.8.
Number. 12.8? Why, who was Moses that he might not be spoke against? surely one
of Gods familiar Friend, with whom God spoke mouth to mouth, face to face, as a
man speaks to his Friend. And do you think that God will see his Friend
wronged and not right him? See what Miriam got by it, Numb. 12.11.
Number. 12.11. Miriam became leprous: but how escaped he was spared (says
Chrysostom,) or rather, he met God speedily by Repentance, and so disarmed his
indignation. Does thy conscience tell thee, that such a one is a man that truly
loves and fears God? oh beware how thou wrongest him, or speak evil of
him; for God takes the wrong as done unto himself, and first or last thou
may assure thy self that thou will hear of it, be thou never so great: for
He has reproved even Kings for their sake, saying, Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prephets no harm, Psalm. 105.15.

Thus you have seen in a spiritual sense, who this friend is, Psalm. 105.15.
proceed we now to take particular notice of the Indigent, and the Exigent he
was put unto. The Indigent or Person that is in want, [a friend] The Exigent or
the straight that he was in, appears by his going to his friend at Might-night,
etc. We begin with the Indigent or person spoken of. Literal Observation.
And so we may observe,

A man that has a Friend may yet be in want. This is true in the History, 1 Samuel 20. and 21. etc.

Narrowness of affection, even in the very best. Pride and self-love there is
enough, yea too much of it which puffs up and vaunteth it self above that
which is meet: it raises up jealousies and suspicions, and causes us to
apprehend a discourtesie by a wrong suspect: that was never intended by a
willing act: This hinders friendship in its proper work of succouring and
relieving a Friend in his want, (as you have heard before.)

Narrowness of Power: Friends may have large hearts, but short hands. As some
can help, but will not; so some would help, but cannot: their hearts are
enlarged, but either distance of place (or some other impediment,) may prevent
it, at least poverty my curb their bounty.

Narrowness of Discretion in the Indigent, in not making known his want unto
his Friend, through a too great bashfulnesse; and hence it is many times that
Friends are in want, when they needed not, if they would make it known. (But
this is not the Principal point that I intend,) A word of Use, shall suffice.

Seneca tells us, Sense Epist. 8.
that when the Scholars of Theophrastus had showed him two men, that were very
familiar, and entire Friends; one of them being very Rich, and the other Poor:
he said, thus unto them. Si amici sunt, quorsum alter ita dives, alter ita
pauper? If these be such Friends (as you speak of,) how comes it to pass that
the one is so rich, and the other poor? Indeed a true Friend will be helpful
to his Friend (as hereafter we shall hear); but yet, it may so fall out, that
my Friend may condole my shipwreck, when he cannot afford me a plank to swim to
shore. All the wants of a Friend cannot be supplied by a Friends desires, and
yet Friendship may be continued, (as now has been showed you).

It was well answered by Phocion (a famous Philosopher in his age) to one who
told him that Dionysius the Tyrant scoffed at him for his Poverty. I am poor
indeed (said he) but Dionysius is much poorer, for albeit, I want money, yet I
want not Friends, who are willing to succor me: Xenoph. Orat. de Agesilao.
And it was the praise of Agesilaus, that he respected such Friends that would
do him a courtesy, more then such as did it, preferring the benevolence of the
mind before the hand.

Mystical sense.
nor keep us from want. Were we God's own Friends, we may look to taste of that
Cup; as follows now, to show. For it is true in a spiritual sense.

Gods own Friends may be in a necessitous or needy condition, Psalm. 107.4, 5.
Romans 12, 13. 2 Cor. 8.14. Shall I bring you Instances? was not this Jacobs
case? Genesis 42.2.
did not he want bread for himself and Family, and was he not enforced to send
into Egypt for it to preserve their lives (as well as the Cananites?) And was
not this Elijahs case; 1 King. 17.4.
who was able to bridle Heaven with his tongue, so that neither dew, nor rain,
fell upon the Earth, but according to his word, yet he is feign to be fed,
first by a Raven, and afterward by a widow, at Sarepta (who was likewise in a
strait her self.) And the like necessitous condition, were all Gods Prophets
in, 1 King. 18.13.
at the same time; they were enforced to hide themselves in Caves, and be fed
with bread, and water, at Obadiahs finding. Elimelech and Naomi, are driven
from their dwellings in Bethleem Juda, Ruth. 1.1.
and enforced to sojourne in the Land of Moab, for want of food: And Ruth (a
holy Woman, and one of the Grand-Mothers of our Savior) constrained by want,
is enforced to go a gleaning, in other men's Fields, for the necessary
sustinance of her self, and Mother in Law. What say you of Job; Ruth. 2.2.
was not he stripped of all, and yet beloved of God? And what to David, Psalm
40.18.
did he not confess himself to be poor and needy? was he not so distressed
for hunger, that he and his company were enforced to eat of the shewbread, 1 Samuel 21.3. Math. 12.4. 2 Cor. 11.27. 1 Cor. 4.11. Heb. 11.37. Heb. 1. Math.
21.18. John 19.28. Luke 8.3.
which (out of the case of necessity) was not lawful for any to eat, but the
Priests only? was not Lazarus needy? Peter pennilesse? St. Paul in hunger,
cold, thirst, nakedness? And what read we of those worthies, which the World
was not worthy of? did they not wander up and down, in Sheepskins, and
Goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented? And did not Christ himself
(the Son and Heir of the whole world) want both meat, and lodging, and other
necessaries; insomuch that others did administer to him of their substance? I
suppose that you can make no doubt of the (...), that it is so: but for the
(...), whence it comes to pass that is is so; you may make some question. I
shall therefore (in the next place) render you some Reasons of it.

Inconstancy, Revel. 12.1. 1 Pet. 1.24. Revel. 4.6.
mutability, and mobility of all earthly things; Nothing under the Sun is of a
lasting, and durable nature; they are like the Moon, ever in changing: Or like
flowers which have their months; to day for the Bosom, to morrow for the
Besome. The world is a Sea of glass; and those that stand fastest on it, have
but slippery footing, Such a Palsy, possesses all secular things, that their
joints cannot hold together: One man's honor is shaken upon another man's back;
one man's Inheritance, into another man's lap: There is nothing certain and
steady; Nor can we be more certain of any thing amongst them, then of the
uncertainty of them all.

Secondly; This may fall out through the malice of Satan, and his Instruments;
who, when they cannot mischief the Godly in their souls, they will endeavor
to do them what hurt they can, in their goods, and Estates: The first thing
that Satan desired against Job, was, that God would put forth his hand and
touch all that he had, Job. 1.11.
and deprive him of it. And the reason of it, Chrysostom gives, Chrysostom. Hom. 2.
de Jacob.
he endeavored to spoil him of his wealth, that he might spoil him of his
worthy deeds.

Thirdly; the maine Reason of all is, Gods providentiall administration, who,
as he orders, and disposes of all things under Heaven, for his own glory,
and the good of his; so he does this, in suffering his to be in want.

First, that the Rich of the world, might not want an object of Charity. The
Rich are proved (says Austin) by the poverty of others. Some good men shall be
in want, to discover what pity and compassion is in men's hearts: Deuteronomy. 15.11.
Mark. 14.7. Math. 25.44.
Deuteronomy. 15.11. and Mark. 14.7. And to leave the merciless and hard-hearted
without excuse: We read Math. 25.44. the wicked will be ready to except against
the sentence of the Judge, Lord when saw we thee an hungry, or thirsty, etc?
why; then, when that poor Widow was sent away without relief, that poor
Orphan without succor, will the judge answer them to their confusion.

Secondly, his Providence does thus dispose, for the good of his, that their
salvation may be furthered, and their better part, (their souls) perfected, so
Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. i. e. that he might humble thee, Deuteronomy. 8.15.16.
with thy wants, and prove thee in thy wants, to do thee good in the end; so,
Jer. 24.5. By this means, our proud natures come to be humbled; pride and
ambition rooted out; corruption mortifyed. When Jesurun waxed fat he kicked
with the heel, Take away the provender from the unruly Steed, and he becomes
more tractable.

Thirdly; Deuteronomy. 32.15.18. Revel. 13.10. Job. 1. Genesis 18.11.21.1.
our Faith, and Patience, are here exercised, and tried, Revel. 13.10. so God
dealt with Job, proved his Integrity against Sathan's accusations. And the
graces of his spirit, are hereby increased in us. When it ceased to be with
Sarah after the manner of other women, then Isaac was conceived: so when it
cease to be with the Godly after the manner of the world's favorites, then
holy thoughts, and godly desires are begotten and conceived in them.

Fourthly; his mercies are hereby sweetened, and better relish with us: Hunger
is the best sauce, Sickness makes Health more grateful: pain, Pleasure more
delightful: Affliction and misery, Prosperity and happiness more desirable:
and Want, the worth of a blessing, more sensible. When Darius (in his flight
from Alexander) had drank puddle water, polluted with dead Carcasses, he
professed, that he had never in all his life, drunk any thing more pleasing:
the Reason might be, for that he always before that, used to drink ere he was
a thirst. Gods blessings seldom appear to us in their full beauty, till they
have turned their backs upon us, and are going or gone from us. Is it not so at
this day? A Probatum est upon the head of this truth, you may putt.

Fifthly: By this means we come to be weaned from the world, and long for
home; we are taught hereby, not to seek for true felicity upon earth, but to
seek for that above: Till Naomi was left of her husband, and her two Sons
were dead, Ruth. 1.6.
there is no speech of her returning from Moab, to her own Country; And before
the Prodigal was in want, he thinks not of going home to his Father's house.
Were the world better to us, our hearts would cleave faster to it; Luke
15.17.18.
it is the worlds venison that causes us to lose our Fathers blessing. And
thus you see how God in dispensing of these outward things, has reference to
the good and welfare of his people.

Thirdly, and lastly: It is not without Reference to his own glory, God will
have his Wisdom seen, in suiting every one with an estate answerable to his
station. In the Body there are many members, and every member has its proper
use and function; There is a Foot, as well as a hand, and head; 1 Cor. 12.
and for the Foot, a shoe of leather, is as fit; as for the Head, a hat of
Bever: So in Gods house he suits men, and gives wages according to their parts,
and abilities. And as his Wisdom is herein seen, so hereby, is his Power known,
in disposing all things according to his own will, (not our pleasure,) Deuteronomy.
8.17.18. And likewise in the preserving of his Servants by weak means; Deuteronomy.
8.17.18.
Or (from so mean a condition) in advancing of them to great promotion, Deuteronomy.
8.3. Herodotus tells us, Herodot. l. 3.
that Polycrates the Tyrant very much exercised Roberie, and Pyracie, both by
Sea, and Land; and his custom was to spoil his Friends as much as his
Enemies; and this was the Reason which he gave, that when he should afterward
understand that his Friend was robbed of any thing he might gratify that
Friend more, in restoring that which was lost, then if he had taken nothing
from him: The practice was badd, but the Reason (says one) has wit and
meaning, and he applies it thus: God knows, Bishop Abbot on John 10. Lect.
that when himself takes from us such things as are not ours, (for we are but
his disposers and Tennants at will unto him) he makes us so much the more
embrace his mercy, who sends Grace in wretchedness, and comfort in extremity.
Thus you have here the Reasons. Now before we apply the point, let us Answer
some objections.

Psalm. 34.10. may be objected against what has been delivered, Psalm. 34.10.
Psalm. 84.11.
The Lions shall lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want
no good thing, and Psalm. 84.11. No good thing will he with hold from those that
walk uprightly.



First in General; These promises of temporal things, are not absolutely
made, but with reservation of the Cross; and with this limitation, so far as
may make for Gods glory; and his Childrens good.

Secondly; more particularly, the promise is not simply, that such as fear him
shall never be in necessity and want, but that they shall not want any thing
that is good; Now albeit wealth and riches, and the outward comforts of this
life, are Gods good blessings in themselves, yet are they not absolutely good;
so as to make them good that have them; But they are of an indifferent nature,
and mutably good, or bad, as they are used; Good they are to the good, evil to
them that abuse them. Albeit then they are good in themselves, yet God sees
they would not be so to thee; Thy weak brains cannot bear such strong liquor;
Did God see, that it were good for thee to have them, thou should not be
without them; but he knows it is better for thee to be without them. And so he
fullfills his promise to thee, in withholding these things from thee; For want
to thee is good, Romans 8.28.
and for thy best, Romans 8.28. If thou be one that fears God, thou may
assure thy self, that that Promise shall never fail thee.

Deuteronomy. 28.48. Psalm. 109.9, 10. 1 Samuel 2.36. Resp.
Deuteronomy. 28.48. And, that they shall beg their bread, Psalm. 109.9, 10. 1 Samuel
2.36.

Resp. It is so indeed to the wicked: but let us here distinguish.

There are two sorts of Persons that are in want. First, Impotent poor ones;
such as fall into want, through sickness, age, or other casualties; (as by
Fire, Water, Thieves, Robbers, or such like men.) And there are Impudent poor
ones; such as by sinful and licentious courses, bring want upon themselves; To
these latter sort want is a curse: But to the former, though it be a Cross,
yet it is no Curse, but a Trial for exercising of their Graces.

Secondly, Although God should send want upon such, as a just Judgment for
their sins; yet if a man be brought thereby unto Repentance, and be humbled
for his sins, and reform his ways, although the entrance into that estate
be in a Curse, yet it shall be turned into a blessing; in that it works for his
good and everlasting happiness.

David says, that he never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his seed, begging
bread, Psalm. 37.25. Psalm. 37.25.
This has much perplexed the Spirits of the Godly.

David may be understood as speaking of a trade of Begging, or a constant
course of street-beggery, (which in these days is become a kind of a Calling,
and whereof there is a Corporation, some Parents bring up their Children to it,
others take Apprentices to learn them the Trade. They teach them how to look,
what to say, how to lie, how to cry, etc.) The Prophet never knew any Godly
man, to be of this Profession, or to drive this Trade. The Profession, and
state of begging was prohibited by the law of God, and accursed by him; so that
no Godly man would offend against that Law, and bring that Curse upon himself.
Such are so far from being Righteous, as that they live without God in the
world, and are like to perish without Christ, in the world to come; being
Atheists, Blasphemers, Sabbath Breakers, Thieves, Whoremongers; the worst of
Infernal Spirits have not less sense of Piety, but more sense of a Diety then
these. These are the Vermin of the Commonwealth, and should not be suffered to
devour that which Impotent poor should have: But why touch I these?

Secondly; David may be understood as speaking of his own experience: for he
says not, that the Righteous were never driven to so bad an Exigent as to beg
their bread; but that he never saw it. And indeed it is a rare, and unusual
thing, to see; Luke 16.
(Albeit it may so fall out), (for we read of Lazarus lying at Dives his gate)
and I believe the Eldest man living, cannot point out many instances. However,
David in all his time, never saw it that a truly righteous person, was brought
(although to want, yet not) to beggary.

Thirdly; David may be understood as speaking of the Righteous and their seed
both: for if God be so pleased to lay this affliction on any of his servants,
to chastise them for their sins, or for the trial of their graces; yet God in
mercy remembers their Posterity; (if they walk in obedience before him) and his
seed shall inherit the blessing. Psalm. 25.13.


Fourthly, the Prophet's meaning may be this, that albeit they were brought to
such extremity of want as to beg their bread, yet he never saw them to be
forsaken in that extremity, but God has stirred up the hearts, of some good
people, (even then) to succor them, and relieve them: yea he himself, rather
then fail, will be the reliever of them, (as he was of Lazarus, who had his
wants supplied, and was succored by God, (as his name imported. Luke 16.
) And when they are most scanted, they are not forsaken: for what they are
scanted in Temporals, they are supplied in Spirituals. And this (I take to be
most genuine, and it) agrees well, with the former Aphorism; though they fall
into outward misery, yet God puts to his helping hand. So much for the clearing
of the point. Now for the Use.



First, Consid. 1.
know thou may abound with these outward blessings have a fullness, and
plenty of them, and yet be never the more favored, Eccles. 9.1, 2.
and respected of God, in that respect. The Scripture teaches that by these
outward things, no man can judge either of Gods love or hatred. And Experience
teaches as much; for we find that the most wicked, most flourish in plenty and
abundance, this Job shows, 21.6, 7, 8. the like does David, Job 21.6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 73.1.2. Jer. 12.1.
Psalm. 73.1, 2, and so Jeremiah 12.1. And by this Argument we might infer that
Esau was the best beloved Son, and Judas the most beloved Disciple; and that
the Turk and Persian and other Infidels are best beloved of God; for that they
most abound with worldly blessings. Examine all History, (sacred and profane)
and you shall find that the most loathsome and abominable creatures that ever
breathed air, or saw the Sun, have sailed through the Sea of the world, in the
tallest and greatest vessels. And yet (as one speaks of the territory of the
great Turk) they are but as a little bone cast to that great Dog: and indeed
were they any better then bones, the Dogs of the world should never have them;
were they bread, Gods children should never be without them.

There is indeed a Common love extended to Man and Beast, of which David
speaks, Psalm. 36.6. Psalm. 36.6. John 4.9, 10.
And there is a special love which God bears to his own in Christ, 1 John
4.9, 10. Temporal blessings are fruits of Gods Common Love, but no signs of
special love and favor. A man may safely conclude God is good to me, and
loves me, else he would not provide for me as he does: but he cannot conclude
God loves me with that love which he bears to his Children, because of these
things. Can a Traitor comfort himself in his Princes favor, because he has
good lodging and good diet provided for him in the Tower, till matters be ripe,
and all things ready for his Arraignment, and execution? or the Ox that is
fatted (if it had Reason to discourse) to say, My owner loves me, in putting me
in pastures where I feed up to the very eyes? Alas! it is but to fat it,
against the day of slaughter.

In the second place (therefore) know, that albeit outward comforts of this
life, be in themselves the good blessings of God; yet to thee that art not
reconciled to God in Christ, but an enemy unto him, they are not good, but
pernicious, and hurtful; curses, and not blessings, Mal. 2.2.
Mal. 2.2. So as thou may say, as that poor woman did to her Physician, (who
being deadlisy sick, and telling him of the Symptoms of her disease, which he
hearing told her, all were good) Woe is me, then, (said she) good has undone
me: So woe to thee, thy good undoes thee, Gods curse is on them so, that they
are a snare unto thee, Romans 11. verse 9. Romans 11.9. Job 20.14. Eccles. 5.13.
Prove. 1.32. Job 18.15.
thy meat shall turn to gall in thy bowels, yea prove as the gall of Aspes, Job
20.14. thy Riches shall be reserved for thy hurt, Eccles. 5.13. and thy
Prosperity tend to thy destruction, Prove. 1.32. Bildad gives that reason of it,
Job 18.15. Because it is none of thine, thou have no just title to it. A Civil
right, thou may have before men, so that he is a Thief and a Robber, that
takes any of these things from thee; But a spiritual right (which is the only
comfortable right) thou have nor, nor can have, till thou be in Christ.
Put case a man has a fair piece of Evidence, duly sealed, authentically
testified, and delivered; if he have no land to hold by it, or Title to recover
by it, would he be any whit the better for it? Evidences, are Evidences, to
them who have a Title: So when a man has a good Title to Heaven, when he has
a testimony of Gods spiritual Blessings, in the temporal, then are these
temporal blessings good evidences: Otherwise, if thou have not the Grace of
God, and spiritual blessings with these temporal; thou art not the nearer
happiness, for earthly abundance. These things are but as an Evidence in his
hands who has no Title: and that is very suspicious, such a one may well be
thought, to have embezeled or purloyed those Evidences: to have forged or
counterfeited them, and so may be called to an account for them: so those who
have temporal blessings, without spiritual; they are but counterseit, they
cannot procure a minutes peace of Conscience, nor a minutes refreshing of the
soul hereafter: But a heavy account must be made, how we got them, and how we
employed them.

Thirdly, thou have little cause to judge thy self happy in having plenty, and
others miserable that are needy, If thou do seriously consider that the good
man's worst estate, is better then thy best, Prove. 19.1.
can be. This Solomon teaches in his Proverbs 19.1. the meaning is, that he
who has a little wealth, and small possessions, and yet endeavors to walk
uprightly; to be just, and godly in his words, and works, is better then any
wicked man (who in Solomon's language is usually termed a fool) being void of
Grace, and goodness; and full of vice, and ledwnesse. And a greater and wiser
then Solomon teaches this, in that his Sermon, Luke 6.20, 27. where, both
poor, and rich; Luke 6.20, 21.
the righteous, and wicked, are presented to us; the one in his worst, the
other in his best habit. The faithful are considered in their poverty, hunger,
sorrow, and contempt, and pronounced Blessed in them all. Blessed hunger,
Blessed thirst, Blessed grief, Blessed contempt, and the wicked are considered
in their Ruff, ruffling it in their Riches, Satiety, Jollity, Honor; and
pronounced woeful, and miserable in all these: woe to you that are rich; woe to
you that are full; woe to you that laugh; woe to you when men applaud you. A
woeful generation they are in their best condition. A woe is entayled to all
those things, wherein you place your best welfare. Judge now I pray you, whose
estate is the better.

Wherefore be advised, not to represent your own estates nor the estates of
other, to the eyes of your minds, in this deceitful glass, of your outward
estates, in respect of things of this world. Nothing is more deceiveable, and
less to be trusted, then the visible estate of any man, in respect of
Temporalities: and yet how ordinary is it, to be herein deluded?

We read of one Argolandus a Prince of Africa, who coming to the Court of
Charles the great, King of France, with a purpose to forsake his Heathenism,
and embrace the Gospel, seeing two tables full of Guests, sitting with him in
his Hall at meat; One at the upper end, full of Gallants, with gold-chains and
rich attire, the other at the lower end of the Hall, full of Guests in ragged
robes, he asked the King what they were? he answered, they so rich at the upper
end, were his Friends and Servants, that attended on his Person: and they in
rags are those (said he) whom I always feed at my table, in memory of my
Master, and his Friends: Why, what Master, and what Friends, said the Prince?
of my Master Christ, and his Apostles said the King: If the case be so, replied
the Prince, that your Master uses his Friends no better, I shall not care for
his friendship, nor do I mean to be any of those Friends of his. Thus many are
ready to fall into a disdain of God, and the profession of the Gospel, because
of the poverty of his Children and Servants But to conclude this Use, remember
that when Ephraim and Manasses were brought before Jacob; Ephraim was set at
Jacobs left hand, and Manasses at his right; But Jacob crossed his hands and
laid his right hand upon Ephraims head, Genesis 48.13, 14.
and his left on the head of Manasses: so it falls out in regard of outward
blessings, oftentimes those who seem to stand now at Gods right hand, shall be
set at his left; and many who seem now to stand at his left hand, shall be set
at his right, Luke 16.25. Math. 25.32.



There are not a few, Math. 4.3.
that have been assaulted with this suggestion. Gods own son was tempted with
this hungry temptation, Math. 4.3. If thou art the Son of God? he would
persuade, that want of bread, argued him to be no Son: So he tempts Gods
Children to believe that their want and poverty, is inconsistent with their
Sonship: And albeit Satan could not persuade with Him; yet he has foiled many
with it. How deeply was David discomfited hereat? so that he began to think
well of wicked men's estates, and to question his own, when he saw the
prosperity of sinners, and the misery of himself: hear what he says. Psalm.
73.1.- 5.
Psalm. 73.1, 2, 3, 4, he was almost gone besides himself to consider it.

Nor was this David's case alone, but good Jeremiahs too, Jer. 21.1, 2, 3.
Ier. 12.1, 2, 3. he was never so near a conquest in any combat as in this:
that God was righteous, he durst not deny; but why a wicked man should be
suffered to prosper, and himself be so wretched (God being righteous) he could
not apprehend. And still to this day the Devil makes use of this temptation,
which he has found to be so prevayling in all ages. What, does God love you?
would he then thus afflict you? are you not in worse case then those who are
stark naught? Were God such a God as you hold him to be; you such men, as you
suppose your selves to be; this could not be. Wherefore it behooves us to arm
our selves against this temptation that we be not foiled in the time of trial.
And for this end I have sundry considerations to commend unto you.

First consider, that though thou art in want, Prove. 15.16, and 16, 18.
when the wicked have a fullness, yet thou art in a better estate then any
wicked worldling is or can be (as we showed you before.) If this be yet doubted
of: Luke 16.19.
let Lazarus and Dives be the men that shall decide the matter: you know what
the Scripture says of them: one wanted crumbs of bread, the other fared well
and feasted daily: one wanted Rags to cover his soars; the other was arrayed
in purple and fine linen; now which of these two, were in the best condition,
think you?

And this must needs be so, for first that which you have, (be it but a little)
yet it is your own, you have the highest title to it, that can be had; for you
hold all in Capite as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 3.21, 23. Romans 8.32. this the
wicked have not, 1 Cor. 3.21.23. Romans 8.32. 1 Timothy 4.3, 5.
do not.

Secondly, that which you have; shall do you good, and no hurt, it is
sanctified unto you, 1 Timothy 4.3, 5. where the Apostle shows, that no creature
is good, but to them that believe and know the truth, and renders that as a
reason, for it is sanctified by the Word and by Prayer. What you have, you have
without sorrow, without the curse: your want and poverty, shall be no hindrance
to your happiness; but it shall further it, Romans 8.35. Now it is otherwise
with the wicked, (as has bin showed, Romans 8.37.
) should the case be put unto you whether a poor and needy condition, may help
a man to Heaven; Or a prosperous and opulent estate, that may hasten a man to
Hell, is to be preferred; would it not be soon determined?

3. What you have, you have with love, which gives a sweet relish to all we
have. We say in the entertaining of Friends, Welcome is your best fare: you
have it with love, though your fare be mean: So Gods love, we should prefer to
the best cheer in the world. But the wicked have not what they have with Gods
special love, as was said even now. You see then, it is impossible for you to
be miserable in your worst condition, and that your worst is better then the
best of any other. Now tell me, Is not a quiet conscience lying on the ground,
better then a tormenting conscience lying on a bed of down?

Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7.
Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7. The richest that is, shall go out of the world as poor
as thy self, and came as naked into it as did thy self, so that thou have no
cause to complain. Some Husbands use to say to their wives, I shall leave you
as well as I found you; you are for present better; Besides you deserve nothing
of that you have, thou do not earn that bit of bread thou eatest. Is not all
thou have of Gift and Alms? and shall a Beggar repine at the Alms that is
given him? much more cause thou have to bless God that thou art so well dealt
withal, than to repine or grieve that thou art no better. Does God lay losses
on thee? why, he might have left thee without a ragg on thy back. Does he
afflict with sickness? he might with death, etc. In what want soever we are,
or what distress soever we lie under, we may bless God that it is no worse
with us: our sufferings are far less, Lament. 3.22. Psalm. 103.10. Ezra 9.13.
then our sins deserve, Lament. 3.22. Psalm. 103.10. Ezra 9.13. we may admire,
our sufferings are so small and easy, when our sins are so great and weighty.
And then remember withal, how many there are who deserve better then thy self,
who yet come short of thee in outward things being without clothes; without
bed; without harbor; without work; without health; without strength;
Lactantius (that Christian Cicero, as Hierom calls him,) was so needy that he
wanted necessaries. And in Queen Mary's days, we read of some that were
enforced to drink their own water, therewith to quench their thrist: (as Robert
Samuel, Martyr). I cannot pass by that which we read of Musculus a very learned
and godly man, (as any that li^ed in his time, Melch. Adams in vita Muscul.
) yet after he had labored much in Gods Vineyard; wrote many excellent books,
and large Comments; he was so ill used of the world, that he was enforced to
get into a Weavers house, and learn to weave for his living; to get bread for
himself and Family, and being within a while turned out of the house, (by the
Master, the weaver, who liked not his strictness of Religion,) he was enforced
to go and work with his spade, in the Common ditch of the Town to get a living
by: read Heb. 11.36. And shall we repine or murmer under our wants when such as
these want: surely there are none so poor, but there are some yet poorer then
they, (so said the beggar to his Companion, of the Mouse,) there are some would
be glad of our leavings.

Thirdly consider, that it is from the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.7.
(whose power it is to dispose of all at pleasure) that thy want and poverty
comes; It is his providence that he has so disposed of thy estate; thou art a
Counter that he with his own hand has laid in that low place: he knows thy
poverty, and sees thy wants, Math. 6.32. Revel. 2.9. nor does he suffer this
want to befall thee, without great reason: he has promised not to leave thee,
Psalm. 37.3, 9, and 34, 10, and 84, 11.
but to provide for thee. And his truth cannot fail; Nor is his power any whit
shortened; he has all at his Command, and will supply thy wants in some kind of
way, or other; many ways he has to do it.

Sometimes, he has wrought extraordinarily, and, by strange ways, supplied
the wants of his: As in feeding of Eliah by Ravens, (who naturally hate her own
brood, 1 King. 17.5, 6.
and were more likely in that time of famine to have fed upon his dead
carcass, then to have fed him). So in supplying the wants of the widow of
Sarepta in that long famine of three years and a half; 1 King. 17.16. Luke 4.25.
so that neither the little meal in the barrel, nor the oil in the cruse did
wast in all that time. Nor has God left himself without witness, in this
latter Age of the world, in providing for his, by strange and unexpected means.
Aretius (a Divine of good note) does confidently affirm, Problem. Theolog. part
2. lect. 119.
that in some parts of Austria and Baccaria, it rained down wheat which the
people gathered, and made wholesome bread thereof. When a general famine was
over all England, Anno 1555. at Alborough in Suffolk, on the Sea coast there
grew on the Rocks such plenty of pease, which came to perfect maturity, that
they abated the prices of the Market, Cambd. Brittannia p. 466.
and saved the lives of many poor people.

Cambden relates when Rochel was besieged in the heat of civil wars in France,
(raised against the professors of the Reformed Religion) and they brought into
great extremity for want of Victuals (their store being spent; God sent into
their Haven, such multitudes of shell-fishes daily, (which cast themselves upon
the Shore) that the people were therewith relieved during that siege, which was
no sooner broken up and removed, Hist. de statu Relig. and Reip. in Regno
Galliae lib. 11.
but they departed also; the like kind of fish was never seen there, before,
nor since. Merlyn being hid in a haymow in the massacre of Paris, was there
nourished for a Fortnight together with an egg a day, which a Hen that came
thither laid by him every morning: Dikes Mich. and the Drag. p. 266. Melch.
Adam.
Musculus (of whom we made some mention before) when his wife and Children came
and begged bread of him in the time of his banishment, to divert his care he
fell to verfifying, Est Deus in coelis qui providus omnia curat, Nunquam
credentes destituisse potest. No sooner were his verses ended, but a Neighbor
of his brought him a loaf, which supplied the want of his family. Not far
unlike to this is that which I have heard from the mouth of a Reverend Divine,
Mr. Rich. Hunt.
(yet living) that there being a great Famine in Lancashire, his Father wanting
bread for his Family, went according to his usual manner to morning prayer, in
Manchester Church: no sooner was prayer ended, but rising to go home, (casting
his eyes in the next Seat,) there he spyed a great loaf, (how it came there he
could not tell) which he with a thankful heart received, and therewith
relieved the necessities of his Family. Other instances we may give (for these
are but a few Annotations in the margent of that great volume of Divine
Providence) of Gods supplying the wants of his by extraordinary ways and
means. Or if he does not this, yet he has many ordinary ways to succor his,
sometimes by giving strength of body and ability to bear the want: If you take
away my meat, said one in Q. Mary's days, (to her bloody Persecutors,) God
will take away my stomach. Acts and mon. fall. 1547.
And when the Bishop of Norwich kept Robert Samuel, Martyr, without meat or
drink in the prison, two or three days together, so that he was almost
famished, he being in a slumber, thought he saw one stand in white before him,
saying, Samuel, Samuel be of good cheer, for after this day thou shall
neither be hungry nor thirsty, and accordingly from that time, to the time of
his burning, (which was not many days after) he neither hungered nor thirsted.
This (as the story tells us) he said, that he related to this end, that all men
might behold the wonderful work of God. Sometimes again he does so bless the
poor means of maintenance and nourishment to his, as that a little shall go
far, so we read, 2 King. 4.6. and Math. 14.20, 21. Dan. 1. 2 King. 4.6.
Math. 14.20, 21.
Five thousand were fed with five Loaves, and two Fishes. So (says one,) God
has blessed to many the fifth part of their own loaf, taken from them, so that
they and theirs live comfortably with it, when the other four parts cannot keep
life and soul together, Mr. Tho. Fuller.
in them that have it. Or else God will supply their wants with counter
blessings of another kind, as Spiritual, for Corporal: eternal, 1 Cor. 6.10.
Jam. 2.10.
for temporal: thy loss shall be thy riches; And the less thou have here,
the more is behind, for God is a good Play Master, the longer he forbeares, the
better payment he makes in the end. What Lazarus wanted here on Farth, he sound
in Abraham's bosom.

Oh! murmur not (then), repine not, distrust not; if God comes, it is to
relieve thee; if he stay, it is to try thee; however, his purpose is, to do
thee good, and save thee. And is it not better to be preserved in Brine, then
to rot in Honey?

Let these things be well disgesied, and we shall not judge want, to be so
terrible, as the world imagines; nor infer that we are any whit the less in
Gods favor, because of it. Let us labor rather to see the want of Faith, and
complain of that, as the greatest want, resting assured, that God will rather
work miracles, (when ordinary means fail) then suffer the Faith of his to
sink, for want of suppo^tation. If we know not what to do, let us lift up our
eyes to him, from whom, both poverty, and riches comes: And if thy thoughts, be
at any time inquisitive as were Isaac's, Genesis 22.7, 8.
Where is the Lamb; How shall I do, for this or that? say to thy soul, as
Abraham did to Isaac, God will provide. His Friends are all of his Family, and
he is worse then an Infidel, that provides not for his Family, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Math. 6.30.
(says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8.) He provides liberally for all his Poultry,
(the fowls of Heaven): And are not ye much better then they? Oh ye of little
Faith.

We have now done with the Indigent, we come to his Exigent.

And shall go to him at Midnight, and say unto him, Friend lend me three
loaves, etc.]

Here we take notice, first of the thing wanted, secondly of the course taken
for the supply thereof. The thing wanted was Bread [Loaves of Bread.] What
bread, (whether of Barley or Wheat) he mentions not; (nor is it to the purpose
to enquire.) He instanceth in that, rather then in money, or clothing, or other
such thing, Because it is the only necessary thing, for preservation of life:
thence we may infer,

Want of Bread, Literal. Doct.
is a great want.

Our Savior so considers it here; had that want been small, or trivial, he
would (without question) have alluded to somewhat else.

This want, brought Jacobs Sons to their wits end; they stood gazing one
upon another, not knowing which way to turn them; Genesis 42.1, 2.
as their Fathers speech unto them imports, Genesis 42.1. It threatened death: Get
you down, (said he unto them) and buy Corn, that we may live and not dye,
verse 2. For want of bread the whole land of Egypt fainted, Genesis 47.13.
Genesis 47.13. or, as Junius has it, furebat, it raged and was well near madd:
but whether they fretted, or fainted, for lack of bread; it appears, that they
apprehended it to be no small Affliction, but a heavy Judgment.

Indeed it is threatened as a Judgment, Levit. 26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.51. Ezekiel.
4.16.17. and 5.16. and 14.13.21,
and put in the Catalogue of curses, that were fearful Judgments, Levit.
26.26. Deuteronomy. 28.51. Ezekiel. 4.16.17. It is one of the deadly Arrows, that are in
Gods quiver, which he shoots against a nation and people, when he is provoked,
Ezekiel. 5.16. and 14.13.21. So Jer. 25.6. Amos 4.6. and this want is bitterly
lamented, Jer. 25.6. Amos. 4.6. Lament. 1.11. Reas.
Lament. 1.11.

It must needs be so; for the greater and more necessary that the blessing is,
the greater must the want thereof be. Of all the blessings which God has given
for the preservation and sustentation of the life of man, there is none more
necessary or useful than Bread is.

It is called in Scripture the Staff or stay of a man's life, Psalm. 105.16
Psalm. 105.16. As old men stay themselves upon their staff, so the life of man
is upheld, and stayed by Bread; and the breaking of the staff is the taking
away of the prop, and stay of life, Isay. 3.1.
Isay. 3.1. And the Necessity of it may farther appear; First, Genesis 3.19.
Exodus 23.25. Pro. 20.13. Psalm. 41.9. Job. 42.11. Math. 6.11, Varro.
in that all necessaries that appertain to man's being, or well being, are
comprised under the name of Bread, in Scripture, as Psalm. 41.9. Job. 42.11.
Math. 6.11. And thence it is, that some derive Panis of the Greek word (...);
for that it is instar omnium instead of all. Others derive it a pascendo from
feeding, in which sense it imports all necessary food.

All Nations, and People in the world, have set a high price on Bread: When the
Egyptians wanted bred, they were content to part with all their money for it,
Genesis 47.14. and not only with that, but with all their Cattle, their Land,
Genesis 47.14. verse. 17.19.
and themselves too, to purchase it, verse. 17.19. They have esteemed it as
their chiefest food: In inviting of their guests, they invite them to eat
Bread with them, as their best dish. And whereas some Nations have abstained
from some kind of meats, (as the Jews and Turks do at this day; And Papists
from flesh and white-meats in time of Lent) yet no Nation, or people (except
Caniballs) abstain from Bread. Bread and water have been used by strictest
Poenitents, in their fastings, humiliations; Fortissimum jejunium est aqua and
panis, etc. Hier. lib. 18. cap. 11. Genesis 14.2. and 14.18.
and been esteemed for the chiefest Fasts. Nor was the use of Bread ever forbad
by any Politic Law; (as the use of other meats have been,) from the very
beginning of the world, Bread was had in great account, and was in use, Genesis
14.2. and 14.18. Albeit some Countries were long without the use of Corn, yet
they used Pulse, and Dates, and Acorns, instead of bread: and although the art
of Baking, was not found out a long time, yet they made bread, of boiled Corn.
It is counted a more wholesome food then any other, and without this, other
meats, rather clogg the stomach then nourish it; they are not well relished
without it; but Bread is savory, without the other. This (then) being one of
the chiefest comforts of Life, the want thereof, must needs be one of the
greatest wants.

Secondly; The want of no Temporal blessing, brings a man to such distress,
as the want of Bread does: This (especially) causes Famine, (whereupon by a
kind of propriety it is called a Famine of Bread, Amos. 8.11.
Amos 8.11.) It is not the want of fish, flesh, fowl, or fruit; that brings it.
It is very probable, that the, Egyptians were not without these, in the time
of their scarcity; Genesis 47.14.
and it is certain that Jacob had store of Cattle, when they sent into
Egypt, and yet for want of Bread-Corn, they were like to perish; Lament. 4.7.8
and yet for want of Bread-Corn, they beauty and complexion to fade; procures
diverse diseases, got by surfets on other meats, eaten without it; and in the
end brings an untimely Death.

very Ancient, (being the first calling that ever was; assigned by God himself,
to Adam who was an Husbandman, and his eldest Son a tiller of the ground, Genesis
3.19. and 4.2. 2 Chronicles. 26.10.
Genesis 3.19. and 4.2.) and very Honorable, (insomuch that Kings loved it, and
followed it) (as we read of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.10. and Cyrus King of the
Persians, who was accustomed to sow Corn, and plant trees,) so it it likewise
very useful and profitable. No Calling that brings a more general good, to
the outward man, then does the Husbandman, by the tillage of the Field;
according to that of Solomon, Pro. 14.4. Pro. 14.4.
Where no Oxen are, the Crib is clean, but much increase is by the strength of
the Ox; the meaning is, that where the means of Husbandy are neglected, the
Barn or Crib is clean, and empty; there is a want of necessaries, (as of wheat
or other grain): but by the care and pains of Tillage, there arises great
plenty; not only the bellyes of men are filled, but their Purses also: Eccles.
5.9.
Not only lives of men are preserved, but their state is likewise increased. So
Eccles. 5.9. The profit of the earth is for all. Some callings there are, which
bring no profit at all to others: (therefore not warrantable.) Other Callings
there are, that bring profit to a few, (and but to a few,) but the profit of
the Field, is of a general concernment; yea the King himself (says Solomon)
is served by the Field. What are all the Revenewes of a Kingdom, but wages (as
it were) which the Field pays? And yet who are more contemned and despised
then these laborious Pismires?



There are four Creatures mentioned by Joel, Joel. 1.4.
(great enemies to Tillage,) which did waste the Corn, and devour the harvest
of the Field. The Palmer-worm, the Locust or Grasshopper, the Canker-Worm, and
the Catterpillar: what one left, the other devoured, and so brought great
dearth, and scarcity upon the people, and was a means of the overthrow of
their Country.

The Palmer-worm, was a flying Creature, and so called from his wandering
disposition. To which we may aptly resemble the mighty Nimrods of our time: Of
this Nimrod we read, Genesis 10.8.9.10. he was the Son of Chus: and Nimrod
signifies Rebellious; he was one that sought to make himself great, Genesis 10.8,
9, 10.
(even to a Proverb, verse 9.) he was a mighty Hunter. Moses shows, (in the
verse following,) he hunted for a Kingdom. But this Hunting in Scripture, is
applied to the hunting of men, by Persecution and Oppression, Ier. 16.16.
Hunters are no good Friends to the Husbandman; they fling open gaps, ride over
the Corn; Ier. 16.16.
not suffering what is sown, to come to ripeness, and perfection: It was a
just punishment that sometimes Frederick, Duke of Saxony imposed on some of
his followers, for that fault, who gave charge, that they should not have a bit
of bread to supper, (with their messes of meat,) that they might know the worth
of that good Creature, which they spoiled: But mystically the Oppressor is a
far worse Hunter, then these; he imployes both arm, and brain, to hunt the
poor out of his habitation, Mic. 2.2. It is a good Item that Solomon gives to
these, Mic. 2.2. Pro. 23.10, 11.
Pro. 23.10, 11. enter not into the Fields of the Fatherless, ( i. e. to wrong
them and oppress them) For their Redeemer is strong, and he will plead their
cause.

Secondly; the Locust is another Creature that is an enemy to Corn. Amos 7.1.
These devour the Fruit of the Earth, Amos 7.1. every green thing they eat,
and in hard weather, lie under hedges. They say of this Creature, that it is
all Belly, (which is joined to his mouth, and ends at his tail.) Our
Monopolists, Ingrossers, and Hoarders up of Corn, (and others of that make)
may be resembled to these Locusts: they get commodities into their own hands,
(what Corn they can, into their own Granaries,) purposely to make dearth, and
so a prey of the poor.

Such were they, that we read of, Amos 8.4, 5, 6. They had hoarded up Corn to
make it dear, Amos 8.4.5, 6.
and now the Markets grew quick, they must bring it forth, in all haste, but it
was only to make a prey of the poor and needy. Had they (with Joseph) bought up
the superfluity of plenty, to prevent a dearth; or had they laid up, Genesis
41.47.48
out of the abundance of one year to prevent scarcity in another; this had
been a wise and discreet providence. Joseph by such a Provident care, brought
it to pass, that when a dearth was in all other Lands, there was Bread to be
had in the Land of Egypt: But when the Markets are unfurnished, then to buy
up, or hoard up, to raise the price; this is an unlawful practice, Pro. 11.26.
and followed with a curse, Pro. 11.26. And Gods curse as well as the Poor's
follows it. We read, in Henry the 3d. his days of one Walter Gray, Stow. Chron.
Archbishop of York, who in a great dearth had five years Corn hoarded up;
and fearing lest it should be destroyed by Vermin, gave command that it should
be delivered to Husbandmen that dwelt in his Manors, upon condition to pay as
much new Corn at Harvest following; But when they came to a great stack of
Corn, nigh to the Town of Ripon, (belonging to the Archbishop) intending to
thresh it out, multitude of Serpents, Toads, Adders, appeared in the sheaves,
so that the Bailiffs were enforced to set it all on fire, to consume those
venomous creatures that were in it.

Thirdly, the Canker-worme, is another devourer and spoiler of Corn, Nah. 3.16.
that spoileth, and then flies away (says Nahum.) To this we may resemble the
merciless and cruel Landlord, who by racking Rents, excessive fines,
imposition of Carriages (more than by Covenant was agreed on,) does so
tenter-stretch the poor Tillager, that he is never his own man again.
Questionles Lands and Rents, may be improved; so that it be with charitable
minds, and that the Tenant may both pay his Rent, and comfortably subsist by
his labors, and maintain himself and his, in an honest sort; Otherwise such
Landlords do but grind the faces of the poor, chop them small as herbs for the
Pot, Mich. 3.3. they seethe a Kid in the Mothers milk, Mich. 3.3. Exodus 23.19.
old and young together, in one another blood. And in raising their Rents,
they do their utmost endeavors to raise the Markets, (for how else can Tenants
pay their Rents?) and in so doing, they seek to bring a dearth upon the Land.

The last, of these wasting Creatures, is the Catterpillar, which in the East,
was a horned worm with 16. Feet, (termed by Jeremiah, the Rough
Catterpillar,) this was a great spoyler, Jer. 21.27. Psalm. 78.46. and 105.34.
and waster of Corn, Psalm. 78.46. and 105.34, And such a horned worm is the
Depopulatour, (which abound most in the North-East) they throw down whole
Villages, and instead of one or two hundred Persons, who have there lived, and
comfortably maintained themselves, and Families; now no more is to be seen,
then a Sheephard, and his Dog. These do not only take away the gleanings from
the poor, Job. 24.10. Deuteronomy. 24.19. Isay. 5.8.
Job. 24.10. (Contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.19.) but the fields and all, Isay.
5.8.

And such a horned Worm, would the Leveller have been, in the West, who pulled
up hedges, removed Landmarks, filling up ditches, and laying all Common (as in
the insurrection of Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw, in the days of Richard the
second,) entering upon other men's labors, bringing confusion on Families.

If these Hoggs, had not been rung, by good laws made against them, and just
punishment inflicted on them; they would (as it is thought) by this time, not
only have rooted up Towns and Houses, but Churches too; And yet it is to be
feared, that their Rings are broken off, for they fall (in some places) to
rooting afresh. Thus by these four Creatures the plenty of Corn comes to be
wasted, and want, and scarcity is brought upon us insensibly; For what the
Palmer-Worme leaves, the Locust eats up, what the Locust leaves, the
Canker-Worme devoures, and what that leaves, is consumed by the Catterpiller.
All together are enough to devour up the plenty of a Land.

As these four Creatures swarm, in the Kingdom; so in our Parishes, Towns,
Villages, Families, the like kind of Vermin may be met withal. How many
loose, and debauched Persons are there amongst us, who by their vicious and
sinful courses bring themselves and theirs, to a morsel of bread? as

First by Whoredom. This the wise man observed in his time, Pro. 29.7.
Prove. 29.3. he that keeps company with Harlots spends his substance; Or he
that feeds Harlots (for so the words may be rendered, and are in some
translations,) for they stick like Horse-Leaches, till they have fed, and
filled themselves; and then they fall off, when they have emptyed those who fed
them. So Pro. 6.26. by the means of a whorish woman, Prove. 6.26.
a man is brought to a morsel of bread; To a bit or a scrap of it: Gods curse
is upon a man's estate, and labors, for this sin; Besides it is a costly sin,
(though it be base and brutish,) and bought at the highest rate: the Wife, and
many Children are not so chargeable as one Harlot is: A price she sets on her
body: none on her soul, (that she gives away.) These are like the Palmer-Worm,
for their gadding and wandering disposition, Prove. 11.7. Jude 7.
Pro. 11.7. No flesh pleases them, so well as strange flesh, Jude 7. For such
is reserved the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

Secondly; Prove. 23.21.
by Drunkenness, Pro. 23.21. the Drunkard and Glutton shall surely come to
poverty. A punishment threatened to the Drunkards of Judah, Joel. 1.5.
Joel. 1.5. God brought upon them a time of dearth, and famine, for abusing
their plenty in excessive drinking. Experience verifies this, in most places,
and Parishes; and I doubt not but you can produce Instances (more then enough.)
If you would keep your Town from beggary, have a care to suppress this sin,
what may be. The only way to destroy some Vermin, is to shave off the hair;
and to destroy noisome fowls, is to destroy their nests. So the way to
suppress Drunkenness is to put down their harbors, where the dissolute
wretch sits securely, and buys beggary at a dear rate: the Wife and Children
being at home wanting bread, whilst he spends all his substance, (his whole
daye's earnings) lavishly in drink. The provident care of our Governors, has
made good laws for the restraining of this vice, and few of our Ale
housekeepers, but are bound to suffer no drunkenness in their houses: yet
(they must acknowledge) if it were not for their old Guest drunkenness, they
might shut up their doors, and should not be able to pay their Rent. These
Drunkards are as those Crowned Locusts mentioned, Nahum 3.17. and they have
great Grasshoppers for their Captains, Nah. 3.17,
which Camp in the hedges in cold day; yet may not Officers forbear to beat
these hedges. If Officers be mild, and the Drunkard merry, little Reformation
in our Towns may be expected of this vice.

Thirdly, I delnesse is another means to bring a man to the want of bread,
Prove. 20.4, The sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold, therefore shall
be beg in Havest and have nothing. By plowing, Prove. 20.4.
the works of a man's calling is to be understood, (that calling being put for
the rest of his labors) and by Winter understand all seasons that seem hard,
or troublesome, to him, that would be at ease; and eat the bread of Idleness.
Such a one in Harvest, shall reap the fruit of his sloathfulnesse, as others do
of their Labor: theirs shall be plenty, his misery and want; When others fill
their bosoms binding up their sheaves, he shall beg for gleanings, and be
denied, Psalm. 126. P.ov. 6.9, 10, 11.
Prove. 6.9, 10, 11. want shall come on such, like an armed man, there shall be
no resisting of it. These are but as Canker worms in the places where they
inhabit, every green thing they spoil and then fly away, Nahum 3.16. leaving
their charge to the Parish. Nah. 3.16.


Fourthly, Prodigality and wastfulnesse, is another devourer, and brings their
want upon men, Prove. 18.9. He is Brother to the slothful; Both give Beggary
for their Arms, Prove. 18.9.
Dr. Jerm. in loc. only this is the difference; The Prodigal runs to beggary,
and the idle and sloathfull person, sits still till it comes to him. We have an
example in that prodigal, Luke 15.11. He was a waster of his Portion of Goods
that his Father gave him, Luke 15.13.
and that brought him (as you may read afterward) to the Hogs-trough. It is
ill trade that Prodigality drives; wasters will be wanters, such Prodigalls may
be resembled to the Catterpillar: for albeit they have but one hand to receive,
yet they have many feet, which carry them to all excess of Riot; they run with
them, with all the might they have, and (like an hour-glasse turned up) they
never leave running till all be out. All these, both in Public and in
Private, take the way to inflict barrenness upon a Land, and bring the want of
bread both on themselves and others; which is so great a Judgment.

Psalm. 144.13.15.
Psalm. 144.13. which is one of those blessings that make a Nation happy, verse
15.

That we may the better feel this mercy, Anne Dom. 1653.
which we now enjoy, and apprehend the sweetness of it, and be stirred up to
true thankfulness for it: let us cast our eye a little, upon the face of
Famine, and then reflect home upon our selves, taking notice of our own deserts
that so God may be the better glorified, for his mercy toward us.

Famine, Revel. 6.5, 6.
is the Rider that sits upon the Black horse mentioned, Revel. 6.5, 6. with a
pair of Balances, in his hand, crying a measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of Barley for a penny. The Balances show that bread should be
delivered out by measure, as is threatened, Deuteronomy. 26. Ezekiel. 4.6. And that men
should be stinted in their allowance. The Measure there spoken of, was a pint
and a quarter, say some; a quart, say others. But so much only as was allowed
a servant for his maintenance, (...)
is generally agreed upon. The Penny, was the laborers hire for a day; as we
read, Math. 20.9. (The old Roman penny being as much as twelve pence sterling,
(as some think.) Now it must go very hardwith a man, when (having a wife and
Children to sustain) the wages of the day's work would do no more then buy
bread for himself alone. This want and scarcity, is a waiter (in ordinary) upon
War. The Black horse, follows the Red at the very heels, and is a soarer
judgment than the sword, Lament. 4.9.
as the Prophet Jeremiah tells us; Lament. 4.9.

The direful, and sad effects of Famine, and want of bread being considered;
will further discover unto us the gas^^nesse, and horror of it. Read Deuteronomy.
28.53, -58. [ Thou shall eat the fruit of thy own Body.] This is a Monster,
Deuteronomy. 28.53, -58.
that turns men into Canibals, and causes the^^ (unnaturally) to devour humane
flesh. At Turw^n in France, the Famine was so great that man's flesh was sold
for tood: and pone pretium humanae carni, was openly proclaimed at Rome,
Alsted. Chron. p. 300.
in the Reign of Honorius the Emperor. Nay, it will not only constrain men to
eat man's flesh but their own flesh too, Isay 9.20.
Isay 9.20. every man shall eat the flesh of his arm; (This has b^n off
observed of such as have bin hanged alive in Chains.) And what else are
Children; but divided pieces of a man's self? parts cut off from the substance
of their P^^en^s. [Thou shall eat the flesh of thy Sons and the flesh of thy
Daughters which God has given thee.] Famine will enforce thee to neglect
natural affection, (otherwise invincible) Deuteronomy. 28 verse 54.55. [his eye shall
be evil, etc.] that is, he shall grudge to part with a bit to any an ^en^ie
those that eat. Deuteronomy. 28.54, 55.
(As when Athens was besieged by Demetrius, the famine was so great that the
Father and the Son tought with bloody swords for a mouse that fell down dead
from the top of an house): Or else so evil that the Husband, will not spare to
feed on the flesh of the Wise, nor the wise of the Hu^ban^'s, etc. verse 56.57.
[The eye of the Mother who has bin tender and delicate shall be evil toward
her newborn infant,] so that she shall re-womb, and rein^omb the train of her
body, to ^ari^ie her hunger; yea she shall de^our her after-b^rith or
Secundine, (which at other times she would have buried of burned) she shall ea^
it secretly, says the Text, either for fear (says Osiander) least some might
p^uck the meat out of her mouth: [An instance of thi^ we have in the siege of
Samaria, 2 Kings 2.29. and ^^menred by the Prophet Jeremiah Lament. 4.10. Or
else out of womanly modesty, 2 King. 6.19. Lament. 4.10.
being ashamed to be seen to eat i^.

And then Read again Lament. 2.20. In all the whole body of story, you shall
not find such an expression of the misery of Famine as the Holy Ghost there
uses, Lament. 2.20.
women eat their fruit, and Children of a span long: that is, (say some
Expositors) Children new born, and as ^oon as the joints were et by the hand,
wenz.
or span of the Midwife. Others thus understand the place, Dr. Down.
They shall (by some means or other) procure abortions, and untimely births of
those Children, that were in their bodies, that they might have so much flesh
to eat. All these threatenings, were literally and punctually fullfilled upon
the Jews, at the last destruction of Jerusalem, 2. These. 2. Joseph de bello
Jud. l. 7. cap. 7.8. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 6. Nic. Ephesians. Hist. l. 3. c.
7.
at which time wrath came upon them to the utmost: of which Famine Josephus,
and others, make so sad a relation, that I know not, who can read it with dry
eyes.

Our own Chronicles, present unto our view the ghastly Picture of Famine: we of
this Nation have bin often smitten with this scourge. In the Reign of Edward
the Second, we read of a terrible Famine in the Land which happened through
abundance of rain that fell in Harvest; insomuch that horseflesh, Dogs and
Cats were held great dainties: Children were stolen for food. Speed. Hist.
Parents did eat the flesh of their own Children, which they hid in secret
places: And Thieves newly brought into the Goal were torn in pieces: and eaten
half alive, by those who had bin longer there. Many other terrible famines, are
mentioned, (as in the days of Henry the sixth, and in the days of Henry the
Eighth: 1440.1527.
and many times since, God has sent famine amongst us, to cleanse those teeth
that have bin furred and fowled with excess.)

If you think I present the face of famine to you at too far a distance, At the
siege of Colchester.
I will bring it nearer and beseech you to veiw it; in our near Neighbors
glass. Was not Dogs-flesh, and Cat-flesh, Rats, Mice, etc. in that straight
siege of theirs, as dainties esteemed with them? Oh the miseries that they
suffered, and had not God remembered them in mercy, to what extreamities they
might have bin brought, the Lord only knows. But God has both freed them,
In the Year 1654. and 1655.
and us, even this whole Nation, and in stead of Famine so much feared, (and
which justly might be expected) he has powered down such a plenty, as that the
Markets in all places are stored to a glut: men's Sellars and Granaries richly
furnished: The Husband man, and Tillager have no vent, whereby to make their
Rent: And (as it is thought) should there be neither seed-time, nor harvest
with us, yet the present plenty is such, that there is enough to suffice the
Nation for diverse years ensuing: which makes some presumtuously confident, that
we shall never any more know what Famine, or the want of bread-corn, means.

But such bold confidence, oftentimes comes bleeding home. 2 Kings 7.^^
That Prince of Samaria would not believe that any such plenty could be, as the
Prophet had foretold; Albeit God should make windows in Heaven, and rain down
wheat amongst them. Nor will some men believe (on the other side), that ever
there shall be scarcity and want of bread-corn, amongst us, Albeit God should
make our Heavens brass, and our Earth Iron. But we may do well to remember,
that next to Pharaohs full ears came Pharoahs blasted ears; next Pharoahs fat
kine, came Pharaohs lean kind; next the Red horse, comes the black horse: many
ways God has to inflict this Judgment on us; sometimes it comes clad, in a
roab of immoderate rain, and showers; drowning the worlds plenty, and the
Earths provision; sometimes it is attended with Catterpillars innumerable to
eat up the fruits of the Earths; and sometimes with blasting and mildew. He
has a Band of Midianities, Judge. 6.3,11. Jerome. 6.25.
to thresh out the corn that we have sowed. A Nation he may bring upon us, who
shall eat up our Harvest, and our bread, which our Sons and Daughters should
eat. Besides, God sets the Markets; sometimes a measure of fine flower for a
Shekle, and two measures of Barely for a Shekle. And sometimes an Asses head at
fourscore pieces of silver, 2 Kings 6.25.
and a Cab of Doves dung at five pieces of Silver. It exceeds belief to tell,
at what high rates a little mouse has bin sold, and puddings made of Dogs
guts. If he raise our Markets, all the Power under Heaven cannot pull down the
prices. And what assureance have we, that he will not do it?





Again, are not those very sins now rife, and reigning amongst us, which God
has heretofore punished with Famine and want of bread? Ezeck. 14.13, 14. more
particularly, Abuse of plenty to Drunkenness, Ezekiel. 14.13, 14. Isay 5.11.12. 2
S^m. 21. 1. Jer. 11.21.22. Jer. 27.8. Amos 6.4.6. Levit. 26.24, 25, 26. Jer.
13.22.-27, and 14, 1, -7 33, 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 2.11.
and riot, Isay 5.11, 12, 13. Murdering of Innocents, 2 Samuel 21.1. Rejecting,
opposing, thre^tning, and persecuting Gods Ministers, for delivering their
message, Jer. 11.21, 22. Refusing to submit to that yoke of Government, which
God has put upon us. Ier. 27.8. Insensiblenesse of the wants of those
distressed, Amos 6.4.6. Obstinacy and incurablenesse in our iniquities, Levit.
26.24 25, 26. Ier. 13.22,-27. compared with 14 1,-7, 33, 14, 15, 16. So that
you may see, this warning is not needless, wherefore as we have cause to be
excited to thankfulness for our present abundance; so to be admonished, to
serve the Lord with fear; that our sins may not draw this heavy judgment on
us, which is so little feared by us.

Isay 55.2. Math. 15.16. Isay 55.2. Math. 15.26. Luke 14.15. John 6.32,- 35.
Amos 8.11.
Luke 14.15. John 6.32,-35. And there is a Famine of this Bread as well as of
the other, threatened, Amos 8.11. as a far greater judgment, by how much the
Soul is more excellent then the Body. This takes away the Beauty of the soul;
and brings heaviness upon it, Psalm. 106.15. Lament. 4.7, 8.9. It causes a man
to feed on rottenness, and filth (as Drusus did on the very stuffings of his
bed, Psalm. 106.15. Lament. 4 7, 8, 9.
when by Tiberius he was kept us in a Room, and denied meat.) In the Roman
Church for want of this Bread, they fed on Lying Legends, stuffed with Fables;
and on lying fictions. It brings Death upon the sold inevitably, Prove. 23.18.
Hos. 4.6. Amos 8.14.
Prove. 29.18. Hos. 4.6. So Amos 8.14. both fair Virgins and young men shall
fall and never rise up again. And yet how insensible are men of the want of
this Bread? how little do we lay to heart the condition of those who are under
it?

When Jeremiah bewailed the state of the Jews, in their Captivity, he begins
his Lamentation with this that the ways of Sion lamen^ed; no man came unto her
solemn feasts, Lament. 1.4.
all her gates were desolate, and her Priests did sigh: Infinite were the
miseries that were upon that City in those 18. months: whilst that siege
lasted, as afterward he mentions, but not before he had groaned out most
pitiful complaints for the spiritual Famine, that they were under, in that
the worship of God was ceased amongst the people. And, is there not cause to
lament the neglect of Gods woship and service that is among us in these days?
for albeit we are not (through Gods goodness) come to that; to travel from
Coast to Coast to meet with a Prophet, yet the case of many of us is like that
of Tantalus; who had Apples at his lips, and water at his Chin, yet pined for
want; we Famish in the midst of Plenty. But thus much of the want, now follows
the course he takes to supply it.

And shall go unto his Friend at Midnight, etc.]

And here take notice, first of his Address, verse. 5.6. Secondly of his
Repulse, verse. 7.

In the former; observe, first to whom he addresses himself, unto [his Friend.]
Secondly, how and in what manner, he does it, He goes to him and says, etc.
First, of the Persons to whom the address himself, in this his want.

[His Friend]

not to a Kinsman; nor a Brother; nor a stranger; He knocks not, at his next
neighbor's door; But to his Friend he goes; there he had most hope, to speed.
Indeed.

A true Friend is a safe Neighbor. A good Resuge (he is) in the time of
trouble. Litter. Doct.


When Saul sought the life of David, and hunted him as a Partridge upon the
mountains, he presently flies to Jonathan and acquaints him with his sad
condition as we read, 1 Samuel, 20.1. and advises with him concerning his sayety.
1 Samuel 20.1.
Nature taught that wretched man Haman, when he was full of hea^inesse for the
honor that was done to Mordecai; to ease his heart and assuage his grief this
way; he gets him home and acquaints his Friends with what had happened, Ester
6.19.
Ester. 6.13. And this is the course that Solomon adv^seth us to take in the
time of trouble. Thy own Friend and thy Fathers Friend forsake not, neither go
into thy Brothers house in the day of thy Calamity, Prove. 27.10.
Prove. 27.10. As if he should have said, when thou art in any trouble or
affliction go not to any of thy Kindred to crave succor and help from them,
but go to thy faithful and tried Friend: he gives his reason for it.

[For better is a Friend that is near then a Brother that is a far off,] that
is, though thy Brother or Kinsman be near thee in blood, yet he may be far from
thee, in respect of any true affection, or comfort that he affords thee;
Nature, may be without good will, Amicitiarerum omnium est vinculum. Amh. de
fid. rer. invisib. Prove. 18.22.
(and often is,) but Friendship, cannot. The love of Friendship ties faster,
then the love of Nature and sticks closer; according to that of Solomon, Prove.
18.24. There is a Friend that sticks faster then a Brother. Frater est fere
alter, A Brother is almost another, but Amans est alter idem cum amato; Another
the same, with the beloved party. Friends are not only like the Cherubins,
whose faces were one toward another; Confess l. 4. c. 6.
but like Ezekiel's wheels One within another. St Austine speaking of one that
used to say, that his Friend was Dimidium an^mae, concludes that he said well,
in so saying; for I well perceive (says he) that my soul, and my Friend's, are
but as one soul in two bodies, by the virtue and efficacy of our steadfast love:
wherefore my Friend being dead, it was horror for me to live; and a longer
life was loathsome to me, but therefore only I stop the current of my death,
least in my body two souls should lose their breath. Prove. 17.17.


Other Reasons Solomon renders us of this point, Prove. 17.17. A Friend loves
at all times, and a Brother is born for Adversity; [He loves at all times,]
his love is an warm in winter, as in summer; Dividi locis, charitas non potest:
nam and si corpore long distinguimur mente tamen tudivisibiles sumus, Greg. l.
8. Eip. is it. 42.
and his heart is as open at Midnight, as at Noonday: no distance of place, no
change of States can cause any alteration in a Friend's affections. Ruth was no
less loving and respective to Nahemi at her return to Judah empty, then when
she came to Moab full; In every place and in every estate she was all one,
after that they two had grown to be one. (And a Brother is born for adversity)
that is, such a Friend as loves at all times, and is to be accounted as a
Brother, and nearer then a Brother; he is born and brought forth (as it were)
into the world to be made use of, in days of trouble, and times of trial.
Not, but that he is likewise born for Prosperity, (for we are as well to
communicate with him our joys as sorrows, as we read, Luke 15.9.) But
Adversity is the more principal end (especially in our sinful and sorrowful
estate) for which God has linked men together in the bond of Friendship. And
this the wisest sort of Heathens, saw by the light of Nature, and held that
man's, Perfection depended upon a Friend.

Offic. l. 3. Nullius boni sine socio jucunda possessio est. Senec. epist. Dr.
Hall. Charac. of a true friend. Psalm. 88.18.
It is one of the chiefest comforts of this life, which sweetens worldly
miseries, to have a Friends to make our cases known unto: (as Ambrose shows).
It is a Clame and clear sea to a storm-beaten Mariner; He is the comfort of
miseries, the guide of difficulties, the medicine of life, the treasure of the
earth, and no other then a good Angle clothed with flesh and blood.

David bitterly laments the want of Friends, in time of trouble; that was a
greater affliction to him, that his Friends were removed from him, than all the
outward afflictions that he suffered. A friendlesse man is a man unfenc't,
unsheltered; like a house unroof'd: no way able (in respect of humane help) to
bear off the gusts of the world, that blow upon him. It mak^s a man a most
impotent Creature (albeit he be neither blind, nor lame) as wanting the most
necessary limbs of life; without which other limbs, are no better, Solemn e
mundo tollunt, qui tollunt amicitiam Amb.
take away friendship from amongst men, and take away the Sun out of the
Firmament. (But of this before.)

fair Havens which St. Paul makes mention of, A and s 27.8.
Acts 27.8. A comfortable harbor, against wind and weather. To Christian
Friends, let us then resort both for counsel, and comfort in any stresse of
weather, and unbosome our selves so far as is fitting) unto such, Robins.
Essays. Nec prosperitas amicum indicat, nec adversitas inimicum celat. Greg.
mor. l. 7.
of whose wisdom and fidelity we are confident. Now there are two sorts of
Friends to make use of: some Living and some Dead. Living Friends are three
sorts.

Some Friends there are (says one) which are rather to be used, then to be
trusted; Being more able, t^en entire and true hearted. Time of adversity,
Amicos secundae res optime parant, a^versae certissime probant. Seneca.
and trouble, discovers t^ese, (as you have heard): for albeit wealth makes
Friends, yet adversity proves them. When thou art in any affliction, or misery,
that is the time to ^iscover, whether the ^o^e of thy Friend besound, and
substantial; or only, frothy. This is one Commodity that distress brings with
it, for so uncertain is Friendship in Prosperity, as that it is questionable,
whether the Person of a man or his Prosperous estate be the Beloved. It is
mi^ery indeed that the knowledge of such a happinessed (as a Friend) cannot be
had, nor fully known, without our own hard hap of being in some sad condition;
but being so, take thou the opportunity, and now try such Friends in lesser
matters, that you may know how to trust them afterward in greater tro^bles.

And some Friends there are, who are ^ather to be trusted then used (save in
case of-extream necessit^) and then also sparingly. These are those, whose
truly loving Affections exceed their abi^ities; and a^e apt to be call down
with excessive sorrows, for that Affliction which has or may befall us. There
are few such Friends in the world, yet some there are. These should not be
overburthened by us, 2 Cor. 8, 2, 13.

Some Friends there are who are both to be used, and trusted; of whose ability,
and sufficiency, we have sufficient proof. No earthly thing is more deligthfull
then the sweet society of these. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so
does the sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty counsel, Prove. 27.9. The
^ociety and company of such a Friend is weet and gracious; Prove. 27.9.
as ointment, and perfume is comfortable to the ^pirits of man; Solatium buius
vilae est ut habeas cui pectus tuum apcri^s, cui arcana communices, cui secreta
tua p^ctoris committas. Amb. de offic. lib. 3. Lord Bacon his Essays, p. 151. o
Friendship, Chap. 27.
That finds entrance through the po^es of the bodies, and having made way for
it self, to go in, it lets out the thick vapors, which clog the body, an
r^joyceth the heart; so the advi^e and counsel of a faith^ull Friend, (being
admitted) it excludes those passions which disturb the soul, and brings ease
unto it. The fuln^sse and swellings of the heart cau^ed by passions all sorts;
(no less dangerous to the soul, then stoppings and suffocations, are to the
body) are eased and di^charged thereby, you may, (says a great Statesman in
his time) take Sarza, to open the Liver; sleele, ^o open the speen; flowers of
Sulphur, for the Lungs; Castoreum for the brain; but no receipt opens the
heart but a true Friend. So says Cassiodorus, A man without a Friend, Cassiod.
de Amicit.
has not to whom he may evaporate the troubles that grow upon him, but Optima
medicina est homo homini, The best Physic for man, is man; such a man, as is
an able and faithful Friend, to whom we may impart our joys, fears, griefs,
hopes, Amicitia and prosperas res dulciores facit, and adversas communione
temperat and leviores reddit. Isid. l. 3. de summo bone.
counsels, or whatsoever lies upon the heart, to oppress it; By commucating
the one, ( viz. our joys and comforts) we double them, by joying the more. And
by imparting out griefs, and sorrows, we cut them as it were in half, and so
mourn the less.

Besides these Living Friends, there are Dead Friends to whom we may address
our selves, in the time of our distress, and these are the Good Books and
writings of Godly, and Orthodox Divines. A living Friend, has this privile^ge,
above the dead; he can better meet with our grievances, and more aptly sure his
advice to the Occasion; what he says, is apprehended with more ease, and less
plodding, and bent of mind: But dead Friends have bin esteemed the best
Counselors, Alphonsus.
in regard of Impartiality, and sincerity. Sir Thomas Moore gave this advice to
K. Henry the 8. that he would consult with the Ancient Fathers concerning his
Divorce from the Lady Katherine, rather then with the Living, who were apter to
deceive him with their flatteries, then to trouble him with the truth. Indeed
the counsel that these give, is dry, and well advised; but yet above all
books, the Bible is to be preferred: None to that.

A Friend in need is a Friend indeed. To find Friends, Joseph. Antip. l. 11. c.
8.
when there is no need of them, and to want them when there is need; are both
alike easy, and common. Such Friends, were the Samaritans to the Jews, who
claimed kindred of them in their Prosperity, but in their Adversity, they would
not own them. Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? said Absalom to Hushai (when
as he supposed, he had deserted his Friend David, 2 Samuel 16.17.
notwithstanding that he pretended great love unto him;) but the question may
be more truly put to many in these days, who do not only forsake their Friends
in the day of their distress, Tuta frequens: que via est, etc. Prove. 27.6. Dr.
Jermin in loc. Tremel. Melius est cum severitate diligere, quam cum levitate
decipe^e. Aug. conf. 9.
but treacherously undermine them, and betray them under a show of Friendship.
Faithful are the wounds of a Friend (says Solomon) but the kisses of an enemy
are deceitful, or (as some render the Proverb,) the wounds of a Friend are to
be nourished: that is, his Reproofs, Corrections, and Chastisements, are to be
received and esteemed as the fruits and effects of Love. But the kisses of an
enemy are to be prayed against: the flattering speeches and fawning courtesies,
of pretended Friends, we must desire God to keep us from the danger of; for
that they proceed from a deceitful mind: (As Abner and Amasa found by woeful
experience, 2 Samuel 20.9, and 13, 18. Psalm. 28.3. Peior est falsus amor, quam
verum odium.
and our blessed Savior who was betrayed with a kiss.) Such Friends David
puts in his Letanie. And Antigonus of purpose kept a Priest to pray and to
offer up sacrifice to his gods, that he might be kept from the Danger of them.
As for his open foes (he said) he would be careful to defend himself.

Ah vile shame, that amongst Christians less faithfulness in Friendship
should be found then was amongst the Heathens! we all profess our selves to be
of the family of Christ: would it were with us as in that, that there were but
one of 12 were unfaithful to God, and their Friend; but we find it otherwise,
not one amongst twelve, that are found faithful: The false dealing of
Counterfeit Friends have more afflicted good men, then all the wrongs that they
have received by open enemies, Psalm. 41.9. It was the Complaint of Luther;
Psalm. 41.9.
A falsis amicis plus est mihi periculi, quam ab ipso toto Papatu. This has
given just cause for some to say of their Friends (as Nazianzen sometimes did
to Basil) that he had got nothing by their Friendship, Basil. Epist. 31.
but only learned this Lesson, not to trust a Friend.

The Naturalists tell us of a Gem, or precious stone, which they call
Ceraunias) that glisters most when the sky is Cloudy, and overcast with
darkness, and to be found soonest (as we say of Eeles) in a day of thunder:
True Friends are like this Gem; Not like those Brooks that Job speaks of, (and
whereunto he compares his Friends) which fail when there is most need of them.
If thou see thy Friend in trouble, and that he flies to thee for harbor, Job
6.15, 19.
prove not (like the Bramble unto the sheep) a means of his further sorrow, and
entanglement; but afford him the best advice, and help thou can. Remembering
what Solomon says, that thou were born to help him in that hour. And to deny
help unto thy distressed Friend and Brother, when power is in thy hand, is (in
a manner) to deny thy birth. And it is pity that ever he was born, who denies
to do that which he was born for. And thus much we have gathered from the
letter of the Parable: now to the spiritual meaning. And thence we are taught,
that

God is that Friend to whom the Godly address themselves in all their wants
and troubles. Mist. Doct.
His bosom is their Refuge in the day of their Calamity.

This is confirmed, by that of David, Psalm. 32.5, 6. Every one that is Godly
shall pray unto thee; Psalm. 32.5, 6.
As if he should say, he that is Godly, and holy, will come to thee, and pour
forth his grievances into thy bosom: yea every such one will do it, of what
degrees or rank soever. So elsewhere; unto thee shall all flesh come, Psalm.
65.2. that is, All sorts of men that are converted, and brought into a League
of Friendship with thee, Psalm. 65.2.
(for flesh is there so to be taken, (as elsewhere, Psalm. 145.21. Acts 2.17.)
they shall fly to thee, and resort to thee, as to their only Refuge in all
their troubles.

Thus did Jacob (a Patriarch) in the day of his distress, Genesis 32.9. Hos.
12.4. Moses and Aaron amongst the Priests. Genesis 32.9. Hos. 12.4. Numb. 16.18,
19, and 20, 6. 1 Samuel 8.21. Psalm. 99.6. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. 2 King. 19.14, 15. 1 Samuel 1.15. Psalm. 34 6. Prove. 18.10.
In all their tribulations, they may be found at the door of the Tabernacle,
Numb. 16.18, 19, and 20, 6. And Samuel amongst the Prophets, 1 Samuel 8.21. These
called upon the name of the Lord in the day of their Calamity, Psalm. 99.6. The
like did Jehosaphat and Hezekiah amongst the Kings of Judah. As we read, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. 2. King. 19.14, 15.

Time would fail me, if I should instance in all; of all sorts, and ranks.
Women, have made this Friend their Refuge as well as men, 1 Samuel 1.15. Poor, as
well as Rich, Psalm. 34.6. In short; the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
(says Solomon Prove. 18.10.) that is; Look what a strong Tower is in time of
Danger, such is God, His power, Providence, Mercy, Goodness, (for by these, is
God known, as men are known by their names) to these that have recourse unto
him. Psalm. 123.1, 2. Psalm. 141.2. Lam. 3.41. Psalm. 25.1.
their eyes are lifted up; their hands are stretched out; their hearts are
carried, and that with speed; as being well acquainted with the way, and there
they know they are safe. For it is a Tower, as high as Heaven it self; as
strong, as strength it self; and such a defense, that all the Assaults that can
be made against it, are but like the blowing of leaves, or paper bullers,
against a wall of brass.



Friend Paramount, our choisestand best Friend, for.

First, all our earthly Friends are but Subservient under God, and for God: It
is he that raises them up unto us, Prove. 16.7. he it was that gave Joseph
favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison (as we read, Prove. 16.7. Genesis
39.21. Exodus 3.21. Psalm. 106.46. Psalm. 88.18.
Genesis 39.21.) And the Children of Israel favor in the sight of the Egyptians,
Exodus 3.21. And the Jews, that were in Babel and other places, he gave them
favor in the sight of all that led them away Captives, Psalm. 106.46. And it is
he that takes away Friends, and removes them far from us, Psalm. 88.18. so that
in them, out of him, there is no safe repose for help.

Secondly, Earthly Friends, can but befriend us in some particular troubles,
and wants; some in one kind some in another, none in all: (which is the Reason
that we stand in need of a multitude of Friends) nor can all our Earthly
Friends afford sufficient help, in all our necessities. There is some choice
mercy, that God reserveth for himself (immediately); as peace of conscience;
joy in the holy Ghost; and the graces of his spirit: which however they are
bestowed on us in the means, yet without the concurrence of divine grace, Genesis
30.1, 2.
they can do nothing: Give me Children (says Rachel, to Jacob.) or I dye; Am I
in God's stead (says Jacob) that I should give thee Children? So should thou
come to thy best Friend on Earth, and say, Give me Faith; Give me Repentance:
Give Peace of Conscience; must not he answer thee as Jacob did his beloved
Rachel, 2 King. 6.26, 27.
or as the King did to the woman in the siege of Samaria, If God do not help,
how can I? Were it in our power to help you to grace, there is not one of you
that should this day return home, without it. It is God only that is able to do
all for you, Ephesians. 3.20.

Thirdly; Earthly Friends cannot befriend us in all Places; should they be both
able, and willing, to help us, yet they cannot be in all places at once, here,
and there too: I may be shut up in close prison; banished out of the kingdom;
cast into a Den of Lions, or be where I cannot send unto my Friend: But God is
such a Friend, as is every where, where we are; on this side the sea's or
beyond them. Jer. 23.32, 24.
Am I a God at hand and not a far off, says the Lord? do not I fill heaven and
earth? Jer. 23.23, 24. When Abraham was called out of his own Country, Psalm.
139.7, 8.
God went with him, when Joseph was in prion, God was with him, etc. He is a
Friend in Court; City, Country. David found him in all places, in his
meditations, Psalm. 139.7.8. And in all places he is ready to supply our wants.
No Friend like him.

Fourthly, the friendship of our earthly Friends, proves (many times) vain, for
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5.
Psalm. 39.5. And their purposes and promises prove no better; they fail us in
undertaking for us, sometimes above abilities; or else through heedlesnesse,
and forgetfulness, or other weaknesses, frustrating their good intentions. If
not so; yet their breath goes forth, they return to the earth, and in that
very day their thoughts, Psalm. 146.3, 4.
(which they had of helping and doing us good) perish with them. Therefore put
not your trust in Princes (says David) nor in any Son of man, Psalm. 146.3, 4.
And why not? there is no help in them: and why no help in them? their breath
goes forth, they Return to the Earth, and their very thoughts do perish.



trust, we put in men; and that we put in God: Trust in men, is that Credit,
which one puts in another, in our mutual and wordly dealings; spoken of Prove.
31.11. This is Civil: Trust in God is the Affiance and confidence of our hearts
in him, Prove. 31.11.
relying upon his providence and promise both for the removing of evil, Psalm.
37.3. 1 Timothy 6.17.
and bestowing of good spoken of, Psalm. 37.3. 1 Timothy 6.17. This is Religious:
There is a Civil trust, due to men; who are raised up as means under him, to
succor us, and do us good; and that is lawful; But it must be subservient to
that Religious trust which we are to put in God; nor can that be put in any
Creature, without Idolatry, and therefore forbidden to be put in man, or in any
earthly Creature. Now let us come to the Application of the point.



To which of the Saints will thou turn? said Eliphaz to Job, Job. 5.1.
Job 5.1. Had he put that Question to a Papist, he would readily have answered,
to St. Sith for my pursse; to St. Loy to save mine horse; for my teeth to St.
Apoline; to St. Job for the Pox; to St. Luke to save mine Ox; Fox. Martyr.
to St. Anthony to save my Swine, etc. They have Saints enough, to turn unto;
As men do please, for every disease, they have a Saint particularly. Such is
the gross Idolatry of the Church of Rome, who set up some such, to be prayed
unto, and put confidence in, as never had any true being, but were mere
Fantasies, and Imaginations of men's brain. And others, such, as we may
conceive (without breach of Charity) are damned wretches in Hell. And for the
best of them (who were indeed true Saints on earth, and now glorious in Heaven)
it cannot be done to them, without infinite wrong offered both to the Father;
Son; and Holy Ghost. Call upon me, Psalm. 50.15. John 16.23. Romans 8.15.
(says God) in the day of trouble. Psalm. 50.15. not on that Saint, nor this
Angel. Ask my Father in my name (says Christ) and he will give you, John
16.23. He is the only Mediator, both of Redemption and Intercession, between
God and us, 1 Timothy 2.5. An (the Holy Ghost teaches us to cry Abba Father,
Bishop King.
Romans 8. Should we take (says one) the Pen of a ready writer, and begin at
Genefis, and proceed to the end of the Revelation and note, all the Prayers,
and supplications (which are many) yet not one that is made to any other, then
the true God; Nor shall we find any Commandment; Promise; or warrantable
example, for that practice. Indeed, we read of a damned wretch in Hell, who did
address himself to Abraham, Luke 16.24.
Father Abraham (said he) have mercy on me, Luke 16. verse. 24. but that example
will not affoard them, one drop of water to cool the tip of their tongues.
Jer. 17.5.


Others fly to mortal men, and rest on earthly means, in the day of their
Calamity. They make flesh their arm, and withdraw their hearts from God; some
rely on great men's favors, and put their trust under the shadow of their
wings. Isay 7.12.
So did Ahaz that wicked King of Judah, who notwithstanding he had protection
offered him from the Lord, together with a sign (such as himself should choose
for the confirmation of his faith in that hehalf,) yet he would needs put
himself upon the King of Ashur, whom he hired (with his army) to be his
defense, and safeguard, Isay 7.18. the hypocritical Isralitees did fly for
succor to Aeygpt and trusted to their horses and chariots, because they were
many: (forwhich cause a woe is denounced against them Isay 31.1.) And Judas,
being in horror of Conscience, Isay 31.1. Math. 27.3, 4.
runs to the chief Priests; (who afforded him, but small comfort. 2 Samuel 16.21.
Psalm. 49.8. Job 31.24.
) Others trust to their own wit; (as did Achitophel, 2 Samuel 16.21.) or to their
wealth, or riches, Psalm. 49.8. They say to the wedge of gold, thou art my
confidence, Job. 31. when alas! neither silver, nor gold, shall be able to
deliver in the day of wrath. All these will prove but as butrushes to a
drowning man: or like the Egyptian- Reed which will not only fail them, but
pierce them with the splinters, and wound them deeply in the end. Of all these
(and others like to these) we may take up the Prophet's patheticall
exclamation, Be astonished oh ye Heavens, at this, Jer. 2.12, 13.
and be ye horribly afraid, for my people have committed two evils, they have
for saken me, the fountain of living waters, and he wed them out Cisterns,
broken Cisterns that will hold no water, Ier. 2.12, 13.

But, the sharpest Rebuke belongs to those, that fly to Hell for succor, and
make the Devil that Friend of theirs to whom they have resort in calamitous
times. Exodus 7.11. 1 Samuel 28.7. 2 King. 1.3. Number. 22.5.
Pharoahs he sends to Jannes and Iambres, his Magicians: Saul to the witch of
Endor; Ahaziah, to Baalzebub the God of Ekron: Balaac, to Balaam the witch of
Pechor, A sin ordinary, and common, to be found even amongst those that
profess the Gospel. The Jews could Reason thus. John 10.20.
He has a Devil, why hear ye him? (a damnable aspersion cast upon Christ) but
these fly to the Devil, and will hearken to none sooner, then to such as have
Devils. A sin that we read not (in Scripture,) that ever any godly man fell
into; but such only as were given up, and forsaken of God. Saul did it not
before God was gone from him. 1 Samuel 28.15.
It is expressly forbidden by the Word, Levit. 20.6.
Levit. 20.6. and severely threatened. Death is pronounced by the Law, not only
on the witch, but seekers to them, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
Deuteronomy. 18.10. Let me tell such, that it is much better to dye, of Gods wounds;
then be cured with the Devils Salves. And let all such, as betake themselves to
sinful shifts, for procuring themselves safety from troubles, or deliverance
out of troubles; and make the Devil (not God) their Refuge; consider seriously
of that they read, Isay 28.15, 17.
Isay 28.15, 17. and lay it to their hearts. It may be a means, to awaken them
and bring them to Repentance.

Psalmist, Psalm. 73.26.
Psalm. 37.26. whom have I in Heaven but thee, O Lord, and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee. None but thee, none but thee; to whom I fly.
This that you may comfortably do, see first, that you make sure your interest
in God, (that he is your Friend) and then improve that interest you have in him
to your comfort.

First, make sure your interest (the means we have before prescribed) till
then you cannot come with boldness, unto him for help. An ill conscience shuns
Gods presence, and will rather seek to any, in time of misery, then to God,
whilst we apprehend a man to be an enemy unto us, though we stand in need of
him, and know that he has Power to pleasure us, yet we shun him, 1 King.
21.20. 1 King. 22.8. Genesis 26.27. Judge. 11.7.
(as Ahab did Elijah and Michajah) and will seek to any other, rather then to
him. Did you not hate me, and why are you come unto me, now that you are in
distress, said Isaac to Abimeletch, and Ieptha to his Brethren. Such an
answer will our misgiving hearts tell us, that we should have from God, (not
being our Friend) Should we come unto him, or say that we apprehend him not as
an Enemy; but as a stranger to us; one with whom we have no acquaintance,
(much less Friendship) yet this alone will keep us from having any familiar
resort unto him in our necessities. Should we be told of such a man that is
well monyed, and has it lying by him; and be advised to go to him for a supply
of our want, you know what the Plea will be; Alas! he is a stranger to me, one
whose face I never saw; I dare not make so bold with him, pray do you speak a
good word for me, it may be for your sake he will do much: So is it with those
that are enemies, or strangers to God; they dare not come to God themselves,
Exodus 8.8. 1 Samuel 12.19. Acts 8.22.24.
but (as Pharaoh did) they send (to Moses) to one of Gods Friends, and desire
him to entreat for them: the like did Saul and Israel to Samuel, and Simon
Magus, to Simon Peter. But when once we come to make good our interest in God,
we shall have great encouragement to come unto him, and that in a familiar way,
as one Friend comes unto another. So we read, Isay. 63.16.
Isay 63.16. The Church there pleads her interest in God, and thereupon
expostulates with God, and asks him a reason of his Judgments, and after a
sort, blames him; why have thou done thus to thy people? and gives reasons why
he should not be so angry with his people, verse 17, 18. many such Friendly and
familiar passages we have in Scripture, that have passed betwixt God and the
Godly. As Job. 13.24, Job. 13.24, 25. Psalm. 13.1. and 44.23. and 89.46, 47. and
74.11.
25. wherefore hidest thou thy face and hold me for thy enemy. So Psalm.
13.1. and 89.46, 47. and Psalm. 44.23. As if God were a sleep, when he should
deliver his people, and 74.11. As though God were slack in releiving his
necessities. Offer this now, to one of your Princes, Mal. 1.8.
(says the Prophet to the people in another case) and see if he will take it.
So come to any Prince on Earth, or great Potentate, in such a familiar manner,
say to him thus; I would your Highness would awake once and attend my
business, and pluck your hand out of your bosom, and execute justice; would
he take it well? although it were from his best Friend or Favorite? yet the
Godly do thus, and God takes it well at their hands, for Friendship's sake;
which is the only ground of this familiarity, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22.
Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22. Therefore make that good.

And then having made good your Interest, Improve it: And that, first by
resorting, and flying to him in all your troubles, Jer. 16.19. The unreasonable
Creatures by a natural instinct, Jer. 16.19.
betake themselves unto places of defense, when dangers threaten them, Psalm.
104.18.
Psalm. 104.18. Birds fly to their Rows in a storm; and Bees to their Hives;
Pigeons to their Dove-coates: So must the Godly to the Lord, Isay. 26.20. Psalm.
57.1. Psalm. 62.8. Psalm. 20.7.
Isay. 26.20. Psalm. 57.1.

Secondly; by trusting in this Friend, Psalm. 62.8. It is a sweet strain which
the Godly have in their song, Psalm. 20.7. Hic curruum et illi equorum; Some in
Charriots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord; We
will remember him so, as to put our trust in him, and settle our hope on him,
alone. As for the transitory things of this world, they are all vain, Psalm.
33.16.
as we read, Psalm. 33.16.



Pro. 21.31.
we may not put our confidence in them: God must be eyed in the means, and on
him the soul must look, over, and beyond the means, for a blessing; else all
comes to nothing. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in
man; It is better to trust in the Lord, Psalm. 148.8, 9.
then to put confidence in Princes (says the Psalmist): both are good; but the
first, best. Not, as if it were unlawful, to put any confidence in a Religious
way, in any thing, (as has been said) but in God alone; But it is better to
put our whole confidence in God, then so much as a Civil trust, in any of the
Sons of men. Men of quality are offended, if they be not trusted upon their
words, and promises; how much more should we trust the Lord, upon promises
made, of Protection, and Preservation? The greatest dishonor to God, is, not to
rely upon his word, 2 King. 17.19,
it provokes God highly, as we find, 2 King. 17.19, 20. the Prince that
believed not, was trodden to death: Jer. 17.5.7. psalm. 146.5.
Such as do not, are accursed by him, Jer. 17.5. but such as do, are blessed
and happy, Ier. 17.7. Psalm. 146.5.

Thirdly; we shall Improve our Interest, by disburdening our minds unto him,
and pouring forth our hearts before him, giving a full vent to our souls in
his bosom, Psalm. 62.8.
Psalm. 62.8. The heart of a Friend, may not be like the nose of a Still, out of
which water comes by drops: But as the mouth of a paile, which has a large
vent, Psalm. 81.10. Nor like a sponge, Psalm. 81.10.
out of which water is squeezed; but it must come from a free spirit: Nor must
it be like the pouring out of oil, or honey, or any such thick and oily
liquor, (which leaves some remainder of its substance behind, on the side of
the vessel,) but like water, which runs all from the sides. Our whole heart
must be opened to the Lord, (but of this more hereafter. Lament. 2.19.
) This shall serve for the second Use.

Psalm. 14.6.
that is a Refuge for us to fly unto for succor, and security, (as were the
Cities of Refuge to the manslayer, when the pursuer of blood, (by unjust
occasions) follows us.)

A Friend, that is a shelter for us, when any storm, Psalm. 61.3.
or tempest of outward Oppression, or inward Temptation, overtakes us in our
journey, Isay. 4.6. Psalm. 3.3.
Isay. 4.6.

A Friend, that is a Shield and Buckler to us, to keep off the push of pike,
force of sword, dint of dart, that are flying at us, by bloody Persecutors,
either with tongue, Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 31.2.11.8.
or hand.

A Friend, that is a Castle Fortress, strong habitation and house of defense
for us, so that we need not be afraid of ten thousand enemies that shall beset
us round. Psalm. 3.6. Psalm. 32.7. and 119.114. Isay. 32.2.


A Friend, that is a hiding place unto us, on whom we may on all occasions
repose our selves, and rest secure, whether sleeping or wakeing; and to whom we
may fly when we are hunted, and pursued by our enemies: There, in him, we may
comfortably live and peaceably dye, (as the Be in the Hive, or Beast in the
Den.) In a word, having Interest in God, thou can not be so beaten out of
earthly comforts, but that thou have, A Friend to hear thee when thou cryest,
A Friend to answer thee when thou call: A Friend to succor thee, when thou
want: A Friend to pity thee, when thou mournest: A Friend to defend thee,
when thou suffer, wherefore having God to our Friend, conclude, Happy are we
in being in such a Case, blessed are we in having this God for our Friend. And
so we pass from the Person, Psalm. 144.15.
to whom he makes his Address, to his Carriage and Behavior: which is seen by
that he did, and by that he said. By that he did, [he goes unto his Friend at
Midnight.]

Where we have, first his Action [shall go unto his Friend.] Secondly the
Amplification from the circumstance of time, [at Midnight.]

[Shall go.]

He sends not to his Friend, by a Servant: he sitts not still under a sense of
want, but he gets out of doors, and uses the means to make supply of his
present necessity. You may conclude from the History, that,

In distress, Doct. Litt.
diligence must be used, and pains taken, for Redress: when we are in
misery, honest pains and industry may not be neglected to find out a remedy.

It is not for us to say, Jer. 10.19.
I Will bear it: but pains must be taken and used, that we may remedy it.

This must be done in all wants, both Temporal, and Spiritual; In outward
wants, that concern this Life; means must be used for supply, Ephesians. 4.28. 1
These. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12. They wrought with their own hands, Ephesians.
4.28. 1 These. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12 Acts 20.24. Pro. 2.5.
to sweat out a poor living, so Acts 20.35. (more shame for them to suffer it,
yet they did it.) And in our Spiritual wants, the like diligence is to be
used for a supply of them, Cant. 1.8. and 3.2, 3. Isay. 2, 3. and 55.1. and
26.8, 9. Dan. 12.4.

God, and means, may not be severed; means being the hand of Divine
Providence, whereby he works: And to be careless herein is to neglect the
Divine Providence, for our good, and no better then a tempting of God, Math.
4.7. Math. 4.7.


Besides, the promises, both of things earthly, and heavenly, are made to such
as use endeavors to obtain them; Heb. 6.12.
and no further can we expect them, then means is used, that God has ordained
for the obtaining of them.

Paradox then, held (by some seducers) in these last and worst days, is false,
and impious: that Careless Christians, are the choicest Believers. This is
some of the trash of the Traskites which they would make good, by the Word,
Phil. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.7. Math. 6.34. But none of these places, Phil. 4.6. 1 Pet.
5.7. Math. 6.34.
forbid a Provident care in using of the means, but a wringing, perplexing,
and distrustful care, proceeding from unbeleefe; Nor has any been more
confident, of Gods making good his promises, then those, who have been most
careful in using means to obtain them, Acts 27.22.31 Obj. John 6.27. Resp.
Math. 20.6.
Asts. 27.22.31.

But John 6.27. Labor, seems to be forbidden.

So then, it seems, if the question should be asked (as it was by him in the
Gospel) why stand you here all the day idle? it may be answered, (not because
none has hired us, but) because we are forbidden to labor. What then shall we
do for food or raiment (if that be so) why then do we not supinely gape, till
the showers of Providence shall rain down Quails into our mouths? expect the
stony Rocks to cleave into cups, and afford us drink, for our thirsty pallats?
and (out of a conceit, of a lawful sloth) expect bowels of mercy, from the
Birds of prey; and wait for the Ravens to be our Carvers? Let us slumber, Pro.
6.10.
and sleep, and fold our hands (and with the Lillies in the Field, neither
labor nor spin; and yet expect that the handmaids of Nature, shall cloth us,
and get us ready? All this might be done, if that precept were merely Negative,
but the meaning is, Labor, not only and principally, for that meat that
perishes, but for another food; viz: that which indures to eternal Life. If
earthly things will not be had without labor, and toil, think not that the
things of Heaven, which are far more excellent, will be had by idleness, and
be cast upon you, whether you will or no, or that Grace will grow like weeds,
without sowing, or tilling.

It is the dilligent hand that makes rich, Prove. 10.4.
(says Solomon.) The sluggard shall be clothed with rags; when such as are
dilligent, shall stand before Princes, Pro. 22.29.
Pro. 22.29. God has given us a double Calling: General, and Particular; and
in both we are to serve his Providence. Our Particular Calling, (dilligently
followed) makes a supply of our outwardwants: and the following of our General
Calling of our Spiritual; The former appears by that of the Apostle, 1 These.
4.11, 12.
1 These. 4.11, 12. there is no Calling, be it never so mean, (if honest and
industriously followed) but is accompanied with a blessing, Pro. 14.23.
Pro. 14.23. In all labor there is abundance; (or profit) the laborers hire,
is never kept back by God, Pro. 28.1.2.
Pro. 28.1, 2. It is not simply a Calling, but Diligence in it, that brings the
blessing with it. No honest calling, but has yielded competency to them that
follow it; If not, the fault is in our selves, not in our Callings. And for a
supplying of our Spiritual wants; the works of our General Calling must be
followed as diligently. It is not enough to have the means, but use the
means; Follow these markets, as diligently as you do the other: play not the
part of that Carter in Isidore, who having overthrown his wagon, prayd'd his
God Jupiter to help him; but would not put to his shoulders. And yet trust not
to the means, but desire God to bless the means unto you.

Sense Spiritual.
And indeed our Savior's drift is (principally) to stir us up to the duty of
Prayer: and from what this man did in going to his Friend, to supply his wants,
he would give us to understand thus much, that,

Prayer is the best means of provision. It is the surest course that can be
taken, to supply our wants: The best remedy in the day of our calamity.

It must needs be so: First, because it is sanctified by God; and established
by Divine wisdom, for obtaining of all things needful, that concern this
Life, and the Life to come, Psalm. 50.15. Isay. 19, 20, 21. Phil. 4.6. Heb. 4.6.
Psalm. 50.15. Isay. 19, 20, 21. Phil. 4.6. Heb. 4.6.
Now God having prescribed this (who is the Fountain of all blessing, and
Author of all help) it must needs follow, that it is the best means that can
be used.

Secondly, this has to do above: It comes to the Throne of Grace, lays hold on
Gods name, (from whom alone all our help comes, Psalm. 124.8.
) when as all other means, and helps, have to do below on earth, and with
earthly things; and can go no further then men's Counsels, Persons, or Purses
can reach.

Thirdly, this is a true Catholicon, a General remedy for every malady, (It is
like the Indian stone, that remedieth all diseases,) as appears, 1 King. 8.
whatsoever plague, 1 King. 8. from verse 33. to verse 40. and from verse 44. to
verse 51.
whatsoever sickness or other misery, does befall us, Prayer will remedy it:
No such universal and general help in all extreamities as this is. Physicians
for diverse diseases have diverse remedies, but the Christian has this one which
is better then all; Prayer.

Fourthly, it is the Readyest remedy: evermore at hand; in what place soever
you are, you may help your selves, and others by it, 1 Timothy 2.8. Jeremiah
prays in the Dungeon, 1 Timothy 2.8. Lament. 3.55. Jon. 2.1. Acts 12. and 16.
Jonah in the Whales belly; Peter in the Prison, Paul in the Stocks. In the
Fields, on the Leads, in the Chamber, in the Closet, in Caves, and Denns of the
Earth; it may be taken, and used.

Fifthly, it is the speediest remedy, no sooner are our Prayers out of our
mouths; nay, in our hearts, but they are in Heaven; and no sooner are they in
Heaven, but we shall find the benefit of them, Dan. 9.21, 22, 23. Genesis 24.15.
Acts 4.31.
Dan. 9.21, 22, 23. Genesis 24, 15. Acts. 4.31.

Lastly, it is an approved remedy; it has its Probatum est, upon constant
experience of Gods Saints; who have ever found it to be the best Leaver, at a
dead lift, 2 Samuel 22.4.7. Psalm. 118.5.
2 Samuel 22.4.7. Psalm. 118.5.





Elihu tells us of many that were oppressed and cried out, by reason of the
Arm of the Almighty, Job. 35.9, 10.
but none said, Where is God my maker? Such is the case of many of us in our
distresses. If we can make any shift, (although it be but (with the Prodigal)
in tending swine, and feeding with them at the trough) we never seek by Prayer
to God our Father. The wickedness, and cursed Atheism of our hearts, is
discovered by nothing more then by the neglect of this Duty. And this is the
Reason why men in their need and necessities, lust, but have not; desire to
have, and yet do not obtain: even because they ask not, as St. Ieames tells
us, James 4.2. He that shall neglect, or despise this means, which God in his
divine wisdom has established, and commanded to be used for obtaining help in
all our necessities, shall find all other means, and courses that he shall
use, to be unprofitable, and unavaileable, yea accursed to him.



[At Midnight.]

An unseasonable time, one would think to seek out for bread. When Night comes,
the beasts of prey creep forth of their Dens, but man betakes himself unto his
rest (as David shows, Psalm. 104.20.23.) Had this man pleaded for himself, to
that Friend that came so late to visit him, as his Friend did, (of whom he
came to borrow,) trouble me not now, it is very late, and I cannot make that
provision for you, that I would if it were day; he might have been excused; But
without excuse, up he gets, out of doors he goes, at that dead time of night,
for to accommodate his Friend, and manifest his Affection, that he bore him:
From hence observe we,

True Love is not Lazy. It is content to abridge it se^fe, of its own ease,
and liberty; and take pains for the good and comfort of the beloved party.

Love seeks not her own (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.5.
1 Cor. 13.5.) the meaning is; not, that Love is regardlesse of it self: but,
that it is, so employed about the good, and welfare, of the beloved party, as
that a man may easily discern in it, a neglect of its own pleasure, and profit
for another's benefit: It is so taken up with the party, that it does affect,
as that it is oftentimes negligent of it self, and will not take all the
Liberty that it might lawfully. Thus it was with Abraham in his carriage
toward Lot, Genesis 13.8, 9.
Genesis 13.8, 9. he stood not strictly upon his right, (as being the elder and
his Uncle, Genesis 11.27. and so might lawfully have pleaded his privilege in
choosing) but he, for the Love that he did bear to Lot; and out of a desire
that concord should be continued between them, makes himself, not only his
equal, Luther in Genesis 14.
but his inferior, in giving him the choice of his habitation: choose you
(says Abraham) where you will dwell, etc. I will take that which you leave:
Jacobs example (likewise) might be produced, who served a hard Prentiship for
the Love he bore to Rachel, and yet they seemed to him but as a Few days. Genesis
29.20. Hos. 12.12.


It is given in charge by the Apostle* Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others, Phil. 2.4.
Phil. 2.4. And he propounds the example of Christ therein, for us to imitate.
Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ, who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, etc: Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. he
emp^ied himself, suspended, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
and laid aside his glory, and majestly: and made himself, equal to his
inferiors, for their everlasting good: The like we read, Romans 15.2, 3.
Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification, (albeit he cross himsel f in so doing,): which exhortation is
(also) backed with Christ's example, for even Christ pleased not himself, etc:
verse 3. that is, he sought not his own profit, ease, nor content of nature in
that he did, but our benefit, and profit. And elsewhere, Let no man seek his
own, but every man another wealth, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.24.): 1 Cor.
10.24.33.
the meaning is, that no man shou d stand upon terms of right and liberty, or
regard his own pleasure, or profit, in regard of the welfare of others. And
herein, he propounds his own practice, for our example, verse 33. even as I
please all men in all things, (that is, so far as in godliness he might) not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they might be saved, (as
in sundry particulars he had instanced before) 1 Cor. 8.13. and 9.19. -24. and
all was for the Gospel sake, and for Loves sake, (as he speaks to Philemon.)
Nay, he has a higher expression of his Love then that: Philem. 8, 9.
he was content that his salvation might be a while deferred, for the Love that
he bore to the Philippians, c. 1.23.24, 25. Yea, and a higher then that too,
Phil. 1.23, 24. Romans 9.3.
he could wish himself accursed from Christ for the Love, that he bore to the
Jews, his brethren and Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, Romans 9.3.

Math, 23.39.
Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self, and not better then thy self, or
above thy self.

Then a man loves another as himself, R^sp.
when he is ready to do that for another, which (out of a right and sound
judgment) he would have another do for him, in the like case, and kind;
according to that of our Savior, Whatsoever you would that men should do to
you, Math. 7.12.
do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets, Math, 7.12. now
(in some cases) who would not be glad, that his Friend, or Neighbor should
prefer him before himself? his Necessity, before his own Convenience, but we
are more acute Doctors o^ Passive, then faithful Disciples of Active Charity,
(as one speaks.)

Magis bonum proximi praeserendum minori proprio, sed non aequali.
Again, in regard of Affection, Love must be equal, but in regard of the
Effect, there may be a difference: For the greater good of my Neighbor, is to
be preferred to my own good, that is less, (but not where it is equal.) If
there be an equality, betwixt Person and Person, Danger and Danger, Necessity
and Necessity, of my self, and Neighbor; then I am to prefer my self both in
things Spiritual and Temporal; (else I should Love my Neighbor better then
my self) otherwise not. I am indeed, to love my own Soul better then my
Neighbor's, and my own Body better then my Neighbor's, (if all be equal;)
but where there is an inequality, either in Person, or in Necessity, or in
Danger, it is otherwise. Thus, if my Neighbor should be in certain danger of
death, and I but in hazard to save him, I am to hazard my own Life to save his;
(as did Aquila, and Pr^scilla, to preserve Paul) Romans 16.3, 4. (which seems to
be when he sojourned in their house, and had a hot combat, Romans 16.3, 4.
with the Jews, so that he was enforced to leave them, and go to the house of
one Justus.) And the spiritual good of my Neighbor, Acts. 18.
I am to prefert to my own temporal; his soul before my own Body, for that the
soul is more worth, then the body; and betwixt the soul, and the Body, there
can be no equality; And this seems to be the meaning of St. John, 1 Epist.
3.17. hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his life for us,
1 Epist. Joh. 3.16.
and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, that is: look as Christ
laid down his life, and gave it for the spiritual life of his Children, so
ought we to follow Christ therein, and lay down our lives for the salvation of
their souls, as the good Shepherd is to do for his Sheep, John 10, 11. John 10,
11. Obj. 2.


Here, another doubt may be started: For, if I may not prefer the salvation of
my Brother, before my own; why did the Apostle wish to be separated from
Christ, for his Bretheren's sake, Romans 9.3? Romans 9.3. Resp.


So far as God may have more glory by the salvation of others, then by my own,
so far I am to prefer it; for the glory of God ought to be dearer to me then my
own salvation, and the zeal of Gods glory, joined with the love of his
Brethren, carried St. Paul so far, as to make that wish, Exodus 32.31 Math. 5.
(so it did Moses in the like case.) It were better that one member perish,
then that the whole body should be cast into Hell (says our Savior.) So the
respect that the Apostle had to the glory of God, in the salvation of that
Nation, (as the whole body) moved him to this (says Chrysostom.) Nor did the
Apostle absolutely wish this, but with condition (says Pareus) as Christ
desired the passing away of the cup of his death. Other an wers might be made
to this Objection, but I hasten to make some Application of the Point.

way) though in the greatest kind, advance his glory, worship and service? He
gave his Son for us, we will not part with a lust for him: Christ pleased not
himself to please us; we displease him, to please our selves; All seek their
own (says the Apostle,) but not the things of Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.21.
This sinful self Love, and selfseeking, is the bane of true Religion.
Self-loving, and self seeking Ministers, have been the bane of the Church. And
selfloving, and self-seeking Hearers, have frustrated Gods Ordinances: And what
greater let, Ezekiel. 33.31.
has been to a hoped-for Reformation, then sinful Self-Love; love of ease,
love of gain, love of credit with men, have devoured up the true Love of God:
Great cause we have to fear (says one) (to whose judgment any rational man
must subscribe,) that when the glory of our English Church is dead, (as the
Symptoms of death are on her) that it will be written on her Tomb: Self-Love
has laid her here.

As there is little Love to be found in the world, toward God and his Son
Christ; So (if the Doctrine delivered be a truth,) (and a truth it is,) there
is little true Christian Love to be found toward Men: Sinful self-love has
almost driven it out of the world; much Love there is in show, little in truth:
loving tongues men have, Jam. 2.15, 16. Adrian. Jun. Emb.
(as St. James shows,) but no loving hands, nor loving hearts. It is said of
the Weasell, that it conceives at the ear, and brings forth at the mouth: Such
is the Love of our times: it is often, hearing, but it brings forth only at the
mouth, by talking. In this is Love, John 2. Epist. v. 6.
(says St. John) (not that we talk of Gods Commandments, but) that we walk
after his commandments. It is a great walker; but no great talker; You may
trace her by her steps, 1 Cor. 13.4-9.
1 Cor. 13.4.-9. there are sixteen in all, eight of the right foot, (in the
Affirmative.) It suffers long, it is kind it rejoices in the truth; It bears
all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, and
it never fails. And there are eight of the left foot, (in the Negative.) It
envieth not, vaunteth not it self, it is not puffed up, it behaveth not it self
unseemly, seeks not her own; is not easily provoked; It thinks no evil,
rejoices not in iniquity. These are true Christian Love's paces; and where you
find them, you may say, here Love has been. I cannot stand to dilate on each
of these, but if you search, Town, City, or Country, you shall hardly find the
print of Love's feet. The Heathen were wont to say of the men of the Primitive
Church, Ecce ut invicem se diligunt! Behold how they Love one another! they
knew that Love was amongst them, by those steps of Love, which they discovered.
But it may be said of us in these days, (says one) Ecce ut invicem se
oderunt; Zanch.
Behold how they hate one another, envy one another, oppress one another,
slander one another; seek themselves, and not the good one of another. Self is
the Bias in all our actions, as Lucullus sometimes told his guests, who (being
bountifully entertained by him,) wondering and admiring at the magnificent cost
that he was at, for their sakes; (as they said) he replied, Something my Guests
is for your sakes, but the greatest part is for Lucullus, his own sake; But
this is far from Loving truly, Plut. Apoth.
true Love is a free Affection, not a trade, nor traffic for Lucre's sake; It
will not stand forecasting with it self, (as did those in Job,) what shall I
get, Job. 21.16.
or gain by this? It counts, it gain sufficient, if it can do the beloved
party any service. As for such selfe-Lovers, if they take pains to read 2 Timothy
3.2. they shall find themselves to begin that Black Bedrole. 2 Timothy 3.2.


God and Man. Probatio amoris, exhibitio operis, (says Gregory.) It is deeds
and not words, that must manifest our Love.

True Love is the Daughter of Faith; and as Judah said in another case of Jacob
and Benjamin, Genesis 44.30. Gal. 5, 6.13.
his Life is bound up in the Child's Life? So may we say in this case; The
Mother is lively, and working, and communicates with her Daughter of her
liveliness, working by her; Faith is like that thirsty houswife, we read of
Pro. 31.19. Her own hands are to the spindle, Pro. 31.19.
they hold the distaffe, she twists and spins a web to cloth the naked Soul:
And all the while she is at work, she eyes her Daughter, sets her to labor,
and suffers her not to eat the bread of idleness, but causes her to
embroider with her needle, her Tent (which is holiness) and sends her forth
with the garment which she has wrought, employing her about works of mercy.
Whilst Faith keeps within, to defend the Conscience; Love walks abroad to
succor the needy, whist Faith (like the Mason) holds the Ladder with the one
hand, Love with the other serves: Hence it is that Love and Labor are joined
together, 1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10.
1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10, she is no Lazy Daughter, of so painful and laborious
a Mother.

Some have resembled Love to the Plant of Paradife; having the knowledge of
God, for the Root; Faith in Christ, for the stock; The Love of God and our
Neighbor, for the maine boughs, and branches; Good meanings, desires, and
purposes for the budds and blossoms. The leaves, are good speeches; and the
Fruits are good works. Oh! that the house of God did flourish with such Trees;
Such shall grow green for ever, and their fruit shall never wither. Be thou a
Branch of this Tree* Do all the good thou can for thy Christian Friend; Ride
for him, run for him, visit him in health, and sickness; if he be hungry, feed
him; if naked, cloth him; let thy Love be a substantive, felt, heard, and
understood; and be content to abate of thine own ease, and rest, to do thy
Brother any office, or service of Love, much more to serve and seek the
Public good of Church and State. But I shall no further at this time carry
this Doctrine, arising from the letter of the History, we come to the Mystery.

[At Midnight.]

Night, Genesis 8.22. 1. Cor. 11.23. Exodus 11.4. Judge. 16.3. Psalm. 91.5. Isay.
21.12.
properly signifies that space of time, wherein darkness covers the face of
the Earth, (the Sun being absent) and Midnight is the death time of the Night,
when all are at rest, and quiet, Judge. 16.3. Metaphorically, and Figuratively,
it notes calamity in Scripture, as Psalm. 91.5. Isay. 21.12. And so Midnight
signifies extremity of calamity, and misery. In both senses it may be here
taken, and applied; For God is a Friend at Midnight, both in respect of Time,
and respect of Trouble. And our Savior would give us, as much to understand,
that we may not be discouraged from coming to God by Prayer, at any season:
For, it may be, some poor soul may say, I would gladly come unto God, (as to my
Friend,) and seek unto him for a supply of all my wants, but I fear that it is
unseasonable; the day is spent, the night is come, my Afflictions are great,
and the shadows of the Evening are stretched out upon me, Jer. 6.4.
etc. No (says Christ; let not this discourage you, for Friends stand not upon
that. A Friend will go (if occasion be) unto his Friend at Midnight, (albeit it
be in it self an unseasonable time,) and hopes notwithstanding to speed in his
suite. How much more then will God grant the suites which his Friends make unto
him, (to whom no time is unseasonable,) come when they will, they shall be
welcome. If we take the words in the former sense, for the Time and Season:
our Observation may be this.

God is a Friend, to whom we may resort at the deadest time of all the Night.

Prayer is as nigh to God, in the night time, as in the day. This Solomon
intimates, 1 King. 8.59.
1 King. 8.59. be it at what hour of the night it will, faithful Prayer shall
come and stand nigh before him, Jacob wrestled with God, by prayers, and
supplications, all night long, and prevailed, Hos. 12.4. David will ri^e up at
Midnight to pray, and give thanks, Hos. 12.4. Psalm. 119.62.
Psalm. 119.62. Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God at Midnight,
and the Prisoners heard them, Acts 16.25.
Act. 16.25. I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers Night and Day said Paul
to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.3. Luke. 6.12.
2 Epist. 1.3. And Christ himself (as we have it, Luke 6.12.) continued all
Night in Prayer.

Night his, as well as the Day? Psalm. 74.16.
has not he prepared the Light and the Sun? Night and Day are all one to him.
No time can be prescribed against the King, Nullum tempus occurrit. Regi.
(as we were wont to say) and shall any time be pre^cribed against God? If our
Prayers find but the way to him, (as they will in the darkest Night,) his
promises (infallibly) will find a way to us.

Besides; Gods Spirit is as ready to assist us, at Midnight as at midday; And
our Mediator and Intercessor is both Night and Day at Gods right hand, Romans
8.34.
pleading our cause for us.

David's reins did instruct him in the Night season, Psalm. 16.7. that is, Psalm.
16.7.
his inward Affections and desires, did call upon him then to think upon God,
and call upon his name; had we, such desires, and Affections as David had, and
as we ought to have, (sanctified and reformed) we would find a time, and redeem
it from our eyes, and eyelids, to perform this Duty. But he that searches
the reins; Revel. 3.23. Jer. 12.2. Psalm. 36.4. Pro. 4.16.
knows full well, that He is far from their reins, who can break their sleep
to devise mischief on their beds, and sleep not, unless they cause some to
fall. So vehement are their desires unto evil, that the day is not long enough
to practice it, the night must likewise be taken up in following it; And yet
they can find no time to seek unto God by Prayer for pardon, whole nights they
can spare to sport, to gain, to revell: and yet not one hour, nor half a
quarter of an hour, of the Night, to beg pardon for their Daye's
transgressions.

That Italian was conceited, we may imagine, who writ a supplication to
Candlelight, desiring it to disclose unto him the secrets of its Kingdom.
Surely the Sun, (that eye of Heaven) does not see so much wickedness and
villainy, as is committed by Candlelight. It would be a long Assize (only) to
take her Confession and Indictment. It can tell of doors open at the dead time
of night to let in the Adulterer, and let out the Drunkard: It can discover a
world of Unthrifts, revelling and ryoting, Carding and Dicing, swilling and
swearing; till money and wit were both together spent. How happy were it for
such, if the least inch of Candle, were able to witness for them, of one poor
piece of an hour spent in praying, reading, and such pious devotions: which if
it could do, it would do more (I believe) then the Sun in the Firmament can;
for that never saw it. But let such remember that Gods eye is on them at
Midnight; he looks on, when (it may be) we had rather He looked off. If we see
him thus, as standing by us, looking on us; it would be a happy interview. How
does he, that is come abroad at Midnight to do a mischief, sneak away, when he
spies the watch? and what a damp, would it necessarily cast upon a Sinner, to
behold God, (that shall be his Judge) beholding him, at that time of night,
committing sin? Oh take heed, lest he spy thee up, and working wickedness at
that time of night when thou should be in bed, or being stolen to bed, find
thee fast, without asking him blessing, or committing thy self to his gracious
protection and keeping. Both these, are alike dangerous.

Persian Kings held it a piece of their silly glory, to deny an easy access
of their greatest subjects; It was death for any to solicit them, uncalled.
Esther her self was afraid to do it: Esther. 4.11.
but the Gates of Heaven always stand open, to Faithful Prayer; And Gods
scepter is continually held forth to all; and we may safely approach to the
Throne it self, where the King sits; and at what time we will, by day, or
night, have audience in the Court of Heaven. We cannot rise up so early, but
God is awake before us, and ready to attend us; nor lie down so late, but he is
up later then we. He is up early, to refresh his Servants, Psalm. 90.14. Hos.
6.3. and to destroy his enemies, Psalm. 90.14. Hos. 6.3. Exodus 14.24. Pro. 8.17.
Psalm. 119.147* 148. Psalm. 8. Psalm. 19.
Exodus 14.24. and he would have us early up, to observe his going forth, in the
passages of his providence toward us, Pro. 8.17, David prevented the
Night-Watches, and the dawning of the Day, as he says, Psalm. 119.147, 148.
late at night, and early in the mouring; he gave himself to Prayer and
Meditation; he had his Night Meditations, Psalm. 8. and his Day Meditations,
Psalm. 19. and was at the one by Sunrising, (observing his coming out like a
Bridegroom) and at the other late in the evening, (when the Moon was up, and
the Stars gloriously appearing.) And elsewhere he tells us that he would be so
early at his Prayers, as that he would prevent the Lord, Psalm. 88.13. Psalm.
88.13.
In the morning (says he) shall my prayer prevent thee, A very high
expression; as if David could be at his prayers before God were awake, or went
abroad; but that is not his meaning; it seems to be this (rather) that he
would be with God, before any Cross or Affliction befell him, or any blessing
met him. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, as he
says, Psalm. 30.5. he does not say, Weeping must endure for a Night, Psalm. 30.5.
(there was no necessity for that) but it may endure for a Night; but if
weeping do endure all the Night, till the day break, yet then it comes
certainly and infallibly: but David's Prayers, his Midnight Prayers, shall be
with God, and prevent that joy, before that blessing befalls him. And in this
sense David may be understood, when he speaks of his early preventing of God,
by his Prayers.

See then, that we make a right use of this our Privilege, and come to the
Throne of grace, early, and late. Has any evil, any Affliction betided thee
over Night? thou wentest to bed with thine eyes full of tears; thou
slumberest, but can not sleep, thou sleep, yet can take no rest; at
Midnight thou awakest, thy Spirit is perplexed within thee; why, now embrace
God in thine arms, by religious thoughts, and holy Meditations; put up thy
Prayer to the God of thy Life, Psalm. 42.8.
so in the Night, his Songs shall be with thee. He may wipe away all tears
from thine eyes, at Midnight; and put Songs of praise and thanksgiving into thy
mouth at Midnight; if thou pray unto him, and call upon him at Midnight;
Therefore try him that way; But if that do not happen, yet the Lord will
command (says David) his Loving kindness in the daytime; that shall not
fail to follow in the morning* when the day breaks; and so thy Night Prayers
shall prevent the morning Watches.

Daytime, than in the Night, (it being a time of sleep and drowsinesse.)

As God has sanctified all Places for Prayer, Resp. John 4.21. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Ephesians. 6.18. (...)
John 4.21. 1 Timothy 2.8. so has he all Times; yet (the duty being Affirmative,)
we are not tied to All, but to the season only: Pray always (says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6.18. that is in every season (as it is word for word in the Original,)
When you have an occasion, or opportunity to pray, then lay hold on it, be it
in the day, or in the night, morning or evening; (for every part of time, is
included; none excluded, (so it be seasonable.) Now Prayer may be considered,
as it is more solemn, or more sudden; Solemn Prayer, is that, which we
compose our selves unto, in a more solemn manner; And it is, either Public,
or Private; Public is that which is made in a public place, (and in the
Congregation. Isay. 56.7. Neh. 8.6. Joel. 2.16, 17.
) There must be a public place, and a public meeting, to make public
Prayer, Isay. 56.7. Neh. 8.6. Joel 2.16, 17. And a Public Time, is most
suitable for public Prayer; So there were times limited under the new
Testament, for this duty. The third hour, the sixth, and the ninth; were their
ordinary hours (which are our nine, twelve, and three in the afternoon.) Acts.
2.15. and 3.1. and 10.9. Acts. 2.15. Acts. 3.1. Acts. 10.9.


Private Prayer; is that which is more privately made, in some private place,
or house, and that either by some few together (as the Master with his
household or Family, Acts 10.30. Math. 6.6. Acts. 10.9.
Acts. 10.30.) or more Secret by one alone (as Math. 6.6. Acts. 10.9.)

Concerning Domestical Prayer, it must be daily performed, as may be gathered
from that before delivered by our blessed Savior, in this Chapter, Luke 11, 3.
And morning, Luke 11.3.
and evening, are the most seasonable and fitting times of every day, for the
performance of that religious Duty: Exodus 29.38. and 30.7, 8. Numb. 18.4.
For that morning and evening, God did appoint (of old) for his service; and
required morning and evening sacrifice. And we have the example of Gods Saints
to warrant it, Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 141. 2. Psalm. 92.2.
There David was at his morning Prayer, and Psalm. 141.2. there he was at
evening Prayer; And Psalm. 92.2. both are joined. In the morning it is
seasonable, to call upon God, for that our Spirits are then most fresh, and apt
to any undertaking, (as is employed, Job. 11.17. Pro. 3.9. Exodus 34.19.
Job. 11.17.) and for that God expects the first Fruits, Pro. 3.9. Exodus 34.19.
the first that opened the matrix was to be the Lord's. So should the first
glance of the eye, so soon as it is opened, be lifted up to Heaven, etc. And in
the Evening, it is seasonable, to call upon God; for that men are then usually
freest from distractions, occasioned by their worldly business, and
employments; Provided that evening Prayer be not too late deferred, so that the
Fami^y become sleepie and sluggish in the performance of that Duty, (which is a
great fault, in many who yet make some Conscience of the performance of it.)
Death, Mr. Thomas Fuller his med: on all kinds of Prayers, med. 9.
(says a very ab^e Divine) is compared to sleep, well then may our Night
Prayers be re^embled to the making of our Will; As we are careful not to ^ye
intestate, so should we be careful not to deferr the making of our Wills, till
we are not compos mentis; till the Lethargy of drowsiness ceaze up us; but
being in perfect memory, bequeath our souls to God. But however sleep, Fell ham
Resolves, Cent. 2. Resol. 67.
be the Image and shadow of death (says another) yet a man at rest in his
Chamber, is like a sheep impenn'd in the fold; subject only to the unavoidable
and more immediate hand of God; whereas in the day when he roves abroad, in
open and wide pastures, he is then exposed to more unthought-of accidents, that
contingently, and casually occur in the way; so that, albeit Prayer, morning,
and evening, should be the godly man's Keys to unlock, Clavis diei, sera noctis.
and open for him, the blessings to be enjoyed in the day time; and to lock and
shut up the discomforts and dangers of the night season, so that the Sun shall
not smite by day, Psalm. 91. Mr. Tho. Paget his demonst. ^f family du^ies.
Propos. 22.
nor the Moon by n^ght (as speaks a third) neither of which may be omitted;
yet it is held to be more needful in the morning (for the Reasons before
rendered,) then when our bodies do take their repose.

As for secret Prayer, performed by one alone in the Closet, or any other
secret place, (no matter where, so we be free from distractions, in which
respect) the night is very seasonable: then the soul may draw near to God in a
more familiar manner, (for that darkness shutting the outward senses, and no
noise annoying them, the inward, are more free and fitted for meditation,):
Hereto tends that of Chrysostom, Always (says he) endeavor to pray both in
the day time, ^mys. in Genesis Hom. 30.
an in the night; and rather in the Night, for that no body then is troublesome
unto us. Then have we a great tranquillity of our thoughts, when our businesses
are not troublesome; when there is none that can hinder us, from having free
access to God; when our mind knitting it self together is able dilligently to
make reference of all to the Physician of our souls. In this respect, David
wills us to commune with our hearts upon our beds, Psalm. 4.4.
and be still, Psalm. 4.4. No way countenancing thereby that lazy practice of
many, who deferr this Night Prayer, till they are a-bed, and then fall asleep
before they have half done, and say they know not what; for we must mind well
what we do, and with a modest quietness of mind, call our ways to an a^count;
And entertain our waking, (if at Midnight) with Godly thoughts and meditations.

Besides this solemn Prayer, (both public and private) there is sudden and
occasional Prayer; when upon some sudden and unexpected accidents, Neh. 2.4.
Ruth. 2.4.20. Judge. 6.12.
the heart is instantly lifted up to God, as Nehem. 2.4. Ruth. 2.4.20. Judge.
6.12. such Prayers are called Ejaculations of the heart, and argue an holy
familiarity with God, and manifest an heavenly mind. These come not under Rule;
bind not men to any bodily observance; take not up any room in the soul, are
to be used, as salt, with every bit of meat we eat; They hinder us not from
following any work of our calling; and are (says one) as little Pinnces,
Fuller. med.
which may freely and safely come to the shore, when greater Ships cannot come
near for the sands: when we are Time-bound, Place-bound, or Person bound* so
that we cannot compose our selves to make a large solemn Prayer; this is the
right instant, for these short ejaculations: yet these kind of Prayers must be
so used, as that set and solemn Prayers, may not be neglected.

Night-Vigils, seeing Midnight-Prayers are commendable, and (at some times)
seasonable.

Surely this; that they are superstitious, Resp. Vid. Rhem. Annot. in Acts 10.
Sect. 6. Bellar. de bon. oper: lib. 1. c. 21.
and not worthy of the time that is spent, in Confutation: Three Vigils they
make* one at the beginning of the Night, another at Midnight, the last at the
closing up of the Night, and appearing of the day. But they fail, for first
they place Religion in observing of these hours, and seasons; a Religious
observation of one hour more then another, is to be accounted no better then a
beggarly ceremony, o^ element, Gal. 4.9, 10. Gal. 4.9.15.


Secondly, they tie themselves to a stinted number of Prayers; so many
Ave-Maries and Pater Nosters, which they post over, without any understanding,
(saying them in Latin, which many of them are unskillfull in*) and so without
any devotion in their hearts: this is no better then mere babbling and
lip-labor condemned by our Savior, Math. 6, 7. and by the Apostle, Math. 6,
7. 1 Cor. 14.
1 Cor. 14.

Thirdly, they tie themselves to the very hours, whence it comes to pass that
they pray many times without Affection, (drousily and sluggishly,) when as we
are to pray with an holy intention, which does not always jump with their set
hours; We deny not, but that it is fit for certain hours to be set apart
both for Public and Private prayers; which accordingly would be observed and
kept constantly, but to put Religion in the very hour, and to tie all men to
the same hour, or to a stinted number of Prayers, so many and no more, this we
condemn. Our Midnight Prayers are to be performed as occasion is offered, and
no otherwise. And so we come to the other sense; As Midnight notes Calamity and
Affliction, and thence, Observe.

God is to be sought unto in all our distresses, seem they never so great and
desperate. No distress whatever, should keep us from it.

Thus Hannah in the bitterness of her soul, sought unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.10.
1 Samuel 1.10. so David being in the depths of trouble, came to God, Psalm. 130.1.
and cried to him, Psalm. 130.1. when the sorrows of Hell compassed him about,
and the snares of death prevented him, Psalm. 18.5. when he was laid in the
lowest pit in darkness, Psalm. 18.5.
in the deep, Psalm. 88.6, 7. when his spirit was overwhelmed within him, Psalm.
88.6, 7. Psalm. 142.3.4.
refuge failed him, and no man cared for his soul, Psalm. 142.3, 4. yet in this
great Affliction he came to God and sought to him by Prayer. I might instance
in Iehosophat, Hezekiah; and others (formerly mentioned,) and in doing so, they
did no more then Christ enjoynes, Luke 21.25, 26.
Luke 21.25, 26. when such times come, that men's hearts shall fail them, then
Watch, and pray, that you may be accounted worthy to escape those things, verse
36.

Alsufficient; Infinite in power, wisdom, goodness, etc: he is able to help
us in our greatest troubles, seem they never so desperate, Psalm. 68.20.
Psalm. 68.20. This Reason is given why our blessed Savior in his Agony, when
his soul was heavy unto death, did then, fly unto God, and cry unto him; he
knew that he was able to deliver him from death, Heb. 5.7.
Heb. 5.7. And as God is Alsufficient, and able: So he is as ready, and willing
to be found at such times, Psalm. 145.18. Psalm. 46.1.
as at any other, Psalm. 145.18. yea sooner at such times then at any other,
Psalm. 46.1.

Hannah speaks in her song of such, as are silent in darkness, and brands them
for wicked persons, 1 Samuel 2.9.
1 Samuel 2.9. Such a wicked Person, did Saul prove himself to be, who being in
extremity, when his grief and vexation increased, would meddle no more with
God, and seek to him no further, 1 Samuel 13.8.
1 Samuel 13.8. So, many when they perceive outward means to fail them, wax
desperate, and in stead of praying fall to blaspheaming, (with those
Antichristians, Revel. 16.9.) As their Afflictions increased; Revel. 16.9.10,
11.21.
so did their blasphemies, verse 10, 11.21.) And this comes to pass, either,
because they cast their eyes, and rest altogether on secundary causes, not
considering that God has a principal hand in all their distresses, that they
are in, (of what kind soever) that he who formed the light, Created that
darkness likewise, and that he who makes peace, Isay. 45.7.
did also Create that evil which they lie under: Or, through a distrust of
Gods help; conceiving that either he is not able, to help in such a Midnight
condition, (although he should open the Windows of Heaven, to send forth light
unto us,) or else that he is not willing to help them; not believing the
gracious promises which he has made to us, in our greatest troubles, if we
call upon him.

Isay, Isay. 50.10, 11.
cap. 50.10, 11. who is amongst you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon it. Art thou in a dark,
and sad condition? art thou under the darkness of Affliction? the darkness of
want, of poverty, of debt? do thou sit in the darkness of temptation,
desertion, etc? is thy Sun set? has the shadows of the evening overspread
thee? nay has an horror of great darkness fallen upon thee, (as did on
Abraham, Genesis 15.12.) so that thou see no light, Genesis 15.12.
none within thee, none without thee, none about thee; yet if thou be one
that fears God, that walks in the way of his Commandments; be not out of
hope; judge not thy case desperate, with those who sailed in the ship with
Paul, (from whom all hope of being saved was taken away when they saw neither
Sun, Acts 27.20.
nor Star, for many days together) yet call upon thy God, (for all that) and
stay thy self, upon the gracious promises that he has made unto thee, as
David resolved to do, what time I am afraid, (and you know the terrors of
Midnight are fearful) I will trust in thee: and how he will do that, Psalm. 91:
he shows in the words following, In God I will praise his word in God I will
put my trust, Psalm. 56.3, 4. as if he had said, Psalm. 56.3, 4.
what darkness soever lies upon me, what fears soever I am under, what
distress soever does most disquiet me: I will fly to God, call upon his name,
and trust upon the word of promise, for help and succor: No other way to find
true comfort but this. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your
selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled (says the Prophet Isay, in the place above mentioned) as
if he had said, All ye that out of your own thoughts, and fancies, raise up to
your selves imaginary succors, and seek not to God; make use of your own
devices, please your selves in your own projects, and follow after that light,
which you your selves have kindled out of your own Tinder-box: This you shall
have of mine hand, you shall lie down in sorrow, take this from me, (and it
is all that you are like to get from me in this case) that light which you walk
after, shall afford you but light enough, to the pit of darkness; It shall not
light you long: before you go to bed, it shall out, and you will lie down, in
a very sad and disconsolate condition, And so much of the Time, when this man
came to his Friend to supply his want; It was at Midnight.

Thus having heard, what this man did in his extremity, now let us hear what
he said.

Friend, lend me three loves?

And here we have considerable, first the suite or Request made, secondly the
Arguments to enforce it.

In the suite, we take notice, first of the manner, secondly of the matter of
it.

For the manner, he comes not rudely, and abruptly, but insinuates himself into
him, prefacing his request with a respectfull Compellation, [Friend]: thence we
note that,

Honest motions, may not want the help of artificial Insinuations. Let the
motion be never so good, and honest in it self, yet it would have some
Complement allowed, to make it more passeable.

Not a Book in the world, wherein you read of fairer expressions, and more
ci^ill language used one to another then in the Scripture? where do we find
more of that which we call Complement, then in Abigall's access and address
to David, in the behalf of her foolish Husband, when she interceded for him?
Upon me my Lord, upon me let this iniquity be, 1 Samuel 25.24.
and let thine handmaid I pray thee speak in thy audience, 1 Samuel 25.24. And
what phrases of humility and diminution, and undervaluing himself, does David
use to Saul, to insinuate into his affections? After whom is the King of Israel
come out 1 Samuel 24.14. 1 Samuel 26.19, 20.
after whom do thou pursue? after a dead dog or flea, 1 Samuel 24.14. so 1 Samuel 26.19, 20. The like does Bathsheba to David, my Lord thou swarest by the
Lord thy God unto thine handmaid, 1 King. 1.17. 1 King. 1.17.
O man of God, (said the Captain unto Elijah) I pray thee let my life, and the
life of these fifty thy Servants, be precious in thy sight, 2 King. 1.13. Acts
26.2.27. and verse 25. Colos. 3.12. Acts 1.16. and 2.14.22.29.
2 King. 1.13. So St. Paul to Agrippa, Acts 26.2.27. and to Festus, verse 25.
Such discreet and loving insinuations does St. Paul use frequently. Now
therefore as the elect of God holy and beloved. So Peter, Men, brethren, etc:
Asts 1.16. and 2.14.22.29. so Steven, Acts 7.2. I might abound with examples.

dress of flattery. Indeed: as that woman who is overcuriously dressed, is to
be suspected, so is the speech, that is so: Iezabel did not more inveagle her
Lovers, by her wanton dress, than do some seducers, in these days, Romans 16.18.
their hearers and followers by their feyned speeches. The heart of many a
speaker, is far from his tongue: but this concludes not, but that a fair
heart, and a fair tongue, may very well consist together: That man aggravates
his condemnation, that speaks fair, but means ill; but yet, he that means
well, and expresses himself in a good form, gives me Wine in a clean
glass. Good forms, are letters commendatory, (as Queen Isabella was wont to
say,) and add much to a man's repute: By this, Sueton:
Titus Vespasian gained the name of the Darling of the World. They are unwise,
that affect masterfullnesse in speech, though it be to their equals, or
inferiors; much more they that use harsh and coor^e language to their
superiors, to whom they must be beholding. So far are some from an oily
tongue, that they are swollen in the mouth with a venomed and poisoned one, (as
was Shemei 2 Samuel 16.5.) Thou man of blood, thou man of Beliall. 2 Samuel 16.5.
Our carriage and behavior should be (says one) like our Apparel; not too
strait, but free for exercise: Yet (as the Tailor does by garments, so should
we do by complements, cut them out with advantage rather then otherwise) better
give too much, then come short of what is due. Fair words (we say) make fools
glad; and so they do wise men also.

Dic mihi si velis hominem rogare ^t sic incipias, Da mihi quod peto, nonne
arrogans videtur oration? Genesis 18.27.30. 2 Samuel 7.22. 1 King. 8.23. 2 King.
19.6.15. Nehem. 1 5. Luke 11.2.
how much more are we to use them in our accesses, and approaches to the God of
Heaven? Oh let not my Lord be angry (says Abraham) and I will speak but this
once unto thee. And again, Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, who am but dust and ashes, etc. The Saints have ever made God glorious in
his Titles, when they have been Suitors to him, 2 Samuel 7.22. 1 King. 8.23. 2
King. 19.6.15. Neh. 1.5. And our Savior in that platform, given his Disciples
in this Chapter does preface it with Our Father: we may not rush rudely into
his presence.

And here take notice, that those Names and Titles which we give to God, those
notions, and attributes wherewith we preface our Prayers, would be such, as may
strengthen our Faith in our special suits. This man, in this Term of Friend,
incourageth himself to speed in the suite he makes. Psalm. 65.3. 1 Pet. 5.10.
Dan. 9.4, 5.
If many and general requests, be to be put up, then such Names and Titles
would be used, as may encourage us, that all shall be heard as Dan. 9.4, 5. But
if some particular petition be to be pressed, then God would be represented
unto the mind, under such a name or notion, as may help the heart, and
strengthen our Faith in that particular; So Abraham's Servant being to pray for
good success in his Masters business, looks upon God under that notion, as
the God of his Master Abraham, Genesis 24.12. and 32.9. Psalm. 94.1.
Genesis 24.12. so Jacob fearing his Brother Esaus wrath, Genesis 32.9. So David
praying against the enemies of God and his Church, Psalm. 94.1. So when Peter
entreated God to make choice of an Apostle in the place of Judas, Acts 1.24.
Acts 1.24. So the Church seeking courage, and that wonders might be wrought
set God before them as a God of power, Acts. 4.29. Acts. 7.2. 1 These. 5.23.
Romans 15.5.13. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Acts 4.24. So S^. Paul still, sets God before him, as having that in him, for
which he prays, 1 These. 5.23. Romans 15.5.13. and 16.20. 1 Timothy 1 17. And
seeking the consummation, or perfecting of the believing Hebrews, he considers
God under an answerable notion, Heb. 13.20. Heb. 13.20.
Learn this to help thy Faith, be acquainted well with the Name and Attributes
of God, and accordingly make use of that, to preface thy Prayers, which may
best serve to strengthen thy Faith, and inflame thy Affections. And so much of
the manner, now to the matter of the request.

Lend me three Loves.]

Here we have, first the Thing desired [Lend me] secondly the motive to enforce
it, which is taken from the Facility thereof. It was but three Loaves that he
desired to borrow, he would not be overburthensome unto his Friend, he desires
that which was in the power of his Friend to grant, and that without any
prejudice unto him.

We begin with the thing desired.

[(...), da mihi mutuo; Lend me.]

It will not be amiss to acquaint you with the nature of the thing, and show
you what Lending is; and what kind of Lending it was which this man desired,
(that we may make the better way to the Doctrine.) For albeit, Borrowing, and
Lending was (as we think, never more used then in these days, yet upon a
strict enquiry, we shall find that it was never more rare: for amongst many
Lenders, there is scarce a Lender to be found, that does perform aright this
Christian duty to his Friend. Know then; that Lending is a Contract which
transfers the right and dominion of a thing to another, for no Consideration of
price or Recompense, What Lending is.
but only upon Covenant that the same kind of thing be rendered, and repayed
again, (says Hemingius.) Or more briefly, thus. Heming: Comment in Jac. de
mutuatione.


Lending is a kind of contrast, whereby things are alienated for a time without
price.

A Contract, is the consent betwixt parties, concerning the alienation or
permutation of things upon condition, which condition is either presently
performed, or else for the future assured by obligations, either Verbal, by
word of mouth, or Writing. So ( Philem. 18.19.) St. Paul engaged himself by
word, Philem. 18.19.
and writing to Philemon, for Onesimus his debt; or Real, as by Pawnes, and
Morgages (which under the Law was allowed, Exodus 22.6. Deuteronomy. 24. Pro. 20.16.
Exodus 22.26. Deuteronomy 24. Pro. 20.16.) Or by Sureties and Hostages; so Genesis 42.36,
Genesis 42.36, 37. and 43.8, 9, 10. and 44.32.
37. Reuben offered his two Sons in Hostage, and delivers them unto his Father
as pledges, for the forthcomming of Benjamin: the like did Judah, Genesis 43.8,
9.10. and 44.32.

This Contract we (now) speak of, concerns Alienation of Goods, and

Such Contracts, are either for the perpetual alienation of them or but for a
time only,

The perpetual alienation, is both of the Use and Property of what is
alienated, and that for ever. And it is either Free and Liberal, or for
Recompense.

If it be free, and liberal. It is Donation or giving; if it be for
Recompense, then it is Commutation, as ware for ware, (which is called Bartery)
or money for money (which is called Exchange,) or ware for money, (which is called
selling) or money for ware, (which is buying.)

The Alienation, which is but for a Time, is either of the Use only* or of the
Property also.

That which is of the Use only, for a Time; if it be liberal and free, is
called Commodation, or lending to Use; (the property being still retained.) But
if it be for Recompense, then it is called Location or letting to Hire.

That which is not only of Use, but of Property also; if it be liberal and
Free, is called Mutuation or lending to spend, if it be Illiberall, and for
gain it is called Usury.

Now the difference is to be taken notice of betwixt these two kinds of
Lendings; Mutuatio Accommodatio.
Mutuating, and Accommodating. When any does mutuum dare, mutuate, he looks but
for his own again, in eadem specie, in the same kind. As when one lends Bread,
Corn, Money, to a Friend; he lends it not with condition to have the very self
same Loaves again, or grains of Corn, or pieces of Silver again that were
lent; but with condition that it should be repayed in the like kind, Bread for
Bread: Corn for Corn (of the same kind and goodness): Money for Money so much,
for so much; For here the Property and Dominion of the thing, lent, is
transferred from the Lender to the Borrower; otherwise a man could not use
them, in regard that the Use, and the Property, cannot besevered. And therefore
this kind of Lending is called mutuum, Heming. in Jac. 5.
(in which too words meum and tuum are contracted into one.) As if the Lender
should say, this that is mine, I now make it thine, for a time; thine to do
with what thou will: thine in Use and Property, both to lend, and spend, to
give, etc: so thine, (that during the time of the loan of it) I will not call
thee to an account for it, because it is thine. And this kind of lending is
only of such things as are spent in the Use, and pass from man to man by
number, weight, or measure.

Now when a man Accommodates, he looks to receive that which he lends, in
Individuo; for as much as the Use is only transferred, but not the Property,
unto the Borrower, so that he cannot every way use it as his own, he cannot
sell it, exchange it, or bestow it on whom he please. Should a man lend his
Friend, his Horse; he may not, by virtue of that Lending, sell him to another,
nor exchange him with another; for as much as the Lender did not make his
Friend the owner of the beast, by transferring the Property or dominion unto
him, he only yields the Use of it for a time, and when the time is expired, he
expects the same Beast again, (and no other) in the room of him. Now the
Lending which our Text speaks of, is of the former kind called Mutuation, being
of such things, whose use consists in the consummation of their substance, and
whereof both Use and Property are passed over for a Time only, and not
Perpetually; which Time being expired, the borrower is to restore the
Principal, not the self same particular, or individual loaf, or loaves, of
bread; but so much in the same kind, or the same in value.

Duo sunt contractus qui de natura sui gratuiti sunt, Muum et Commodatum. Great.
decret, part. 2. Cause. 14. Quest. 3.
Whether we Accommodate in passing over the Use only, but not the Property; or
Mutuate in passing over both Use and Property; Lending must be free, and
without price: for it is gratwitus contractus, and if any thing be taken for
lending, the nature of lending is corrupted (says Chemuitius.)

By this description of Lending it appears, how it differs from all other
Contracts: as first from Lettings, for in that we pass over the Use of a thing
for a certain price, retayning still the Property, but in this we many times
pass over both Use and Property: but whether one, or both, it is always
without price.

It differs from selling: For that is a contract by which a thing is
transferred, from one to another for a certain price, and that for ever: both
agree in the transferring and alienating the Property, with the Use; but herein
they differ, the one is Liberal, the other not; the one is Temporal, the
other for ever.

It differs from Exchange; which is the yiedling of one thing for another; As a
Horse for a Cow, or this Horse, for that Barley, gold for Silver, etc: But when
I lend, I look that the like should be restored, in the same kind, and that at
the time appointed.

It differs from Giving: in both there is a free passing over both Use, and
Property; But he that gives me this, or that, gives it me with this intent,
that it should become mine, and never be returned to him again; but so does
not the Lender, in that which he passes over unto me. These things I thought
good to premise, that we may make better way to what I intend to propound unto
you from hence, and make use of. The point shall be,

He that Lends me, befriends me.

This man does intimate as much, in coming to his Friend to borrow, and
prefacing his Request with such a Compellation as Friend: as if he should say,
Were thou not my Friend, I could not be so bold, but being my Friend, do so
much for me for Friendship sake: as to Lend me three Loaves, etc.

When God brought Israel out of Egypt, he wills Moses that the people should
borrow every one of his neighbor, Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold; a
likely thing, (might the people say,) that the Egyptians will lend to us their
Jewels whom they so much hate, Well (says God,) I will give this people
favor in their sight, so that they shall lend unto them what they desire. And
he did as he said; for the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the
Egyptians, Exodus 3.21. and 11.2, 3. and 12.35, 36.
so that they lent unto them, such things as they required, (says the Text,)
Exodus 12.36. They were no Friends to the Israelites, yet that God who
fashioneth men's Spirits, wrought their hearts to favor them, and perform this
Friendly office to them, When a man's ways please God, Pro. 16.7.
he will make his exemies become his Friends. You see then, that it is esteemed
for a friendly favor, albeit little or no thanks was to be given to them for
it.

Thus was that poor Widow befriended, who was Wife to one of the Sons of the
Prophets: she (bemoaning her condition to Elisha, that her Husband was dead,
and dyed in debt, and that her two Sons were ready to be seized on by his
Creditors, and taken for slaves,) was enjoined by the Prophet, to Borrow yet
more, Go borrow thee Vessels abroad (says he) of all thy Neighbors, 2 King.
4.3. 2 King. 4.7.
Though they were but empty tubs that she was to borrow, yet it was a Friendly
and Neighbourly part in them, that lent them to her, considering her poverty;
for they might have been jealous of her, that she might borrow, to make them
away, and by that means supply her present necessity, (for they could not be
ignorant of her wants, and how that she had nothing to fill them with) yet like
good Friends and Neighbors they lend, according to her desire.

A good man (says David) shows favor, and lends, Psalm. 112.5.
Psalm. 112.5. or does graciously in lending (as some read.) A favor it is,
and for a great favor it must be held, to be thus befriended. Such a good man
was Nehemiah; I, my brethren, Neh. 5.10.
and Servants (faith he) might exact of them money and Corn (that is, if we
should follow your example): but yet they did not, for they lent, and lent
freely to those that were in need, and took no use of them, and that was
Friendlily done of him. Amb. lib. de Tob. c. 2.
And then Ambrose speaking of Tobias (says,) that he performed the duty of a
just and righteous man, in lending freely, according to that of David. An^
Justin Martyr justifying the godly conversation of Christians, says that they
did so far perform the friendly offices of humanity, Just. Mart. orat. Authen.
pro Christianis.
says that they did so far perform the friendly offices of humanity, as that
they loved not only their Friends, but their enemies likewise; and did lend to
them, of whom they hoped not to receive any thing again. A Friendly part
indeed it was so do do, and agreed well with our Savior's precept, Math. 5.42.
Math. 5.42.


buy, buy, buy; they hold it, both sin and shame in those that would borrow of
them, and no less in themselves, if they should lend: They have an answer
ready for him that craveth this kindness of them; Truly, I cannot lend, I have
promised my Friends that I will not do it: I have sworn to the contrary, and I
dare not break my oath: one shift or other they will have, to put the Borrower
off: As Theocritus had, in answering those two men, who came to borrow his
Bathing-comb (the one being a stranger, the other of his acquaintance) you
(said he) I know not, and you I know too well; I will lend to neither: so
un^ociable and uncharitable, are men grown in this iron or steely age of ours.

Others there are, that will lend unto their Friend, and pretend much love this
way, but in their love there is a great lack; for that they mar all, by some
usurious contract. Does a poor Neighbor want Corn, or money, or such like,
they will supply their wants, provided that he will give him a day or two's
work in Harvest, or let him have his Horse to Cart, or plow, or pay him so
much, over and above what was lent: but such a kind of lending is as much as
nothing, and quite corrupts the nature of it (as before was showed.)

It is accounted for an Act of Charity and Mercy to lend unto our Friend or
Neighbor in his necessity, Deuteronomy. 15.4.
and want, Deuteronomy. 15.4. Now, no act of Charity should be bought, and sold; to
^ell Justice is unjust, we justly cry out against it; and to sell Charity,
cannot be good. Dr. Down, on Psalm. 15. page 250. Fenton on Usury, lib. 2. c. 16.
The one is Bribery, and the other Usury: Charity by such a mercenary lending
is depraved, and perverted, turning an act of Liberality, into an act of
Self-love, Covetousness, and Cruelty, as Divines observe.

It is an act of Self-love to lend in this manner unto a Friend; Boltons
dicourse of Usury. p. 37.
For whereas, Lending was ordained for the good of the Borrower, and not of the
Lender; This good of the Borrower, is not sought at all, or at most but in a
secondary respect, as it serves or furthereth the Lenders gain; Now Charity
seeks not her own good; but the good of others, 1 Cor. 13.5.
1 Cor. 13.5.

It is an Act of Covetousness; for what is Covetousness but an unlawful
desire of having more? Now he who lends for the Lords sake, his needy
Neighbor, looking for nothing again, is said to lend in Christian Charity. And
he who lends looking for his own again, lends in civil Love and humanity. So
he who lends, looking for more then his own again, Luke 6.35.
lends in Covetousness.

It is an Act of Cruelty and inhumanity. A good man (says David) is merciful
and lends, Psalm. 37.26. implying that he who lends not freely, Psalm. 37.26.
wants those bowels of mercy which good men have; Insomuch that Luther
sticks not to term an Usurer, a blood-sucker of the people; Luth. in Decal.
and Cato being asked What is was to be an Usurer, demanded again What it was
to be a Murderer; implying, as was the one, Cicero de Offic. in fin.
so the other.

Nor is Charity only perverted, and depraved, by such a kind of Lending, but
everted, and extinguished thereby. In our Forefathers days, when Usury was
held a deadly sin, Moss on Usury.
A poor couple, or young trader, might easily have borrowed of a rich Friend
or Neighbor 40. or 50. s. yea 5. l. (or more) according to his need to be paid
again at convenient leisure: but in these days (wherein Charity is rather
dead, then waxen cold) (a price being set upon lending,) free lending is scarce
known; insomuch that it is a hard matter for a poor Neighbor to borrow 10.
shillings for a few days without some recompense.

etc.

In things lent out, wherein the Use is only passed over for a time, but the
Property retained, R^^^.
there recompense may be received; for as much as such things are wearable, and
return not in the same perfection every way as they were lent, in
consideration whereof (as likewise in regard of the hazard that the owner
stands unto) the lender may take reward: But where both the Use and Property
of what is lent, is passed over to the Borrower (as must be in those
particulars mentioned, Deuteronomy. 23.19. Levit. 25.37.
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Levit. 25.37. (for otherwise they could not be used) (as before
has been showed.) And where the Lender stands not to the hazard, but the
Borrower, there it is judged unlawful. Sure it is, that recompense received
both in the one kind and the other, does pass it into another kind of
contract, namely into Hire.



damage sustained, through the deteyning of what was lent, longer then the
time that was contracted for.

And as it is lawful to take for what was lent in a Recompencing way, so
secondly it is lawful in a Retributory way, to take some profit. The Borrower
finds himself much benefired by the Lenders courtesy, and of his own accord,
(in testimony of his Thankfulness,) freely gives to the Lender, who (when he
lent) neither intended, nor expected it, (much less covenanted, or contracted
with him for it): such profit, and increase may lawfully be taken as well as
given, as an acknowledgement for the courtesy received. And such receiving of
gain* or profit for what was lent, is by all Divines, both Papists and
Protestants, allowed.

etc: and have no recompense, I will not lend at all: but consider seriously,

First, it is Gods command, that we should lend our Neighbor. In his Law he
has enjoined it, Deuteronomy. 15.7.8. Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
God having before provided that in the seventh year, no debt should be
demanded, he foreseeing that when the seventh year should draw near, the
covetous would refuse to lend to them that were in need; straightly charge his
people not to forbear to lend in that year, more then in any other. Beware
(says he) that there be not a wicked thought in thine heart, etc. verse 9, 10.
verse 9, 10.
where he uses two effectual Reasons, to persuade to the effectual
performance of the duty; first, if they should forbear to lend, it should be a
Sin unto them, verse 9. (For no man is an absolute Lord of that he has, but
Gods Steward, Luke 16.1. and 19.13.
who has committed that we have into our hands to be employed to his glory,
and our own and Neighbors good, and to such uses as he has appointed.)
Secondly, if they did thus cheerfully and freely lend, as he required, then,
because of this thing, God would bless them in all their works, verse 10.

This is a duty likewise, charged upon us by our blessed Savior in his Gospel,
Math. 5.42. Luke 6.35. Math. 5.42. Luke 6.35.
It was a Pharisaicall conceit, that their kindred, Friends, and such as had
well deserved, should only be lent unto; but our Savior shows, that, that
friendly office is owing to every one that needs, be he Friend or Foe, if he be
willing and desirous (his necessity being such as compells him to borrow,) and
thy estate such as inables thee to lend, ne averseris, turn thou not away,
plead not excuse, make no delay, be so far from denying this friendly favor,
as that thou suffer not thy countenance, or gesture to be strange, toward him.

Thus we have both Law and Gospel for the duty; in observing whereof both our
Obedience, and Faith will be discovered: we cannot say we love God, and trust
in God, if we yield not obedience to him herein.

Secondly, take notice, that to deny to lend, is to offend against humane
society, which cannot subsist without it. Usurers (and the Patrons of it) say
so of Usury. It is so necessary, that Commonwealths cannot stand without the
practice of it: Without lending (indeed) they cannot, but without Usury, they
both might, and ought. Wherefore has God made men sociable Creatures but to be
helpful one unto another upon such occasions?

Thirdly, know that it is a greater sin, not to lend unto thy Friend, and
Neighbor, then to be an Usurer unto him: As it is a greater offense; to deny
food to him that is almost famished, then to sell it unto him at an
unreasonable rate. Therefore many States, tolerate Usury, for the good, both
of the Borrower and Lender: Of the Borrower, because his necessity is
oftentimes such, that it is far better to borrow upon Usury, then not to
borrow at all: Of the Lender because to lend upon moderate Usery, to them that
must needs borrow, is a less sin, then not to lend at all. And yet how many
are there, who will cry out upon the Usurer, when they themselves are worse, in
not being upon necessary occasion a Lender unto their Neighbor? Look then
upon this duty, not as arbitrary, and left to your own choice, whether you will
lend or not: for if our Brethrens necessities require it, we stand bound unto
it; and rest assured that God will require it of us, if we do it not.





And there are others, who hypocritically and dissemblingly would be Borrowers,
that they might be esteemed poor; and in debt, thereby to avoid public or
private taxes, and contributions: To such as these, we are not to lend, lest we
make our selves accessory to their covetous practices.

Nor are such, as borrow for the maintenance of their Pride, and excess of
Riot to consume upon their lusts, pleasures and vanities, fit Objects of this
kind of Charity; To lend to these, is but to feed their sensual humor. If we
know that any Friend would borrow of us, for these, and such like sinful
purposes, we may not lend them, for not only the followers but the furtherers
of sin are guilty, Romans 1.31. Romans 1.31.




extreme poor, and unable to provide for themselves necessaries, by reason of
blindness, lameness, or other defects of nature, yet their modesty (many
times) keeps them from begging; they will be borrowing, albeit they know not
which way to pay again. To these we may not lend, but Give: Alms, are their
due. Deuteronomy. 15.11. Levit. 25.22. Math. 5.42. Deuteronomy. 15.11. Levit. 25.22. Math.
5.52. Pro. 19.17.
And in giving to these, we lend to the Lord, Pro. 19.17. he will restore, and
repay it again, for they cannot.

Some are Rich (at least comparatively) who yet at some times, and for good and
necessary considerations, may stand in need, and have no way to supply their
wants, but by borrowing of a Friend (unless they should much diminish their
Inheritance, or impare their stock, and trade to their great prejudice); To
these neither gift, nor Loan is due, (otherwise then of courtesy,) we may
lend them (and it is a neighbourly and friendlily part to lend them, if we can
well spare to supply their present needs,) but no man is strictly tied in
Conscience to lend them, inasmuch as they have wherewith to supply their wants,
and make money of, albeit (it may be) they should sell underfoot, or leave their
grounds understocked, if they should so do. And if I lend to any such, I may
expect the like courtesy from them; should I at another time have the like
occasion: And this is that (...) spoken of Luke 6.34. Luke 6.34.
which sinners (that is very Heathens) expected and rested satisfied withal.

And some there are, of a middle rank (neither very poor, nor very Rich,)
They have a Trade, a Calling, wherein they are able, comfortably to provide for
themselves, and theirs, and whereby they may be enabled (through Gods blessing)
to give every one their own, and repay what was lent them, and yet their
estates may be such, as may minister occasion to them frequently to borrow;
Trading may be dead, Charge great, much hinderance they may have by sickness,
or other casualties, or being young beginners, they may want necessaries, (as
Money, or stock to set up withal.) These are they, that we are bound by the
bond of Christianity to lend unto, and that freely, in their necessity, and if
(in case,) we have just cause to doubt, or mistrust their credits; A pledge may
be taken of them, provided first that it be not their Bed from under them, or
such necessary things as they cannot well spare without hazard of their health,
and livelihood, Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11, 12.17. Exodus 22.26, 27.
Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11, 12.17. Exodus 22.26, 27. for in so doing, we rather impoverish
them, then pleasure them, nor do they save so much in borrowing, as they may,
another way loose, for want of those necessaries, whereby they should get their
living. Secondly, that the pledge or pawn be not used by thee, (for that would
be Usury in thee:) The pledge, be it linen, woollen, or such like may be the
worse for the wearing, so is not thy Money in the borrowers hand. This is
condemned, Amos 2.8. Amos. 2.8.
Thirdly, if we see that what was borrowed, cannot be repayed without hazard of
the borrowers undoing, thou may not take any advantage against thy poor
brother, Math. 18.18.
but show compassion to him, in giving him a longer time, or wholly forgiving
him the debt, restoring his pledge again, so shall that poor man, to whom
thou have showed mercy, bless thee, and it shall be righteousness unto thee
before the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 24.13. God will reckon it for a good work, Deuteronomy.
24.13.
and graciously reward it.



Though, Resp. Psalm. 112.5.
a good man shows favor, and lends; yet withal, he will guide his
Affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112.5. As our Neighbors necessities, so our
own abilities is to be respected; God requires no more of thee, then he enables
thee to do. Nor have we any command to lend, what cannot be well spared. But
here the Rule is good, our super fluities must give way to our Neighbors
Conveniences, and our Conveniences to their Necessities, yea our Necessities, 2
Cor. 8.12.
(though they be great) to their Extreamities, for the supplying of them. If we
in lending, shall more damnifie our selves, then profit our Friend, or
Neighbor; (in such a Case) we may not lend. The wise Virgins did well, and
wisely, in keeping of their oil, when they had not to spare, Math. 25.9. But
take heed that this be not made a pretense only, Math. 25.9.
(as it is made by many,) who cannot lend a shilling to their poor brother,
when they can spend pounds in sinful and lewd company,

Friend and Money.

wicked persons that do so, Psalm. 37.21. Psalm. 37.21.
nor may others fare the worse for their fault. The Godly make Conscience of
paying what they owe, as did the Son of the Prophets, (mentioned, 2 King. 6.5.)
and that poor Widow, 2 King. 6.5. 2 King. 4.1, 2.
(which before we made mention of,) of whom we read, 2 King. 4.1, 2. etc. Nor
may a necessary duty, be omitted for some men's faylings: It should only teach
us to be the more careful, in the discharge of it.

Wherefore, silence Reason, and exalt Faith; Remember it is a work of mercy to
lend unto the needy, Math. 5.7.
and such as show mercy, shall find mercy at the hands of God, when they stand
in most need of it. And in the performance of this Duty, see that it be in
Christian Compassion, and Charity: lend not grudgingly, and repiningly, with an
evil eye, pinching hand or heart. And so likewise have respect to Justice and
Equity in your lending, so as that it be not to the prejudice, but profit of
your Neighbor, and in so doing, the greatest comfort and profit will redound
to thy self in the end.

the Borrower, P^o. 22.7.
is a servant to the Len der) (says Solomon): and why should any man
needlessly, lose his liberty, and make himself a slave; As the Apostle says in
another case, so in this, if thou can be free, use it rather: 1 Cor. 7.21.
If thou can use any other lawful shift, borrow not: He that goes a
borrowing (we say) goes a sorrowing: and this many have found true, (by woeful
experience,) who have met with bitter reproaches, mocks, taunts, checks,
reproofs, even in the house of their reputed Friends, they have been thus
smitten, when they have come upon this errand; wherefore be wary, borrow not
overgreedily: Plato's law was, that no man should fetch water from his
Neighbors Well, until he had first dug in his own ground, to the Potters
earth: But if thy necessity be urgent, the occasion necessary, the request
reasonable, and that thou can not otherwise make some honest supply of thy
present want, then see that thou discharge the duty of a good Borrower.

First, borrow with a resolution to restore what is lent thee, and that at the
time appointed. There are in these days (more then a few,) who by fair words
and colorable pretenses, and under the Cloak of Religion, creep into their
Neighbors bosoms, borrow money, take up wares of credit, (as far as they can
be trusted,) never purposing to pay, but resolving before hand, that so soon as
they have gotten their Neighbors goods into their own possession, voluntarily
to break and turn Banckrupts, and then an agreement must be sought with
Creditors, and composition made for a third, fifth, or tenth part of what was
borrowed: by which wicked course, many a conscionable, and well-minded Lender
has been brought to much want; when these unjust, and base-minded Borrowers
have lived like Gentlemen upon their stolen goods, and the sweat of other men's
labors. This is a pernitious-kind of theft, and in former ages scarce heard
off: they steal more in a day or two, and with more security, then a Highway
Robber does all his lifetime. But though the Law of man arraignes these not,
yet the Judgment seat of of God, 1 These. 4.6.
will not acquit them.

Secondly, repay truly and at the time appointed, abuse not thy Friend in
denying the debt, and putting him to prove it, (which is the practice of too
many) nor keep it from him, with a strong hand, longer then the time contracted
for (which is the practice of more.) This is the cause of so many troublesome,
and chargeable suits at Law, to the undoing (in a manner) of many an honest
Neighbor, who, if he will have his own, must come that way by it, or else lose
it, which (if the debt be not very great) some peaceable minded man, had rather
do then sue, and so he is defrauded of his due. And this is one cause why
Friends are so backward in lending, and that such as have been pitiful, and
compassionate this way formerly, have their hearts closed, and shut up against
this duty. Have thou borrowed of thy Neighbor ought, then know thou art a
debtor, and debts must be paid. The Law of God, 2 King. 4.7. Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 3. cap. 2. Oecolamp. in Proph. Abdiam. Hier. Lyra in loc.
and Conscience requires it, go pay to them, thou art indebted unto, (said
Elisha to the Prophets Widow) (whose Husband some think was good Obadiah,
Ahabs Steward, who hid and mainteyned a hundred Prophets, in the time of
Jezebells persecution, and by that means came greatly indebted, for the
payment of which debts God wrought a miracle by Elisha,) 2 King. 4.7. her first
care must be to pay what she owed, and then she and her Children were to live
upon what remained: whilst she had nothing, it was no sin to owe, but when she
had wherewith, she could not have been guiltless, if she had not paid, before
she stored up for her self, and hers. Nor might she put it off from day to
day, but do it presently: the debt was due, and no delay might be made of
payment, To detain what is due, is all one, Aquin. 2.2 ae. q. 66. Art. 3.
as if you robbed your Neighbor (says the Schoolman.)

Thirdly; if what was borrowed of they Neighbor be lent, only to use (and is
to be returned in the same individual thing,) abuse it not: Use it, to that
end, for which it was lent, and no further, then the Lender does like of; and
then restore (at the time appointed,) what was borrowed, safe, and entire, or
otherwise, make it good. And herein many Borrowers come short, who care not to
what Use they put their Neighbors goods, (not using them as they would their
own; but, to save their own, abuse theirs) forgetting our Saviors Rule, Luke
6.13.
As you would that men should do to you, so do you to them: They would not like
it, should they be so dealt withal.

Lastly; Restore what thou have borrowed, with thanks: as thou did profess
it to be a kindness, when it was lent; so make a return with the like
acknowledgment.

There are those who borrow with Thanks, but restore with Enmity; Let the
Lender send for his own again, or require it of them, they repay with cross
and cursed language, and that is all they have for their friendly kindness.
And some there are so proud, and unthankful, that they esteem all that is
done this way for them, but as matter of duty; you have done no more (say they)
but what God commands you, and less then you ought to do: But God commands us
not, to lend to such unthankful persons; They are not yet poor enough, to be
befriended this way: Nor is it Gods mind, that such as lend unto us, should be
so ungratefully required. Nabals churlish requital of David, and Gods
punishment on him for it, makes it evident, 1 Samuel 25.28. 1 Samuel 25.28.


And thus you see your Duties, that are Borrowers: Borrow not more then is
necessary: Repay truly: Use the borrowed thing honestly: and return it
thankfully to the owner.



As Solomon speaks in case of suretiship, Resp. Prove. 6.3. Dr. Jerm. in oc^?
so do I in this. Go and humble thy self unto thy Creditor, and make sure thy
Friend. The Riches of humility (says one) are able to pay a debt, when there
is nothing remaining to pay it. In all humble manner, go unto thy Friend,
request him to be favorable to thee; if thou can not repay the whole, repay
in part, show thy readiness out of that thou have, to make satisfaction to the
full, and (according to the French Proverb) if thou bring no Money in thy purse,
yet bring Honey in thy mouth. And withal make sure thy Friend (says Solomon)
that is (say some) strengthen thy self with Friends, who may intercede for
thee, and add their help to thine own humility: This do, and however (perhaps)
men will not be satisfied with it, yet in having a good Conscience, and doing
what thou do sincerely, God will be therewith well pleased, and accept of
votall restitution for total, what is affected as if it were effected, the
will for the deed. And this may comfort us, in as much as he is the Principal
Creditor: Spirit: sense.
In a spiritual sense we are given to understand thus much from the Text, that,

Temporal blessings are but borrowed things for a Time. Doct. Mystic.
God is this Friend, (as you have heard,) to him we resort in all our wants,
and what we have from him, is but lent us; they are not our free purchase, but
had from God by way of Loan. [Friend lend me.]

Sold they are not: A sale, is the perpetual Alienation of the property for a
price (as before has been showed.) Now where do you find that God has
renounced his dominion and Lordship over these outward blessings that we enjoy?
He challenges still his right in all, Every beast of the Field is mine, and
the Cattle upon a thousand hills, Psalm, 50.10, 11. so Hos. 2.9. my Corn, Psalm.
50, 10, 11. Hos. 2.9. 1 Samuel 25.11.
my Wine, my Flax, etc: Those things that we call our own, (as Nabal did) my
Bread, my Flesh, etc. God has an interest in: and that very Money, we buy these
things withal from the hands of man, is Gods coin too: we may read Him on the
one side of it, as well as King, or State, on the other, Joel. 2.5. Joel 3, 5.
Hag. 2.8.
Hag. 2.8.

Exchanged they are not: for in Exchange, one certain thing is given and taken
for another, as 1 King. 21.2. 1 King. 21.2.
But we have nothing to give to God by way of Exchange, for these things: we
came naked into this world, and shall carry nothing out of the world with us,
Job. 1.12. 1. Tim. 6, 7. Job. 1.21. 1 Timothy 6, 7.


Let out unto us, they are not, neither by Lease, nor for yearly Rent: God
takes no hire of us for them, nor may we use them as we please, nor can we be
assured of the enjoyment of them for a day, Luke 12.19, 20. Luke 12.19, 20.


Given they are not, (properly and in the strictest acceptance) (albeit the
Scripture frequently speaks of them as things given us): for a gift, is a
passing over of the Use, and Property of a thing for ever; but these temporal
blessings are not ours for ever, Psalm. 49.11, 12.

Lent us then, and only Lent they must be, Psalm. 49.11, 12
and that freely (for all we have is of grace, and favor, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6.
Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6.
) and but for a time, reserving power to Himself, to take away again at
pleasure, Job. 1.22.

Thus David, Job. 1.22.
in that thanksgiving of his acknowledges them to be: what am I, and what is
my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for
all things come of thee, and of thine own, have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
1 Chronicles. 29.14 Luke 19.
And our blessied Savior in that Parable of the Pounds committed in trust, by
a certain Nobleman (that went into a far Country) unto his Servants confirms
this. So that of all outward blessings that we enjoy in this life we may say,
as he of the Axe-head (when it fell into the water, 2 King. 6.5.
) 2 King. 6.5. Alas Master, they are but borrowed; and Christen all our
worldly comforts, as Hannah did her Son, calling them Samuel, Lent of God, 1 Samuel 1.20. 1 Samuel 1.20.


Psalm. 12. Psalm. 12.4.
our tongues are our own, who shall control us? If thine own, how came thou
by them? The mark of the Creator and Maker of all is upon them. If they were
not lent thee, where stol'st thou them? If but lent thee by him that made them;
how say thou, that they are thine, and that thou art not indebted for them?

Luke 4.6.
or put these things into his hands? we read otherwise, Deuteronomy. 10.14. Psalm.
24.1.
Deuteronomy. 10.14. Psalm. 24.1.) And he seems to be very liberal, he will give them,
and expects nothing but thanks for them; when indeed, had Christ accepted of
that offer, it had been the dearest sold ware, that ever was any, (no less
then the souls of all mankind must have paid for it.) Or if he Lends, (as
sometimes he seems to do) tempting to pleasure or profit, for (like an
infernal Broaker) he must have the soul for pawn. And then he will give a
longer day, (think not of repentance yet, time enough; old age shall serve, but
he soon takes the forfeiture, and seizes on the soul, (unless the Chancery,
the Court of Mercy do relieve us.) But God (though he absolutely gives not, so
as that we may do what we list, with that we have, yet) he lends freely to us,
expecting no gain, nor profit from us: For wherein can we profit him, Psalm.
16.2.
our goodness extends not to him, it is for our own good and benefit that he
lends these things unto us. Indeed he expects that we should employ what he
betrusts us with (as appears by those Parables of the Pounds and Talents) but
the advantage is ours, Luke 19. Math. 25.
(albeit he be pleased to esteem the gain we get thereby, as advantageous to
himself. Those Servants that showed faithfulness in a little, they were
recompense with much: They were Servants, before, but now Rulers; they returned
pounds, but had as many Cities as they gained pounds, bestowed on them.

And it may further inform us of a different manner, of dispensing things,
Temporal and Spiritual unto us. God is said to give with both hands. In his
right hand, Pro. 3.16.
are such gifts as accompany salvation, (as justifying Faith, sound Hope, true
Repentance, new Obedience.) In his left hand are Riches and Honor, health, and
such like. What comes out of the right hand are absolutely given, and so given,
2 Pet. 1.4.
as that they shall not any more be required, or returned to the giver again,
(for such gifts are without Repentance.) But what are given with the left hand
shall be required, Luke 16.1.2.9. Luke 16.1, 2.9. 1 Samuel 15.35. and 16.14.
It is said that God repented that ever he made Saul a King, and took from him
his spirit, (that is the gift of strength, and courage, and such like gifts as
were fitting for Kingly Government) but we never read that he repented of
making man a true Believer, a new Creature, a true Penitent. How happy is a
true Christian in this, that albeit he has the least share in things lent, yet
he has the greatest share in things that are given: better is a Molehill of a
man's own, then a Mountain of another bodies,

Humility, and lowliness of spirit, 1 Cor. 4.7.
for what have thou, that thou have not received; and if all be received, (and
that by way of free loan) Wherefore boastest thou?

Thy food is from Gods Earth, thy Cloth from Beasts, thy silks from Worms,
thy riches from the Mines of the earth, thy Wine and Oil from Trees, all are
God's, and from him borrowed. Shall a Stage Player be proud of a rich raiment
which he borrowed of a Broaker, to Act his part in, or thou proud of thy Rings,
Jewels, goodly furniture all which must shortly be called for again; surely
thou have little cause: Had every bird its own feather, the proud Popingay
would be left stark naked.

Secondly; if all be but lent, then let us take heed least we abuse any
Temporal blessing, wherewith we are betrusted, (as Health, Wealth, Strength of
Body, Life, Liberty, or any member of our bodies, or power of our Souls,) but
use all to those ends, for which they were lent us, otherwise we shall have
little thanks or credit, when we come to restore them. Oh! that men would put
the Question to their souls, when they go about any sinful and wicked act. Did
God lend me my senses, my sight, my hearing, smelling, tasting, feeling, to be
thus employed? was this Eye given me to behold vanity? this Ear to entertain
such discourse, etc? How shall I be able ever to look God in the face, when I
shall be called to restore back these borrowed things? Surely this is one great
cause why men are so loath to dye and depart this world, for that they well
know, how they have polluted and abused that precious soul of their's, which
God lent them in Love.

Thirdly; if all be but lent, let us not be unwilling to part with any thing we
have, when God sends for it. All we have we should make use of, as we do a
borrowed book, or tool, not knowing how soon the owner may call for it; and
when it is called for, return it with many thanks, and not seek to keep it
against the owners mind. We count him unworthy of a kindness, who will deal
churlishly, and unkindly with a Friend (who lent him in love) either in denying
of the debt, or returning with discontent; and yet we deal thus with God:
sometimes we deny that ever we borrowed of him, and put him to prove the debt;
or if we do acknowledge the receipt, yet when he sends for what was lent, be it
Health, Wealth, Friend, Child, etc: what sighing is there, yea howling and
crying upon the parting? Oh Absolon my Son, Absolon my Son, 2 Samuel 18.33
as if God offered us great injury in sending for his own so soon, when we have
enjoined mercyes many years, and were not worthy to be trusted one hour with
any of them: few have learned to say Jobs Grace, Job. 1, 2.
It is God that has given, and God that has taken away; Blessed be his Name.

Fourthly, let us be s^irred up to Thankfulness for what we have: seeing to
lend, is a Friendly part, how infinitely are we engaged unto God? He lends us,
and loades us daily with innumerable blessings, he has been lending us from
day to day, ever since we came into the world, and is not hasty with us to call
in his own. The Borrower is a Servant to the Lender, (as you heard in the
former point.) Let us be so to God, let us come for him, go for him, run for
him, ride for him, and think nothing too much to do for him, Psalm. 116.12.
who does thus daily befrien us, Psalm. 116.12. So say thou to thine own sol.

We have done with the request, now we come to consider of the Motive brought
by this man in want, to move his Friend to condescend to his Request, and that
is taken from the facility of it: It was but three Loaves he desired to borrow.

Three Loaves.

As if he should say, my request is such, as you may easily grant; It is but
three Loaves of bread that I would borrow of you, I am not willing to be
overtroublesome or burden some unto you: Thence observe we, from the Letter.

Friends may not overburthen Friends with Suits. That would be requested, which
may easily be granted, and condiscended unto.

It was Esther's wisdom, Ester. 5.3.
when she had a promise of half the Kingdom, from Ahashuerosh the King, to
request no more then needs must, only the Life of her self, and people; to
which (likewse) she made way, by two other small requests, that the King would
be pleased to come unto the banquet that was prepared for him. The like
modesty, did Nehemiah show in his suite to Artaxerxes, Neh. 2.5. Neh. 2.5.
First he craves leave for his journey, and building, and then aid for both.

Thus David in his suite to Araunah for the threshing floor (to build there on
an Altar for the Lord,) he desired not to have it of free cost, 2 Samuel 24.22.24.
(although he might,) (for Araunah offered upon the first motion, more then was
asked, As Oxen for Sacrifice, Carts and Ploughs and other Utensils of Husbandry
for the wood) David desired to buy: Araunah would give all, but David would not
take too much of a free heart, Nay (says David) I will surely buy it of thee
at a price, -- so David bought the threshing floare, and the Oxen for fifty
shekels of Silver, 2 Samuel 24.22.24.

And such a suitor Bathsheba pretended to be in the behalf of Adoniah, to her
Son Solomon (albeit it proved otherwise,) 1 King. 2.20. I desire one small
petition of thee, 1 King. 2.20.
say me not Nay. Such a modest Suitor was old Barzillah; David remembered the
kindness of this his old Friend, which he showed him in the day of his
distress, and now by way of requital invites him to the Court, where he
should be royally entertained and preferrd, but Barzillah modestly puts by the
motion, he will be no Suitor for high place, or great preferment for himself,
(who was too old to be a Courtier) but for his Son, he requests the King, to
accept of him in his room, and to deal with him as seemed good in his eyes, 2 Samuel 19.32.-38. And amongst diverse other instances which might be brought, 2 Samuel 19.32.38. Phil. 2.
that of Paul to Philemon in the behalf of Onesimus would not be forgot. In
all likelihood Onesimus had wronged his Master in his estate by pilfering, and
purloyning from him, and then running away when he had done: Paul becomes a
Suitor to his Master, only that he would receive him again: he did not desire
that he would forgive him the debt, he undertakes for; he would see him paid:
albeit if the business were brought into the Court of Conscience, he might
have required that and more, in as much as Philemon owed him a far greater
debt then that was (even himself besides) this (says he) I do not say (albeit
he might have said it, verse 19.
Phil. 19.) he leaves that to Philemons most serious thoughts.

Court, who having obtained many a suite from Queen Elizabeth, and still
following her with Petitions, She asked him (at length) when he would leave
begging; he made her this Answer, when her Majesty would leave giving, and not
before. We read of one who begged of Archilaus, King of Macedon, (as he was at
Supper) a cup of Gold, the King (being well acquainted with his begging humor)
commanded it to be given to another, more worthy, saying, Thou art worthy to
crave, but not to receive; but This man is worthy to receive, though he does
not crave. Thus by overburthening Friends with daily Suits, we our selves may
become burdens, ere we be aware.

Propound not any thing then unto thy Friend, unless it carry with it a
probability of obteyning it, engage your Friends in honest causes only, make
such motions as may beseem a Christian to grant; if you desire their hand to
help. If thou have the face to desire any thing of thy Friend unjust, he must
have the heart to deny thee in what thou requirest of him: should my Friend
desire any thing of me which is at enmity with Reason, and holds no
correspondence with Religion; I must take leave to answer with Pericles, I
cannot satisfy you: Vsque ad aras.
the bounds and limits of the Altar will not permit it.



When Abraham made suite for Sodom, Genesis 18.23, 24, 25.
how modestly and religiously did he behave himself; Will thou destroy the
Righteous with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the
City, will thou not spare the place for fifties sake? That be far from thee to
do after this manner, that be far from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? He desires nothing of God, but what might stand with
righteousness, and truth, that God would not destroy the just, with the
unjust, and make the case of both a like. And how does he gain upon God by
degrees, he brings down Gods price from a greater, to a lesser number, from
fifty to ten, and there he stays (modestly) and goes no lower; which if he
had, who knows whether God would not have come lower yet, for the saving of
Sodom? It is very probable that he would, for the Text says He went not away,
till he had left communing with Abraham; that is, till Abraham had no more to
say unto him. Abraham had brought God down (at six several times) so low, that
he is loath to seem immodest in his suite, yet it may be thought that the holy
impudence which this Friend in our Parable had (of which in due place God
willing) might have done well in Abraham's case for Sodom.

But the Requests we put up to God, are far unlike to Abraham's; Such things we
ask as will not stand with the honor of God to give. Should God condescend to
our desires, he should deny himself, and contradict his Truth.

There are some, who would have God to forgive them their sins, to give them
Heaven, and save their souls; yet have no desire to leave sin, not lead a new
course of life; They swear, and swill, and plod on in wickedness, adding
drunkenness to thirst, dealing (herein) as Lewis the 11th. did, with his
leaden Crucifix, (which he used to wear in his hat,) which after he had
committed any wickedness, or villainy, he would kiss, and then to it again,
as f^esh as he did before; They run on into all excess of Riot, then cry God
mercy, yet go on still in their wicked ways, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
blessing themselves therein, as we have it, Deuteronomy. 29. Now God has passed his
word, that he will not spare such, but his wrath shall smoke against that man
and all the Curses that are written in the book of God shall fall upon him:
should God hear thee, and grant thee thy desire, where were his Truth; how
should his Justice be satisfied? Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the world do right; If so, woe be to thee, that
live and dyest impenitently.

So in craving Temporal things at the hands of God, how immodest, and
unreasonable are many in their Suits; James 4.2, 3.
You lust and have not (says St. James*) ye kill and desire to have, and
cannot obtain, etc: Hos. 7.14.
you ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you may spend upon your
lusts, so Hos. 7.14. Now is it not unreasonable, that you should beg blessings
of God, that you may abuse them to his dishonor.

Clemens Alexandrinus, observes of the Pythagoreans, Strom. lib. 4.
that they cried loud in their Prayers, not because they thought that their
Gods did not hear them, but because they would have the world to hear that they
prayed for nothing, but things justifiable. The Requests that many put up to
Heaven, are such, that they would (or at least have cause to) blush, if they
should be overheard by any man, to move for things, so vile, and shameful, of
the God of Heaven: If thou would speed with God, desire nothing at his
hands, but what may stand with his Glory, so thou may be sure to be heard
(as Austin told that Widow, who desired him to direct her how to pray, so as
she might be sure to speed.) But of this we shall hear in the Applicatory part
of this Parable more fully.

More particularly; Consider we, first the Quality of the thing desired, and
that was Bread; secondly the quantity, three Loaves. [Lend me three Loaves.]

Bread, as you heard before, is a comprehensive word, all other necessaries are
comprised under it, Math. 6.11. Math. 6.11.
But in this place it is not to be taken in so large a sense, but more properly
and strictly, for that food which is made of Corn; either Wheat, (as 1 King.
5.11.) or Barley, 1 King. 5.11. Judge. 7.13. 2 King. 4.22. Horat. l. 1. Epist.
10.
whereof bread was most usually made, as Judge. 7.13. 2 King. 4.42.) so bread is
used for homely provision, and opposed to things delicious, and pleasing. This
was that he desired of his Friend, to entertain his other Friend withal.
Intimating thus much unto us, that,

Bread is good fare at a Friends board. Lit. Doct.


In former times it was esteemed so: Friends entertained Friends with
Barley-bread, and homely fare. The best cheer that Elisha had for a hundred
Guests (Sons of the Prophets) was twenty Loaves of Barley, and full ears of
Corn, 2 King. 4.42, 43, 44.
in the husk. A present that was brought to him before, by a man from
Baalshalisha, 2 King. 4.42. verse 38.
Indeed he had commanded that the great pot should be set on before that
present came; but it was but homely Pottage that was made, Pottage made of
Coleworts without either Meat, or Oat-meale, or skillful Cook (for they put
in Wild-goards instead of better herbs) so that the Pottage could not be eaten,
before he had thickened it and sweetened it with Meal, as appears in the story.

Such homely provision it was, that David carried his Brethren, (being sent
unto them from his Father) an Epha of parched Corn, 1 Samuel 17.17.
and ten Loaves, 1 Samuel 17.17. And little better was the fare that his Friends
brought to entertain him and his Servants with, after that he was anointed
King over Israel: they brought Wheat, and Barley, and Flower, parched Corn,
Beans, and Lentiles, and parched Pulse (with some other provision) for David
and the people to eat, 2 Samuel 17.28, 29.
2 Samuel 17.28, 29. Fare homely enough for so great a Personage. Boaz a mighty
man of Wealth, (and as good as great) and yet the Harvest provision which he
made for his Reapers, Ruth. 2.14.
was parched Corn, Ruth. 2.14. Nor was the food that Abraham entertained
Angels with, (though unawares) very costly, or dainty; Bread and Butter, Milk
and veale he sets before them. And Sarah bakes Cakes upon the hearth, Genesis
18.5, 7.8.
to welcome them withal. Genesis 18.5, 6.8. And our blessed Savior feasted five
thousand of his Auditors, with Barley-Bread, Mark. 6.41.
and small Fishes, Mark. 6.41. you see by this how moderate they were in former
times, in their enterteynments, with what homely fare they used to enterteyne
their Friends.

Hugo Cardinalis, tells us that the Devil had two daughters, Covetousness and
Luxury; the former he married to the Jews, the other to the Gentiles: but it
is thought that we (upon whom the ends of the world are come,) have taken them
both from their Husbands, and use them as our own: Nor is any Nation under
Heaven, more guilty herein, then ours. Pride, is not more proper to Spain,
Lust to Italy, nor drunkenness to Germany, then Epicurisme is to England: A
sin so common and ordinary, so natural and genuine unto our Country, as that
it has purchased to us (amongst other Nations) the name of sweet toothed
Englishmen.

Gluttony amongst the Romans was then at the hight, when junkets of the Land
could be fed upon at the Sea, and the Sea send her varieties to the Land for a
Requital, Lamprid. in vita, Heliog.
(so Heliogabalus being in the mid-land Country, and far from Sea, would
always eat fish, and being near the Sea Coast, would never eat fish, but
flesh) when they invented new dishes, and mixed variety of meats to please the
palate. Sucton.
(So Vitellius caused to be mingled together, the Livers of diverse fishes, the
brains of diverse Pheasants, and Peacocks, thousand of Creatures must be killed
only for their tongues, and giblets, and but one dish of meat made of them
all, and served in one platter (which for its unmeasurable greatness, he
called Minerva her shield.) And yet I have not read, that ever they were at
such cost in laying of Napkins, or dressing a dish of Eggs, as has been
credibly reported some of our English Gallants have been at. Certain it is,
that Earth, and Air, Land, and Sea, must concentour at some men's tables, in
enterteyning their guests; all Markets must be laid out for dainties, and our
tables spread as it were with St. Peter's sheet (which he saw in a vision)
representing the species of all sorts of Creatures, clean, and unclean; Acts
10.
And our stomachs made like Noah's Arc, were it not that those Creatures eaten,
are not preserved, but perish (with a deluge of drink which follows after.) As
for our medlies, or mixtures of meat, they are such, that if some of our
thirsty Ancestors were alive to see them, they would wonder what monsters were
crept into our platters, and desire some Interpreter to tell them the name, and
use of them.

I would I knew, what Arguments to bring, praevalent enough, to reform this
fault amongst us: I might bring you many presidents of Temperance in Diet, both
Christian, and Pagan (if I had hopes to prevail with you by examples.) Hieroms
Temperance was so great, that he thought it Luxury if he had eaten any thing,
that was boiled; Augustine in his Confessions, acknowledges, that however
sometimes surfeiting crept upon him unawares, and that he had therein sometimes
exceeded the bounds of Necessity; yet he warred daily against his lusts: and
for unnecessary refections, he had clean cut them off, and did shun the
company of gluttonous men, and was content with his own portion, exhorting his
brethren most earnestly, and lovingly, to do the like. Luther was a small
meat-man, and a great faster; Melancthon observes of him, that for many days
together, he contented himself with a little piece of Bread, and a Herring.
Queen Elizabeth of England did seldom eat, but of one sort of meat, and
always rose from table with an Appetite; (King Edward the sixth was wont to
call her his sweet Sister Temperance.) Nay, very Heathens, and Pagans, have
exceeded many professed Christians herein. One asked Cyrus (marching with his
Army) what he would have provided for his supper; he answered, Bread; and I
hope (said he) we shall find a Fountain that will serve us for drink. Augustus
was never curious in his diet, but was content with ordinary and common viands,
and albeit, he was a liberal housekeeper, yet (says Suetonius;) he had
ordinarily but three dishes served to his table, and when he had most, but six:
when he was alone, he was contented with household bred, small fishes, Curds,
and green Figgs; And to restrain the great Riot that was wont to be amongst the
Romans at their Feasts, it was forbidden by the Law of C. Fannius (which was
long in force) to have any foul, set on the Table except one Hen, and she
should not be franked, or crammed: (A practice, says Pliny, that the
Inhabitants of Delos first began,) yet they found a starting hole, and waved
the Law, by cramming Capons, which the Law spoke not of. (But this cramming of
fowls is no news to us.) And the Turks at this day when they feast most
sumptuously, their fare is but Ryce and Mutton. Blunts voyage into Levant.
So Ferdinands Ambassadors, who had brought a great present to the great Turk
Solomon, were feasted by his Bassaes, and that so plainly, and sparingly
dressed (says the Historian) as if they had thereby noted our gourmandise, and
excess. Much might be said of the Temperance of former times, and other
Nations to the shame of ours, (if it might any whit prevail with us.) But
stronger motives we shall bring you to dissuade from this vice then this from
example, yet I shall but name them.

First; Luke 15.13. Phil. 3.19.
we deal injuriously with God, in abusing of his blessings, and wasting them
in vain, Luke 15.13. to make our Belly our God, is the worst Idolatry of any.

Secondly; It hinders Charity, and hardens the heart, so that the poor shall
not be regarded, Luke 1, 6. Amos, Luke 16.19.21. Amos 6.6.
6.6.

Thirdly, it hurts the body, and breeds diseases: who more unhealthfull then
finest feeders: many graves there are of lust in our Country, Numb. 11.34.
the Kitchen kills more then the Cannon.

Fourthly; It wastes the estate, and brings unto poverty, Pro. 23.20, 21. such
begin with Habeo, Pro. 23.20, 21
and end with Debeo.

Fifthly; It stirrs up Lust, and so endangers the soul; Ezekiel. 16.49.
and it was one of the sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. But when we have said all
we can, we speak to the Belly, that has no ears, and what hope have we to be
heard.

Oh that men were more dilligent and laborious in their Callings, and then
plain food would relish, (as a mess of Potrage did with Esau, when he came
weary from hunting): Genesis 25.30.
Such a delicate Cook is Hunger, that it can season, and make savoury, that
which fulness makes loathsome: many Servants can witness this, who when they
have lived at their own hand, then that meat has relished well with them,
which at a Masters table would not down, (unless it were cast under the Table
to the Dogs.)

Advice, in reference to your Invitations; you that invite your Neighbors, or
entertain your Friends (as coming unto you guest-wise) say not I am sorry, I
have nothing that is good to set before you: When Plato invited Timothy the
Athenian Duke, to supper, he entertained him with a Root, and a Sallet; but
with a great deal of Philosophical discourse: Timothy the day after gave him
many thanks, saying that who so supped at his Table, should be much better for
it many days after. Brown Bread with the Gospel (said Greenham) is good
cheer; what thou want in outward provision, make up with welcome, and
Christian discourse. A plentiful Table to feed the body, without profitable
discourse to feed the mind, is little better then a Manger. Nor let any that
come to the Table of a Friend, judge of their entertaynment, by their full
Cups, or variety of dishes; Thinking there can be no true welcome where there
is not excess; A moderate Table, where there is an open heart of courtesy, is
to be preferred before a sumptuous feast, (exceeding in abunbance,) where love
is wanting. Better is a dinner of green herbs (says Solomon) where Love is,
Prove. 15.17.
then a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. If Love be the enterteyner, it
matters not what the provision be; let it be but a Sallet of herbs, yet coming
out of Loves Garden, they will be sweet, and well relished, and worthy of
acceptance, Jerm. in loc.
(for that there is no poison in them, nor Serpent that lies under them.) But
on the otherside, let a fatted Ox be set before a man (never so many delicate
and costly dishes) with hatred and ill will, such a feast cannot be savoury. A
Feast is made for laughter, Eccles. 10.19. And yet all feasts are not so,
Eccles. 10.19. 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
some are made for slaughter. Absolon made a feasts for him, he meant to kill.
And some cunning Usurer makes a feast for that Prodigal heir, he means to
undo: They that dress most meat, are not ever the friendlyest men. Christ
enterteynes his Disciples, with Barley Loaves, and a few small sprats, 1 Samuel
25.11.
or some such like fish; when Nabal kills both Beeves, and Muttons, for his
Sheep-shearers. If then thou be called to the Table of thy Friend, be not
discontented, although there be not many messes, nor variety of dishes, to
please thy palate; If it be cheer that thou come for, thou come not with
the affection of a Friend, but of a Glutton; If thou be a Friend indeed,
homely fare will be taken in good part; if thou art not a Friend, Bread is too
good for such a one. And thus much of the Quality of the thing he desire to
have lent unto him, wherewith to enterteyne his Friend [Bread.] Now of the
Quantity, how much he would borrow of him [Three Loaves.]



Mald. in loc.
and another in common; (if in case there should be any want,) for such was the
custom (say some,) besides the bread that every one had unto himself
peculiarly, there was some over and above at Table (A custom not unlike to
that which is amongst us, at some men's Tables.) And this gives occasion to note
thus much unto you;

In the Enterteynment of Friends, it is lawful to exceed the bounds of
ordinary provision. We may have at table somewhat more then is usual, and be
more liberal, at such times then others.

God allowed his Servants to meet together, thrice every year and then to
feast together, for the space of seven days, and to lay out their monyes for
Oxen, Sheep Wine, Strong drink, Deuteronomy. 14.26. and 16.15.
or for whatsoever else, their hearts desired, Deuteronomy. 14.26. and 16.15. The
bounty of God reaches not only to our Life, but to our Contentment; nor does
he affoard us only the bread of sufficiency, but of Pleasure, that we may more
then live even live happy; We read of a marriage that was at Cana in Galilee
and it seems probable, that it was of some of Christ's kindred, Joh. 2.1.-11.
(for that blessed Mary, the Lords Mother, was there not as a guest, but as a
Helper, and orderer of business, directing the waiters what to do.) Nor were
they very rich, that were married, yet they had more then ordinary provision,
for they made a feast: And at this feast, there was a defect of Wine, (not of
water, there was water enough to quench thirst, yet) there was not Wine enough
to cheer the spirits. The Virgin is troubled for this lack of superfluity,
Christ miraculously makes a supply of that want, by turning six potts full of
water (containing two or three firkins a piece) into Wine. Had he turned but
one of those firkins of water into Wine, it had been a sufficient proof of his
power, and perhaps enough for the present necessity, (for that all had well
drank before) yet he makes wine enough to serve above a hundred (had they been
but new set down.) It was a Feast, and that quantity which at another time had
been superfluous, was now but necessary. Thus Matthew the Publican, Luke 5.29.
Luke 19.7. Luke 10.38.
when he enterteyned Christ, he made more then ordinary provision for his
entertainment: the like did Zacheus, and Martha, (who was not therefore blamed
for making provision more then ordinary, but for that she exceeded the bounds
of moderation and cumbred her self about much serving.)

Pertinax one of the Roman Emperors, that he was so miserable in his
entertainments, that he would have his guests served with a plant of Lettice,
di ided into two parts, and to appoint nine pound weight of flesh, unto three
messes; and if any thing were left cold at any time, he would cause it to be
set up to the next day; This might well beseem a poor man, but such
niggardliness at the table of a Person of such honor, was too far beneath
him: As Excess is to be avoided, so too much pinching and sparingnesse; In
Love will be no lack.

wisely frugall in your preparations, as well as cheerful in your
enterteinments: Too much, is a vanity; Enough is a Feast, Break not out into
superfluity and excess; your own calling, and abilities, are as well to be
respected, as the call of Nature. It is taxed in Nabal, that being a Country
Farmer, he would make a Feast like a King. And Tully taxes some that would be
feeding on Salmon, 1 Samuel 25.
when they could scarce purchase a herring. It is a shame that any one should
cause his Friend to turn Canibal, and invite him to devour his substance, Si in
uno convivio tantum capis, quantum centum diebus sufficere potest, jam non
panem quotidianum, sed mullorum dierum panem manducas. Aug. Sermon. in monte.
Pro. 23.1, 2. Jerm. in loc.
eat him out of house and home, and pursse up at once, many days earnings in
his Belly.

A great fault in the poorer sort, who will (upon some occasions) so abound
with unnecessary provision, that Wife and Children shall suffer for it a
twelvemonth after, and in one day wast the bread of many days.

Secondly; Watch over your Affections, set them not on meats and drinks: Every
one of Eves Sons, has her sweet tooth in their heads; but give not thy self
to please thy appetite, Pro. 23.1, 2. put thy knife unto thy throat (that is,
to the throat of thy greediness, put the knife of mortification) when the
knife of our care is thus used, then we may safely use the knife for the food,
that is before us: Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the
desire, Eccles. 6.9.
Eccles. 6.9. in dainty delicates and variety of meat, the sight of the eyes
is better then the wandering of the Appetite, and it is better to please our
selyes with looking on, then to please our Appetites with feeding on them.

Thirdly; Watch over thy practice, corrupt not thy self in the use of Gods
plenty, abuse not his blessings to surfeiting and drunkenness. Those
Love Feasts mentioned in the Scripture, Mensa (says Varro) quasi mesa, a
mediatrix betwixt men.
were first intended for the preservation and increase of Love but the first
institution did languish into corruption, and they became luxurious; for some
were drunken, and unchatitable, and some were hungry, 1 Cor. 11.21.) Remember
Plety, be thankful to God, for that plenty he allows, 1 Cor. 11.21.
and season your meats with savoury discourse. And Remember Charity, think of
those who are poor and needy, Neh. 8.10. Luke. 14.13. Neh. 8.10. Luke 14.13.
And so we have done with the Collections which the letter affords us: now come
we to the spiritual sense and Application.

[Lend me three Loaves.]

Three is a mystical number, as well as Seven, In tribus autem panibus etiam
illud significatur unius esse substantiae Trinitatem, Aug. Quaest. Evang. l. 2.
cap. 21. Luther in Genesis 18. Quod si alia Trinitatis probatio non ess^t quam hae
tres species, ego sane eamnon crederem, etc.
and of special use in Scripture, (in St. Austins judgment) the mystery of
all mysteryes, even the mystery of the blessed Trinity is hereby taught.

But as Luther, in discussing the question, whether the Trinity of Persons
might not be proved from, Genesis 18. where three men are said to appear to
Abraham, concludes, that if there were no other proof of the Trinity, but
that; he should not believe the Trinity; so may we say concerning that mystery,
as grounded upon this Text.

But withal he tells us, that we must not proceed alike in disputation with
Adversaries, that deny the Truth, and in teaching and exhorting a Religious
Auditory, that do already believe the Truth. There are places of Scripture for
direct proofs, and there are places to exercise our meditations, and devotions,
in things for which we need not any new proof. When we dispute against the
enemies of the Church, sollid, and firm arguments must be brought, (otherwise
they laugh at us, Alia ratio disputandi contra adversarios. etc.
and are rather confirmed in, then reclaimed from their errors) but in dealing
with those who are Friends unto the Truth, we are content to use similitudinary
and comparative Reasons to exercise devotion (as in military exercise, we
content our selves with a foil, and make not use of a sharp sword.) He
instanceth in St. Paul, who after he had proved the Doctrine of Faith
Dialectically and Logically to confute Adversaries, Gal. 4.
(and used a sharp sword to that purpose,) he adds an Allegory, (as a foil,)
to make that which was true in it self, more evident, and more acceptable.

Nobis autem jucunda sunt Trinitatis vestigia in creaturis ibid.
And indeed it is a lovely and religious thing (says a great Scholar, and
learned writer of our times, agreeing therein with Luther) to find out vestigia
Trinitatis, impressions of the Trinity in as many things as we can. It is the
confession of a Trinity, which distinguishes us from Turks and Jews, and
therefore the beams of it would be discerned in as many things as we may, for
the refreshing and cherishing of that Faith we profess in it. And the
knowledge and Faith we have of it, would be awakened, and quickened by all good
means that are afforded us, either from the Scripture, or from the Creatures,
and so that beam of the Trinity which this Text affords us, may be made use
of, and higher I dare not carry it, upon this ground.

Qui autem sunt isti tres panes nisi mysterii caelestis alimentum Aug. de verb.
Dom. Scr. 29.
And yet, although that great mystery of the Trinity cannot safely be concluded
from the three Loaves mentioned in my Text; other heavenly mysteries (happily)
may, as the nourishment of our souls, by the graces of Gods Spirit, which our
Savior seems to intimate, verse 13. Others, (more particularly) understand
thereby the bread, fish, and egg, afterward mentioned by our Savior. Others,
Faith, Hope, and Charity. Some understand thereby Grace working, co-working,
consummating, but herein we may be overcurious. It is probable that by these
three Loavs may be shadowed out, the three sorts of Bread that the Scripture
mentions, Doctrinall, Ioh. 6.26. Sacramental, 1 Cor. 11.28. and Eternal, John
6.48.50. However we may infer from hence that,

The souls nourishment is to be sought after. Read Isay. 55.1, 2. John 6.27. 1
Pet. 2.2. This the Apostle prays for so often in the behalf of others, Isay.
55.1, 2. John 6.27. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Timothy 1, 2.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace. And this food say some of the Ancients, Christ
directs us to pray for, in that petition, Math. 6.11. taking bread there,
Math. 6.11.
(in a spiritual and mystical sense) for that bread of life, which is the
word of God, wherewith Christ' s flock must be fed, John 6.26, 27.
John 6.26, 27. or Christ himself, who is that Bread which came down from
Heaven, as he tells the Jews, verse 33.35.48.
John 6.33.35.48. which bread we eat in the Sacrament, by a true and living
Faith. These sorts of bread may be included, albeit not principally intended.

soul has its decays, as well as the Body, and is subject to hunger, and
thirst, as well as the body, and stands in as much need of daily repair, as
the body does, and her leanness, and faintings, wants and pinings, which she
is subject unto, are no less dangerous then those of the body: Therefore it is
necessary to have a special regard of the souls nourishment, as well as of the
Bodye's.

Spiritual, what then can bread do for the nourishment of that?

Assimilation: Bodies feed not on spiritual things, nor Spirits on Corporal,
but bodies are sustained by things bodily, and spirits by things spiritual;
now that Bread that must be craved for the soul, is Bread from Heaven,
spiritual food. Christ is Bread, John 6.35.
John 6.35. he is the souls nourishment, the graces of his spirit, are Bread,
Isay. 55.2. The Ordinances of God are Bread, Isay. 55.2. Pro. 9.5. Job. 23.12.
Pro. 13.10.
Come eat of the Bread, and drink of the Wine that I have mixed, Pro. 9.5. so
Job. 23.12. Psalm. 19.10. This the Godly have found their food, and sweeter then
any earthly food could be.

2 Samuel 19.35.
as Barzillai his bodily food was to him, it has no taste, nor relish: Has
thy Servant any taste in that he eats? (said he to David). So it may be said
of Gods Ordinances; we relish them not. Nay some will not eat, they will not
taste at all, but famish their souls wilfully to death. Had the souls of
diverse of us present, but a grate to look through, and did we behold them with
a spiritual eye, would not their hollow eyes, swarthy skin, lank entralls, dry
bones astonish us? would not that lamentable cry which the soul makes for bread
(like a Prisoner out of a grate, Bread for Christ his sake, Bread) move you to
have compassion on it? Not one bit of bread do thou put into the mouth of
this thy soul, from one Sabbath to another, and when thou give it any, one
meal thou think enough for it (and that is but a grudged one too); so much
you give it, and no more, than may help it to a lingering death. Though thou
be not sensible of other wants, yet pity the starved condition of thine own
poor soul.

2 King. 7.3.
Why sit we here, said the Lepers (that sat in the gate of Samaria) until we
dye? i.e. be starved for want of food; so say I in this case, why sit you still
and suffer your souls to perish? Time was when we had sharp Appetites, after
Gods ordinances, we would ride, we would run, no let should hin^er us from Gods
house, (if God did not let us) and then as those we read of, 1 Samuel 14.32.
1 Samuel 14.32. we would fly upon the spoil, and not stand upon ceremonies, no
matter for a convenient seat, the ground should serve for a need, we valued not
curious cookery so the food were good, and wholesome; But in these days we may
say as the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.8.
now ye are full, now ye are rich, etc: 1 Cor. 4.8. (all was but an Ironicall
reprehension of them, for that high conceit which they had of their own parts)
(as if they had no need of the Apostles help.) Such a conceit have many of us,
of our selves. You know as much as the Minister can teach you, and need not to
be taught your duties, and are you not then full? And for Faith and Repentance
that is not to be learned now; ye have enough of it, and are you not then Rich?
You can find no leisure to frequent Gods Markets, and apply your selves to the
means for supplying your wants, you have as good Sermons at home, and can
profit as much by a Cobbler, as at Church by a Minister; do you not then, as
Kings reign without us? I would to God (says the Apostle) that you did reign
that we might reign with you: But woe be to you that are full (says our
Savior) for you shall hunger, Luke. 6.25.
Luke 6.25. It is an unhappy thing to be full, and fat, and find no spitituall
appetite after Grace, in the use of the means. I would that words might
prevail, or that I had such words to use as might prevail with you to seek
after this spiritual food. To sharpen your Appetites; I shall desire you to
consider.

First, what our Savior speaks of this food; It will endure for ever, John
6.27. other food lasts not, John 6.27.
the taste of yesterdayes bread is gone; but this lasts: twenty years after, a
man may find the taste of a good Sermon: Philoxonus (the glutton) wished, that
he had a Neck as long as a Crane's, so that he might be long in tasting the
sweetness of his meat; It does so here; the sweetness continues, and the
strength of it for ever.

Secondly; this Bread satisfies, Isay. 55.2.
Isay. 55.2. other Bread does not, outward things cannot content the soul, they
are but those husks that the Prodigal fed on: can you satisfy a man with
painted cheer? or a Child with a painted bib? it must be substantial food
that gives the soul content. None but Christ, none but Christ, said that Martyr
Lambert.

Thirdly, it is the most pleasant and delicious bread of any. It is Manna, and
has the taste of every good thing (as was said that Manna had.) This bread is
health to the sick, strength to the weak, comfort to the distressed, liberty to
the captive: No food like this. To these Considerations add Practice.

First, Purge away the fowlnesse of your Stomach, 1 Pet. 2.2.
as we are required, 1 Pet. 2.2. lay aside envy, guile, malice, etc: and then
we shall desire that deceitlesse milk of the word. An Infant (you know) flies
to the breast withal his strength, nothing will content but that, so would it
be here; were our hearts purged from these vices, as they ought to be.

Secondly, work hard, follow the Plough; the smell of the earth procures an
appetite, Plow up your fallow grounds daily, Jer. 4.3. Hos. 10.12.
Ier. 4.3. Hos. 10.12. And then your stomachs will come to you.

Thirdly, use Exercise; As walking, especially with God, Psalm. 116.9. and
26.11. and 101.2. Psalm. 18.29. Psalm. 119.32, 1 Cor. 9.32. Cant. 2.15.
Psalm. 116.9. and 26.11. Psalm. 101.2. Leaping, Cant. 2. 8. David leaped over a
wall, Psalm. 18.29. so do you over temptations and the wall of security;
Running, David used that recreation likewise, Psalm. 119.32. so 1 Cor. 9.32.
Hunting, Cant. 2.15. Magistrates, Minsters, and others to assist, let these be
your Exercises.

Fourthly, sharp sauce; In hot Countries they used to steep their bread in
Vinegar, Ruth. 2.14.
to help Appetite as Ruth. 2.14. so think on thy misspent time, the fearful
account thou must make, suffer afflictions patiently, Heb. 12.3, 4, 5.
and bear them profitably, Heb. 12.3, 4, 5. Use these means, and I doubt not,
but you will have a better stomach to the food of your souls then formerly. To
conclude, when Christ raised up Jairus his daughter, he commanded that they
should give her meat; Luke 8.55.
so when God rayseth up the soul of any from death to life? it is his will that
they should give it Bread of Instruction, comfort, and resort to the Word, the
Saments. And if then thy soul be partaker of this happiness, to be quickened
and raised up, take some pity on it, feed that soul which thou have so long
starved, cloth that soul which thou have stripped, and left naked; warm and
thaw that soul, which hitherto has been almost frozen to death with a cold
devotion, and when thou providest bread for thy Family, when for Children, call
for it; when for Servants, ask for it; forget not that Child, that Servant,
that principal part of thy self, which is thy soul, If thou starvest it for
want of Bread, thou will be indicted, and arraigned one day for a Murderer, and
for a Soul-Murtherer, yea thy own Soul-Murtherer, in denying it that bread
which God has allowed for the Life and subsistence of it.

Yet there is somewhat else which our Savior seems to intimate unto us hence,
(says Chemnitius,) viz. that,

The desires of a Christian ought to be kept within their limits, and not
suffered to exceed the bounds of moderation. Three Loaves were sufficient, and
he desires no more.

Thus Jacob confined his desires, to bread to eat, and raiment to put on. If
God (says he) will be with me in this way that I go, and will give me bread
to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers house in
peace, then shall the Lord be my God, etc: Genesis 28.20, 21, 22.
Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. He does not say, if God will give me riches, or great
revenewes, but food and raiment. And St. Paul having learned the same lesson,
calls upon us to take it forth, 1 Timothy 6.8. 1 Timothy 6.8.


Agur in that excellent prayer of his, Pro. 30.7, 8.
Pro. 30.7, 8. Two things have I required of thee; he commenceth not a
multiplicity of suites, he beggeth not a monopoly of favors; Duo rogavi, two
things have I required, that is, these two which are of special concernment,
and most expedient for me, and best sorting and suiting with my necessities. So
our blessed Savior in that blessed and absolute plat-forme of prayer, Luke
11.2.
which he (before my Text) had prescribed to his disciples, limits all our
desires for things earthly, and heavenly, within the bounds and limits of six
distinct petitions; the three first concern God, the other three Man, and that
either in his life natural, or spiritual. In desiring things temporal, we
are limited to daily bread. Bread for quality (not biscuit, no gorgious
apparel, stately houses, great livings, etc.) And for quantity, it must be
daily; so much as is sufficient for the day, (not for a week, month, nor year;
it must be ordinary, and convenient maintenance.) For spiritual blessings,
there are larger bounds; Two petitions for one, and both larger then the other,
yet they have also their limits, they are not boundless; No further do we
desire God to forgive us, then we forgive others; nor can we expect to be
delivered from evil further, then we avoid Temptations that lead thereunto.

Seneca speaks; Natural desires are finite, Senec. epist. 16.39. de benef. l.
2. c. 27.
and content with a little, but when corrupted, they know no limits (till grace
order them.) All natural thirst is quenched with a draught or two, but that
which is unnatural and aguish, is not satisfied with a whole vessel of drink:
And needs must that be a corrupt desire which proceeds not from our want, but
from our vice.

Horse leach (says Agur) has two daughters which still cryout, Give, give,
and never have enough. Pro. 30.15.
The Horse-Leach of the soul, is the greedy desire of man, her two daughters,
are Covetousness, Dr. Jermin. in loc.
and Prodigality (says a learned and judicious Expesitor upon the place):
these two sisters, be of a contrary disposition, yet they both cry out give,
give, the one to hoard up, the other to spend wastfully, they cry give, they
set out the throat, and are earnest in their ways, and insatiable in their
desires.

And there are four other things, (that the same wiseman mentions in the same
Chapter) which cry nunquam satis, they never have enough. Pro. 30.16.
The Grave, the barren Womb, the Earth (that is not filled with water) and the
Fire (that burns all combustible matter): The two forementioned vices of
Covetousness, and Prod gality are meant by the Grave and the Earth: And Lust
and Ambition are to be understood by the barren Womb, and by Fire. Enough is a
language that none of these can speak: many such Graves and barren Wombs there
are, much of such Earth and Fire in all places; men who are infinitely addicted
to worldliness, and wickedness, 2 King. 9.20.
driving Iehu's pace, as if they were madd; But their desires after goodness
is the pace of a snayle. Sanctified affections are too feeble in us, drawing
after them, the clogg of the flesh which lusts the contrary way; We would all
be Gods: Genesis 43.34.
Benjamins in respect of things of this Life, and have our messes double to our
Neighbors; and our change of raiment, exceed our bretherens: we think we are
not well dealt withal, unless it be so, nor can we be content to dwell with
virtue in a mean estate; If God will give me food and raiment said Jacob, then
God shall be my God. If God will give me so much riches, wealth, or promote me
to such a high place, or office, fill full my cup, so that it does run over,
spread my table in the sight of mine enemies, why what then? speak out, what
then, thou worldling? why, then my gold, shall be my God, my belly my God, my
meat, and drink offering should be my morning, and evening sacrifice. But
know that Hell does enlarge it self for those, whose desires are enlarged as
Hell it self, that they may spend upon their lusts.

God that must give the blessing: give me leave then to do the one, and leave
we the success to him.

There are two bounds which the Holy Ghost has made to hem, and keep in, the
unruly desires of men, (which are as it were the pale, or Park to keep these
unruly Bucks within their compass.) They concern God, or our selves.

In respect of God, the Rule of Limitation is, his blessed will, Math. 26.39.
Christ desired no otherwise, Math. 26.39.
that the cup should pass from him, but as it might stand with Gods good will,
and pleasure. Nor is it that part of Gods will which we call secret that must
be the Rule, but that part of his will which is Revealed to us. A man may
desire that which stands with the secret will of God, and yet highly offend;
and on the other side he may desire that which is against Gods secret will, and
yet not offend him in so doing, (St. Austin instanceth in a Child's praying for
his sick Parent: the Father lies upon the bed of sickness, August Euchir. c.
101.
it is Gods will that the Father should dye of that Sickness, but that is
secret to the Child; should the Child pray that his Father should live and
recover, God is well pleased with the filial affection of the Child: should he
pray that he might not recover that Sickness, God would be highly offended
with that Child for want of Duty,) submission we owe to the will of Gods
purpose, and Counsel, and conformity to the will of his Command and precept.
Nothing is to be desired of us that stands not with the revealed will of God
unto us.

Sit oration quae pro temporalibus est circa solas necessitates, restricta, Bern.
The Rule of limitation in respect of us, is our Necessities. And our
Necessities are to be considered according to our twofold condition, or estate,
Corporal or Spiritual, either of soul or body: In both which respects, things
may be said to be necessary, Absolutely or Respectively, Absolutely necessity
is that without which the Life, either of soul or body, cannot be sustained:
Respective necessity is that, without which neither the one, nor the other can
be comfortably mainteyned: The former respects our Being, the latter our
comfortable and Well-being.

Now let us show how to apply these Rules for the limiting of our desires, both
in things Corporal and Spiritual.

First, for worldly things. No more are to be desired by us of them, then God
has required us to seek, and promised to give. Things necessary (which
concerns our Persons, and tends to the preservation of Nature and maintenance
of our Bodies in health, strength, and chearfullnesse, or which concerns our
Places and conditions, (without which our civil conditions cannot be
comfortably mainteyned, neither in respect of our selves, nor others depending
on us,) may be desired and prayed for, but not things superfluous (for then
they go beyond the bounds that God has set them, 1 Timothy 6.8.
) 1 Timothy 6.8. And exceed the measure of those ends, for which they were
ordained, (which are to glorify God, mainteyne our selves, and relieve others)
and so cannot be lawful. This abundance, or superfluity, God forbids even
Kings themselves, Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17.
Deuteronomy. 17, 16.17. Yet who have greater uses, and fairer pretenses for such
things, then Princes? If Kings may not multiply above that which is enough, for
the estate of a King; what prerogative have any other to do it? It is true,
That is needful, and may be desired by a man of one calling and condition,
that may not by another, that is of a diverse condition, and calling, because
respective and conditional necessities follow the calling and condition of
men. A King has need of greater means to mainteyne his estate then any
subject: and amongst subjects, one may have more need then another, according
to their different callings (as there are warm days in Winter, and cold in
Summer, respecting the season of the year; so there may be poor Lords, and
rich Cobblers, in respect of outward estates) yea amongst men of the same Rank,
and place, that may be desired as necessary for one, which may be superfluous
for another. Timotheus his complexion and state of body, required that
nessessarily, 1 Timothy 5.23.
that another Minister's condition did not, 1 Timothy 5.23. Times, places, and
conditions of men do much alter the case. Nor are we to judge what is needful
and requisite for our Persons, or callings by our own covetous conceits, (for
they have no limits) but what the godly of our rank and place, who are wise and
frugall, declare by their practice to be needful. These things may be desired
of us, and yet not absolutely but so far as God has promised and engaged
himself unto us in things of this nature, that is so far as they make for his
glory, and our good.

Secondly, as our desires respect things spiritual, so we are to make use of
the former rules of Limitation, both in the removing of evil, and obteyning of
good.

First in desiring to have evil removed, our desires are to be ordered aright;
And here we must distinguish of evil, which is of two sorts, first of Sin,
second of Punishment; Evil that we do, and evil that we suffer. For the Evil
of sin, here our desires are not to be limited, for as much as all Sin is a
breach of Gods law; and however Sin will be committed by us in this Life, yet
God has forbidden all, as well as any, and our desires should reach farther
then our abilities; we should desire to be freed from every wicked way, and
sinful work, 2 Timothy 4.18. Psalm. 119.128. and 66.18. 1 Pet. 2.1. 1 These. 5.22.
2 Cor. 7.1.

As for the Evil that we suffer, that is of two sorts, the Evil of
Temptation, or the Evil of Affliction, but neither of these are absolutely to
be prayed against, for as much as it is Gods revealed will that we must taste
of them. As for Temptation to Sin from Satan as it is a motion, and
solicitation to evil, it is to be prayed against, but under correction, if it
may stand with Gods good will and pleasure; but so far forth as it is a means
to draw away our hearts from God, and turn us out of the way to Life, we are
to desire the Lord absolutely to keep us from them, St. Paul prayed, 2 Cor.
12.7, 8.
2 Cor. 12.7, 8. to be (as it seems) freed from the temptations of Satan, but
it is hard to say what St. Paul means by that, however the words carry an
Argument against absolute praying, against all Temptations; my grace (says
God) is sufficient for thee, I have as many Antidotes, as the Devil has
Poisons; I have as much mercy, as the Devil has malice; There must be
Temptations, but Temptations add to Mine and to thy glory; God should lose by
it, and we should lose by it, if there were no Temptations. Math. 6.13.
That petition, Math. 6.13. is not meant from being assaulted by any
temptation, or being attempted to evil, but from being swallowed up by it, so
that we are not us utterly, as vehemently, to pray against temptations, as we
are against Sin.

As for Afflictions, they are laid upon us by the hand of God, all come from
him, and not to be despised not prayed against, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7. only so far
forth it is lawful to pray against them, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7.
as they are the punishments of a angry God, a part of the Curse, and a means
to drive us to impatiency. And thus of limiting of our desires, in respect of
Evil: Now of the Rules of Limitation, in respect of Good, a word or two.

In good things our desires ought to be infinitely carried after them (for this
is the measure of our desires in these things, to covet them above measure, 1
Cor. 12.31. and 14.1.
1 Cor. 12.31. and 14.1.) An unlimited desire is only there requisite, where
the Object thereof is Infinite, and ordained to perfect man's nature, but not
where it is only a means appointed for his benefit, and comfort; Here then we
must distinguish between such spiritual things, which are absolutely necessary
to salvation: those God has absolutely promised to give to his, and these may,
yea must absolutely be desired and sought for. And the Degrees of those Graces
that admit of degrees, these may not absolutely be desired in every degree;
because it is the grace it self, and not the degree that is absolutely
necessary.

Our Consolation lies much in the Comparative degree, but our Salvation lies in
the Positive. God does dispense with his gifts, and graces to every one as he
sees fit, to one this measure, to another that. It is not warrantable to
desire as large a measure of grace, as ever any Saint had, Not that degree of
Faith which Abraham had, of meekness which Moses had, of Wisdom which Solomon
had, of Patience which Job had, etc: God gives his greatest measure of graces
to those, he means to employ in greatest, and weightiest services; Although
thy Omer, or Ephah be not pressed down, and running over, yet it is thy duty to
be thankful, but so as still to use the means to increase thy graces,
desiring God to bless the means to that purpose, for as much as thou know
not, Ames. de. Couse, p. 147.
to what encreasings thou may attain unto but no way to limit God. Yet such
a degree of grace thou may desire absolutely, as is necessary to keep thee
from scandalous sins, and enable thee to walk on in the ways of piety, and to
the keeping of Faith, and a good Conscience, Psalm. 19.14. James 1.5, 6. 1 Cor.
10.13. And thus we have done with the Motive, taken from the facility of
granting the thing desired. It was but three Loaves he desired to have lent
him: Now let us see how he Prosecutes his suite. And with what Argument he does
press it upon his Friend.

For a Friend of mine in his journey is come unto me, and I have nothing to set
before him.] The occasion of troubling you is urgent, a Friend of mine is come
to be my guest, and I have not wherewith to enterteyne him; had I of my own at
home, I would not be troublesome, but I have it not, wherefore I am
necessitated to seek out for a supply: you see then that,

Necessity carries with it strong force in Reasoning. Or, An Argument taken
from necessity, is very powerful and weighty.

Christ commanded his Disciples to use this Argument to any one that shall
demand a Reason of their loosing and carrying away the Ass with her foale. The
Lord has need of them, and that shall satisfy, Math. 21.3.
Math. 21.3. This Reason caused the Apostles to preach to the Jews before they
turned to the Gentiles, Acts 13.46. And why Paul was so diligent in preaching
of the Gospel, necessity is laid upon me, Acts 13.46. 1 Cor. 9.16. Romans 13.5.
1 Cor. 9.16. so Romans 13.5. you must needs be subject. It is as a strong
Argument for Abstinence from things indifferent, Acts 15.28. Romans 12.13. 1 John
3.17. Luke 10.42.
Acts 15.28. To works of Charity and Mercy, Romans 12, 13. 1 John 3.17. to seek
after grace in attending on Gods Or^inances, Luke 10.42. Such force is in it,
that it prevailed with Pilate to deliver an Innocent, against his Conscience,
into the hands of the Jews to be crucified, Luke 23.17.
Luke 23.17.

force of a Law with it, it does command, yea it is above Law, for Necessity
has no Law, that is none that can command it and overpower it. Necessitas non
habet legem sed sibi legem f. cit.
It dispenses with the Law (as David in eating Shewbread, Circumcision in the
Wilderness, Journeyings on the Sabbath, etc.) and yet it is a Law to it self.
Themistocles coming to the Andraeans for Tribute, told them that he was
accompanied with two Goddesses, Abbot, descript. of the world, p. 228.
Eloquence and Violence, they replied that they had two Goddesses as strong
which did deny, Necessity and Impossibility. They had it not neither was it
possible to part with that which they possessed not, Necessity prevails more
then any other Goddess.

etc: Some make it, and then plead it. A practice in these days ordinary. Some
bring it for their justification in Sinful courses; as to Lie, Swear, break
the Sabbath, they cannot subsist, and of necessity they must do thus or thus,
or else they must do worse, and of two evils the least is to be chosen: which
albeit it be true, being rightly understood of the evils, of pain and
punishment, (for there, e malis minimum.) (And so it was necessary that David
should make choice of one of the three, 1 Samuel 24.12, 13, 14.
Famine, Sword, Pestilence, and it was his Wisdom to make choice of the
less,) yet this is not true of the evil of Sin, (for there e malis nullum,
Romans 3.8.
Romans 3.8.) No man can be driven into such a strait as to be necessitated to
Sin; he cannot be so encompassed betwixt two evils, but that he may find an
outgoing, without a third. Herod was not necessitated to cut off John Baptists
head, because of his rash oath; he should have broak that bond. There cannot a
case be imagined, wherein it should be impossible to avoid one Sin, unless it
be by the committing of another. Therefore an Argument drawn from necessity in
that case is invalid.

But in our Requests made to God or Man, as concerning things necessary, Genesis
47.18.
and lawful, it may be pressed. To man; so Genesis 47.18. We will not hide it
from my Lord, how that our money is spent. So in case of debt, 2 King. 4.1, 2.
2 King. 4.1, 2. That distressed Widow of one of the Sons of the Prophets,
comes to Elisha, and be moanes her condition; her Husband was dead, dyed in
debt, and moves compassion from her necessitous condition; she had nothing to
pay, and her Creditors come and Arrest her Sons, and carry them away for
Bondmen, who were the only comfort of her L^fe remaining. This moves Elisha to
study to do her good, and relieve her wants by Counsel and Miracle. So the
poor oppressed, made known their necessityes to Nehemiah, Neh. 5.1.-6.
c. 5.1.-6. which moved him exceedingly with Compassion toward them. And the
Necessities of the Saints of Jerusalem, is used as an Argument to stir up
Charity, 1 Cor. 8.2. 1 Cor. 8.2.


By the same Argument may our Requ^sts to God be pressed. So did Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. So Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. 2 King. 19.14. Psalm. 70.5. and 86.1.
2 King. 19.14. So David, Psalm. 70.5. and 86.1. Many examples might be brought,
Act. 4.27.29.

And indeed it is a great fault not to lay open thus our wants. Beggars much
move by showing their soars: man may turn away the eye, but God will not, and
beholding us, he cannot but pity us. David ( Psalm. 25.18.) ^esired God to look
upon his affliction, Psalm. 25.18.
and his misery: the Proph^t knew that having obtained that, help would soon
follow; His eye is a healing eye, a helping eye; So Moses speaking of the
Fruitfullnesse of the Land of Canaan, ren^ers this to be the Reason of it the
Eyes of the Lord were always upon it, Deuteronomy. 11.12.
from the beginning of the year, unto the end thereof, Deuteronomy. 11, 12. So, that
poor dejected soul that lies under wants and miseries, shall have a cheerful
Spring, a fruitful Autumn that has the Eye of God cast upon it; his Eye
makes our Midnight, Noone; our Capricorn Cancer; our Winters, the Summers
Solstice. It sanctifyes, yea it glorif^es all our Eclipses, of poverty and
want; it turns our want into fulness, our stones into Bread, our Water into
Wine, if he please but to look upon us, he presently remembers our case as he
^id Peter's, Luke 22.65.
Luke 22.65. But this cannot be expected he should do, till we urge this
Argument, and press it upon him; I am nothing, I have nothing, I am needy, and
in ^ant, Psalm. 12.5.
behold my Affliction and my misery. And then for the sighing of the poor and
needy, God will arise as Psalm. 12.5.

And as Pliny tells us of some Creatures which hatch their eggs only by looking
on them, Plin. lib. 10. c, 9.
so will God with his Eye help us, and hatch us up again, be our Condition
never so sad.

Need speak, when yet the needy man says nothing? Revel. 1.12.
his Case cries aloud when he is silent, St. John Revel. 1.12. speaks of seeing
a voice; A man may see a sound, a sad aspect, a pale look, a hollow cheek, a
bloodlesse lip, a trembling hand speaks loud, and presses this Argument of
such men's necessity, who yet are more perplexed to ask, then to want. Lay
thine ear unto the ground, and harken after them that lie in the dust, enquire
after the necessities of the poor distressed, and let that Argument of
Necessity prevail with thee, which does with God and all good men.

More particularly: This Necessity of his did arise from a double cause. The
one respects his guest that was come unto him, the other himself. In respect
of his guest, First he was no stranger, but a Friend of his, so that what was
done on his behalf, he judged as done for himself: Secondly, he in his journey
had come out of his way to visit him. And by the Law of equity, kindness must
be required with kindness. Then in respect of himself, and present condition,
which was such that he had not wherewith to enterteyne his Friend, which did
cause him to seek out at that time of Night: Of both something, briefly.

It was on his Friends behalf, that he was at this time a Suitor, yet so as
that he sued as for himself, [Lend me for a Friend of mine.] Thence observe,

A true Friend, makes his Friend's case to be his own: what is done unto a
Friend, or for a Friend, is esteemed by a Friend as done to, and for himself.
So David made Abiathars case his own, 1 Samuel 22.23. 1 Samuel 20.34.41. Psalm.
35.14. Mark. 9.22.
1 Samuel 22. ult. And Jonathan, David's, 1 Samuel 20.34.41. This David intimates,
Psalm. 35.14. I behaved my self as though he had been my Friend: why how was
that? in mourning for their sadd estate, as though it had been my own. So Mark.
9.22. The Fat^er cries come and help us, and have compassion on us, when it was
his Child only that was possessed.

This is required and enjoined of all Religious Friends, Romans 12.25. Heb. 13.3.
Romans 12.15. so Heb. 13.3. And this was the Apostles own practice, he joyed in
the prosperity of the Church of Thessalonica, as in his own* 1 These. 3.7, 8, 9.
1 These. 3.7, 8, 9. 2 John 1.4. 2 Cor. 2, 3.
So St. John to hear of the Children of the Elect Lady, that they walked in
the Truth, 2 Epist. 1.4. so 2 Cor. 2.3. St. Paul is confident, that his joy,
would be the joy of them all.

And so for Sorrowing at the Adversity of Friends, see Neh. 1, 2, 3, 4. Dan.
9.4. These were safe enough themselves, Neh. 1, 2, 3, 4. Dan. 9.4. Esth. 7.4. 2
Cor. 11.28, 29.
yet their Friends case was their's. So Esther. 7.4. and 2 Cor. 11.28.29.

To God, who would not be esteemed for the Friend of God? but who are affected
with Gods cause, as if it were their own? Should we be wronged in our Body,
Name, or Goods: in our Wife, Children, Servants, how would we take it? alas,
our zeal would be stirred up we would not endure it. But does not God suffer
in these daily? and yet we are silent, and can well digest this; do we then
herein make our Friends case to be our own? so on the other side, how cheerful
are we, and joyfully affected when all things go well with us and ours? Is it
so with us in Gods cause, when it goes well with the Church? Alas it is
otherwise, we make not this Friends case to be our own.

And in our Friendship toward others, which we pretend to bear, there we are
much wanting. Every member of the body, has a sense of the injuries, the other
members suffer, yet we hear and see the injuries of our Brethren without
remorse, Amos, 6.6. Sometimes it may be, Amos 6.6.
we can rejoice with them that do rejoice, but how seldom do we mourn with
them that mourn, and weep? we are so taken up with our own ease and pleasures,
that we have no leisure to think of the distress and misery that they are in,
whom yet we pretend to bear much love unto. Christ told his Disciples, that
their Friend Lazarus was dead, this so affected them, that they made a motion
one to another, to go and dye with him, John 11.16. Tell many of us, John
11.16.
your Friend such a one is weak, sick, in great want, we are little moved
therewith, etc.

Isay. 63.9.
yet we have a fast Friend in Heaven, who does sympathize with us in all our
Afflictions; and is hungry, thirsty in us, and esteems our case to be his, as
we have it, Math. 25.40.
Math. 25.40. and has been before showed.

Secondly, in that this Friendly guest came to give his Friend a visit, and
that (not as the Samaritan did the wounded man, in transitu, Luke 10.33.
Luke 10.33. but) (...) de via, out of the way (says the O iginall): we may
stop here a little, and, for all our haste, take up this useful Observation.

It is a Friendly part to visit, albeit we go somewhat out of our way to do
it. David remembering the kindness, that Nahash had showed him, sent and
visited Hanun his Son, as a testimony of true Love (albeit it was ill requited,
2 Samuel 10.2.
2 Samuel 10.2.) Joash pretending great Love, and bearing good will to Elisha,
gave him a visit, 2 King. 14.14.
2 King. 14.14. And St. Steeven mentions it as a Friendly office in Moses, Acts
7.23. Luke 1.39.
to go and visit his Brethren, Acts 7.23. Mary goes into the Hill-Country, to
visit Elizabeth, Luke 1.39. and Elizabeth being delivered, was visited by her
Neighbors. verse 58. verse 58.
Barnabas and Paul resolved thus to manifest affection to their Brethren, Acts
15.36. Romans 15.24. Heb. 13.23. 1 These. 3.6. Gal. 1.18.
Acts 15.36. This St. Paul promised the Romans to do, Romans 15.24. The
Thessalonians desired it, 1 These. 3.6. He went up to Jerusalem to see Peter,
and aboade with him fifteen days. Gal. 1.18. And how many bouts did he fetch
in his travailes, to come to those whom he affected?



Hanun's Servants mis-construed David's kindness, 2 Samuel 10.
2 Samuel 10. But in the neglect of this duty, we rob our selves of much good,
for great benefit arises from Christian visitations hereby; First, Love is
preserved, united, and mainteyned: Secondly, hereby the gifts that God has
betrusted us withal, are communicated to the good of others. Ferus on Matthew
tells us, that it was an ancient practice of Monks, to meet together once in a
week, and acquaint each other with their temptations, and with the means of
resistance, with the issue thereof.

Thirdly, the gifts of each other are hereby sharpened, as iron by iron, and
increased, as flower to flower, which makes the sweeter posie.

Fourthly, hereby we become more encouraged, and emboldened in our Christian
course, as St. Paul was by some of the Brethren that he met with, Acts 28.14,
15. Acts 28.14, 15.
Let us then visit one another, not so much with bagg and bottle to chatt and
prattle, but that one may be bettered by another, with Christian Counsel.

It was the speech of Seneca, that he seldom or never came into company, but
he departed worse then he came; but whose fault was that, either he chose not
good company, or made no good use of it; It is a scandal that is cast upon
Religion, and the Professors of it, that they are unneighbourly and unsociable,
God himself loves society, he loves holy meetings, he loves the Communion of
Saints, the household of Faith, and his delight is to be with the Sons of men,
and well approves that the Sons of men should be one with another, yet so, that
he may not be excluded, but be esteemed one of our visitors in our meetings,
and looks that as he visits us, we should visit him in his house, and
Ordinances, where we may visit one another one day in leaven, if we visit no
where else, and at no time else, Psalm. 122.1. Psalm. 122.1.


Again, take notice how that this Friend, who came out of his way to visit his
Friend, caused this Friend thus visited by him to go out of his doors at this
time of Night, to visit another Friend on his behalf, that he might be the
better enabled to manifest his friendly affection in the enterteynment of that
Friend, who came thus to visit him, from which intercourse we may observe that,

Love amongst Friends is Reciprocal. Courtesies pass interchangeably betwixt
Friend and Friend.

If you observe it, you shall find that for the most part, wheresoever the
obligation of Love and Friendship is mentioned in Scripture, the condition is
expressed that it be mutual, Be kindly affectioned one to another, with
brotherly Love, says the Apostle, Romans 12.10. so Gal. 5.13. In Love serve one
another. So in Hospitallity enterteyne one another, Romans 12.10. Gal. 5.13. 1
Pet. 4.9. Gal. 6.2. Colos. 3.13. Romans 16.16. 1 These. 5.11. Jam. 5.16. 2 Cor.
6.13.
1 Pet. 4.9. In Compassion bear one another burden, Gal. 6.2. in Patience
forbear one another, Colos. 3.13. In Curtesy salute one another, Romans 16.16.
In Christian Communication edify one another, 1 These. 5.11. In Devotion pray
one for another, Jam. 5.16. Still St. Paul call for an (...) a recompensing of
the same Christian duty, a reciprocallnesse it it, as 2 Cor. 6, 13. his heart
was enlarged, and their bowels should not be straitened. And where true
Friendship has been, it has been always thus, as betwixt David and Jonathan;
1 Samuel 18.4. 2 Samuel 9.1.
Jonathan shows kindness to David, and if David cannot show the like to
Jonathan, he will do it to Mephibosheth for Jonathans sake. So when Solomon and
Hiram entered into a league of Friendship; Hiram will accommodate Solomon with
Cedars, and Firr-Trees, for the building of the house of the Lord; and Solomon
will re-accommodate Hiram, with Wheat and Oil for food, 1 King. 5.8.11.
for his household, 1 King. 5.8.11. The Church of the Thessalonians was highly
commended for this Reciprocation in Charity, 1 These. 3.6.
2 These. 1.3. so 1 These. 3.6. you desire greatly to see us (says the Apostle)
as we also to see you: Amongst the Heathens the like has been found, as
betwixt Pylades and Orestes, Damon and Pythias, Scipio and Laelius, and diverse
others (before mentioned.)

etc?

Danaeus de. amicit.
or else for the difference of their wealth and ability; one may be very rich,
and the other poor, one fortunate, the other miserable, one exiled and
banished, the other living at home, in his native Country. In these and such
like cases no man can requite so amply and beneficially as he received; yet he
is to requite in as good a manner, and measure as he is able, (as David did in
requiting Jonathan.) So that still it is a truth (notwithstanding this
inequality,) Courtesies and favors amongst Friends are always mutual and
enterchangeable, albeit not always alike and equal.



Cor. 12.15. the more I love, 2 Cor. 12.15.
the less I am beloved: much kindness I have showed, but none returned. Gods
Children have been much troubled at this, Psalm. 35.12, 13. Jer. 18.20, 21.
Omnia te advorsum speetantia, nulla retrosum. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Use. 2.
as Psalm. 35.12, 13. Jer. 18.20, 21. Indeed it is Lyon-like, not Love-like so
to do; but it will be so, so long as there is so much self-Love (which like
Charons Boat carries all over the dismal Lake (as they say) but brings none
back) and so little Love of Friendship to be found in the world.

iniquity does abound amongst us, Math. 24.12.
and true Love waxes cold. Seneca aptly resembles the mutual, and
reciptocall duties of Friendship in giving, and receiving benefits, one from
another, to a game at Tennis, where the Ball is tossed backward, and forward,
from one Racket to another, and never falls to the ground, for if it fall, it
is his forfeit who mist the stroke. So every kind office wherewith our Friend
serves us, ought to be returned back unto him, that no courtesy fall to the
ground.

To stir us up to hold this fair quarter in Love, and Friendship, I shall
commend a few things to your serious thoughts.

First, remember that all Societies are like Arch-buildings (as one speaks)
in which, unless every stone upholds the other, the whole frame must suddenly
fall.

Secondly, as affection is mutual, so the gain is reciprocal. As in a
building, the Walls bear up the Roof, and the Roof keeps the Wall and
Timber from rotting. It was a good saying of Chrysostom Naturally a man has
but one head to advise him, one tongue to speak for him, two eyes to see for
him, two hands to work for him, two feet to travail for him: Now (says he)
had a man but that skill, and cunning, to make that one head, that one tongue,
those two hands, and two feet, many; he would hardly be circumvented by any
carnal Policy. By mutual Affection one with another, this is done.

Thirdly, very Nature calls on us for this Reciprocallnesse, and leanes to
mutual requital. Does not the Earth which receives moisture from the sky,
repay it back again into vapors, and exhalations? Does not the Rock which
receives a sound from the air before it be fully given, return it by an
Echo? Does not the stony Wall being heated by the Sunbeames, reflect-back
heat? Does not my bed, and clothes keep me warm all day, when I have warmed
them? Are not all Creatures friendly to those that do befriend them? The Lion,
the Dog, the Storke are all returners of Love for Love. Shall I instance? Aul.
Gul.
We read in History of one Androclus, who was a slave to a Noble man of Rome,
and condemned to dye, he being brought out of prison was to combat with a very
great and strong Lion, (for to that kind of death, the Romans used to condemn
some sort of malefactors) (delighting much in that kind of combat between man
and beasts) when all expected that the combatant should be suddenly devoured,
and torn in pieces by the savage beast, the Lion no sooner saw the man, but he
came unto him, fawned on him, and licked his hands and feet, holding up his own
foot in the sight of all the people: The matter being enquired into, it was
found, that this Androclus being in Africa with his Master, (to whom the
Government of that Province fell, ran away from him (through cruel usage) into
the deserts, being there in a Cave, this Lion came to him groaning and halting,
and offered to him his paw grievously wounded with a stub: Androclus plucks out
the stub, washes and dresseth the wound, and cures the Lion; for which the
Lion (as a diligent Servant) brought every day to Androclus a part of his prey,
for the space of three years together, afterward Androclus wandering from his
Cave was found, and sent to Rome to prison by his Master: not long after the
Lion was likewise taken, and his fierce nature conquered by that good turn
done him by Androclus, so that he would not hurt him; whereupon the Emperor
pardoned Androclus, set him free, and gave him the Lion, of whom the people
usually said, Hic est Leo hospes hominis, hic est home medicus Leonis. This is
the Lion that fed the man, this is the man that medicin'd the Lion. The horse
of Nicomedes, would never eat meat after his Master was slain in the Wars,
but wasting daily with sorrow and emptiness, soon after dyed. And when the
Turks had for their pastime cut off five hundred captive Christians by the
middle, in Constantinople; their Carcasses lying on the ground where they were
slain, an Ox coming into the field, finding his Masters carcass (amongst
the rest) lifted it up with his horns and carried it away to another place,
and returning, setcheth the other part and joined them both together, which
thing being brought to the ears of Mahomet the great Turk, he caused the
parts of the body to be separate again, and brought to the former place, the
Ox following finds out his Masters Corpse the second time, and did as he had
done before, which the great Turk beholding, caused all those dead bodies to
be buried, and the Ox to be kept amongst his own Cattle during life.

The kindness and fidelity of Dogs toward those who have daily fed them, is
no less remarkable (if it be not troublesome nor offensive to any, as I hope
it will not) I shall only relate unto you what we read in the French History:
A Gentleman of France being murdered, his Dog would not depart from the
slain Corpse, until by the Kings command he was by force taken away; The
Murderer could not by any means be heard of until it happened, that as the
King was walking and taking a view of his men, the Dog waiting upon the King,
the Murderer passed by, whom the Dog no sooner perceived, but he ran
furiously upon him, and returning again to the King looked earnestly in his
face, as though he required Justice, and thus ran to and fro; barking and
howling, so that the King and the rest suspected that he was the person that
did the Murder; he was thereupon examined, but denied the fact; Thereupon the
King was purposed to make trial what the Dog would do, he gave leave to the
Gentleman to use his sword for his defense, and armed the Dog with Leather,
and so turned them both together; the Dog assaulted the Gentleman with such
fury and violence, that perceiving himself like to be torn in pieces, and
unable to defend himself from the Dog (he desiring to be freed from his fury)
confessed the fact. The manner of this fight was commanded by the King to be
drawn in a table for a memorial, and to be kept in the Kings Court, where it
was to be seen many years after. The like discovery we read was made by a Dog
of the Murderer of his Master, in King Pyrrhus his Army.

Many strange relations we find in good and credible Authors of Love and
kindness, showed by bruit beasts (in their kind) to those that have been kind
unto them, which might be mentioned to the shame of those that are ungrateful:
hear how God complains of ungrateful Israel, Isay. 1.3.
Isay. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but
Israel does not know, my people does not consider. But I forbear, nor should I
have spent so much time in these things, were it not that I did speak to the
shame of many (who yet will know no shame) in not answering kindness with
kindness. There should be in all Recursus gratiarum; they are beasts and worse
then beasts that do not so: A very ill disposition is discovered to be in such.
A good Nature is loath to receive kindness, where he cannot re-render it. If
it be so, that he cannot, yet he will ever have a ready mind to make some
Return, although his hand be shortened.

Seneca, Senec. Epist. 9. Ut ameris am a.
how thou may make another Love thee without a Love-Potion, Spell, or
Witchcraft. If thou desire to be beloved, Love thou first, sincerely and
entirely. This is a compendious way to be beloved. ( Austin excellently to this
purpose) Nulla est major provocatio ad amandum, etc: Aug. lib. de cat. rud.
There is no greater provocation to Love, then to prevent in loving. Love is
the Loadstone of Love, he must have a very hard heart which (though he will not
of his own accord yield Love) will refuse to requite it. Thus the bands of
Syria were overcome with kindness, 2 King. 6.23. 2 King. 6.23. Use. 4.


And (to carry this, yet a little higher) it may be of use unto us to stir us
up to Love God again, who has Loved us first, and given his Son for us, 1
John 4.16. he loved us not-existing; 1 John 4.16. Tantus tautum gratis
tantillos et tales Bern: de dil: Dei. Luke 7.37.
nay resisting, and shall we make no return? None breathed more Love then St.
John, nor was any more beloved then he; Mary could not but love much, having
much forgiven her, Luke 7.37. Certainly the loving kindness of God has such
an operative virtue in it, that it cannot but deeply affect those who seriously
fix their minds upon it: (as fire heateth those who stand nearer it.) You may
read, 1 Samuel 24.17.
1 Samuel 24.17. how David's kindness in sparing Saul wrought upon him, and how
it thawed his frozen heart, and made him relent, and kindle a fire of
affections of Love in him, Come again my Son David, thou art more Righteous
then I, etc: So the Consideration of Gods kindness in sparing of us from Hell,
and not only so, but in giving his Son to dye for us, cannot but affect us, and
cause us to return back Love for Love, (if our hearts be not extremely
hardened,) 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Cor. 5.14. Pro. 8.17. John 14.21. Bern. Epist. 107.
Nor can any of us have any comfortable assurance that God Loves us, if we Love
not him again, Pro. 8.17. John 14.21. Let me conclude this Use with that of
Bernard, Let no man whose heart can truly testify for him that he loves
Christ, make any doubt but that Christ loves him: for how can he choose but
Love thee; when thou Love him, who loved thee, when thou love him not?

You have heard how this man was necessitated to seek out on his Friends
behalf: in the next place take notice of his own want, which did occasion this
trouble at this time of Night.

I have nothing to set before him] that is, no fitting provision for the
enterteynment of such a Friend as he is. Observe hence, that

It is sense of want that makes us to seek out.

It was want that caused Abraham to go down into Egypt, Genesis 12.10. Genesis
12.10. Genesis 26.1. Genesis 42.2. Genesis 43.2.
Isaac into Gerar, Genesis 26.1. Jacob to send his Sons into Egypt, Genesis 42.2.
And a second time to part with his beloved Benjamin, Genesis 43.2. Elimelech was
enforced through want, to go down into the Country of Moab, with his Wife and
two Sons, Ruth. 1.1, 2.
and continue there, Ruth. 1.1, 2. It was want of water that enforced Ahab to
seek to Elijah the Prophet, 1 King. 18.16. 1 King. 18.16. 2 King. 3.
And Iehoram to seek to Elisha, 2 King. 3. And want of food that caused those
Lepers that sat at the gate of Samaria, 2 King. 7.3.
to fly to the Camps of their enemies, 2 King. 7.3. And the want that the
Prodigal fell into, by reason of his Prodigality, was that which caused him to
return to his Fathers house, Luke 15.14. Math. 9.12.
Luke 15.14. Hereto tends that of our Savior, The whole have no need of the
Physician, but the sick, Math. 9.12.

pay then pray.

Then again; Life is dear, and Nature is forcible to seek out for the
preservation of it self, when it is necessitated and put to it, it will seek
out before it suffer too much, and break through stone Walls rather then famish.

Sun to be desirable: So sickness makes health more grateful; Pain,
Pleasure, more delightful; Want, Plenty more Comfortable; And it makes
exceedingly for the preservation of Love and Unity, amongst Neighbors, and
toward the maintenance of civil society, and commerce amongst Christians. And
this is one Reason why it has pleased the manifold wisdom of God, to enrich
several Countries, with several Commodities; Non omni^^ omnia tellus.
diverse gifts to several Persons, not all to any one, that our wants may be
supplied by their fulness, and one be beholding to another for a supply of
his necessity, which otherwise would not be. Laish was a secure and careless
people, and the Reason is rendered to be this, they had no want, Judge. 18.10.
Judge. 18.10.
A fulness causes us to contemn, and scorn those whom in our wants we are
glad to make use of. So we read, Judge. 11.6.
Judge. 11.6. The Elders of Israel did of Jeptha; And Sampson of the jaw bone of
that Ass, wherewith he had killed many Philistims which he threw away, but
after being athirst, he runs to that contemned jaw bone for water, Judge. 15.17,
18, 19.
Judge. 15.17, 18, 19. that indeed was Gods work, he clave the hollow of the
jaw bone, and caused water to flow from thence. And so is this to bring good
out of want to us, and therefore despise it not. Want is a good Neighbor, a
good Townsman; it will send, it will visit, it will use good words, give fair
language, etc: It is a good Market-man, it will tend to the Market (rain or
Sunshine) it knows the worth of blessings, of Health, Peace, Plenty, and it is
willing to come to the price, though it pawn the coat it will buy. And it is
a good Churchman too, it carries a man to the Word, to the Sacrament, to
Prayer, etc: And therefore although want goes in mean clothes, with a
patcht-coate, and is clad oftentimes in Sheep-skinns, and Goats-skinns; Heb.
11.^^.
albeit it has lean cheeks, hollow eyes, staring bones, and is of a sad
countenance: yet despise it not seeing there may be a blessing in it, many have
cause to bless God that ever they came acquainted with it. Priissem, nisi
periissem, If I had not perished, I had perished, said Themistocles; having
been first banished by the Greeks, and after advanced by the Persians.

Thus far the letter of Parable has carried us. Now let us take notice of the
sense mystical, and moral Application.

Who this Friend should be, that in his journey comes out of the way to visit
his Friend, is questionable: Theophylact's opinion is, that the Angels of God*
who assist us in all our ways, are to be understood thereby: Bernard conceives
that it is man himself, who in his journey to the grave, comes out of the way,
wherein he naturally is (the way of Sin and Vanity) and by true conversion
visits his own soul by sad and serious thoughts of his sad condition; (as did
the Prodigal upon his return to his Fathers house, Luke 15.) And this his
opinion is best liked, and most followed. Gualter observes from hence that,

Whilst we are in the body, we are in our journey, we are all of us but a brood
of Travailers, during our abode on Earth. To which point I shall speak something.

In a twofold respect, man in this Life, may be said to be in his journey. In
respect of his Being, and in respect of his Doing.

In respect of his Being, he is a Travailer, or Pilgrim, for he Travailes from
the Womb to the Grave, from the Cradle to the Coffin without Intermission,
whether he be by Sea or by Land, on horseback, or on foot, sleeping or waking,
he is upon his journey still, and daily shortens it. As Rivers run back into
the Sea from whence they came, and Bees into their Hives from whence they fly;
Genesis 3.19.
so dust we are, and to that we must return. Indeed Rivers and Bees go often
into their journeys, man only once, and when he returns to the Grave, he is
come to his hou e, Job. 17.13. And there he is well known, and amongst his
kindred, Job. 17.13, 14.
Job. 17.14.

And yet the Grave is not the furthest end of man's journey. The way of his
Doing carries him to a further home; Every Action is a step, that tends to Life
or Death, to Heaven or Hell; 2 Cor. 5.6. Romans 2.7. Acts 1.25. Romans 2.8, 9:
Heaven is the Godly man's home, the end of well Doing, 2 Cor. 5.6. Romans 2.7.
And Hell is the wicked man's home, Act. 1.25. and the end of wicked Doing, Romans
2.8, 9.

Thus every one is in his journey, and upon his travail, all the while he
lives here, he is from home, upon the way, and so properly a Pilgrim on Earth,
he is borne out of his own Country, as no other Creature is.

The steps or paces that the Godly take in the ways of well-doing, are holy
motions, godly resolutions, pious actions, etc. And so they proceed from
strength to strength, till they see God in Sion, Psalm. 84.7. Heb. 11.14.
which is the City and Country the Ancient Believers sought, Heb. 11.14. There
be also the paces or steps of sin, evil suggestions, consent, doing,
defending, etc: by these the wicked are carried to Hell in the broad way, as to
their own Country.

Journeymen, this world is not our resting or abiding place, think not of
staying here, away you must; home, home, must be thought on.

And for your future estate, that may be judged of, by the way you take; Such
as the way is wherein a man walks, such shall his end be, that he will come
unto at last: Deuteronomy. 30.19.
Deuteronomy. 30.19. The broad way tends to death, the narrow way is the way of Life,
Math. 7.13, 14
Math. 7.13, 14.

2. Psalm. 50.23.
are we in our journey, in our Pilgrimage, why then show your selves wise
Travailers and that,

First in choosing the good way to walk in, Jer. 6.16.
Jer. 6.16. there are more ways (we say) to the wood then one. So to Hell
there is the way of Hatred, that was Cains way; the way of Pride, that was
Absoloms way; the way of Covetousness, that was Balaams way; the way of Envy,
and murmuring, that was Corah's way. And many such ways there are, all
crooked, dark, and durty ways, woe to those that walk in those ways: Jude 11.
John 14.6.
but the way to Heaven, that good old way is but one. I am the way says Christ
(and he was before the world was) a safe way, a strait way, a plain way, and a
pleasant way: walk in the steps of faithful Abraham; Romans 4.12.
that is the way.

John 14.4.
Secondly: get a good Guide. Whither I go you know, (said Christ to his
Disciples) and the way you know: Should he say so to many of us, our answer
must be the same with Thomas, Lord we know not whither thou go, and how can
we know the way? our knowledge of the way is but confused, and indistinct at
best; and, Romans 3.17.
by nature, none at all, Romans 3.17. The best needs a guide, because of our
blindness; Math. 4.14. Isay. 48.17. Psalm. 32.8.143.10. Exodus 33.12.
blind guides are dangerous, get the Spirit of God to guide thee, Isay. 48.17.
Psalm. 32.8. and 143.10. This was a special favor that Moses craved, and God
granted, Exodus 33.12. The Pillar should go before them still, as it had done,
and show them the way. God goes with his Church, by his Spirit (and that in a
Pillar;) it guides us in the word, and by the word, 1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 5.15.
Colos. 4. Isay. 30.21.
which is the Pillar of Truth; by that we come to know the way, and are
directed in the way, how to walk, Ephesians. 5.15. Colos. 4. Isay. 30.21.

Thirdly; affect good company in your journey. David called on others to
accompany him, and was glad when he had associates, Psalm. 122.1. Isay. 2, 3.
Psalm. 16.3.
Psa. 122.1. so Isay. 2.3. But make choice of good company (else better go
alone,) Psalm. 16.3.

Fourthly; provide for your journey, first lay by what may clogg you, H^b. 2.6.
2 Cor. 7.29. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Heb. 2.6. clogg not your selves with thick clay. Of the Christian Pilgrim the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 7.29. Nor with heavy garments, Heb. 12.1, 2. A Viaticum
is enough for a Viator, 1 Timothy 6.8. Mark. 6.8, 9. Math. 10.10.
1 Timothy 6.8. Then provide your selves of what is necessary. So Mark 6.8, 9. A
staff must be taken, although staves were forbidden, Math. 10.10. A staff is
necessary to stay us, but not staves to load us. So shoes, and a sword, Ephesians.
6.16. For let us be assured, Ephesians. 6.16. Psalm. 140.4, 5.
we shall be waylaid, Psalm. 140.4 5.

Fifthly, Hold out to the end; play Ruths part, not Orphahs, Ruth. 1.14.16.
Ruth. 1.14.16.
Let no temptation on the right hand, stop thy journey. A Pilgrim travailing to
Jerusalem, says the story, came to a City where he saw a goodly training, and
mustering, there he had a mind to stay, but that he remembered, that was not
Jerusalem; he passed by another, where he saw great sports, and pastimes; and
by a third, where were goodly buildings, fair Ladies, etc: in all these he had
a good mind to stay, but still he remembered Jerusalem, the place to which he
was going. So must we think when we meet with earthly delights in our journey,
fair houses, goodly furniture, yet this is not Heaven. Nor may we be
discouraged on the other hand, with storms, tempests or harsh usage, that we
meet withal; Regard not the difficult passage, but the good end, and whither
it tends; if it be easy, thou may suspect it, if hard, yet endure it. Dr.
Tailor leapt when he came near the stake, for that he had but one style more
to his Fathers house. But I will carry this Point no further, I now dismiss it
and proceed.

In that this Friend came to his Friend in the behalf of his Friend, our
Savior seems to hint thus much unto us, that,

God is to be sought unto in the behalf of others, (especially of those whom
we most affect) as well as on our own behalf.

Whom we Love and truly affect, them we will pray for, yea the more earnestly
we Love any, the more fervently shall we pray for them, 1 Samuel 12.23. God
forbid (says Samuel) that I should cease to pray for you. What could move him
to do this, 1 Samuel 12, 23. Psalm. 35.13. Romans 9.3. and 10.1. Romans 1.9, 10.
Colos. 1.3. and 4.3. Philem. 1.3. 2 Timothy 1.3. Philem. 4. Luke 22.32. John 17.9.
Gab. Biel. Nominativo, Pro seipso. Psalm. 51.1. and 69.1. Luke 18.13. Genitivo.
Pro patre, matre etc.
but Affection? Thus David manifested his Affection to his enemies, and St.
Paul to his Countrymen, Romans 10.1. and 9.3. And so he testifies his Love to
all Christian Churches, in the beginning of his Epistles, by thank givings and
prayers: so to Particular persons, 2 Timothy 1.3. Philem. 4. So Christ for Peter,
Luke 22.32. and for all his, John 17.9.

Some Schoolmen (for memory sake) lead us through all the Grammatical cases
in the performance of this duty, which we may take notice of (if it be not
thought Fryer-like.)

1. A Christian is to pray for himself, Psalm. 69.1. and 51.1. Luke 18.13. If
you Love your selves, lay open your own states to God, declare your wants and
pray for grace: till you can pray for your selves, you shall not be able to
pray for others, pretend what you will.

2. We are to pray for those we have Relation unto, that have begot us, or are
begotten of us, from whom we have our being, or well-being, our Parents and
Kindred must be remembered in our Prayers, whether they be Temporal or
Spiritual. Temporal Parents as the Father of the House, whether he be so by
Nature, Pro. 30.11. Or by Constitution and office, Pro. 30.11. Genesis 24.12.
as the Master of the Family, Gen 24.12. Or Parents of the Country, to whom we
should bear Loyal Affection, Jer. 29.7. Ezra. 6.10. 1. Tim. 2.12. Jer. 29.7.
Ezra. 6.10. 1 Timothy 2.12.
(Albeit in these days Kings were Idolaters, Infidels, Tyrants, and
Persecutors; Nero was then Emperor, who was the first that drew out the sword
of Persecution, says Tertullian.) Our Spiritual Parents must likewise be
prayed for (for by these we are begotten unto God) 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. Thus
Moses prayed for the Tribe of Levi, 1. Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. Deuteronomy. 33.8. Romans
15.30. Ephesians. 6.9. 1 These. 5.25. 2 These. 3.1. 1 Cor. 2.1.11.
Deuteronomy. 33.8. this if frequently enjoined, as Romans 15.30. Ephesians. 6.9. 1 These.
5.25. 2 These. 3.1. 1 Cor. 2.1.11. Heb. 13.18. Great need is there, that we pray
for them, and they for us again. The thriving of the sheep depends on the
Shepheard's safety.

And, Lege Talionis, the same again by Parents for Children, Job. 1.5. Genesis
17, 18. Masters for Servants, Ruth. 2.4. Math. 8.6. So Kings and Governors for
subjects, Heb. 13.18. Job. 1.5. Genesis 17, 18. Ruth. 2.4. Math. 8.8. 1 King. 6.8.
2 Samuel 24.17. Psalm. 51.18. Levit. 5,6. Romans 1.9. Genesis 4.29. Acts 4.29. Dativo.
Pro Fundatoribus et benefuctoribus. Ruth. 1.8. and 2.19. 1 Samuel 25.33. 2 Timothy
1.18. Accusativo. Pro inimicis and accusatoribus. Math. 5.44. Romans 12.14. Psalm.
35.14. 1 Samuel 13.23. Acts. 1.60. Vocativo. Pro Peccutoribus and Infidelibus. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
1 King 6.8. 2 Samuel 24.17. Psalm. 51.18. Ministers for People. So Levit. 5, 6.
and Romans 1.9. Brother for Brethren, Genesis 4.29. One for another, Act. 4.29. and
12.5. and 15.40.

3. Those who have been Benefactors to us, are to be remembered: Such as have
done us or ours any good, so Ruth. 1.8. and 2.19. Thus David prayed for
Abigail, in that she gave him good counsel, 1 Samuel 25.33. This is our best
requital, to pray for them, 2 Timothy 1.18.

4. Our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slaunderers are to be prayed for. Thus we are
commanded to do, Math. 5.44. Romans 12.14. Such was David's practice, Psalm. 35.14.
And Samuels 1 Samuel 12.23. and St. Steevens, Act. 7.60. Christ himself has
left us his example to follow, Luke 23.34. Hereby shall we manifest our selves
to be the Children of God, Math. 5.45.

5. We are to pray for all those that belong to the Election of grace (be they
what they will be, Jew or Turk, Pope or Pagan.) This seems to be the meaning
of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. God has those who are yet uncalled, but in his
own time will call; our Prayers must further it.

6. Those who have taken from us our goods, Ablativo. Pro obtrectatoribus and
maledicis. Jer. 18.18, 19. 1 Cor. 4.13. James 5.14, 15, 16. 1 John 5.16. Perk.
Reform. Cathol. de Purgat.
and good Name, 1 Cor. 4.13. and all that are afflicted and deprived of
Friends, and comforts of this Life. Such as are sick and sorrowful, must be
prayed for, yea and so far as that Petition reaches, (thy Kingdom come) it
may be granted that we are to pray for all such Indefinitely as have been taken
from us by Death, that they may be made partakers of the blessed Resurrection
of the just in Gods own time. But this warrants not any particular Prayer, for
any particular person deceased (which is the practice of the Church of Rome,
(and by the Orthodox Church justly condemned).

And thus you see whom we do Love or ought to Love, we ought to pray for, and
whom we do Love, we cannot but pray for, and the more entirely we Love any the
more earnest, shall we be with God on their behalf.

etc. These pretend Love, but when did you go to God in the behalf each of
other; To use the words of Dalilah, how can thou say thou love me, etc: So
may the Wife say to the Husband, the Child to the Parent, etc. when thou do
not this thing for them: Prayer private, as well as public is required, Math.
6.6. Judge. 16.15. Math. 6.6. Si pro te solo, pro te solus orabis: si pro
omnibus rogas, omnes pro te regabunt: Ambros.
But we may be too too private in our Prayers, when we pray not only by our
selves (which is commendable) but when we pray only for our selves, or those in
near relation to us. The Athenians would offer sacrifice for their own City
and Neighbors of Chios, but for no other; and I have heard of one, whose
usual Prayer was, God bless my Father, and Mother, Brothers, and Sisters, and
none else (to whom one that heard him answered, It were better the Devil had
thy Father, and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, and none else,) but this is
uncharitable. And Bellarmine tells us of a desperate Advocate in the Court of
Rome, who being exhorted on his deathbed to make his peace with God, made this
speech: Lord I have a word to say to thee, not for my self, Bellar. de art.
mor. lib. 2. c. 10
but for my Wife and Children, Ego enim propero ad inferos, neque est ut
aliquid pro me agas. For I am hasting unto Hell, neither is there any thing
that I would beg in my own behalf. And this he spoke as boldly (says
Bellarmine, who was then present) as he has been to take his journey, only to
some neighboring Village. But this was desperate, to pray for others as for
our selves, and with our selves, is truly Christian.

No Prayer without Faith, no Faith without Charity, no Charity without mutual
intercession. See not my Face (said Joseph to his Brethren) unless your
Brother be with you; Genesis 43.5.
so says God to us, come not into my presence, unless in your Prayers you
remember your brethren also. And therefore he has taught us to Pray, Our
Father, not Mine. For our selves we are to pray as well as for others, Math.
6.9.
and for others as well as for out selves.

Greenhams works, p. 14.
then from those that he prayed for, most fervently. The Jews found it true in
praying for Darius the Emperor of the Medes, Ezra. 6.10.
and Persians, how bountifully were they rewarded by him, what a decree did he
make for the building of the Temple? Nor shall we ever enjoy the comfortable
fellowship of a Friend, if we omit this duty. For all things are sanctified to
us by Prayer. 1. Tim. 4, 5.


when Jesus saw their Faith, says the Text, Mark. 2, 3.5.
he said unto the sick of the Palsy, Son thy Sins be forgiven thee. God for
one man's sake helps another. So Math. 8.13. Math. 8.13.
The Centurion believed, and the Servant was healed. Little know thou, what
good thou receivest from the hands of God, by the means of praying Friends.
St. Stephanus non sic orasset, Paulum hodie Ecclesia non haberet. Aug. Heb.
13.18, 19
St. Paul found the benefit St. Steevens Prayers. And Austin of his Mother
Monica's. So Heb. 13.18, 19. Pray for me; I say, pray for me I say, said Father
Latimer. Pray for me, pray for me, for Gods sake pray for me, said blessed
Bradford. It is no matter if we be forgotten in Cups, so we be remembered in
Prayers. And ever count Praying-Friends the best Friends. And to such I shall
readily endorsse my letter, To my truly Loving Friend this, etc.

Father, for as much as they are taught by Christ to say Our Father, Give us,
Forgive us. They are not so strait-laced as to forget the Church, and every
member of it. They who love Christ, love every member of Christ, to the lowest.
Oh the happiness of a Christian, who has a stock going in every part of the
Christian World. He is like some rich Merchant, who has his Factors in all
Countries. Some in Spain, others in France, and where not, where God has a
Church? The Prayers of the Saints are for the common good of the whole body;
and the poorest member of that body, is a sharer in all the Prayers that are
put up to Heaven in the behalf of the Church: As when several Ships go to
Sea, some traffic in one thing, and some in another: Some bring Gold, others
Spices, and others other Commodities; but all that is brought, is for the
common good of the Country: So the Prayers of the godly are like these Ships
that go to Sea. Some request this of God, others that, but all that they bring
home is for the good of the whole Church, whereof thou (being a member) shall
certainly be a sharer. If one Elijah can procure plenty, and prevail for a
whole Country; If one Isaac by Prayer can make Rebeccah fruitful; If the
Prayer of one Righteous man can so prevail with God, what will so many eyes
and hands reared up to Heaven do? Single Prayers are like Sampsons single
hairs, every one has the strength of a man, but the Prayers of many are like
his whole bush or head of hair, able to overcome the whole Host of Heaven,
and to bind the hands of God himself, as appears by the passage betwixt God
and Moses. Exodus 32.10.
And if men should fail me, yet Christ still loves me, and loving me, he will
not be wanting in making Intercession to his Father on my behalf.

Lastly; In that this man having nothing at home, is enforced to go out and
fly unto his Friend, it may teach us this Lesson that,

Afflictions drive to God.

Isay. 17.3. there we read that Ephraim the prime Tribe of Israel should lose
his strength, Isay. 17.3.
and Damascus the prime City of Syria should lose his Kingdom, and that the
Enemy should deal with Israel and Syria (who had joined together as one
against Juda) as the Harvest man does with the stalks of Corn within the
compass of his sickle, verse 4, 5, 6.
cut them off together, verse 4, 5. And yet as in a Harvest-field, after the
carefullest Reaper, there will be some gleanings left, and some grapes after
the gathering in of the Vintage remain hid under the leaves, and some Olives
left upon the out boughs after the tree is most shaken: so shall it be (says
God) with Israel, some few shall be reserved after the common destruction,
verse 6. And the fruit of this Affliction shall be, that the remaining
Israelites shall look up to their Maker, verse 7. They shall fly to him, call
upon his name, devote themselves to his worship, and service, however before
they were rebellious. Isay. 26.16.
So Isay. 26.16. Lord in trouble they have visited thee, and thou have heard of
them, they have sought thee, etc. This fruit of Affliction is so general, that
the Prophet speaks as if it wrought thus in all men. And thus did the
backsliding Jews, Jer. 2.27. Hos. 5.15. and 6.1. Psalm. 78.34.107.28. Judge.
6.6.2 Chron. 33. ii.
as God himself testifies of them, Jer. 2.27. So Hos. 5. ult. and 6.1. Psalm.
78.34. and 107.28. In the time of their trouble they cried unto the Lord. We
find they did so Judge. 6.6. Bind Manasses with chains, load him with irons,
bow down his neck and back with bonds, and then he will know himself, and
confess that the Lord he is God. 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Pull the King of Babylon from
his Throne, lay his honor and insolency in the dust, banish him the company of
men, turn him to eat grass with the Ox of the field, and he will learn at
length to praise the God of Heaven, Dan. 4.33, 34. Let the Prodigal be brought
into extremity, Dan. 4.33.34.
stripped out of his gay clothes, clothed with rags, have an empty purse, and
an empty belly, then he will think of his Fathers house, and return home, as we
have showed you more largely on that Parable, Luke 15.11. Luke 15.11.
So the Syrophoenician being afflicted in her Daughter, vexed with an unclean
Spirit, runs to Christ, Mark. 7.25.
Mark. 7.25. Much more might be said of it, but I hasten to the Use, after we
have removed a scruple which is this.

2 Chro. 28.23. and 33.23. Jer. 2.20. and 5.3. Isay. 1.5. Resp.
and not brought nearer to him by their Afflictions, as we read, 2 Chronicles.
28.22. and 33.23. Jer. 2.20. and 5.3. Isay. 1.5. And this daily experience
teaches.

For Answer; It is true, Afflictions in their own nature, do not this, but as
they are sanctified. The effect of Gods strokes is like to that of his word,
and other Ordinances, if grace be given with them, they are very profitable
through his blessing, if they be sent without a blessing, they are a savor of
Death, and not of Life. Now to the wicked they are not sanctified, they are
part of the Curse, and forerunners of future destruction, they reteyne their
Nature still, and so long no wonder if they profit not.

Secondly; Albeit they drive not men to God (so as to be truly humbled, yet
they enforce the worst to some outward kind of humiliation for the present, as
they did Caine, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, and others; albeit they returned to their
former course, and (like iron out of the fire) to their former hardness.
Indeed the wicked are worst in long sorrows, and best in sudden; as the godly
are worst in sudden, but best in long Afflictions and continued calamities.

Isay. 1.5. and 9.13. Now, Isay. 1.5. and 9.13.
is it not thus with many of us, (I spare to speak of the Land in general, I
come nearer home to our own particular) how have those Afflictions which you
have undergone wrought on you? Balaam's Ass could speak when it perceived the
Angel to stand in the way, in a narrow passage, with a drawn sword. And are
not many of us more brutish then that beast we speak of? We all are under some
affliction or other, yet we confess not, pray not, but murmur and repine,
curse, swear, blaspheme, and work all manner of wickedness, trespassing more
and more against the Lord, Luke 23.
sinning with a higher hand then ever; With Simon of Cyrene we have borne the
Cross, it has lain heavy upon our shoulders, but we have not been crucified
(in respect of our Lusts) upon the Cross. We grin under the burden, as Antic
Pictures seem to do under the weight of the house side, whereunto they are
fastened. Nay, not only grin (like Anticks,) but we wax more violent in sin;
like Mastives we become more feirce for being tied up, or like unto Bulls, more
mad with bayting, Isay. 8.21. Revel. 16.9.11.29.
as we read Isay. 8.21. Revel. 16.9.11.29. Woefully sad is the condition of
such; we leave them to Gods mercy, and come to a second Use.

God, be we exhorted to bear them patiently. The best are apt to discover much
weakness under their wants, and sufferings, and discover much want of Faith,
Patience, Humility, not weighing well the Profit and Necessity of them.

For the profit of them, hear what the Church says, Lament. 3.27. It is good
for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. Lament. 3.27. Psalm. 119.71.
And what David speaks from his own Experience. Psalm. 119.71. Many ways they
are profitable.

First they are Pillulae lucis, Pills made purposely to clear the eye sight,
(not so much of the body, as the mind and conscience) they are the eyebright
of the soul, Vexatio dat Intellectum, the Rod and Reproose give wisdom, Pro.
29.15.
Pro. 29.25. David had many Teachers, yet this taught him best; It was said
that Mr. Ascham was a good Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, but affliction was
a better: Luther says of himself, that he never understood some of David's
Psalms, till he was in affliction. Paul's blindness took away his blindness,
and made him see more in the way of Life, then all his learning, got at the
feet of Gamaliel could do: The Christ-Crosse (as some used to term it) placed
before the Alphabet, is no Letter; yet all the letters in the Alphabet do not
teach so many good Lessons as the Cross does.

Secondly; They open the Ear (as well as the Eye,) and cause us to listen and
attend to those things, which before we would not lend an Ear unto, Job.
33.10. and 36.15. Job. 33.10.36.15.
In our prosperity we will lend an Ear to some truths; laugh at others, fret
and rage at others; but adversity is a good Schoolmaster, Isay. 28.19. only
Fear will make us understand the hearing. Isay. 28.18.
Look on a man that is exercised with affliction, and he will profit more by
one Sermon, then others do by ten; Nay one week's affliction will teach a man
more, then many years preaching without affliction. Many will not be persuaded
that swearing, Sabbathbreaking, etc: is a sin, when, lying under some heavy
affliction, they are convinced of it; many, that will not endure reproof in
prosperity, in adversity will receive it. The Rebuke of sin, is aptly resembled
to the fishing for Whales: the mark is bigg enough, one can scarce miss
hitting, but if there be not Searoome enough, and line enough, and a dexterity
in letting out that line, he that fixed his harping iron in the Whale,
endangers both himself and his boat. God has made us Fishers of men, and when
we have struck a Whale, touched the Conscience of any person, which held it
self above our check, it struggles, and strives, and endeavors (as much as it
can) to draw Fisher, and Boat, and all into the Sea, bring the man and his
state into contempt, and danger: but if God tie a sickness or other sad
calamity to the end of that line, that will wind up this Whale again to the
boat, bring back this rebellious sinner better advised to the mouth of the
Minister for counsel and comfort.

Secondly; It is a means to work holiness in us, Heb. 12.10, 11. Job. 33.16,
17. Psalm. 119.67. Numb. 21.7. 2 Cor. 15.4. Jam. 4.8, 9.
Heb. 12.10.11. Job. 33.16, 17. This also David confesses of himself, Psalm.
119.67. Thus Numb. 21.7. 2 Chronicles. 15.4. They cause us to look into our selves,
reflect home, find out the cause of sin, confess that sin, and leave it. Thus
James 4.8, 9. When the Apostle had exhorted sinners, to cleanse their hands,
and purge their hearts, he directs them to the means, verse 9. suffer
affliction, mourn, weep. A great force, affliction has to mortify lusts,
and subdue sin in us. Hence it is compared to baptizing, and washing, that
takes away the filth of the soul, Math. 10.28, 39.
Math. 10.38, 39. Linen is washed, and rinsed not to tear it, but to cleanse
it. Luke 22.
It is a Cleanser. They are compared to a winnowing that blows away the
Chafe. Amos. 9.9
It is a purifier, Amos 9.9. To a fire that refineth and purges away the
dross; So a Purger, Zach. 13.9. Zach. 13.9. John 15.2. Isay. 27.9. and 48.10.
To a Pruning knife that cuts off superfluous branches. John 15.2; So a Pruner.
This is all the fruit, etc: Isay. 27.9. and 48.10.

And as it mortifies Lusts in us; so affliction quickens us to holy duties, and
puts Life into our Prayers, it sets an edge on them: When the thorn is at the
breast, the little Nightingale sings sweetest, Isay. 26.16. 2 Chronicles. 20.34.13.
2 Cor. 12.10. Dr. Stoughton.
Isay. 26.16. 2 Chronicles. 20.34.13. And as it quickens to duties, so it renewes
our graces, and revives them, 2 Cor. 12.10. I have heard of a Sexion (how true
the Relation is I cannot say) that went into the Church at Night to rob a
woman, who had been buried the day before with a Gold ring upon her finger
(according to her desire): when he had opened the grave and Coffin, and loosed
the sheet, he fell a chafing her finger to get off the Ring, and with rubbing
and chafing of it, her spirits returned (she having been but in a swound
before) and she revived and lived many years after. So afflictions to the
godly, serve but as boxes on the ear, to revive them that were in a trance.

Thirdly; They are a means to estrange our affections, and alienate them from
the world and earthly desires, Gal. 6.14. 1 King. 19.4. 2 Cor. 5.4.
Gal. 6.14. These made Eliah weary of it, 1 King. 19.4. So 2 Cor. 5.4. The
Mother tells the Child that she must weane it, her milk is naught, etc, but all
that will not do; let Mustard be laid upon the breast, then it will paw at it,
and turn the head away. So it is here: Genesis 13.2.
The World is like Laban, with whom Jacob dwelt, and spent himself with cares,
and yet would have been content to have dwelt longer with him, had not this
Churl first changed his countenance toward him. (...) So would we be to the
world in our affections and desires were we not so often deceived by it.

Fourthly; by them much sin is prevented. As God said to Abimelech, Genesis 20.6.
Genesis 20.6. I kept thee that thou should not sin against me; So God keeps us
within compass by this hedge of Thorns, Hos. 2.6. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Hos. 2.6. Thus St. Paul was kept in by them, 2 Cor. 12.7. A Thorn in the
flesh to prevent Pride. God opens the ears of men (says Elisha) by their
corrections, that he might cause them to turn from their enterprise, and hide
the Pride of man, Job. 33.17, 18. Job. 33.17, 18.


Fifthly; By afflictions graces are increased in us, Romans 5.3, 4.
Romans 5.3, 4. They are but like a growing Ague, or a warm April shower, to
garden herbs, that causes them to shoot out sensibly in one night. As Jacob
said to Laban, before I came unto thee, thou had but little, etc: So our Joy
is increased by them, 2 Cor. 1.5. Romans 5.3.
2 Cor. 1.5. So Patience, Romans 5.3. And other graces of the Spirit. The Link or
Torch we know burns the better for beating.

Sixthly; They are a means to free us from Hell, 2 Cor. 11.32. 1 King. 2.26.
1 Cor. 11.32. As Solomon said to Abiathar, 1 King. 2.26. Get thee to Anathoth
to thine own fields, for thou art worthy of death, but I will not at this time
put thee to death, because thou baredst the Arc of my Lord God before David my
Father. So God deals with us: when he might justly deprive us of Life, yea of
eternal Life; yet if we have borne the Arc, if we can plead any true
Reference or relation to Christ, God will not take away our Lives for our Sins,
but commute eternal torments into temporal punishments, he sends us only to
our Anathoth, confines us to our beds, deprives us of our health, or wealth,
but frees us from damnation by means of them.

Seaventhly and lastly. They are means of increasing our joys both here, and
hereafter. Had Esther never been a Captive, she had never been a Queen. Had we
never been afflicted, we should never be advanced to glory, 2 Cor. 1.5. Psalm.
90.15.
2 Cor. 1.5. Psalm. 90.15. Affliction is the very seed of comfort. And as the
seed cast into the ground promises a Harvest, so do our Afflictions. When
Zachary was dumb, Luke. 1.
John Baptist (the voice) was a breeding: so greatest comforts are preparing
for us, under the saddest Crosses. And as our joys here, so our joys in
Heaven are increased by them: So we read, 2 Cor. 4.17.
2 Cor. 4.17. The more painful that our Labor has been, the greater and
richer shall be our reward, and Recompense.

As they are Profitable, so they are Necessary. And this is the Reason of that
strange and passionate speech that the Lord uses of his people, Jer. 9.7.
Behold I will melt them and try them: Jer. 9.7.
for what should I else do for the Daughter of my people? as if he should say,
I can devise no way to do them good, but by casting them into the Furnace of
affliction. As Christ says of offenses, it is necessary that offenses come;
Math. 18.7.
so may it be said of afflictions, it is necessary that afflictions do come,
Acts. 14.22, And that, Acts. 14.22.


First, Romans 8.29.
In respect of Gods predestination, Romans 8.29. secondly, Conformation to Christ
our Head, who was consecrated through afflictions, Heb. 2.10. Romans 18.16, 17.
Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
Heb. 2.10. Romans 8.16, 17. And Thirdly, They assure us of our Adoption, Heb.
12.6, 7, 8. In these respects we shall find that Gods Children have first borne
afflictions patiently; Secondly they have been cheerful under them. Thirdly,
they have been thankful for them. Fourthly, they have been so far from
desiring to be freed from them, that they have rather wished for them, and
desired them. These are strange Paradoxes to flesh and blood, yet undoubted
truths.

First, Psalm. 39.9. Psalm. 62.1.
They have been patient under them, so Psalm. 39.9. and 62.1. not only I was
dumb (for a sullen silence argues a worse nature, then a crying passion) but my
soul keeps silence; he was free from murmuring and impatience. Levit. 26.41.
This was required, Levit. 26.41.

Secondly, Romans 5.3.
they have been cheerful under them, Romans 5.3. So it is required we should be,
Jam. 1.2.9.
Jam. 1, 2.9.

Thirdly, they have been thankful to God for their afflictions, and
sufferings, Job. 1.21. Psalm. 41.11. 1 These. 5.18.
Job. 1.21. Psalm. 41.11. This is likewise enjoined by the Apostle, 1 These.
5.18. In all things give thanks.

Fourthly, they have wished, and (after a sort prayed) for affliction, Jer.
10.24.
Jer. 10.24. So it is said of King Alured, that he prayed God always to send
him some sickness, whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better disposed
and affectioned to Godward: yet I conceive it had been better to have prayed
that affliction (when it did come) might be sanctified. For I find no direct
warrant for any one absolutely to pray for affliction.

Jeremiah says, I have not desired the woeful day thou know, Jer. 17.16.
And for that prayer of Jeremiah (before mentioned. Jer. 17.16.
) Jer. 10.24. he prays not simply for affliction, but by way of Confession,
as if he should say, Lord if thou will needs correct me, and, thy people as
thou have threatened, then do it not in thy wrath, and fury, but in mercy and
goodness. For however afflictions are good to the good, yet it is but so
accidentally; for in themselves they are evil, and Punishments for sin. Nor
does any man know his own strength, how he shall be able to bear them.

Afflictions then being thus Profitable and Necessary, Let us not be too much
afraid of them, nor complain of them too much, as many do, though they come
yawning upon us, (like Sampsons Lion) as if they would devour us, but let us
husband them well, as we ought; let them drive us to God as the storm does the
Birds to their rows, and Beasts to their denns, and Ships into their Havens:
they are part of our portion in this Life, and may not be wasted Prodigally;
And though you look on them as on so many wayward guests, yet at their going
away they pay freely. To conclude (then) in a word. Let our Afflictions cause
us to seek out a Promise, a Promise cause us to seek out Faith, Faith put us to
seek out Prayer, and Prayer will not fail to find out God.

And he from within shall answer, and say, Trouble me not, the door is now
shut, and my Children are with me in bed, I cannot rise and give thee.]

Hitherto you have heard of this man's Address unto his Friend, in his time of
want. And of the Request he made; (which was both reasonable and honest in it
self, albeit at an unseasonable time of night.) Now follows the Success he
had, which was not at present answerable to his hopes, for instead of a Grant,
we find that he meets with a Repulse, [ And He from within shall answer and
say, Trouble me not, etc.]

Where, First take notice of the Person Answering. He from within. Secondly, of
the Answer it self, containing first an inhibition. Trouble me not now, etc:
Secondly, a Resolution. I cannot Rise and give thee, i. e. I will not now do
it. We begin with the Person Answering.

[ And he from within shall answer and say, etc.]

This Friend was within (then) and not so asleep, but that he heard his suite,
yet he condescends not presently unto him: from the History, we may observe
that,

A Friend within may a while keep his Friend without, he may refuse to
condescend to his Friends Request, and yet remain a Friend still.

Thus David, 2 Samuel 13.25.
albeit he was much pressed by Absalom his Son, to go with him to his feast,
yet he would not condescend thereto, albeit he affected his Son (too much
indeed) and he gives a Reason for his refusal lest he should be chargeable
unto him, 2 Samuel 13.25. So Solomon albeit he was a very dutiful Son unto his
Mother, and honored her, and bore all filial affection toward her, and
promised to deny her nothing, yet when she demanded an unreasonable request,
which he saw tended to the undoing both of her self, and him, he did not only
deny her suite, but swears, God do so to me and more also, if Adoniah have not
moved this against his own Life, 1 King. 2.23, 24.
1 King. 2.23, 24. Christ himself denies the motion made unto him by his two
Kinsmen, Math. 20.20. Luke 9.54, 55.
Math. 20.20. So Luke 9.54, 55. The motion of those two fiery Disciples was not
only denied, but they were sharply reproved for their rash and fiery zeal in
making of it.

Friend without, the other of the Friend within.

The Friend without conceives that the Friend within does transgress the Laws
of Friendship, if he denies him any Request, be it never so unreasonable, or
unseasonable, and is too too apt to question the affection of that Friend that
says, I cannot give nor lend. For such is the disposition of some, that they
never look on what they have received from the hands of Friends, but
continually fix their minds on what they would receive, and hope for: let their
obligations be never so great, and many, yet one thing denied, shall so solely
possess their memories, that all former kindnesses and favors are clean
lost, and buried in forgetfullnesse, when, it may be, the request made makes
not for the good of him that craves it, nor for the Credit of him, of whom it
is craved, to condescend thereunto.

One desiring of Publius Rutilius an unjust request, be^^^ denied said in
Indignation, Valor. Max. lib. 6.
What am I the better for all thy Friendship, if thou denyest me this that I
desire of thee? And what am I the better for thy Friendship said Rutilius, if
thou desire that of me, which cannot be granted by me without dishonor?

If thy desires suit not with rectifyed Reason, and Religion, or are unfitting
and beyond the expedience of him, who should grant thee thy desire, be not
offended with thy Friend, but with thy self, if thou meet with a Repulse: the
refusal is deserved. To think ill of any man for not giving thee what he need
not, is injustice, much more for not giving thee what he ought not. But if thou
should rise higher, and for one denial blot out the remembrance of many
benefits, that were the height of Ingratitude. Such dispositions are no way to
be liked, that will either make unkindnesses, and remember them, or unmake
kindnesses and forget them. This is the fault of the Friend without to be
reproved.

The Friend within is faulty in not daring to deny his Friend without, any
request unto him, made, be it never so immodest and unreasonable. Caius
Blossius being demanded by Laelius, in the presence of the Roman Consulls,
what he would have done for his Friend Gracchus, answered, All things: Put case
then, said Laelius, he should have required of thee to have burnt our Temples,
would thou have done it? My Friend, said Blossius, would never have required
that of me; but if he had, I should have done it for his sake. Accursed is that
Friendship which is so slavish as to refuse nothing which a Friend requires,
Amicitia in malo esse non potest. Aug. ad Cons.
be it never so unjust. Socrates being advised by his Friend Criton to break
prison and save his Life by flight, replied, thy earnestness my Friend in this
matter were much worth, if it were consistent with uprightness, but it not
being so, the greater it is, the more troublesome it is. True Friendship is
neither fond nor cruel. It is an injurious weakness to be drawn upon any
by-respects whatever to the furtherance of faulty suits, and unlawful actions.
And it is cruel courtesy to yield to any thing prejudicial to it self, or
dangerous to the beloved party. As (...) showed before in Adoniahs case.
Consent in sin is Conspir^^^, not Friendship.

And yet that facile and flexible disposition which like wax is fit for every
impression, Mr. Tho. Fuller, mixed. Cont. p. 77.
is (says a Reverend Divine) esteemed in the world for a good nature, but such
Osyers (says my Author) can never make Beams to bear any stresse in Church,
or State; If this be good Nature, let me be a Clown: he cannot be a Friend to
any that is a Friend to all, and the worst foe to himself. If the desires of
my Friend be such, as I know will endanger him, or prejudice my self, and so
pleasure neither, I should in condescending, besides making my self accessory
to his fault, give him a Scorpion instead of a fish, and occasion him in cold
blood to say, Ille amando me occidit. There is a man whose Loving and kind
affection wrought my destruction.



Nabal denied David with a crabid and cross interrogatory, Who is David, and
who is the Son of Ishai? The bitter and malignant quality which denyalls and
repulses of a Friend within, to his Friend without, carry with them, would be
corrected with loving speeches, and mild behavior. So that albeit thou
satisfy not thy Friend in his desire, yet thou so manifestest thy Love, and
good Affection to him, by Circumstances as that he shall never have just cause
to tax thee of unkindnesse. So did this Friend within, who being loath to
satisfy his Friend without in one kind, endeavors to satisfy him in
another, and renders some plausible reasons to him, why he could not give him
what he desired, (of which hereafter.) Now to the spiritual sense, where first
observe, that

God is a Friend within, always within Call. Mist. Doct.
He is within in diverse respects.

First, in respect of Habitation. Our God is in Heaven (says the Psalmist,)
Psalm. 115.3. That is his home, Psalm. 115.3. Psalm. 68.5. Psalm. 113.5. Psalm.
123.1.
there he dwells. Psalm. 113.5. and 68.5. and 123.1. But this must be warily
understood, He is not in Heaven circumscriptive, as though he were included
within that compass, as bodies are within the compass of some place, and may
be circumscribed with all the Dimensions; for this is contrary to his infinite
greatness which does fill both Heaven and Earth. The Heaven of Heavens is not
able to contain it, 1 King. 8.27. Nor is he within in Heaven Definitive, as
though he were no where else; As the Angels, 1 King. 8.27.
who though they are not in Heaven circumscriptive, for that they want bodies,
and so are not circumscriptible, yet they are there Definitive, so as when they
are there, they are no where else. Certain it is that God is present in every
place, and bounded within no place: He is as truly without the Heavens, as he
is in them: in as much as his infinite essence cannot be contained in them. He
is no where, because no place whether Real, Nusquam est and ubique est. Bern.
or Imaginary can comprehend him. He is every where, because no body, no space,
or spiritual substance can exclude him, or avoid the penetration of his
essence. David compasses the world, Psalm. 139.7, 8.
Psalm. 139.7, 8. and finds him every where, yea he finds him in a strange
place, a place of our own making, which grew out of our Sins; that is Hell. If
we make our bed in Hell (A woeful Inn to make our Bed in) yet God is there too,
and more strangely there, then any other place, because he is there without any
Beam of Light, James 1.17. Romans 15.25.
who is the Father of Lights; without any beam of comfort, who is the Father
of all Consolation: he is in all places, and can be circumscribed in no place:
Neither of these ways is God said to be within, in Heaven. But in Heaven he is
said to be Declarative, there and thence declaring his unspeakable glory and
majesty. There he does manifest himself most of all, and in the greatest
splendour that may be; And that immediately, Revel. 21. Psalm. 19.1. and 76.8.
Romans 1.18. Jam. 1.17. Psalm. 102.19, 20.
not by means, neither Ordinary, or Extraordinary as he does here in this
world. Thence we see most evident signs of his Properties, and Attributes, of
his Omnipotency, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Psalm. 19.1. and 76.8. Romans 1.18. Jam.
1.17. Psalm. 102.19, 20.

Thence he sends his Angels; Thence the Son of man descended; Thence the
holy Spirit was sent; And thence the Son of man shall come to judge the world.
In a word, Look as the soul of man is said to be in the Head or Heart, so
conceive of Gods being in Heaven. The soul (we know) animates the whole body of
man, and by the presence of it, in every member communicates Life to the whole:
yet by way of preheminency and excellency, it is said to be in the Head or
Heart of man, because in these two parts of man, and from thence she exercises
her chiefest functions, and deriveth her chiefest influence. Thus it is with
God, he is every where; And yet said to be within in Heaven, because thence is
the chiefest rays of his majesty manifested. Thus God may be said to be
within, in respect of his Habitation and dwelling.

More Particularly; God may be said to be within, in two other respects: First
in regard of Audience; he is re^dy to hear us when we call upon him. Secondly
in regard of Ability and Power, to help and succor us in our greatest
distresses.

He is always within, in respect of his readiness to hear us when we call
upon him, Psalm. 34.15. verse 17, 18. Psalm. 145.18, 19
So Psalm. 34.15. His ears are open unto our cries, and verse 17, 18. The
Righteous cry and the Lord hears, he is nigh to them that are of a broken
heart, So Psalm. 145.18, 19. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, yea to
all that call upon him in truth, he will fulfill the desires of them that fear
him, he will also hear their cry and will save them. Psalm. 102.17.19, 20.
So Psalm. 102.17.19, 20. He has regard to the prayers of the destitute, etc:
He looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth, to hear the groaning of the Prisoner, to loose those that
are appointed to Death.

This readiness of God's to hear us may be seen, first in giving an Answer to
his, as soon as ever they have done their Prayer, as Numb. 14.20. when the
people murmured and God threatened, Genesis 24.15. Numb. 14.20.
Moses cried, and the Lord presently answered, I have forgiven them according
to thy Request. So 2 Samuel 22.7. And Acts 4.31. When they had done praying, 2 Samuel 22.7. Acts 4.31.
the place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost.

Secondly; He sometimes Answers before we have done praying So Dan. 9.20, 21.
whilst I was speaking and praying, Dan. 9.20, 21. Psalm. 35.13.
yea whilst I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel came, etc: So Psalm.
35.13. my Prayer was turned into my own bosom. This Answer David received,
even whilst he was praying.

Thirdly; He shows his readiness in that he hears us so soon as ever we
begin to pray. So Dan. 10.12. Fear not Daniel, Dan. 10.12.
for from the first day that thou did set thy heart to understand, and to
humble thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, his ears are open at
the first; like a tender Mother or Nurse, which use to be so wakeful, as that
they hear the Infant when it first begins to whimper.

Fourthly; He shows his readiness to hear, in that sometimes before we can
speak a word, Psalm. 32.5.
when it is but in the purpose of our Hearts to pray, God prevents us, and
grants us that which he knows we would have begged of him. Isay. 65.24.
Isay. 65.24. Before they call, I will answer. He hears and sees the
inclinations of the heart. John 11.41.
Father I thank thee (said our Savior at the raising up of Lazarus) that thou
have heard me: Bernard notes upon these words, that at that time, when Christ
gave thanks to God for having heard him, he had said nothing to his Father, but
in his heart. And that God had heard before he spoke. And thus as our Savior
entered into the house to his Disciples januis clausis when the doors were
shut. John 20.28.
So God many times enters into us, when our lips are shut, and we have not
opened them by verbal Prayer.

Fifthly and lastly; He shows his readiness to hear us, in hearing a voice in
that which has no voice, and that is our Tears. The Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping says David, Psalm. 6.8. Isay. 38.5.
Psalm. 6.8. So Isay. 38.5. In all these particulars, Gods readiness to give us
audience may appear.

And as he is always within, in regard of his readiness to hear so no less
within in regard of his Ability to help and succor us. God has spoken once,
yea twice have I heard it, that Power belongs unto the Lord says David, Psalm.
62.11. This has the Testimony, Psalm. 62.11.
both of Gods word* and works. Of his word, There is none like unto the God of
Jesurun says Moses, who rides upon the Heavens for thy help, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27.
Jer. 32.27. 2 Cor. 9.8.
Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. read Jer. 32.27. 2 Cor. 9.8. The very Pillars set up in the
Porch of the Temple taught this Truth, the name of the one was Jachin, he shall
establish, and the name of the other was Boaz, in him is strength, 1 King.
7.21. Jachin and Boaz in him, 1 King. 7.21.
cannot be sundered.

And the works of God in all ages have testified as much, Psalm. 135.5, Psalm.
135.5, 6.
6. What mervailous things has he effected for the succor of his Church and
people, you have before in part heard, and may hear more thereof hereafter. In
short, Gods Almightinesse is his Essence, and his Essence is his Almightinesse.
All in God is Mighty, mighty Mercy mighty Patience, mighty Power; It has no
limits. He has the same way, means, receipts, to keep from ruin and to help,
as in former times, etc: Thus you see how God is a Friend within, not only in
respect of habitation, but in regard of Readiness to hear, and of Ability to
help.

Friend within, and knock at a wrong door, seeking to vain helps in the day of
their distress. Papists reach us to go for all our Necessities by Invocation
to Saints in Heaven; but these can neither hear, nor give. I know that the
Papists will not say, that all the Saints in Heaven hear all that is said and
done on Earth. And we must be sure to pray where we may be sure to speed. Our
Savior Christ was willing to give us a Rule for Prayer, and in that Rule he
has taught us to say Our Father; had he been willing that his Rule should have
been declined to the Saints, he would have taught us to say Frater noster qui
es in coelis, and not only Pater noster, to pray to our Brethren which are
there, and not to our Father only, that is in Heaven. Besides, many of the
Saints that they direct us to, we know not where to find. Whither shall we go
to their St. George; (when we are to fight) for Victory? Where shall we find
their Petronilla, when the Ague is upon our backs, or their Saint Apollonica
when we have the Toothache? What know we whether these be in Heaven or no? Many
of their Saints are so far from heating in Heaven, that they are not there: For
may not the Pope err in matter of fact and so Canonize a Traitor for a Saint.
And many of their Saints are so far from being there in Heaven, that they were
never here on Earth. So far from being Saints, as that they were never men,
but are either fabulous illusions, or at least but symbolicall and Allegorical
allusions: Our adversaryes can say no other. They do not hold that all their
Legends were really, Historically true, but confess that many of them are but
symbolicall inventions to figure out, not what was truly done before, but what
we should endeavor to do now. Sure we are, that our God is a God of L^fe and
Being, And we know where he is, and no man knows where he is not; he can hear
at all times, and is ready to hear, and help, and therefore being a Friend,
and a Friend within, to him should we resort.

And as these are to be reproved, who trust in Friends, whose breath is not in
their Nostrills, nor ever was; so others amongst our selves, who put their
trust in other Friends, whose breath is in their Nostrills as the Prophet
speaks; Isay. 2. ult.
for wherein are they to be esteemed. But of these more has been said before.

Friend within, one that is within call, and both ready and able to help us.
And this has been a great encouragement to the Godly from time to time, to
come unto him by Prayer, Mich. 7.7. Psalm. 65.2. and 86.7. and 6.9. Psalm. 41.1.
Mich. 7.7. Psalm. 65.2. and 86.7. and Psalm. 6.9. And a great encouragement it
is to them to hold out and persevere in Prayer, Psalm. 40.1. Baals Priests could
not always find Ball at home; our God is never abroad; he is in Heaven, there
we shall find him. Whilst we know a Friend is within that we are desirous to
speak withal, we continue knocking. That we may do thus,

First; See in God a fulness of those things that thou beggest of him by
Prayer; Consider of him as of one, who is able to give being to his promises,
see an Alsufficiency in him, one in whom there is a fullness of all those
things thou cravest at his hands. He that comes to God may not waver in
respect of Gods sufficiency, Jam. 1.5. We seek things more earnestly, James 1.5.
and confidently when we know they are there, where we look for them. This is
the foundation, the Basis, upon which our Savior erects that Prayer which he
has recommended to us. Our Father which art in Heaven, see him to be a God in
Heaven: and thou will pursue cheerfully all other Petitions. As for daily
Bread, forgiveness of Sins, deliverance from Temptations; For Kingdom
Power, Glory is his: Thus the Apostle Paul still sets God before him, as having
that in him, for which he prays. Speaking of Peace, he prays, The God of
Peace, sanctify you througho^t, 1 These. 5.23. so Acts 4.24. The Church praying
for courage and bol^nesse, 1 These. 5.23. Acts 4.24.
set God before them as the God of Power, who has made both Heaven, and Earth,
and Sea, etc. Thus if thou desire pardon of Sin, Psalm. 86.5.15. Psalm. 130.7.
2 Cor. 1.3.
consider of God, as a God with whom there is plenty of Redemption and
Forgiveness. Desire thou ease in any misery or grief? Consider of God as a
Father of Mercy and Consolation, etc: This will strengthen Faith, and inflame
Affection: It di^covers to me the Key within the door, and assures me that he
is within whom I should speak withal, one able to help. (But of this before.)
(...) Secondly; If thou would see God within, see a Promise from God, of
those things thou beggest, ground thy Prayers upon that Promise, set that
before thine eyes, and ground thy confidence upon it, Genesis 32.9.12. 2 Samuel
7.25. 1 King. 8.25. Psalm. 119.147. and 143.1.
Genesis 32.9.12. 2 Samuel 7.25. 1 King. 8.25. Psalm. 119.147. and 143.1. These
promises are as Gods Staff and S^gnet. When we see a Friends Staff, or Cloak
lie upon the Table through a Window, it tells us he is not far off, and
encourages us to knock and wait. Therefore Acquaint thy self with the
promises that God has made unto thee, both for things of this Life, and of a
better. Consi^er how far they reach; upon what conditions they are made, and
understand them right; So shall thou see God to be a God within, ready and
willing to hear.

Thirdy and lastly: If thou would see God within, look upon him through the
door; John 10.7. Romans 11.36. 1 Timothy 2.5.
I am the door says Christ: in him and through him look up to God, He is the
Mediator, or the mean betwixt God and us, through him we must look unto God;
and through that mean he looks upon us. In his name we must ask if we
obtain, John 16.23. and 14.14. Aug. med. c. 5.
John 16.23. and 14.14. For what, says St. Austine, can be more pleasing to a
Father, then to use the mediation of his Son? The whole frame of our Prayers
should be like the beating out of a piece of Gold, but the last clause is like
the Impression of the stamp; Now no silver is current that has not Caesar's,
impression nor any Prayer acceptable that has not the stamp of Christ, the
Image of the Father. The ascending of the Throne of Solomon was by six stayres
or steps, and at the end of every step, or stayre, 1 King. 10.72.
was engraven a Lion; We ascend to the Throne of God, by those six Petitions of
that Prayer, which the Son of God has composed as a platform for us, to the
end of each of which Petitions must be annexed a Lion; even the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, Revel. 5.5.
who by his mediation must procure us both audience and favor. The Sun
enlightens the Cloud, when the Cloud is directly opposite to the Sun, as we see
in the Rainbow, albeit the Cloud is obscure and dark, yet in it is seen diverse
fair colors, but this is never but when the face of the Cloud ^ooks in the
face of the Sun: So is it in Prayer, if at any time man looks full in the
face of God, in and through his belove^ Son, he shall find him to be within,
and God will shine on us with the Divine colors of his grace, Luke 9.29. Psalm.
36.9. Exodus 34.29. Thence it is that we conclude all we pray tot, Exodus 34.29.
Psalm. 36.9. Luke 9.29.
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum the force of the whole, is usually at the
shutting of it up, all is concluded in the name and mediation of Christ. Dan.
9.17.
Dan. 9.17. Observing these three general Rules thou may comfortably rest
assured, that God is within, ready and able to help thee in thy greatest
troub^es.

a Friend within to come unto. Take outward comforts from a worldling, he is
like an unarmed man in a field, or a naked man in a storm, but a Child of God
is still happy, he has a Friend within, one that will comfort him, direct him,
protect him, Isay. 43.1, 2. and is ready at hand, Isay. 43.1, 2.
when all worldly Friends forsake him, Psalm. 27.10. I will conclude this point
with that sweet meditation of Austin, Psalm. 27.10.
upon this passage of the Parable, Nullus de janitoribus respondit, etc. None
of all the Porters, none of all the Servants, Aug. de. Temp Sermon. 171. Tom. 10.
none of all the Children made answer, they were all asleep, only the Master
was awake, and heard when he was called; Chrysolog.
and (as another upon the Text) he was nearest the gate, when the Friend
knocked at this dead time of the Nig^t: He was first awake (if he slept at all)
and first answered. O quam dare vult, etc: How willing is he to grant, who is
so willing to be di^quieted: how glad to hear thy knock, who has placed his
bed so near the gate? O quam non ad januam tantum, sed ipsa janua Dominus
fuit. And how truly may we say, he was not only near the gate, but the Lord
himself was the very gate, who when his Children are asleep, and the ears of
Saints, and Angels shut, primus and solus, first, and at the first call, nay,
only, made Answer to it. Nor is there any (says Austin) that can give an
answer but thy self; And to thee Lord I come, of thee I crave, at thee I
knock, for thou art the Gate. Rise Lord and show me Mercy, thou need'st no
Minister, thou can do all things. If thy Children should be asleep, yet thou
that keep Israel do never slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121.3, 4.
Still thou art within and awake, why should I fear?



For a while we may, Resp. Doct.
we lay it down for a Truth. Although God be a Friend within, and always ready
to hear the Prayers of his Children and Friends, yet he does not always grant
them their desires at the first, he may put off his Friends with delays for a
time: keep them without, and give no satisfactory answer to their desires, and
that for some weighty Reasons, which in his wisdom he sees fitting. I will
first prove it, then give Reasons for it.

Sometimes he may be silent, and answer nothing when they call; Job. 30.20.
And this the faithful have bitterly bewailed, Job. 30.20. I cry unto thee,
(said Job,) and thou do not hear me, I stand up and thou regardest me not.
Psalm. 22.1, 2. Lament. 3.8.44. Cant. 5, 6.
So David, Psalm. 22.1, 2. and the faithful Lament. 3.8.44. God did not only
keep his Friends out, but their prayers out for a time, in their apprehensions.
This the Church laments, Cant. 5, 6. And sometimes he puts them off with
excuses as he did the woman of Canaan, Math. 15.22. etc.
Math. 15.22.-27.

Yea; he has sometimes deferred and put them off so long, as that they have
been weary with waiting, Psalm. 69.3.119.81, 82.123.
Psalm. 69.3. and Psalm. 119.81, 82.123. and have done expecting: like some
Merchants who hearing no news of their ships for a long time, give all over
for lost. Isay. 49.14.
So Isay. 49.14. Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me; And this seems to be the meaning of that place, Luke 18.7, Luke
18.7, 8.
8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? His stay
will be so long before he comes to avenge the cause of his Elect, that when he
does come, he will scarce find Faith in holding out, expecting the performance
of those things which we have prayed for.



First; God has an eye herein to his own glory, which is exceedingly advanced
hereby. When Lazarus was sick, his Sister Martha and Mary sent word to Christ
thereof, John 11.3.
John 11.3. Behold, he whom thou love is sick, that they thought was enough;
upon the news thereof they doubted not, but he would come quickly, and visit
him; but he abides two days still in the same place, verse 6. he delays (on
purpose) to come and comfort them, And why so? The Text shows that it was for
this end, verse 6.
that God might have the more glory by it, verse 4.15.40. So at that Marriage
Feast in Galilee, verse 4.15.40
whereto Christ and his Disciples were invited when the provision of Wine
failed, Mary his Mother acquainted him therewith, hoping that Christ would make
a supply thereof, he tells her that his hour was not yet come, John. 2.4. he
delayed till general notice was taken of the want, John 2.4.
that so the glory of the miracle might be the greater, The Lord has made
every thing beautiful in his time, (says Solomon, Eccles. 3.11.
Eccles. 3.11.) He knows the best and fittest time to bestow his mercy on us,
so as that he may have most glory by the grant, and we most comfort, and that
is usually the time of trouble, Psalm. 9.9. and 86.7. Genesis 22.14. Isay. 33 9.10.
Psalm. 119.126.
Psalm. 9.9. and 86.7. yea of great trouble and sorrow. In the Mount of the Lord
it shall be seen, Genesis 22. See Isay. 33.9.10. Now in this desperate case I will
arise; so Psalm. 119.126.

Secondly; God respects the good of his Children in this delaying: For in so
doing he prepares them, for an Answer, and prepares the Answer to be the better
for them.

First, he fits them and prepares them the better for an Answer, and that many
ways: As first, by humbling of them under a fight, and sense of their wants
and faylings, which usually are best disco^ered by long delays; as a horse
that has any infirmity will soon show it in a long journey; and a leg that
has any imperfection in it in a long walk: Then Murmuring, Pride, Impatience
will appear that is in us, and thereby we come to be made vile, and base in
our own eyes. We use not to put in the spice, till the liquor be sodd to the
height; nor does God bestow his mercyes, till we are brought to the lowest
depth.

It was the speech sometimes of a great States man, concerning the Son of a
great Lord (committed for some misdemeanour) at the Council table, Let us
forget him a while, and he will remember h^mself the sooner. So upon the like
Reason God seems to forget us, that we may remember our selves, and be
humbled for our faylings: I shall give you three examples of this: One is Numb.
12. Miriam was struck with Leprosy for murmuring against Moses, Numb. 12.14.
he prays for her, God hears his prayer, and will heal her, but not so soon
as Moses would: She must be better humbled then as yet she was. If her Father
had but spit in her face says God, should she not be ashamed seven days?
verse 14. Let her be shut out of the Camp seven days, and after that received
in again.

Another Instance we have, Judge. 20.18.
Judge. 20.18. The Israelites had a good quarrel; they consult with God what to
do, they were encouraged by God, to go up against Benjamin, yet the first time
they are overthrown, and worsted, verse 21. verse 23. It may seem strange that
in such a case they should be overcome. But the Reason is evi^ent, they were
not yet enough humbled; for after that they had humbled their souls, and
sought the Lord by Prayer and Fasting, God gave them the victory, verse. 26.
etc.

The third Instance we have in the Apostle Paul: God intended to take from him
the Messenger of Satan that buffeted him, but not so soon as he would have had
it removed, Thrice he besought God earnestly, 2 Cor. 12.8.
that it might depart from him, 2 Cor. 12.8. but God having respect to his
greater Humiliation, deferrs and puts him off, telling him that his Grace was
sufficient for him, i. e. I will uphold thee, but it is too soon for thee Paul
to berid of that thorn.

Secondly, God does thus delay us, to quicken our Appetites, en^^^^e our
desires, and make us the more earnest and fervent in Prayer, dealing herein as
the Fisher does in drawing back his bait, to make the fish more eager of it.
Or as the Father does with his Child, holding an Apple in his hand, and
suffering the Child to tug at it, and then it may be he opens one finger, and
then another, and so by degrees parts with it to his Child: This was Christ's
dealing with the woman of Cannan, he put her off, and delayed her of purpose to
make her the more earnest and importunate in her ^uit, Math. 15.25.28.
Math. 15.25.28. Delays do but whet the desires of earnest suitors.

Thirdly, God does this for the trial and discovery of those graces that are
in us, and to inure us to Patience, and Obedience, and submission of our wills
to his. A Father will sometimes cross his Child to discover his disposition,
and with holds for a time that which he purposes to give, to see how he will
take it, he inures him to obedience, and subjection, by crossing him of his
will a while. I will Love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1.
(says David) because he has heard my Prayer, This is right, but not enough,
God will prove us whether we will Love him, and fear him, and trust in him,
even then when he seems to reject our Prayers, and shut them out of his
presence. He will prove our Faith, whether we will believe his Promise, and
wait for the Performance thereof, though he delay long. He will try our
Obedience, whether we will continue to seek him, and call upon him as he has
commanded, and for that he has commanded us so to do, al^ough we find our
selves disappointed for the present. And so our Patience and other graces, by
the exercise of which in trials he brings us to more perfection in them (for
use makes perfectness;) Hereto tends that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.8.
2 Cor. 1.8. We had the sentence of Death in our selves, that we might not
trust in our selves, but in God, which quickens the dead, And thus by these
delays we come to be the better fitted for mercy.

Fourthly, hereby the mercy is better prepared for us, for it becomes the
greater, and the sweeter; by delaying and putting off our suite, we are brought
to value the thing sued for the more, when things easily had are lightly
esteemed: lightly come, lightly go, Cito data vilescunt. Acts 22.28.
(as we use to say in the Proverb,). The Chief Captain, Act. 22.28. that
obtained his freedom with a great sum, bought it at a dear rate, valued it
highly: So it is in this Case, If blessings were as soon had, as asked, they
would be the less set by. And this is one cause why God hides his face so
long from many of his dear Children, that they might prize the sense of his
Love and favor the better, when they have it, Cant. 3. Cant. 3.1-4.
1-4.

And by this means the mercy when it is obtained is the sweeter, and more
welcome when it comes. Isaac is Isaac, a Son of Laughter, when he comes after
many years expecting. When Jacob hears of Joseph, whom he had long wanted and
clean given over for gone, he was so full of joy that he desired not to live a
day longer, Genesis 45.28. and 46.30. So Psalm. 128. 1.-5. Pro. 13.12.19.
Genesis 45.28. and 46.30. Thus it is true that Solomon speaks, Pro. 13.12.19. A
desire accomplished delights the soul, and when it comes, it is as a tree
of Life, to heal the maladies of the heart. And thus I have rendered you some
reasons of the point: Now to the Uses.

Peter does, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the Godly who are Gods Friends, 1 Pet. 4.18.
are many times delayed and put off in their lawful suits, and sometimes
seemingly not heard, shall the Enemies of God hope to have Audience, or think
to speed in their suits when they beg mercy? does God keep his own Children in
suspense, and will he give bread to bastards, and open the door to them when
they call? What Hope has the Hypocrite (says Job,) Will God hear their cry
when trouble comes on him? Job. 21.9.
Job. 21.9. Let David Answer the Question from his own experience, They cried,
but there was none to save them, even unto the Lord, but he answered them not,
Psalm. 18.41. God will be a God of his word, Psalm. 18.41. Isay. 1.15. Pro.
1.29.30. Hos. 5, 6. John 9.31. Psalm. 78.34.35. Neh. 9.27.
he has protested against their Prayers, Isay. 1.15. Pro. 1.29.30. Hos. 5.6.
And this we know, said the blind man cured, that God hears not sinners.

Obj. But God has heard such, Psalm. 78.34.35. Neh. 9.27. Resp. God is not
inclined by their Prayers to hear and grant, for they are abominable to him;
but, for other Reasons, as they are his Creatures, he gives them common and
general mercyes; as he hears the Ravens, he hears them: Secondly, Psalm.
147.9.
God is mindful of his Covenant made to their Forefathers, which moves him
sometimes to show mercy to their Children, Neh. 9.8.
Neh. 9.8. Thirdly, he does this for his own sake, to prevent blasphemy, Deuteronomy.
32.26, 27. Exodus 32.12, 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 32.26.27 r Exodus 32.12, 13, 14. Psalm.
105.48.


Secondly, God does not hear them to gratify them, (as he does hear his
Friends,) but to punish them, as he heard Israel, in begging Quails. God may
hear, and does hear, many a wicked man; but it is to his ruin, as he heard
the Jews crying His blood be upon us, and upon our Children. Math. 27.25.
It were better to have Gods gracious denyalls, then his angry yeildings.

Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.10. Jer. 15.18.
but this was his infirmity as he confesses, verse 10. So Jer. 15.18. as if he
should have said, I hoped that thou would have helped me, but it is with me,
as with a thirsty Travailer, who seeing a pit before him, hops it will be a
refreshing Fountain to him, when it proves but as a dry pit, thou have
beguiled me and my hopes: so the Disciples though of Christ when he was asleep
in that storm, Mark. 4.38. Master, carest thou not that we perish, Mark. 4.38.
as if he were more careless of them, then any other Master would be.

To sustain our hearts from sinking under this Affliction, It would be
considered.

First, that thou art not the only man whom God has thus dealt withal: It is
not thy case alone, but it has been, and is the case of many of Gods dearest
Children, who were and are highly in his favor. It was Jacobs case, Genesis 32.24.
God held him wrestling till morning before he obtained his desire. It was Jobs
case. Job. 13.24. It was David's case, ^ob. 13.24. Psalm. 44.24. and 88.1.- Math.
14.25. Judge. 3.25.
Psalm. 44.24. and. 88.1. The Disciples case, Christ came not to them till the
fourth watch of the night, Math. 14.25. And the case of thousands of Gods
Children, and beloved Friends besides, who (as it was said of Eglons Servants,
they tarryed out at the door till they were ashamed, so they) have been kept
without till they have been ashamed to be denied any longer, 1 Pet. 4.12.
so that what St. Peter says concerning the fiery trial, think it not strange
as if some unwonted thing did happen to you, we may say concerning this trial,
it is no new thing that happens, but that which happened to the best, and does
daily happen.

Secondly, thou must know that Hearing is one thing, and Answering is another,
there is oftentimes a great distance betwixt them. There is not a faithful
prayer that thou have put up to God but it was presently heard and regarded,
and accepted, whatever he seems to thee to do for present, Psalm. 22.2. Psalm.
31.21.
read Psalm. 22.2. with 24. and Psalm. 31.21. All the time that God delays the
Godly, he is but consulting (as it were) of the fittest opportunity, and the
best way to Answer the prayers of his Servants.

Thirdly, we must learn to put a difference betwixt delays and denyalls his
forbearance is no denial of thy suit, God may regard thy prayer, and answer it
too, though he do not presently grant that thou beggest of him, should he deny
thee having engaged himself by promise to hear, Psalm. 50.15.
Psalm. 50.15. he should deny himself which is as impossible for him to do, as
to cease to be God.

Fourthly, thou may be answered when thou think that thou art delayed and
put off. God has many times answered the prayers of his Children, when they
perceived it not; either through heedlessenesse; or negligence, not looking up
after their Prayers, Psalm. 85.8. Job. 9.16.
not regarding their return, Psalm. 85.8. or else through anguish of mind and
spirit, as Job speaks of himself, Job. 9.16. Now Prayer is answered, not only
when the very thing craved is granted, 1 Samuel 1.27. 1 King. 3.9. Psalm. 21.4.
Genesis 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 138.3. 2 Cor. 12.8. 1 Samuel 1.20.
as 1 Samuel 1.27. 1 King. 3.9. Psalm. 21.4. but when that very Particu^ar is not
granted, but a better in the Room, as Genesis 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 138.3. 2 Cor.
12.8. If God then make an Exchange with thee, giving thee Gold for Silver, if
he cheer up thy spirit, after thy Prayers, as he did Hannahs; if he gives thee
strength, Psalm. 73.22.
and upholds thy heart to bear the want as he did David's, Psalm. 73.22. and to
continue in Prayer, God has heard thee, and thy prayer is returned into thy
bosom.

Lastly, if God do for a time withold the thing thou prayest for, and his
Answer likewise, yet thou may rest assured that he does it for thy good, for
one of those ends before mentioned. Which if thou find to be wrought in
thee, thou art an happy man.

Charge not God (then) foolishly with harsh dealing or unkindnesse, nor make
any rash conclusion against thy self, as if thou were out of favor with God,
but make the true Use of it, for although our hearts may not sink under this
burden, yet we may not pass it over, as a slight matter, or thing of nothing,
but lay it to heart as the Godly have done, Psalm. 28.1.
Psalm. 28.1. David counted himself no better then a dead man in such a case.



Isay. 59.1, 2. Jer. 5.27.
Isay. 59.1, 2. Jer. 5.27. do thou not regard some iniquity in thy heart,
harbourest some secret, and beloved sin there? is there not some failing in thy
Prayers, for Substance or Circumstance, Jam. 4.3. Goodw. return of Prayer.
Jam. 4.3. If you send to a Friend who uses to be punctual, and not to fail
in returning answer to your letters, you strait think that there is some
miscarriage in the business (says one,) so should it be in this case, if you
have no answer made unto your Prayers, it should cause thee to be jealous of
thy self, and conclude that something is amiss. The Fisher if he knows there
are store of fish in the water, and yet has no bite, plucketh up his line,
looks on his bait, and mends it, so should we do when God is silent: examine
well where the fault is, and amend that, that we may find more comfort after.

Secondly, do as the Fisher does, put in again; say with Peter Lord we have
fished all night, and taken nothing, Luke 5.5.
nevertheless at thy command I will let down the net. Duties that God enjoynes
must be discharged, albeit we see no likelihood that any good will come
thereof: This is a duty strictly pressed on us in the word, Phil. 4.6. 1 These.
5.17. Phil. 4.6. 1 These. 5.17.
We must do our part and duty, and leave the success to God: As Job said in
another case, we must say in this, be of good courage and play the men, and the
Lord do that which seems good to him, 2 Samuel 10.12.
2 Samuel 10.12. This will yield us much comfort, although we should get no more
good by our Prayers: Lack of present success is no warrant to surcease a duty
enjoined. Isay. 56.6. er. 20.9.
It was Jeremiahs fault, a blemish in him, to resolve to speak no more in the
name of the Lord in that respect, Jer. 20.9. And can we be excused if we speak
no more to the Lord, or call no more on the name of the Lord for want of
present Audience?

Thirdly, as we are to pray with perseverance, so let us wait with patience (as
the Fisher does.) And there is great Reason for it.

First, although God has made a gracious promise of hearing us, yet he has
reserved the time of Answering us to his own wisdom, Heb. 2, 3.
Heb. 2, 3. The vision is for an appointed time.

God has given us his Bill for payment, but the Time is his own pleasure,
Psalm. 145.16.
Psalm. 145.16. there is plentiful opening, and filling every thing, but it is
in due season, and that due season expressed to be his pleasure; Isay. 49.8.
that is the Time acceptable, wherein we shall be heard. And for the place of
payment, it usually is upon the Mount, Genesis 22.
Genesis 22. (as was said before) Man's Extremity is Gods Opportunity. We are but
Beggars, and Beggars must not be Chusers. It is not fit for us to appoint God
the Time and Place. This is a limiting of the Holy one, Psalm. 78.41.
Psalm. 78.41.

Secondly, there is nothing lost by waiting upon God, Psalm. 9.16. and 40.1.
Psalm. 9.16. and 40.1. Isay. 25.9. and 30.18. and 49.23.
Isay. 25.9. and 30.18. and 49.23. Have thou waited long? the more reason thou
have to hold out in waiting. The Ambitious wait for their place and Office till
it falls: Long looked-for comes at last. The case of Monica (Mother to St.
Austin) is famous: she greived that her Son was spotted with the heresy of the
Manichees, and she prayed that the Lord would bring him to the Orthodox
Catholic Faith, she remembered this day by day, and yet (as himself does
witness*) for nine years together he continued so infected; It fell out
afterward, that he would needs go and travel out of Africa into Italy; His
Mother being loath to part with him, who was the staff of her old age,
earnestly prayed that God would hinder him of that purpose; yet St. Austin
went, and by hearing the Sermons of St. Ambrose at Millaine, he was converted
to that, which in former times he could never like. He reporting all this
matter, does use this good speech of it; Thou O God being d^ep in Counsel, and
hearing the substance of my Mothers desires, did not care for that she did
then ask, Aug. Confess. lib.
that in me thou might do that which she ever asked: Thus the Almighty
deals with other of his Servants, working all things to the best, but it is
at such times as he himself does think good. If it be in him to bless, it is
in him to do it when it seems good to himself. Therefore let us never be
angry, and repine at that which he alters from the intent of our mind, nor
discontented with his long delays; many Answers at the last shall be given
thee at once. For as the wicked treasure up wrath by their daily Sins, so do
the Godly mercy by their daily Prayers (says one): what thou have been craving
this seven years, nay twenty, thou then shall have a return of; for Mercyes
and Answers will come thick, as they did to Joseph. Then you shall receive the
money together. And many say, that they had rather so receive it than by
driblets.

Or suppose, thy Answers should be few whilst thou live, concerning the
things that in this Life thou cravest, yet at the day of thy Death thou shall
have the benefit; Then has the Righteous Hope, Prove. 14.32. Mark it and
behold it says David, Psalm. 37.37. Pro. 14.32. Psalm. 37.37.
Old Simeon had put up many Prayers, and begged many a year that he might Live
to see the Savior of the world in the flesh, Luke 2.25.28.
and now being very old, and ready to leave the world, he has his full Answer,
and embraces him in his arms: or if God should not give thee thy Answer in
this Life, concerning some things thou beggest in the behalf of the Church in
general, or thy Wife, Children, Friends in special; yet when thou art dead and
rotten in thy grave, an answer may be given, and a return made. However, rest
assured, that at that great day of Retribution, thou shall find thy reward is
with the Lord: when the books shall be opened, every Faithful Prayer that thou
have made, Isay. 40.10. and 49.4.
every short ejaculation, every sigh will be found upon Record, and book't; it
will be upon the ^yle, not one of them omitted.

Wherefore as St. Paul wills us that are Ministers in preaching to wait,
proving if at any time God will give men Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.28.
2 Timothy 2.25. And if after many a Sermon preached, we have no comfortable
assurance of any one soul converted, yet we may not be discouraged, for that
our Reward is in Heaven, Isay. 49.4. So must it be in Praying. Thou have put up
many a Prayer, and yet no answer comes; be not disheartened, a full answer will
be given in the end. When you pray say (says our blessed Savior, in the
beginning of this Chapter to his Disciples.) Give me leave to add but one
letter, Psalm. 27. ult.
when you pray, stay. Not from praying, for want of present audience (as some
would); but wait and stay Gods leisure for an answer, (as all should.) If any
withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him says God, Heb. 10.38.
Heb. 10.38.

Come we now to the Answer it self, that was given by the Friend within, to his
Friend without.

[ Trouble me not, the door is now shut, Text
etc:]

Where, (as was said) we have considerable, first the Inhabitation and there,
first the thing inhabited, (Trouble me not now.) Secondly the Reasons rendered,
why not now, first the Door is now shut; secondly, Children are in bed, so that
he could not rise without disquieting of them. And then secondly he concludes
Roundly and Resolutely, I cannot rise and give thee.

With the thing Inhabited we begin [Trouble me not] or vex me not, (...) of
(...).
molest me not, for so the words may be rendered: the Answer is somewhat quick,
and frowning, albeit mitigated by some fair and plausible excuses which we
will particularly examine in due place, and order. That which I will commend to
your Consideration in General from the letter is this, that

Sloth is not shiftlesse, Litteral Doct.


Sloathfull spirits want not excuses to justify themselves in their omissions.
This Friend in the History questionless was somewhat sluggish, and he wants not
his pretenses, and excuses, for his sluggishnesse; you do but trouble me,
disquiet my Children, etc. Hereto tends that of Solomon, Pro. 22.13. Pro. 22.13.
The sloathfull man says, there is a Lion without, I shall be slain in the
streets, not as if the sloathfull used the same words which are here set down,
but they always so behave themselves when they are called upon for duties,
always some excuse is in their hearts or mouths. And Pro. 26.13. we have the
like, Pro. 26.13.
yet with some difference; in the former Proverb it was but one Lion that
troubled him, now there are two, the one a great and a fierce Lion, the other a
great one, yet lesser then the former. And whereas it might be answered, if a
Lion were one way, he might go another; he says a Lion is both ways, so that
there is no escaping, whence (as one observes) it is evident, that the more a
sluggard is called from his sloth, the more excuses he makes. So Cant. 5.3.
Cant. 5.3.
the Church was loath to rise, and she brings her excuses, she has washed her
feet, and is loath now to defile them, she had put off her Coat, and was loath
now to put it on again. Abundant Testimony we might bring for Confirmation, as
1 King. 12.27. Hag. 1, 2. Mal. 1.13. Luke 14.17. and 19.21. But what needs this
waste, upon so clear a truth.

God made man right, but he sought out many inventions, says Solomon, Eccles.
7.29. In this fallen estate, Eccles. 7.29.
our created abilitye to devise things truly good, is turned to a matter
untoward wit joined with shifting; so that Carnall-will ever has Carnal wit
attending upon it, and Carnall-Reason shall be an Advocate to plead for Carnal
Lust.

It would be a happy thing, if we could but discover the sophistical shifts of
our fleshly corrupt nature, whereby it seeks to shift off good duties; This is
not the least piece of the hearts deceit, and therefore to be in a special
manner watched. There was never yet any that came to Hell, but had some
pretense for his coming thither. Our vi^e hearts would make us to believe that
there is some Sense in sinning, and some Reason to be madd; Wickedness never
wanted pretexts, nor ever will, whilst the Devil has wit; or, were the
Devil dead, our own wit would serve us to lay blocks in our own way to hinder
us in our course to Heaven.

It would be too large a discourse to enter upon, to acquaint you with the many
excuses that are brought to put us upon the practice of sin, and keep us from
performances of good duties. The excuses of sin are many. It has Pride in it,
which is not content with one garment; G^n. 3.7, 8. verse 12.
Adam covered, first with Fig Leaves, then with whole-Trees, then he covered
his sin with the woman, then with Gods actions, and this was Adams wardrobe.
David he covers his sins with Furrs, soft stuff; soft persuasions to Uriah,
then with rich stuff, 2 Samuel 11.8. verse 15. verse 27.
with Scarler, the blood of Uriah, then with durable stuff, with an
impenitency for a year (almost) together: This was David's wardrobe; none so
poor but has his wardrobe, out of which he can fetch some shift, some garment
or other to hide his nakedness, some apron or other he will patch up to cover
his sloth. One would gladly come to Church, hear often, but his seat is far
off, or behind the Pulpit, he cannot hear well; or his habitation is far from
Church, and he has ill legs: Another would gladly read the word but his
Bible is too small a point, and he wants good eyes: call on others to perform
family duties, or multitude of business; stir up others to works of Charity,
alas they want change, or have left their pursse at home. M^. Harris,
Beatitudes.
Thus plays your idle vagrants (says a reverend Divine,) call on them to
work, and they will tell you, they can get none; provide them work, and then
they want tools; supply that want, and then they have some infirmity about
them, which they are loath to name, and that is Idleness: their will indeed is
lame, they are sick of the Lazies. So it is with us, were the will mended, were
that willing, there would be no lack. As you see it is with boys that go to
school, something is ever wanting sometimes the band, the hat, the breakfast;
but when they come homeward, they can play without hat, forget their meat,
nothing is wanting then, but time and daylight: get better affections, and all
will be mended, all excuses laid aside; which only proceed from want of Love,
See Mr. Dykes Deceit of the heart. And Mr. Downames fourth part of his Christ:
warefare.
ordinarily. Rotten stuffes will not be vendible without watering, nor sinful
actions pass uncensured without excusing, but God will wash off all varnish*
he will not be deceived, no excuse, nor preten^ed Reason will do us good at his
bar, but I may not expatiate into this field of matter: some godly Divines
have done it to excellent purpose. Come we now to Particulars.

[Trouble me not.]

There are many sorts and kinds of troubles, distinguished according to the
causes, whence they do arise.

Sometimes some sudden amazement troubles us, so Luke 1.29. Turbatio
Admirationis. Luke 1.29.
that is a trouble of admiration, which was the blessed Virgins trouble.

Sometimes it arises out of fear of some danger in this world: this was
Herod's trouble, Math. 2, 3. Turbatio Tim^ris. Math. 2, 3.
who upon the news of another King, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.

Sometimes it arises from multiplicity of business, and this was Martha's
trouble, Luke 10.41. Turbatio Occupationis. Luke 10.41.
Martha thou art troubled about many things.

Sometimes it arises from Compassion, and this was Christ's own trouble,
Turbatio Compassionis. John 11.33.
Joh. 11.33. When Christ saw Mary weep for her Brother Lazarus, he groaned in
the spirit, and was troubled in himself.

Sometimes troubles arise from the corrupt flesh, as 1 Cor. 7.28. Turbatio
Carnis. 1 Cor. 7.28.
such shall have trouble in the flesh, cares and vexations arising from corrupt
flesh in them. Such was the Trouble of this Friend, for the flesh loves ease,
and is loath to be disquieted. Observe.

Unwilling minds esteem it a Trouble to be moved to Christian Duties.

When the will is not inclined to a work, it is a trouble to be moved to it,
then it shall be put off with Trouble me not. Thus Ahab having no delight with
Elijahs Prophesyes, counted him no better then the Troubler of Israel, 1 King.
18.18. So the Apostles were esteemed turbulent, Acts 16.20. 1 King. 18.18. Acts
16.20.
they Trouble (say they) the whole City, and Acts 24.5. Tertullus charge
Paul to be a pestilent fellow, (A Pestilence in the Original), Acts. 24.5.
(...).
and a mover of sedition.

In that Parable propounded by our Savior of the unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.1.
we have this Truth confirmed. Luke 18.1.
A poor Widow comes to him desiring Justice, he was one that neither feared
God, nor yet Reverenced man: yet he resolves to do justice, (but not for
justice-sake) only because she troubled him, as appears by his own confession,
verse 5. verse 5.
he had no mind to do it, and therefore she was a trouble to him in desiring it.

Solomon, Pro. 15.19.
Pro. 15.19. The way of the sloathfull, is a hedge of Thorns. They forecast in
their minds, the hindrances that are in it, the troubles that they shall meet
withal, which appear to them as a path overgrowne with thorns, and briars;
every work is a thorn in his foot, and a bramble that will scratch his hand,
and this keeps him back; but the way of the righteous is made plain, or is as
a paved causway, that is, the use and exercises of good duties, are easy and
commodious, they pass over the impediments, through the willingness of their
minds, and go on with much contentment, as passengers that walk in a plain
way: Numb. 13.30.
See an instance, Numb. 13.30. The spies thought it as impossible to overcome
the Cananites, as for Grasshoppers to overcome Giants, but Caleb and Joshua were
of another mind, cap. 14.9, 24.
Numb. 14.9.24.

Trouble me not. Thus the sick Patient complains of his bed, when it is his
back; and the Child cries out of his shoe, when it is the Humble upon the Heel
that troubles him.

Let the question be now asked, Who troubles the Commonwealth or State, and
some will tell you, It is not Ahab, who encroacheth upon his Neighbors
Vineyard, and rises up and takes possession with blood; 1 King. 21.1, 2, 3.
but poor Naboth who blaspheames God and the King: and what was his blasphemy?
he will not part with his Inheritance on any terms; he it is that is esteemed
troublesome.

Not our Nimrods, those mighty Hunters of the Earth, Genesis 10.9.
who ride a racking pace over the heads of their poor Tennants, destroying the
nests of the breeding birds, by their depopulations, killing the dam with her
young, seething a kid in the Mother's milk; but the poor blood-suckt wretches,
Neh. 5.5.
who exhibit their bills of complaint against such oppressions; would these be
conrent to be quietly wracked, there would be no trouble.

Not our Ephramitish Merchants; Hos. 12.7.
fraudulent and deceitful Tradesmen, who sophisticate their wares as they
have done their Consciences, having a false measure in one hand, and a false
balance in the other; but the wronged buyer, or busy Informer that complains
of these things, he troubles all.

Not the notorious Adulterer, Jer. 5.8.
that neighs after his Neighbors Wife, nor the debauched Drunkard that makes a
God of his liquor, and a beast of himself; nor the disordered Victualler, who
has a close room for his old Friend Drunkenness, and robs guests of their
money, as the pot does them of their wit, these are not troublesome; But the
Puritanicall Minister that calls for the suppression of such disorder, the
busy Officer that informs, and the rigid Justice that punishes such
offenses, these are troublesome; might such abuses be connived at, all would be
quiet.

Ask again who in the Church are they that trouble it? And you shall be told,
Josua 7.25.
that it is not Achan that has sacrilegiously taken the accursed thing; Not
those Harpyes, who have robbed the Churches nest, and stolen away her birds,
sticking down a feather of Augmentation, and Charitable benevolence in the
Room, (for which they look to be thanked); but he that will be telling Achan
of that his sacrilege, and be crying out of that horrid Iniquity, he it is
that is troublesome.

Not Baals Priests, 1 King. 18.22. 1 King. 22.6.
nor Ahabs Prophets that preach lies, and say, Go up and prosper, but faithful
Michajah, zealous Elijah that tell the truth. Not Annas nor Caiphas, nor Herod,
nor Pilate, nor any of the Scribes, but Christ himself, and his Disciples;
these trouble all,

Not the seducing Heretic, Gal. 1.7. and 5.12. 2 Timothy 3.6. 1 Timothy 4.2.
nor seditious Scismatique, who, contemning public Assemblyes, creep into
corners, leading captive simple women, speaking lies in Hypocrisy and by fair
and plausible persuasions lead into error: but those Huntsmen that labor to
unearth these Foxes, and discover their Burrowes, and follow the Chase, ul-cry;
as Luther did the Pope (for which he was said to be Tuba rebellionis), these
are they that trouble the peace of the Church.

Are there troubles in the House or Family, put it to the question who troubles
it? And it will be said, not the idle wastfull and untrusty servant, Philem. 11.
whose fingers are like lime-twigs in putloyning his Masters goods, who will be
at his own dispose; but the strict Master, who will be calling him to an
account for his Time, and Actions, he it is that disquiets all.

Not the stubborn and disobedient Child, who sets light by the honest
injunctions of his Parents, Pro. 15.5.
and with Clito in Terrence turns a deaff ear to his Parents Counsel, but
the wise Parent that reproves and corrects that stubbornness in his Child, he
causes trouble.

Not is it the imperious, Dr. Hall.
and insulting Wife, who (forgetting her place whence she was taken) usurps
Authority over her Husband, and will be the head, but the resolute Husband that
is loath to loose his Authority in his Love, He it is that is troublesome. Thus
in Town, City, and Country, we shall find that such are charged for being
troublesome, who least deserve it. When the Lamb is drinking at the poole, the
Wolf comes blundering into the water, and troubles it, and then quarrels with
the Lamb, Quare turbasti aquam? why have thou troubled the water? when the
Lion, the Bear, the Bull, the Hogg, the Dog, the Fox, the Ass, the Elephant,
and all other beasts of the field do trouble the water, and soil it with their
feet; the Wily Wolf charge only the poor filly sheep to be the doer of it,
and none must be blamed but he. There wants in these days but one clothed
with Elijah's mantle to tell such Ahabs, that it is not I, but thou that have
troubled Israel, 1 King. 18.18. Ezekiel. 34.18, 19.
1 King. 18.18. read Ezekiel. 34.18, 19. and apply it home.

Let not then the Innocent and well-meaning man be charged with turbulency,
count not those troublesome to thee, who require of thee, that which Reason and
Religion enjoyne. It was Jephtha's fault and folly to charge his daughter with
troubling of him. She did but her duty, He was Heaut ontimoroumenos, Judge.
11.35,
a self troubler, through his own rashness, and indiscretion. And so much for
the first Use: we have a second.

Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the troubles of the Righteous, Psalm. 34.19. In the world you shall
have Trouble, says Christ, John 16.33.
John 16.33.

It is true indeed; in the way of Christianity, we must look to meet with many
Crosses, and Afflictions through Satan's malice, and the worlds hatred; God
permitting this in Love for the trial of us, etc: yet this may not discourage
us from doing that which by virtue of our Calling, General or Particular is
required, for then no good duty would be performed by us to God, nor man: The
flesh loves ease; and before it would be diseased, and rise out of bed to give,
Christ and his members shall be sent empty away, and suffered rather to starve
then be relieved. But (for the defeating of this his policy, and better
enabling us to do our duty) be we careful to fortify our Hearts with Faith
and Love: Faith, that will discover unto us the helps that God, will and does
afford us, and the rewards, and recompense that he will give unto us, if we
apply our selves unto his service. Thus Moses, Heb. 11.26.
Heb. 11.26. encouraged himself to go through troubles with the people of God,
rather then to enjoy the pleasures of Pharoah's court; And so did Christ
himself, Heb. 12.2.
Heb. 12.2. It is the Love of the honey that causes the Bear to contemn the
sting of the Be. The Fisherman looks not so much at the casting in of his net
as on the draft: Nor the Husbandman to his sad seed-time, as joyful Harvest.
Art thou to give an Alms, let not the expense of money trouble thee, but
consider the return, and increase of that which thou expendest, says
Chrysostom. And so in other duties, Faith will sweeten all troubles with the
promises of Recompense, yea in the very act of performance, with the delight
and joy of peace, of Conscience. A man in bed, having a foul way to go, whilst
he plods on the fowlenesse of the weather abroad, thinks it tedious, and not to
be endured; but being once up, what with stirring and help of clothes, he
passes through all, and then is glad that he undertook it: So shall it be with
us, when the duty is performed.

Secondly; Get a Love unto the duty, and then you will not say, trouble me not,
when you are moved to it. Love is as strong as Death, Cant. 8.6.
says Solomon, Cant. 8.6. it is unresistable, nothing can withstand it. Death
overcomes all, so will Love, it breaks through all impediments that are in the
way, it has a most vehement flame (compared to the coals of Juniper) it is
earnest and vehement, it is overcoming, and not ready to be overcome, much
water cannot quench it; Temptations, Troubles, Persecutions cannot so hinder
it, Rom 8.35.
but it will still burn, Romans 8.35. Thus powerful is Love, which if thou
gettest thy soul possessed withal, Trouble me not, will be no longer used as a
put-off from Christian duties.

Aequity and upright dealing. Secondly, Piety and godly Living.

Solon being asked, What did most keep men from troubles, answered, Upright
dealing; Do so, says he, to others as thou would be done unto, so shall
thou not disquiet thy self, nor will others trouble thee. And who is he that
will harm you, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.13.
if ye be followers of that which is good? but if in Case you do meet with
such (and such you may meet withal,) yet you shall be no losers by such
troublers; they shall not be to your loss, and hurt, but gain and honor, as
Chrysostom shows in that Homily entitled, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.

But be careful withal, to join Piety with Equity: what peace, and quiet can
there be, so long as Jezabels Whoredoms and Witchcrafts do abound, 2 King.
9.22. Sin is that Achan that troubles, 2 King. 9.22.
not only a man's self, but all Israel. Have not to do with it. It brought David
into great straits, and troubles. 2 Samuel 24.14,
Would any draw thee into the practice of sin? say then with Paul, Gal. 6.17.
Gal. 6.17. Let no man trouble me; See thou any that would allure, or entice
others unto sin? say to them as Christ said to his Disciples in Maryes Case,
why Trouble you the woman, Math. 26.10.
Math. 26.10. And for Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and other profane
Livers, who are the grand Troublers of our Church and State, we may in some
Case wish with the Apostle, Gal. 5.12.
Gal. 5.12. I would they were cut off that trouble you. But no more of this.

Mystically; you have heard before how God may delay his: now from this
frowning Answer given by this Friend within, to his Friend without, we may
further learn; that,

God does not only delay to Answer the prayers of his Children for a time,
Mist. Doct.
but he may sometimes seemingly frown upon them and be angry with them when
they pray unto him, and count them troublesome, he may enterteyne their prayers
with a seeming dislike and distaste, as if he had no pleasure in them, and
seemingly shake them off in anger. This the Church complains of. Read at
large, Lament. 3. verse 1-19. So Psalm. 80.4. etc. So Job, Lament. 3.1-19. Psalm.
80.4. Job. 13 24. and 19.11. Psalm. 88.3.14. John 4.43.
chap. 13.24. and 19.11. the like does David, Psalm. 88.3.14. Such was his
dealing with the Ruler, who became a suitour to him for his Son that was sick.
Christ enterteynes him with a check, and reproose, for his infidelity, and the
infidelity of his nation, John 4.43. And such was his carriage toward the
woman of Canaan, who came to him in the behalf of her little daughter. Math.
15.24, 25.
Math. 15.24, 25, 26. Look how cunningly Joseph acted the part of an Enemy with
his brethren, when they came into Egypt to buy Corn, so deals God (many
times) with his. It is said that Joseph knew them well enough when he saw them,
but he seemed strange unto them, and spoke roughly challenging them for spies,
and such as came to see the nakedness of the Land, Genesis 42.7, 8, 9.
Genesis 42.7, 8, 9. So God knows his well enough, yet seems strange, and
charge them many times with grievous crimes, (when they come unto him,)
whereof they are innocent, yet not seriously, but tentatively for trial sake,
and writes bitter things against them, whereto they make a modest and humble
answer, as Joseph's Brethren did to him, Nay my Lord we are all one man's Sons,
we are true men, thy Servants are no spies, but to buy food thy Servants are
come, verse 10, 11. verse 10.11.
Lord we are not such as dissemble and play the Hypocrites with thee; we come
unto thee in the name of thy Son, we are thy Children, and come to thy
Ordinances for bread, etc. Joseph lays it hard unto them still, and puts them
to the trial of their truth, verse 12.14.
verse 12.14. And by that wile he gets out of them that which he much longed to
hear, namely of his Fathers, and Brother Benjamins health, and welfare, and
makes way to have his Brother Benjamin brought into his presence, whom he
longed to see. God presses hard upon the conscience, that he may get out of us
what he longs to hear, and loves to see in us, an honest heart. Joseph puts
his Brethren altogether in ward three days, and then delivers all but Simeon,
whom he keeps in durance, that he might bring Benjamin his Brother to him,
verse 17.21.
verse 17.21. Thus deals God with us, he brings us into great straits, and
as his countenance is severe, so his hand is oftentimes heavy on those whom he
best loves, thereby to bring us to Repentance for our sins, Hos. 5.15. he shuts
us up for a time, Hos. 5.15. and 6.2.
that we may have opportunity to reflect home, and repent; and then after two
days he will revive us, and then the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight: by chastening of our Bodies, he saves our souls, and
brings our Benjamin to him, our hearts in his worship and service.

Joseph's Brethren call to mind their cruelty and unkindnesse toward Joseph,
and upbraid one another for it, not thinking that Joseph understood them; Genesis
47.21.25.
but he understood them well enough, and turns about and weeps, yet conceales
all, and binds Simeon, verse 21-25. Conscience though it may be a while still,
and seemingly asleep, yet affliction will awake it, and bring us to an
acknowledgment of those sins long before committed and forgotten, and then it
falls to accusing, (which God is not ignorant of,) he hears us and is affected
with us, but conceales his affection till due time.

Simeon is taken and bound before their eyes, verse 24. He shall be left in
pawn, in fetters, the rest shall return with Corn; Simeon was bold and
fierce, as appears by his cruelty to the Sichemites, and seems to be the
chief cause of Joseph's trouble, he is therefore singled out. So in that
wherein we have offended, God will correct and chastife us, and as we mete to
others, it shall be measured to us, Mark. 4.24.

Joseph's Brethren come down a second time to Egypt to buy Corn, Genesis 43.15.
they bring Benjamin their Brother with much ado, for their Father would not
part with him till necessity compelled, they are kindly enterteyned by Joseph,
who no sooner sees Benjamin, but he requires the Ruler of his house to kill and
slay, for these men (says he) shall dine with me, Genesis 43.16. verse 16.
He feasts them whom former he threatened. When we come to God again, if God
sees Benjamin with us, an honest heart brought into his presence, he will make
a feast for us beyond expectation.

This extraordinary favor made Joseph's Brethren to fear the more, and to
clear themselves to Joseph's Steward, verse 18, 19, verse 18, 19, 20.
20. A guilty Conscience made them fearful, and suspicious, thus we are apt to
misconstrue Gods actions; his works of grace (through our sin, and ignorance,)
occasioneth us to fear where no fear is, as Judge. 13.22. Math. 14.25, 26, 27.

Joseph's Brethren make ready the present which they had brought for Joseph, and
present it, verse 25. So do the Godly, though it be but a little of every good
thing, a little Faith, a little Repentance; this God accepts and takes well at
our hands, though there be but a little of it, be it of the best.

Joseph makes haste, verse 30. yet he hides his affection till he had brought
them to a more sound and serious sight of their sins, And therefore after all
this their kind enterteynment, and mirth, when they thought all danger over, he
beats upon their guilty Consciences by another trial, no whit inferior to the
former. Hue and Cry is sent after for a stolen cup; They are accused of flat
felony, they plead their Innocence, search is made, and the Cup is found in
Benjamins sack, Genesis 44.6.12. All this was to sift his Brethren, Genesis 44.4, 5.
and to try their affection to Benjamin, Job did, till search be made, and then
we find that in our sacks which we knew not of, and would not believe to be
there, which when we find, we stand amazed at.

And all this God does to try the sincerity of our hearts, and the Truth of our
Love to Benjamin, and to double our joys in the end, after we have been
brought to a thorough Humiliation for our sins.

Joseph, casting themselves on the ground, confessing their sin (not this
whereof they were accused, for therein they were innocent, but) their cruelty
toward Joseph.

Judah, of this all were guilty, and confess their deservings, verse 15.-18.
thus the Godly make good use of their present sufferings, and look back to what
they have deserved. And then,

Judah he comes near to Joseph, verse 18. usque ad^fin. cap.
craves favor to speak a word in his ear, relates all the matter to Joseph,
as if he had been ignorant of the matter, when he knew all as well as himself,
verse 18. to the end. He acquaints him likewise with the danger of his old
Father, and sadness of his complaint at parting, offering to be a bondsman in
his Brothers room, that he might preserve his Fathers Life. And thus are we
brought by our afflictons to power forth our hearts before the Lord, like him,
and acquaint him with all that has happened, as though God were ignorant of
the business, when he knows all better then we our selves can know it.

After Judah had done thus, then Joseph makes known himself, Genesis 45.1. etc.
Genesis 45.1. etc. Compassion and joy can be concealed no longer, every man must
be put out save his Brethren, he discovers his affection, tells them he was
Joseph their Brother, bids them not be afraid, but puts them (withal) in mind
of their injury, whom you sold into Egypt, yet comforts them with the
consideration of what God had done, sends for his old Father, wills them to
bring all they had away, and some live with him in Egypt, which they did to all
their comforts. And the like is Gods dealing with us, after he has tried us to
the purpose, brought us to a true sight and sorrow for sin; he can refrain no
longer, Isay. 42.14. He says, Isay. 42.14.
I am your Father whom you have injured, and wronged in breaking my Laws, but
I have pardoned and forgiven you, and prepared an inheritance for you in the
Heavens. Therefore regard not the stuff, care not for the Lumber, and
trumpery, come up quickly and tarry not, the good of all the Land of the Living
is yours. And thus you see how Joseph's dealing with his Brethren when they
came to buy Corn of him, is a lively resemblance of Gods dealing with his
(oftentimes,) when they come unto him in their Afflictions.

Job did. Those that are well acquainted with Gods proceedings, Job. 13.15.
know that cherishing ever follows after stripes, as Cordialls do vehement
Evacuations. His Anger ever ends in Love, and by it he prepares us for Love.
His Countenance resembles the picture of Diana at Delphos, whose face though it
seemed to frown upon comers in, yet it smiled upon them at their going out,
Examine me O Lord and prove me (says David,) Psalm. Psalm. 26.2.
26.2. try my reins and my heart, for thy Loving-kindnesse is ever before mine
eyes: he was to be tried as Gold is tried, but he builds upon Gods Love; If
Gods Anger, and not his Love had been before his eyes, it had been but a
fearful Apparition, and a dangerous issue to have gone upon, but he saw Love
in all, and so long he could submit unto any furnace of his hea^ing. If through
those black and thick Coulds that compass thee, and seem to interpose betwixt
thy Prayers, and the Throne of Grace, thou could discern the bright
Sunbeams of Gods favor; if thou could look beyond the Cloud of
afflictions, and see the Sunshine on the other side, if when God seems to
frown upon thee, and be angry with thee, thou could by the hand of Faith,
pluck off that mask and Vizard, thou would then see a Loving heart through
contrary appearances, and pick love out of angry speeches, Math 15, 16, 17.
Hos. 5.15. and 6.1.
as the woman of Canaan did out of Whelp and Dog. He hides himself when he
means to be found, he kills himself when he makes alive, throws down when he
means to build up, and intends to ease us of our burdens, when he seems to
lay heavier upon us. Say then with David when thou lie under such temptation,
Psalm. 42.
Why art thou cast down, o my Soul? why art-thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my Countenance
and my God.

The Reasons rendered of this trouble pretended by the Friend within, to the
Friend without, are now to be examined. And they are two, first the door was
now shut, and it would be troublesome, if not dangerous to arise at that time
of night to open it. Secondly, his Children were with him in bed, and at rest,
and it was not fit that he should disquiet them. We begin with the first.

The Door is now shut.

There is no fault to be found with that. The barred Door keeps out the Thief,
Job. 24.16.
who in the Nightime breaks into houses which they have marked for themselves
in the day. And it may teach us a point of Wisdom.

To shut the Door against dangers, as did Elisha, 2 King. 6.32. Nature teaches
the brute beast to prevent danger, 2 King. 6.32.
much more should Reason perswa^e men unto it, and Religion allows it and
commends the prudent man that fore-seeth the evil, and avoideth it, Pro.
22.3.

Prove. 22.3.
Argus his eyes are to be preferred before Briareus his hands. A provident eye
for the preventing of future mischief, is more excellent and useful then a
potent arm, for the suppressing of that evil which is befallen us.

But this man who knocked at Door at this time of Night, came not to steal, but
to borrow; he was no Enemy, but a Friend, and one that came in a friendly way
unto him, desiring this friendly courtesy from him, and it was his fault to
deny him so small a request under pretense of trouble. When the Heart is open,
the Door cannot be shut. As before has been showed.

That which this denying Friend seems to beat most upon, is the Now. The Door
is [now] shut, as if he should have said, Had you come sooner, before I had
shut in the Door, I would have satisfied your desire; but the Door being
barred, and I in bed, it is a trouble to me to rise, therefore spare me for
this time. That I commend to your Observation from hence, is this.

Good Duties are many times omitted under a pretense of an unfitting season,
for the doing of them.

The unseasonablenesse of the action is made a great put-off and plea for the
Omission of it, albeit in it self warrantable, Thus when the Priest was about
to ask counsel of God in the behalf of Saul and all Israel, (A course that God
had commanded to be taken in all their weighty and serious affairs, as
appears Numb. 27.21.) Saul perceiving his enemies to be nearer then he was
aware of, wills the Priest to withdraw his hand, Numb. 27.21.
(that is to forbear consulting with God,) for want of leisure, 1 Samuel 14.19.
1 Samuel 14.19. The Ephod must give way to Arms, It was no fit time in his
opinion to fall to prayer, and offering up of sacrifice, but to betake them to
their weapons, they would ask counsel of God another time when they had more
leisure. Much unlike was he herein to Samuel, who (when the Philistims came
upon them, being assembled before the Lord at Mizpeh) would not give over till
he had offered a burnt Sacrifice unto God, 1 Samuel 7.5.
1 Samuel 7.5. And herein Saul discovered his hypocrisy, and profaneness.

Thus the Jews objected against the Time for building of the material Temple,
Hag. 1, 2. that it ought to be re-edifyed, Hag. 1, 2.
they confessed; and professed likewise to go about the work: but they saw
that their envious Neighbors would oppose them in that work, and therefore
they forboare, pretending it was not yet seasonable to undertake it, and in so
doing, they deserved, as they had, a sharp reproof.

Another Instance we have, Acts 24, 25.
Acts 24, 25. When St. Paul was preaching to Foelix, and to his Wife Drusilla,
and reasoning of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Foelix not
much affecting that discourse, wills him to make an end for that time,
pretending want of leisure to hear him our, but when he had a more convenient
time he would send for him: other Instances might be produced of the like kind.



season for fish or flesh, out of which they are not good, so may we say of
some Duties. But here let us distinguish of actions: which are either bad, or
good.

As for Actions sinful; they are at no time seasonable. And therefore it is well
observed by some Expositors that Solomon distributing, and laying out a portion
of time for every action under the Sun, Eccles. 3.1.-9. Acts 8.21.
Eccles. 3.1.-9. allows no time at all to sin. As the Apostle says to Simon
Magus, Non est tibi pars neque sors; so may we say of it, it has neither part
nor lot in that partition; neither God nor Nature has bequeathed any Legacy of
time to it. Sin should have no existence at all, and therefore no time; no
estate, therefore no Term: albeit it so falls out, that it usurpeth, and so
goes away, if not with all, yet with the greatest part of our Time.

Good Actions, they must likewise be distinguished of; some are great and
weighty (as Christ speaks of the weighty matters of the Law) which are to be
concurrent in the practice of all men, with every moment of their lives; such
is that great work of glorifying of God, working out our salvation, keeping a
good Conscience, waiting for our Lord and Master's coming* etc: These duties
are to be concurrent with all our Time, and every moment of it; which seems to
be the Reason why Solomon does no more mention a Time for doing these things
(in the fore-quoted Text) than he does for sin. He does not say there is a time
to do ill* nor does he say there is a time to do well, for that in all those
particulars he there reckons up, God is to be glorified in the doing of them,
and the welfare of the immortal soul therein to be sought. These duties are
to have a share in every part of time, nothing but has a season: but the
working out of our salvation has every season, (at least should have, albeit
indeed it has the least of all.) Now the duties of this kind can never be
unseasonably performed. Trust in the Lord at all times, says the Prophet
David, Psalm. 62.8. Psalm. 62.8.
Blessed are they that keep judgment and do Righteousness at all times, Psalm.
106.3. Psalm. 109.20.
Psalm. 106.3. My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments
at all times, Psalm. 119.20. etc.

There are other duties, both Natural and Spiritual that have an appointed
time, and season, for the doing of them, they have both (...) and (...), not
only determinatum tempus, time allotted to them, as all things under Heaven
have (for as God has joined Time and Duty together unseparably, so that there
is no Time, but has an appointed Duty for it (none can say of any time, At
this time I have nothing to do); so there is no duty, but has time alloted and
appointed for the doing of it.) And it has likewise opportunum tempus, an
opportune Time, a peculiar season, in which it is to be done; insomuch that
that time which is peculiar and natural for one thing, may be prejudicial and
hurtful to another. Solomon instanceth in diverse actions, both natural and
voluntary, Eccles. 3.1, 2, 3. Eccles. 3.1, 2, 3 verse 11. Isay. 50.4. Psalm. 1.3.
Now every thing is beautiful (says the wise man) in his time, verse 11. The
grace of an Action is much in the right timing of it, Isay. 50.4. And it is the
praise of a Godly man, Psalm. 1.3. that he brings forth fruit in due season.



Thus Preaching and Hearing of the word is out of season with some, as the
Apostle intimates, 2 Timothy 4 2. 2 Timothy 4.2. Aug. lib. de. past.
Preach the word in season and out of season; opportune volentibus, importune
nolentitibus (says Augustine); in season to those who are willing, and out of
season to those who are unwilling, and judge it to be so. The Friars of Basil
held it to be Heretical to preach diebus prophanis on working days, Melch.
Adam.
and we have amongst us who judge them Puritanicall, who hear a Lecture on
such days. Prayer and other Religious duties have the like put off, we want
time, have no leisure to do them, hereafter we shall have more and better
opportunity.

So in the works of Mercy and Charity we are apt to delay and put off, under
pretense the Door is shut, we cannot spare as yet; when we dye the door will be
open, then we will give more amply and liberally: as yet our charge is great,
expenses large, and who knows but we may want our selves before we dye? In
short, the maine business of our Lives is neglected under this pretense. Call
upon men to Repent and turn, to make their peace with God, they think that we
come to torment them before their time. It is not good, say they, to be
religious too soon. Old Age and Sickness is fitter for sad thoughts, than
youth; Repentance must be deferred till a more convenient time. Modo et modo
sine paululum, etc: modo and modo non habebunt modum, Aug. conf. lib. 8. Pro.
6.10. Cras do; non Hodie; sic nego quotidie.
Like nimble Tapsters, they cry Anon Anon Sir. So Austin confessed of himself,
that in his unconverted estate, he returned to Gods call, verba lenta, and
somnolenta, Anon, Lord, Anon; he would come Anon, but not yet, By and By, but
not presently. In his secret thoughts he desired Chastity, but not yet; with
Solomon's sluggard he cried out, yet a little more sleep, a little more slumber,
a little folding of the hands to sleep, Pro. 6.10. So is it with all Licentious
Sinners, Hodie sibi reservant, and cras Deo promittunt; they will be their own
now, and the Lords another time, but let all such Procrastinators consider
seriously.

First in putting off any good duty, (an opportunity being offered for the
doing of it) (under pretense that the Door is shut) we control the Wisdom of
the Almighty (in whose power it is only to appoint times and seasons, Acts
1.7.17.26.
Acts 1.6. and 17.26.) as if we could find out a more convenient time then that
which God does offer us, and has allotted unto us: yea, we challenge to our
selves that which is Gods Prerogative, Psalm. 31.15.
for he is the God of Time, our Times are in his hands, yet we make as if it
were at our own command, in neglecting the Opportunityes that he does offer us
to do good, or receive good, which is a most presumptuous sin to do, and never
goes unpun shed.

Secondly; in deferring or putting off the p^esent opportunity offered, we put
our selves to a great deal of pain and ^abour more then needed; What profit
(says Solomon) has he that works in that where^n he labors, Ecc es. 3.9?
Eccles. 3.9.
As if he should have said, If a man let pass that season and time allotted
for every purpose (of which he before spoke) there will be then no profit of
his work, labor he never so diligentl^. If he miss his Time, and pitch not
upon the very (...) his labor will be lost. There are many Nicks in Time, a
great many (...); which if they hit, all goes well, (as you see it in a Clock
or a Jack,) if they hit not, if they fall not one within another, the whole
work stands. Opportunity and season in time, is aptly resembled to a joint in a
member, BB. Andrews.
if you hit on the joint you may easily divide it, but if you are on this side
or on that, you do but mangle the meat, and loose the pains you bestow in
car^ing of it up. Thus much Samuel showed Saul, 1 Samuel 13.13.
1 Samuel 13.13. Thou have done very foolishly, said he, in that thou have not
kept the Commandment of the Lord God which he commanded thee, for [Now] would
the Lord have established thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever. Now was the Time
to have been made happy for ever, if thou would have taken it. So 1 King.
12.7. 1 King. 12.7.
The want of wisdom, to lay hold on the present opportunity lost Rehoboam ten
Tribes, and in seeking to recover them again, he did but lose his labor, as
the Prophet told him, verse 24. And 2 King. 13.18, 19. Joseph is willed by the
sick and dying Prophet Elisha, to take his Arrows, and smite upon the ground,
1 King. 13.18, 19.
not limitting the King to any number of strokes, supposing that Joash upon
his former Parabolicall Act might well understand^, that the number of those
blows he gave were to be significant; Joah smitt but thrice the Prophet is
greived with his slack hand, and tells him that he should have smitten five or
six times, and then he should have consumed Syria, but now he should smite
Syria but thrice: which thing questionless God revealed to the Prophet, for
his last gratification, upon his prayers for Joash, and against the Enemies of
Israel. The opportunity being omitted, he should smite them thrice, but no
more: All his after-endeavours were to no purpose. Nor was it without cause
that our Savior complained of Jerusalems neglect in this point, Luke 19.42.
Luke 19.42. If thou had known in this thy day the things which belong unto
thy peace! And so he breaks off, Tears stopped the passage of his speech, he
was not able to say any more, he weeps out the rest of the sentence, lamenting
the misery that was likely to fall on them, for that they apprehended not the
opportunity offered. Those Tears of his showed to the world, that Opportunity
is a grace to have it, a second grace to know it; but a third grace, and better
than both the rest, to make good use of it.

And Lastly; if we do but consider, how wise the Children of this world are in
their generation, to lay hold on Time, and Opportunity, it may shame us. The
Husbandman puts in his plough after a soaking shower, and makes his Hay whilst
the Sun shines; when the Regions are white to Harvest, he puts in his sickle,
and suffers not his Corn to shed: The Mariner takes next fair wind, and will
not lie longer in the Harbor; when the wind serves, he hoysteth up his sails,
Acts 27.17. There is a Time when Kings go forth to war, Acts 27.2.
which the Soldier neglects not, 2 Samuel 11.1.
2 Samuel 11.1. The Lawyer observes his Terms; the Merchant his Marts, the Smith
neglects not to strike whilst the iron is hot. And for any Action Natural, or
Civil, that we have a mind unto, we will find an Opportunity for. As Caesar
said of his way and passage, Inveniam aut faciam, we will find one or make one.
And yet we are fools in enterteyning opportunityes offered for the good of our
souls: so far are we from making more opportunityes then we find, that we
plead against those that are offered on Gods part, and ought to be taken on
ours.

Ephesians. 5.16.
Good hours and opportunityes are merchandise of the highest rate and price;
and whosoever would be rich in Grace here, or Grace hereafter must not suffer
any fair opportunity to pass by him, but must buy it up out of those
Hucksters hands which would forestall the markets of it. I mean Profits, and
pleasures of the world, vain sports and pastimes, idle talking, immoderate
sleeping, superfluous feeding etc. We give our monyes for meat drink and
apparel; so should we be content to part with our delights and pleasures, to
purchase some time for holy Duties: We should get knowledge of the worth of the
Commodity, as Merchants do of that they buy. David highly esteemed of the men
of Isachar, for that they had understanding of the Times, 1 Chronicles. 12.39.
1 Chronicles. 12.39. And God will highly esteem of us, if we be skillful herein,
and wise to apprehend them. It is good in this sense to be a Time-server. So
some read Romans 12.11. Serving the Time (the Greek words (...) and (...) being
not much different in old brief writing. Romans 12.11. (...) Ambrose. Pelican.
Calvin. Gualt. Martyr. Erasm.
) The meaning is not that we should be as weathercocks turning with every blast
of wind, that our Religion should be an Almanack-Religion changing with the
Time and season, nor a Meridionall-Religion, calculated to the height of
Westminster; nor a Lunary Religion that ebbs and flows, nor a State Religion
that obeyes Affections of Persons; but the meaning is, that we should observe
what is fitting for Time and Season, and that do; yet without departing from
truth and honesty; that we should reject nothing, that in its season is
offered, nor embrace any thing that is not in its season tendered.



God has made every thing beautiful in his Time, says Solomon, also he has
set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God
makes from the beginning to the end, Eccles. 3.11. Eccles. 3.11.
The word that is translated, the world does properly signify, Tempus
absconditum, a hidden time, and is so rendered by some learned Expositors, Dr.
Jerm. in loc.
as best agreeing with the scrope of the place. They read the words thus, he
has made all things beautiful in his Time, also he has set a hidden Time in
the heart of them, that is, he has hid from the heart of men the Time for
every thing which he has appointed, so that man of himself cannot find out the
work which God makes so beautiful on its Time. So Eccles. 9.12. Eccles. 9.12.
Man knows not his Time. Such is his ignorance, that herein the brute
Creatures are preferred before him. Jer. 8.7.
Jer. 8.7. Yea the very Ant a silly and contemptible creature seems herein to
excel him, Pro. 6.6.
Pro. 6.6. Notwithstanding the heart of the wise man shall know it, God will
teach him to discern both Time and Judgment, Eccles. 8.5. Psalm. 25.15.
Eccles. 8.5. God will guide him in the way that he should choose. Psalm. 25.15.
And this he does both by his word and Spirit.

His Word is not wanting, in pointing out the Time and Season for doing any
Action of moment. Isay. 22.12, 23. Nehe. 8.10. Jam. 5.13. Amos 5.13. Pro. 3.2.7.
It gives us Rules when to Mourn, and when to Rejoice, when to Pray, and when
to sing Psalms, when to Reprove, and when to be silent, when to give, and when
to forbear giving; which General Rules a wise Christian will apply to his own
occasions.

As for other particular occasions which occasionally happen, Now for this; Now
for that; These shall not want a secret knock, and call at the Door of a
wisemans heart, which shall be as if a man stood behind him, whispering to him
saying, Now it is a Time to speak to God for his Church; and Children: Now a
word of comfort would be in season, to such, or such a distressed Creature. Now
it is a fitting Time to humble thy soul by Prayer before the Almighty, and to
set in with God, to strike when he strikes, (like the Smith and his boy,) A
secret guidance, from Gods blessed spirit will pitch us upon the right Time,
Hol. 14.9.
Who is wise will understand these things.

There are some other Particular Rules which may be very useful to us for our
direction, in seasonable performance of good Actions: such are these.

The first Opportunity that is offered to any for doing good, or receiving good
would be apprehended, and not put by, for that is commonly the best: It being
with Time as it is with a Vessel of Wine, the best and purest part of it is
first drawn out; and that which remains behind, being near the dreggs and
Lees is the worst: when a man omitteth a fair Opportunity offered him, ^^cts
24, 25.
he seldom meets with the like again. Foelix thought to have had a more
convenient Time to send for Paul, but he never met with it. A wise Merchant
takes his first Chapman; And a wise Christian lets not slip the first occasion
offered of doing what good he can. Thus Samuel advised Saul when this shall
come to pass, do that which comes next thy hand, (for so the words are to be
read,) 1 Samuel 10.7. 1 Samuel 10.7. Eccles. 9.10.
Hereto tends that of Solomon, Eccles. 9.10. whatsoever thy hand finds to do,
do it with thy might, the hand finds that which is within the reach of it, or
else within the grasp of it, and whatsoever thy hand finds to do, is,
whatsoever thou art able, whatsoever thou have means to do, Do that with thy
might, that is with all thy strength and ability, lay fast hold on the first
Opportunity, suffer it not to slip from thee, say not the Door is now shut. I
cannot rise to give thee.

Secondly; let the weightyest works have the praecendency, those which are
first in excellency, should be first in Time, Math. 6.33.
Math. 6.33. No wise man puts off matters of greatest weight, and importance
till the last, but gives them the priority both of Time and Place. What
Tradesman on a Market day would neglect a good Customer in his shop to hear a
Ballad sung in the street? What wise man having a suite at Law, and the day of
hearing at hand, would neglect that, and spend the Time in delivering letters
to this or that Friend? Mary was commended above Martha for this, Luke 10.42.
that she minded principally that one thing which was necessary. If an
opportunity be offered of doing good to our souls, and our pleasures or wordly
profits, step in to hinder, It is no good Plea to say the Door is now shut, I
cannot rise to give thee.

Thirdly, a less good may not be suffered to crowd out a greater. When Christ
called a man in the Gospel, he desired he might go first and bury his Father,
but Christ would not grant it. Math. 8.21, 22
It may be, on the Sabbath thou layest hold on the opportunity, and call thy
family together, thou read, prayest with them, and preparest them the best
thou can for the hearing of the word. But in the mean Time thou art noted to
be a very negligent, and backward commer to Gods House, and all under pretense
of private devotion, and family duties; but a lesser good may not exclude a
greater: And being come to the house of God thou lightest upon some passage of
Scripture which much affects thee, thou spendest thy Time in reading of it,
when thou should be a hearing Gods Minister, and attending to that which is
delivered. Satan deals in this case like Samballat and Tobiah, who would have
drawn Nehemiah away from building of the City by calling him to conference:
but we should answer as he did, Neh. 2.6, 7.
Neh. 2.6, 7. I have a great work to do which I am now about, and I cannot come
down, Why should the work cease whilst I leave ^t, and come to you? When a
less good withdrawes our heart from that which is a greater good, in such a
case it will be no fair plea to say, The Door is now shut, I cannot rise to
give.

Lastly; An uncertain Good (though in its own Nature more excellent,) may not
exclude a certain good, (though of an inseriour Nature, Pro. 3.27.28.
) that is in our Power to do, Pro. 3.27, 28. If at present it be in the power
of thy hand to do good to thy self, or Neighbor, and thou omittest this
opportunity, hoping to do thy self or Neighbor some greater good hereafter,
the Plea will not hold, The Door is now shut, I cannot rise and give.

Thus learn we to inform our Judgments, not only of what is good, and to be
done by us, but also in what degree of goodness every Christian duty is; that
every thing in due order may be chosen; the highest degree before the mean, and
the mean before that which is Inferior unto it. So shall every work be done in
the season of it: We shall discern when it is fit to open the Door, and when
to keep it shut. A glorious Luster will be upon our Actions, Aptum est omne
bonum locis suis, and Landabilia quaeque sordescunt, nisi congrua sede
potiantur Cassiod. lib. 6. Var. 22. Eccles. 3.11, Pro. 25.11.
they will be lovely and beautiful being done in season, Eccles. 3.11. And
what Solomon says of a word in season, Pro. 25.11. is likewise true of an
Action in season, It is like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. An Apple is
not to be pulled before its time, for then it is sour; nor suffered to hang
too long, for then it rotts: And the Beauty of a Picture is the comely
proportion of the parts; the graceful fitting of the colors, to the parts;
the artificial placing, both of the colors, and parts: Thus, when we give our
words and actions, their due proportion, when we rightly order them, and fittly
color them with their due circumstances; Then there is a Beauty on them,
otherwise there is a deformity, an obliquity in them, the beauty and
comeliness of them is lost. And so much of the Case.

Now Mystically, our Savior in encouraging us to hold out in Prayer (as before
you have heard) notwithstanding the rubs and letts, the blocks and impediments
that may lie in our way to discourage us, (whereof this is one,) he gives us to
understand thus much, that,

When the Door is shut, Prayer is not so speeding, Luke 13.25. Math. 25.10, 11.
as when it stands open to us. The Truth of this appears by that which our
Savior says, Luke 13.25. and Math. 25.10, 11.

For the better clearing of the point, let me show you (before I come to the
Use;) when the Door may be said to be shut upon us, and when to stand open for
us.

The Door is shut, first when the Decree is past and gone forth against a Land,
Nation, or particular Person, Zeph. 2.1, 2.
Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gods Decrees are immutable, and unchangeable, as himself, and
secret to himself, we cannot Dive into them; Dr. Preston on the Attrib.
1.2.4.82.
but there is a double Time to be taken notice of by us; First, a Time of
preparing and trying before this unchangeable Decree come forth, which to some
is longer then to others: God bore long with the people of Israel in the
Wilderness, Numb. 14.22:
ten times they provoked him before he declared his resolution of rejecting
them, before that Decree came forth, Heb. 4.3.
before he swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. And
there is a Time when the Decree is come forth and past: till that be come forth
and past, there is a Door of Hope opened, but when that is past, and the Door
shut, the Prayers that we put up, either for our selves, or others will not
avayle, nor be successful. For proose of this, read Jer. 7.16. Therefore pray
not thou for this people, etc. Jer. 7.16.
But what if the Jews being moved with the calamity, should cry and importune
the Lord with Tears, Fasting, Praying, etc: If they do, (says the Lord) I
will not hear them, Jer. 11.11.14. and 14.11, 12. and 15.1.
Jer. 11.11.14. and 14.11, 12. But put Case, others of Gods beloved ones, some
of Gods special favorites, the worthyes of the world should intercede for
them? Well (says God) though Moses and Samuel stood before me for them, verse
15.1. or those three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in such a City, they
should not prevail for that City, Ezekiel. 14.14.20. Ezekiel. 14.14.20.
Before that Door of Gods Decree be shut, they may do much: but if the Decree
be past, all Hope is past, Prayer speeds not, the Door is now shut.

Secondly, the Door is shut, when the means that should do us good are taken
from us, and then our seeking may prove unsuccessefull, Amos 8.11, 12. God
threatened a Famine, Amos 8.11, 12
not of bread, but of the Word which is worse, and that time of Famine mine is
unseasonable to seek out for food; Then our Prayers have a moultring time, the
wing of our Hope is cut short, then they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from
the North even to the East they shall run to and fro, to seek the word of the
Lord, and shall not find it. Whilst the means of doing good are continued, a
large Door is opened unto us, 1 Cor. 16.9. 2 Cor. 6.2.
1 Cor. 16.9. that is an acceptable Time to be heard in, 2 Cor. 6.2. but if we
omit these opportunityes of Grace which lie open, and fair before us, God will
not only deprive us of them (through our neglect,) but make us cry mightily for
them, before we do enjoy them, Pro. 28.9.
Pro. 28.9. Those who in prosperity despise Gods Laws, shall hardly have their
Prayers heard in time of trouble.

Thirdly, the Door is shut when a man is taken from the means, though they be
continued, yet he is disabled from attending on them, and that either by
weakness, and other infirmityes, or by Death it self. When neither the parts
of the Body, nor the powers of the Soul can discharge their office. Eccles.
12.1, 2, 3.
Solomon brings in old and decrepit Age; deaf, blind, lame, shortwinded, full
of coughs and aches, trembling on a staff, robbed of all its senses, and
presents him to the young man to behold; willing him to Remember his Creator in
the days of his youth before those evil days come upon him, and those years
draw nigh wherein he shall say, I have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12.1, 2, 3.
etc. This old Age he calls an evil Time, because when the days of youth are
not well spent, the days of old Age are hardly brought to goodness, exhorting
that before those evil days come, they would remember God that made them, and
serve him, calling upon his name; for if it be deferred till those evil days
come, their seeking of God will not be successful.

And yet to him that is living there is hope, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.4.
Eccles. 9.4.
in which respect a living Dog is better then a dead Lion: for when Death
comes the Door is so shut, that no Prayers can prevayle, no returning from the
grave to praise God. Thence it was that David forbore any longer to Fast and
Pray for his Child, 2 Samuel 12.22.
hearing of the Death of it. And the wise man advises to do whatever our hand
finds to do with all our Power, for that there is no work, Eccles. 9.10.12.
nor knowledge in the grave whither we are going.

Fourthly and lastly; at the day of Judgment the Door will be so shut, that it
shall never be opened more, then all our prayers, Luke 13.25, 26. Math. 25.11,
protestations, etc: will be bootlesse, Luke. 13.25, 26. Math. 25.11, 12. as we
have showed more at large on that Parable.

Sons of men are snared in an evil Time, when it falls suddenly upon them,
as fishes that are taken in a net, Eccles. 9.12.
and brids that are taken in a snare, (as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 9.12.) they
are disappointed of their intents and purposes, as we have in the former
Doctrine showed you.

1 Cor. 16.9. Resp. Genesis 28.17.
the Door is open, 1 Cor. 16.9. What need we fear Audience?

In regard of the means that are continued yet unto us, I doubt not but we may
say that it is the Gate of Heaven, and with the eye of Faith, we may with
Seeven see the Heavens open, Acts 7.55.
so that the prayers and tears; the sighs and complaints of Gods faithful
Servants do come before him, and are regarded by him: but this should be no
encouragement to any of us to walk presumptuously. For,

First; Albeit the Master of the house has not shut to the Door upon us, yet
the day is far spent, and the shadows of the evening are stretched out already
on us, Jer. 6.4. how many of Gods Faithful Ministers are driven into corners,
Jer. 6.4.
and not a few that pretend to hold forth new lights, prophecy lies, and the
people Love to have it so, Jer. 5.31. and 14.14.
and what will you do in the end thereof: when the Candle burns blew, the damp
is coming.

Secondly, albeit the Door be open unto others, yet it may be shut on thee,
what Job says of the Life of man may be as truly said of all things that fall
out in the Life of man, (especially of the Time of his Conversion,) All his
days are determined, Job. 14.5.
and the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds
that he cannot pass, which Time if men trifl^e away, and receive this general
grace of God in vain, they may be cast into a reprobate mind, and incurable
hardness of heart, as appears, Isay. 6.9, 10. Isay. 6.9, 10. Math. 13, 13.
Luke 19.42, 43.
compared with Math. 13, 14. A man may have the liberty to live under the
means, a long time after the Door is shut upon him, so Luke 19.42.43. the
Jews enjoyed the Ministry of the word still, yet Christ tells them that the
time of their visitation was past. This possibly may be thy Case if thou
contemns mercy oftered; If thou deferrest seeking to God, when thou art
called upon to do it, thou may be like that Fig Tree that Christ cur^ed,
Math. 21.12.
and that curse may be denounced against thee, Never fruit grow on thee more,
never profit thou by Sermon more, Indeed it is hard to say, (neither Angels
nor men can tell) how long the Door of mercy shall stand open unto you, that is
a secret known only to God. Nor can any man say of another, the Door is so shut
against this man, that it shall never again be opened to him, for whilst there
is Life, there is hope (as was said) and whilst God strikes thy heart with
some remorse for sin, and gives thee a desire to seek to him, and call on him,
and attend to the means, with a desire to profit thereby, that man may
comfortably conclude that the Door is not so shut, but that upon his knocking
it shall be opened unto him, yet the Dew may lie upon Gideons fliece, Judge.
6.37.
and thine be dry, and whilst light is in Goshen, Exodus 10.23. Genesis 19.11.
darkness may be in thy habitation and dwelling, thy blindness may be such
that with the Sodomites thou may not find the Door of Repentance, and be
wearyed in groaping after it, but if in case thou should find it, thou may
find it shut, and so shut, as that all thy knocking will never move the God of
Heaven to open it to thee, Heb. 12.17. Obj. Deuteronomy. 4.29.
Heb. 12.17.

But how then is that Promise made good, Deuteronomy. 4.29. when thou art in
Tribulation (says Moses) and all these things are come upon thee, at length if
thou seek the Lord thy God thou shall find him; and in the applicatory part of
this Parable seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened.

limitation, omnis qui petit recta and recte, every one that asks right
things, and rightly. Secondly, Omnis in quo non est legitimum impedimentum quo
se indignum facit, every one in whom there is not a lawful impediment, by
which he makes himself unworthy of receiving, (of which more hereafter in its
due place,) wherefore that clause of Moses may not be left out, Jansenin
Concord Evang. e. 38.
If thou turn to the Lord thy God, and be obedient to his voice, if thou seek
him with all thy heart, and withal thy soul. God is truly sought when he is
sought in truth of heart, and that is no where to be found, but in a converted
person. Now it is just with God to deny them repentance, who have contemned the
means which should bring them to Repentance, Pro. 1.30. Ezekiel. 24.13. Pro.
1.30. Ezekiel. 24.13. Revel. 22.1.22.
Revel. 2.21, 22.

Secondly; Albeit the hand of Eaith and true Repentance be never unsuccessefull
in respect of the Salvation of the soul, yet in respect of Temporal blessings
it may be without success, Deuteronomy. 3.26, 27.
see Deuteronomy. 3.26, 27. No doubt but Moses had repented him of his Sin, in that he
glorified not God at the waters of strife, yet he obtained not what he sought
for, at the hands of God, to enter into Canaan: the like in David, 2 Samuel
12.14. 2 Samuel 12.14.


Thirdly, if the Master of the house, (or Friend spoken of in my Text) shall
open the Door unto thee upon thy knocking, after it is shut, yet Audience will
not be so easily obtained, as when it stands open: there must be bouncing as
well as begging: more prayers, longer waitings, etc. Nor is such coming so
acceptable to him, as earlier coming; wherefore stay not till the Door is
shut, if thou be wise thou will find a difficulty in that, albeit thy suite
happen to be granted in the end. It is observeable, that albeit Scripture
speaks of an acceptable year of the Lord, Isay. 61.1.
as if the Door stood open all the year, yet, that we may not trust to that,
it is reduced to a narrower compass of time, Psalm. 95.8. Heb. 3.7, 8: To day
if you will hear, Psalm. 95.8. Heb. 3.7, 8. Luke 12.12. 2 Cor. 6.2.
etc. to a narrower then that, to an hour, Luke 12.12. and to a narrower then
to an hour, to a very minute, the very Now. 2 Cor. 6.2. Therefore make use of
it. And so much of the first discouragement or difficulty. A second follows.

My Children are with me in Bed. ]

As if he should say, Jam pueri quiescunt, and non est dignum, ut, propter te,
in, jurium patiantury. Aug. de Temp. Tom. 10. Ser. 171.
my Children are at rest, in Bed with me, and it is not fit that I should
disquiet them to pleasure thee; should I now arise, I should disturb them,
break their sleep, wherefore trouble me not at this time. Observe,

The tender affection that Parents bear unto their Children, might in the
first place be taken notice of. They lay them in their Bed (you see) yea, in
their Bosom, as Ruth. 4.16. and that not only whilst they are alive, but when
they are dead, as we read, Ruth. 4.16. 1 King. 17.19.
1 King. 17.19. But of this Parently affection I shall speak more fully
hereafter on verse 11. That I now shall commend unto you from hence, is this

Natural Affection of Parents toward Children, proves many times a great let
and hinderance in the discharge of Christian Duties.

Jacob discovered too much fondness this way, whilst for the present he seemed
more willing that himself and whole Family should perish, then to suffer
Benjamin to go with his Brethren to buy Corn, Genesis 42.38. and 43.3-11.
Genesis 42.38. and 43.3.-11. David's inordinate affection toward Absal^m,
discovered by his immoderate mourning for him had well nigh marred all, as you
read, 2 Samuel 19.2.-9. 2 Samuel 19. 2-9.
And what other excuse did Ruths Kinsman make, that he did not take her to
Wife, as God required he should do; but this, Ruth. 4.6. Lavater. in loc.
he should then mar his own Inheritance? Ruth. 4.6. that is (say some) by
prejudicing those Children which he had before, if in case he should Marry
Ruth, and have any Children by her; the strength of a worldlings excuse lies in
his Children and Charge, and hence it is that our Savior requires all that
would be his Disciples to deny themselves (in respect of Natural Affection to
Father, Math. 10.37. Luke 14.26.
Mother, Sons, Daughters,) etc, Math. 10.37. Luke 14.26.

blinded and corrupted by our Affections; they often lead the understanding
captive, they overruled, and over perswarde the Judgment, and make it servilely
to yield to their desires: they bear great sway and command in the Soul, (like
Rehoboams beardlesse boys,) they will order all. Look as fumes arising from a
corrupt stomach, darken and dimm the bodily eyes; so naturally the
understanding, (besides its own inherent blindness) is so corrupted with
partial affection, as that it neglects all due examination, and
disquisition, and unadvisedly judges that good which is pleasing to sensual
appetite, and carnal Affection; And so being led, and swayed by Affection: it
is carried out of the way (as a foolish Waggoner by his unruly horses.) Thus
Adam was deceived, as the Apostle shows, 1 Timothy 2.14.
1 Timothy 2.14. that is, not so much by his judgment (though by that also) as by
his Affection to his Wife which blinded his Judgment. And who sees not how our
Affections to our Wives, Children, and Kindred do many times so dazzle our eyes,
that we maintain wrong and error? as Barnabas seemed to have done against St.
Paul in his stiff standing out against him in the cases of Mark, Acts 15.39.
Now Mark was Barnabasses Kinsman, as appears, Acts 15.39. Colos. 4.10.
Colos. 4.10.

Let us then be wary how we let loose the Raines to our Affections, which like
wild and unruly horses are ready to draw the Chariot of the Soul out of the
way, unless with the bridle of grace, and heavenly wisdom they be restrained,
and kept in. Man is a Coach* Understanding the Coachman, Affections the
Horses, Conscience the Carriage; if the Coachman want will, or skill, or drive
heedfully, or puts the raines into the hands of Affection, if he knows not his
stops, and sideings, the Affections will prove resty, and either kill, or
bruise the Conscience.

The Stoics knowing the unrulynesse of the Affections, commend vacuity of
them, as a point of chief wisdom. They say to their Affections as Abimelech
says to Isaac, get you out from amongst us, for you are too strong for us,
Genesis 26.16.
Genesis 26.16. Because they found them too strong for them to master, therefore
they banish them altogether, but the word condemns it as a fruit of a Reprobate
mind, to be without natural affection. Romans 1.30.
Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.3.
Inordinatenesse of Affection may sometimes make some men, like some beast; but
Privation of Affection makes any man at all times, like stones or dirt. They
are imprinted in Nature by the finger of God; And, by natural affection
S^lomon discovers the true Mother from the false; 1 King. 3.27. 2 Pet. 2.8.
Heb. 2.17.
the Godly have been commended for them, 2 Pet. 2.8. Our Savior himself was
not without them, Heb. 2.17. Affections then to Children, to Friends, etc: we
condemned not; that which we press upon you, is the ordering of them, and
keeping them within their bounds. They are common to us with brute beasts and
therefore Judgment must order them that they be not brutish. Order them
aright, and they are serviceable, and of excellent Use; but if they be not
restrained, they will prove most dangerous, like fire, which of all Creatures
is one of the most comfortablest, and most useful, whilst it lies upon the
hearth, the place ordained for it: but if it exceeds the limits, and gets into
the thatch, it is most merciless and over-runneth all. Look as it is in great
States, so is it in man's little Commonwealth; there are no more pestilent
disturbers of the Public good, then those who are best qualifyed for service,
and employment, if once they grow turbulent, and mutinous, neglecting the
common good for their own private ends, desirous to raise themselves upon the
public ruins; so is it with the Affections, wherefore let it be our care to
order them aright. Jos. 9.23.
Joshua killed not the Gibeonites, but condemned them to be hewers of wood, and
drawers of water for the Sanctuary. So dispell not your Affections, but let
them be serviceable for your souls welfare.



Voluntas inordinata est quae non est subordinata.
or come short of the due measure; or are placed upon wrong objects, when we
love what we should hate, and hate what we should Love: It needs must be a
deformed face, where there is a transposition of colors; as when the blewnesse
of the veins is set upon the lips; the redness which should be on the Cheeks
is set in the Nose: so when joy stands, where grief should and grief where
joy ought to be; such a soul must needs be misshapen: or if placed on right
objects, yet if they exceed, or come short of the measure. God is to be loved
above all, our selves next, and so the divided pieces of our selves; but if we
love any better then God, our Affections are inordinate, if we so love our
Children, as to love their faults; to hear them curse or swear, etc: or will
not cross them, we overlove them as did Ely, 1 Samuel 2.29. 1 Samuel 2.29.
and honor them more then God.



Religion and Justice that must bound and limit them.

First Religion, in which regard God commands that, if thy Brother the Son of
thy Mother, or thy own Son or thy Daughter, or the Wife that lies in thy
Bosom, or thy Friend which is as thy own soul, if they entice thee secretly to
follow after other Gods, that then thou shall not consent nor hearken, nor
shall thine eye pity or spare him, but thy hand shall be first upon him to
slay him, and then the hand of all the people, Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7, 8. So Luke 14.26.
Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7, 8 Luke 14.26.
When any of these stand betwixt us and God, they are not any longer worthy of
our Love.

Secondly; Justice must bound them. Affection to our own flesh may not hinder
us from any just, nor carry us to any unjust Action, as it does the worldlings,
who to leave their Children large Portions, care not how they withold from
the poor of their superfluity, nor what unjust act they commit. Oh let not
your Affections exceed these bounds which they will soon do if you be not
careful. It is said of Conjurers compacting with the Devil, that if they
suffer their foot to slip, or if they miss their Circle, the Devil takes his
advantage and destroys them. So if our Affections which are the feet of the
soul, if they keep not within this bound, and circle, Satan will take his
advantage thereby to ruin us. To conclude the point, you may remember what you
read in 1 Samuel 6.12. 1 Samuel 6.12.
There was a Natural Affection in those two Kine which made them lou, as they
went; yet the power of God so overmastered Nature, that they went on with the
Arc, and carried it to the place appointed for it; So should Gods grace order
our Affections that it may hinder us in any duty that God requires of us. A
picture pasted to a wall cannot be pul^'d away without tearing, but put it in a
frame, and you may remove it as you please. So our Affections put into a holy
frame of Christian moderation, we can remove them any where; but if we fix our
Affections on any earthly thing, it will be a renting and tearing to the heart,
to be pulled from it.

Mystically, by Children, some understand the Creatures in general, for God is
said to be a Father of all, as he is Creator and Conservatour of all, Job.
38.28. Mal. 2.10. Heb. 12.9.
Job. 38.28. Mal. 2.10. Heb. 12.9. And thus his Children are in Bed with him,
being not able to help and succor us, if God do not first arise.

Others by Children abed, Theoph. in loc.
understand his Saints, and faithful Servants, of whom God is a Father after a
more special manner, 1 John 3.1.
1 John. 3.1. These are abed with God in respect of the care, and protection he
has over them, nor is he willing that they should any way be disquieted
(albeit he seems sometimes to be asleep, suffering the enemies of his Church to
molest and disquiet them.) It is hard to say which of these interpretations are
best; both are good, and we shall rather speak somewhat of both then prefer
either.

Understand we by these Children all Creatures in General, then this will
follow.

Whilst God is in Bed, Deuteronomy. 32.30. Isay. 30.7. Psalm. 94.16, 17. Psalm. 60.11.
and 94.16, 17. Lament. 1, 2. Psalm. 18.41.
there is no Child he has that is up to help, or succor us in our
Necessityes. For proof of this, read Deuteronomy. 32.30. Isay. 30.7. This Gods Church
attest they have found it true, Psalm. 60.11. and 94.16, 17. Lament. 1.2. And
the enemies of Gods Church have found the like, Psalm. 18.41.

Two things would be inquired into for the further clearing of the point: First
how God can be said to be abed. Secondly, whence it is that no Child can help
when God is abed. Of the first.

I hope there is none present that have so gross and earthly conceit of God,
as to imagine that he was in Bed indeed, for he is Vivens vidensque that
ever-living and all-seeing God, whose eyes are never closed, according to that
of David, Behold he that keeps Israel, Psalm. 131.4. 1 King. 18.27.
does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 131.4. He is nor like Baal, of whom
Elias sometimes spoke tauntingly to his Priests, Cry aloud peradventure he
sleeps, E^as. in Apoph. Cic.
and you must awake him; rather what the Roman Orator spoke pleasantly of
Caninius his Consulship, Vigilantissimum habuimus Consulem, etc: never was
there a more Vigilant Consul then Caninius, who during all the time of his
Consulship never took a nap, (for indeed his Consulship lasted but for a day,
it did set with the Sun,) that we may truly say of the Almighty. And yet
although he always does like himself, yet he speaks like a man for the
infirmity of our flesh, and resembles himself to one that is a bed and asleep,
when he puts himself into a sleepy posture (as it were) toward his people, and
is to them as a man asleep is to his Friend; and that first in retiring and
withdrawing himself, from them for a time, (as a man that goes to sleep
withdrawes himself from company) and does not appear openly in the behalf of
his Servants; of this David complains, Psalm. 9.19. and 59.4.
Psalm. 9.19. and 59.4. Secondly, when he appears to be as one that has
forgotten them; A state of sleep, is a state of forget fulness, this David
laments, Psalm. 44.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, Psalm. 44.24. and
and forgettest our Afflictions and Oppressions. Awake, o Lord, arise for our
help, verse 23.26. Thirdly; verse 23.26.
when he appears to be unwilling to be disquieted, and seems to thrust us
from him, (as this Friend which my Text speaks of, did his Friend). This David
likewise bewailes, Psalm. 44.23. Cast us not off for ever, Psalm. 44.23.
or thrust us not away (as some read). Indeed it is his mercy and Patience that
casts him thus on his Bed, Ainsworth Jun.
and brings him as it were into a sleep; and that for no other end, but to
awake us out of sleep (as the Disciples did, Math. 8.24 25. Math. 8.24, 25.
)

Next; when God is thus abed, no Child he has, can arise for our help. All
Creatures in Heaven and in Earth are but as the Reflex of the glass which
presently vanishes upon the turning away of the face. The whole Creation is
but a broken Cisterne of it self, and can hold nothing. Jer. 2.13.
As the Creatures speak of Wisdom. The depth says, It is not in me. The Sea
says, It is not in me, Job. 28.14. So may they say of comfort, and help. Job.
28.14. 2 King. 6.26, Psalm. 119.91.
Thus said that King, 2 King. 6.26, 27. And so will all Creatures say in
Heaven, and in Earth. All are Gods Servants, and at his command; they stir not
till he gives the word. As all Creatures have their being from God, so they
have their dependence on him. Lopez. de Gomara.
The Kings of Mexico, when they are consecrated, use to take this Oath. I
swear that the Sun during my Life shall hold on his course, and keep his
wonted glory and brightness, and the Clouds shall send down rain, the Rivers
shall run, and the Earth bring forth fruit. But the Lord has a Negative voice
in all the Actions of the world, and what things are necessary to the Creature,
and have a must be to the Creator, they are free, and have a may not be, nay a
must not be, except he gives the word.

Saul, he runs to the Witch of Endor, and sottishly wills her to raise up
Samuel who was at rest, 1 Samuel 28.16.
she raised up the Devil in the likeness of Samuel, who cunningly resembles
him, both in habit and gesture, and uses the very language of Samuel: but what
said he to him? Wherefore have thou disquieted me, and wherefore do thou ask
of me seeing the Lord has forsaken thee, and is thine enemy? Whilst God does
hide himself from us, expect no Samuel to comfort us: The Devil (as soon) in
his likeness. If Gods eyes be shut, no Child's eyes will be open to us. If he
do not first arise, none of the Family neither in Heaven nor in Earth dare get
up to open the Door for us, or give a comfortable answer to us. Means indeed
must be used, but not trusted to: God can work without means, no means can
avail without God. 2 Chronicles. 16.12. Job. 13.4.
A^l outward helps are vain, till he puts to His helping hand. What good could
Asa's Physicians do him, when God was not up to bless the means? Adrians
Physicians cast him away, (so far were they from saving him); Zerxes trusted
to the multitude of men, but they encumbered him; Darius in his wealth, but
that sold him: Rehoboam to his young Counselors, but they lost him: Caesar to
his old Senators, but they conspire against him. Domitian in his guard, but
they betrayed him. All outward aides are but Egyptian reeds, which being
leaned upon, do not only break under us, and so deceive our trust, but pierce
into our hands and sides, and so make a greater wound.

Church cries unto him three times with one breath, Awake, awake, awake, Isay.
51.9. David often cries out Awake, Isay. 51.9. Psalm 9.19. and 35.23. and 44.23.
Math. 8.25.
Lord awake rise up Lord, why sleep thou? Psalm. 9.19. and 35.23. and 44.23.
and God rook it well at his hands. Nor did our blessed Savior take it ill,
from his Disciples that they awake him in a Tempest, Math. 8.25. albeit it
seems by the Text that they did it very turbulently and irreverently, their
fear being great, but their Faith small. Nor will God take it ill at our hands,
if we call upon him to raise, for our succor: nay therefore he does seem
sometimes to sleep, that he may be awaked by our outcryes. Till this be done,
expect not any Saint nor Angel to come in for our succor.

If we take the words in another sense, and understand by Children, Gods
Church and people, his Saints and holy ones, who were now abed with him, and
asleep by him, termed Children for their innocence, then it gives us to
understand, first that,

Innocence sleeps securely and quietly, Jer. 31.26. Psalm. 3.5. and 4.8. See
this in Peter, Acts 12.6. Jer. 31.26. Psalm. 3.3. and 4.8. Acts 12.6.
Peter sleeps so foundly that the Angel could hardly awake him the night before
he was to be slain. So in some of the Martyrs, who slept soundly and quietly,
the very night before they went to execution. And this was not out of a
senseless stupidity, but arising from tranquillity of mind and spirit, and
sure confidence in God, who,

First has promised this to the Obedient. Levit. 26.6. Pro. 8.2.4. Job. 11.18,
19. Ezekiel. 34.25. Isay. 26.20.
Levit. 27.6. Pro. 8.2.4. Job. 11.18, 19. Ezekiel. 34.25.

Secondly he takes them into his protection, provides a good Chamber, and
Pavilion for them, Isay. 26.20.

Thirdly, He furnishes them with a good Bed. It is a large Bed we may stretch
our selves upon, and not like that spoken of, Isay. 28.20. It is a soft Bed of
Gods own making, Isay. 28.20. Psalm. 41.31.
Psalm. 41.3. None shall take this Bed from under them. Pro. 22.27.


Fourthly, he pitcheth a strong guard about them, his holy Angels shall attend
them. Psalm. 91.11. Heb. 1.14. Plut. Apoth.
It is said of Philip King of Macedon, that having slept a sound sleep, and
waking at last, seeing Antipater by him, said, that it was no mervaile that he
slept so soundly, being Antipater watched; much more may we so say of the
blessed Angels, Psalm. 91.1.4.10.-14.

Fifthly, he frees them from all stinging gnats, of worldly cares, Eccles.
5.12. Isay. 57.2.
and biting Fleas of fears, Eccles. 5.12. Whether they eat much or little,
their sleep is sweet. Peace shall come, they shall rest in their Beds, each one
walking in his uprightness.

John 11.12. Aug. Ser. 92. de Diverse.
Of Lazarus the Disciples said, if he sleep he shall do well; but he that
sleeps with a quiet Conscience cannot do amiss. St. Austin, speaking of St.
Stevens sleep, says thus, o somnum pacis, etc: O sleep of peace, he that thus
slept amongst the stones of his enemies, how shall he awake in his ashes? And
let me say of this, O the sweet, of the sweet sleep of an Innocent heart, and
spirit, and of a quiet and contented mind, which can lay by earthly cares, and
revengefull thoughts, and commend it self into the hands of God; how sweetly
shall he sleep in his Death, that thus sleeps in his Life? when as an ill
Conscience is full of jealousies, and fears, and thinks every bush to be an
armed man. It is storyed of King Richard the Third, after he had murdered his
two Nephews in the Tower, that he had fearful sleeps, often leaping out of
his Bed in the dark, and catching his sword in his hand (which hung by his
Bedside,) and going distractedly about his Chamber seeking for the Traitor. So
Charles the Ninth of France, after the bloody massacre of Paris, seldom did
take any sound sleep, nor could endure to be awakened out of his sleep without
Music. There is indeed a sound sleep that sinners fall into, but that is but a
carnal security, joined with dreadful starring from a blockish numbnesse,
Pro. 23.35.
Pro. 23.35. or out of a desperate fool-hardinesse, and not out of Faith, and
test of a good Conscience; that ends in a fearful wakening, so does not this.
Great is the privilege of that man, whose Conscience is quiet. I have read of
one who being accused for Treason, (but no proof,) was dilligently observed;
and from the sound sleep he took, and quiet rest he had in his Bed, was
concluded Innocent. If thou would sleep sweetly, make thy peace with God,
cast thy self in his bosom, he gives his beloved rest, Psalm. 127.2. Psalm.
127.2.
He need not fear to give himself to sleep, who has such a Bed to lie in,
only be careful to keep your Bed, (as we read of one that did, Acts. 9.33.
Acts 9.33.) let us never part with it. And whilst we have it, take heed that
we defyle it not, as Reuben did his Father's, Genesis 49.4. 1 Chro. 5.1.
Genesis 49.4. 1 Chronicles 5.1. So God will take us and keep us in his own Protection,
and not suffer any to disquiet us. Which is the next thing that must be spoken
to.

[My Children are with me in bed. ] q. d. I may not have them disquieted; which
must needs be, should I rise from them. Observe from hence.

God is not willing that his Children being in Bed, and at rest should be
disquieted. The Children may be disquieted, but God likes it not. Hear what a
solemn charge is given by Christ concerning his Church. I charge you Daughters
of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and Hindes of the field, that you stir not up, nor
waken my Love, until she please, Cant, 3.5. Cant. 3.5.
The Church was now fallen into a sweet sleep, and peaceably taking her rest
after her labor in seeking; and he would not that she should be awaked out of
it, nor raised out of her Bed. As if he should have said, I charge you all that
profess Friendship, by all that is comely, dear, and pleasant to you, that as
you will answer to the contrary, ye trouble not my Spouse's peace with any
unseasonable suggestions, or uncharitable contentions, or Novelt yes of
Doctrine, Dr. Hall. Paraph. in loc.
but suffer her to take her rest sweetly in that Divine Truth which she has
received, and that true apprehension of me, wherein she rejoices. Nor is there
mention made at any time of sleep in that book, but the charge presently
follows that no man waken her, chap. 2.7. and 8.4. Cant. 2.7. and 8.4.
God has reproved the disturbers of his Children, (of what sort or rank
soever,) as he did those waves that put his Disciples into a fear, Math. 8.23.
Psalm. 105.14, 15. Read Jos. 7.25. 2 These. 1.7, 8.

For the further clearing of the point, and the better making way to the Use, I
shall first show you how these Children may be said to be abed, and at rest,
and then in what respect it may be said that they are disquieted of their rest.

The Godly may be said to be in Bed and at rest, both in Life and Death, and at
the last day of Judgment.

this Life, Cant. 3.4.
they have a threefold rest. First a Rest of Resolution, spoken of, Cant. 3,
4. After the Church had found her Beloved, she held him, and would not let him
go. Till she had found him, she was perplexed, goes up and down, enquiring who
saw him, whither he was gone: but having taken hold on him and resolving to
keep him, she Rested from those perplexityes wherewith she had been troubled;
of this Rest she might not be disquieted, verse 5.

Secondly, a Rest of Refreshment; of this David speaks, Psalm. 23.2, 3. And this
the Church enquires after, Psalm. 23.2, 3. Cant. 1.7. Isay. 28.12.
Cant. 1.7. Tell me where thou make thy flock to rest at noonday. And of
this the Prophet is to be understood, Isay. 28.12.

Thirdly, a Rest of Peace, security and tranquillity of mind, through the
Assurance of their Reconciliation with God, and of his Love and favor through
the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ. (Albeit this Rest be not perfect in
this Life, but subject to many interruptions.) This is the Rest that Christ
calls us unto, Math. 11.29.
and has promised to give us, Math. 11.29. And thus Bernard calls a good and
a quiet Conscience, the Bed of the Soul, Bona and tranquilla conscientia est
lectus animae; in hoc requiem capit aemima. Bern. Sermon. parn. 1. Psalm. 116.7.
Isay. 57.1.
wherein it rests quietly, and contentedly. Unto this Bed, David calls upon his
soul to return, Psalm. 116.7.

Secondly, the Godly go to their Beds, and betake themselves to their rest at
the day of their Death, Isay. 57.2. Where by Beds the Prophet understands such
places, as the dead bodies of Gods Saints are put into after Death; in which
respect the burying place was usually termed (...) the sleeping-place of Gods
Saints; for that their bodies lie quiet there, (be it in any Chamber of the
Earth, Sea, or Air*) as men rest in their Beds till the morning Bell rings,
that loud Trumpet of the Arch-Angell sound, Psalm. 16.9.
warning all to arise out of their graves, and come to Judgment. Thus we say of
those that are dead, they are at Rest, and hence it is that the Hieroglyphics
describe a man at rest, with one soot upon another, as is visible on many
Ancient Sepulchers. Nor do their bodies only take their rest, but their souls
likewise; they are carried into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22.
as was the soul of poor Lazarus, there to rest in bliss till it shall be
reunited again unto the body. Thus Revel. 14.13. Revel. 14.13.
They are pronounced blessed, that dye in the Lord, for that they rest from all
labors.

Thirdly, at the general Resurrection of all flesh, at the last day they shall
have an eternal Rest, of which Rest the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1.7. Heb.
4.1.9. 2 These. 1.7. Heb. 4.1.9.
Of that Rest Canaan was but a Type, many wicked men entered into that Rest,
but none but the Godly shall enter into this. Here we have but one day Rest for
six days of labor, but there we shall have an eternal Sabbath without any
labor to disquiet it.

In the next place take notice, in what respects the Godly may be said to be
disquieted of their Rest. And so

The Children of God may be disquieted of their Rest in this Life many ways.
Of their Rest of Resolution, they come to be disquieted; by doubtful
disputation, new opinions, curious and intricate questions, Romans 14.1.
forbidden Romans 14.1.

Of their Rest of Refreshing, they may be disquieted by Persecution; our necks
are under persecution, says the Church, we labor and have no Rest, Lament.
5.5.
Lament. 5.5.

And of their Rest of Tranquillity and inward peace, they may be disturbed
through manifold temptations and afflictions inward and outward, from men or
Devils. David roared out for the disquietnesse of his heart, Psalm. 38.3. -8.
Afflictions work sorely even upon gracious dispositions, Psalm. 38.3-8.
to the disturbance of the tranquillity of the Soul. Heb. 12.11. Heb. 12.11.
And hence it is that David calls upon his soul to return again unto its
rest, Psalm. 116.7. Psalm. 116.7.


Secondly, in their Rest at Death, they may be disquieted too, the Devil
intimates as much, 1 Samuel 28.15.
1 Samuel 28.15. (albeit in that Particular he lied.) Indeed it is not denied by
Divines, but that the Devil by Gods permission may enter into the corpse of a
dead body, and make it speak and walk as he pleases, but with two provisoes;
first that it must be the body of a Reprobate that he assumes, not of the
Godly, for that they rest in peace. Secondly, that the body which he raises,
he can no longer appear in, then naturally he can preserve it from corruption.
But albeit the Godly be not in this kind disquieted of their rest, yet in other
Regards they may, by the Agents of the Devil, as

First, it is a kind of disquietnesse to keep them from their beds; albeit they
are not thereof sensible, yet God likes it not, who as he has made the body a
house for the soul, till he calls it forth, so has he made the Grave a house
for the Body, till he calls it up, Job. 17.13. Isay. 26.19. Job. 17.13. Isay.
26.19. Psalm. 79.2, 3. Revel. 11.9.
And thus the Saints have been disquieted. Of this David complains, Psalm.
79.2, 3. So Revel. 11.9. which is understood of the cruelty of the
Antichristian power against the faithful Ministers of God. And this is a thing
most dishonorable to deny Christian burial as appears, Eccles. 6.3. and
reckoned up for a Curse, Eccles. 6.3. Deuteronomy. 28.26. Jer. 22.19.
Deuteronomy. 28.26. Jer. 22.19.

Secondly, it is a disquieting of them when they are turned out of their beds,
after they have been peaceably and quietly laid therein. Every man that has
not divested humanity, desires to have his bones lie at rest; And this seems
to be the reason why the old Prophet enjoined his Sons to bury him in that
Sepulcher, 1 King. 13.31.
wherein the younger Prophet was buried, who was slain by a Lion: He knew that
the bones in all the other graves of the Priests, of other places, should be
taken up and burnt by Josiah upon the Altar of Bethel, verse 1, 2.
(as had been prophesied and foretold) but he presumed that Josiah would spare
the bones of the Prophet that had prophesied this, and so his bones being
mingled with his would be likewise spared. God cannot endure that the
Sepu^chres of the dead should be any way violated, Amos 2.1, 2, 3.
Amos 2.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, th y may be disquieted of their Names and Credits after they are laid
to Rest and that either by giving them too little, (as when they are robbed of
that testimony which is due to a virtuous life.) Thus dealt the Jews by
Christ, Math. 27.63. This the very Heathen have abhorred. Math. 27.63. De
mortuis nil nisi been. Deuteronomy. 34.6. J^de v. 9.
Or else by giving them too much, as when they adore and worship their very
relics; this God likes not, and therefore he hid the dead body of Moses, nor
would he suffer the Devil to remove it, lest the people should make an Idol
of it. So when they invocate on them, or pray unto them, which should the
Saints in Heaven know, they would spit in the face of them that do it: but this
I pass.

Thirdly and lastly, concerning that full and perfect Rest which the Saints
shall enjoy hereafter, of that being once possessed they never shall be
disquieted; there shall then be no more enemy to assault them, no more
corruption to grieve them, no more Temptation to ensnare them. And so much for
Explication. Application follows.

Mother with the Children, the Spouse of Christ, with those that she has borne
to God, of their Rest and quiet, which they comfortably enjoyed, or do enjoy.
There are four sorts of men that are to be especially taxed for this fault.
First, the violent Tyrant, Secondly, the virulent Heretic; Thirdly, the
Scandalous Shcismatique; Fourthly, the dissembling Hypocrite.

In all ages the Devil has raised up some to persecute the Church. Genesis 4.8.
Genesis 10.9. Gal. 4.29. Gen 27.41. Exodus 3.7.
There was a Cain to persecute Abel from the beginning, and a Nimrod (the
offspring of Cain,) a mighty Hunter, and bloody Persecutor. In Abraham's house
will be a persecuting Israel, and in Isaacks an Esau; who threatens to kill his
Brother: Pharaoh oppresses Israel in Egypt, and being afterward in the Land of
Promise, Judge. 3.5. Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. Heb. 11.35-39.
they have the Canaanites and Hittites, etc. amongst them, as Thorns in their
eyes, and Goads in their sides. So Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. And for the times before
Christ, and the cruelty of the Churches enemies then, the Apostle declares,
Heb. 11.35, 36-39. Should we make a Catalogue of the sufferings of the Saints
of God, since Christ's coming in the flesh, under the Gospel; and of the
crueltyes of the Roman Emperors toward them for the first three hundred
years, under ten grievous Persecutions, from Nero's days ^ill Constantine's,
(wherein those Emperors that raised those ten Persecutions, seemed to have
labored, to have exceeded God in the ten Plagues of Egypt,) it could hardly
be written or read, Eusebius Eccl. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 26.
or spoken without tears. Eusebius writing of Nero's P^rsecution of the
Church, says, that in his time a man might see Cities lie full of dead bodies,
the old lying together with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast out in
the open streets, without any respect to their sex: but I need not carry your
thoughts back so far as to those elder times, we have had sad experience in
this latter Age, how the Church has been disquieted by bloody Persecutors. As
Rome old, was a disturber of the Churches peace, so no less is Rome new by her
bloody Persecutions: what crueltyes have they not used both to the living, and
to the dead? When the Town of Bar in France was taken by the Papists, Acts
and Mon. sol. 1951.
they cut up Children alive, the guts and hearts of some of them they pulled
out, and in rage they knawed them with their teeth. The Italians which then
served the King, did for hatred of Religion rip up a living Child, and took his
Liver, (being yet hot) and eat it as meat. And in Queen Maryes days, they
spared neither the Living nor the Dead. Wickliffs bones must be dug up forty
one years after his Death and condemned to the fire, the like was their
dealings with the dead bodies of Paulus Phagius, Bucer, the Wife of Peter
Martyr; whose bones two years after their Death, they dug out of their
grave. These past calamityes we cannot be forgetful of, nor I hope insensible
of present calamityes: for, Albeit we fled from the Lioness, yet since, a
Bear has met us: witness those late unheard of crueltyes, so much written
of, practiced by those Irish Rebels against the English, etc. Were I (says a
very learned and grave Divine) to work upon Heathen men, Western Americans, or
Eastern Chinesses for their conversion to Christ, I should scarce adventure to
propose to them the Historyes of the Churches Persecutions, because to men that
have no taste of Religion, they would rather seem fables then truths; and I
should as soon be believed.

But as in ^ueen Maryes days, the Papists said, All was done in Love, they
Tyrannized, Imprisoned, Manacled, Beat, Burnt, Hanged, all in Love. So is it
preten ed by Persecutors at this day; but then we may say, the Love and Mercyes
of such is hatred and cruelty: such Love and favor Vitellius showed Julius the
Senator, who having a command from Commodus the Emperor to slay him with the
sword; he out of the Love that he bore to him beat him to death with Cudgells.

As the Persecutor is a disturber of the Churches peace, so is the subtle
Heretic, who although he comes in sheeps clothing, is inwardly a Ravening
Wolf. And such disturbers the Church has in all ages, (since her Infancy) met
withal; No sooner did she begin to take ^ome rest, in the days of good
Constantine, but she was disquieted with the Heresy of Arrius, and his
followers; Insomuch that Jerome tells us that the Christian world did lament,
Dialog. cont. Lucis.
and wonder to see how suddenly the Church was become an Arrian. Vid Aug. de.
Here Is. c. 10. and 49. and Enchir. per Lamb. Daneum. c. 25.
It would take up too much time to acquaint you with the several Heresies,
wherewith the Church has been pestered, and is at this day: No less then one
hundred and eighty several Heresies (as some have confidently affirmed) are
propagated and spread amongst us, many of them even to blasphemy, and that both
in Press and Pulpit, so that if the world groaned once to see it self turned
Arrian, England may wonder to see it self turned Anabaptist, Arminian
Antinomian, Socinian, Arrian, Antitrinitarian, Antiscripturist, and what not?
And all these laid in a boundless liberty of conscience, so as no age since
the Apostles time could ever parallel. How can the Church but be disquieted
hereby of her Rest, that she quietly took under the Government of pious Princes
for many years? St. Paul's Imprecation may justly be taken up of us, Gal. 5.12.
and every faithful heart may without sin give their Amen of Assent unto it.
Gal. 5.12.


Nor is the Church any whit less disquieted by the Schisms which are raised
in her by pretended Friends: and little difference will be found at the last
day, betwixt those who have wounded the Church in her Head, by their Heretical
opinions, and those who have lacerated and rent the body by Scismaticall
distractions: for Albeit Scisme in it self is not so dangerous as Heresy, it
being an Error in the fundamentalls maintained with obstinacy, Schism about
Circumstantialls and superstructures; yet Schism is no less dangerous to the
disturbance of the Churches peace then Heresy; for as one arises from want of
Faith, so the other from want of Love. Schism being a fit slock to graft
Heresy upon. The Donatists (as Austine shows), were at first but pure
Scismatiques, but they stayed not there, till they came to a plain period of
Heresy. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 8. c. 5.
No man becomes an Heretic upon the sudden, Cassiod, lib. 1. c. 12. Aug. lib.
de Haeres. Ad quod vult deum. 1 Cor. 11.16. verse 18, 19.
but winds into it by certain steps and stays, as the Apostle intimates, 1
Cor. 11. First there arises contentions about Church-Customes, verse 16. these
are carried on with much heat. Then arises Shcisms and divisions, verse 18.
And then Heresies, verse 19.

Now there are two sorts of these Disturbers; Some that separate from the
Church, others that make only a division within it.

Such there are that separate from the Church, as the ten Tribes sequestered
themselves from Judah and Jerusalem, the only place where God had promised to
dwell by his solemn Church-presence, 1 King. 12.28. Heb. 10.15.
1 King. 12.28. Such were those mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 10.15. And such
are those who cry out, Come out from amongst them; who from the Churches
blemishes conclude her nullity, that she is no Church, no Spouse, has no
Ministers, no Sacraments; and yet they grant that this Church was their Mother.
And yet none of Christ's Wife? Brave Children! who pass not to prove themselves
Bastards, so that their Mother may be noted for a Harlot. Such Aspersions must
needs disquiet both Mother and dutiful Children borne in her, and nursed up by
her. But the shame be their own, and Integrity hers, who has not defiled her
bed, albeit they have shamed her Womb.

Others there are, who still acknowledge their Mother, and cleave unto her, but
are contentious within her: Dissenting Brethren. Brethren they profess
themselves, both by Fathers side, and Mothers side, and yet cannot agree; How
was Rebeccah troubled with the striving of Children in her Womb? it made her to
cry our, Genesis 25.22.
Why am I thus. The Church is no less troubled and disquieted at the
dissentions of her Children, albeit it be not in substantialls and essentialls
(for therein they agree) but in Rites, yet that gives her cause to complain,
Why am I thus? fruitful in Children, yet disagreeing Children. These
dissentions, and different opinions is a Church, causes it to be like Jacobs
stock of sheep which he had for his wages, parti-colored, full of the black
and white spots of jealousies, and distractions; Genesis 30.35. Jer. 12.9.
or like Jeremiahs speckled bird, a bird of diverse colors It proves the bane
of the Church, and that the Devil knows full well, and therefore does his
best to raise them and maintain them. It was a Poetical fiction that the
Thebans sprung of the seed of the Serpents teeth; but it is more then a
Philosophical opinion, that dissension amongst Brethren arises from Satan's
subtility. The former sort of Schismatiques are as a Serpent in the Churches
bosom. These are like a V^per in the Churches belly, that seek to fret and
eat her womb asunder, no mervaile if she be by them disquieted of her rest.

The last disquieter of the Churches peace is the dissembling Hypocrite, such
as have a show of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but deny the power thereof; The Church has suffered more by these, then it
has done either by Tyrants, Heretics, or Schismatiques; So we find, Revel.
9.7. the greatest persecution was by them; Revel. 9.7.
who had faces like men, but teeth like Lions, and such are Hypocrites. Tyrants
indeed are full of cruelty, Heretics are full of subtilty, Schismatiques full
of falsity, but the Hypocrite is full of all, therefore worse then any: Else
our blessed Savior had not denounced heavier woes against them, then against
any other, and warned us in a special manner to beware of these rather then of
any other. Beware of these men, Math. 10.17. (...).
using a word of Emphasis, having reference to those kind of men, whom before
he called Wolves in Sheeps clothing, being crafty, cruel, ravenous, and
bloody as Wolves are. St. Paul found the hardest measure from such, they were
his first disquieters, 2 Cor. 11.26.
2 Cor. 11.26.

I spare to speak of other Particular disturbers of the Churches quiet, as
Slanderers, Swearers, Liars, and other of wicked and flagitious lives, whereby
the Godly are much vexed and troubled, and by whose means Gods Israel comes to
be afflicted with heavy Judgments, as Israel was for Achans sake, Jos. 7.
Those I have mentioned are the principal outward disquieters of the Church,
and have been, and yet are of this poor disturbed and distracted Church of
England, which has been esteemed the most happy and flourishing Church in all
the Christian world, and that not only in the opinion of our Friends, but our
Enemies themselves being Judges; whilst other Churches have been rent and torn
with dissentions, wasted with miseryes, plowed with the sword, and watered with
blood, this Church was quiet in her Bed.

bitter lamentation on her behalf. Not long since, she was in such a condition
of Rest and peace, that all the world thought us happy, but our selves; We had
the Gospel truly and sincerely taught amongst us; The Sacraments frequently
administered, Marriage honored and solemnized, the Sabbath religiously
Sanctified, our Congregations duly frequented; The hearts of our people knit
together, as one man in praising God, hearing his Word, singing Psalms, etc.
The whole Kingdom was both warm and wealthy; our Nobility were honorably
respected: The Gentry regarded, the Comminality encouraged, every one sat
under his own Vine and Fig Tree, Mich. 4.4.
with much delight and content. Thus God gave his beloved Rest. But in a sudden
all is in a confusion, and she, (to the Admiration of the Christian world) so
disquieted and distracted in her Rest, that her Friends lament her condition,
and her Enemies hiss and wagg the head at her, as Lament. 2.15. saying,
Lament. 2.15.
Is this that Church, the beauty of the Earth? etc. The Sons of her Mother are
become the Persecutors of her, and those Watchmen who should have secured her
by their vigilance, have proved her Adversaryes, they have fallen upon her and
wounded her, Cant. 5.7.
greater cruelty she met not with in those bloody Marian Times, by Enemies,
then, in these days of pretended Reformation, she has met withal, by her
pretended Friends, exercised both upon the living, and the dead, yet (as he
said that beat his Father, Philippides.
all was in Love so) these pretend in Afflicting and Persecuting of their
Mother, all is in Love, as we said in the former Use.

And as she is wounded, so spoiled of her veil, the purity and sincerity of
her profession, so that she has in a manner lost the Credit and esteem of a
Church. The Field is overspread with Tares of error and heresy; Math. 13.
in the mean time the Servants are asleep and take little, or no regard thereof.

And for the Factions and Fractions; Rents and Divisions in the bosom of the
Church, whose bowels does not yerne to behold them? scarce two in a house of
one mind, etc: Judge. 19.29.
So that our Religion like the Levites Concubin^ is mangled and cut into twelve
pieces, or like unto a Taylers Cushion patcht up together with many lists, or
pieces of cloth of several colors, and more seames, which though never so
curiously (in outward appearance) drawn up for present, yet they are now seen
breaking out into open Rents.

The Hypocrisy that is amongst the better sort of Professors, who seem to be
of sound judgment, (yet unsound in practice) is apparent, scarce a true face
to be seen in our Congregations. A form of Godliness, men have got; but they
deny the Power thereof, etc.

As for profaneness and wickedness, that every where abounds; it is too too
obvious; Swearing, Whoredom, Drunkenness, nothing regarded, etc. This is the
state of this poor Church, for which mine eye weeps, heart bleeds, oh! that
we could lay the unsettled and distracted estate of the Church to heart, Dan.
10. 2, 3. Neh. 1.1.11.21.
as did Daniel 10.2, 3. and Nehemiah 1.1.11. and 21.

But as we look backward, and so have great cause to lament the present estate
of our Church; so let us now look forward, and use the best means we can, to
bring her again to an estate of rest, and peace. As long as Sion is at rest,
every heart and hand should be used to maintain it; but where she is
disquieted and disturbed in her rest, all means should be used to settle the
peace of it. Acts. 27.21.
Sirs (said Paul to the Mariners in that great distress that they were in,)
you should have harkened unto me, and not have gained this loss; so may we say
to you, you should have harkened to Gods faithful Ministers, who told you of
the danger you were in, by your rash and headstrong undertakings, and then this
had not befallen us, but the case being as it is now with us, I shall give you
the best directions I can, that she may have her peace restored.

First; see that you have peaceable and strong affections toward the Churches
peace, and welfare: for as in every art and action what^oe^er, that which a
man would commendably effect, he must inwardly affect; so it is in this, we
shall never seek after the peace of it, if we be not deeply affected with it.
Thus was Nehemiah (as was before showed) such were the affections of Gods
people toward Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.5, 6.
Psalm. 137.5, 6. They could not but weep for the distress of it, they vowed
not to forget it, yea to prefer it to their chiefest joy.

Secondly, acquaint your solves with the way of Peace, and follow those things
which make for it, which are either Parents to it, to breed it, Romans 14.19.
or Nurses of it, Romans 14.19. What makes for it, and conduces to it, Romans
12.16.
we read Romans 12.16. Be of the same mind one toward another, etc.

1 Unanimity.
First then a likemindednesse is to be endeavored and sought after, and that
both in opinion and judgment: this is so necessary that the Apostle presses it
very often, and with much Oratory, 1 Cor. 1.16. and 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 Cor. 1.16.
2 Cor. 13.11. Romans 15.5, 6. Phil. 1.17. and 2.1, 2. and 3.16. and 4.2.
So to the Romans, Romans 15.5, 6. And the like to the Philippians 1.17. and
again chap. 2.1, 2. and 3.16. and 4.2. Two women famous in the Church, leading
persons as it seems, between whom there was some difference in judgment about
some point of Religion (as Zanchy thinks) yet these he beseeches to be of one
mind; even women as well as men, he would have alike minded. And certainly this
makes exceedingly for the Churches peace, as appears Acts 2.46. and 4.32. and
5.12. Acts 2.46. and 4.32. and 5.12.
This was the glory of the first Christian Church.



of one mind, and one judgment, yet it is to be endeavored: and if that way
were trod in, spoken of by the Apostle, it would be effected, Phil 3.16. Gal.
6.16.
Phil. 3.16. Walk by the same Rule, the word is the Rule we must walk by, Gal.
6.16. So much knowledge therefore as we have attained unto, and already
obtained, let us therein walk peaceably, and that measure of truth which God
has not yet revealed unto thee, in his good time he will open your eyes to
see, and acknowledge, 1 Cor. 13.19.
for here we know but in part, and see but in part. About such Truths as are
fundamental, and necessary to salvation, there is clear and undoubted light
in the Scripture, of these let us be fully persuaded in our minds: about other
things that are of private practice, we may abound in our own judgment, care
being therein had to the Churches peace; for if an opinion tend to the
breeding, either of scandal, or division, it should rather be concealed then
uttered, doubfull disputations avoid, Romans 14.1.
Romans 14.1. As for such as cause divisions and offenses contrary to that sound
Doctrine which we have learned, mark them and avoid them, Romans 16, 17, 18.

Secondly; Humility and Meekness is laid forth as another path of peace. Mind
not high things, says the Apostle, be not wise in your own conceit, Romans
12.16. Pride is forbidden, Romans 12.16.
and Humility commanded: Pride and Conceitednesse, all ages have found to be
the Mother of Heresies. What bred Arrians, Donatists in ancient times, but a
priding themselves in their own wits? and the like in our days: Some men have
gloryed in being the head of a faction; but it is a miserable thing to be a
witty disturber of the Churches peace. Thus, Separatists, and other Disturbers
of our Church have a proud conceit of their own worth, above others. It is by
Pride that contention comes (says Solomon.) Some men will maintain an Error
stiffly, Pro. 13.10.
because they have held it, this is Pride: hence comes controversy upon
controversy, and that for small matters, till the Church be miserably
distracted; meekness and lowliness of mind would help this, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.
Ephesians. 4.1, 2.3.
Thence it is that Gregory calls Humility, Radicem pacis, the Root of Peace,
S^eg. Epist. lib. 11.
Learn of me (says Christ,) I am meek and lowly, and you shall have Rest,
Math. 11.30. Math. 11.30.


Thirdly, Patience; This will teach a man not to offer, but rather to suffer
wrong, and to buy peace, albeit it be with much damage, as we read Abraham did
of Lot; Genesis 13.9. Ruffia.
Genesis 13.9. memorable is that speech of Gregory Nazianzen concerning himself,
Si propter me est ista tempestas, etc. If this tempest be by reason of me, take
me, and cast me into the Sea; (like Jonas) and so let this Tempest cease to
avoid the Churches troubles, impendent, he was content to suffer loss of Life.
And such was the custom of faithful Bishops and Pastors in former Times.
Austin, Aug de. gest.
and almost thirty Bishops besides himself, out of modesty, and humility agreed
either to admit Partners into their Sees, or else pro Christi unitate
Episcopatum deponere, for the Unity of the Church to lay down their Bishop-like
Authority: Thus they reasoned with themselves, Did Christ descend from Heaven
into our humane members, that we might be his members; and are we afraid to
come down from our Sees, to prevent division in Christ's members? Our lives
should not be dear unto us, so as we may fulfill our course with joy, Acts
20.24.
Acts 20.24. Concerning peace, let us say as faithful Mephibosheth did to
David concerning his return to his own house, Let him ( i. e. Ziba, 2 King.
19.30.
) take all, so long as my Lord the King is returned in peace.

Fourthly; Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.2. 1 Cor. 13.4.
Love and Charity is another way of Peace, Romans 12.10. 1 Pet. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.2.
that will cause us both to bear, and forbear: It suffers long, it is kind,
not easily provoked, etc: 1 Cor. 13.4. It will not give offense carelessly, nor
take it causlesly.

If there be difference in judgment, yet there may be no distance in Affection.
Still we should Love as Brethren, as did Paul and Peter, Hierom and Austin.
This will keep us from judging, and censuring those who dissent from us as
Antichristian profane: Oh that we could tread in this path, but iniquity
abounds, and love is grown cold. Thus you have heard of the paths of peace, and
of that which makes for Peace, which must be followed.

The third and last thing that must be done for procuring Rest to the Church,
Psalm. 122.6. Psalm. 51.18. and 53.6. Romans 15.5. 2 These. 3.16.
is Prayer, Psalm. 122.6. Thus David frequently, Psalm. 51.18. and 53.6. Psalm.
102.13. So Isay. 62.7. Jer. 29.7. In all your Prayers, let the Church of God
find a Room. And thus you have heard what is to be done by us for procuring
the Churches peace.

I have now only a word or two, by way of Motive to say unto you, I would feign
set an edge upon what has been delivered, and quicken you to the Duty in
seeking after the Rest of Gods Church. And for this end Consider:

First you have a Call to do it, and that may encourage you, 1 Cor. 7.15.
Colos. 3.15. Heb. 13.10. 1 Cor. 14.3. Isay. 9.6. Ephesians. 6.
1 Cor. 7.15. Colos. 3.15. If you look to Particulars, you have the God of
Peace for your Father, The Prince of Peace for your Governor, your Law is a
Gospel of Peace, your Titles, Titles of Peace, Sons of Peace, you are Doves,
and Sheep, not Dogs nor Swine. No one duty more pressed nor called oftener
upon, then this of Peace, Peace, hold your Peace; has the Parents of our
bodies often said. Now then let me use the Apostles words, If there be any
Consolation in Christ, etc: if there be any such thing as the comfort of Love,
or the fellowship of the spirit, fulfill you my joy, yea your Fathers joy, your
Mothers joy, your Bretherens joy, that you be like minded, etc.

Secondly, Consider the good that follows upon the Churches Peace, Behold how
good and pleasant a thing it is, Psalm. 133.1. Pax optima rerum, It is good
beyond expression, Psalm. 133.1.
every way good. Behold it,

First in Reference to God, so it is good; It makes us fitter to praise him,
and do him service with greater comfort, and encouragement, as we see, Romans
14.5. Romans 15.5.
Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant you to be like-minded, etc. why,
to what end? that you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the
Father, etc.

Secondly, it is Good in Reference to Christ the Head, whose coming was to
establish peace on earth, as appears by the Angels, Luke 2.14. So Ephesians,
2.13, 14. Colos. 1.20. Romans 5.10. Luke 2.14. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Colos. 1.20. Romans
5.10. John. 14.21.23.
Now whilst there is discord, etc: the work that Christ came to do is undone,
hence is that of our Savior in his Prayer, John 17.21.23. Holy Father keep
through thine own name, those that thou have given me, that they may be one as
we are, that the world may believe that thou have sent me, that is, that the
world may be convinced of the efficacy of my coming, seeing the Concord,
Unity, and good Agreement, amongst the members of the Church.

Thirdly; it is good in Reference to the Church, for as it is in the natural
body, not only the beauty, but the strength and safety of the whole consists in
the Union of the parts; so is it in the Body Mystical, which like a tight ship
makes head against the waves, and whilst her sides hold, and her planks lie
close, she works it out bravely in a storm; but when they are disjoynted,
shipwreck follows. Agree amongst your selves, said Severus to his Soldiers,
and fear nothing.

Fourthly, it is good, in reference to our selves, as being an evidence of our
being in the Body, and true members of the Church, Isay. 11.6. John 17.11, 22.
Jer. 29.7. Psalm. 122.6. Psalm. 34.12, 13. 1 Pet. 3.10.
Isay. 11.6. John 17.11.22. And for outward Blessings, our Peace depends on the
Churches peace, Jer. 29.7. Psalm. 122.6. There is plenty, and prosperity attends
the Churches peace, never look to see good days till you see the Church enjoy
her Rest, Psalm. 34.12, 13. 1 Pet. 3.10. Wherefore for Gods sake, for Christ's
sake, for the Churches sake, for your own sakes, labor and endeavor after the
peace of the Church.

Fifthly; It is good in respect of those without, for peace in the Church is as
an Adamant, it draws men into it. This was a prevailing Argument with the
Sichemites to enterteyne Jacob, The men are peaceable, Genesis 34.11.
said Sichem, Genesis 34.11. So it draws others to a Love of true Religion.

Thirdly, if this prevail not, then consider the ill effects of her trouble,
and disquiet, for hereby the Church comes to be scandalized. One of the maine
scandalls that the Jews take against Christians, is their dissentions in
Religion. And the Turk could say that he should sooner see all his fingers to
be of one length, then Christian Princes to be of one mind. And Camerarius
tells us of one, Philip. Camer. in oper. su^c. c. 30.
who sometimes had been a Christian and a Schoolmaster, but afterward he
turned Turk; and being sent Ambassador to Steven the King of Poland, did
profess freely and openly that he was moved to renounce Christ, by the
discords and jarrings that he found amongst Christians in point of their
Religion. And one of the chiefest objections of the Papists against the
reformed Churches, at this day is our dissentions amongst our selves, evident
signs (say they) of an Heretical Spirit. Nay among our selves, Religion
suffers by our discords, men of profane minds, think Religion but a fancy or
a frenzy, as 1 Cor. 14.23. 1 Cor. 14.23.
To hear many speak in the Church with strange tongues, will they not say you
are mad, etc. This causes many to forsake us, keeps back others from joining
with us, (as was said before,) causes our enemies to write, and speak against
us, Psalm. 44.13.
so that we are now become a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and derision
to those who are round about us, Ought we not therefore (as Nehemiah said in
another case) to walk in the fear of God, because of the reproach of our
Adversaryes: so, Neh. 5.9.
ought we not to be of one mind, in respect of those who behold ours
differences, and rejoice at them? Sirs, said Bias to his Soldiers in a mutiny,
your enemies see you; so, Atheists, Papists behold and clap their hands. I have
read that there was sometimes a great contest between Basil and Eusebius, but
when they heard how the Arrians (the common enemies of Christ and his Church)
began to take advantage thereof, to the prejudice of the Truth, they presently
laid their controversies asleep, and both joined against the common Adversary;
so should we, according to that foretold, Isay. 11.13.14. Isay. 11.13, 14.


Nay, yet more; It does not only scandalize the Church, but it tends to the
ruin, and subversion of the Church, (for dissension ever tends to desolation,
Math. 12.25. Math. 12.25.
) Boards joined make a ship, but dis-joyned a shipwreck; Connection of stones
makes a house, but the dissipation of them a ruin. If men think to build and
agree not, they are deceived. Such do with the foolish woman in the Proverbs,
Pro. 14.1.
pull down the house with their own hands; or, if they build, they build but a
Babel of Confusion.

Lastly, Consider; how highly God is offended, with such as disquiet the Peace
of the Church, Offenses indeed will come, Math. 28.7.
but woe to those by whom they do come. Thou have troubled us, and God shall
trouble thee this day, (said Joshua to Achan. Jos. 7.25.
) So may it be said of all the disquieters of the Churches peace, Thou have
disquieted the Church of God, and God shall disquiet thee. And it is a
righteous thing with God so to do, says the Apostle, 2 These. 1.7. It was
Cyprians observation, 2 These. 1.7.
that man's cruelty never raged against Gods Church, but some extraordinary
Judgment followed. And indeed who can name the Persecutor (unless penitent,)
that ever dyed a dry death? The story of the Church, both sacred and humane,
manifest this: particulars would be too long to relate; we shall find in
Ecclesiastical History, that from the first Persecution under Nero, (whom
Tertullian styles Dedicator Damnationis nostrae, The first that made a Law to
condemn Christians to death,) to the last of the ten Persecuting Emperors, not
one of them but came to a fearful end: only Libarius escaped, who went to
Basil and became a Christian. The like fearful ends has befallen Persecutors
in these latter days, as we may read in our own stories, and thither Treferr
you. See Acts, and Mon. of the Church. p. 1902 to 1950.
The like fearful ends have happened to blasphemous Heretics, and other
troublers of the Churches peace; but I forbear.

Let these Arguments prevail with you to study, and endeavor the peace and
quiet of Gods Church, and Children; did I know better I would bring them, could
I procure stronger motives, I would make use of them: I would be content with
Austin, August Epist. 15.
to fall down before your feet, who are disturbers of the Churches peace, and
humbly beseech you, for the Lords sake, for his Christ's sake, (our blessed
Savior) for the flourishing estate of England, and for the welfare and
safeguard of innumerable poor souls therein, to avoid contentions, and
dissentions, and make after those things which tend to the Churches peace: and
in so doing, albeit your eyes should never see the Church in that Bed of Rest
and Peace, that she has been raised out of by the troublers of Gods Israel;
yet Rest shall come to you, and much comfort when you can say in this Case, as
the Elders of Israel in Case of shedding innocent blood, Neither have our eyes
seen it, Be merciful O Lord unto thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed,
Deuteronomy. 21.7.
and lay not innocent blood to the charge of thy people Israel. And in so
doing, says God, the blood shed shall be forgiven them. So, Lord, I have not
disturbed thy Spouse of her Peace, and quiet, by any willing act of mine, but I
have desired her Rest, prayed for her Rest; Do so, and then her troubles shall
not be laid unto thy charge, nor imputed to thee.

We have now done with the Reasons, used by this Friend to his Friend, to
render it a troublesome suite: Now let us hear his Resolution and
Determination, the premises considered.

I cannot rise and give thee. ]

And yet the Text shows that afterward in regard of this man's importunity, he
did arise, and give him as many as he needed. It appears then, that it was
rather want of Will then Power: but thus it is (and I pray observe it.)

What man will not do, that he excuses with [I cannot do]; I cannot is pleaded,
when the Truth is, it is I will not. Nolle in causd est, non posse
praetenditur. Sen. Epist. 116. Ruth. 4.6.


Thus Ruths Kinsman pleaded for himself to Boaz; Ruth. 4.9. I cannot redeem it
for my self, least I mar my Inheritance, he loved the Land well which he was
to redeem, but he cared not for the woman; she was a poor Widow, and he a
rich worldling: now when he is put in mind of that, that he must buy it of
Ruth, and so take her to Wife, he pleads I cannot, albeit before the motion, he
was both willing and able. And thus the chief Priests and Elders answer our
Savior, when he asked them what they thought of John's Baptism, They could not
tell, but indeed they would not tell, for they knew it well enough, Math. 21.27.
Math. 21.27. So John 12.39. they could not believe, that is, says
Theophylact, they would not understand. So Luke 14.20. John 12.39. Luke 14.20.
Some that were invited to the wedding feast, excused it thus, I have married a
Wife, and therefore cannot come, but why therefore? he might have brought her
with him if he had pleased, and t it is very likely she should have been as
welcome as himself, the Truth is he would not come, albeit he pleaded, he
could not. Non posse pro no Velle.
The like excuse, we read that the unjust Steward made, who being cast out of
his Stewardship for his Injustice and deceit, consulting with himself what
course he was best to take for his future livelihood, he tells us that he
cannot dig, he was unable to follow labor, Luke 16.3. But what should hinder?
Luke 16.3.
he had his health, strength, and limbs, the truth is he wanted a will to it,
he had a Disease that lay in his bones, called Idleness.

I cannot, is a more modest speech then I will not, and carries with it a
reasonable excuse: and thence it is, that it is so often used; for in Reason we
think, what a man cannot do, he should not be urged to.

Piety, how often do we hear I cannot alleged? I cannot hear, I cannot pray,
I cannot abstain from cursing, swearing, theeving, etc. And why so? thou can
abstain if the eye of man be on thee, if thou be in the presence of some
superior whom thou do reverence. Thou can absteyne, if a punishment were
presently to be inflicted on thee, etc. And yet thou plead est thou can not.
Believe it, though no natural man be able to do any thing spiritually good,
and pleasing to God; yet there is no natural man but may do much more good then
he does, to further his own salvation, and to avoid damnation. He has power
enough by Nature to curb and restrain himself from all gross sins, as
Whoredom, Drunkenness, lewd company, etc. He has power enough left in him,
to make him lead a civil and unblameable Life, Luke 11.18. He has ability and
power enough to do many good duties, Luke 11.18. Math. 19.20. Romans 2.14.
naturally and morally good, Math. 19.20. Romans 2.14. You may come to the word,
hear it, attend to it, etc. this you may do if you will; and that you do not
thus, the want is in that, not in any want of power in you.

Alike faulty are we in our excuses for our Omissions of works of mercy, and
Charity; men cannot give, they cannot lend, they cannot do as they have done;
but where is the want? Look upon our backs, Mr. Harris.
they are as fine as ever, (as one says,) no want there; Look upon our Tables,
they are as full as ever, no want there; Look into our houses, they are as
richly furnished as ever, there is no want there. Where is the want then? in
your Ability and Power? no, no, but in the will. You have to spend on fools,
and Jesters, to consume in needless suites, and brabbles; you will spend ten
pounds, nay twenty, but you will have your wills, and yet not wherewith to
comfort a poor distressed Widow, Fatherless Child, to help an honest decayed;
Christian. I tell you, mend but the Will, and all is mended; were that right,
this excuse needed not; help that and all is helped. If Will were at home the
Door would be opened, though at Midnight, (though the Children be abed and a
sleep,) to pleasure a Friend, to succor the poor, needy, and such as are in
distress.

We read of a poor woman that came to Basil, desiring him to write to the
Governor of the place in her behalf, that he would ease her of her Taxes; he
did so: The Governor returns this Answer, I would with all my heart do what
you desire for this woman, for your sake if I could, but she is under such and
such Taxes that I cannot relieve her: well says Basil in his reply, si adsit
voluntas, etc. If you have a Will and want power, it is tolerable; but if you
have power and want Will, God will bring you into a poor condition: and so it
fell out, for this man was afterward by the Emperor cast into Prison, he
sends to Basil, desiring him to intercede for him, he did so; and after six
days he was delivered, and then he shows twice as much favor to the woman,
Surius. 1. Tom. in vit. Basil.
as she before desired.

To say I cannot upon respect of some inconveniences may in some sort be
excused, being thus to be understood, with Convenience I cannot: yet this is no
excuse for the Omission of any Duty whereto we stand bound, either to God or
man. But to say, we cannot do that which we have no will to do out of a froward
spirit, is an untruth, yea a sinful excuse, wherein many times we charge God
foolishly with that unprofitable Servant, as if he reaped where he sowed not,
and requires that of us which we have not ability to perform, Luke 19.21.
Math. 25.32.
although he justly might by reason of our first abilitves: but yet he does
not, he requires of us what we may do, and (if we be as we profess our selves)
good Christians have ability to do, Phil. 4.13.
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things (says the Apostle) all things in some
measure, though not in that absolute and perfect measure that the Law requires.
Let us not be like Banquerours, who because they cannot pay all, refuse to pay
any thing at all: but pay, so far as our power reaches.

Will; which you may thank for your Damnation: for men perish not because they
can do no better, Math. 23.37.
but because they will do no better, Math. 23.37. As sometime a Roman Senator
said of his Wife (after he had discharged Cataline his house, and forbidden her
his company, which she obeyed not,) Opulentia valet, ingenium valet, lingua
valet, animositas valet; tantum voluntas aegrotat, Her purse is in health, her
wit in health, her tongue is in health, her courage in health, only her Will is
sick: so may we say of our Wills, God has charged us not to admit his enemies,
our sins, but observe his precepts, and do good duties; we have hands able to
do it, they are in health; wits able to do it, they are in health; wealth and
means able to do it, they are in health; only our Wills are sick, they will
not do it. God of his mercy recover them, and all will be recovered. Thus of
the Literal, now of the Spirtuall meaning.

Our Savior by this seems to hint unto us, whence it is that our doubts and
fears arise, of not being heard in prayer, namely from a conceit that God
cannot help us: for whilst a Door is open, and Children up, and some fair
probability of speeding, so that we see a likelihood in respect of means, we
receive encouragement; but if there be a want of means, no fair probability
of help from the Creature, then we think that there is a want of power in the
Creator; he would help us it may be if he could, when indeed it is not want of
power, but want of will in God that we are not helped, and from hence may be
inferred,

That Gods will does not always permit his power to bring into Act what it
could. God may Answer us sometimes as this Friend answered his Friend, I cannot
rise, etc: when indeed it is, I will not rise.

This is a lesson that the Godly have been well instructed in: So the three
Children who were cast into the fiery Furnace in their Answer to Nebuchadnezar,
Dan. 3.17, 18.
Dan. 3.17, 18. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning
fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. But if not, be
it known to thee, O King etc. that is, if he be not pleased to deliver, that
his Will permit not his power to do what it can, yet we will not fall down,
etc: So the Leper in the Gospel; Math. 8.2.
Math. 8.2. doubted not of Christ's power, he knew that he could make him
clean, only questioned whether his Will would permit his Power to Act.

For the further clearing of this point, it will not be amiss to take notice
that the Power of God is said to be either Intrinsecall or Extrinsecall. The
Intrinsecall Power of God is that which works in himself Internally, and is
always active, and actual. And thus it is equal with other his Attribures;
for all his Attributes are his Essence, and Himself, (for whatsoever is in God,
is God): And so no Attribute as it is his Essence, and Himself, can exceed
another; His Mercy is not beyond his Justice, nor his Justice beyond his
Wisdom, nor his Power beyond his Will, nor that larger then his Power.

The Extrinsecall Power of God is that which is exercised about outward
Objects, and is so called in respect of outward operations, proceeding, and
passing from him toward things that be diverse, and various from Himself? This
power is always Active, but not Actual. And this is (for our Capacityes)
distinguished into Absolute, and Limited,

His Absolute Power is that, whereby he is able to do all things Possible to be
done, I say possible; for some things cannot be done, being in themselves
impossible, of which nature are such things as infer a Contradiction, as for
one thing at the same time to be, and not to be; A body to be here, and at the
same instant of Time not to be here. The Sun to shine, and at the same instant
of Time not to shine: But of things of this Nature, it may rather be said, they
cannot be done, then that God cannot do them; Seeing the Reason of this
impossibility is not in Gods Nature but in theirs.

And some things God cannot do, as contradicting his Nature and Essence,; So,
first; Matter of Iniquity, he can not Lie, Tit. 1, 2. Heb. 6.18. Genesis 18.25.
Secondly, Genesis 18.35. Numb. 23.19. Tit. 1, 2, Heb. 6.18. Gal. 6, 7. Jam. 1.13.
Jam. 1.17. 1 Samuel 15.29.
Matter of suffering, Gal. 6, 7. Jam. 1.13. Therefore the Son of God that he
might be capable of suffering, took on him man's flesh. Thirdly; Matter of
variableness and Inconstancy, Jam. 1.17. 1 Samuel 15.29. (And where such things
are said of God, they are to be understood figuratively.) These things may be
done by the Creature, but not by the Creator. And that not because of impotency
in him, but because of Potency and perfection of excellency (says Tertullian).

Now by this Absolute Power of God he can do all things positively, Job. 42.2.
Math. 3.9. and 19.26. and 26.53. Romans 9.18. Mal. 2.15. Job. 42.2. Math. 3.9.
and 19.26. and 26.53. Romans 9.18. Mal. 2.15. Nihil impossible nisi quod non
vult. Tertul. de carne. Christi. Psalm. 115.3. Isay. 46.10. Genesis 19.22. Mark.
6.5.


The limited Power of God is that which his Will or some other Attribute
limiteth or restrains, Psalm. 115.3. Isay. 46.10. I will do all my pleasure.
Thus God by his Absolute Power could have destroyed Sodom before Lot came out
of it; but by his Limited Power he could not, Genesis 19.22. It was not Passively
limited by Lot, but Actively by his own will. Thus Mark. 6.5. By Christ's
absolute Power he could have wrought more Miracles then he did in Nazareth, but
by his Limited Power he could not, and why so? because he would not, it making
more for his glory, not to work any great miracle amongst that unbelieving
people. So Math. 26.53. and of this Power we now speak.

Qui rationem quaerit voluntatis Dei, aliquid majus Deo quaerit (says St.
Augustine.) He that seeks a Reason of the will of God, seeks for something
greater then God. Therefore, says Luther justly, periculosa and pestilens
quaestio, Quare? It is a dangerous and infectious Monosyllable, Why? And he
persues it farther with words of more vehemence: Odiosa et exitialis, vocula,
Quare, It is an execrable, and damnable monosyllable, Why? it exasperates God,
and ruins us; For when a man comes to the boldness of proposing such a
Question, he will not give over till he find some Answer, and he has nothing to
answer him but his own Reason; and that affoards not lead enough, nor line
enough to sound the depth of Gods proceedings. The Will of God is the Cause of
all Causes, in which we must make a stand, and seek for no Reason beyond it. It
is thus, or thus, why? it is Gods will to have it so, that is enough: There is
no Cause of the first Cause. The Sea be it never so deep has a bottom, the
Heavens be they never so high, they have a top; but of the will of God there
are no Confines, nor Limits, as Zophar excellently tells Job. cap, 11.7, 8,
9, Job. 11.7, 8, 9.
God is an absolute Lord over his Creatures, and has as just right of their
Disposition, as he had power of their Creation. Has not the Potter power over
his Clay? The Carpenter of his Timber; Romans 9
The Governor of a Family, power to put out at pleasure, to set this Vessel
on the Cupboard, fling that other on the Dunghill? God has a far more
incomparable right over us, then we over any Pot or Vessel, who then shall
demand a Reason of his Will?

And yet though there can be no Cause given of Gods will, which is the Cause of
all Causes, yet (as Aquinas teaches us to distinguish) there may be ratio rei
velitae a reason of that thing which is willed by God, Ephesians. ^^.4.
for God works all things according to Counsel. And so his Will is not
without Reason, and according to this Counsel of his own Will, he sets
diverse things in such an order, that the former is the cause of the latter, yet
none of them a Cause, but an Effect of his Will. Muscul. loc. com. p. 412.413.
Romans 8.29. Genesis 6.12, 13. Romans 9.20-25.
So Romans 8.29. all depend on Gods Will, but his Will on none of them. And thus
God himself is pleased to render Reasons for the doing of that which he
commands, and of his proceedings with the Creature, as Genesis 6.12, 13. Romans
9.20.-25. And a Reason of these things may modestly be enquired.

This Doctrine delivered serves to reprove a double fault in us: The one is
that absurd and foolish Reasoning from the pewer of God, to the will of God,
God can do this, or that, therefore he will do it. And thus they of the Roman
Church Reason for Christ's Corporal presence in the Sacrament of the Altar;
they obtrude to us, Asylum Haereticorum est omnipetentia D^i. Chrysostom.
miraculous Doctrines of Transubstantiation, and the like upon a possibility
only, It may be done, say they, it is possible; God can do it (which yet
implying contradictions cannot be done) but should it be granted that God can
do it, yet an Argument a posse ad esse is infirm and weak; unless they can
find Gods will to be there, as well as his power, they prove nothing. The like
absurd Reasoning we hear from many careless people. God can save me without
means, help me without praying; Indeed, by Gods omnipotent and absolute power,
he can do this; he can feed Eliah by a Raven, cause Corn to grow without
plowing or sowing: of stones, raise up Childeren unto Abraham, but will God
(think you) do this? Is not his power limited by his will? And by his limited
power he will not do this that you say.

God will not, but because they imagine God cannot help men. And this was the
fault of Moses, God promised to spread such a Table in the Wilderness, that
all the Israelites should have flesh to eat, Numb. 11.19.
Numb. 11.19. and that, not for a day or two, but, a month together. Moses
questioned whether God were able to make good his promise, verse 21. thus he
argues; the people are six hundred thousand foot men, etc: shall the Flocks and
the Herds be slaire for them to suffice them? etc: but see the Answer that God
makes, verse 23. Is the Lords hand waxed short? etc. implying that Moses and
the people of Israel had such an apprehension of his power: for this is said
likewise of them, Psalm. 78.20. They spoke against God, and said can God furnish
a Table in the Wilderness? Pro. 78.29.
from the strongest premises which Omnipotency it self could make, they could
not dispute Faith in the Conclusion. Behold he smote the Rock etc: can he give
bread? Oh cursed Infidelity! which will pervert Gods Logic, and dispute Gods
Arguments backward: From what God has done Faith, gathers strength, 1 Samuel
17.34.
as David said in Goliahs Case, God has done this and will. But Infidelity
from the premises of Gods power concludes weakness; from a Can to infer a
Cannot, so verse 41. they turned back, and limited the Holy one of Israel, they
said, he cannot do, and why? because they have Cities walled up to Heaven, that
is the thing laid to their charge, in limiting the holy one of Israel; they
thought, if their Cities had been but low, and the men had been but ordinary
men, God might have brought them into that Land: but hear what they said,
Numb. 13.22, 23. Numb. 13.22, 23.
The Land through which we have gone to search, is a Land that eats up the
Inhabitants thereof, and all the men that we saw, were men of great Stature,
and there we saw Giants; A strange story, and a likely tale. The Land did eat
up the Inhabitants, and yet they are men of great Stature, and Giants, surely
then they were no starvelings, they wanted no victuals: but put the Case that
they were so great, had not God power? that it was, they doubted. Many other
Instances might be brought, 2 King. 7.2. Mark. 9.22. John. 11.21.38. 2 King.
7.2. Mark. 9.22. Joh. 11.21.38.
In all these Instances there is doubt made of Gods Power, and so it is still
with us, our unbelief arises more from a suspicion of Gods Power, then of his
Will, else why do we believe least, when dangers are greatest? In little
Dangers we believe that God will help, but in greater troubles we believe not;
but are much cast down with doubtings; and the Reason is, for that then we see
a greater Power is required, and that we doubt of: but here you lee the power
of God is Absolute, were it not limited by his Will; so that we need not doubt
of that.

Will of God does not ever permit his Power, to bring into Act what it could
do; then let it advise us to make sure Gods will, that we may comfortably rest
upon the Power of the Almighty. It is Gods Power that works all things for
us, but it is his Will that sets that Power on work: He can do by his Power
more then he will, but he cannot do any thing by his Power which is contrary to
his will. That there is a Power in God is very comfortable unto us, he is able
to help us; The Faith of the Godly has built much upon that, (as did
Jehosophats, So. Heb. 11.19.
and the three Children in the fiery Furnace) but if the Will of God accompany
it not, sollid comfort cannot be had from th^nce, but being assured of Gods
Will, we need not then doubt his Power. Abraham thus builded his Faith upon
Gods promise, and his ability to perform it, Romans 4.19.20. This bred that
strength of Faith in him. Romans 4.19.20.
What God wills once, we may conclude that he effectually works.

Ezekiel. 33.11. Psalm. 81.11. Hos. 7.1. Math. 23.37. 1 Timothy 2.4. Resp.
Ezekiel. 33.11. Psalm. 81.11. Hos. 7.1. Math. 23.37. 1 Timothy 2.4.

Some distinguish here, and say that the Will of God is Absolute or
Conditional. In things that God has Absolutely determined to do, there his
Power does work them effectually. But the things which God would have on
condition from us, those his Power does not work further then the condition is
performed by us. God would that a Sinner should live, and is willing to give
him Life, and Salvation, but it must be understood according to that course of
providence that he has taken for him, in, and by the New Covenant. And that he
may live and obtain Salvation, God would that he should turn from his wicked
ways and come to the knowledge of the Truth: And for that end and purpose he
sends his Word, and Messengers to convince him of his Sin, Acts 26.18.
to reclaim him from his evil courses, Acts. 26.18. wherein if they be
wanting to themselves, God withholds his Power, and they perish: And thus by
this Conditional Will, he wills the Salvation of all; but by his Absolute Will
which does always most certainly and infallibly take effect, he wills the
Salvation of none, but the elect only.

The Usual distinction of Gods will, is, Secret or Revealed, the former is
called Voluntas Beneplaciti, the good pleasure of his Will, the other Voluntas
Signi, that will of his word, wherein he declares and opens to man what his
will is, The former is Voluntas, quam Deus vult, that will which he wills us
to will; and with this, his Power does not always concur. And of that our
Savior speaks, Math. 23.37. Both these distinctions look the same way. Math.
23.37.


Others Answer thus: Junius.
The will of God though it be but one as God is one, yet this one will does
exercise and extend it self diversely upon diverse objects, and is to be
considered in diverse degrees. The weakest and most remiss degree, is to will
the suffering of evil, for though God (to speak properly) wills not sin, yet
he willingly suffers it which he could easily prevent, and hinder if he would
oppose his omnipotent Power, which he always does not.

The next degree of Gods willing, stands in commanding good, approving of it,
where it is found. And thus he wills and commands that all men should repent,
and would not that men should perish, and these things he wills seriously:
but this will which stands in commanding, promising and the like, is too often
resisted, and made ineffectuall by men.

The highest degree of willing in God, is, when he so wills a thing, as that
withal he employes his Omnipotent Power for the effecting of it, and by this
he does whatsoever he pleases in the Heavens, and on the Earth, Psalm. 115.3.
Psalm. 115.3.
This Will cannot be resisted: And thus he wills the salvation of the elect,
and works that in them that he requires of them.

See then that thou provest what the good and acceptable will of God is toward
thee, Romans 12.2. Romans 12.2.
Leave secret things to God, enquire into that part of his Will revealed. Does
any man put his Son to School to learn what his Master thinks? Quis tam stulte
curiosus est, qui filium suum mittat in scholam ut quid Magister cogitet,
discat?
(says Austin.) Consider how far God has engaged himself unto thee by
promise, what qualifications and conditions he expects to be in thee, and from
thee, and so far as he has made known his Will unto thee, thou may rest
upon his Power, for that shall not be wanting to effect it. Call upon me, Psalm.
50.15.
says God, in the time of Trouble, and I will hear. In all thy troubles,
inward or outward cry, call, fear not the Power of God; doubt not of it, Math.
8.2.
but say, Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, so if thou will, thou
can pardon me, hear me, help me; Jam. 4.15.
Put in, if God will in all thy Resolutions, make that good and thou may
conclude, what God sees to be good for me, that he will do; what God will do,
that he can do; what God will do, and can do, that shall be done; Therefore
what God sees to be good for me, shall be. Get but Gods good will and all will
be well, and get unto Christ and fear not, but thou shall have that, Luke.
2.14.
Luke 2.14.

Thus you have heard of the discouragements that we may meet withal in our
coming to God, but notwithstanding all these we may not be driven off. A
Friend will not be discouraged (says Christ) from coming to his Friend,
although the Door be shut, etc. God is your Friend, you are his, therefore be
not discouraged; So then let us take one observation more along with us.

Gods Friends should not be driven off from seeking to him by Prayer,
notwithstanding the many discouragements which they meet withal; let the Door
be shut, the Children abed, an unkind answer given, yet nothing should stave
them off from calling upon God in the day of their Distress.

How was Jchosaphat put to it? 2 Chronicles. 20.12 Psalm. 44.8 -- to the end.
he knew not which way to turn him; his Enemies were many, people unable to
resist, yet his eyes were up to God still, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. So Psalm. 44. from
verse 8. to the end, nothing could keep them from seeking unto God. Nay, albeit
the Lord had willed his people not to trouble him, and positively told them
that he would deliver them no more, yet that could not beat them off, they
would sti^l seek unto him, as we read Judge. 10.13.15. Instance in David, Psalm.
88.3-14. And in Dan. 6.10. Judge. 10.13.15. Psalm. 88.3-14. Dan. 6.10. Jon. 2.1,
2. Math. 20.30. Mark. 10.46.
So Jon. 2.1, 2. He was in the belly of the deep and in the belly of the Whale,
and had neither Sun-light, nor Candlelight, little hope of ever being
delivered out of that Prison, yet he is there praying. We read in the Gospel,
Math. 20.30. of two blind men, (one was Bartimeus, Mark 10.46.) they were
rebuked by the multitude, but that would not do, they hold on and cry out after
Christ: But amongst all examples, none is more remarkable then that we have,
Math. 15.22. Math. 15.12.
It is set out with an Ecce, and so calls upon us for special regard. A poor
Cananite comes to Christ in the behalf of her Daughter, who was possessed with
a Devil, she instantly beseeches him, prostrate on her knees, even in the
bowels of compassion, to behold her Child, her little Child (as St. Mark has
it,) and dislodge that unclean and raging spirit, Mark. 7.23.
who had taken up her body as a Cabinet to rest in. Have mercy upon me o Lord.
She saw her self beaten on her poor Child's back, and acknowledges her own sin
in her Daughters sufferings, Have mercy (on me) thou Son of David, thou that
wast thy self borne of a woman, pity a woman; thou that have the bowels of a
man in thee, hide not thine eyes from thine own flesh; my Daughter, my little
Daughter is vexed, yea greviously vexed with a Devil, and thou our blessed
Jesus, who came to destroy the works of the Devil, have pity therefore on
this my Child, etc. Now who would expect any other then a present Answer to so
humble and pious a suite? yet see what discouragements she meets withal.

First, not a word does Christ give her, Math. 15. verse 23.
verse 23. he seems to neglect and slight her: and a willing neglect (says
one) lays strong seidge to the best Fort of the soul. She was well assured
that he heard her; for she cried out, she whispered not, what might she think?
Math. 9.12.
Is this the Physician that came into the world to cure the sick, and does he
refuse to help his Patient? Is this that Fountain that invites all to come and
drink freely, John 7.37. John 1.1.
and does he now withold water from the thirsty? Colos. 2, 3. Pro. 9.3, 4.
Is this the Word and wisdom of the Father which sends the maidens to cry out
in the Market places, Come unto me, and Who is simple let him come, Esaias. 61.1.
Luke 4.18.
and is he now become dumb? Is this he that was sent to comfort the afflicted,
and will he add Affliction to Affliction by a willing disrespect? No, No, it
cannot be that this is he, I must seek to some other for relief: Or, if this
be he, I see my request is not minded by him. I have run, and cried after him
in whom all Nations of the Earth should be blessed, and he disdaines me; Ah my
dear Child, what shall I do for thee, to whom shall I go? my bowels are
turned within me on thy behalf. The Lord of Life has closed his ear against
my humble suite, And I, whither shall I go? Thus she might have debated the
matter within her self, but this she did not, but rather gathers strength from
this discouragement. Does not Christ answer? well I will have one before I
leave him: he says nothing, this is no denial yet: She follows her suite,
insomuch that his Disciples come unto him, and move on her behalf. Send her
away, for she cries after us.

Math. 15.
I am not sent (says he) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, verse
24. as if he should say, It is not within the compass of my Commission. For my
Father has sent me (not only, but) chiefly, and principally, to the Jews, of
which number she is none, but a Gentile; (Nor was the wall of Partition as yet
broken down,) so that it implies that the suite was unreasonable, at least
unseasonable, and therefore she might set her heart at rest, and spare her
breath, and trouble neither them nor her self any further.

Could there be any greater discouragement then this? for what was this Answer
which he gave to them, any other then a defense of his former silence, and
seeming neglect? Whilst he was silent, it might be thought that he heard not,
or else that (his thoughts being taken up with matters more serious) he
regarded not her suite; But this Answer professed that silence, to proceed from
a Resolution not to grant her her desire, she being one that he was not sent
unto, and so (with warrant from his Calling) could not help her.

Lord help me, verse 25. Pity the case of a poor distressed woman, and let
tears work thee to some compassion of me in misery. I am thy beggar, and come
for my Dole, oh reject not her, who in all humility does here prostrate her
self at thy feet for mercy.

a third Repulse, more severe and rough then either of the former. She is not
only snapt and chidden, but reproached. It is not meet to take the Childrens
bread and to cast it unto Dogs, verse 26. (...) to whelps for more contempt
sake (as Beza notes. (...)
) So by consequence he calls her Bitch, and her Daughter Whelp. What more
ignominious, and opprobious name, then the name of a Dog? Am I a Dogs head
said Abner to Ishbosheth that thou accountest of me so basely? 2 Samuel 3.8. And
am I a Dog that I should do this, said Hazael to Elisha, 2 King. 8.13. Our
Savior does imply, that she, being a Cananite, was no better. And as in a well
ordered house, 2 Samuel 3.8. 2 King 8.13.
Dogs are not allowed to eat Childrens bread, no more says Christ, may I
take the Privileges intended for the Children of the house of Israel, and cast
them to such as thou art, who being out of the Covenant, and without God in the
world art no better then a Dog in his esteem: no, no, I may not; worser
scraps of common mercyes must serve thy turn.

What ordinary Patience would not have been overstrained with so opprobious a
Repulse? who would not have flung away in passion. What? do such terms beseem
the lips of a Prophet, nay of the Son of God, the Savior of the world? is this
the comfort that poor distressed Creatures are like to find when they come to
thee for help? did I snarle at thee when I called thee the Son of David? or did
I bite when I prostrated my self by humble adoration at thy feet? And shall I
be thus reproached with the name of Dog? What woman can endure it?

Dogs lick up the crumbs that fall from their Masters Table, verse 27. or as
St. Mark has it. Mark. 7.28.
The Dogs under the Table eat of the Childrens crumbs. Dogs some way belong
unto the Family; Some interest and right they have to crumbs, and scraps: I
account my self a happy woman, that I may be admitted into thy house, though it
be but in the nature of a Dog; for like a Dog I will wait at my Masters
heels, and will not be rated away. The Spaniel will quest when he espyeth his
game; and can I hold my peace and be silent, having such an opportunity offered
of doing my self and Daughter good? Give leave then, O blessed Jesus, to speak
unto thee, I take thee at thy word; I am no Jew therefore, no Child; and
because no Child, I expect not bread; none of thy greatest Miracles, Theophyl.
and mercyes which thou reservest for those that are thy chosen and peculiar
people. I am a Dog being a Gentile; thou say it, and I believe it, but
crumbs are for the Dogs that they find under the Table, although they have no
right to the Childrens meat. Yet if Children being full fed, crumble their
bred, and make waste of it, (as the Jews now do,) may not Gentile Dogs lick
up their leavings? Let me then who am but as a Dog expect some crumbs of mercy
from thy Table, at which thy Children surfeit. Cast out that Devil out of my
little Daughter, show this small favor to me a Cananite; this is but a crumb,
a fragment, in comparison of the whole Loaf: Lord, help me, and it shall
content me.

Logician in the world bring a stronger and more prevayling Argument? Christ
neither denies nor distinguishes says one, but grants the Argument; commends
her Faith, and that with Admiration, O Woman, great is thy Faith, verse 28. as
if he should have said, I never in all my Life met withal, I have not found
such Faith in Israel, verse 28. And thus you see that neither silence, nor sad
Answers could stave her off from calling on God for mercy in her trouble.

Prayer of Faith, and faith overlookes all difficultyes, and discouragements;
it will eat its way through the Alps of seemingly, insuperable difficultyes. It
bears down all lets before it, and breaks down all hindrances, 1 John 5.4.
This we find in sundry examples, 1 John 5.4. Heb. 11. Psalm. 61.2. Psalm.
119.49.50.114. Romans 4.20, 21.
Heb. 11. It fixes the eye on that Rock that is higher then the highest on
earth, Psalm. 61.2. It sees God true in his promises, upon which they build,
Psalm. 119.49, 50.114. Romans 4.20, 21. It eyes him who is above all Plots, and
Projects whatsoever; So that difficultyes are no difficultyes in the eyes of
Faith.

But. Oh, But God is great, and I am vile: remove that, tell them there is a
Mediator appointed for them, and then another But is brought; But we see no
likelihood of help, no means to effect what we desire, etc. Answer that, then
follows a third But, and a fourth; and we never leave Butting till we have
Butted out the Duty. Such dull, base, feeble spirits we have within us, that
are ready to receive all impressions of discouragement, yea to frame them
within our selves, This is a sign of a weak Faith; (if not unsound).

Whilst the Door is open, Children up, and we see some fair probability of
speeding, we can (seemingly) pray heartily, but when the means seem to make
against us, wealth lost, Friends forsake us, outward props and stays pulled
away from us; then our hearts sink within us, notwithstanding Gods promise;
which discovers plainly that our Faith was founded on the means, and not on
the promise, and that we give no more Credit to God then we would to a
Banquerout, who although we will not trust on his own Credit, yet if he brings
a pledge or pawn, in his hands, we will credit him. Outward means or helps
are as it were a pawn in the hand of God; if we see that, we will trust him,
but no further. This should not be; wherefore,

etc: all makes against you, yet it is your Friend you come unto. The Cynick
could say to Antisthenes (his Master) that there was no cudgel so crabbed that
should drive him away from him. And shall any thing drive us from so gracious a
God? See (says one) how it is with Beggars that come unto your Doors, Peter's
enlargement by Mr. Harris. p. 19.
and learn of them, The Master chides; The Beggar stands it out; The Dame
chides, yet he will not be gone; Servants, Children tell them that they have
their Answer, yet they will not away till they have a better: threaten them
with stocks or Officer, or what you please, all is one to them, they will not
from your Doors before they taste of your Charity. And have not we as good
encouragement to beg of God, as Rogues and Vagrants have of us? have we not
Precept, Promise, Law, Gospel, Servants, Children, yea the Son and Heir all on
our sides, and shall we be put off? that may not be, it will not be, if our
Faith be as it ought to be. If thy Petitions be not Lawful, never prefer
them; if lawful, never give them over. But more of this hereafter, in the
Applicatory part of the Parable. We have now done with the Case Propounded by
our Savior. The Resolution of it follows.

I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him because he is his Friend,
yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he
needs.

We have here Considerable, First, the Person. Secondly the Thing.

The Person resolving the Case, [I say.] The Persons resolved, concerning the
Case [You], I say unto you.

The same mouth that had put the Case, resolves it; So then,

Christ is an excellent Casuist, he can resolve Cases, as well as put Cases.

His dexterity in this kind appears in the Evangelists plentifully, Math.
19.25.26. and 22.26.29. Mark. 10.12. Luke 10.29.37. John 4.20.21. and 9.2.
Mark. 12.32. Math. 32.46.
Math. 19.25, 26. and 22.26.29. Mark 10.12. Luke 10.29, 37. John 4.20, 21. and
9.2. So able was he to answer questions, resolve doubts, and remove scruples,
as that his very adversaryes approved of his Resolutions, and answers, Mark.
12.32. nor durst they ask him any more questions, Math. 22.46.

But how was it then, that sometimes he made no answer to doubtful questions?
and at other times he answered, but not ad Idem, to the point in hand?

Tempting questions, as were those that his adver^aryes propounded to him; in
which Case he was sometimes silent, John 8.6.
making as though he heard not, (as John 8.6.) and at other times answering by
a Cross Interrogatory, (as Mark 11.29.)

Or curious questions, Mark. 11.29.
such as tended not to edification, such was that of the Disciples, Acts 1.5.
Acts 1.6. to which our Savior returns no Resolution, but a check: So when
his Disciple questioned him about the Ubi or Place where he would appear in
Judgment, Luke 17.37.
he answers with an Ubicunque, Luke 17.37. not directly to the question.

Or Impertinent; concerning others rather then our selves, as Luke 13.24. to
which our Savior makes no direct Answer, Luke 13.24.
but rather to a question that should have been made, and not to what was made,
John 21, 22.
and such a question was that of Peter, Joh. 21, 22. to which our Savior makes
a round Reply by way of reproof. In these Cases our Savior gave no direct
answer to questions made unto him, not for that he could not, but for that he
thought it in wisdom not fit to do it, his ability was not to be doubted of.

Solomon. Solomon was indeed a wise Prince, and was able to resolve the Queen
of Sheba of all the doubts she did reproof (who came to prove him with hard
questions, 1 King. 10.1. 2 Chronicles. 9.1. Colos. 2, 3. John 2.25.
1 King. 10.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 9.1. but the Son of man excells him, for he was the
Wisdom of the Father, all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge dwelt in him,
Colos. 2, 3. He knew what was in man John 2.25. which Solomon did not, but was
enforced to discover the inward affection by the outward action, as in the
deciding that controversy betwixt the two Mothers, 1 King. 3.24, 25, 26.
1 King. 3.24 25, 26.

other to arise; concerning what he hears, or reads. Nor did ever any prove
good Scholar in any kind of Learning, who was not a Questionist, that had not
some doubts to propound. Now in such Cases, to whom should we go, but to this
learned Casuist for resolution? who will not be wanting, nor is at any time
without an answer in readiness for us, if we ask him humbly and sincerely.

Romans 10.7.
Romans 10.7.

the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart, Romans 10.8. Two
ways he speaks unto us. Inwardly and outwardly. Sometimes Inwardly, Romans 10.8.
by the immediate suggestion of the spirit, but this is in extraordinary cases.
Outwardly (ordinarily) by the Scriptures, and by his Ministers; by both, his
Spirit speaks unto us; It speaks evidently unto us in the Scriptures; by it he
resolves his Church no less then by an Oracle from Heaven; all questions and
controversyes in matters of Faith, and substantialls of Religion, must by them
be decided, and determined, as the supreme Judge of all.

And for our further direction and resolution he has given the knowledge of
his word to his faithful Ministers, who draw all their light from the word,
and do thereby ask counsel at the mouth of God for us, to whom we may resort,
and on whose Ministry we must depend; which if we carefully and conscionably
do, we shall experimentally find that there is scarce any objection of moment
that arises up in our hearts, (be it never so secret) but some time or other
it will be met withal, and answered: we shoot at adventures, but God guides
the Arrow, as 1 King. 22.34. So Austin, 2 King. 22.34.
besides his purpose fell upon a discourse against the Manichees, concluding
from thence, that God had some work to do that he was ignorant of, and it fell
out to be so; for at that Sermon was one of the chiefest of the Manichees
converted.

As for those mavelous discourses of some, framed upon presumption of the
Spirit's help in private, in judging, or interpreting of difficult places of
Scripture, (says a very learned and judicious Divine, Mr. Hales. on 2 Pet. 3
16. page 25.
) I have often wondered at; For the spirit is a thing of dark and secret
operation, the manner of it none can descry; As underminers are never seen till
they have wrought their purpose; so the Spirit is never perceived but by its
effects. The effects of the Spirit, so far as they concern knowledge, and
instruction are not particular information, for resolution in any doubtful
Case (for this were plainly revelation): but as the Angel which was sent to
Cornelius informs him not, but sends him to Peter to School, so the Spirit
teaches not, but stirrs in us a desire to learn. Desire to learn, makes us
thirst after the means; and pious sedulity and carefullnesse makes us
watchful in the choice, and dilligent in the Use, of the means. The promise
to the Apostle of the spirit, which should lead them into all Truth, was made
good to them by private and secret informing of their understandings, with the
knowledge of high and heavenly mysteryes, which as yet had never entered into
the conceit of man; The same promise is made to us, but fullfilled after
another manner; For what was written in their hearts by Revelation, for our
instruction; have they written in their books. To us for our information
otherwise then out of these books, the Spirit speaks not. Thus far he.

To conclude the Point, Remember what you read, 1 King. 1.13. 1 King. 1.13.
There was a great contention betwixt Adoniah and Solomon who should reign,
and there was great parts taking: Priests were against Priests; Captains
against Captains; and mighty men against mighty men; Nathan in this Case
advises Bathsheba to go to David himself, and to know his pleasure in the
business. So in points of Faith and matters of Religion, when Council is
against Council, Assembly against Assembly, writer against writer, Preacher
against Preacher, etc: let us fly unto the Scripture, and put on the resolution
of David, Psalm. 85.8.
Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will say in the business.

Yet one thing more from this [I say] wherewith our Savior determines the Case.

It was Christ's usual Form of confirming Divine Truths: Joh. 3, 3, 5. Isa.
21.10. 1 Ioh. 1.1. 1 Cor. 11.23, Act. 28.23.
No Prophet, nor Apostle, spoke in their own names, but delivered what they had
heard and seen, 1 John 1.1. The Apostles preached nothing, but either by
immediate Commission from Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23. or out of the Law and Prophets:
But our Blessed Savior propounds his Doctrine in his own Name, that he may
be known to be the chief Doctor of the Church, the Author and Fountain of all
Heavenly Doctrine: So that we may hence conclude, That

Christ's [I say] his bare Word is confirmation sufficient: No other Proof needs
necessarily to be brought for confirmation of any Point of Doctrine.

Woman believe me, says Christ to that Samaritane, Ioh. 4.21. Ioh. 14.11.
Joh. 4.21. The like to his Disciples, Joh. 14.11. Believe me, Take my bare
word, without any further pawn or proof.

This honor he claims over the Consciences of men, Math. 5.20, 22, 28, 32,
34.
to overruled their Assents against all Mists of Error, or Sophistical Glosses
of false Teachers; as appears, Math. 5.20, 22, 28, 32, 34. Audistis, and
Audiistis, this and that you have heard others say, (says Christ to them that
come to hear him) but I say thus, etc. and that is your Rule to follow.

faithful and true Witness, Rev. 1.5. and 3.14. 1 Ioh. 5.7. 1 Pet. 2.22. Romans
3.4. 1 Cor. 13.9. John. 14.6. Ioh. 1.1.
Rev. 1.5. He bears Record with the Father and Spirit, 1 John 5.7. and they
agree in one Testimony and Witness. As Man, there was no error nor sin in
him, 1 Pet. 2.22. which cannot be said of any other man (for all men are Liars,
and subject to errors, 1 Cor. 13.9.) And, as God, so he was the Author of
Truth, and Truth it self, Joh. 14.6. Every word he spoke, was the Word of God,
the Word was God, Joh. 1.1. Christ was the Word, not only the Essential Word
which was always with God, but the very written Word too: He was Scripture
(says one): Dr. Dunn.
As we say of great and Universal Scholars, that they are viventes
Bibliochecae, living, walking, speaking Libraties: so Christ was Loquens
Scriptura, living, speaking, Scripture. Our Sermons are Text, and Discourse;
Christ's Sermons were all Text; And so Credit (of right) is due to whatsoever
he spoke without any further proof.

Luke 19.46. and 24.46. Ioh. 8.17. and 10.34. and 5.33. Resp.
he confirms his Doctrine by it; as Luke 19.46. and 24.46. and Joh. 8.17. and
10.34. And referred his Hearers to the testimony of others; as Joh. 5.33.

He did so; and in so doing, he refers them to himself, for he was the
Scripture; nor was that testimony which was given of him, the testimony of man,
Ioh. 5.34.

Again, Ioh. 5.34. Ioh. 3.35.
this he did; First, to confirm the Authority of Scripture, Ioh. 3.35.

Secondly, Ioh. 13.5.
to give us that are Dispensers of the Word an example, Ioh. 13.5. I have given
you an example, that you should do as I have done: As in that, so in this.

Thirdly, in respect of the weakness of his Hearers, whom he did instruct;
because, as yet, they did not so fully know him to be the Son of God: they
looked on him as mere man, not knowing the relation he had to the Father, nor
believing that the Deity was veiled under the flesh. And so, for the present,
the testimony of Scripture was of more Authority with them, then his bare word:
But this was more then he was bound unto, or needed to have done.

2. Ioh. 5.31, 32. Resp.
his Witness were not true, Joh. 5.31, 32.

That was said, out of a Legal and Proverbial Opinion of theirs, that a Witness
testifying of himself, was not to be believed, in that he said; and so there is
a Rhetorical Conception in the words (says Beza) and he reasons with them
after their own Conceptions, q. d. Say, I should yield unto you, that my
Testimonies, concerning my self, were not to be admitted, (as indeed in
Judicature, the Rule is both just and equal) yet you have no reason to press
this upon me; for there is another that bears Witness of me, even John, whom
you sent unto; who pointed to me with the singer, and willed you to behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World: John 1.29.
But after this, after he had done enough to make them see, that he was more
then man, by multiplying of Miracles amongst them, (and when he speaks
positively unto them) he tells them plainly, That albeit he bore Witness of
himself, yet his Witness was true, John 8.13. And why so? Because (says
Christ) I know whence I came and whither I go, verse 14. John 8.13. Ver. 14.
Even out of the Bosom of mine Eternal Father, whither I am returning, even to
the re-possession of that Glory. So then, albeit our Savior grants, that in
the ordinary course of Humane Proceedings, no man's testimony is to be taken
concerning himself; yet in his Case it was far otherwise, he being a Divine
Person, exempted from all possibility of Error: Nor was it possible, that
Christ could be singularis testis, he was more then one Witness, because he was
more then one Nature, God and Man: and therefore instructing Nicodemus, he
speaks plurally; We speak, that we know, we testify; you receive not our
Witness, John 3.11. John 3.11.
He says, not mine, but ours; because he was, although a singular, yet a
plural person too: The Uses follow.



First, such as will not take it alone, without other warrant, they rely not on
it without other Testimony. The Papists are such; who, without the Testimony of
the Church, will not receive the Testimony of Christ, (albeit they will receive
the Testimony of the Church, without the Testimony of Christ.) They will not
believe the Scripture, unless the Church give Testimony unto it; but the Church
they will believe, even in such things as have no Testimony at all from
Scripture. And what is this then, but to undervalue the Testimony of Christ,
and prefer the Testimony of the Church before it. This is no other then, in
effect, to believe God, for man's cause, and give him the honor. For, Dr.
Pride. Lect. de testib.
as he that receives the Testimony of Christ for its self, sets to his Seal,
that God is true; so he that receives it for the Testimony of the Church, sets
to his Seal that man is true.

It is granted, that we receive the Scriptures by the Churches Testimony; but
yet, not for it. The Testimony of the Church may first incline us to believe,
that the Scripture is Scripture, and make us willing to read it, Whitak.
and hear it. Yet the Church has a Ministerial Introductory persuasive
concurrence in this Work, pointing unto the Star, (which yet shines by its
own, Light,) and it reaches forth, and exhibiteth unto me the light; which,
Dr. Potter's Answ. to Char. mistaken, p. 141.
though in it self visible, could not be so ordinarily unto me, unless thus
presented; explaining the Evidence of those Truths, unto which I assent; not
for the Testimony of the Church, but for their own intrinsecal certainty. We
know such a weight to be true, by the Standard; but the Standard true, by it
self. All other Doctrines we know to be sound by the Scriptures, but the
Scriptures by themselves: one Text, by another.

And amongst our selves, there may be found such, as refuse to receive the bare
word and testimony of Christ: That Ministry is disdained by them, as
unlearned, and of no worth, that brings no other Authority, and Testimony with
it, then the Scripture: as if a Thief should refuse a Pardon from his Prince,
because there is not witness to it, only his own hand. The Prophets, Apostles,
yea and Christ himself, contented themselves with the bare Testimony of
Scripture. And if the Word preached by the Prophets, Apostles, yea, and Christ
himself, whether to Jews or Gentiles, were absolutely to be believed, and
obeyed by every one that heard it, without other, or further Testimony, why not
as well, and as much now by every one of us who hear it read and preached.



Confirmation of Doctrine, so much as for illustration of the Point, or
Conviction of Gainsayers: And so St. Paul alleged the Authority of a Cretian
to the Cretians, Tit. 1.12.
Tit. 1.12.

And so to the men of Athens, a sentence out of Aratus (which quotations have
sweetened the unwholesome waters of Jericho, and have made wholesome drink of
them, for the Children of the Prophets). But in Confirming of the Truth, we may
say with Hierom to Eustachius, Quid cum Psalterio Horatius, cum Evangelistis
Maro, cum Apostolis Cicero? It is unseemly for the Subject to fit on the same
throne with his Prince, or the Maid on the same seat with her Mistress; yet it
is comely to have them stand about, and attend in their places. Stars have
their stations and motions allowed them in the Firmament, albeit they come far
short of the Sun and Moon.

And, As these deserve Reproof, who cannot content themselves with the single
Testimony of Christ, without other Authority; so Secondly; Such fall under it
as do absolutely reject it, and give no credit at all to it, be it backed with
never so many testimonies, or good Authority. Who has believed our report,
says the Prophet, Esaias 53.1. So, Esaias 35.1. John 12.38. Romans 10.16. Acts 7.38.
Heb. 1.2. Revel. 2.7. Heb. 5.12. Luke 10.16. 1 Timothy 6.3.-5.
John 12.38. and Romans 10.16. Sometimes Christ spoke unto us by lively voice;
Acts 7.38. Heb. 1.2. and something he speaks to us in the Scriptures, Revel.
2.7. Heb. 5.12. And something he speaks to us by his Ministers, Luke 10.16. yet
who gives any credit to any of those things they read or hear. These men the
Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 6.3,-5.

A Popish Friar, sometimes wittily told his Hearers that the Truth Preached,
was like unto Holy water, which every one calls for apace, but when it came to
be cast upon them, they would turn their faces aside, and their backs upon it.
And as Agathon once said, If I tell the Truth, I shall not please; and if I
would please, I may not tell the Truth. You call on Us, that are Gods
messengers, to speak the Truth, and embolden us to speak it; but (as Martial
said to some of his Friends so) we may say, the Truth is, you will not endure
to hear the Truth.

Nay we do not only scorn it, and reject; but oppose it, and set our selves
against it to persecute it, and the Bringers of it; Thus Elijah and Michaiah
were hated of Ahab, for the Truths sake; and the man of God by Jeroboam. And so
John of Herod, Steven of the Jews, and St. Paul of his own Hearers: Gal. 4.16.
Seldom does Christ's word (the Truth) go without a scratcht face. As Luther
once said of Preaching, Praedicare nihil aliua est quam derivare in se furorem;
To Preach the Truth is nothing else but to stir up the fury of Hell, Satan,
and the world against a man. But thus (not only to reject the Truth of Christ
but) to hate it, and persecute the bringers of it, is a sin next to that that
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come.

a King protest in verbo Regis, he will look to be believed. If a Noble man,
protest, in verbo Honoris, he takes it indignely, if he be not credited. If a
Clergy man averr ought in verbo Sacerdotis, he thinks he ought to be regarded,
what then does Christ expect, think you, who is both King, Priest, and Prophet?
that Amen, the true and faithful witness of his Eather, Revel. 3.14. 2 Cor.
1.20. 1 Pet. 2.22.
Revel. 3.14. whose words are all yea and amen, in whose lips there was no
guile.

How often does Christ repeat Amen, Amen? so often as that you may reckon it
thirty times in that one Evangelist St. John. It was Christ's ordinary
Asseveration. As often as the other Evangelists mention it, in Christ's mouth,
they mention it and express it, singly with one Amen, Verily, I say; but St.
John does evermore double it, Amen, Amen, Verily, Verily, it is thus, and thus.
The Reason is rendered to be this; St. John considers the Divinity of Christ,
more then the other Evangelists do, and the nearer we come to the consideration
of that, the more confident we are of the establishment of his promises: but
however it is religiously thought, that from the frequent Use of that
Asseveration, St. John called Christ by that name Amen, Revel. 3.14. Surely,
Verily, John 10.3.
that is his Name.

And shall we not know him by Name? He knows us by Name, and calls us by it,
John 10.3. And shall we not know him by His? how then can we call upon it, and
come to God in it, as we are required in Scripture?

To know him by Name, and come to him by Name, is to consider him in, and come
unto him as this Amen, the faithful and true witness, and to put up our
Prayers, and shut up our Prayers with this Amen, resting upon the Truth of his
Promi^es. Oh! what Name do thou call him by, when thou swearest, blasphemest,
slaunderest, witnessest a falsehood? can thou call him Amen then? art thou
persuaded that his threatenings are true, as well as promises? Oh! that we that
profess the name of Christ, would learn at length to justify both It, and
Him! and give Him the honor of his Testimony in b^lieving it, and Assenting
unto it, seem it never so unlikely* or improbable in the eyes of flesh and
blood; be it either the word of Precept, Genesis 22.2. Gal. 1.16. Genesis 16.5, and
17, 16. Romans 4.20. Heb. 11.11. Gen 6.13, 17. Joh. 3.4, 5. Heb. 11.7. Heb. 11.3.
Math. 8.3. 1 King 13.18. Gal. 2.13. Acts 3.1, 12.
Genesis 22.2. Gal. 1.16. or of Promise, Genesis 15.5, and 17, 16. Romans 4.20. Heb.
11.11. or of Reproof, Genesis 6.13, 17. John 3.4, 5. Heb. 11.7. or of History,
Heb. 11.3. What Christ testifies we are to rest, and acquiesce in. Say with
the Centurion, speak the word only, Math. 8.3. and when Christ has spoken the
word, rest in it and yield that honor which Pythagoras his Scholars gave to
their Master, in resting upon his bare Authority. It is much more due to
Christ, then to any mortal man else, whatsoever; for that they are subject
unto error, and their knowledge is imperfect, such as may both deceive others,
and be deceived themselves, 1 King. 13.18. Gal. 2.13. Acts 3.1.12.

Much Reverence indeed, and Respect is to be given to the opinions of the
Ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the Church; to the Judgment of Learned, Sober,
Godly Divines; more to Canons and Decrees of General, and Provincial
Counsels: But (as one truly) we may not jurare in verba, build our faith upon
them, as upon a sure foundation, nor pin it upon their sleeves so as to receive
for an undoubted truth, whatsoever they maintain and hold, This honor is due
unto Christ alone, and let him be true, though every man a liar, Romans 3.4. If
we receive the Testimony of man, (says St. John) the Testimony of God is
greater, 1 John 5.6.
1 John 5.6.

Math. 5.3. -- If thou mournest, thou art blessed: if poor in spirit; blessed,
etc. Say thou best accused, slaundered by the worl^, yet Gods Testimony is
true, and that shall stand. A Frenchman at Cambridge being very sick, and
given over by Physicians, yet recovering said, that he had rather ten
Physicians, should say, that he should dye, then one Judge of Assize: so,
better all the world should condemn us, then Christ testify against us. And
thus much of the Authority of the Testimony, now of the Application of it, I
say unto you,

The Minster's duty is to apply himself unto his Auditory in all his Sermons.

This was our Saviors constant Practice, And such was the Practice of the
Apostles, Acts 2. Acts 7. Acts 13.26, 40. Romans 11.13.
as you may find in all their Sermons, that are extant. Thus Peter, thus
Stephen, thus Paul and Barnabas. To you is this Salvation sent, Behold this,
you despisers and wonder. I speak to you Gent^les, for that I am an Apostle of
the Gentiles, etc.

Epistle that he is to handle and divide, you are the epistle (says the
Apostle). 1 Cor. 3.7. Romans 15.6.
What ever other Epistle and Gospel he preaches upon, he must be careful to
keep to this. If he speak not home unto his Auditory, he speaks not to hit
Text, nor is he at any time beside his Text, if he be not beside them.

Indies, that we think concern us not, we are but little affected with it; It
is home speaking, that is moving and stirring. That general Parable* pronounced
by Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.5, 6.
(wherein the foulness of his Sin was notably laid open,) made David somewhat
fierce against the man that should do so, but it never brought him to any touch
of heart, for his own sin; till Nathan apylyed it home, telling him Thou art
the man, and then he was humbled: ^o whilst Christ kept aloof, and told the
Jews a Story of a Husbandman, Math. 21.33.
that let out his Vineyard, but could get no Rent, and when he sent his servant
for it, they beat some, killed others, and at last murdered the Heir also,
that they might make the Inheritance their own; they were ready to pass a
sharp Sentence on them, that should offend in such a sort; but when he applied
it in Particular; and showed that it was their case, then they were exceedingly
moved at it.

Cant. 1.6.
And yet he that can declaime against Governors, and Magistrates; when (it may
be) none are present, Or cry out of oppressing Lords; and cruel Landlords in a
Country Village, where (it may be) none are but a few Cottagers; these with
many shall be cried up for bold, and courageous Preachers.

But this is not to speak to the edification of that Auditory, to whom we are
to speak; nor to feed that flock which depends upon us. Alas, should we do
thus, what profit would you get by it; where there is a soar, there should we
apply our plaster.

Paul expresses to be three, 2 Timothy 4.2. First, To Reprove, or Convince by
Argument; to settle Truth, 2 Timothy 4.2.
and overthrow Errors. Secondly, to Exhort and Rectify our manners: and
Thirdly, to Rebuke and denounce Judgments against the Refractary. There are but
few in any Congregation, but these concern. That which is said by way of
Convincing Ertours, Schisms, etc. concerns us nearly; for we have need of
stablishing and settling in the truth, we do profess: When he exhorts to a
holy Life, and beseeches us by the mercies of God, that we receive not the
grace of God in vain, that concerns us likewise: And what ever he can say
concerning sin, by way of Rebuke, that belongs to us too; for the best man sins
daily, and in many things we offend all. Therefore from the beginning of the
Sermon, to the end of it, apply what is said, as spoke to thee; be content with
the word of Application, and wait, for it will come home to thee in the end:
say thou be not named, yet if thou be guilty of the sin that is reproved
thou art named. When we speak of Jerusalem, Sodom, Babylon, do not conceive we
speak of such things as no whit, concern thee: Thou art Jerusalem, if thou
killest the Prophets, Math. 23.27.
and stonest them that are sent unto thee. If thou live in Pride,
Uncleanness; thou art Babylon, Sodom, etc. All is intended for you that we
speak, and so conceive. Think not that we, in applying the Text, are besides
our selves, or it: we are not beside our Text, if we meet with you, or any of
you, as we said before: And so, as in beating of a Buck, the Maid beats, and
the Dame beats: or, as in a Smith's shop, the Master strikes, and the man
strikes: so in the hearing of the Word, the Minister must apply, and the Hearer
second him, otherwise we shall never profit as we should.

From the Reasons, we come now to the Things resolved, which is asserted in the
latter end of the verse, He will arise, and give him as many as he needs; and
the Grounds thereof rendered; Negatively, not because he is his friend;
Affirmatively, because of his importunity.

Though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because of
his Importunity, he will rise, and give him as many as he needs.

Our Saviors aim and drift is, (as before you have heard) to bear up the poor
doubting Christian, against all discouraging doubts and fears, whereby he may
be driven off from seeking to God, by Prayer, in his greatest wants; and now
(by way of concession) he closes up all with another Argument: For suppose it
be so (says he) as is before objected, that God may a while defer, and put you
off, (as one friend may another) with, Trouble me not etc. and give you a
frowning Answer (as one Friend may give another,) yet a Friend will be at
length overcome by his Friend if not for Friendship sake, yet through the
importunity of his Friend to arise and give him what he needs. How much more
will God, who is a true Friend indeed, and calls upon us to call on him, and
has promised to hear us, when we do call, be prevailed with by us, if we hold
on our suits, and give not over? Shall a denying friend be overcome by
importunity, and not a promising God? That were strange!

We begin with the Assertion; that (though last in my Text) is first in order:
He will rise and give. From the Letter of the Parable, we may gather some
profitable Observations: First, we may take notice thence, that

There is no want to a willing mind: You heard before, that he said, he could
not; I showed you then, that it was, because he would not; and here you find it
true: for when he found a will unto it, then there was no let at all; he has
as many loaves for him, as his need required.

Hereunto, tends that Parable of Solomon, Prove. 15.19. Prove. 15.19.
The way of the sloathful is an hedge of Thorns, but the way of the Righteous
is made plain; or is like unto a paved Causie: Every thing to a sloathful man
seems difficult and dangerous; he is as unwilling to go about his business, as
a Traveller is to walk in a Path, that is overgrown with Thorns and Brambles:
But it is otherwise with the Righteous, who have a willing mind, they go about
their work readily and contentedly: and albeit they meet with some Lets and
Rubs, in the discharge of the Duties of their Callings, yet they go on with as
much cheerfulness, as if their way were plain, or paved, and all such obstacles
taken away and removed. This is true, both in Spirituals, and Morals. In
Spiritual matters.

Thus David speaking of the Country Israelites, who tendered their appearance
before the Tabernacle of the Lord in Sion, according to the Statute, Exodus
37.17. Deuteronomy. 16.16. Exodus 37.17. Deuteronomy. 16.16. Psalm. 84.6.
describes them by their resolute undergoing, and enduring all the difficulties
of the way, Psalm. 84.6. They were to pass through a dry and barren Desert, the
Valley of Baca (or of Mulberries) the Greek says, the Vale of Tears, a Valley
very dry and destitute of water (unless what flowed from their eyes); with much
wea^iness and faintness of body, they did overcome that journey: yet having a
will unto it, and a desire to undertake it, they made this Valley, a Well of
refreshing; they made account of that dry place, as though they had Wells of
Water, and their willing minds afforded them many sweet and pleasant showers:
so that as in a paved way, they went on cheerfully, from strength to strength,
encountering, with patience, all sense of weariness: So that they felt no
weariness not feebleness at all. No Let, no Rub, in the way, could discourage
them in their journey: their Will sweetened their hard and tedious Travail. Many
Examples might be brought, for the further confirmation of the Point delivered,
I shall only trouble you with some few in matters civil.

You shall find this true, in the different carriage betwixt the Spies, who
went to view the Land of Canaan. Some of them thought it altogether impossible
to overcome that people; they had no heart to go up; Briars and Thorns were in
their way, the people (say they) be strong that dwell in the Land and the
Cities are walled and very great, and there are Giants in it, the Children of
Anak are there Numb. Numb. 13.28.
13.28. Others, as Caleb, and Joshua, encourage the people, Let us go up at
once and possess it, for we are well able to overcome it: The way to them was a
paved way; it was no more then to go, and see, and conquer. Those mighty men,
that the other spoke of, could not dant their spirits, They are but as bread
for us, Numb. 14.9.
say they, Numb. 14.9. Therefore fear them not: as if they should say, We
should make but a Breakfast of them, consume them with great ease, and feed
upon their rich Provisions. And this different carriage, proceeded from a
different spirit that was in them, Numb. 14.24.
Chap. 14.24. The one had a free and willing spirit; the other not: and that
enkindled the spirit of the one, which quenched the other.

A second Example we have in David, going to fight Goliath: Could a man have
more discouragements then he had? partly from his Brethren, and then from Saul,
and then from the potency of his Adversary, 1 Samuel 17.28. Verse. 33, 41, 42, 43.
Mark 2.4.
1 Samuel 17. Yet his will and desire put him upon the service, and he would try
it with him.

In the New Testament we read, Mark 2.4. of a Palsy man that was brought to
Jesus to be healed: but the Text says, that there was no coming to the door of
the house, where Jesus was, by reason of the press of people: What do they in
this case? Why, they uncover the Roof of the House, and let him down bed and
all, into the Room where Christ was: that was a plain and paved way to them,
who had a willing mind to have this poor man healed. The Will is wonderfully
active, in affecting that which it is minded to do.

Another instance I commend unto you, Luke 19.2, 3.
Luke 19.2, 3. Zacheus is very desirous to see Christ, as he passed through
Jericho, the place of his abode; but he could not, says the Text, for the
press of the people: and because he was little of stature, and so could not see
the face of Christ, over the shoulders of the Crowd: his Will is not wanting,
being seconded by his wit, to find out a way to remedy both. He runs before the
multitude, and so frees himself from the press of people, and climbes up into a
Figtree, and thereby supplies the others want of stature; what might he think
the people would say of him? Zacheus climb a Tree like a Boy, to see novelties!
But let them say what they would, his Will sets him a work, to employ both
hands and seet; No want to a willing mind.

Will is as Queen-Regent in the Soul; it governs and rules all: When it says,
with the good Centurion, to one, Go, it goes: to the other, Do this, and it
does it: It is an active thing; it will sharpen Wit, and sets it on devising,
and contriving: It quickens Sense, both in Seeing, and in Hearing; and employs
Tongue, Hand, Feet; all, in effecting what it undertakes.

Will, Nehil in voluntate quod non prius fuerat in Intellectu.
which was not in the Understanding first; How then does it govern?

constraining or compulsive Power: It does intimate unto the Will, Intellectus
non imperat sed solummodo significat voluntatem imperantis.
the pleasure of God, and the Rules of right Reason (as it conceives and
apprehends) but it may not be hence concluded, that the Understanding has any
Superiority, in regard of a dominion over the Will; although it has priority,
in regard of operation: For the Will is always Domina suorum actuum, the
Mistress of her own operations.

Noluerunt, they would not: My people would not hearken, Psalm. 81.17. Psalm.
81.17. Isa. 30 9. Ezekiel. 3.7.
They are rebellious Children, and will not hear, Isa. 30.9. They will not hear
thee (says God to Ezekiel,) why that is no wonder. But it is added there, they
will not hear Me: they will do what is good in their own eyes, and walk after
their own ways, etc. And the same complaint we find in the Gospel likewise,
They would not come that were bidden to the Feast, Math. 22.3. They would not
be gathered, albeit Christ would gather them, Math. 23.37. Math. 22.3^ Math.
23.37.
Let men plead what they will, the Will will be found to be the Grand Rebel:
were that reformed, all would be reformed; there would be no want in our Duties
to God nor Man.

Paul say, That to will was present, but how to perform, Romans 17.18, 19. Resp.
he found not, and the good he would do, he did not, but the evil he would not
do, that did he, Romans 7.18, 19.

In every Regenerated Person; there are two men, the old man, and the New; the
Regenerated, and unregenerated part; flesh and spirit: so was it in St. Paul.
Now so far as the will was regenerated, there was no want; but so far as it was
unregenerated, so far there was a want; Verse. 20, 25.
And thus he explaines himself, verse 20. and 25. So then, with my mind, I my
self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of sin; with my
regenerated part, I my self with my mind, Will, and Affections serve God; but
there is another self in me, the flesh, and with that I serve the Law of sin.

Secondly, The Apostle speaks not there simply of not doing at all what he
would, but of not doing so much as he would, and in so perfect a manner, he
does not say, to will is present with me, but how to do, I find not; but how to
perform or perfect, or do it thoroughly (for so is the word in the original) I
find nor. He did do much, yea was able to do all things, in an Evangelical way,
Phil. 4.13.
Phil. 4.13. but he would do more, and in a better manner then he did: holy he
was, but he would be more holy; mortified he was, but he would be more
mortified; all that he did, he would do in a more perfect manner.

Performance went very far in him, and so it does in other of Gods Children,
(although in some more, and in some less) but the Will in the best goes
beyond performance. 2 Cor. 8.5.
So, 2 Cor. 8.5. St. Paul speaking of the Macedonians mercifulness toward the
distressed Saints, testifies that they were willing beyond their power, they
did what they were able, yet their will was far beyond their ability. It is the
Soul's Tiptoe, it stands upon the back of performance, Psalm. 119.5.
and reaches higher, as Psalm. 119.5. David kept the Statutes of God a great
way, but his Will reaches higher, he would not break any one: we cannot reach
to the things that we would, Gal. 5.17.
says the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. A Christians would is the reaching forth of the
soul, beyond that it can do already, and therefore resembled to a Horse that is
stak't at grass, which when he has eaten as far as he can go, then it lets
back his tied leg, and streines to reach farther: so the will of a regenerated
Person having done what it can, (and so much as God has set in reach,) puts
forth it self in wouldings, Oh that I could do this or that, etc! And this was
St. Paul's Case.

It may be, some will bless themselves in this, that St. Paul says, I would
do good but evil is present with me, for so says the Swearer, Drunkard,
Adulterer, and such as walk after their own ungodly Lusts; I would do otherwise
then I do, but I cannot; I wish I could, etc. but I must rapp such upon the
fingers, and will them to keep their hands off, and not to abuse Scripture to
their own destruction, they must remember that sins are of two sorts; some are
committed of infirmity and weakness, others wilfully committed.

Some sins there are, that if the will would not commit them, they could not be
committed; a full Consent of the will is requisite, in the doing of them, they
cannot pass into the soul, without the Allowance of the Will. Such are gross
and open sins, as Swearing, Whoring, Drunkenness which could not be committed
if a man would not; and other sins there are, wherein there is a resistance
betwixt the will, and the deed, although their wills would not, yet they do
break out daily, as wandering thoughts in Prayer, and other Duties, passionate
Distemper, etc. these crowd in upon us, without saying by your leave. Now in
sins of this nature, only being sins of infirmity, can a man say, the good
that I would I do not.

Secondly, Although thou can sometimes say, the good thou would do, thou
do not; and Oh! that I could do otherwise, I would do better then I do; yet
thou must know, that thy would is of a differing Nature from that of St.
Paul's; for,

First, St. Paul's would, was the would of a converted man, of the Regenerated
part; and so proper only, to a Regenerated Person; to a Converted soul. As for
others who are in the state of Nature, their wills are altogether rebellious:
they cannot say, the good they would do, that they do not, but the good that I
do not, that I would not do, and the evil that I do, that would I; Or, it is
the would, of a Natural Conscience at best, not of a Regenerated spirit, and
Conscience is ever on Gods side; none so wicked, but has something in
Conscience to take Gods part, as Iesabels Eunuch was on Iehu's, 2 Kings 5.
2 King. 5.

Secondly, there was some performance in his Would: he did not only will,
Phil. 2.13.
but did do; doing was joined with it, as Phil. 2.13. But yours is a
Lazy-would; a willing without any doing: an imperfect weak woulding, or a doing
to no purpose. St. Paul professes of himself, that he was willing in all
things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18. Acts 24.16.
Heb. 13.18. and endeavors it, as appears, Act. 24.16. Is this endeavor in
you? you say, you would be saved; you would leave your sins; you would do well;
but where are your endeavors? This is the wishing, and the woulding of the
Sluggard whereof Solomon speaks, Prove. 21.25.
Prove. 21.25. The Sluggard lies on his bed, and says, Oh! that I could arise,
Oh! that I had wealth! Oh! that I had as much as my Neighbors! but he will not
get out of his bed, but turns himself as the door on the hindges, Prove. 26.25.
Prove. 26.25. he will not up to work. Such a Sluggard was Balaam, Oh! that I
might dye the death of the Righteous; but he would not take pains to live
their life, Numb. 23.10. John 6.3 4, 35, 36. Luke 23.20. Verse 24. Prove. 13.4.
Numb. 23.10. So those in the Gospel, John 6.34, 35, 36. they would fain have
the Heavenly bread; but they would not take pains for it, and come to Christ
by faith, that they might attain it. Pilate was willing to save Christ, and
release him, Luke 23.20. but he did not what was in his power to do, he gave
sentence against him, verse 24. Such a willingness, slayes the soul, it brings
naught, but destruction, Prove. 13.4. Is there not difference betwixt the would
of a resolute Soldier, and a Coward? the Coward wishes victory, that he may
devide the spoil, and feed himself with the fatness of a good booty, but he is
loath to enter the battle, venture his limbs look the Enemy in the face; when
a resolute Soldier, that wishes Victory, will fight for it, and venture limb
and life, for the obtaining of it. No further is thy will right, then it puts
thee upon the means to obtain the thing willed.

Thirdly, The would of St. Paul was vehement, as he speaks of Desires, 2 Cor.
7.12. Romans 7.24.
2 Cor. 7.12. which appears by that Complaint of his, Romans 7.24. And such are
the Wouldings of every Regenerated soul, they are the pantings, and yernings of
the soul. David compares them to the pantings of the Heart, after the water
brooks, Psalm. 42.1. Which when it is stung, Psalm. 42.1.
(say some) with a Serpent it is insatiably thirsty; or, being hunted, it
thirsts for water, etc. Such was St. Paul's would: a panting would, Genesis 30.1.
Judge. 15.18. Psalm. 119.20.
a thirsting would, like Rachels desire of Children, give me Children or I dye,
like Siseraes thirst, I dye for it, Give me drink. My heart breaks, (says
David, Psalm. 119.20.) for desire to thy Judgments: he is ready to break a vein,
with streining his heart to holy duties. But thy would is only a luskish and a
yawning would; no streining, no servency in thy wishes and endeavors: they are
at best but lukewarm; therefore naught.

Fourthly, St. Paul's would, lay next his heart: no lust came between, so as to
say, I would do well, but yet such a lust must be spared, etc. So says David,
Psalm. 119.10.
with my whole heart have I sought thee, etc. But the would of a Carnal Liver,
lies uppermost: it is as the froath in the glass, or skim on the pot.

Envy, Pride, Lust, lies next his heart; these things he would, rather then
grace; his would proceeds from by-ends, etc.

Math. 19.17.
as Christ did the young man that pretended he would to Heaven: if thy will be
right, thou can not be wrong. And, if in case you find that there is any
unwillingnesse in you, or that the will is not right, get that rectified. See
that you get but a Good Will, to good duties; bring a willing mind, and there
will be no want. Remember,

First, Gods people are a willing people, This is the Convert's Title, Psalm.
110.3. by that property they are described. Psalm. 110.3. Psalm. 40.8. Judge. 5.2,
9. 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 9, 14. 2 Chronicles. 17.16. Nohem 11.2. Romans 12.1.
And such we find them to be, Psalm. 40.8. Judge. 5.2, 9. 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 9, 14. 2 Chronicles. 17.16. Nehem. 11.2. Without this willingness, we can have no Comfort,
that we are God's: all his Soldiers are Voluntaries, and not pressed to Duties.

Secondly, No service will be accepted, but what comes from a willing mind,
Romans 12.1. Our service must be reasonable; Unwilling service the unreasonable
Creatures give, yea the Devils. Willingness, is the fat of the Sacrifice;
without that, it is but lean and dry. To preach the Gospel, is a worthy work,
but if it be of necessity, and not willingly it is scarce thank-worthy: to do
it willingly, has approbation and reward with God, 1 Cor. 9.17. God has more
honor by the obedience of the will, 1 Cor. 9.17.
then of the outward man. Humane restraints may rule the one, but nothing but
grace can rule the other: Hereby we acknowledge God, to be the searcher of the
heart; the discerner of our thoughts; and Judge of our Consciences: thence is
that strange speech of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.10.
2 Cor. 8.10. You have begun, not only to do but to be willing, as if it were
more, to will then to do; and so it is, more then to do any thing of necessity,
with an ill will or by-respects whatsoever: therefore what you do, see you do
it willingly, Colos. 3.23.
and heartily, Colos. 3.23. It adds much to the grace of Performance; as
fruit that falls willingly is well colored, and better tasted, then that which
is cudgelld down. Christ will enjoy his Spouse's Love by a willing Contract;
not by a Ravishment.

Thirdly, A good will supplyeth many defects in our Performances, 2 Cor. 8.12.
Hence it is that we find sometimes the will to be accepted without the work,
Quicquid fieri vult voluntas, hoc factum reputat Deus. 2 Cor. 8.12. Numb. 14.4.
Neh. 9.16, 17. Heb. 11.17.
but never the work where the will is wanting. As in evil, the will is accepted
for the deed, Numb. 14.4. compared with Neh. 9.16, 17: So in good, Heb. 11.17.

Fourthly, A willing mind makes quick riddance of the work we go about; it is
winged, and overflyes rubbs and lets in our way: it is so far from being
hindered thereby, as that it is quickened, as the Bowl going down a Hill is by
the rubbs it meets withal, as before has bin showed in Caleb and Joshua.

Let these things prevail with you to bring the will with you in all
performances, especially in holy Duties.



Romans 8.7.
Romans 8.7.

Secondly, desire God to establish thee with a free spirit, Psalm. 51.12. John
8.36.
Psalm. 51.12. If the Son set us free, then we shall be free indeed: till this
be done, our wills are not our own, but cheined to unrighteousness; every day,
seek more freedom to good, and get grace to be freed from the bondage under
evil, Romans 7.25.
Romans 7.25. Bring such a will, and you will find nothing to be wanting.

David did so, he rejoiced to find the people willing, 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 13, 14. 1 Chronicles. 29.6.


Romans 7.18.
in doing good? Is it ever present to will, as the Apostle speaks of himself,
Romans 7.18?

2 Chronicles. 30.19. Psalm. 105.4. 2 These. 3.13. Gal. 6.9. Heb. 12.3. 2 Timothy 1.6. 2
Pet. 1.13.
for otherwise what need those frequent exhortations, to stir up our selves to
seek the Lord; and not to be weary in well doing, etc. And this unwillingnes,
may arise from many grounds; some from without us, and some from within us, as
Carnal affections to the world; strength of Temptation the weight of some fresh
sin committed; desertion of the Spirit (being grieved) in some proportion and
such like: but none of all these, takes off the will a toto, though it do a
tanto: in the general, they have a will to good things; and under their
greatest lumpishnesse, and unfitness of spirit to good, they have a stronger
Bias toward God, then any wicked man has when he is at his best; Nor dare
they altogether omit those duties, which they find no disposednesse of heart to
perform: Although they cannot do them with Alacrity, Jon. 2.4.
yet they will do them in obedience, Jon 2.4. and be seriously offended, with
themselves, for their unwillingnesse of Spirit; striving against it, and using
all means to overcome it: so that the faithful still have this ground of
Comfort, that God has their wills always devoted, and resigned to him; and
though there be a backwardness to any duty, they approve not of it, the
general bent of their souls being to his name and to his fear, Esaias 26.8.
Esaias 26.8.



want of Liberty, 1 These. 2.18.
So Satan may hinder, as 1 These. 2.18. but this Let does not lessen the will,
but increase it rather. Or through want of health, 1 Timothy 5.23.
so Timothy would preach oftener, but health of body would not permit. Or want
of estate; so when a man would relieve Gods poor Saints, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3.
but wants means. But these hindrances put no fault at all upon the party, 2
Cor. 8.12.
2 Cor. 8.12.

Sometimes the Let is from within a man, Math. 26.41. the flesh, Math. 26.41.
that is the part unregenerate, that hinders performance: this may humble us,
but not dishearten us, but teach us to long for that day of our Redemption,
when our wills shall be perfected, etc. And so much of this Point. A second
follows.

This Friend is said to rise and give: he rises first, and gives after, which
affords us this Lesson, that

Friendship well awaked will be yiedling to an honest motion: whilst this
Friend was in bed, and sleeping with his Children, at least drowsy (as may be
thought) he denies his Friend, but now being risen, he graunts what he desires,
if not more: Though Friendship abed denies: yet being up, it condiscends.

We read, 1. Sam. 20.14, 15.
1 Samuel 20.14, 15. that David made a Covenant to do good to Jonathan, and his
Household; because of the kindness that Jonathan showed to him, in the day of
his distress; And we find, 2 Samuel 9.1.
2 Samuel 9. that he enquires whether any of Ionathans race were to be found.
Search being made, Mephibosheth is heard of ( Ionathans Son,) and with him he
performs the Covenant made.

But the Story tells us, 2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3. 2 Samuel 9.7.
2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3. that Ziba, (a treacherous and notable Sycophant.) one of
Saul's servants, but given to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9.7. accuses his new Master
Mephibosheth to David, of no less then high treason, as if in David's absence,
he treasonably aspired to the kingdom; David believes Ziba, (though a single
witness) upon the first information, and without hearing both parties, proceeds
to censure, condemn's Mephibosheth as guilty, gives away his Land to that false
Informer. And here David's Friendship which he professed to Mephibosheth, for
his Father Jonathans sake, was asleep: for in his distracted condition, he
passed this sentence; being in fright and flight when he did it, it could
scarce be accounted his deliberate act.

David afterward (the Tide being turned) returned to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 19.24.
and then Innocence had a day of hearing: Mephibosheth meeting David, was
admitted to speak in his own behalf, and he makes a plain relation of the
business; so far was he from any treacherous intent, that he had neither
washed his feet, clothes, nor trimmed his beard, from the Kings departure till
that time: he cleares himself, discovers the falsehood of Ziba, who intercepted
his purpose, in refusing to saddle his Ass, which should have supplied the
lamnesse of his legs: And then having thus wronged his Master at home, he
traduced him abroad, as if he were the Traitor, 2 Samuel 19. Here Friendship
began to be awaked: David perceives his error, and revokes his last sentence;
ordering that the Lands should be held in Co-partnership, as they before had
bin. Indeed had Friendship bin thoroughly awaked he would rather have divided
Ziba's head from his shoulders, then Mephibosheth's Land, and justly have
punished him for his slander; but this is enough to prove the point in hand,
When Friendship is awaked, it will be yielding.

Take yet another Instance, and that is in that passage betwixt David and
Bathsheba, 1 King. 1.15.
1 King. 1.15. David had sworn unto her by the Lord, that Solomon her Son,
should succeed him in the Throne: but his Love to Adoniah, (then the eldest)
seems to be such that he could willingly have given way, that he might reign.
Here Friendship, old matrimonial Friendship, was asleep: but Bathsheba comes,
and puts him in mind of his Oath, Nathan comes and seconds Bathsheba's motion
with an humble and lowly expostulation, Is this thing done by my Lord the King?
Verse 29.30.
etc. And thus by the seasonable importunity of Bathsheba, and Nathan thus
seconding each other; he comes to be awaked, and renews his ancient Oath, with
a passionate Solemnity, As the Lord lives, etc. ver. 29, 30.

Christ and John, Math. 3.13.
when Christ came to be baptized of him, Math. 3.13. John was the Forerunner of
Christ, a Friend of the Bridegroom's, etc. yet refused to admit him, verse. 14.
he flatly forbad him (albeit not out of disobedience, but reverence, yet faulty
and erroneous) and therein friendship was asleep; for he might well know, that
Christ would not have made so tedious a journey to him, or attempted any thing,
or required ought from him, that was either unlawful, or inconvenient. Christ
awakens him, verse. 15. Suffer now, for so it behooves us to fulfill all
Righteousness. Christ assents to that John said; but yet shows cause why he
should suffer it to be, for present: as if he should say, It is not for thee to
stand upon the excellency of my Person, above thine, now at this time, when my
Baptism is at hand; thou art to yield to that I require of thee, as that which
my Father has willed me to undergo, and thou to do; for it is fit for us to
accomplish all the parts of God's Will: and then says the Text, He suffered
him: here Friendship awaked is yielding.

Joh. 13.6.
and that is John 13.6. Our Savior intending to leave an Example of Humility
with his Disciples, pours out Water into a Basin, girds himself with a Towel,
and begins to wash the feet of his Disciples. He comes first to Peter; out
of modesty and reverence gives him the Repulse, and (as the Baptist refused to
wash Christ; so) Peter refuses to be washed of Christ, Lord do thou wash my
feet? q. d. It shall not be. Christ, with great mildness, makes him an answer,
verse. 7. Thou do not, as yet, understand the reason of this act of mine; in
due time thou shall know the ground and reason thereof: but yet Peter is not
awakened, he grows more peremptory, ver. 8. Thou shall never wash my feet,
therefore offer it not, nor use more words about it. Upon this second denial,
our Savior rounds him in the ear, and tells him plainly, That if he washed him
not (namely with his blond, and by the sanctifying power of his Spirit, which
he represented by this washing) he could have no part in him, nor benefit by
him. This awaketh Peter indeed, and now he yields to more then was required;
Lord, not my feet only, etc. Now for Application.

Judge. 16.15.
and it be denied; conclude not against the friendship of thy friend, as
Dalilah did against Sampson, How can thou say that thou love me, etc. but
think rather, thy friend is not well awaked, he does not rightly understand thy
case: Do herein, as Arist^ppus did, who being asked by one, What became now of
the great friendship, which had formerly been betwixt him and Estines?
answered, It is asleep; but I will go and waken it. Be assured of this, that
friendship may sometimes be very drowsy, and stands in need of quickening; and
being raised out of a drowsy fit, it will, upon better consideration, give way
to thy honest motion.

I shall relare a memorable story to this purpose, of what happened betwixt
John the Patriarch of Alexandria, and Nicetas, a friend of his, and Senator of
that City. There was a difference betwixt them in the behalf of the Poor, (for
whom the Patriarch pleaded very strongly): many hours were spent to no purpose,
for Nicetas would not yield, although strongly importutuned by that good
Patriarch: the day now growing toward an end, they parted displeased, each
with other. But the Patriarch remembering the Apostles Rule, Ephesians. 5.26.
that the Sun should not be suffered to go down upon our wrath, sent again to
the Senator Nicetas, giving the messenger charge to say this only, Sol est in
occasu, Domine; Sir, the Sun is upon setting. Upon the very delivery of which
message, there was such a sudden alteration wrought in Nicetas, as that he
hastens to the Patriarch, (his eyes running over with tears) condescends to his
request, blames himself for his former backwardness, and promises, for ever
after to hearken to him, and be ordered by him. Good men, (true friends) may be
in an error, but they will be willing to see it, and, upon the sight thereof,
to amend it, and then they will say, as David to Abigail, when he was met by
her, 1 Samuel 25.32.
and dissuaded from his purpose, (and so awakened) Blessed be the Lord that
sent thee, and blessed be thy Counsel, and blessed be thou that have kept me
from blood, 1 Samuel 25.32. So, Blessed be thou, for a wakening me out of my
slumber; for otherwise I had dealt unchristianly, unfriendly, etc. As the Woman
sometimes appealed from Philip to Philip; from Philip sleeping, to Philip
waking: so do thou, in case that honest motions are denied, appeal from thy
friend to thy friend, thy sleeping friend, to thy waking friend, and it may do.

Yet one thing more observe; it is said he gives him as many as he needed (not
what he craved.)

In works of Charity and Mercy, regard is to be had to our Brethrens
necessities: what they need, we are to give, rather then what they crave.

It is true, respect is to be had to our own abilities in giving, Luke 11.41.
Give of such things as you have, Luke 11.42.
that is, (according to the Marginal Translation) as you are able. And such was
the practice of the Primitive Disciples, Act. 11.29.
Act. 11.29. And so a man may give according to his place, and rank, and the
dignity of his proper state: And the Apostle, appointing a Collection for the
Saints, enjoyneth every one to lay up in store, as God has prospered him, 1
Cor. 16.1.
1 Cor. 16.1. But this is not all, for respect must be also had to the parties
abilities, to whom we give. So Act. 2.45. They gave to every one as he had
need. Act. 2.45.


First, there must be a necessity or want, Deuteronomy. 15.11. Isa. 58.7. Luke 14.12,
13, 14. Romans 12.13. 2 Cor. 8.14. and 9.12. Communis et ordinaria. Deuteronomy. 15.11.
Gravis. Deuteronomy. 28.48. Extrema. Job 31.9.
in a work of Charity. Such only as need, are the proper Objects of our Bounty
and Liberality, Deuteronomy. 15.11. Isa. 58.7. Luke 14.12. 13, 14. Romans 12.13. 2 Cor.
8.14. and 9.12.

Now there is a threefold want: first, ordinary and common, such was the want
of those Poor that God speaks of, which always should be in Israel.

Secondly, Great: as Deuteronomy. 28.48. when there is a want of all things* meat,
drink, clothing: when a man draws breath, yet he has much ado to subsist.

Thirdly extreme: When a man has not to preserve life, but is in peril of
death, if relief comes not: Of such Job speaks, 31.9. One want or other a man
must be in, that we give unto.

Secondly, as there must be a necessity and want; so there must be some
correspondence between the gift and the want.

The gift must be proportioned to the want of our Brother, both in respect of
quality, and quantity: For kind and quality; if he be hungry, give him bread:
if thirsty, drink: if naked, cloth: So Math. 25. What they stand in most need
of, Math. 25.35.
in that afford your help. It would be a senseless oversight to give a
strong-limb'd soldier a Crutch or a maimed one a Corslet.

Secondly, in such a measure must we give, as our Brethrens present necessities
do require; He that gives more then sufficient, non dat, sed ditat, does
rather out of Bounty, enrich with benefits, then out of Charity supply with an
Alms. And he that gives less then necessity requires, non pauperem sustentat
sed paupertatem, (says one); he cures not the Disease of poverty, but only
gives some present ease unto it; and if fresh Remedies be not supplied, the
pains are but prolonged: You suffer him to roast at a lingering fire, rather then
take him from off the spit: yet it is better, that the poor should take a
slight surfeit, through too much fullness, then to be pinched or famished for
want of necessaries.

Alms of the Tongue only, to him that is hungry, or thirsty, cold and naked,
etc. as if men could eat Precepts, and drink Advice. Wisdom is good with an
Inheritance, says Solomon: so is good Counsel, with other outward supplies.
Should a hungry man beg bread of thee, and thou fallest to instruct him, but
deniest him food to his body, he may say to thee, as Hushai said to Absalom of
Achitophels counsel; The counsel; is good, 2 Samuel 17.7.
but not at this time. Others (it may be) will give, but it shall be that which
they can best spare (but not what their brother wants) or whereof they are able
to make any use. Eye Salve laid to the foot profits not; and the Poultess for
the feet, laid to the eye, does more hurt then good: so, Bounty misplaced. And
others (perhaps) will give, but to all alike, having but one Omer or measure
for their Charity, be the Person, Time, or Occasion, what it will be: As so
much to a Brief, and no more: so much at every Good-Time (as at Christmas,
Easter) but at no time else. And some give only Mint and Cummin, things so
small, and in so small proportions, (be the necessity never so extreme) as that
it seems only to keep him alive (who receives) in continued misery. And so the
benefit has almost the nature of an injury. This is not wisely to consider of
the poor and needy, as we are required, Psalm. 112.5.
Psalm. 112.5. Giving must be done with choice, and not by chance; wisely, and
warily, not heedlesly, and carelessly.

Christ's Rule, that in giving, out left hand may not know, what our right hand
does: Math. 6.3:
Yet our right eye must know what our right hand does, for the better ordering
and directing of it. There is a bountiful eye that Solomon speaks of, Prove.
22.9.
Prove. 22.9. This is such an Eye that looks every way, and searches out
where want lies hid. Rev. 1.12.
And, as St. John, Rev. 1.12. is said to turn and see a voice. So this Eye sees
a voice in a sad Aspect, a pale look, a hollow cheek, a bloudless lip, a sunk
eye, a trembling hand, etc. and it no sooner sees this voice, then it is
forward to supply it: it opens the hand, before the other opens the mouth. So
Archesilaus no sooner discovered the cloaked wants of his decayed Associate,
but presently he conveyed a sum of money, in very close and secret manner,
under his pillow, that he might seem rather to find, then to receive, that
which he stood in need of, and was ashamed to ask: which caused him to say upon
the discovery, This is Archesilaus's Theft. Oh that we had more such Thieves.
In many cases, and with many persons, it is more grievous to ask, then to want:
much rather had they endure their poverty with silence, then, by publishing
their wants, receive relief: Hearken thou after another voice, Psalm. 21.2, 3.
Isa. 21.14.
then the Tongue; and hear with another Organ, then the Ear: Hearken with the
Eye, and thou shall see Need speak, when the Needy man says nothing; his Case
cries, when he is silent: and as God preventeth us with his mercy, so should we
the needy and distressed with ours.

If this Eye of Bounty stay till it be asked, it does not give as it is asked
but as it sees the necessity to require. If the want be ordinary and common, it
supplies that with her abundance, and superfluities, Prove. 5.15, 16. Luke 8.11.
with the overflowing of her Cestern. If great, it supplies it with her
conventencies, Luke 8.11. Having two coats, it spares one; and if the Necessity
be extreme, it shall be supplied with her necessities: it will sell the Coat
from off the back, rather then suffer such a one to perish, Luke 12.32.
Luke 12.33. And thus in giving, we should show our selves to be as wise
Physicians, and not as deceitful Empiricks: the Physician enquires after the
nature of the Disease, constitution of the Person, temperature of the Climate,
Season of the Year; and answerably prescribes his Remedy. The Emperick gives
his Remedy without any respect of these. And such are Physicians of no value,
Job 13.4.

Mystically from this friends arising out of his bed to help his friend, our
Savior would give us to understand hereby, That

God is never so in Bed, but being awakened by faithful Prayer, he will rise
and relieve his friends: that is the Point we are now to speak unto.

God is pleased sometimes to put himself into a posture toward his friends, as
if he were a man a bed, and asleep in his bed, (as you have heard before): he
seems to be to them as a man asleep is to his friend, unmindful, and forgetful
of them, when he retires himself, and does not appear in the behalf of his
servants: it carries with it some show of indisposition, and otiation in God,
as if he were gone to rest, and minded us not; but when he appears for our
help, when he addresseth and prepares himself to succor us, then he is said
to arise out of his bed, and open his eyes, and to awake out of his sleep.

So we read, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the
needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him. The people of God sigh, and cry in their Afflictions, at which
their Enemies make but a puff, and laugh them to scorn. Now will I arise says
God, etc.

So Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall arise ( i. e. thou will arise: it is spoken
prophetically) and have mercy on Sion, etc. for he will regard the Prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their prayer, verse. 17. And Isa. 33.10. Now will
I arise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self;
that is now, that the Enemies of God's People grow so tyrannical and insolent,
and that my people call on me for help (as they did, ver. 2.)

The truth of this I might show you in sundry Examples, (but I shall not
overburthen you with many): Cast but your eyes upon the afflictions of God's
Church, under Pharaohs Tyranny, An Iron Yoke was laid upon their necks (to use
Moses's expression) Deuteronomy. 28.48. upon a suspicion of revolting, heavy burdens
are imposed on them, they tread in Mire and Clay, Exodus 1.11. and are enforced
to serve with rigor; so that their lives were made bitter with hard labor,
ver. 12.13. they proceed from burdens to bondage, from bondage to blood; from
vexation of their bodies, to destruction of the fruit of their bodies: Midwives
are suborned to destroy all their Male-Children; they whose Office it was to
help the Birth, must now murder it, ver. 15. If they refuse, the multitude
shall do it, ver. 22. Cruelty, that before but smoaked, now breaks forth into a
flame: and to add to their misery, an insupportable task is laid upon them;
they could neither make straw nor find it, yet they must have it; and for not
doing what was imposed, they are made daily to feel the lash of the Whip Exodus
5.12, 14. All this while God seems to be as one asleep, holds his peace, lets
their Persecutors alone. The persecuted sigh groan, cry, and call on God,
(which God heard, as before, Exodus 2.24. and 3.7, 8, 9.) And now he arises,
comes to deliver them; and being arose, Now thou shall see (says he) what I
will do to Pharaoh, Exodus 6.1. and with a strong hand he delivers them out of
the hand of their Oppressors, and brings out his people with joy, and his
chosen with gladness, Psalm. 105.48.

Look again upon the state of God's Church, in the days of Ahashuerosh. Ester
3.5, 6.
Haman had obtained a decree for the slaughter of the Jews; the Decree was
sealed, published; the day set and appointed for the execution of it: all this
while God seems to be asleep, he looks on, seems to take no notice of it; the
Jews are greatly perplexed, they fast, mourn, weep, lie in sackcloth and ashes,
they cry out with a loud and bitter cry: then God awaketh, and arises for
their help; Chap. 5.1, 2, 3.
and being risen, awaketh the King, Chap. 6.1.
causes him to send for the Chronicles of his time, turns him over to the
Record of Mordecai's fidelity, in discovering a Treason intended against his
person, by two of his Eunuchs: upon which Mordecai is honored, Chap. 9.22.
the Decree comes to be disanull'd, Haman the Conspirator, and his Sons are
hanged, and to the Jews, deliverance is granted; for which, days of joy and
rejoicing are by the Jews celebrated. Many other proofs may be brought for
confirmation, but I shall only produce one more unto you, Math. 23.28. In that
History of Christ's Sea-Voyage with his Disciples; a great Tempest arose
(stirred up, as some are of opinion, by the Devil who questionless would have
drowned Christ if he could) so that the ship was covered with Waves, Christ he
was fallen asleep, in the hinder part of the ship (says St. Mark) that is the
stern, Nark 4.3.
being wearied (probably) with exercise of his Ministry, amongst the multitude
on the shore. His Disciples being terrified, and much afraid, thinking their
case desperate, come to him, and awake him with an Outcry, Master, save us, we
perish. Christ thus awaked, reprehends them for their immoderate fear, and the
weakness of their Faith; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? and then
rebukes the Wind and Sea, charging them even with threatening and menaces to be
still; upon which followed a great calm, to the admiration of all beholders.

Besides the truth of the story, there is a mystery in that passage of
Scripture (by the consent of all Divines, Ancient and Modern) it sets forth
unto us, the state of the Church of God, militant on Earth, resembled unto a
Ship, wherein Christ and all the Faithful do pass from Earth to Heaven. The Sea
is the World, a very unconstant Element, resembled by St. John to a Sea of
Glass, Rev. 4.6. The great storm and tempest that arises, is a lively
Representation of the great troubles and persecutions, Rev. 1.16.
which are raised by the Devil and his Instruments against the Church,
intending the ruin of it: Christ, his being asleep in this storm, sets forth
the seeming neglect that he has of the peace and quiet of the Church, for the
greater manifestation of his power, and our patience. The crying out of the
Disciples, sets forth the Prayers of the Faithful, who night and day cry unto
him, for the defense of the Church. Christ's arising and rebuking of the winds,
intimates his reproving, and plaguing of the enemies of the Church. The great
Calm that follows, signifies the peace that the Church and People of God shall
enjoy in the end, in despite of Satan, and all his adhaerents. And thus much
for the Confirmation of the Point propounded: The Use follows.

his enemies shall be scattered, Psalm. 68.1.
and they that hate him shall fly before him; and arise he will, and not
always keep his bed, nor close his eyes.

Oh! what navock do the enemies of Gods people make, whilst God seems to sleep?
Psalm. 83.2, 4, 12, and 94, 4, 5, 6.
David tells us, Psalm. 83.2, 4, 12. Psalm. 94.4, 5, 6. and they are encouraged
to all this mischief, upon a conceit that God is asleep, and sees not, verse 7.
But understand ye brutish amongst the people, Verse 7.8, 9.
and ye fools when will you be wise? he that planteth the ear shall not he
hear, and he that formed the eye, shall not he see, Verse 8.9. His eyes behold;
yea his eyelids, try the Children of men, says the Prophet in another place,
Psalm, 11.4. God has both an eye and an eyelid, God sees with an open eye
(says a reverend Bishop,) when he discovers a thing at present, Psalm. 11.4.
and causes us also to see it. And he considers with his Eye lid when he
winketh at the ways of men, B. B. King. Sermon. at Whitehall. Nov. 5. 16^8.
and makes as if he slept, and takes leisure, and respite before he brings
things to light. God in the sufferings of his Church and people, may be silent
for a time, as one that sees not, and hears not, but his eyes are at no time
so shut; but that he sees through his Eyelids, and well considers the doings
of the Sons of men on earth. The Master sometimes makes as if he slept, to see
what the servant will do, when some advantage lies before him; were God always
up, and did he discover himself in present execution of his Judgments on
sinners; the thousand part of that Villainy that is daily committed, would not
be acted, Eccles. 8.11. And yet, God sees and observes, Eccles. 8.11.
through his Eyelids, all the plots and projects, all the wrongs and injuries,
that are offered to his people; and although it do not presently appear to us,
that he did see, yet the awakening cries, that his Children make in his ears,
shall raise him; and then he will make it known, that he was not so asleep, but
that he observed all that was plotted and contrived; done and acted against
them. Hear, how Christ concludes in that Parable of the poor widow, suing to
an unjust Judge, Luke 18. 6, 7, 8. Shall not God avenge his own elect, whcih
cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them, Luke 18.6, 7, 8.
(and makes as if he saw not) I tell you, he will avenge them speedily; their
prayers will awaken him, and when is he arose he will right them, and relieve
them, against all their enemies that wrong and injure them. When Noah was
awake, and knew what Cham had done, he cursed him for his pains; and will God
think you, bless you for your deeds? Let this restrain you from your wicked
ways, you that swear, blaspheme, reproach, slander; Gods eye sees you, at
least his Eye lids try you: you play with God, as Children that play at Blind
man Buff do with their fellows; and yet if these children perceive, that he
that they think blinded, sees, they break off their play, he sees, he sees,
(say they,) I Will play no more; Oh! that you were as wise, and would do this in
time.

Peter was,) who having bin used to see storms, to cry out, they perish: All
this while our Pilot is in the stern, sleeping upon a pillow; which causes us
to think hardly of him, and to charge him with unkindnesse, as if he cared not
for us whether we sink, or swimm: Now what shall we do in this Case? Let us
with the Disciples run to God, by Prayer, and awake him; they did it very
turbulently, and irreverently, (as it seems, for their fear was great) yet
Christ blamed them not for that, but for their too much fear, and too little
faith. Come then to the Throne of Grace, desire God to awake and arise, he is
willing to be awaked by us, and therefore seems to sleep, that we may awake
him: God admitts his servants to this boldness with him. Princes like it not.
Should a subject come to the Supreme, and say, Would your Highness, or your
Majesty, would awake once, and arise to do such, or such a business for me, or
read my Petition: would not the Prince conceive just indignation against such a
Petition: yet God is well pleased that we should thus come unto him, and say,
Awake Lord, come and help us: If we thus come, He will awak; nothing sooner
awakes a seeming sleepy God, then Prayer, (as you have heard): were our God a
dead God, an Idol God, prayer could not do it, (as we see in the Priests of
Baal,) but of our God, we may say as Christ of Lazarus, he is not dead, but
sleeps only and that seemingly.

There is a story goes of a poor man, that served God faithfully, and yet was
cruelly oppressed by a neighboring Knight, who took his goods from him, and all
that little that he had: insomuch that he concluded that God was dead; and
forasmuch as he had formerly found God to be gracious to him, (albeit now as he
thought he was forsaken by him) he would make a solemn Funeral for him, which
when he went about, an old man meets him with a Letter, and desires him to
deliver it into the hands of the oppressing Knight: he did so, and upon the
reading of that Letter, the Knight. was so convinced of the wrong done to that poor
man that delivered him the Letter, that immediately he confessed his faults, and
restored again to him what he had injuriously taken from him; which caused the
poor injured wretch to forbear any funeral solemnity, and to say, Now I see
that God may seem to sleep; but he can never dye. Comfort thy self then, under
thy heaviest afflictions, never forsake thy Confidence in thy greatest
streights; when our faith begins to flag, and hang the wing; when our strength
is gone, and we have given up all for lost, waken God by thy Prayer, and then
God will say, Now I will arise, Now I will be exalted, now will I lift up my
self, Esaias 33.10.
Esaias 33.10. Man's extremest necessity, is God's chiefest opportunity to do us
good. The Church of God in all ages, has found it true: we have heretofore
found it true; and shall find it true, and every Friend of God, every believing
soul, may from his own experience confess it to be true, Let me close up this
Use with that of David, Psalm. 102.20. Psalm. 102.20.
He looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth. To what purpose? To hear the groaning of the Prisoner, to
loose them that are appointed to Death. Thus might England say, and so I hope
God will give us cause one day to say, if we do but awaken his old Love and
Friendship to us by our Prayers.

And thus much Gods arising, and giving: Now it is further said of this Friend,
that he gives as many as he needs, not so many as he craved, (as was from
the Letter showed) whence we may take notice both of the wisdom, and bounty of
God toward his Friends: Wisdom in giving what is needful, Bounty in giving so
liberally, as many (says the Text) as he needs; of both somewhat.

God in giving has an eye upon the necessities of his servants. He looks not
so much upon what they ask, as upon what they want, and accordingly he makes
supply. See this first in Kind, secondly in Quality.

Sometimes he gives the same thing that is craved, and grants the Requests
of his servants in the same kind, both for the Substance and Circumstance: So
he gave to Hannah a Son which she begged of him, 1 Samuel 1.27. To Solomon
Wisdom, 1 Samuel 1.27. 1 King. 3.9.12. Psalm. 21.4. Exodus 13.21.
1 King. 3.9, 12. to David Life, Psalm. 21.4. And many times he applies
remedies, answerable to the distinct distresses that his Children are in: So
Exodus 13.21. that which was a Cloud in the day to shelter his people from the
heat of the Sun, was a pillar of fire to give them light in the night, that
they might go both by day, and by night: When they had no bread, he gave them
bread, and rained them Manna from Heaven, Exodus 16.4. Exodus 17.6. Psalm. 116.8.
Exodus 16.4. When they had no drink he opened a rock, and gave them water to
drink, Exodus 17.6. So Psalm. 116.8. He delivered his soul from death, eyes from
tears, feet from falling.

Sometimes he denies to give unto his Friends that Particular which they
desire; and supplies their wants some other way, as may make more for his
glory, and their good, not giving what they would, but what they should have.
Non tribuit quod volumus ut tribuat quod malinus. Aug. Genesis 17.18, 19. Deuteronomy.
3.26, and 32, 49. 1 Samuel 12.22.
As when the sick Patient cries out for drink, the Physician pitties him, and
gives him something more proper, but satisfies not his desire in that very
kind: so deals God many times with his.

Thus dealt he with Abraham, Genesis 17.18, 19. So with Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.26. and 32,
49. So with David, 1 Samuel 12.22. -- 22. -- And with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. Heb.
5.7. Esaias 60.17.
2 Cor. 12.8. And with Christ himself, Heb. 5.7. For Brass I will bring Gold
and for Iron Silver, says God, Esaias 60.17. So God for brass, iror, wood,
stones, which we crave, does often give us that which is better, and more
useful for us, as Faith, Patience; Supportation, etc.

See Gods dealing with us likewise in respect of Quantity and measure. When he
gives in kind what we desire, and ask of him, yet he gives not always such a
degree as we would have, but as he sees to be fitting for us. Genesis 17.18, 20.
Sometime more (as we shall show you in the next point) and sometimes less. So
Genesis 17.18, 20. yet he went not so far in that kind, as Abraham desired. David
desired to build a House for God, 2 Samuel 7, 2. Verse 23.
the Temple: God denies that, but yields so far as that he should prepare
materials, and draw the pattern, 1 Cor. 12.13.
etc. Covet earnestly the best gifts, (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 12. ult. There
is a holy covetousness then, in the best of Gods Children, and this carries
them to a desire after more, and more still: Oh! that I had as much knowledge,
faith, hope, patience, as such, or such a one, etc. But God does not ever
satisfy our desires in this kind, but gives (in things of this nature) what
he knows most fitting, Revel. 3.8.
Revel. 3.8. A little pinn is as needful and useful in the building of the
Temple, as a greater piece: the like may be said of outward gifts. As Health,
Strength, Wealth, Liberty: God observes a measure in all these; and has
respect to the necessities of his Children; and shows mercy according to the
measure of our misery.

Romans 8.27.
according to the meaning of his own spirit, and not according to the words,
wherein those desires are expr^ssed, Romans 8.27. the meaning of the spirit is
the prayer, and not simply the things desired; which are such oftentimes, as
that we know not what they are. Luke 9.54.
Now the main ends, and true meaning of our hearts (if faithful) in all our
Requests to God, are his Glory, and our own and the Churches good; and no
further. Now God hears us in the maine, in denying us the By: he sees that the
way we prescribe, or that thing which we desire of him, or that measure,
conduces not to those ends we aim at, so well as some other, which he in
wisdom knows fittest, and lays out for us.

Temporal blessings, freedom from all crosses, freedom from temptations; nor
for less principal graces; nor yet for the highest measure of sanctifying
grace, but with Submission and Reservation, as Math. 26.39. Math. 36.29.
The promise of being heard in our Prayers, runs with this Condition, if we ask
any thing according to his will, 1 John 5.14. 1 John 5.14.
And it is one of the evils noted in the old Israelites that they limited the
holy one of Israel, Psalm. 74.41. they tied him to their own ways, Psalm. 78.^1.
and means; and prescribed him how; when; and in what kind, and measure he
should supply their wants: This may not be. The Physician knows better then
the Patient what is good for him, God is our Physician, we are his Patients.
Learn submission.

very particular which we desire. God lays out our Prayers for our best
advantage, and husbands our Stock in such away, as may bring in the greatest
return, and gain. Many Temporal blessings which thou have desired have bin
denied thee; this for the present has grieved thee, that thou have not what
thou would; but upon serious thoughts, and in cold blood, thou may find;
that had thou had thy will, thou had bin undone. A Factor beyond the Seas,
sends not always that which the Merchant writes for, but other Commodities
which he knows will be most vendible, and advantageous: so deals God with
us. If then thou have in thy prayers referred thy will to Gods, rest assured
that it shall be the best for thee, which way soever it falls out: if thou
be denied in thy suite, for this or that particular, thou may be assured
it is better for thee to want it, then to enjoy it; Quod non dat Deus, non est
necessarium.
and that it is not necessary that thou should have it; or if thou desire
such or such a degree, or measure of Knowledge, Peace, Joy, Health, Strength,
and he gives not with both hands, that abundance of these things, be content
that he gives with one hand; with that manner and measure that he gives.

Next, take notice of the bountiful disposition of God in giving, (from the
bounty of this Friend to his Friend): he does not only supply his want in
lending, as he desired three Loaves, but gives him as many as he needs.
Thence note,

God is many times larger in his gifts then we are in our desires, he gives not
only abouve our deserts, but above our desires, and out-bids our hopes.

This Abraham found; he begged a Child, God promised a multiplied seed; and yet
more, that the Messiah should come out of that seed, that should Redeem the
World, Genesis 22.17, 18. Genesis 22.17, 18.


Jacob found this: He in his journey to Padan-Aram, desired of God but
provision necessary, and protection in his way, with a safe return, Genesis 28.20.
Genesis 32.10.
Genesis 28.20. God gave him more then this as himself confesses even two bands,
Genesis 32.10.

Joseph found this; whose Innocence was not only cleared, and he delivered out
of prison, but he was made Ruler over all the Land of Egypt, Genesis 41.41.
Genesis 41.41.

David found this: he asked Life of God, and he gave him long life, Psalm. 21.4.
even for ever, and ever, Psalm. 21.4.

Solomon found it: he desired Wisdom of God, and an understanding heart. God
granted more, he did not only give him that, 1 King. 3.9, 12, 13.
in an excellency, but wealth, and riches, in an abundance, 1 King. 3.9, 12, 13.

Hezekiah sound this: he desired God only to remember his former walking
before him; and God does that, and also adds fifteen years to his days,
delivers him from Ashur, and gives him rest, Esaias 38.3.
Esaias 38.3.

The Prodigal Son found this: he desired only to be received home as a hired
servant, and the Father brings forth the best Robe, Luke 15.19.
etc. Luke 15.19.

The Unmercifull Debtor found this: the desired only forbearance; and he
obtained remission of the whole Debt, Math. 18.26. Math. 18.26.


The Sick of the Palsy found this: he desired health of the body; Math. 9.2,
6, 7.
which he received, and with that, forgiveness of sin, Math. 9.2, 6, 7.

The Ruler found this: John 4.47.53.
who seeked to Christ for the Life of his son, obtained it, and withal faith
in his own, and his houshoulds hearts, John 4.47, 53.

The Thief upon the Cross found this, who desired Christ to remember him, when
he came into his Kingdom, and was heard in that, and withal assured, that that
very day he should pass from the misery of the Cross, to the felicity of
Paradise, and there have fellowship with Christ in Eternal Glory, Luke 23.42,
43.
Luke 23.42, 43.

James, Cap. 1.5. He gives like a King, as was said of Araunah. Abundantly,
says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.17. Kings give like Kings. Antigonus could tell that
Cynick, that begged a penny of him; Jam. 1.5. 1 Timothy 6.17. Romans 10.12.
that that was less then became a King to give. He is rich to all, says St.
Paul, Romans 10.12. And, as if that were a term too far beneath him, he terms it
exceeding riches of his grace; Bounty, not Liberality: not Bounty neither, but
Munificence, that becomes Majesty: as we shall show you in the Applicatory part
more fully.

exceedingly, above all that you are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Men
commonly, in policy, ask much, Ephesians. 3.20.
though they look for less: But such is God's goodness to us, that he gives
more, then men in modesty can ask. Man is many times liberal in promising, but
sparing in performing. Indeed, God is large in promising but more large in
performing.

Alexander the Great gave to Perillus 50 Talents toward the Marriage of his
Daughter; Perillus told him, that was too much by half: If half be enough (said
Alexander) for thee to take, yet it is not enough for me to give. The like
speech, at another time, he used to one Bias, a poor Egyptian, to whom he gave
a rich and populous City: at which, he standing astonished, supposing that he
had but mocked him; Take, said Alexander, what I give; for though thou art Bias
that demandest, I am Alexander that bestow it one thee.

We read, that God commanded Moses to bring the Twelve Robs before him, for the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, and there lay them in the Tabernacle before the
Testimony, and the Rod of that Tribe that God should choose, should budd: When
Moses came to review the Rods the Rod of Aaron had not only budded (that is,
Numb. 17.8, 9.
chipt, or broken the Rind) but the Budds were swollen and brought forth; and
after buds, blossoms and flowers; and after these ripe Almonds. Thus fares it
with us in our Prayers, (which are like those Rods) we expect no more, it may
be, but the Bud of Health, Strength, necessary Maintenance, etc. and we find
that our Rods are not only chipt, by our Prayer, but there is many a blossom,
yea ripe Almonds which attends them, and accompanies them that we thought not
of, nor ever asked. Look but on the Rods every morning and evening, you shall
find it true. Do you ask every particular benefit daily that you do enjoy?
Alas! not one, of many. What a poor life would you lead? What a maimed body
should you have? if you had no more then you begged at Gods hands: surely this
may be a help to uphold us against grudging and discontent, when at other times
we think God deals too sparingly with us and shortens us in our desires.

express Rule, a good heart should go with the furthest. So for the Sabbath, we
should not grudge God his measure. In all doubtful and undetermined Cases, it
is best to do with the most. In resolved cases, I could wish, that we would do
but what is required.

And thus we have done with the thing asserted, He will rise and give, etc. We
come now to the Grounds of this his Liberality and Bounty, which are laid down;
first, Negatively, [Not because he is his friend]. Then Affirmatively, [Because
of his Importunity].

Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend. As if Christ
should say, If it should thus happen (as it often does) that he will not in
that respect give, because of friendship: implying, that



The vile Person may be called liberal, and the Churl bountiful; as Isay
speaks, cap. 32.5. Was not Saul a vile person, Isa. 32.5. 1 Samuel 18.
one whom God had rejected? Yet how liberal and bountiful was he to David, in
giving him his choice of his two Daughters? He would make him his Son-in-law,
without any Dowry given to his Daughter: (which was the Custom of those Times
to do, Genesis 34.11. Exodus, 22.16, 17.) So great a kindness this was, Genesis 34 11.
E^od. 22.16, 17. 1 Samuel 18.17, 18.
as that David could not but wonder at it: Meribah, his eldest, is first
promised, the only condition was to fight the Lords Battails. David, as it
seems, having no great affection to her, she is given to another; and then
Michol, his younger Daughter is offered him, who loved David and David her.
Saul eems glad of it, and so forward is he of the Match, that he sends
Spokesmen to David to solicit him to be his Son-in-law, Verse. 29. Verse. 22.
Verse. 25.
and no other Dowry is asked, but a hundred fore skins of the Philistims etc.
Yet all this Bounty, was but a Child of Envy; a plot of mischief, he did it but
to ensnare him, and to destroy him by the hand of the Philistims, in exposing
him to their rage not being willing that his own hand should be upon him, in
the murder of him, to avoid (as some think) Sedition amongst the people. So
alike liberal was he, in his promises (to his Captains and Servants) of Fields,
Vineyards, and Offices, 1 Samuel 22.7. but his end was to make them more eager in
pursuing the life of David, and, by such Liberality and Bounty, to tie them
faster unto him. Thus the vile person will seemingly be liberal.

And so the Churl bountiful. You have an example of this in Nabal, 1 Samuel
25.3. Churlish enough he was to David; 1 Samuel 25.3. Verse. 36.
as appears by his Answer to his Servants, ver. 11. His Feast was like the
Feast of a King, ver. 36. But this Bounty of his was for his own gain and
state; for otherwise those shearers of his might have had the same Answer, that
David's Messengers had, and should have been sent to seek their bread, water,
and flesh, as well as others.

I might produce diverse instances, for the further confirmation of the point
delivered; I shall trouble you but with one more, which shall be in the Gospel.
You read of a large and liberal Offer, that the Devil made to Christ, of all
the Kingdoms of the Earth: the glory whereof he presented unto him in a trice,
Math. 4.8, 9. But can you think that it was done with a friendly mind? Math.
4.8, 9.
No such thing; for it was a wicked and Diabolical Liberality: as appears,

First, in that he was liberal, of what was not his own: He said, indeed, Luke
4.6, 7.
that all was his to dispose of at his pleasure; but therein he was a Liar. Let
Satan show his Patent, with Witnesses attesting the same, when, where, and
upon what consideration, God passed over his Power and Right to him. Had the
Devil had the World at his dispose, just Job should never have had Wealth, nor
chaste Joseph Honor, etc. Nor would he have begged leave to enter into the
Herd of Swine. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, says David: In
making this liberal Offer, Psalm. 24.1.
he showed himself a notorious Thief and Impostor: he would have robbed all
other Kings of their Royalties, to invest another in them.

Secondly, they were his own ends that he aimed at therein, and his own glory
that he sought; and, in seeking of himself therein, his Bounty was not
friendly. Christ must do him homage, Worship me.

Thirdly, his Bounty tended to the dishonor of God, and maintenance of sin,
and to entice to Idolatry; which God abhors. Christ must fall down, and worship
him: it must be performed with all Solemnity and state, after the best manner
and fashion.

Fourthly, his Bounty and Liberality was not free, but Conditional: If thou will do this, said he to Christ; and to make sure work, he would have all paid
him before hand, Christ must do the work, before he would part with any thing.

Fifthly, his Bounty proceeded out of a desire to satisfy his ancient envy,
in the destruction of all mankind, and so he was treacherous to his Offers:
Math. 16.26.
he would have got more then he gave, (for one Soul is more worth then the
World, Math. 16.26.) Then what were the Souls of all men; all which had been
lost, had Christ consented to that which the Devil required. And thus you have
heard the Point proved. Now let us apply it.

Alexander the Sixth, would give America to Spain; a bountiful gift indeed i^
but it was out of the Indians Free hold. The Spaniard and Pope, in Eighty
Eight, gave many Lordships and Dignities away, but it was out of Englands
Exchequer. It was said of Sylla, multa eripiebat, donabat plura. So it may be
said of diverse; they take from the right Owners, and give prodigally to others,
robbing Peter, to pay Paul, (according to the Proverb). So Church Lands have
been taken from Papists, and given to Rapists, to maintain Hounds and Harlots.
How many great men of the World have by oppression and extortion made a
thousand Beggars, and then at the day of their Death, bequested a thousand
pounds, or two, to build an Hospital to maintain ten? We read of Cain, that he
first sacrificed, and then slew his Brother; but such, as in their profane
bequeasts, give of that they have extorted from others, first slay their
Brethren, and then offer a part of their ill-gotten goods for sacrifice. These
are worse then Cain, in that respect. Shall we esteem these liberal, who build
Hospitals for Children with their Fathers bones? So were the Jews, who bought a
burying place for strangers with the blood of Christ. Our Daniel, in his
History of England, relates, that when Henry the 3d, had sent a Load of Freez
to the Fryar-Minors, to cloth them; they sent it back again, with this
message, That he ought not to give Alms of that which he had rent from the
Poor; neither would they accept of that abominable gift: and can we imagine
then that God will?

Some are liberal; but it is to those only that can re-pay them, or do re-pay
them. These play at a game of Tennis, toss the ball to those only, that will
toss it to them again.

Others are liberal, but it is for base ends, to procure respect and credit
from others, (which they are ambitious of) they seek themselves in their
Liberality (as in large Expenses on costly Buildings, gorgeous Garments). Thus
Titus Vespatianus knowing how his Father was branded for his insatiable
Covetousness, steered a contrary course; and by his great Bounty and Liberality
was surnamed, Delitiae humani generis. So Absalom made a liberal Feast, and, by
his Bounty and Courtesy, stole away the hearts of the People. So these are
liberal to such as will couch and bow to them, Paov. 10.16.
and to none else.

Or else their Liberality tends to sin, Prove. 10.16. as to corrupt
Magistrates. So some are liberal in giving Bribes, for perverting of Justice.
Others bountiful to Ministers, but like Thieves, they cast them a bone, to keep
them from barking. Others in seducing men to Popery, or erroneous Opinions, or
in enticing to lewd and lascivious courses: Prove. 1.14.
as Prove. 1.14. Such Bounty and Liberality as this is Diabolical, and far from
being friendly.

Some men's Liberality is the fruit of Envy. It is storied of Henry the 8. that
he gave many flowers to some well-deserving; that in the end of Harvest, he
might burn them in their Hives like Bees.

Deuteronomy. 16.19. 2 King. 5.16.
then take heed of being ensnared by the Bounty of any, 2 King. 5.16. Bounty,
in a Master, is a great attractive to his service, and gifts blind the eyes of
the wife. Munera magna mihi mittis sed mittis in hamo, as one said; Numb. 6.22.
so may we of the Bounty of many. Such was Balaack's Bounty to Balaam; and then
he thought that his Ass could never go fast enough to do him service. To refuse
gain, is oftentimes no small gain. So, to refuse the Liberality of some, is
many times a point of wisdom. Dan. 5.17. 2 King. 5.16.
So Dan. 5.17. 2 King. 5.16. Nor is every kindness offered, to be construed as
the Prognostic of ingenuous love.

Mystically: It is true that Maldonate says: All that is here spoken of a
friends carriage to his friend, cannot properly be applied unto God; for he
regards not importunity more then frien^ship: yet what is said from the Letter,
that all Liberality is not friendly, is true also, in a Spiritual sense.



He gave the people of Israel a King, 1 Samuel 8.5, 19. Hos. 13.11. Psalm. 78.25.
Numb. 11.4, 43.
1 Samuel 8.5.19. God hearkened to their preposterous desire, and gave them their
longing; but it was in anger, Hos. 13.11. So when they lusted after flesh, and
desired that, God yields to them; but that Liberality of his was not friendly,
Psalm. 78.25. Numb. 11.4, 33. It had been better to have been without such
dainty meat, then to have had such sour sauce unto it. Balaam longs, prays,
and obtains leave to go and gratify the King of Moab, whose desire was, to
have the people of Israel cursed: but that permission was worse then a denial:
Nay, Numb. 23. Math. 8.31, 32.
the Devil himself had his request granted, when he desired to have leave to
enter into the Herd of Swine.

Non est magnum exaudiri ad voluntatem, non est magnum, says Austin, more then
once. It is no great matter, that God should hear thy Prayers, and let thee
have thy will in what thou desire, and yet not in favor. God, who denies
many things to his in mercy, bestows also many things to his Enemies in
displeasure: Thou have thy ambitious, covetous, revengeful wishes: it falls
out, as thou desire; yet think not thy self ever the more befriended for
this. God does not hear the Wicked to gratify them, as he hears his Friends:
nor for their Prayers sake, but for other ends to punish them, etc. To all my
former Suits, I will add this, that God would deny me, what he knows to be
hurtful for me, notwithstanding I am earnest with him for it. Far better it is,
to have God's gracious denials, then his angry yieldings. Thus much briefly of
the Negative, He gave not, because he was his Friend. The Affirmative follows.



Importunity (you see) is the prevailing Argument with many: That oftentimes
prevails more then Friendship, or a good Cause. See this in Sampson, (a good
man) how it prevailed with him in a bad Cause, Judge. 14.17, 18, 19. and 16.16,
17. through the importunate Solicitations of his Wife, first; and Harlot,
next: he wrought against himself. And how many has weariness of solicitation
won to those Actions, which at first motion they despised.

See this further proved in a good cause, in that Parable of a wicked Judge,
Luke 18.1.
Luke 18.1. He was one that neither feared God, nor reverenced man. A poor
Widow comes to him for a piece of Justice, which Conscience would require him
to do* both in respect of the goodness of her Cause, and poverty of her Person:
but when, neither the one, nor other, could prevail, Importunity did it;
Because of her Importunity, he did her right.

honest Suits, it shall be our wisdom to hold on, and not give over; albeit we
deal with persons seemingly inexorable: indeed, nothing is held more
over-bought (by some generous spirits) then that which costs them many tedious
supplications: yet how often does this Orator, Importunity, procure a dispatch?
If you be blamed for Importunity, say as Aristippus did to his friend, who
reproved him; for that being a Philosopher, he would so abase himself, as to
fall down at the feet of such a Tyrant as Dionysius was, to obtain a Suit: He
replied, that it was not his fault, but the fault of Dionysius, that he did so,
for that he carried his Ear in his Feet.

But in evil things, let us arm our selves against it: Trust not to your own
power; Importunity and Opportunity do much with the Coyest She, (we say): so in
other matters. How many, too late bewail the Importunity of others, as a mean
of drawing them into sinful courses? Thus did Aaron excuse himself to Moses,
Exodus 32.22.
for his making the Golden Calf, Exodus 32.22. But that would not serve the
turn; for it is said, that Aaron made them naked in so doing. Easy Rhethotique
draws us to the worst part, but Importunity drives us.

I shall no longer insist on this Doctrine, arising from the Letter; the Point
principally intended is this.



Moses, by his Importunacy, prevailed with God for Israel: Let me alone, said
God, Exodus 32.10. God bespeaks (as it were) his own freedom: He offers Moses
fair Conditions, and would buy his consent, Exodus 32.10.
if he would be quiet: but Moses follows his Suit still, makes request for the
People, asks God a reason of his anger, ver. 11. reason, why he should not be
angry. Thou have brought them out with a great power, etc. tells him of the
Inconveniences that would follow. The Egyptians will say, etc. He puts God in
mind of his Covenant; yea, of his Oath to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. So that
God would seem to break Covenant; and forswear himself, if he should destroy
the people: and then concludes with great vehemence. Turn from thy fierce
wrath, etc. and repent this evil purpose against them: and see what followed,
ver. 14. The Lord repented, etc. You see Moses had a hard pull; but by his
Importunity he carried it.

Thus Jacob wrastled with God and prevailed: You have that story, Genesis 32.24.
Esau comes against him, Genesis 32.24. Genesis 48.16. Genesis 32.26, 28.
an Angel appears to him, wrastles with him, (which Angel was the Angel of the
Covenant; which is Christ, Genesis 48.16.) Let me go (said the Angel, Genesis 32.26,
28. I will not, said Jacob, he holds with his hands, though his joints were our
of joint: Let God seem to take Esau's part, smite him, maim him, he will not
let go his hold. What is thy name (said the Angel) never did I meet with so
stout a man? Well! kneel down Jacob; rise up Israel, thou art a Conqueror,
verse. 28. Now, Was this strife corporal only? No, no, hear what the Prophet
speaks, Hos. 12.3, 4. Nor was it perfunctory and formal prayer, but earnest and
importunate, Hos. 12.34.
He cried, and made supplication, and thus overcame.

Besides this Parable, of a Friend coming to his Friend at Midnight, Christ
has given us another, that of the unjust Judge, who heard the Widows Cause, in
regard of her Importunity; and not otherwise, Luke 18. and withal, leaves us a
History of his own, of the Woman of Canaan, who overcame him, in the behalf of
her Daughter, by importunity, (with which History we have before acquainted
you) such have the Prayers of the godly been.

For the further clearing of the Point, let me show you what this Instancie,
and Importunacie, in Prayer, is, and wherein it consists. And so

Importunate Prayer is a fervent and frequent desire of the Soul, for some
special mercy; so as it will take no denial: Or, A fervent and frequent pouring
forth our souls to God, without giving over till he grant us our desires.

There are three things in Importunity: First, Fervency: Secondly Frequency:
Thirdly, Perseverance.

First, Fervency: This consists not in the loudness of the voice (albeit, it be
many times expressed by loud crying); the Peacock has a louder voice, then the
Nightingale. Nor in long praying; for God does not measure prayer by the
length, (albeit, long Prayers, may be fervent Prayers) but in the crying of the
Heart. The earnest intention, and contention of the Soul and Spirit expressed
in Scripture, Joel 2.3.
by renting of the heart, and pouring out the Soul, and crying of the whole
heart, Psalm. 119.145, 146. This is added as a Proviso to effectual Prayer, 1 Samuel 1.15. Psalm. 119.145.146. Jam. 5.16. Ver. 17, 18.
Jam. 5.16. where effectual and fervent are joined together: the more
fervencie, the more prevalencie in our Prayer. Eliahs example is added, ver.
17, 18. He prayed, and prayed, (so it is in the Original) We translate it, He
prayed earnestly, and he was heard. Thus our Savior prayed in the days of his
flesh, Heb. 5.7.
Heb. 5.7. We read of a Dutch Martyr in our own Monuments, one Giles of
Bruxels, who was so ardent in his Prayer, kneeling by himself in some secret
place of the Prison where he was, that he seemed to forget himself; and being
called to his meat, he neither heard, nor saw, who stood by him, till he was
lifted up by the arms, and then he would speak gently to them, as one awaked
out of a Trance.

Secondly, there must be Frequency in it: We give not over at the first denial;
no, nor at the second, if we be importunate, Psalm. 27.4. One thing I have
desired of the Lord and I will seek after it: Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 69.3. Isa.
62.9. Ver. 6, 7.
that is, I have sought it, and will seek again, and again: So Psalm. 69.3. and
Isa. 62.1. For Sions sake, I will not hold my tongue etc. He would renew his
Suit, and follow it: and the like he requires of all faithful Watchmen, that
they cry day and night, and not keep silence, till they had obtained their
desire for Sion, 2 Cor. 12.
ver. 6, 7. Thus, Paul prayed thrice: and Latimer plied the Throne of Grace,
with, Once again, Lord, once again, restore the Gospel to England: as if he
would have no nay.

Thirdly, as our Suit is to be renewed, Genesis 32.24.
so we must persevere in it. So Jacob did not only wrestle, but continued all
night and morning too: He gave not over, till he had what he sought for: this
is enjoined, Col. 4.2. 1 These. 5.27. And that Parable propounded for that very
end, that we should pray, and not faint, Col. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. Luke 18.1.
Luke 18.1. And thus you see, what importunate Prayer is, and wherein it
stands. These Particulars, we shall hereafter, in the verses following, speak
more fully unto: let us now make some use of this.

lip labor is lost-labour. Lukewarm prayers, God respects no more then he does
lukewarm persons; and such he has threatened to spue out of his mouth, Rev.
3.16.

True Prayer, is not the labor of the Lips, Rev. 3.16.
but the labor of the Heart, and of the Soul: Moses prayed earnestly to God,
and yet not a word that we hear him speak, Exodus 14.15. Wherefore cryest thou
unto me? says God; that is, with inward groanings, Exodus 14.15.
albeit there was no audible voice, and God heard that strait. The like did
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13. and yet she spoke not a loud, 1 Samuel 1.13.
she spoke in her heart, says the Text, and that fervently, and God heard her,
and answered her.

Paul, before his Conversion, prayed often, and long too, for he was was a
Pharisee, and one of the strictest and devoutest of all the Sect, (as he
testifies of himself) and they were given to much praying, as the Scripture
testifies of them: yet God took no notice of all his formal and hypocritical
Prayers; he gave no ear unto them before his Conversion; but when he came to be
humbled, and poured forth his Soul earnestly and fervently, God then said of
him, Behold he prays, Act. 9.11. Before he prated prayers, now he prays
prayers: that was prayer, indeed, Act. 9.11.
which he now put up to God: and that God heard. How often do we pray, and yet
forget that we have prayed? Can we think that God will hear us, when we hear
not our selves? Or remember that Prayer which we have forgotten, that we ever
put up unto him.

Never think to be heard of God in mercy, or to obtain any blessing at the
hands of God, by thy cold, careless, and customary prayer. Psalm. 141.2.
David compares his prayers to Incense, and no Incense was offered without
fire: it was that, that made the smoke of it to ascend: Prayer that is cold,
makes but a smother, and troubles the eyes of God; Isa. 1.15.
as he shows, Isa. 1.15. but they are not a sweet Perfume in his Nostrils.

Arrow of Deliverance; if it be not drawn up to the Head, is will hardly fly
home unto the Mark.

Our Savior tells us of a King, that (going with Ten Thousand to make War
with another that comes against him with Twenty Thousand) sends an Ambassador,
Luke 14.31, 32.
and desires Conditions of Peace, whilst his Adversary is yet a great way off.
Our Prayers are our Ambassadors to God in all our fears and dangers; we send
them to make our Peace: and as they act our Cause, we are sure to speed. Now it
is not by their Rhetoric, and Oratory, that they prevail with God; but by
their earnestness and fervencie: They must go to work, as those Ambassadors
we read of, Isa. 33.7
Isa. 33.7. They must cry without, and weep bitterly, and then our Peace will
be made: So Luther, when he had been earnest at his Prayers, came leaping out
of his Closet, crying out to his Fellows, Vicimus, vicimus; and at the same
time, the States of Germany, (after long debate) concluded for the truth of the
Gospel, yet unknown to Luther. He was wont to term Prayers, Christianorum
Bombarda, the Gun or Canon of Christians. But it is God himself that charge
this Canon, Zach. 4.6. It is not by our might, or by our power, but my Spirit,
says God. It is the force of that, Zach. 4.6.
and the strength of that, whereby we cry Abba Father. Romans 8.


And then Prayer being thus charged, God (out of a willingness to be prevailed
withal) puts himself into the way of a Shot, he meets such a faithful fervent
prayer, and is pleased to be wounded with it; yea, God charges and discharges
the Canon upon himself, and he puts good words into our mouths, and good
purposes into our hearts, and so charges the Canon, and then leaves his Blessed
Spirit to discharge it upon himself, and is content so to be overcome by it;
and yet looks that we should hold the Lint-stock, and give fire, by enkindling
of the Spirit in the use of all good means to make us fervent.

Impudency in the Creature, to press the great Creator to condescend to our
Requests: Princes love it not: mean men affect it not; and will God suffer it?

ways are not as man's: with him, he is magis importunus qui importunat minus:
most troublesome, that is least troub e o^e (says Gregory). It is true, Isa.
55.
that importunate prayer has something in it, (...) private. et (...) pudor.
of the nature of it, which we call Impudency: The Friend, in my Text, was so
importunate, as he was impudent again, (for so much, the Notation of the
Original Word imp yeth). Impudency, taken in the best sen^e, as Christ here
u^eth the wo^d, is such a holy constant importunity, as will take no denial;
like that in Beggars: So Paulinus, Paulin. Ep^st. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
speaking of the Woman which anointed Christ's feet, says, that she was
pudenter impudens, and pie improba: and such a modest impudency the Woman of
Caenaan had. So Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of his Si^^er Gorgon^a, says, that
in the vehemence of her prayer, honest a quadam impudentia egit impudentem, she
came to a Religious impudency with God, so as to threaten Heaven, and tell God
that she would never depart from his Altar, till she had her Petition granted.
So Luther had this Impudence, Melchier Adam in vita Luther's
who when Riches were sent him, refused them; saying, that he had earnestly
protested, that God should not put him off with those things. And yet more;
Importunate prayer has a kind of violence in it. Tertullian says that in the
public prayers of the Congregation, we besiege God, and take him prisoner,
and bring him to our own Conditions: yet this importunity, impudency,
violence, God likes well, (as, in the verse following, we shall further show
you.)

Had Abraham had a little more of this Impudency, (says one) when he made
suit for Sodom, Dr. Donn, fol. p. 522. Genesis 18.22, 33.
it might have done well. Abraham brought down the price to Ten Righteous, and
there his modesty staid him: Had he gone lower, God knows what God would have
done; for God went not away (says the Text) till he had left communing with
Abraham; that is, till Abraham had no more to say to God. Abraham left over
asking, before God left over granting: he left over praying, before God left
over bateing: and so Sodom was lost.

Austin speaks of some, who pray, nimis ardenter, too too earnestly: so that it
seems to be a fault to be too importunate.

inordinate desire of that we crave, having no respect to the Will and Promise
of God: This was in Israel, desiring of a King. And there is another kind of
Importunity, joined with a subjection to the Will of God: Math. 26.39, 42.
And this was in Christ, Math. 26.39, 42. This latter, is acceptable and
pleasing; but the other is displeasing: When a man begs prohibited favors, (as
Balaam did in begging leave to go to Balaack, and pleasure him in cursing of
God's people: and Ammon to satisfy his Lust) is earnest with God for that
which is against his Will revealed, and which in his Word he has absolutely
denied to give: Or to pray absolutely for that which he has only conditionally
promised to bestow, and no otherwise: and not therein refer our desires to his
good will and pleasure: This is too much sawciness; such Importunity he cannot
brook: such pray nimis ardenter, and that is displeasing.





Some things that we stand in need of, are more excellent and necessary, being
proper and peculiar to the Elect, which God has absolutely promised: about
these we are to wrestle, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Romans 15.30.
and strive with God, and take no denial from him. Other things are more common
and transitory, being but mean and worthless, in comparison of the other,
scarce worth the naming: concerning which, God is not well pleased, that we
should spend the heat of our zeal. It is worthy of your notice, that our
Blessed Savior, in that Platform of Prayer which he has given us, puts daily
bread, before forgiveness of sins: not for that it is to be preferred, but for
that it may sooner be dispatched, and more time spent about the other, which
concerns the Salvation of our Souls (there being two Petitions of this nature,
for one of the other): for as it is in pouring out of some Liquors, that which
is thinnest, will first come forth, and the thickest last; so is it oftentimes
in pouring forth the Soul to God. And thence it is, that the Faithful are
usually more earnest and importunate with the Lord, toward the end of their
prayers (as it was with Daniel and David): This we often find.

Secondly, albeit our earnestness is not to be alike in degree, for small
things, as for great; yet our Faith must be the same, let the thing be what it
will be, that we pray for, if lawful. Small or Great, Temporal or Eternal, (if
according to God's Will) we are to rest assured, that it shall be granted with
the like degree of Faith, seeing the truth of God's promise, upon which our
Faith rests, is the same in all things, as well small as great, and always
infallible. In things that God has not promised unto us, yet not forbidden to
be asked, an act of Recumbencie is sufficient; but in such things as God has
promised to give, and so far as he has promised to give, be it small or great,
an Act of Affiance is required.



Prophet that said, Woe to him that striveth with his Maker; that is, Isa.
45.9. and 64.1.
that presses God before his time, says also, Oh that thou would rent the
Heavens, and come down! Promises of surest accomplishment are to be furthered
by our fervent Prayers. Dan. 9.
Thus Daniel, albeit that he found the time drew near of Isreal's deliverance,
from the Babylonish Captivity, yet he prays earnestly for the acceleration of
it.

And, indeed, that time is God's time, to which he is brought by our Prayers,
as that price was God's price, for sparing of Sodom to which Abraham had
brought him by his suit and solicitation, and not the first fifty.

To conclude then, let us all follow God with our honest suits fear not of
being over-bold with him, in importuning of him about that which he has
promised to give us; and the more difficult the thing is that you desire to
obtain put thereto the more strength.

Drexellius tells us of a Vision that a Religious man had at his Prayers in the
Congregation. He saw a several Angel at the Elbow of every one present, ready
to write down his Petitions: those who prayed heartily, their Angels wrote down
their Suits in Gold: Those that prayed but coldly and carelessly, their Angels
wrote too, but it was with Water: Those that prayed customarily, only from the
teeth outward, had their Angels by them, who seemed to write, but it was with a
dry Pen, no Ink in it: Such as slept had their Angels by them, but they laid
their Pens by: Such as had Worldly Thoughts, their Angels wrote in the Dust:
And such as had envious and malicious Spirits, their Angels wrote with Gall. If
this be so, I fear few Angels have wrote this day in Golden Letter; but the
Pens of the others have gone very fast. Have a care how thou prayest, if thou
would have them written with the Golden Pen.

And so we have done with the propounding part of this Parable, we proceed to
what follows.

And I say unto you, Text. Verse, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Ask, and it shall be given you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall
be opened unto you: For every one that asks, receives, etc.

We have here the Apodosis, or Applying Part of the Parable: wherein, first, a
Mandate, ver. 9. Secondly a strong Motive, to en force it, ver. 10.

In the Precept, or Mandate, we have the Duty, or Work imposed, laid down in
three several Terms: Ask, Seek, Knock: Secondly, the Warant, I say unto you.

The Motive is from a gracious promise of Audience, verse 9, 10. which we have,
first, Asserted; and that is three fold, according to the threefold urging of
the Duty, verse. 9. Secondly, Amplified and enlarged from common Experience,
verse 10.

We begin with the Mandate, or Injunction; And I say unto you, Ask and ye shall
have etc.

The Warrant offers it self in the first place to be spoken unto; we begin with
that, and then to the Duty.

[I say unto you.]

Where, first, see, by what Authority we do these things. (I say.)

Secondly, Who are Authorized to perform them, you my Hearers, and Disciples,
[unto you] I say.

I say.

There are certain suppletory Phrases, which fall often upon the Tongue in our
usual Discourse, and are repeated almost in every sentence; but none more
frequently used by us then this [said I.] If we relate any ordinary passage
betwixt our selves, and others, every second or third word, (almost) shall be
[said I] when many times it conduces nothing to that we would say, but rather
discomposeth the story, and confounds and troubles the Hearer.

This, I say, in my Text, is frequently used by our Savior, but never idely
nor impertinently.

In the former verse we had it, [I say unto you] and here again we have it, in
both places, to very good purpose. There it was used for Confirmation of the
Truth delivered; Here, to Authorize and warrant the work required: From hence
we conclude:



There is no Duty belonging to a Christian, that has better and clearer
Evidence for it, then Prayer has.

It is warranted by Precept often, both in the Old Testament, 1 King. 8.33.
Psalm. 27.8 and 50.15. And more abundantly in the New, 1 King. 8.33. Psalm. 27.8.
Math. 26.41. Ephesians. 6.16. Phil. 4.6. Col. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17, 18. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Jam. 5.13. 1 Pet. 4 7.
Math. 26.41. Ephesians. 6.16. Phil. 4.6. Colos. 4.2. 1 These. 5.17, 18. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Jam. 5.13. 1 Pet. 4.7.

It is warranted from the frequent practice of God's servants in all Ages.
Moses is often found upon his knees, Exodus 14.13. and 32.11. Numb. 21.7. David,
thrice a day, Psalm. 55.17. Yea seven times a day, Psalm. 119.164. his Psalms
full of Prayers and Praises. Daniel kept a constant and set course of Prayer,
thrice every day upon his knees, Dan. 7.10. The Apostles, abundant in the
Duty, Act. 6.4. So the Church, Act. 2.42. It is reported of St. James, that his
knees were horn-hoofed, like the knees of Camels, Exodus 14.13. and 32.11. Numb.
21.7. Psalm. 55.17. and 119.164. Dan. 7.10. Act. 2.42. and 6.4. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2.
Tim. 2.19.
with Prayers. And Gregory, in his Dialogues, writes of his Aunt Trasilla, that
being dead, she was found to have her Elbows as hard as Horns: which hardness,
she had got, by leaning on a Desk, at which she used to pray. And by this Duty,
the Saints are known and distinguished from others; they call upon God by
Prayer, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.19.

Nor is there any Duty that has more Promises made unto it, then Prayer has,
for our encouragement therein, as you see here is the Text. (Large Promises
indeed; of which more hereafter.)

Lastly, the whole Trinity concur in the discharge of the Duty; each Person
has a hand in this Holy Exercise. Romans 8.16, 17. Heb. 4 14. Rev. 8.3, 4. Joh.
16.23.
The Holy Ghost frames our Requests for us, Romans 8.16, 17. The Son offers
them up unto his Father, Heb. 4.14. Rev. 8.3, 4. And the Father accepts them
thus framed, and offered up, Joh. 16.23. O noble work! Ursinus.
(says one) ad quod tanti Artifices concurrunt, to the performance whereof, so
many Artizans do concur and meet. The Omnipotency of the Father, the Wisdom of
the Son, the goodness of the Holy Ghost; where Goodness wills, Wisdom
disposes, and Omnipotency performs. These things considered, who can
question the lawfulness of the work enjoined: yet had we no other Warrant then
this in my Text, [I say, Ask] it were sufficient.

Daniel, Dan. 6.8, 9. Verse. 10.
when a Decree was established by Darius against Prayer, Dan. 6.8, 9. that
could not drive him from the doing of it, ver. 10. He knew well enough who it
was that had said, Call upon me, and was content to hazard his life, rather
then to hazard his soul (says Chrysostom). Chrysostom. de Orand. Deum. lib. 1.
Polan. in Dan. 6.10.
Nor could that Edict of Hen. the Third, King of France, restrain the
Protestants in his Kingdom from Prayer, albeit he had thereby strictly forbad
them to pray with their Families.

No Prince, nor Potentate, Parent nor Master, has power to forbid what God
has enjoined, (and that as a special part of his Worship) nor may they be
obeyed in any such Injunction should they give it.

And if fear of punishment, nay Death it self should not dishearten us; much
less should fear of a frown, from some that are great, or superior unto us. It
is a good meditation of an able Divine, Mr. Tho: Fuller, Med. lib. 2. p. 6.
concerning the point in hand, hear his words. A Person of great quality (says
he) was pleased to lodge one night in my house, I durst not invite him to my
Family Prayer; and therefore, for that time omitted it, thereby making a breach
in a good Custom, and giving Satan advantage to assau^t it: yea, the loosening
of such a link, might have endangered the scattering of the Chain. Bold
bashfulness, which durst offend God, whilst it did fear man; especially
considering, that though my Guest was never so high, yet by the Laws of
Hospitality, I was above him, whilst he was under my Roof. Hereafter,
whosoever comes within the Doors, shall be requested to come within the
Discipline of my house, if accepting my homely Diet, he will not refuse my
Home-Devotion; and sitting at my Table, will be entreated to kneel down by it,
Bravely resolved!

Jos. 1.9.
Have I not commanded you said God to Joshua (in another case) as it he should
say; Go on courageously, whosoever does oppose, I Sam. 13.28.
I will bear thee out: Wicked Absalom would encourage his servants to a b^ou^ly
act, with Fear not, Have not I commanded you, be courageous, and be valiant:
and shall his Servants venture upon so horrid an act, upon his command, and we
not upon so ho^y a Duty, upon our Lord and Masters Warrant? Jacob thus
encouraged himself, being to go for his own Country, by order from God (to
pass by ^is Brother Esau's Territories, whose fury he feated) Have not thou
said unto me, Genesis 32.9.
Return unto thy Country and I will deal well with thee, Genesis 32.9. And shall
we fear and be faint-hearted, in ^eeking to Go^ by Prayer, having Christ not
only to go before us by his example, (as we showed you in the entrance upon
^he Parable) but likewise commanding us to perform the Duty, who is our Lord
and Master, to whom we whom we owe abso^ute obedience? He that healed me the
same said unto me, John 5.11.
Take up thy Bed and walk, said the Lame man unto the Jews. Thus an^wer all
Opposers Mockers, Scorners whatsoever; He that made me, he that saved me, he
that is now my Advocate, and shall by my Judge has said unto me, Call upon me,
ask of me, seck to me. Thy face, Lord, will I seek.

Abraham, Daniel, Job? etc.

I say to thee; but generally, I say to you, you my Hearers, you my Disciples.
So then,

Prayer is a work of General Concernment, Psalm. 145.10.
It concerns every one, as well as any one; the Saints especially, Psalm. 145,
10. (they are best fitted and qualified to pray and praise the Lord), yet all
men, Generally, 1 Timothy 5.8. 1 Timothy 5.8.
Nor is it to be restrained to men alone, as if the woman had nothing to do
with it, for they are in the Pattent, as well as men. So Wives with their
Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.7. and alone by themselves as did Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.10. and
another Anna that was a widow, 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 Samuel 1.10. Luke 2.37.
Luke 2.37. No Sex, State, or Condition but is bound to a performance of this
Duty. And thence it is that where we read of any Command to pray in Scripture,
usually it is as large as any of the ten Commandments, binding all persons to
the performance of it.

And yet there are two necessary Cautions or Limitations given; the first
concerns Infants, and Children, Danaeus in orat Dom. c. 4. Psalm. 8.2.
and such as have not the use of Reason: these cannot perform the Duty as yet,
and are excusable: As for that of David, Psalm. 8.2. Out of the mouth of Babes
and Sucklings, etc. that is to be understood of the might and power of God,
seen in them: yet these must be taught as soon as they are able to Learn, to
lisp out Hosanna, even in their tender years; Eyf. 1. Colos. p. 15.
these seeds of direction are to be sown in their hearts, even in their
Infancy, that so they may be in a better forwardness, when they come to years
of understanding.

Secondly, This is not to be understood of all sorts of Prayers, Public as
well as Private, Vocal as well as Mental: for Public Prayer in the
Congregation vocally, pronounced, and offered up belongs not to all; but to
those that are thereunto called, a^^s the Pastor of the Chureh, Acts 6.4. Jam.
5.14.
Acts 6.4: Jam. 5.14. Nor are women permitted to speak in the Church, as the
mouth of the rest; neither in preaching or praying; further then in manifesting
their Assent, by closing up with Amen.

The grounds or Reasons of this Doctrine delivered, are these.

First, Prayer is a moral precept, and all the Commandments of the moral Law,
bind the consciences of all men, to obedience so long as they are in force;
and his moral precepts being perpetual bind the consciences of all to
obedience perpetually.

Secondly, We are all Gods Creatures, and bound to worship him as he is our
Creator, Psalm. 107. and 147.
Psalm. 107.147. Beasts, Ravens, in their kind call upon him, and shall we be
worse then they, to whom God has given the Use of Reason, that we may serve
him better then they.

Thirdly, Nor is there any one amongst us, but stands in need of some blessing
or other; and if we want, then must we pray for it (as you find in my Text).

Fourthly, None but hold something of God, and must pay this Rent; we hold by
Copy what we have, and owe to this Lord suite and service.

Esaias 1.15. Psalm. 50.16. Prove. 15.8. Resp. Acts 8.22.
and if so, why are they forbidden, Esaias 1.15. Psalm. 50.16. Prove. 15.8.

There is no man, so wicked, but stands Charged with this Duty, Acts 8.22.
Simon Peter calls to Simon Magus to pray to God.

The second Commandment enjoins the material part, and imposes the Duty on
all.

Secondly, Yet wicked men living in sin may not pray, for that they sin in the
formal part of prayer, in the right manner of doing it, and so take Gods name
in vain in the performance thereof, (which is forbidden in the third
Commandment). These praying amiss without Faith, Repentance, Fear, Fervency,
etc. God counts their prayers abominable; and rejects them.

Thirdly, Though wicked men sin, if they pray not, and sin if they pray; yet
the sin of such is less, who fail in the manner of praying, then theirs who
wholly omit it: for in the total omission of this Duty, there is a double a
breach; breach both of the second and third Commandments; but in performance
of the duty, (though sinfully) the third Commandment is only violated.

Fourthly; Although God do not hear, nor will he hear a wicked man that prays,
in respect of his sin, John 9.31. Yet such may be encouraged to the Duty, John
9.13.
as they are Gods Creatures, (though but Ravens) nor will God withhold from
them Common mercies, but reward, with Temporal blessings, the very shadow of
goodness, as he did Ahab, 1 Kings 21.29.

1 King. 21.29.
and belongs to all, Let every one make Conscience of it, none has a
dispensation for the omission thereof, from the Throne to the footstool; It is
not highness, nor honor, nor poverty, nor sickness; that will dispense with
it. Bless the Lord O house of Levi, Bless the Lord O house of Aaron, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 135. So here, let the house of Judah; Psalm. 133.
Kings and Potentates of the earth bless the Lord, and call upon his name, let
them praise him and magnify him for ever. Let the Tribe of Reuben Nobles and
Potentates of the Earth make Conscience of honoring that God; who has
honored them: Let the Tribe of Dan, Judges, and Magistrates, do the like,
calling on God for grace, to execute Judgment without partiality. Let not the
Tribe of Gad forget it, men of War, and Martialists, that God may teach their
hands to War, and fingers to fight. The Tribe of Zabulon, Seafaring men, and
Mariners? these have a great need to call upon God, being in the mouth of
danger. So the Tribe of Joseph, Students and Scholars: The Tribe of Benjamin,
Traffiquers, and Merchants. And the Tribe of Ashur, Citizens and Courtiers; The
Tribe of Isachar Countrymen and Farmers, every Tribe as well as the Tribe of
Levi, whose calling calls on them, especially to be abundant in this uDty, All
must pray; every Tribe must call upon the Lord, praise him and magnify him for
ever. Revel. 5.8. we read that every one had his harp and vial full of odours,
so ought, Revel. 5.8.
this Duty to be performed by every man's own self, and for himself. The Just
shall live by his own faith, Hab. 2.4.
says the Prophet, so he must look to get his living by his own prayers.

I might reprove the horrible prophannesse of most families; who are without
prayer, and live in an ordinary neglect of this Duty: Let such read those
Texts, Psalm. 97.6. Zeph. 3.1. Dan. 9.13. Ezekiel. 22.30. And of such as neglect
this duty in private, Psalm. 79.6. Zeph. 3.1. Dan. 9.13. Exek. 22.30.
(especially great ones who have greatest cause to pray) seldom shall you hear
of a silk-stocken worn out at knees with praying. The Lord amend us, for we
stand in great need of mending.

Thus much of the warrant: now to the work it self.

Ask, Seek, Knock.

Here are three Acts, but the Duty is the same, all is by Prayer, albeit
expressed by a kind of gradation, in three several terms, whereof the latter
imports more vehemence then the former.

Some distinguish the words thus, Bonavent in Loc.
Ask by Prayer, Seek by Living well, and Knock by Perseverance, and holding out
unto the end. And others thus, Ask by Prayer, Seek by Reading, Knock by
Repenting: or ex part petiti, in respect of the thing sought thus. Petite
veniam: Quaerite Gratiam, Pulsate ad gloriam: Ask forgiveness, Seek for Grace;
Knock to enter into Glory. Aug.
In short, (for so Austin concludes it) To Ask is the Labor of the mouth, To
Knock is the Labor of the hand, And to Seek is the Labor of the Heart; so
that the whole man is to be occupied, and all the members of the Body, and
powers of the soul are to be employed in this Duty of Prayer; mouth, heart,
hand, all must be working when we betake our selves to the Duty.

mental, we may think prayers; it may be vocal we may speak prayers; it may be
Actual, we may do prayers: but I pass that Observation, and pitch upon this,
that,

Prayer is a difficult work, an hard task, and requires our best Abilities for
the right performance thereof; it is a work that takes up the whole man.

It is said of Epaphras, Colos. 4.12. (...).
that he labored fervently in Prayer for the Colossians, even to an Agony, as
the word imports, Colos. 4.12.

And when St. Paul went about that work, he cries out for help, for Gods sake,
beseeching the Romans to strive together with him in their prayers for him,
Romans 15.30. He was an Artist at it, even from his first Conversion, Acts.
15.11. and yet he vehemently presses others, to set in with him, Romans 15.30.
(...).
and put to their helping hands. It is a Striving, and a striving of that
nature, as makes the body, yea and soul of him, that striveth, to shake again.

St. James terms it a working prayer, it sets the whole man on work, eyes,
ears, hands, etc. Understanding; Memory, Affections, etc. Jam. 5.16.

The difficulty of this Duty, may appear the better, Jam. 5.16. (...).
if we consider it, in its own nature, and then the Lets and hindrances that
we shall meet withal in the Performance of it.

In it self we shall find it a work full of hardship, so many Essential
Circumstances go to make a Prayer, a right Prayer; that the best man may justly
suspect his best Prayer.

The Object of our Prayers is God alone, who is to be conceived of in Prayer,
as he is; purely, simply, spiritually, as of an absolute Being, without form,
without matter, without Composition: Good without Quality, Great without
Quantity: Present every where, without Place; Containing all things, and
contained of nothing. Nor is this enough to have this awful, and confused
Apprehension of a Diety without a more special, and inward conceit of three in
this one; three persons in this one essence; not divided, but distinguished;
One Jehovah begetting; begotten, proceeding; Father, Son, Holy Ghost, yet so as
that the Son is no other thing, from the father but another Person, or the
spirit, from the Son: Dr. Hall. Decad. lib. 4. Epist. 7.
Here (says a Worthy of our times,) the path is very narrow; if we fashion
God, after any form of our own, or have any ignoble conception of him, in our
Prayers, we set up an Idol of our own making, which God will not brook.

On this Object, must our hearts be fixed, and so looked upon through a mean, a
Mediator: in whom we must apprehend, a Manhood gloriously united to the
Godhead, One Person in two Natures, without change of either Nature; without
mixture of both, whose presence and merits, must give both passage, and
acceptance to our Prayers. If we conceive nor thus aright, we p^ay not aright;
And thus to conceive of the Object in our Prayers is no easy matter.

Then for the matter of our Prayer, that must be carefully attended unto;
nothing may be asked but what is warranted by precept or by promise, Every
thing (says a grave Divine) will no more bear a prayer, Dr. Harris his Theo.
of prayer. Romans 8.25.
then every stream will bear a Ship. Now we know not what to pray for as we
ought says the Apostle, Romans 8.25. Many times we crave that which is hurtful
for us; And sometimes deprecate that which makes for our good, you know not
what you ask, said Christ to the Mother of Zebedees Children, Math. 20.21.
Math. 20.21. Error in the matter frustrates prayer; and our understandings
being exceeding corrupt, it is no easy matter to know what is good for our
selves: therefore is the spirit: Romans 8.26.
said to help our infirmities in this respect, Romans 8.26. If that lift not with
us, and before us, (as the word signifies,) and help, (...).
as the Nurse does the Child, we cannot do that Duty.

Besides, the Manner and form of praying must be regarded: Error in the Manner
frustrates Prayer, as well as the matter, Jam. 4.3. Care must be had of our
words, so says Solomon, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth when thou
speak to God. We may not pray as the Jews did eat the Passover in haste,
Jam. 2.3. Eccles. 5.2. Exodus 12.11.
nor tumble out words in a confused manner, (so much does the Original word
imply,) they must be distinctly digested, into Order and Method, (as our
Savior teaches in that Plat-forme of Prayer prescribed;) The want of this the
cause, that men go forward, and backward in prayer like Hounds at a loss
(says one) and having unadvisedly begun to speak, they know not how wisely, to
make an end.

Nor may the Heart be hasty, in uttering any thing to the Almighty. And
Impression, must be in the heart of what the mouth makes Expression of. As
words may not be to seek when the mind utters it self, lest it be distracted;
no more must the mind be to seek, whilst he Tongue is calling upon God. Now the
heart is too rash in prayer, when it brings not with it those Graces Requisite.

First, when it prays without Understanding and Knowledge; as the words of
prayer must be attended unto, so must the sense, and meaning of the words: I
will pray (says the Apostle) but I will pray with the understanding, 1 Cor.
14.15.

Secondly, when it prays without faith: 1 Cor. 14.15.
for as the Apostle speaks of the word, Heb. 4.2. It profits not, Heb. 4.2.
Jam. 1.6, 7. 1 Timothy 2.8. Psalm. 26.6, and 66, 18. Job 11.3. Esaias 1.16. Psalm.
10.17. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Psalm. 34.6, 18. Luke 18.14.
because not received with faith. No more does that prayer profit, that is not
made in faith, Iam. 1.6, 7.

Thirdly, when it prays without Repentance, it is too rash. Pure hands washed
in innocence must be lifted up, 1 Timothy 2.8. So David, Psalm. 26.6. See, Job
11.3. Psalm. 66.10. Esaias 1.

Fourthly, it is too hasty when it brings not Humility with it, they are the
desires of the humble, that God will hear, Psalm. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Psalm,
34.6, 18. Proud boasting Pharisees are beheld alooff off, and sent empty away,
Luke 18.14.

Fifthly, it is too rash, and hasty, when it comes without Charity, if we would
be heard, we must bring a Charitable heart with us, ready to give, Psalm. 41.1.
and forgive, Math. 6.14, 15, Psalm. 41.1. Math. 6.14.15, and 18. ult. 1 Timothy 2.8.
and 18. ult. As we must lift up pure hands, so without wrath, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Sixthly, It is too hasty if it comes without Patience: we must patiently wait
Gods leisure, if we would have him to hear us. and graciously Answer us, Psalm.
37.7, and 40, 1. Lament. 3, 26, Psalm. 37.7, and 40, 1. Lament. 3.26.
No subject dares send for his Prince by post.

Seaventhly, It is too hasty when it comes into Gods presence, without
sincerity. Our ends and aims must be right, and strait: If we play the
Hypocrites and seek our selves; or lawful things for by-ends; our prayers are
lost, Iam. 4.3. Paul resolves when he prays to pray with the spirit, 1 Cor.
14.15.

In all these respects, it will be found, Jam. 4.3. 1 Cor. 14.15.
that it is a difficult work to pray aright. No other Duty requires so strong
abilities, as prayer does. The whole man, must be taken up in it, Invention,
Judgment, Will, Memory, Affections, Tongue, Hand, all: Many pinns in a Lace,
make it hard in weaving; and many strings in an Instrument the more difficult
in fingering.

As prayer is difficult in it self to perform aright, so the many Lets and
Impediments that we were sure to meet withal, when we go about it, adds unto
the Difficulty thereof.

These Lets are of two sorts; Intrinsecall or Extrinsecall from within, or from
without our selves.

From within our selves, There is naturally, a great deal of enmity in us
against this Duty, which keeps us from coming into Gods pr* sense, Romans 8.7.
Psalm. 14.4. The duty, is very spiritual, Romans 8.7. Psalm. 14.4.
and we are naturally carnal, and it is no easy matter to bring these two
together: And in the best and most regenerated person, Math. 26.41.
(although the spirit be willing yet) the flesh is weak; It being, but partly
mortified, will hand back, and falter, and kick with the heel against this
Duty. When are our spirits more dull and heavy, then when we betake our selves
unto prayer? when does Corruption show it self more, then when we go about it?
Psalm. 40.12. or, When are our hearts more fugitive? we look our Door, Psalm.
40.12. Nihil in mundo est fugacius cord meo. Bern.
throw our selves down in Gods presence: bend all the powers and faculties of
our souls upon him, in the best manner that we can, and suddenly by reason of
this unmortified corruption that is in us (says one) we may find our selves
scattered into vain thoughts; or sinful thoughts; we are upon our knees, we
talk and think not what we say: we rally again our forces, try to do better,
and presently do, as we did before; we find that we have forgotten, what we
were about; but when we began to forget we cannot tell. Should God or his
Angels ask us, when we have done praying; when we thought last of him, in that
Prayer we last made to him? we should be posed, Hier. in Dialog. advers.
Lucifer.
Hierom laments this in himself. My mind, (says he) is wandering or walking in
this, orthat Gallery, of else telling, or counting this or that sum of money,
or diverse others ways misled or seduced. These hindrances we may find within
our selves.

Then from without our selves, we shall meet with Lets too: Satan, he will be
most busy with us in tempting, when we are most busy in praying; he seeks by
subtilty, to beat us off from the Duty: Thou pray, thou Hypocrite? thy person
is abominable; thy prayer loathsome: come not into the presence of so great a
God, and full of Purity, and Majesty he will consume thee. If this take not,
but that we will needs betake our selves to prayer, then he will be
interrupting of us, by his suggestions, and jog us one the Elbow: he will needs
be talking to us, when we are most busy in speaking to God; sometimes of good
things, but now unseasonable: sometimes, of evil things: evil thoughts shall be
suggested, we know not how, nor whence, and all to hinder Audience. When two go
to Law together, Full. Med. lib. 1. p. 80.
one with another, the Plaintiff will do what he can to hinder the Defendant,
that the Judge may not hear what he is able to say for himself, and in his own
cause. In like sort, the Devil, the common Plaintiff, and Accuser of Mankind,
when he sees us upon our knees, pleading for our selves by Prayer, Playfer.
and pleading for favor and mercy from God, the Judge of all: then does he
seek to molest and trouble us, and the Pythonisse did St. Paul, Act. 16.16.
Act. 16.16.


And from the World we shall meet with many Lets likewise: this business calls
us away; that Friend comes to speak with us; a knock at the Door; the whining
of a Dog; the humming of a Fly; a noise in our Ears; a light in our Eyes; an
any thing; a nothing, will make us neglect God, and this his service. In this
regard, our Savior wills us, when we go to Prayer, to shut the Door, Math.
6.6. so as to shut out distractions: and yet no shutting of the Door will do it
so, as to keep out all, Math. 6.6.
till the everlasting Doors be opened unto us; Rev. 22.14.
till we enter in by the Gates into the City of the Living God. And thus you
see the Point propounded, proved, and confirmed: Now let us hear it applied.

two hours, then to pray one quarter: It is more easy to speak of God, says
Ambrose, then it is to speak unto God.

run away with it so easily and lightly. Others think they can do that, and
other things besides; they can say their Prayers, and wash their hands, button
their doublets, comb their heads; and do what not? They can talk with their
Servants, and pray too; tell the Clock, and pray; bid put out the Dog, shut the
door, and pray, etc. A Spiritual use may be made of these things, and some
Ejaculations, or sudden liftings up of the Heart, may be used in the doing of
these Natural Actions; but in Solemn Prayer they have no place, seeing the
whole man must attend upon it: men may say their prayers, and sing prayers, and
read prayers; but to pray Prayers, is another matter then they take it to be.

And there are others, who esteem of Prayers as lightly, and slightly, which
is the Reason they are so prodigal of them. Not a Canting Rogue, nor Vagrant,
that goes from door to door, but will tell you that they will pray for you;
albeit, if you give them naught, they will curse you to your face^ they do by
their prayers, as Beggars do by their Rags, they hang them upon every hedge
they come at; and you may judge by that what they are. How can those pray for
others, that are not able to pray for themselves?



Quint. Curt. lib. 8.
As when Alexander met with Porus, and saw his mighty Elephants and Army, he
told his friends, that now he had found a people equal to his heart, on whom to
try his valor: So should a Christian say, Now I have met with a Duty, that
will try my best abilities, and so set upon it with the more courage, and
resolution of spirit, and preparation. Now because some have a better
inclination to perform it, then power to do it, let me give you some general
Directions, which being observed, may facilitate the work, proceeding therein in
good order: A Truss well packt together, is the better born (as you know). We
read of the Builders of Babel, that they would build a Tower to reach up to
Heaven, etc. This was their folly; but, in Prayer, we erect up a Building that
reaches to the Clouds. Now, as wise Builders do in building, so let us do
herein.

First, with that wise Builder, which our Savior tells us of, Luke 14.28. Sit
down, and count your cost: Luke 14.28.
Consider what charge you must be at in the doing of it; all the care, and all
the intention that may be, is little enough for the service. Many Lets, and
Hindrances, from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, you must expect to meet
withal (as before was showed). Now unless thou put on an unalterable
Resolution, to break through all Lets, thou shall never keep a constant course
in it, or keep thy self from a formal and customary performance of it: Say then
to thy Soul, If I will betake my self to this work, then this cost I must
resolve to be at: And lay it as an inviolable Law upon thy self, that no Let
whatever, (that is not necessary) shall hinder thee from the performance of it,
after thou have resolved to set about it. First, provide materials for the
Building. Secondly, frame it orderly. Thirdly, prepare the ground, whereon to
erect the Building. Fourthly, then rear up the Structure. Fitting matter must
be provided for Prayer, as David did, for the Building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles.
22. All materials must be laid in beforehand. The wise Preacher (says
Solomon, Eccles. 12.10, 11. sought to find out acceptable words; he spoke not
at adventure, what came into his mind upon the sudden, but prepared the
general heads and parts of his Exhortation beforehand. We like not that a
Preacher should speak to us, without premeditation and thinking. Now Preaching
is God's speaking unto us; Praying, is our speaking unto him; And shall we
speak to him suddenly, and inconsiderately, when we are not willing that he
should speak to us after that manner? Read Hos. 4.2. Take with you words, etc.
Yet our words must not be affected, but such as are plain, apt, and significant.

But this is the least; provide matter, and words will not be altogether
wanting: Did you ever know a Beggar want words, that was pinched with need?

We may be furnished with Matter out of the Book of the Scriptures, by that
which we read, or hear. If business permit, some part of the Word would be read
daily: It is a good preparative to Prayer, and does furnish us with fitting
matter to commend to God: Read the Law, and out of that gather a Catalogue of
sins committed, and Duties omitted: Read the Gospel, and out of that gather a
Catalogue of Precious Promises made in Christ, unto us, in every condition that
we are, or can be in. If this be wanting, that we cannot read, then remember
what you have heard the Sabbath day before. That Sabbath was ill spent, the
Sermon weakly preached, that does not afford some store of Provision for
Prayer, all the week after.

And, as hearing and reading will afford Matter for Prayer, so Meditation and
Observation affords plenty. Meditate on what may humble thee, what may raise
thee, what may encourage thee, to come before God. More particularly, meditate
on God's greatness, goodness, power, truth, mercy, and other of his Attributes.
These afford great store toward this Fabric; the House of Prayer, and Duty of
Prayer. Then meditate on thy own sinful corrupt nature, proneness to evil,
backwardness to good, etc. of your own wants and weaknesses, and the greatness
of the benefit you desire, and you shall be furnished with matter.

And as Meditation, so Observation will furnish you abundantly. Observe the
Passages of God's Providence toward his Church in general, you selves, and
yours in special, and that daily and hourly, in protecting, preserving,
providing for it, and you: this do, and you cannot want matter for Prayer; you
shall be furnished abundantly.

And then having found Materials, proceed as Builders use to do. The Carpenter
(says one) being to build an house, hews not his Timber at an adventure; but
beforehand, projects in his mind the several Rooms and Parts, and accordingly
disposes of his Timber. He lays this by for Groundfil; that, for Spars; that,
for Windows; that, for Studs, etc. and fits every piece for its proper place,
according to the Idea and Platform conceived. So should we propound certain
general Heads in our mind, etc.

Now the Heads of Prayer are ordinarily three, Confession, Petition,
Thanksgiving. To the Head of Confession, Psalm. 51.4. Isa. 59.12, 13. Noh. 9.10.
Dan. 9.10, 11. Ver. 14. 1 King. 24.17
the evils of Sin and Punishment, are to be referred. The Evil of Sin Original,
Psalm. 51.4. Actual, Isa. 59.12, 13. Omissions and Commissions, Nehem. 9.10.
Dan. 9.10, 11. The Evil of Punishment. Public, Dan. 9.14. Private, 1 King.
24.17.

To the Head of Petition refer all our desires, for our selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
Psalm. 103.2.
or others, either for the averting of evil, felt or feared, which we call
Deprecation: or for the obtaining of good, Temporal or Spiritual, which we call
Apprecation.

To the Head of Thanksgiving, refer all mercies received from God, either
privative, or positive for this life, or a better; For Body, Soul, Name,
Estate, bestowed on our selves, or ours. And thus we are to proceed orderly,
and place all in a due Form, Ephesians. 1.3.
each part may be enlarged, from God's glorious Attributes, Word, and Works.

We read that Moses built the Tabernacle in all things alike to the Pattern, he
saw in the Mount. So let us build, according to Rule given us. Christ, from the
Mount, prescribes a pattern to us, Math. 6.9. Math. 6.9.
It is framed in form of the Decalogue the three former Petitions respecting
God; the three latter, our selves, and others: that Platform is most excellent;
and yet without doubt, it was not Christ's intent, to tie us strictly to that
Method and Order; for then should other of God's Servants have sinned, who have
sometimes begun Prayer with Thanksgiving, (as David often) and sometimes with
Confession; as Dan. 9. Nor would our Savior have commanded us; First, to seek
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; Math. 6.33, seeing in
that Form, Math. 6.33.
the Petition for Daily Bread, is set before that for Remission of Sins. But
our Savior's intent is principally to direct us in the matter of our prayers.
Aug. Tom. 10. Hom. 4^. de orat. Dam.
After this manner, pray ye: as if he should have said, Pray the matter herein
contained. Let this Form direct you what you must ask. Paraus, in Math. 6.9.
If you can refer your Requests to some of these Petitions, you may be bold to
ask it. And pray with the Affections here expressed, and enjoined: but whether
we begin with Confession, Petition, or Thanksgiving, it is left to the liberty
of him that prays, and as he finds his heart disposed. If thou find a
cheerfulness of Spirit in thee for mercies received, then Thanksgiving may have
the first place: If thy heart be affected with grief and sorrow, then
Confession of sin, and desire of pardon, may precede; only let God's glory, in
general, be first in our aim: next, our own, and our Brethrens salvation: and
lastly, the things of this life. So shall we build, according to the Pattern
given us in the Mount; The Rule of Scripture.

A third thing that Builders do, is to rid the ground of Rubbish, and make it
fit, before they set up their Frame: Such a riddance must we make, before we
enter upon the Duty. First, of Sin in general. If I regard wickedness in my
heart, God will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18.
says David, Psalm. 66.18. The Conscience of guiltiness, gives a stab to our
Prayers, and puts us out of heart of being heard. Mr. Perkins tells us of one
that had stolen a sheep, who ever found it in his way, when he went to Prayer,
and could find no rest, till he had confessed and made restitution: Our
Consciences are never more stirring and active, then when we betake our selves
to Prayer: If we have let our selves loose to any sin, then be sure our
Consciences will be flying in our faces: Ah Wretch! how dare thou look God in
the face? Rememberest thou, what thou lately did? What thou said, etc? and
can thou think to speed? Thou must wash off the stain of sin, Isa. 1.10.
by godly sorrow, and quiet thy Conscience in the blood of Christ, before thou
enter upon the Duty.

Next, rid thy heart, more particularly, of all distractions arising from
Worldly Cares, Domestical Discords, private Passion: these press downward,
Psalm. 40.12. 1 Pet. 3.7. Genesis 15.11.
and keep our Thoughts from ascending, Psalm. 40.12. they interrupt Prayer, 1
Pet. 3.7. and must be removed, as Abraham drove away the Birds that would rob
him of his Sacrifice.

They must be dealt withal, Math. 19.22.
as Christ did by the Minstrels, in Jairus his house; turned out of doors.

Some thoughts of Worldly things are allowable in Prayer, to the end, that we
may pray for direction, and good success therein; else why did Christ teach us
to pray for Daily Bread? But when we think on these things, our Thoughts may
not be Worldly, through Distempers and Distractions about the same. Abide you
here, (said Abraham, to his Servants) with the Ass, Genesis 22.5.
and I, and the Lad, will go yonder and worship, and come to you again. So say
to all distracting Thoughts, in this Duty: Stay you here, I, and my Savior
will go alone, and pray yonder, and come again to you; but, at this time, I may
not be distracted with you.

This being done, then, in the last place, up with the Frame, reat up the
Structure, fall upon the work it self. And now do as Nehemiah did in building
up the Walls of Jerusalem, Neh. 3.
wherein every one was employed; some at one Gate, some at another: So must it
be here; every power of the Soul must fall to work: The Understanding in
conceiving; the Memory, in retaining; the Will, in inclining; the Affections,
in moving to, and fro, carrying, and recarrying. The whole Soul must be busied:
otherwise, as Samballat, and Tobiah scoffingly said to those Builders, Cap. 4.3.
If a Fox go up, he will break down the Wall; (And a Fox; yea, Foxes will assay
it the Devil and his young Cubs.) Wherefore, as they did, so must we; employ
our Hands, as well as our Hearts; build with the Trowel in one Hand, and the
Sword in the other: They watched, and wrought: so, Watch and yray, Chap. 4.17.
Math. 26.41. Col. 9.3. 1 Pet. 4.7.
Math. 26.41. Yea, Whilst you are praying against Corruptions within,
Temptations without, that we be not ensnared, and circumvented by Sathan's
Baits and Methods.

And forasmuch, as the Builder builds in vain, unless the Lord builds with him,
Psalm. 127.1. Go to God, Psalm. 127.1.
and desire the assistance of his Spirit, in the performance of the Work: It is
a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.26.
Zach. 12.10. and it is a helper of our infirmities, Romans 8.26. And that,

First, in teaching, and prompting us what to say.

Secondly, in stirring up devout Affections in the Soul, which express
themselves by sighs and groans.

Thirdly, in enabling us to attend to the things we pray for: Thus, if we
observe and follow these directions, the work, although difficult in it self,
will become more easy to us, so that we need not be disheartened in it.

David thanks God that he found in his heart to pray, 2 Samuel 7.27. Gal. 4.6.
2 Samuel 7. It is the spirit of God that helps our infirmities in prayer, Gal.
4.6. and that puts life into our prayers, and makes them fervent, and helps
with sighs and groans, etc: if then thou have this gift; albeit not in the
like measure that others have, yet then thou have the spirit of God that does
enable thee even with the spirit of Adoption. I have known (says one) many
wicked men hear; Mr. Henry Smith in his Ladder of Peace.
and I have known many wicked men study, and I have known many wicked men fast,
and I have known many wicked men preach, and I have known many wicked men
Counsel, but I did never know any wicked man pray well, or any that could pray
well live wickedly: for praying will either make a man leave sinning, or
sinning will make a man leave praying. Hearty prayer, (especially in secret
unto God,) cannot possibly spring from an heart that maintains it self, Job.
27.10.
and nuzzels it self in any noisome lust, Job. 27.10. Such a one cannot set his
delight on the Almighty, nor call upon God at all times, for that is a special
gift, and peculiar to the Saints: the prayers of an Hypocrite may come from his
lips, or from his brains; but there is nothing of Gods spirit in them. But
here some scruples arise to be removed.



very prone to fashion God to some form of our own; and this pronesse
discovers it self in the very best, and in no duty more then in prayer, but
this want shall be covered by Christ's intercession, and our suites followed in
Heaven by his advocation, 1 John 2.1. 1 John 2.1.
But for your further direction and satisfaction in this Case, know,

First, that there is no direct beholding of God in his Essence and
Infiniteness; if we consider him simply and abstractively, Adaequatus
conceptus.
no finite Creature is able to comprehend him.

Secondly, we must conceive of God as he has described himself in his word:
though we cannot conceive of him fully as he is; yet we should study well the
Attributes of Gods praises, and conceive of him as his word reveals him to be.

Now there are two ways, whereby we usually make representations of men, or
other Creatures: Statuaryes have one way, Painters another. Statuaryes do it,
by substraction; they take away or pare off some part of the Timber or stone
which they work upon, and then that which they leave becomes like that man whom
they would represent. Painters do it by Addition; whereas the Cloth or Table
presented nothing before, they add Colors and Lights and shadows, and so
there arises a representation: both these ways, the Scripture represents God
unto us. First as a Statuary, per viam Negationis, by Negation or Substraction:
hereto tend all those Attributes which we call Negative, as God is Immortal,
Unchangeable, Invisible; 1 Timothy 1.17. 2 Timothy 2.13. Act. 17.24.25. Tit. 1, 2.
He cannot lie, He cannot dye, etc: 1 Timothy 1.17. 2 Timothy 2.13. Act. 17.24, 25.
Tit. 1.2. And he that has learned (in this Case) to Abstract from God,
whatsoever has the least affinity, with the least imperfection found in any
Creature conceives of God best. We must go above all similitudes and likenesses
in his worship.

Secondly, it represents God unto us, per viam Eminentiae, by way of eminency;
putting upon God in the highest degree whatsoever is good in the Creature, and
hereto tend those Affirmative Attributes which are given him, as that he is
most wise, most high, most holy, most just, etc. Acts 7.48. Romans 17.27. etc.
and this is an excellent way to take up God, Acts 7.48. Romans 16.27.
and conceive of him; seeing our hearts cannot conceive his nature, we should
fill them with an impression of his praises; and remember that he we call upon
is an All-seeing, All knowing, All-sufficient God and such a one as he has
proclaimed himself to be, Exodus 34.6. Exodus 34, 6.


Thirdly, if we be yet prone to conceive of Likenesses, it may much help us, if
we conceive of God, as dwelling in the humane nature of Christ: thou may set
before thy mind his humane nature adoring the God head in him, as conceiving
of God in that humane nature thou think of, Colos. 2. 9. John 17.3. John
14.9. Colos. 2.9. John 17.3. John 14.9.


When a man looks into a Crystal Glass, it casts no reflex; but put steel
upon the back of it, and then it casts a reflex: So, when we cannot see God
himself, we must put the Manhood of Christ, as it were a back to his Godhead,
and then it will cast a reflex to us. But here remember, that we do not set
before our minds Christ-man, and so worship him without any more ado: but
conceive of the Man-Christ, and then worship that God head that d^vells in him,
and then we do right.

they want words, they cannot unter themselves in any good method; yea many
times they are dumb, and have nothing to say when they should pray.

David lamented it in himself, Psalm. 77.3. he could not speak, Psalm 77.3. Psalm.
32.3. and 102.5, 6. and 55.2. Isay. 34.14. Psalm. 142.3.143.4.
that is, distinctly and orderly: he was sometimes so unlike himself, in
respect of the form of prayer, as if he had not been the same man, Psalm. 32.3.
and 102.5, 6.7. and 55.2. So Isay. 34.14. And this may proceed from abundance
of pressures, and amazements of the soul, Psalm. 142.3. and 143.4. Yet know,

First, the spirit of prayer may be in thee* and work effectually, Romans 8.26.
when words are wanting, Romans 8.26. Sighs groans, tears, shall supply that
want, as it does in a dumb man, his very dumbness speaks, the moving of his
lips speaks; or in a sick Child, when it cannot speak for pain, yet the sign
it makes, speaks; the watery eye speaks, groans speak, the lifting up of the
eye speaks; the Paren^ knows the meaning, and is moved: So is it in this Case
betwixt God and us. They voice of Prayer is not absolutely necessary; being but
an accident, the substance of Prayer being the desire of the heart; and the
matter is not much, if the door of the heart, be shut when the Closset of the
heart is open.

Secondly, know, that even then God hears those broken prayers, Psalm. 77.1.
and 38, 9. and 39.12. Isay. 38.5. Lament. 5.56. Psalm. 77.1. and 38.9. and
39.12. Isay. 38.5. Lament. 5.56. Psalm. 119.25. verse 159. Isay. 64.7. 2 Timothy
1.6. Hos. 14.2.
He hears chatterings, he hears sighs, he hears tears: And yet in this
Case; First, lament and bewail thy indisposednesse to the duty, as Psalm.
119.25. v. 159. Secondly, yield not to it, but stir up the gift of prayer that
is in thee, Isay. 64.7. 2 Timothy 1.6. Thirdly, take unto you words, Hos. 14.2.
Use the help of some good Form. Some think this to be a stinting of the
Spirit, and a pinnioning of the wings of the Dove. But how is the Spirit
limited in a set-Forme, more then in singing one of David's Psalms? or joining
with others in prayer which is required, 1 Cor. 14.16. A good Horseman may
sometimes use the help of a block to save his stirrup. 1 Cor. 14.16.
Had not set Forms bin lawful, God would not have prescribed them, Numb. 6.24,
25, 26.10.35. Luke 11.1. Math. 26.44.
as he did under the Law; nor Christ and his Servants used them, as they did
under the Gospel. Children learn to go first by a form, before they go alone.
If some men had longer learned to pray by a set form, they would (it is like)
have prayed better without them then they do.



Attention is twofold, Resp. Ames. Cas. Cons. lib. 4, c. 14. Baldwin. de Cas.
Consc. lib. 2. c. 7. Cas. 14.
Actual which is a constant and distinct attending to what we say; or Virtuall
when we proceed in the same disposition, and desire of attending which we had
in the beginning of our Prayers. The former is most laudable, but if the latter
be not wanting, our Prayers shall not be rejected.

Secondly, wandering thoughts and distractions are of two sorts: some arise
through our own negligence, and are voluntarily admitted; these turn our
prayers into Sin; Others there are that arise not so much from our own neglect,
as from weakness and temptation of Satan; they break in upon us uninvited and
are undergon with grief; these exclude not comfort. Our devotions shall not be
loft, because of such deviations. God is much delighted in our labor of Love,
Heb. 6.10.
Heb. 6.10. that is, in those duties, which out of Love to him we perform with
labor, and striving. Those prayers are not always best pleasing to God,
wherein we please our selves best, or which we perform wi^h most facility and
attention. The worst prayers that we make (to our own sense,) speed often best;
and then we pray most happily, when we arise most humbled. Those prayers that
we perform with mighty conflicts, and oppositions are the most acceptable
prayer. God who puts all our Tears into his bottle, all our sighs into his
bosom, all our words into his Register, will also spread that sincerity, that
zeal, with which thou entered'st into thy prayers, over thy whole prayers: and
where thy zeal is too short, Christ will spread his prayers over thine, and
say, Give him Father that which he has faithfully desired in my name; and
where he has failed through wanderings, and negligences, there Father forgive
him though he hears not what he said: Only be careful to prevent these
wanderings what may be.

First; by fixing thy heart on God, to whom thou speak, bring thy soul if it
be possible to David's temper, Psalm. 57.7.
Psalm. 57.7. my heart is fixed O Lord my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise. Give God the heart, six it on him, and the Will will command the
thoughts. Friends think of their Friends, and cannot but think of them.

Secondly, Keep your thoughts within compass at other times, suffer them not
to roave about without check; if they have got a custom of ranging, they will
not readily be called home when you would have them. The wise man's heart is at
his right hand, (says Solomon); Eccles. 10.2.
he has it not to seek when he should use it about holy dudyes as the Fool
has. Do in this Case, as you use to do with your horse, when you are to go a
journey, have him under bridle, and suffer him not to run up and down the
pastures wildly. Dr. Preston.
The best way (says one) to be rid of bad thoughts in thy prayers, is, not to
entertain them out of thy prayers; if at other times thou entertaynest them
willingly, they will be entertavned in thy prayers against thy will.

Thirdly, bring a fervent and zealous Spirit with thee to Prayer: (...) the pot
that is full of liquor in the heat of Summer, is troubled, and polluted with
many flies; but if that liquor were hot and boiling, those flies would not be
so busy, about it. Whilst our prayers are cold, we are troubled with idle
cogitations, but if our minds were inflamed with zeal, it would abandon all
those vanities.

Fourthly, be not long in Prayer; Bald. Cas. Cons. lib. 1. c. 7. Cas. 14. Aug.
Epist. 121. Cassian. Instit. lib. 2. c. 10.
If you find your thoughts roaving, the shorter we are, the less apt to
wander. Religious Persons think it best (says Cassian,) that their prayers be
short, but frequent; the one, that praying to God we might continually be
joined unto him; the other, that by shortness we may avoid the Devils darts
which he throws especially at us, when we are praying. So Austin writes of
the Primitive Christians in Egypt, that they had their short, but frequent
prayers which he calls Ejaculations, dart-like: least their intention should
relent with long continuance. A short Prayer and much Spirit, is better then a
long Prayer and little Spirit.

Fifthly, bewail the loosnesse of thy nature to the God of Heaven: and before
thou endest, desire God to pardon thy wanderings for Christ his sake, and so
though thou go limping away from God as Jacob did, yet be not discouraged,
thou shall carry away the blessing. Notwithstanding these scruples, be not
disheartened; the bringing forth of a right prayer is like the bringing forth
of a Child (says one); in which there is much pain, and anguish, but after
the birth joy. And thus much of the difficulty of the duty in general, now to
Particulars.

Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find etc.

Ask, Seek, Knock; each Act has a suitable promise annexed, Ask and you
shall have, etc: each of which promises we will carry along with the duty, to
which it is made; as they lie in the Text.

Ask and you shall have.

The Duty is (...) Ask ye, and this a work of the mouth: Albeit words are not
absolutely necessary in prayer (as we have showed in the former Doctrine); yet
if we can speak, we are to take unto us words, and use our tongues in the best
manner that we can. God expects that we should express our desires by word of
mouth unto him, Let that be the note.

Open thy mouth wide, Psalm. 81.10. Psalm. 3. and 5.1, 2. and 19.14. and 17.1.
and 57.7, 8,
and I will fill it. And this the Godly have done, as might be showed in
infinite examples; the frequent mentioning of mouth, lips, words, voice, cry,
call, in Scripture, in relation to prayer, is sufficient proof.

God knows the heart, what need is there of words?

Cor. 14, 15, 16.
1 Cor. 14, 15, 16.

Secondly, words add more force to our inward devotion, they stir up, and
increase the Affection of the heart. As the beams of the Sun wax hotter by
reflection; so does the desires of the heart (says one) by expression. Pet.
Mart. in 1 Samuel 1.12.
To this purpose speaks Peter Martyr, Though there is no need at all of
voice, when we make our private prayers unto God, in regard that God hears
and beholds our hearts, and minds; yet sometimes (says he) it may be used
to very good purpose, because it may fall out, that we may languish in our
prayers, and our minds may be wearyed, which the voice again will refresh,
and give thereunto a new vigor.

Ejaculations of the Spirit, and devout thoughts, and meditations, neglecting
the use of the tongue in prayer, are too blame, and that not only for the
Reasons before mentioned, but for that they neglect to employ their tongue to
that use, for which it was given, which is to bless God withal, Jam. 3.9.
Psalm. 16.9.57.8.108.1.
Jam. 3.9. (in which regard by an excellency the tongue is termed, Man's glory,
Psalm. 16.9. and 57.8. and 108.1.)

Some indeed have thought it a wise course in the Confession of our secret
sins (residing in the heart) not to use the outward voice, for fear of
acquainting Satan with them thereby; and so he over-hearing us, will take
advantage of our words, and apply himself in his temptations to that, wherein
he sees us likest to sin. But albeit he knows not our thoughts directly and
by immediate insight, (as God does,) but gathers them by the motions, and
manifestations of the body; yet considering that he himself is the original of
all evil, mediately, Robins. Essay on Tempt.
or immediately; it is like, that by confession of our secret and bosom
sins, we shall acquaint him with no news, but with his own work in us; nor
is it probable that any of us have managed our secret sins with such privacy,
but that he by some circumstance or other knows well enough what they were,
and are; and therefore it is good wisdom in us, to prefer the best manner of
acknowledging our sins to God, and for our best advantage, before the fear of
discovering our sins to Satan. Wherefore, says a Reverend Divine, for the
future, Tho. Full. his mixed. Cont. Med. 17.
I am resolved to acknowledge my darlings faults though alone, yet aloud that
the Devil who rejoiced in partly-knowing my sin, may be grieved more by
hearing the expression of my sorrow. As for any advantage he may make from my
confession, this comforts me; Gods goodness in assisting me, will be above
Satan's malice in assaulting me.

Ask.

Qui non eget non petit (says Luther): Multa petentibus desunt multa.
This then implies a sense of want, and gives us to understand that,

True Prayer must be accompanied with a sense of the want of those things we
crave. When we come to God by Prayer, a sense of those things we ask, must be
brought with us. This is required, Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, i. e. if
any be sensible of the lack of it, and desires it. Jam. 1.5.


In the sense of want, have Gods Servants come before him continually. So
Jehosophat, We know not what to do, 2 Chro. 20.12. 1 Samuel 1.6.15. Psalm. 60.11.
Luke 15, 16, 17. Math. 9.12.
2 Chronicles. 20.12. So Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.6.15. So David, Psalm. 60.11. So the
Prodigal Luke 15.17. So all the Godly from time to time.

This is that that puts us in a praying condition; for first, no man will ask
that which he supposes he has no need of Math. 9.12. the proud Pharisees
begged nothing, though he pretended thankfulness, for he had no sense of the
want of any thing, Luke 18.11. Revel. 3.17. Genesis 4.26.
Luke 18.11. So the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.17. Seth called his Son Enosh
that is miserable or calamitous, Genesis 4.26. And then men began to call upon
God. Felt-misery, makes men to be religious.

Secondly; This is that that humbles us, and causes us to be lowly in our own
eyes; It is the having of some good that puffs up, not the want of it. The
Publican being sensible of his wants fell prostrate on the ground, Luke 18.13.
Jam. 4.6.
and to be humbled thus, is necessary to the offering up of an acceptable
prayer, Jam. 4.6.

Thirdly, without a sense of the want of what we ask, we shall never earnestly
desire it, nor use the means for the obteyning of it. It is want that makes us
to seek out, as it did that man we heard of before, who went to his Friend at
Midnight. Now you have heard, It is importunate prayer that is prevayling.

Fourthly, should we have what we crave, yet without sense of want of the
mercy, we should never prize it. Alexander was wont to say that his hungry
dinner was his suppers sauce. Unless a man bring this sauce with him, mercy
would be no mercy, Christ no Christ, Heaven no Heaven: but this want makes
common blessings sweet; as Darius said of the puddle water he drank in his
flight from Alexander, that he never drank better liquor.

Now there is a threefold want that must be taken special notice of, when we
come to God by Prayer.

First of the blessing it self, which we desire to have be it outward or
inward, Corporal or Spiritual, Temporal or Eternal; of what kind soever it
be, we must be sensible, and have a feeling of it, and value it accordingly; as
for outward, and bodily wants of health, wealth, strength, and things of the
like nature; these are not the greatest, and yet usually they most pinch, and
of them we take most notice, and first complain: but Spiritual wants are the
greater, albeit least regarded, yet they pinch most at last. How many ramp like
lions when the world does frown upon them? but under the want of Knowledge,
Faith Repentance, and other Graces of Gods Spirit, yea of Christ himself, they
couch as Issachar under his burden, and lie down to sleep as Jonah did in the
bottom of the ship; but a true valuation should be had of our wants, and of
our greatest wants should we most complain.

A second want that we must take notice of, is our own disability to help our
selves, Psalm. 60.11.
and the disability of any other Creature in Heaven or Earth to supply our
wants. You have heard before, that till God be up, no Creature can arise to
help us: David saw this, and found this, and protests against the expectation
of help from any other Creature in Earth or Heaven, Psalm. 73.25, 26.
Psalm. 73.25, 26. and being sensible of his own inability to help himself, and
of the inability of any other Creature to supply his need, he finds his soul
in a sit frame, to approach before God, verse 28.
verse 28. It is good for me to draw near to God.

Thirdly, of our own unworthiness to obtain that we crave, Dan. 9 8, 9.
we must be sensible. There is as great a want of worth in the best of us, why
God should supply our wants, as there is of ability in our selves to supply
them: I am not worthy (says Jacob) of the least of all the mercyes, and of all
the truth which thou have showed unto thy Servant, Genesis 32.10. I am but dust
and ashes, Genesis 32.10. Genesis 18.27. Psalm. 22.6. Pro. 30.2. Math. 8.8. Luke
15.19. Luke 18.14.
(says Abraham) when he came to speak with God, Genesis 18.27. I am a worm and
no man (says David, Psalm. 22.) I am more brutish then any man (said Agur) Pro.
30. I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, (said the humble
Centurion,) Math. 8.8. I am not worthy to be called thy Son (said the
Prodigal) in suing to his Father, Luke 15.19. Lord be merciful to me a Sinner
(l;aid the poor Publican, Luke 18.14. and he it was that went home justified
rather then that proud Pharisee, who boasted of his own worthynesse;

You see what wants you are to be sensible of, when you come to pray. Now let
us apply this.

ignorant Papist (and I have heard the like of an ignorant and profane
Protestant) who not knowing how to pray as he ought, would every morning on his
knees repeat the Alphabet, A. B. C. D. etc: and then conclude, Lord put all
these letters together, and of them spell syllables, and of syllables make
words, to make such a sense as thou know may be most to thy glory, and my
good. But we have learned better things, we must spell our own wants out of the
Cross Row, and put them up to Heaven, in the name and mediation of his Son, by
the assistance of his Spirit, who will teach us to spel, and put together, and
then God will read them.

It is a degree of unthankfullnesse to thank God too General, and not to
insist upon the weight, and measure, and proportion and goodness of every
particular Mercy; so it is an irreverent and inconsiderate thing (says a
learned, and grave Divine) not to take particular wants into our thoughts, and
into our Prayers, that so we may take a holy knowledge, that we are worth
nothing, worthy of nothing, have nothing but from God, and by Prayer.

Math. 6.8.
as our Savior tells us, Math. 6.8. What need we then particularize?

vain babbling, (but not against praying,) and from thence stirs us up to an
earnest and serious performance of the Duty. The truth is, we do not make known
our wants to God, to inform him of that he knows not, but we manifest our
obedience, and duty unto him in running that course of getting good things
which he has prescribed, Jer. 29.11.12. Phil. 4.6.
Jer. 29.11, 12. Phil. 4.6. and likewise show that we our selves do know,
(albeit not altogether as we ought) what it is we stand in need of. This is
that which is required.

etc: we make some kind of howling, (as God speaks of Israel, Hos. 4.14.
Hos. 4.14) but therein we are more like beasts then men. There is a want in
all outward things, in riches, pleasures, and delights of this world, Isay.
55.2.
Isay. 55.2. that want we are not sensible enough of, much less of the want of
the graces of Gods Spirit. In every power and faculty of the soul, there is a
great want; in every gift and grace of the Spirit, (as in Knowledge, Faith,
Repentance, Love, Joy, Meekness, Patience) much is wanting. And in every duty
we perform, Public, private, we come exceedingly behind hand, but where is
that he, or she, that bewailes these wants? The Church wants, the State wants,
shall I tell you what? what need I? A Carpenter in rearing up a Fabric,
finding his work not to come home after much knocking, asked his Son what it
wanted? he answered: a good workman. This is the maine want indeed, we are
naught, stark naught at praying, the Lord in mercy mend us, then all will be
mended, but till we are more sensible of our wants, there is little hope of our
amendment. Go to Christ, bewail thy wants, confess thy nothingnesse: If he
ask thee thy Name, say my name is sickness; thou art a Physician, on blessed
Jesus heal me: my Name is Lost, and thou came to seek such, o blessed Jesus
find me: my name is want, and thou art fulness, o blessed fulness out of
thy store supply me: my Name is Beggar, and thou art Bounty, out of thy
bountyfullnesse relieve me. Etiamsi non sum dignus, nihilominus tamen sum
indigens (said learned Pomeran.) Such a kind of begging must be in praying, as
in imported in the word here used.

Aske]: Even as Beggars are wont to beg an Alms in a humble and submissive way;
Whence we take up this note,

What we would have, we must crave. We must ask as Beggars do an Alms: humbly
craving it from the hands of God.

What is prayer? but a craving of Blessings from the hands of God in the name
of Christ. In some places, it is said to be a calling upon God, Genesis
12.18.21.33. Psalm. 4.1. and 50.15. Phil. 4.6.
Genesis 12.8. and 21.33. Psalm. 4.1. and 50.15. but it may not be thought to be
such a calling as men make for a due debt; but a making known of our Requests
to him that is the Master of Requests, by humble Petition, Phil. 4.6. wherein
we renounce all others titles; and rely wholly upon his Bounty.

Thus the Saints, when they have come to God have used the Tone of Beggars, and
observed the Posture of Beggars. Psalm. 119.58. Dan. 9.57, 18, 19. 2 Timothy 1.18.
Exodus 9.19. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Ezra. 9.5. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 95.9. Mark. 10.7. Luke
22.41. Acts 9.40. and 20.36. Ephesians. 3.14. Math. 6.11.
David coming to God, intreates, beseeches, Psalm. 119.58. Daniell putting up
his supplication to Heaven, beggs for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17, 18, 19. and
St. Paul praying for Onesiphorus, cries out, The Lord reward him, and show him
mercy, 2 Timothy 1.

And the posture of Peggars they have likewise used when they have prayed,
spreading out the hands, bowing their knees in a craving way, as Beggars do.
Exodus 9.29. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Ezrae 9.5. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 95.9. Mark 10.7. Luke
22.41. Acts 9.40. and 20.36. and 21.5. Ephesians. 3.14. And in this Posture was the
good Emperor Constantine, stamped upon his coin, kneeling with his hands lift
up to Heaven.

it shall be given us upon our asking, Math. 6.11.
given) not merited. So our Savior has taught us to beg daily bread, for we
earne not what we eat, not what we put on: that which God gives, that we
gather.

Oramus is often in their mouths, but they are like sturdy Beggars, who come
with their Mandamus, and rather threaten then beg; Such Beggars deserve rather
a house of Correction, then and Alms, but we will spare them at present.

a nest of Beggars; from our very conception to our grave, we are in a begging
and craving condition, in the Womb we crave nourishment, and then we crave
Liberty by birth; and at our birth; our weeping is a craving; by that we
testify what an indigent creature is come into the world; and being in the
world we live by begging still, now food, then clothing, then Physic etc:
when I see a Beggar by the way, or at the door craving an Alms, why should I
despise him, seeing I am no better? Nay,

Solomon did out of the Sluggards Garden. Pro. 24.40. Pro. 18.23.
) The poor speaks (says Solomon) with humble supplications and intreates (if
poverty pinch him to the purpose) he stands not upon a flaunting and
rhetorical style; nor does he boast of his good parts and excellencyes, but
cries, Good Master or Mistress something of your Charity; one morsel of
bread, or draught of your drink; one small piece of Silver toward the relief
of a poor distressed Creature, without house or harbor, lame and impotent,
and no way able to help my self; your Charity cannot be bestowed better then
upon such a Creature as I am: Now God bless you and all you have, and defend
you from your Enemies; now for Christ's sake good Master something, etc: when
thou hear one thus begging of thee bethink thy self, Alas! I am in a greater
want then this beggar is; I am deprived of Heaven and happiness, turned out of
house and home, driven out of Paradise for sin and disobedience, maimed and
wounded in every power and part both of soul and body, and no way able to help
my self in the least, my help must be from God alone; to him I Will fly, on him
I Will call, and learn to say as this Beggar does: my eloquence shall be my
sighs and groans: Rhetorical strains better become Hypocrites then such a
wretched Creature as I am: my heart shall speak, my eyes shall speak, and my
tongue shall vent the troubles of my heart, in the best language that misery
will give leave: Lord be merciful to me a sinner, a woeful miserable wretched
sinner, Oh look upon my affliction and my trouble, one crumb of comfort, one
drop of mercy for me, wretched creature that I am: thou can not give to one
that stands in more need of mercy then my self: for Christ his sake pity me,
and succor me. Thus follow thy suite again, and again; and think thus with
thy self, Does that beggar move me with his begging: why shall I doubt that I
shall not move God with my praying?

And as I may learn of a Beggat what to say, so I may learn of him what to
do. I see a Cripple follow me on his stilts, hang on my coat: he shows me his
wounds and soars to move compassion, beggs in rags, not in robes: so will I
do, etc. Let a poor Beggar come to a rich man's gate, be delayed, no answer
given; yet he or she waits patiently the time: sometimes he sits him down, and
will be parching and mending, knitting or knocking, and so between times will
be begging, and working; let him be denied, and bid begone: let him be
threatened, chidden, frowned upon, yet he continues begging, he will not away
without an Alms: let any thing be given him, (be it never so coorse or small)
he is thankful, and blesses God and you: if nothing, yet he will leave a
blessing at the door, (if he be truly humbled under the sense of Poverty.) And
shall not we do thus? Does God delay me, shall not I wait patiently his
leisure, without surceasing my suite? does he frown upon me, chide me, bid me
begone? yet I will hold out still till I obtain mercy: Does he give me any
thing? I will b^esse his name; shall he deny me all together, and give me
nothing; yet I will not murmur nor repine, nor charge God with unkindnesse; but
praise his name as Job did, God has given, Job. 1.21.
God has taken, Blessed be his name.

And yet in all things I may not be like the Beggar at the door, neither in
that he says, nor in that he does. Not in that he says; for his form is
Customary (usually) and fashionable, he has but one form or kind of Prayer
for every door he comes unto: Formal Prayer is no Prayer in Gods account. A
Form of Prayer, I may comfortably Use; but formality in using of that Form
God likes not; nor yet that I should always tie my self to one Form,
(whatever my occasions are;) The Beggar tells us that he never troubled us
before, and promises never to come again unto our doors. I will not say this,
nor promise this. I come to God to beg pardon for this or that sin committed;
I reckon up so many, Original, Actual; Omissions, Commissions: God pardons
them, and forgives them; and yet I must say (with that learned and reverend
Divine in his heavenly Hymn that he made on his sick bed to God, Relation of
the Life and Death of Dr. Donn before his first, vol. of Sermon.
) when thou have done, thou have not done, for I have more: still I must beg,
and daily beg at the throne of grace, for mercy, till my last thread is spun;
and I be landed on the shore, and when that is done, then I have done; I Will
beg no more.

nor will I imitate the Beggar in all things that he does; for too too often he
plays the Counterfeit, and tells us of great losses that he has had, when it
is nothing so: God hates Hypocrisy in every duty, in none more then in Prayer;
he knows our hearts better then our selves; He Beggs to spend and consume on
his Lusts, to frisk and skip; to drink, and bowze. I will not spend on my
Lusts, what I have got by begging.

And thus I have showed you wherein we are to be like Beggars, and wherein not.
There are some Objections we meet withal before we end the point.

Isay. 45.11. Resp. Hos. 12.3.4.
Isay. 45.11. and that is no Begging of him.

That only sets forth the power of Prayer, as we read, Hos. 12.3, 4. Such is
the efficacy and power of it, as that it, after such a sort, commands God, and
has power over him.

Thou him; Thou art this, and Thou have done thus, which familiar word Beggars
use not: and they come boldly into his presence, which Beggars may not do if
the Personage be great.

humble familiarity, and in a craving way. Gods indulgency toward his, is the
only ground of this honor, and favor, proper only to favorites; yea such it
is, that Princes would scarce take well from their nearest Favorites, much
less Petitioners, whose place is without the gate, or in the outward Court,
etc. But we have liberty to come into his Hall, his Parlour, yea
Presence Chamber, nay nearer yet, into his bosom, and there leave our Requests
with him, Psalm. 140.13.
Psalm. 140.13. Heb. 10.22.

But was not Beggary forbidden in Israel, Heb. 10.22. Obj.
Deuteronomy. 14.4.

So some indeed understand that place, (for Ebion is a Beggar) the Charity that
God required in Israel was that no man should be put to that necessity, as to
be an Ebionite, a Beggar. And yet (says Luther) Judaei habuere jus mendicandi,
The Jews had a License to beg; they had a Breve, and might gather, (for they
had a Covenant and might plead with God;) And we (as you see in my Text) have a
License to beg, more fairly written and granted then they. We have wholesome
Laws against street beggary. Notwithstanding, Beggary is become almost a
Calling, (for some Parents bring up their Children to it, they teach them what
to say, how to look, how to lie, how to cry;) Oh that we were as wise for
Heaven, to practice this Spiritual Beggary: we have better encouragements then
they; A License which they want; a Law for it, they have none; Of common
Beggary we say, It is the easiest, but poorest trade; of this, It is the
hardest, yet the richest. Let us follow it, we may do it without sin or shame.

Promise annexed to this Asking, is Giving, 2. Sam. 22.4. Deuteronomy. 4.7. Psalm.
86.5. Isay. 58.9. Jer. 3.19. and 29.11, 12. Ezekiel. 36, 37.
[ Ask and it shall be Given you] and here first from the Precedence we may
observe, that Asking must go before Giving: (...) has the Precedence of (...).

Deuteronomy. 4.7. Psalm. 86.5. Isay. 58.9. Jer. 3.19. and 29.11, 12. Ezekiel. 36, 37.
Still God will be sought unto, albeit, it be in his heart, to do a people good,
and in his hand, yet Prayer must go before, as the means to effect it. Yea
Christ himself was to ask of the Father, the world for his Inheritance, Psalm.
2.8. The Father intended from all Eternity to make him the heir of all (nor was
there any danger of disinheriting him) yet he must beg that boon. Psalm. 2.8.


Psalm. 50.5. and 81.16. Jam. 1.5. Jer. 33.3. Pro. 2.3, 5.
then to give upon our asking Psalm, 50.5. and 81.16. Jam. 1.5. Jer. 33.3. Pro.
2.3, 5.

Secondly, God delights to have his favors sued for, that so (though we cannot
give a full price, yet) we may take some pains for them, and obtain, (though
not for the merit, yet) by the means of Petitions.

Thirdly, Austin renders another Reason, Deus non dat nisi Petenti, ne det non
cupienti. God withholds from them that ask not, lest he should give to them
that desire not.

Isay. 65.1.24. he tarryed not till he was entreated Isay. 65.1.24. Math.
14.13, 14. Mark. 3.3. Luke 7.13. John 5.6. and 9.6.
And in the Gospel we have many examples of such as Christ cured undesired,
Math, 14.13, 14. Mark 3.3. Luke 7.13. John 5, 6. and 9.6.

As for that of Isay, St. Paul tells us that the Prophet was very bold in so
speaking, Romans 10.20. (which yet is not to be taken in the worst sense, for
though it were boldly said; yet it was truly said) but that is to be understood
of preventing Grace; Resp. Romans 10.20.
in bringing the Gentiles within the pale of the Church; but now we are upon
Gods ordinary proceeding with man (within the pale) and so God answers not
(ordinarily) bu^ to our Petitions and Prayers.

Secondly, the Prophet adds (in the same place) I am sought of them that
asked not for me importing that we never seek to him for Grace, till we are
effectually called by this grace, howbeit, no sooner is any effectually called,
but he presently prays, as did Paul, Acts 9.11.
Acts 9.11.

And for our Saviors practice, he shows therein his readynesse to cure our
sinful souls; that he might the better draw men to seek salvation from him,
Math. 8.16, 17
Math. 8.16, 17.

But Gods Prevention is not Dispensation: it quits not our duty; we must look
at his Commandment, not at his Grace; and his commandment is, that we should
pray unto him; run that course for obteyning good things that he has
prescribed, Jer. 29.11, 12.
Jer. 29.11, 12. And although God gives many unsought favors, yet it is not
safe to stay till God bestow mercyes without asking; though he gives oftentimes
unaskt, yet he lets us often want, because we ask not, Jam. 4.2.

Jam. 4.2.
they deceive themselves. If thou have no mouth to ask, God will have no hand
to give; we must ask before he answers; Psalm. 81.
how can he answer us if we say nothing to him? Thou come to the house of
God, hear there what God says to the Congregation: but expect not that God
should Answer thee that have not been with him by Prayer before. God speaks in
the Sermon to all, but he answers (that is, applies himself comfortably by his
Spirit) only to him that has been with him with his Petition before hand, the
like might be said in other Particulars. If thou restrainest Prayer from God,
and be one of them spoken of, Job. 15.4.
Job. 15.4. wonder not if God restrain blessings from thee, he will not cramb
his blessings down thy throat whether thou will or no. Psalm. 81.
Open thy mouth wide (says God) and then I Will fill it: spare to ask, and
spare to speed.

etc: but how came thou by these things? Unless that Prayer had a hand, yea
a chief hand in getting of them, the purchase has a flaw in it. Conversion it
self is not had without praying (albeit it be Christ's Prayers that obteynes
that, and not ours.)

tongue-tyed. Look as in bodily diseases, we count him desperate, and past hope
that is speechless. So is it in Spiritual: when God means to bestow his
graces and gifts on us, then he stirrs up in us desires after grace, dealing
with us therein, as we do with our Children; he shows us pleasing things, that
we may cry for them, and have them. He looks that we should say, I pray Father
give it me, before he gives it. His eyes are so upon his, that his ears are
exercised with their cries, Psalm. 34.15.
Psalm. 34.15. the noise thereof must open his eyes, which otherwise are shut.
All the world is but a dead body, till God act it: and all lie dead, till God
be acted by Prayer. None of Gods Ordinances, (the word, the Sacraments) have
Life in them, till Prayer quickens them. All the comforts in the Creature
sleep, till we extract comfort out of them with this Limbeck. If then Gods eyes
be shut, his hands shut, all shut, thou may conclude, it is because thy
mouth is shut, and heart shut: for as God will not give unless we ask, so
neither can we we ask as we ought, and God not give, which is the second
Observation from this branch of the Promise, It shall be given you.

He does not say (perhaps) (as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus) or it may be
given you, Acts 8.22.
but it shall be, doubt it not: So then,

There is no denial upon true and fervent Prayer. The Lord is night to all
that call upon him, says the Psalmist; and he will fulfill the desires of such
as fear him, Psalm. 145.18, 19.
Psalm. 145.18, 19. He hears the desire of the humble, he prepares their heart,
and causes his ear to hear, as we have it, Psalm. 10.17. And else where he
tells us that the eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, Psalm. 10.17.
and his ears are open unto their cries, Psalm. 34.15. or in their Prayers (as
some read) intimating his readiness, Psalm. 34.15. Aures ejus in precibus
eorum. Isay. 65.24.
to hear and grant what we desire of him (according to that of the Prophet,
Isay. 65.24. before they call I will answer, and whilst they are yet speaking,
I will hear,) signifying thereby (as some others would) that though our Prayers
are so weak that they cannot pierce the Clouds, Dr. Playfer.
and much less enter into the ears of the Lord of Hoasts, yet that he will bow
down, and incline his ears unto our Prayers, as he did to Josuahs, whose
Prayers went up to the Sun, and no farther (as it seems by that speech): Sun,
stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, Jsou.
10.12.
Jos. 10.12. yet the ears of the Lord were in his Prayers, so that there was
no day like that, before it, or after it, wherein the Lord hearkened unto the
voice of a man, verse 14.
verse 14.

Our Savior confirms this truth with an earnest asseveration, Verily, Verily,
whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John
16.23. 1. John 5.14, 15.
John 16.23. And of this the faithful have been confident, 1 John 5, 14, 15.
This is the Confidence that we have in him that if we ask any thing according
to his Will he hears us: and if we know that he hears us in whatsoever we
ask, we know that we have the Petitions that we desire of him, Jam. 1.5. and
5.14, 15.
Jam. 1.5. and 5.14.15.

I might here (as a real demonstration of this Point) produce many hundred
instances of Gods hearing the Prayers of his Servants in all ages of the world;
but I shall not insist thereon. Something has been before said of this
Argument, and something more shall be said afterward. I shall give you the
Reasons.

his own Name. Psalm. 65.2.
He is styled a God that hears Prayers, Psalm. 65.2. Nor can he deny himself;
If he should deny the Prayers of the faithful, he should deny himself: for it
is his Spirit that prays in them, Romans 8.26.
Romans 8.26. besides he has made himself a debtor to us by promise, that if we
call on him he will hear us, Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15.
Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15. And can we think that God has no care to pay his
debts? will he after the fashion of the world dye in our debts think you?

Secondly, Christ intercedes for such unto his Father as Paul did for Onesimus
to Philemon, Philem. verse 10.12.
I beseech thee for this my Son whom I have begotten in my bonds, etc: So I
beseech thee for this poor soul, whom I have begotten in my blood, thou
therefore receive him, receive his prayer, grant him his request, that is mine
own bowels. Now Christ was ever heard in whatsoever he asked: besides, he
perfumes their Prayers with the merits of his own precious passion, so that
they ascend into Gods presence, and cannot but find acceptance, Revel. 8.3.
John 11.41. Revel. 8.3. John 11.41.


Thirdly and lastly, add to this that which our Savior tells his Disciples,
John 16.26, 27. The Father himself loves you, John 16.26, 27.
because you have loved me: and thereupon assures them that they shall ask
nothing of the Father in his name, but it shall be granted them. The Godly are
his favorites, and have his ear; and from specialty of favor it is, uthat
God hears Prayers, Psalm. 119.149. Psalm. 119.149: Use.


What greater encouragement would you desire to stir you up, to be abundant in
Prayer, then assurance of Audience and answer. Hope to speed is a spurr to
Suitors; here is more then Hope, Assurance. Esther had great encouragement from
Ahashuerosh, Esth. 5.2, 3.
when he said unto her, What is thy Petition, and it shall be given thee? Ask
of me my Mother (said Solomon to Queen Bathsheba) I will not say thee nay, 1
King. 2.20. Prayer is our Bathsheba, 1 King. 2.20.
and God says thus unto it, Ask and I will not deny thee. It is but ask and
have, what can you desire more? King Stephen said of the Bishop of Salisbury,
that he should be weary of craving, Dan. Chron. p. 75.
ere he would be weary of giving. It is thus between God and us: we are sooner
weary of asking, then God is of bestowing blessings on us. He is worthily
miserable that will not make himself happy by Asking. Prayer is a Key, we may
by help op it take out of Gods treasure plentiful mercy, both for our selves,
and ours. Now let me ask you, what lack you? what is it you want? would you
have graces increased, would you have corruptions subdued, your Friends and
Children blessed, the glory of the Church restored, and more beautifyed? pray
for these things, and they shall be effected. Eccles. 10.19.
Prayer is not only our Key, but our Money too, and Money answers all things
(says Solomon.) It bears the Mastery all the world over: none so admired,
none so soon admitted as he that is well monyed. It was commonly said in
Greece, that not Philip, but his Money won their Cities. Ask what you will,
desire what you will, command what you will, money will give a satisfactory
answer to all. Money of all stamps was intended, and commended, for facility of
exchange amongst all nations of the world: they who have good money, need not
want any thing, Prayer is our exchange, our Spiritual coin, and there is of
all sorts and stamps, Apprecations, Deprecations, Intercessions; mental,
vocal, vital: public private, this answers all things. Prayer is our
Spiritual coin, bring that with you and you have command of all the Market.
Private prayer is our Silver, Public prayer is our Gold; Fasting and Prayer
is our refined Gold: bring money in your hands of all stamps: ply God with your
prayers, public, private, etc: you shall have any thing in exchange for it,
that the Market affoards, and what will not Gods Market affoard (unless it be
Apes and Peacocks). Solomon had wisdom for it; Jacob had bread and clothes
for it; Isaac had a good Wife for it; Hannah had a Samuel for it; Hezekiah had
long life for it, and that which all the world will not fetch, prayer will
purchase; you shall have the Holy Ghost for it as follows, verse 13. Any
thing, any thing, you may have Gods Quidcunque. That which Zedekiah said to his
Courtiers flatteringly, God will perform to his faithful Servants really, The
King is not he that can do any thing against you; Ier. 38.5.
Luther found it so, potuit quod voluit, so it was said of him, that he was a
man that could have what he would at the hands of God, so mighty was he in
prayer, and from his own experience he might well say, as usually he was wont,
that Prayer was after a sort Omnipotent, whatsoever God could do, that could
prayer do, for it commands God, and yet are we backward.

It is storved of Severus the Emperor, Quid est curnihil petis, etc: Lamprid.
in vita ejus.
that it was more troublesome to him to be asked nothing, then to give much,
and that he would blame his Courtiers for asking nothing of him, and will them
to ask of him, that they might have no cause of complaint against him. Christ
disliketh our dullness to this duty, and blames his Disciples for their
backwardness in asking, John 16.24.
John 16.24. hitherto you have asked nothing, i. e. to what you should have
asked, and in so doing might have obtained, Ask therefore (says Christ) that
your joy may be full. Let us come to him, and he will not send us away without
our errand.

Jer. 11.14. Jer. 11.14. Resp.


What has been answered formerly to this Objection, I hope is not forgotten. I
have showed you that God may delay his Friends, and yet not deny them. Delays
must be distinguished and differenced from Denyalls.

Secondly, that some have prayed, and have not obtained, is undeniable: but
then our coin has not been current money: either our Silver is but dross,
Isay. 1.22. the metal base, and adulterate, Isay. 1.22.
our Prayers mixed with Infidelity, Impenitency, Pride, Uncharitablnesse, etc.
and such coin will not pass with God, Luke 18.11, 12.
Jam. 1.5. 1 Timothy 2.8. Acts 8.22.

Or it wants weight, it is clipped within the Ring, our prayers are cold, and
careless, without zeal, and fervency; Jam. 1.5. 1 Timothy 2.8. Acts 8.22. James
5.16, 17. Math. 6.5, 6. Job. 27. 10. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.26, 27. John 14.13, 14.
and 16.23.
they are discontinued and intermitted, we pray by fits and starts: Will the
Hypocrite pray always, Job. 27.10.

Or else, our money has not Caesar's stamp, it was never in the mint, they are
not the voice of the spirit, but of sinful corrupt nature: or not put up in
the name of Christ, John 14.13.14. and 16.23. if our coin be faulty in any of
these particulars, it passes not; no more does our Prayers.

Thirdly, we come for that which Gods markets will not affoard, we ask things
dishonest, unjust, unlawful: God has not such commodityes in his market for
those that come; he will not put such things into our hands. His basest
commodityes he puts off to his worst customers (as Quails to rebellious
Israel) he answers them acccording to the stumbling-blo^k in their hearts,
Ezekiel. 14.3, 4.
Ezekiel. 14.3, 4. but he deals not so with his Friends. When the fiery
Disciples would have fire to come down from Heaven to consume their Enemies;
God had not for them. Luke 9.54. Jam. 4.3.
So when we ask good things for sinful and wicked ends, as Jam. 4.3. In these
and such like cases our Prayers are not heard: but if we ask any thing that
Gods market affoards, (and his market is a well furnished market) we may have
of him. What Zozomon spoke of Apoll^nius, that he never asked any thing of God
in all his Life that he obtained not, is an honor that belongs to all Gods
Children, and faithful ones.

But whilst I press a price, mistake me not, as if these things which God
bestows were to be purchased with money: this was Simon Magus his error; I
resemble Prayer to Money, but it is Figuratively, and in an Allegory, for that
it does what money can, it answers all things, but not according to the worth
thereof: that which we obtain by Prayer is not so much bought, and sold, as
given, therefore our Savior says here in my Text, it shall be given you,
giving us to understand thus much.

What we obtain by asking is not of our deserving, but of Gods vouchafing,
John 3.27. and 16.23. Jam. 1.5. Match. 6.11. Reas. Philem. 22.
Joh. 3.27. and 16.23. Jam. 1.5.17. Math. 6.11. Philem. 22. Thus you see, that
albeit we obtain blessings by our Prayers, yet not for our Prayers, that is
not for the merit of them.

1. We have told you before that prayer is a begging of blessings from the
Lord: now what does the Beggar deserve for his beging? when we give an Alms to
one, that beggs of us, do we do it for any worth in him, or desert on his part,
or out of mere compassion of his misery?

Secondly, Gods blessings are of such a worth, that no money is of value with
them, therefore he will rather give them, then fell them to us.

But we read of some that they are worthy, Luke 7.4. for whom thou should^st do
this.

But he, of whom they said this, and who best knew himself, said that he was
unworthy: they held him so, but he saw himself better them they. Again it is
one thing to deserve of men, and another thing to deserve of God.

to God the Scripture counts some worthy, as Luke 21.36. Acts 5.4. 2 These. 1.5.
Revel. 3.4. Colos. 1.10. 1 These. 2.10. Luke 21.36 Acts 5.4. 2 These. 1.5. Colos.
1.10. Revel. 3, 4. Resp. Math. 3.8.


This word (...) worthy, does not intend any merit but a mere meetnesse: no
condignity, but a congruity, and correspondency to that, to which it is
referred, so Math, 3.8. Bring forth fruit worthy of Repentance, or meet for
Repentance (as our translation has it,) that is answerable to amendment of
Life, (as the margent render is). If in that place (...) worthy should be taken
for any matter of desert, it might be thus translated, fruits with deserve
Repentance, that is such as are to be repented of, and what fruit those are the
Apostle shows, Romans 6.21. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21,
Romans 6.21. A Catalogue of them, we have reckoned up, Gal. 5.19.20, 21. Such
fruits as we have cause enough to be ashamed of, but the word (...) is derived
from (...) which signifyes to poyse, and the Metaphor is taken from things
equally poysed. Thus when man's inward disposition, and outward conversation is
answerable to Gods gracious dispensation, it is termed in Scripture a worthy
walking. So then for a fuller Answer;

There is a twofold worthynesse; Acceptable, and Meritorious, that which merits
must be dignitas Aequalitatis, as Luke 10.7. the Labourer is worthy of his
Hire; this is exact, Luke 10.7.
and may challenge a reward due unto it, and the detayner does wrong and injury
to the party that the due is detayned from. This the Godly have still
renounced, Genesis 32.10. Math. 3.11.
Genesis 32.10. Math. 3.11.

Acceptable worthynesse is that which is called dignitas dignationis. The
worthynesse of Acceptance, when God for Christ's sake is pleased to take our
actions in good part, and worth: and so with this kind of worthynesse, the
Sainrs are said to be worthy, not with the other.

Dagon did before the Arc. They of the Roman Church would feign set in up.
Vulcane in his fiery forge did never sweat more in making Achilles Armor, then
these do to establish Merit; in no one thing do they bestir themselves more
busily then in advancing it; when there is scarce so much as stumps or scull
upon the threshold of Gods house; for them to work upon.

The Nature and Essence of a Merit requires sundry Propertyes. The work we do
must be our own, wrought by our own strength, and not by power ministered by
him that rewards: now all the good we do is from the power of God, 1 Cor.
15.10. Isay. 26.12. 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. John 15.5.
and his grace enabling, 1 Cor. 15.10. He does all our works for us, Isay. 26.
both the will and the deed 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. without him we can do
nothing, John 15. Now can we oblige God to us by paying him his own?

Secondly; a Meritorious act must be in our own power to do, or not to do; such
as cannot be challenged at our hands, it must not be a due debt, but must come
from our own free will. Can that debtor merit of his Creditor who discharges a
bond, which he was bound under a great penalty to satisfy precisely, by such a
day? But, whatsoever we do, Romans 8.12.
we do as poor debtors, Romans 8.12. we owe all we are or have, to God for our
Creation; what is there left to pay for our Redemption, that was not so cheap
as our Creation? Indeed we are Banquerouts, worse then Debtors, Math. 18.25.
Luke 17.9, 10.
Math. 18. See what our Savior speaks to this point, Luke 17.9, 10. when we
have paid all our debts, give God the surplusage, and then plead merit.

Thirdly; A meritorious work must be beneficial to him, of whom we would
deserve; but our best works are not so: our goodness extends not to God,
Psalm. 16.2. Job. 22.1. Romans 11.35, 36.
he is far above it, Psalm. 16.2. nor does he stand in need of any thing that
is ours, Job. 22.1. Romans 11.35, 36. If we serve and worship God, as we ought
(says Austin) the whole benefit thereof accrueth unto our selves, and not unto
God, for no man will say that the Fountain gains any thing by our drinking
at it.

Fourthly; A meritorious work must be perfect and complete, and without
exception: If a Labourer do not his work sufficiently, he cannot in justice
demand his hire, nor the workman require his price; Now our best works are
stained with imperfections, Gal. 5.17. Isay. 64.6. Eccles. 7.22. Jam. 3.3. Romans
3.10.12.20.
Gal. 5.17. Isay. 64.6. Eccles. 7.22. Jam. 3.3. Romans 3.10.12.20.

Fifthly, It is requisite that a meritorious work be in some sort
proportionable to the reward; no work, nor labor, can merit more, then in true
estimation it is worth; The labourer deserves his Hire, but it is such as is
correspondent to his pains: but no other: if he labor but a day, does he
deserve the hire of two days, or a week? Now what Comparison can there be,
betwixt the Glory in Heaven, and our works on Earth, Romans 8.18. weigh our
sufferings in the balance, Romans 8.18.
with the glory (and yet our sufferings for Christ are of greatest weight, of
all our works) but these will be found far too light, in comparison of the
glory: the one is finite, the other infinite, betwixt which there is no
proportion.

Unto these Defects of our works, and Reasons against Merit, let us add these
Scriptures, Dan. 9.9. Romans 4.5, Dan. 9.9. Romans 4.5. 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.8, 9.
Vega. Bellar.
1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.8, 9. And then tell me, what foundation has this Doctrine
upon Scripture? And yet a Clerk of theirs dares insolently say Coelum gratis
non accipiam, He will not take Heaven and happiness of free gift; if he have
it not a penny worth for his penny, he will none; and another tells us Opera
bona mercatura regni coelestis, that good works are the price of Heaven: and
another wretched Monk dyed with these words in his mouth: read mihi aeternam
vitam, quam debes: But God will cast out such merit mongers out of his Temple.

Inform us, concerning all the good things we do enjoy: they are but
Donatives; all we hold, we hold, in Frank Almoigne, and no other tenure, 1 Cor.
4.7. what have thou that thou have not received? As if he should say, 1 Cor.
4.7.
Name any one thing, if thou can: so that we have little cause to boast of
any thing, seeing all, Bishop Andrews Sermon. at Spittle.
from Panem Quotidianum to Regnum caelorum, from our Daily bread, to the
Kingdom of Heaven is bestowed on us, and freely given to us. Wherefore be not
proud of thy Alms, nor ascribe any thing to thy own deserving, a sin that we
are too too prone unto, as Israel was, Deuteronomy. 9.5, and 32, 27.
whereof they are often warned to take heed.

nay worse then nothing, stark naught, I deserve nothing, how can I expect to
have my prayers heard? Say it be so, yet no unworthiness of our own hinders
the mercy of God from us, (if we seek unto him unfeynedly, in sundry examples
you may find, that none have found so much favor and mercy from God, as those
who have come unto him in deepest sense, of their own unworthiness: so the
woman, that Christ cured of the bloody issue, Mark 5.27, 33. Luke 7.6, 7. Luke
15.21. Luke 18.13. Math. 15.27.
Mark 5.27, 33. and the Centurion, Luke, 7.6, 7. and the Prodigal, Luke 15.21.
And the Publican, Luke 18.13. And the woman of Canaan that judged her self to
be no better then a dog. Who could have deeper sense of their unworthiness
then these? and who ever spedd better in their prayers then these? It is not in
our own name we go to God, but in Christ's, Heb. 4.16. not trusting in our own
merits, Heb. 4.16.
but in Gods mercy, which is our merit. He that obtaines no more then he
deserves, will find little heart to pray, and may spare the Labor of
Thanksgiving: which is the next Use we should make of this Point.

Psalm. 50.15. Phil. 4.6.
Psalm. 50.15. Phil. 4.6. we have never cause to pray to God, but we have like
cause to praise him. We read of one Thales Milesius that having communicated to
one Mandrita, (another Philosopher) an admirable discourse, of the motion of
the Heavens, he gave him great thanks, for the instruction; and asked him, What
recompense he should give him for the dowment? to whom Thales thus replied; O
Mandrita, it shall be sufficient for me, if when thou divulgest this secret
tibi non ascripseris sed me ejus repertorem praedicaveris, that thou do not
ascribe this to thy self, but confess that it was my invention: This man
requires of man, much more justly does God require this of us, and this is all
that God requires, Deuteronomy. 16.12.
Deuteronomy. 10.12. a poor Rent, and return indeed. This is the way to have mercis
continued to us, and to be further trusted with favors, as the Tradesman
deals with his Customers, so deals God with us: pay as you do take up, and
he will further trust you, and pay him in his own Coin. He that bought (in
former times) any of the Kings Land, did pay for it in the Kings money; So give
God that which is his own for it, that is his mercy; and to give God his mercy,
is to give God thanks for his mercy. Joseph's Brethren stood ready with their
presents in their hands, when they came to Joseph, Genesis 43.25. So must we with
thanks, Genesis 43.25.
when we come to God for any suite, God expects it. Prayer, and Praise should
be like the double motion of the Lungs; the Air that is sucked in by prayer,
should be breathed out again by praises. Call then upon your souls, for the
performance of this Duty, Psalm. 103.1, 2.
Psalm. 103.1, 2. forget not all his benefits: as much as to say, (by an
ordinary Hebraism) forget not any of his benefits. What we winn with Prayer,
let us wear with thankfulness; and not give God cause to brand us with
Ingratitude, as he did those Lepers, Luke 17.17, 18. but one of those ten, was
the figure; Lukke 17.17, 18.
the rest were as the Cipher (says one,) and he that returned thanks was a
Samaritan too: more shame for Gods Israel, that God should have the best Tithe,
out of a strange field. And thus much of the Promise which is here made to
Asking, Ask and it shall be given you. Now to the second Term seek and you
shall find.

Seek Ye.

As in Asking we employ our tongues, so in seeking our eyes, both of the body
and mind. Seeking is an action of diligence and care, in endeavoring to find
out something that is missing, as 1 Samuel 9.3. Luke 2.48, and 15, 8. 2 Timothy
1.17. so that this is a further degree then the former: (...) contains (...)
in it and somewhat more. (...), is but a piece of (...), this has both (...),
and (...), in it, it must be done with fervency.

Something is employed, and something imported in the word, That employed, is,

All of us are at some loss. Math. 10.6, and 15, 24, and 18, 11. Luke 19.20. 2
Cor. 4.3.


The Scripture speaks of our natural condition as of a lost condition, Mat.
10.6, and 15, 24, and 18, 11. Luke 19.20. 2 Cor. 4.3. Three Parables we have
Propounded by our Savior in one Chapter, Luke 15.4, 9, 24, 32. all to confirm
this one Truth unto us. Luke 15.4, 6, 9, 24, 32.


But what are our losses? Alas, more then we are able to declare: we have lost
our God, his Love and Favor, and with him Heaven and Happiness, Romans 3.23,
24. Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 3.23, 24. Ephs. 2.12. Psalm. 58.3. Esaias 53.6.


Secondly, we have lost our selves too, we are all wandered out of the way
Psalm. 58.3. Esaias 53.6. we are all naturally to seek in that.

Thirdly, we have lost all the good we had, even our best abilities; so that we
have no power to do good, Romans 3.12.
Romans 3.13. He spoke well that said, He which has himself, has lost nothing:
but we in losing our selves, have kept nothing; The Image of God after which we
were first Created is lost, and that consisted in two things in Conformation
and Domination. Now there is no Conformity in man, with the holiness and
righteousness of his Creator; and as that is lost, so is man's Dominion and
Rule over the Creature, they rise up against him, and will not be subject: we
have lost our beauty, health, strength, and all external good things,
wherewith the life of man was honored. And at last the loss of the soul, the
greatest of all.

Adams defection, Unthanfullnesse; and Ambition. God made man happy, Eccles.
7.29.
but he sought out many inventions, through Satan's Suggestions: he, aiming at
a higher estate then that wherein God set him, lost all; and we his woeful
posterity are enforced to sit down by it, Romans 5.12, 18.
Romans 5.12, 18.

Secondly, it happens through our own actual transgressions, for being left to
our selves, we lose our selves more and more, whilst we wander in the
wilderness of this world, after blind guides, as the lusts of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and pride of life, 1 John. 2.16. Luke 12.15.
1 John 2.16. We read of a rich man that lost himself in a corner of this
wilderness, his Barn, Luke 12.16. but many lose themselves in a far less
Room.

Thus wandering, we fall into the hands of Thieves and Robbers, as the stray
sheep many times does into the hands of bloody hounds, and mastives: so did
that poor man that travailed from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30. The Devil
spoils us, Luke 10.30.
and robbs us of our gifts and graces, and leaves us sorely wounded.

etc. in these cases we cry out, we are undone, all our Neighbors shall be
acquainted with them. With Rachel, (for the loss of her children) we cry out,
Jer. 31.15.
and will not be comforted; but that loss which we have sustained, and daily
do sustain, by sin, and sinful courses, does not once trouble us, (or very
little). How many lose their precious time by idleness? their wits by
Drunkenness, their strength by incontinency? their health by intemperance,
their estates by Prodigality? their Credit and Reputation by lewdness, and
dishonesty? yea their very souls by wickedness, and impiety, and yet are not
sensible thereof? And is there any loss to be compared with that? our Savior
tells us there is none, Math 16.29.
Math. 16.26. But it is so long since that this has bin lost by Original, and
Actual sin, that if some be asked, Whether they have or ever had a soul, they
cannot tell; so senssesse are we of this loss.

spiritual things, as well as in Temporal, and as many ways; yea more: All
which would be avoided by us.

Sometimes men suffer Loss in worldly things, by Trading, as in buying dear,
and selling cheap; or neglecting their Markets, for want of insight into their
trade: And the same way, we may be losers in spiritual matters. God complains
of his people that they had sold themselves for naught, Esaias 52.3. Thus Ahab
sold himself to work wickedness, 1 Kings 21.25. And Esau his birthright for a
mess af pottage, Esaias 52.3. 1 King. 21.25. Heb. 12.16. Math. 26.35.
Heb. 12.16. Judas was a bad Merchant, to sell his Master for 30 pence:
Whereupon (says Austin) Judas sold his salvation, and the Pharisees bought
their damnation. Many sell that cheap, that cost dear: these buy and sell, but
live by the loss.

Sometimes men become losers, by Crediting and Trusting either others, or
themselves too far. And thus the Sinner becomes a loser; he trusts the Devil on
his word, as Eve did Satan, he promises pleasure, and delight in sin;
Repentance time enough hereafter; better opportunity, then, to serve God, then
now, better Markets afterward, etc. but he deceives men, and that they find
when it is too late. The wicked work a deceitful work, Prove. 11.18.
(says Solomon): Trust not then, Sin, Satan, nor any of his Factors; Jer.
17.5.
Ier. 17.5. It was a good speech of Sir Thomas Moor, He would not pin his Faith
on any man's sleeve, for that he knew not whither he would carry it.

Sometimes men lose by Gaming, and bring thereby many a fair patrimony to
nothing; vita nostra lusus, (says wisdom, Chap. 15.12.) our Life is a Game.
Man and Satan are the Gamesters: Satan stakes, but it is against the soul,
which man must stake down; that the Devil throws at. The Devil is not so
prodigal in his staking, Math. 4 9.
as he seemed to be, Math. 4.9. for he well knew that all the souls in the
world lay at that stake, if Christ would have ventured; but to this man he
stakes honor, to that man pleasure: to that man profit, and what cares he if
he lose many stakes, if he can draw but that one, the soul; having drawn that,
he will play no more. He is a foul Gamester, and has many wiles, 2 Cor. 2.11.
2 Cor. 2.11. he casts foul at every throw; and who ever played with him, but
was a loser? He is a Cogger, and Cheater, and we had need beware of such a
Gamester.

Other ways, yea many other ways, there are whereby we become great Losers;
but these are the most ordinary, which I advise you to take heed of: say not
that thou have ever lost by Trading, Gaming, or ill Husbandry; all thy losses
have come this way. In all our losses it is wisdom (says one) to have an eye
to what is left us, as well as to what is lost. To what is lost, that if it be
possible we may recover it; to what is left (be it but a little) that we may be
thankful for it. We are not yet such losers by sin, but that something is yet
left us: We have sense, and Reason, we have still eyes, ears, and hands, and
feet, and natural abilities which may be, and ought to be, improved, toward
the recovery of our losses; yea our Lives are continued unto us, and that is no
small mercy, for whilst there is Life, there is hope. These let us employ and
improve, with our best endeavors, (as we are here exhorted by our Savior,)
that we may find what we have lost. And that is the next thing which is
imported in the word Seek.

Bare Asking serves not to recover what has bin lost, there must be a seeking.

It is not enough to sue by Prayer, but we must pursue by our pious endeavors,
to recover what is lost by us.

In seeking, there is a double Act; one of the Desire, the bent of our
Affections must be upon that we seek after: As one in seeking of a Jewel that
is lost; he sees not other things that lie in the way, the mind is so bent upon
that he seeks after. Secondly, an Act of Endeavor using the best means, and
most likely for obtaining that we seek. As the woman in seeking for her lost
groat, She lights a candle, Luke 15.8.
and sweeps the house, which was the ready way to find it: So our Prayers must
be seconded with our best endeavors, for the obtaining of those things which
we are at a loss of. Pro quibus orandum, pro eis laborandum, (says Augustine)
those things we pray for, those things we must labor for. All our Petitions
and Requests, must be practiced as well as prayed, Psalm. 27.8. Psalm. 24.6.
Cant. 3 1, 2, 3. Luke 2.45. 2 Timothy 1.17. Exodus 14.10, 16.
Psalm. 27.8. The Godly are in this respect called a Generation of seekers,
Psalm. 24.6. Thus the Spouse sought her beloved, when she missed him, Cant. 3.1,
2, 3. So did Mary Christ, Luke 2.45. three days she spent in seeking, before
she found him. So, 2 Timothy 1.17. We read Exodus 14.10, 16. that Moses cried unto
the Lord, God blames him for resting upon prayer, with neglect of the means:
he should hold on his course, and make way for Gods help, as well as pray: God
wills him to go on, and the Children of Israel to go on, Gods help is not
enough, without our Endeaours. So, Exodus 17.19. Moses falls to prayer, Exodus
17.19.
but while he prays, Joshua must out and fight: in vain shall Moses be in the
Hill, if Joshua be not in the Valley. Jos. 7.10, 11.
So, Ios. 7.10, 11. Get thee up said God to praying Joshua, wherefore lie
thou upon thy face, Israel has sinned, go and search, etc. Jacob prays to God
for protection, against his Brother Esau, and yet he seconds his Prayers, by
his Endeavors; sending Presents withal to pacify his Brother's wrath, Genesis
32.6. Prove. 2.3, 3, 5.
Genesis 32.6. Thus we are directed, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, There Is Prayer: If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as hidden treasures, There Is
Endeavor, etc.

mockery of God; a tempting of his Majesty. He works (ordinarily) by means,
and expects that we should be ready Instruments to effect his will, which to
refuse, cannot but displease him highly, Math. 4.7.

nor is it availeable, Math. 4.7. Prv. 14.23.
Prove. 14.23. In all Labor there is profit, but the labor of the lips tends
to penury. Lip-labor is but lost labor, bare begging is bootlesse.

Isidorus mentions, who when his Cart was overthrown, would needs have his God
Hercules to come down from Heaven, and help him up with it: but whilst he
forbore, to set his own shoulders to it, his Cart lay still in the mire, and so
would have lien, had not one, (who had more wit) advised him to put his own
shoulders to it, and shove hard, and then pray. Joh. 6.34, 35.
Those we read of John 6.34, 35. would fain have that heavenly bread, which
Christ told them of. Lord evermore give us of that bread, (say they): but they
would not, as Christ tells them take the pains, to come to him for it. Such
desires are no better (as Solomon tells us) then the lustings of the sluggard,
Prove. 13.4. and such a desire slayes a man, Prove. 13.4. Prove. 21.24, 26.
Prove. 21.25, 26. that is, it tends to his destruction, for that he will not
second his desires with his Labors and Endeavors; your desires being idle are
deadly, and destructive to you as was his to him, of whom I have read: who
being a great frequenter of Alehouses, and Taverns, yea and wor^e places; yet
durst never go out of his own doors, without saying his prayers in the morning,
which being done he would say, Now Devil do thy worst, as if the Devil were
charmed by that spell; so that he durst do nothing to hurt him when yet he
avoided not his Temptations, but thrust himself upon them: Many say, they p^ay
against such a lust, etc. and yet get not the victory, but they add not the
means which should second their Prayers; so they may thank themselves.

David said to his Son Solomon, Arise, and be doing, and the Lord God be with
thee, so let me say to you, 1 Chronicles. 21.16.
Arise, and be seeking: The Lord will be with you whilst you are with him.
Whilst you are with him, in seeking with fervent Affections and hearty
endeavors, he will be with you, in blessing your labors, he stands at our
right hand, to save us (as David shows) Psalm. 16.8, and 109, 31. Now the right
hand, you know, Psalm. 16.8, and 109.31.
is the working hand, he stands there to bless us, and prosper our labors.
but he stands not at our left hand to succor us, in our idleness; Ora, Labora
was an Emperor's Motto: So it is the Christians, Pray, Pray, Pray, said that
Martyr, so to that add Work, Work, Work. Pray and Work; Work and Pray; Exodus
28.14. Esaias 65.1. Romans 8.26.
let these be like the Bells and Pomegranates about Aaron's robes: God infuseth
his First grace into thee, merely as a Giver, that is found of them, that
sought him not; but his subsequent Graces, as a Helper, therefore we call them
Auxiliant graces, Helping graces; and we always receive them when we endeavor
to make use of his former grace. I cannot look for his help, unless I
endeavor withal to help my self: Help always presumes an endeavor, and
cooperation, in him that is helped. Now the spirit is said to help our
infirmities, Romans 8.26. By the grace of Prayer, it will help us, and by our
godly endeavors we must help it. I put God to more, and his spirit to more,
then he has promised, if I do nothing toward the obtaining of mercies
promised, and recovery of my losses, if I seek not. Remember what pains Saul
took in seeking after his Fathers Asses, which were lost, 1 Samuel 9.24.
1 Samuel 2, 9.4. Is it not a shame for us that we take no more pains in seeking
after a lost Heaven, a lost soul? Let this quicken us in our Endeavors.

Some Objections we meet with, made against this Doctrine.

Math. 21, 22.) If then, I believe that I shall be heard, Math. 21.22.
it is enough though I use no more endeavor.

pray in Faith we shall be heard; but that Prayer is not made in Faith thas
neglects the means, that God requires to be used, but it is the Prayer of
Presumption. God has so coupled the end, and the means, as that without using
the means (when the means may be had) the end cannot be attained, Acts 27.30.
Acts 27.30. Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved, (said Paul to
the Centurion,) Why, might some say, God has told you, that there shall not
any man's life be lost, and you say, that you believe God, verse. 25. what need
we then to let these men from going out? Yes, God must be trusted, but not
tempted, by neglect of due means, which God does ordinarily work by: had these
gone away, they should have wanted hands, to bring the Ship nearer to the Land.
A groundless warrant has that man for his Assurance to be heard in Prayer,
that neglects the means which God has prescribed to be used.

Prayer is the best means that can be used in our distresses; what need more
endeavors?

only means, as if all other were excluded. It is but a part of the means,
albeit it be the best part, and principally to be used. A Physician puts many
Ingredients into his Physic, and yet there is one Principal Ingredient
amongst the rest, which he highly esteems; and makes account that it will
effect the Cure: so in this Case, other means that God offers must be used,
for the effecting of what we pray for: Acts 27.30. 1 Cor. 3.7. Psalm. 127.1, 2.
Phil. 4.6, 7.
but it is Prayer that sanctifies these means and blesses all unto us, 1 Cor.
3.7. Psalm. 1, 27.12. Phil. 4.6, 7,



Dr. Preston (...) Prayer.
A Physician prescribes us such a course of Physic to be used, such a diet to
be followed, etc. Now, if I do put my Life into such a Physicians hands, and
trust to his skill, I shall be very careful to observe his Rules, and follow
his Prescriptions: so is it, in this Case.



We must be neither further off, Resp. Acts 12.10.
nor nearer the means then befits us: You read Acts 12.10. that when the Angel
brought St. Peter out of Prison, the Iron gate opened of its own accord; there
was no man there to open it, Gods finger shall do it: but when he came to the
house of Mary the Mother of John, he was fain to stand before the door and
knock, Verse. 13.
verse. 13. We may think it strange that Iron should give way, and wood make
opposition; but God would not show his finger, where man's hand was to be used.
If we have the means, we are to use them, because it pleases God to work by
them; as the ordinary Instrument for the effecting of his promises; Psalm.
127.1, 2, and 42, 6. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
yet we may not trust in them, nor to them, Psalm. 127.1, 2, and 42, 6. Deuteronomy.
8.3. So look we on the means, as knowing they are but means; the blessing
comes from God, which by Prayer we crave: and God to show himself chief, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
can (and oftentimes does) work without means, as, 1 Chronicles. 14.11. and against
means suspending the power, and operation of natural causes, as when the fire
burnt not, the water drowned not; the Rock gave water, and the Iron swam; So
that God has not tied himself to the means and use of them: If the means be
withheld, his power is not: Pray still, and leave the success to God. And so
we have done with the second Act, required in my Text: Seek. The promise made
to it, follows.

[And you shall find] Thence we infer that, Amos 5.4, 6.


Such as seek faithfully, shall find infallibly, Amos 5.4, 6. Seek you me and
you shall live, says God. So the promise runs through the whole Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 4.29. Thou shall seek the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
and find him; And Jer. 29.13. Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall seek
me with all your hearts, Jer. 29.13. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
So, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If you seek him he will be found of you. And the whole
house of Judah found it to be so, for when they sought him with their whole
desire, he was found of them, Verse. 15.
2 Chronicles. 15.15. According to the word of the Prophet, this David assured his
Son Solomon of, if thou seek him he will be found of thee, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Psalm.
34.4. Cant. 3.4. Lament. 3.25. Math. 13.44. Luke 15.9. Esaias 45.19. Esaias. 8.19.
1 Chronicles. 28.9. he had himself found it experimentally true, Psalm. 34.4. I
sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. So more,
beside David, Cant. 3.4. Lament. 3.25. Math. 13.44, 45. Luke 15.9. And this God
has not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth, says the Prophet Esaias
45.19. (as did the Prophets of the Heathen Gods, who spoke uncertainly, and
obscurely out of dark denns, Esaias 8.19. but) the Lord speaks righteousness,
and declares things that are right; goodness and truth concur in him;
goodness in inviting us to seek him, (as willing to be found,) and truth in
not deceiving, and frustrating of our hopes when we do come unto him, and seek
him.

God be found of those who seek him truly, he should withstand his own glory,
(in losing the praise of his truth) which is the main end of all his mercy,
They that seek after the Lord shall praise him, Psalm. 22.26.
(says David, Psalm. 22.26. How praise him? Namely, in acknowledging him, true
in all his promises, and plentiful in his mercy.

etc.? if there were no hope of finding what they seek for, Psalm. 10, 18.
Psalm. 9.10.18. The Poor shall not always be forgotten, the hope of the
afflicted shall not perish for ever. Prove. 10.28.
So, Prove. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: they shall have
Comfort in seeking: Hope, and joy in hoping good success; in which success,
is happiness.

Hos. 5.6. Romans 11.7. Heb. 12.17. Luke 13.24.
and yet not sound. So Israel. Hos. 5.6. They shall go with their Flocks and
Herds, to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him, and Romans 11.7. Israel
has not obtained what it seeks. Of Esau it is said that he sought carefully
with tears for the blessing, yet found no place for Repentance, Heb. 12.17.
And many shall seek to enter in, but shall not be able, Luke 13.24.

Indeed all Adams sons are a Generation of Seekers, but all are not happy in
finding, what they seek: but you must know that there is a twofold seeking; one
right and true, when all due Circumstances are observed therein; that, fails
not: And there is another kind of seeking, which is unsound and Hypocritical,
no mervaile if that be unsuccessfull. It is the former kind of seeking that we
speak of, a true and faithful seeking, and the infallibility of finding
attends upon that. He that seeks, Quae oportet, and quomodo oportet, cannot
miss finding what he seeks for.

Some there are that seek, what they should not seek but rather shun: He that
bids us seek, says likewise Seek not, Amos, Amos 5.5.
5.5. Seek not Bethel: nor enter into Gilgal, go not up to the Calves of
Bethel; nor to the high places, and altars of Gilgal. So, Jer. 45.5.
Ier. 45. ult. Seek thou great things for thy self, (as honor, pleasure,
riches, great estate, etc.) these are great things indeed in the eyes of men of
this world, (who having an itching desire after them, will scratch for them
till the blood come) seek them not (says God,) such things should rather seek
us, then we them: they are inter Vtenda, rather then inter Quaerenda, (as one
speaks): use them we may; seek them immoderately, we may not (they being but
superfluities.) Those things that must be sought after especially, are things
that are above, Colos. 3.1. Colos. 6.1. Zeph. 2.3. John 8.21. Math. 6.33. Gal.
4.6, 7. Jam. 1.12. Psalm. 4.6. Phil. 2.21.
Such things as Zephanie speaks of, Zeph. 2.2. God and his favor, Christ, and
his righteousness; John 8.23. Math. 6.33. the spirit of grace, and the graces
of that spirit, Gal. 4.6, 7. Iam. 1.17. These are great things indeed, and in
seeking these things most of the world are failing. David speaks of many such,
Psalm. 4.6. St. Paul says all, Phil. 2.21. that is the most of all: these run
after a shadow, but selom overtake it.

Others seek recta, but not recte: right things, but they seek not rightly.
Three ways says Bernard, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 15.
men may be frustrated in seeking. Cum non in tempore quarunt, aut non sicut
oportet, vel non ubi oportet: when they seek not in a due time, nor in due
manner, or not in a fitting place they lose their labor.

Some fail in the Quando; they seek, but out of season. The Spouse sought in
the night, Cant. 3.1.
but found not him she sought for. The time of ignorance, and darkness, is no
time to seek in, but the time of light and knowledge: Math. 15.10, 11. Heb.
12.17.
Some seek when the Door is shut, so did the foolish Virgins; and Esau when the
blessing was bestowed. They shall seek thee in a time when thou may be found,
Psalm. 32.6. Prove. 1.28. Job. 8.5, 6. Prove. 8.17. Math. 6.33.
(says David) Psalm. 32.6. implying, that there is a time when men may seek
God, yet not find him. And such a time indeed there is, Prove. 1.28. They shall
seek me early but shall not find me, and yet the Promise is made to early
seeking, Job 8.5, 6. Prove. 8.17. But you must know that there is a twofold
earliness, God's Early, and Man's Early: Gods Early is to seek him in the first
place, Eccles. 12.1. Psalm. 57.8, and 63, 1, and 88, 13.
in respect of order, Math. 6.33. Early in respect of Life, Eccles. 12.1. Early
in the day, in respect of other business, Psalm. 57.8, and 63, 1, and 88, 13,
Such earliness is acceptable. Man's early is, at the beginning of his trouble,
sickness, sorrow; and so it may be too late. If we take Gods early, we are
sure to find; but if we take man's early we may happ to miss. Early Seeking,
is the way to find.

Some again seek, but not in the place right, Vbi quaerunt bona, locis
non-suis; they seek for things out of their proper Orbs, (as one speaks). The
Spouse in the Canticles sought him whom her soul loved that was a good what;
but she sought him in her bed, Cant. 3.1. Aug. Confess. Lib. 4. c. 11.12.
and that was an ill where, Cant. 3.1. Do you seek the valiant one in a Bed?
No, no, (says Austin) seek What you seek, but not Where you seek: the bed was
no fit place to seek him in, who had no place whereon to rest his head; whilst
she seeks him there, she does but lose her labor: Joseph and Mary missing
Christ, sought him in cognatione carnis, amongst their kindred; Luke 2.44. John
2.39.
they found him not there, he was in Domo Patris, in the Temple, his Father's
house, there they found him. How, O sweet Jesus, shall I find thee amongst my
Kindred, (says Holy Bernard) when thou were not found amongst thine own
natural Kinsmen? Quomodo, o bone Jesu, inter cognatos meos te inveniam, qui
inter tuos minime es inventus? Bern. Luke 24.5. Math. 24.23. Cant. 1.7.
Mary Magdalen, with some other women, sought him in his grave, but seeking the
Living amongst the dead, it was to no purpose. Some seek him in secrets, Math.
24.23. Others in profane Company, and places; they seek Life, in the Region of
Death. No marvel if such find him not, Gods house and habitation is the
finding place; Cant. 1.7. There Mary found him.

Papists, they seek in Pictures, instead of Scriptures: vicious Livers, hope to
find in worldly vanities; they seek for honor in Pride, when it is to be found
in humility; they seek for Reputation in Revenge, when it is to be found in
Patience; they seek for Content in Riches when it is to he found in Godliness:
Many such seekers there are in the world, but mistaking the place, all their
hopes of finding will be frustrate.

Lastly, Others fail in the sicat, it may be they seek in due time, and in the
right place too, but they fail in the manner of seeking, they seek not as they
should.

Some seek without Eyes; they have the eye of Sense and Reason, but that of
Faith is wanting; they seek ignorantly, and unbelievingly, their eyes are not
opened; they know not what belongs to their peace. The Jews sought, but
missed, Luke 19.42. Romans 11.7, 8.
that they sought for; for that they had no eyes to seek withal, Romans 11.7, 8.
Whilst men remain in ignorance, and are blinded; they may with the blind
Sodomites grope for the Door, but they shall not find it. He that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, Heb.
11.6.
Heb. 11.6.

Some seek, but without a Light, as our Familists, Anabaptists, and that
Sublimated generation of Quakers, newly sprung up: they scorn the Scriptures,
and seek in the dark co^ners of Enthusiasms, and Revelations. Search the
Scriptures, says Christ, John 5.27.
John 5.37. but these will none of that.

Some seek, but without Humility, proudly and boastingly, not upon their knees,
but tiptoes, as did that boasting Pharisee, Luke 18.11, Romans 6.31.
Luke 18. and other Justiciaries: So Israel sought it by merits, Romans 9.31. God
must be sough humbly, and submissively, Seek the Lord ye meek of the Earth,
Zeph. 2.3.
Zeph. 2.8.

Some seek, but without Sincerity; Fictitiously, and Hypocrititically: so Paul
sought God, 1 Samuel 28.6. Math. 15.8. Jer. 29.13. Deuteronomy. 4.29. Hos. 7.14. John
6.26. Tract. 25. in John. Vix quaeritur Jesus propter J^sum. Bern. ad Fratres
in Erem. Ser. 2.
1 Samuel 28.6. and the Hypocritical Jews who drew near with their mouths, but
their heart were far from God; You shall seek me and find me, says God, when?
When you shall seek me with all your heart, Jer. 29.13. So, Deuteronomy. 4.29.

Some seek, but not purely, and chastely; they seek not grace, for graces sake;
nor Christ for Christ's sake. So, Hos. 7.14. Ioh. 6.26. searcely is Jesus sought
for Jesus, (says Austin,) Propter te, Domine, propter te was his Motto; so
must we seek him, as not any other thing as it were him; not any other thing
besides him; nor any other thing before him, says Bernard.

Some Seek, Prove. 2.4. Luke 15.9. Dominus quaerendus est sicut and diligendus.
Hug. Card. Esaias 26.9.
but not fervently, and earnestly: they Seek not as for silver, Prove. 2.4. not
as the woman did for her lost groat, Luke 15. as God is to be loved, so must he
be sought, with all our heart, with all our soul, etc. So, Esaias 26.9. Mary at
the Sepulcher, was so intent, that she minded not the Gardener.

Lastly, Some Seek not constantly, and perseveringly: Seek the Lord and his
strength, Psalm. 105.4. Luke 2.46. 2 Timothy 1.17.
seek his face evermore, says David, Psalm. 105.4. Joseph and Mary continued
three days Seeking. So Onesiphorus sought Paul till he found him out, 2 Timothy
1.17. All such seek and miss, because they seek amiss. And so much for Answer
to the Objection.

Jacob, Esaias 45.19. Psalm. 9.10.
Seek you me, Esaias 45.19. He never forsakes them that seek him, says David,
Psalm. 19.10. and he will not begin now.

set our hearts to seek the Lord aright, 1 Chronicles. 22.19.
1 Chronicles. 22.19. Seek what you should Seek; Seek where you should Seek; Seek
when you should Seek; Seek as you ought to Seek; and rest assured that your
labor shall not be in vain: 1 Cor. 15.58.
you shall find. In Seeking for earthly things at man's hands, we often fail;
but if we Seek the best, at Gods hands we always Speed. We may go to the
Physician, and Seek health, but meet with Death; we may go to the Lawyer and
Seek for Law, and Justice, and meet with Injustice, and Oppression; we may Seek
to Friends, for kindness, and favor, and find enmity, and hatred from them!
All that Seek to men, speed not; though their requests be never so just, and
honest (as we find Luke 18.1.) But whom did God ever send away with a sad
heart, that sought him sincerely? Suetonius reports of Titus that he was wont
to say, that none should go away from speaking with a Prince, with a sad heart.
God likes it not, that we should go from him with a dejected spirit: it is our
own fault, if we do. Ezra 8.22. Lament. 3.23. Psalm. 34.10. Psalm. 9.10. Amos 5.6.
The hand of the Lord is with them for good, who seek him, Ezra 8.22. He will
be good to that soul, Lament. 3.23. They shall want no good thing, Psalm. 34.10.
Never be forgotten, Psalm. 9.10. But they shall live for ever, Amos 5.6.

To conclude with that of Berward, It is more easy for Heaven and Earth to
pass away, than that he who so seeks as he should, should not find; that so
asks, should not receive; that so knocks should not have it opened to him.
And that is the last branch I am to speak of.

[Knock and it shall be opened unto you.]

And here (as in the former) we have the thing enjoined, Knock. And the promise
made, It shall be opened unto you, we begin with the First.

(...), (...), cornibus ferio a (...). Od. (...).
Knock ye.

A term that imports more vehemence, then either of the former; It is a
Metaphor, taken from the Ox, or some other strong necked beast, which runs
with the Horn against any thing with force and violence, and gives a great
blow unto it. Such a holy kind of violence must be offered at the gate of
Heaven, by our prayers, if we would have it opened unto us: bare asking is not
enough, Seeking not sufficient, unless we so ask, so seek, as that we Knock
withal, in our asking, and seeking.

Something is employed in this term, as well as imported: that employed, is, that,

Heaven has a Door,

A Door, or gate we know, is properly that whereby an entrance is made, into
some house, City, or other place; and serves to let in some, and keep out
others. Thus Metaphorically Heaven is said to have a door, or gate, Genesis 28.17.
Psalm. 24.7. Math. 7.13. Luke 13.25, 28. Revel. 4.10. and 21.12. and 22.14. Acts
10.11. Revel. 4.1. and 19.11. Acts 7.56. Luke 13.25.2^. Math. 25.1^.
Genesis 28.17. Psalm. 24.7. Math. 7.13. Luke 13.25, 28. Revel. 4.10. and 21.12.
and 22.14. Which gates are not literally to be understood, but Mystically, pro
modo intrandi, for the manner of Entrance: that door, those gates, are those
passages whereby we enter, and are admitted.

This Door does sometimes open to let in some, and is kept shut against others.
St. Peter saw them open in a vision, Acts 10.11. So did St. John, Revel. 4.1.
and 191.11. St. Steven saw them open visibly, and sensibly, Acts 7.56. And as
it opens, so it shuts, Luke 13.25, 28. Math. 25.10. It keeps out, as well as
lets in.

And it is a large two leaff'd Door; Revel. 3.8. Per portam Ecclesiae, intramus
ad portam Paradisi. Aug. Sermon. de temp. 136. 2 Pet. 1.11.
the one leaf of it, is Grace, the Grace of Regeneration and Adoption: by this
we make our first entrance into Heaven, and that in this Life, sealed and
confirmed unto us in our Baptism, which is the Sacrament of our Admission into
the visible Church, (the Suburbs of Heaven) and the more we abound in grace,
the more abundantly do we enter, 2 Pet. 1.11.

The other Leaffe of this Door is Glory, Math. 25.
Math. 25.10. No passage to Glory, but by Grace: and into it our souls shall
enter at the day of Death, Luke 16.22, and 23, 43.
Luke 16.22, and 23 43. And at the day of Judgment we shall be admitted both in
body and soul to enter in with Christ, Colos. 3.4. These. 4.17.
and Reign with him in Glory, Colos. 3.4. 1 These. 4.17.

Heb. 10.19, 20. The High Priest entered into the Holy of Holies, Heb. 10.19, 20.
with the blood of Beasts. Now we have free entrance into Heaven it self,
(which is the Truth and Substance of that shadow) through the precious blood
of Jesus Christ. He is that new and ever living way ordained, and consecrated
for our only passage into glory. Man, by his transgression was not only
excluded the Earthly Paradise, but the Heavenly Heaven was, by it, fast shut
against him; and Hell set wide open for him: but God (in mercy pitying man's
misery) ^ent his Son, to satisfy his Justice, for man's disobedience; Sanguis
Christi, clavis Paradisi. Hier.
and by satisfying, and obeying in our behalf, to open Heaven again for us,
which he did exactly (so we have it in our English Liturgy, when thou did
overcome the sharpness of Death, Aditum per vulnera pandit.
thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers). Thrice were the
Heavens opened to him, whilst he was on Earth; Math. 3.16. Math. 17.5. Acts 1.9.
Once in his Baptism, Math. 3.16. The second, at his Transfiguration, Math.
17.5. And the third at his Asscenston, Acts 1.9. Which visible Scissures, and
patefactions were figures of our invisible entrance; and that it was made by
Christ alone. For (as St. John speaks of opening the Book), No man neither in
Heaven, nor Earth, Revel. 5.3. Joh. 14.6. Joh. 10.7. Revel. 3.7. Revel. 1.18.
nor under the Earth was worthy not able to open Heaven for us, in which regard
he is said to be the Way, Ioh. 14.6. and the Door John 10.7. and to have the
Key of David, Revel. 3.7. yea of Death and Hell, Revel. 1.18.

to enter into Heaven, 1 Cor. 6, 10. Revel. 21.8, and 22, 15.
albeit they find themselves amongst those mentioned in the black Catalogue, 1
Cor. 6.9, 19. Revel. 21.8, and 22, 15. whom God has threatened to exclude: yet
they make but a tush at all, as if they had power to enter whether God will or
no, at pleasure: It is true, that Heaven has a Door, but a door that stands
not open to all Comers, so as that who so will may enter, when he will,
without knocking. It is a Door that has a Lock, belonging to it, albeit a
spring-lock; which we can shut upon our selves, but not open again at pleasure,
it is the hand within that must do that. Nor is there any other way to enter,
then by the Door. The wall is said to be great, and high, there is no climbing
over that, Revel. 21.12. Math. 6.20.
Revel. 21.12. Nor is there any breaking through, Math. 6.20. Nor is there any
window to creep in at. The excellency of Heaven is wonderful and secret; God
will not open a window for the eye of his own, they may not be prying in too
far into his secrets: A Door indeed he has prepared for the foot; a passage
for the soul, both whilst it is in the body; in holy thoughts, fervent prayers;
and when it passes out of the Body, at the day of Death: but yet so, as that
Door cannot be opened neither by force, nor fraud.

no Pick-lock nor Golden-key can do any thing here; Bribery unlocks the gates
of Hell, but not the Door of Heaven. Nor will St. Peter's keys which the Pope
pretends to have, fit the wards of that Lock. These keys that hang at the
Pope's girdle, are the keys of the bottomless pit, Revel. 9.1.
Revel. 9.1. not of the gates of this Celestial City.

Pope Leo being much troubled in his Conscience, for sin; was cheared up by his
Confessor, after this manner. Quid times, sancte Pater, etc. what makes you
thus afraid, (most holy Father) you have the keys of Heaven, and the merit of
Christ at your dispose? Oh! said Leo, this you know, that he who sells any
thing, has no right in that he sold: I fear, since we have so often sold
Heaven, that we shall have no right nor interest therein our selves.

nay, the very Angels of Heaven, those Celestial spirits, though they be able
to penetrate all things under Heaven; yet are they not able by their own power,
to enter that body, without leave, no more then they are able to enter into the
body of one another. The Empyrean Heaven (where God, and all his blessed ones
inhabit eternally) gives way to these Messengers by the power of God, when they
are sent; otherwi^e they could not pass in, or out: And shall any wicked Liver
think to get in, without Gods leave? Oh desperate folly!

torrent of wrath, and curses betwixt us, and it; yet was pleased, in giving
his Son for us, to dry up that torrent, and drink up that wrath, so that we may
pass over it, Psalm. 110.7.
as Israel did over Jordan, and not be swallowed up; so making that possible to
us, through Christ, which through sin was altogether impossible. Hos. 2.15.
Had there bin no Door of Hope, (as we see there is) we had bin the most
wretched and miserable of any of the Creatures that God ever made: but this may
stay our sinking hearts, and raise up our drooping spirits; It is possible, it
is possible, to enter into Heaven; there is a Door, and a Door to open. Clavus
penetrans Clavis aperiens (says Bernard) the nails that fastened him to the
Cross, are the key that unlockt it. An entrance, a passage is made for our
Prayers, so that they may come into Gods presence, and a passage for Gods
blessings to come to us; A passage from man to God; from Earth to Heaven, by
the Prayer of Faith: And a passage again from God to man, whilst he hears
Prayer, and showreth blessings upon our heads, sending down his Holy spirit
into us, and his Holy Angels to attend upon us, even in this Life; and at the
day of Death. A passage for our souls too, which if we commit to God, in well
doing, we need not doubt, but have comfortable assurance, that albeit our
bodies be interred in the earth for a time, Eccles. 12.7.
yet our spirits shall return to God that gave them. And at the last day a
passage will be found both for body and soul into that Heaven, whither Christ
our head is already ascended, and be for ever entertained in that house, and
within those Doors, ubi non intrat inimicus, ubi non exit amicus, (says
Austin:) where never any that hates thee shall get to thee, nor any that loves
thee, part from thee. Let us often think of the Door, and be careful to find
the Door, get a knowledge of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 2.2. Acts 4.12.
and him crucified, there is no other name under heaven to be saved by, but by
that name. He is the way, the Truth, and the Life. If we know not him, we do
but grope, as the Sodomites struck with blindness for the Door, but shall not
find it. God by his word and spirit calls upon you, come up hither, Revel. 4.1.
Follow that call, it will bring you to the Door, and being come, knock as we
are willed by our Savior, Reve l. 4.1.
and knock with violence: So much (as I have said) the word imports; and gives
us to understand, that,

There is a Holy violence to be offered at the gate of Heaven. Having found the
door, it is not enough, to call, or ask, Ho, who is within there? Nor to rap
easily, and gently; there must be a bouncing (as we use to speak) with the hand
too: we must lay on with all our might, if we look to be admitted.

The Kingdom of Heaven, (says our Savior) suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force, Math. 11.12. which words, Math. 11.12.
albeit in a more peculiar manner, are to be understood, of that confluence of
people who with great eagerness, followed after John's Ministry; yet it is
applyable to this Duty of Prayer; and to all other means whereby the Kingdom
of Heaven is sought; in the using whereof a religious violence is to be showed,
in the zealous performance thereof. This is explained by a Parallel place, Luke
16.16. The kingdom of Heaven is preached, Luke 16.16.
and every man presses into it; No better way then by Prayer added to
Preaching, do we press into that kingdom.

This Holy violence, the Saints of God have used in their Prayers. What think
you of Nehemiah, when he prayed himself pale, Neh. 2.6. of Daniel when he
prayed himself sick, Neh. 2.6. Dan. 8.17. 1 Samuel 1.14.
Dan. 8.17. of Hannah, when by reason of the unusual motion of her lips, old
Ely judged her to be drunk, 1 Samuel 1.14? Preces fundimus Coelum tundimus,
misericordiam extorquemus, as was said of Christians in Tertullians days, they
did not only beseech, but besiedge, God; (But of this importunacy in Prayer we
have before spoken, therefore here the less shall serve,) yet give leave to
show you how we must knock, and with what, at the gate of mercy. It is said of
the wicked, they work wickedness with both hands, i.e. earnestly and
industriously with all their strength, Mich. 7.3.
Mich. 7.3. so must we knock with all our strength, with both hands; one hand
is not enough to knock withal, we must knock with both hands, and both littlee
now. The hand of the soul, and the hand of the Body, the hand of Faith, and the
hand of a godly life. The hand of the inward, and the hand of the outward man,
(for as the Outward man is furnished with members, eyes, ears, hands, etc. so
is the Inward likewise, in a spiritual sense) both must be employed.

The hand of the soul, is Faith; A strong hand indeed: when that knocks, God
soon hears: indeed it will be heard before it leaves rapping. It knocks with
Authority, and presents God's Promises as his own hand writting, and
obligation; As Thamar did to Judah, his bracelet, and his signet, saying,
Discern I pray thee whose these are. Genesis 38.25.
It brings us with boldness to the gates of Heaven, Heb. 10.19. Ephesians. 3.12.
Psalm. 116.10, Jam. 1.6. 1 John 5.14. Lament. 3.41. Psalm. 142.3. Esaias 1.15.
Heb. 10.19. Ephesians. 3.12. Psalm. 116.10.11. Nor will it take a denial. This is
required, Iam. 1.6. 1 John 5.14. And with this hand has the Faithful knocked
at the gate of mercy, as Scripture shows abundantly.

The other hand we must knock withal, is the outward or bodily hand, Lament.
3.41. Psalm. 141.3. Nor may this hand be a polluted or defiled hand; such a hand
shall be rappt: Nor will God regard the knocking of it, Esaias 1.15. Should a
Subject offer up a supplication to his Sovereign, with a hand wreaking in the
blood of the Prince, the Son of the King, can be look to speed? No! this hand
must be washed in Innocence; 1 Timothy 2.8.
pure hands they must be that we knock withal, 1 Timothy 2.8. A virtuous and
godly Life Knocks aloud; Acts 10.31. Semper orat, qui semper bona facit.
good works as well as good words have a loud cry. The vices of Sodom did
cry, and the Alms of Cornelius did knock and call. As Prayer is vocal, so it
may be actual; we may do prayers, as well as think prayers, or speak prayers.
In doing the Duty of your vocation you knock with the hand; in mortifying the
lusts of your flesh, you knock with the hand, etc. In the first of the
Revelation, Revel. 1.12.
verse 12. we read that St. John looked back to see a voice; and if that were
proper, then it is not unlikely that God will look down to hear a work. And
thus you have heard that we must knock, and how we must knock. Now a word of
Use.

Esaias 64.7.
by his blasphemy; and presently another etc. But who stirrs up himself to take
hold upon the Lord*

On Earth likewise there is violence offered, Psalm. 55.9. and 58.2. Esaias 59.6.
Jer. 6.7, and 54, 46. Ezekiel. 7.11, 23. Mich. 6.12. Amos 3.10. Obad. 10. Hab.
1.23. Mal. 2.16. Jer. 23.10.
David complains of it, Psalm. 55.9, and 58.2. You weigh the violence of your
hands in the earth. Instead of weighing all things by Justice; they weighed
matters according to the violence of their passions; they weighed out wrong for
right. All the Prophets complain of this violence, Esaias 59.6. Ier. 6.7, and
51, 46. Ezekiel. 7.11, 23, Mich. 6.12. Amos 3.10. Obad. 10. Hab. 1.23. Mal. 2.16.
There is enough, and too much, of such violence to be found amongst us, (but
such violences are evil, and their force not right, Jer. 23.10.) But how little
is there of this holy violence offered, at the gates of Heaven.

Alas for us, we strive not in prayer, we knock not so as to be heard: we are
like him of whom the Poet speaks, who moved his lips in prayer, as if he were
fearful to be heard. Labra movet metuens audiri. Aug. Cons. Lib. 8. c. 7.
(As Austin acknowledges he used to do before his Conversion.)

Callidus a Roman Orator, pleading a cause very faintly, without any show of
Affection; Tully told him that surely he was but in jest, and not in earnest,
for if he had bin so, the tide of his Affection would have bin up. It is a
shrewd Argument that such as knock gently, at the gates of Heaven; do not
indeed desire to be heard of God.



Christ speaking of his Church, compares it to Pillar of smoke, arising from
the most rich and pleasant Composition of Myrrh and Frankincense, and other
pleasant Odors, Cant. 3.6.
Cant. 3.6. Our Prayers are like these Pillars of smoke, which ascend out of
the wilderness of this world; but this smoke must arise from the sweet perfume
of Myrrh and Frankincense. By Frankincense, some understand the burning
fervency of the affection, when as an enflamed heart seeks: and by Myrrh they
understand mortification, and dying unto sin. Now that holy perfume of the
Tabernacle which God appointed to be made of pure Myrrh and Frankincense, (to
which it may be conceived Solomon alludeth) was to be taken of each like
weight, Exodus 30.34.
Exodus 30.34. If we pretend much Faith, and want Charity, or good works; if we
show not forth the fruits of faith in our lives, the perfume of Prayer is not
sweet in Gods nosthrils. If you make that perfume according to God's
description put in as much of the Myrrh as of the Frankincense, of each a like
weight, let holiness of Life, accompany your holy Profession of Faith; and
when your hands drop down Myrrh, and your fingers pure Myrrh; then lay hands,
on the handles of the Lock, (as the Church says she did) Cant. 5.5. and
knock-hard, that you may be heard. And so we have done with the Duty, Cant. 5.5.
The Encouragement follows.

And it shall be opened unto you.

Such is the power of Prayer, Text. Doct.
that the gates of Heaven cannot stand shut against it.

Elijah by his fervent prayer, locked, and unlockt Heaven, at his pleasure, Jam.
5.17.
James 5.17. by turning the key one way, he locked it up, that it rained not,
and by turning it again, he unlockt it, and set it open, so that the Heavens
gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. And, as he fetched water from
heaven by his prayer, so he fetched fire thence by it, 2 King. 1.18. Jos.
10.12. Esaias 38.8. Luke 3.21.
2 King. 1.10. Joshua's Prayer had such power over Heaven that the Sun and Moon
stood still, till he was revenged on his enemies, as we read, Ios. 10.12. And
Hezekiah by his prayer brought the Sun back ten degrees, by which it was gone
down, as we read, Esaias 38.8. When Christ prayed, the Heavens opened Luke 3.21.
And the godly prayin^ by the same spirit, have the like power. When St. Steven
was brought forth to be stoned, he knocked at the gate of Heaven, by his
fervent prayer, Acts 7.56.
Lord let me in, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and presently the Doors of
Heaven opened unto him: this he saw; and did see withal Christ Jesus whom he
had preached, Standing at the right hand of God, Christus stat ut Vindex, sedet
ut Judex.
as being ready to revenge his wrongs, Acts 7.56.

Math. 25.11. So other, Math. 25.11, So Luke 13.25.
Luke 13.25.



concerning Prayer, should cause you to be in love with it; yet this that is
now spoken, of the efficacy and power of it, should cause you to affect it.
Austin aytly terms Prayer the key of Heaven, for that it lets us into Gods
treasury, whence we may take what we will; it opens the Door, and gives us
entrance, yea possession of the whole house. There is a kind of Omnipotency in
it. Oh! what cannot Prayer do? If the Door of Heaven cannot be kept shut
against it, can prison Doors? iron gates withstand it? It cannot be. There is
no prison so strong, but prayer is able to make the Door fly open: Read, Acts
12.5, 6, 7.
Acts 12.5, 6, 7. Peter is committed to prison by Herod, the Doors are fast
locked upon him; and least the prisoner should make an eascape, he is bound with
two chains, and strongly warded with a double watch: so that in humane
judgment there was no possibility of escaping, and yet Peter is delivered, and
that through the Prayers of the Church. The Church sent up their prayers, and
God sends down his Angel; who awakes him, unbindes him; directs him, instructs
him, and brings him out of danger, before he leaves him: by which it appears
that it was prayer, rather then the Angel that delivered Peter out of prison;
for prayer went up, before the Angel came down. Another like Instance we have,
Acts 16.15, 26.
Acts 16.25, 26. Paul and Silas are put into prison; cast into the lowest
dungeon; laid fast in the stocks, neck and feet together; made sure enough,
(one would think): they betake themselves to prayer, they send that on their
errand into Heaven, and it knocks so heard, that it shakes Heaven and Earth; by
and by the prison Doors were opened, and every man's chains loosed and fell
from him: such is the power of prayer, that no Door can stand barrd against it.
This St. Paul knew right well, by his own experience, insomuch that at other
times when he was a prisoner, he trusted that through the Prayers of the Saints
he should be delivered, Philem. 9.22. Heb. 13.18, 19. No such way to procure
deliverance for Gods imprisoned servants, Philem. 9 22. Heb. 13, 18, 19.
as to send up hearty Prayers to Heaven on their behalf.

And as no Door on Earth, can keep shut against it: So no power on Earth is
able to withstand it. Thou have prevailed with God: (said the Angel to Jacob)
and shall with man. If it can conquer God, it is able to prevail against Esaus
wrath; Genesis 32.28.
man's greatest malice shall fall before it, as did Haman's malice before
Esther, Esther 4.16. The craftiest pate shall not defear it, Ester 4.16. 2 Samuel
15.32. 2 Chronicles. 14.9, 11, 12. Exodus 17.11. 2 King. 19.15, 35.
the coun^ell of Achitophel shall wither before David's prayer, 2 Samuel 15.32.
the greatest army shall fly before it, as did the host of a thousand thousand
Aethiopians before the the prayer of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 24.9, 11, 12. So, Exodus
17.11. prayer of Moses is more powerful to conquer an host of Enemies then the
swords or pikes of all Israel besides: so was Senacheribs host overthrown by
Hezekiah's prayer, 2 Kings 19.15, 35.

The prevailing Power of Prayer, Anno Dom. 175. Tertull in Apologet. Cohors
Fulminea: Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. Niceph. Calist. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 4. c. 12.
is not only to be found in sacred story, but it has bin recorded in all ages
of the Church. In the Primitive times, the Legion of Christians was called the
thundering Legion; For that upon their prayers, God scattered their enemies
with thunder, and refreshed themselves with showers in a great drought; which
was done when Marcus Antonius waged war against the Germans: his Army being
brought into a desperate condition, through great and long thrist, the
Christian Soldiers fell upon their knees, and craved help of God, and were
suddenly, not only relieved with great showers of rain, but their enemies were
also stricken down, with many strokes of thunder; whereupon they were termed,
(as aforesaid) Cohers Fulminea.

After this, Anno Dom. 394. Ruffinus. Socrates. Doro. et Ambros. de obit. Theod.
in the good Emperor Theodosius his time, in a battle sought, against the
Tyrant Engenius, when the day was almost lost, and in the sight of man an
apparent overthrow was at hand; the Emperor lights from off his horse, and
stepping before his Army, (and in the sight of the Enemy) falls down prostrate
on the earth, crying our, Ubi est Deus Theodosii? where is the God of
Theodosius? whereupon there arose such a mighty wind, that it blew the darts
of his Enemies upon themselves, in such a wonderful manner, that Engenius with
all his host were utterly discomfited; who seeing the power of God so to fight
against them, were forced in effect to say as the Egyptians did, God is in the
Clouds, and fighting for them.

In latter times, we read that Henriens Anceps the Emperor of Germany,
Bucholcer Chronol.
upon the prayers of his Soldiers (they crying out with a loud voice Kyrie
eleison, Kyrie eleison, Lord have mercy upon as, Lord have mercy upon us) flew
and put to flight a mighty Army of the Hungarians, by whom he was in danger to
be worsted. And we in this Land can bring in our Testimony amongst many other;
that great deliverance in Eighty eight, from our enemies, which must needs be
ascribed to the fruit and powerful effect of prayer, which was then put up to
Heaven in that behalf.

nor does it want the Testimony, Spec. Belli. Sacri. p. 182.
of the enemies of the Church, we read of the Angronians a poor people in
France (that worshipped God sincerely, amidst a whole kingdom of Papists) that
when as they saw the enemy to approach, they would cry altogether, for aid and
succor to the Lord: whilst the Soldier fought without, the rest of the people
within, Fox. Martyr. 883.
(with their Ministers) put up their hearty prayers to Heaven, and that from
the morning until the evening; Insomuch that the popish Soldiers that went
against them, told their Commanders, that the Ministers of that Town with their
prayers, conjured, and bewitched them, so, as that they could not fight.

And the Queen Mother of Scotland was sometimes heard to say, Spec. Bell. Sac.
that she more feared the fastings and prayers of John Knox, Fox. Mart. Vol.
1.151.182.298.
and his Disciples, then an Army of thirty thousand men: such is the power of
prayer against the force, and fury of men, be they never so many, or mighty.
Other instances might be produced, but I shall referr my Reader to Fox. Mart.

nor has it power, only over Heaven, and Earth; but over Hell too. Thus our
Savior tells his Disciples (being to deal with Spiritual Powers) that some
Devils were so strong, that they could not be cast out, but by fasting and
prayer, Math. 17.21.
Math. 17.21. Importing that fasting and prayer, is able to cast out the
stoutest, and sturdiest Devil whatsoever. We read of a young man, that had
yielded himself body and soul to the Devil, Acts and Mon. 788.
for money; and had written the bond with his own blood; upon the prayers of
Luther and some others, in his Company, the Devil was forced to come, and throw
in the obligation amongst them, Acts and Mon. 788.

In the Life of Basil we have a story, that the Devil appeared to a Penitent
Sinner, being at his prayers, and told him, If you will let me alone, I will
let you alone, meddle not with me, and I will not meddle with you: he found
that by the prayers of that good soul, God had weakened his power, not only
upon that man who prayed, but upon others too; therefore he was content to come
to a cessation of arms with him, that he might turn his forces another way.
Athanasius tells us that the hearty recital of the first verse. of the Psalm.
68. would make all the Devils in Hell to quake. All conclude with Chrysostom,
that Prayer is Flagellum Daemonum, that wherewith we lash and scourge them.

And thus you see the prevalent power of Prayer, over Heaven, Earth, and Hell,
It opens for us the Golden gates of Heaven, they will not keep it out: it
flings open the iron gates on Earth, yea, the brazen gates of Hell, so that
they cannot keep us in. Let us not have this key to seek, when we should use
it, at every to turn it; do but turn it the right way, no door can stand closed
against it.

To Conclude. Eras. Adag. ex Lucia.
The Athenians had a great Anchor, which they called the holy Anchor, etc. and
this they were accustomed to cast out, when they were in greatest danger, at
Sea: Prayer is to us, as this Anchor. A great storm is arose, and yet
increases, the ship is like to be overwhelmed with waves: Now cast out this
great Anchor, etc. Oh! that we were more Abundant in this duty, then I would
not doubt, but that God would change the face of this our English nation; and
not only wipe blood from the Body, but tears from the eyes of this poor
Church, his disconsolate and afflicted Spouse.

We have done with the several Acts enjoined; and with Promises to each
annexed: But yet methinks something should be spoken to the Copulative [And];
which hand-fasts the one unto the other, man's Duty and Gods Bounty, our
Practice and Gods Promise. Ask (And) then it shall be given you: Seek, (And)
then you shall find; Knock (And) then it shall be opened unto you; The
condition is premised, and the Reward is thereupon promised. Do your part and
then God will do his: each Promise is made to each Act; with Implication. If
you Ask not; you have not; if you seek not, you find not: if you Knock not, it
will not be opened unto you. You see then how,

Evangelicall Promise^ are propounded to us with Iff's and Ands: they are to be
understood with a Conditional clause.

In both Covenants, the Promises run thus. Do this and live, says the Law,
Luke 10.28. Levit. 18.5. Luke. 10.28. Levit. 18.5. Acts 16.31.
Believe and thou shall be saved (says the Gospel, Acts 16.31,) we might
abound with proofs, I shall only commend the^e few unto you, Genesis 4.7. Ezekiel.
18.21. John 11.40. and 13.17. Romans 8.13. and 10.9. 2 Pet. 1.10.



Law admits no qualification, every one must exactly perform the condition in
his own Person: But the Gospel requires the condition with dispensation; for
many faylings it gives favor, and passes by infirmityes upon confession and
prayer, at the throne of grace; it accepts of a surety, and of weak endeavors,
which the Law does not.

Isay. 55.1. John 7.37. Math. 11.28. Resp.
Isay. 55.1. John 7.37. Math. 11.28.

general without exception; yet they are not absolute without condition; they
are general that none may despair; but yet conditional, that none may
prefume: thus John 3.16. Life is offered upon condition of Faith, John 3.16.
Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. Math. 11.28. Mark. 13.13.
and Ezekiel. 18.21. Pardon of sin, upon condition of Repentance and Math
11.28.22. Rest, and refreshment, upon condition of Submission and Obedience.
And Mark. 13.13. Salvation offered upon condition of perseverance. Still the
condition is expressed, or to be understood. Romans 5.15, 16. Resp.


But how then is the Promise free? Romans 5.15.16.

It is free in fieri* made only out of free grace and favor; but conditional
in facto esse, performed and accomplished with dependence upon duties in us.
Free in respect of merit, but not in respect of means.

Secondly, albeit God promises not good things to his Church but upon
condition, and in the use of the means; yet it is God that makes effectual,
the condition and means themselves: for in the Covenant of Grace, the
condition required of us, is also a part of Gods Covenant, Heb. 8.7, 8, 9, 10.
Isay. 26.12.
and promise made unto us, that he will do it for us, Heb. 8.7.9, 10, 11. etc:
Isay. 26.12. Phil. 1.19.
Phil. 1.29. So then albeit Gods promises in Scripture run with condition, and
so are made to all generally in the Church, (that none may have cause to blame
or accuse God,) yet the performance of the condition in respect of the Elect,
is of free grace, he freely doing that for us, which he requires of us.



Promises are of two sorts, either of the End, or of the Means, conducing and
leading to the end. The Promises concerning the End which is Salvation and
happiness, are with condition, as Believe and thou shall be saved; Be
faithful to the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, etc: These
Promises being Conditional; All partake not of the end, (that is blessedness
and salvation) because they keep not the condition required.

The Promises which concern the means of Life and Happiness, are most free
and absolute. So is Christ himself the blessed seed, Genesis 3.15. Isay. 42.6, 7.
and 49.5, 6. Math. 28.18, 19. Mark. 16.15. Romans 10.14, 15.
Genesis 3.15. freely and absolutely promised, Isay. 42.6, 7, and 49.5, 6. So the
Gospel and the preaching thereof is freely and absolutely given, Math. 28.18,
19. Mark 16.15. Romans 10.14, 15. Without this, how should men come to Faith, or
calling upon God, or get any other grace? And whosoever they are, that at any
time enjoy the Gospel, and outward means, it is from free mercy that they
enjoy them, Acts 16.6, 7. Ephesians. 1.7, 8, 9.

Faith and Repentance, the means of obtaining Life, etc.

means of salvation, so they are Ends and effects intended by God, to be
wrought by the preaching of the Gospel. These graces as Conditions of the new
Covenant of Life, and as means of Life, and happiness, are absolutely
promised to Gods Elect, without condition; for that these Promises concerning
means (as means) depend upon Gods election, which election is not
conditional, nor upon the foresight of such conditions wrought in us, (albeit
the execution of his decree be, Math. 20.16. 2 Timothy 2.19. Math. 20.16. 2 Timothy
2.19.
) And yet albeit these graces considered as means, are absolutely promised to
be given to Gods Elect, yet these graces being considered, as the next and most
immediate ends of the Gospel, for which it is sent and preached, they have
their conditions also, which must not be neglected. If we would believe, we
must hear; if we know, we must do, else no salvation is to be had.

Presumption, who put asunder what God had joined; what is propounded
conditionally, they presume upon absolutely; and what is true in a compounded
sense, they catch hold of in a divided sense, and take the words as an entire
Proposition in themselves; being ready to charge God foolishly with breach of
promise, when they either mistake the manner or quality of the promise, or else
fail in the condition that is to be observed in the obligation. Had thou
ever any seeming interest in Gods promises? that interest that thou had was
by contract, and covenant; In all contracts, and compacts; conditions are on
both patts, so in the covenant made betwixt God and man; whether first or
second; of works or grace; the former do this and live; the latter believe and
live: but thou observest the conditions in neither, but live in unbelief and
disobedience, and so long I must tell thee, thou have neither part nor
fellowship in any of the sweet promises of the Gospel; therefore set thy heart
at rest in that regard, glut thy self like the Dog in its own vomit, and be
more filthy still, Revel. Revel. 22.11, Proviso.
22.11. Childrens bread is not for Dogs. Dream no more of a Conveyance
without a Proviso; as thou do, if thou imaginest to have heaven, and
happiness, without observing the condition required.

Dejection, who think it is in vain to serve God, and that there is no profit
in keeping his Commandments: so those, Job. 21.15. Mal. 3.14. Job. 21.15. Mal.
3.15.
but you see the reward is joined with the work. Indeed God need not promise;
we owe him service, as we are his Creatures, but he allures us with his
Promises, and will reward us for well doing? Never ask with Peter, what shall
we have, we shall have what ever heart can wish. Ask and it shall be given
you; Math. 19.27*
it is not said what shall be given, because the gift is above all name (says
Austin) great shall our Reward be, 1 Cor. 15.58. Job. 1.9.
1 Cor. 15.58. This the Devil confesses, Job. 1.9. Of whom do they learn
their lesson that deny it?

misunderstanding, or misapplying them. Some make Conditional promises,
Absolute; and so build on them, expecting God should do that for them which he
has not engaged himself to do: and further press them, then God ever meant
them; when they offer to go one mile, they make them go two. So the Licentious
Libertines of this Age, who refuse the yoke, and cast off obedience, because
they are under grace, these would climb up Jacobs Ladder without treading the
rounds.

For avoiding of both these Rocks, let us first take special notice how far
God has engaged himself unto us by Promise; and then learn how to entertayn
those promises that God has made; I shall be breife in both.

The promises that God has made unto us, are of two sorts. Some concern the
Life that now is, others that concern the Life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.
1 Timothy 4.8. In both God has engaged himself unto us, but after a different
manner.

Concerning things belonging to this Life, God has engaged himself unto us,
yet not absolutely, but first with limitation to expediency; so far as they
may advance our spiritual good, so thought Agur, Pro. 30.8. Math. 10.30. Psalm.
89.31, 32.
Pro. 30.8. Secondly with Reservation of power to the Promiser, either to try
our graces, Math. 10.30. or to chasten us for our particular delinquencies,
Psalm. 89.31, 32. or to pay either in kind, or something equivalent; to pay
either money, or mony's worth.

Concerning Spiritual Blessings, belonging to a better life, he has engaged
himself yet farther in a higher degree. Absolutely (say some) but then we must
distinguish concerning Spiritual blessings (so far as in this life vouchsafed).
Some Promises are of Grace: Others are to Grace.

Those Promises that are made of Grace, are such as qualify a man for the
service of God, and in exercise whereof Gods service stands: such as Faith,
Hope, Charity, etc. These are absolutely promised to the Vessels of Mercy: But
the Question is, de modo, of the manner.

And here we must again consider them (as before); As they are means, without
which, Salvation cannot ordinarily be had; Dr. Jenison, his Tract, on Joh.
13.17. p. 23.
Or as they are ends and other effects of gifts, and graces of God, which are
more remotely the means of Salvation (as the preaching of the Gospel, by which
these Graces are wrought in us). As they are absolutely necessary to Salvation,
they are absolutely promised; but as they are the ends and effects, which God
works by the preaching of the Gospel sent and preached, they are not promised
absolutely, but upon condition, Joh. 17.27. Romans 10.17.
that we attend on those means, by which these graces must be wrought in us,
Joh. 17.27. Romans 10.17.

Secondly, in these gifts and graces absolutely necessary to Salvation, we are
to consider two things: First, Essentiam: Secondly, Gradum. Concerning the
Essence of them, the Promise is absolute to the Elect; but not promised to give
to all, al^ke degree and measure. Nor to any perfection in this life, as Faith,
without doubting, etc.

There are other Promises made to Grace which is the recompense of our service:
As, to him that has to him it shall be given: Math. 12.13, and 25.27. Gal.
6.16. Romans 14.17. 2 Cor. 12.7.
of this sort, is Peace of Conscience, full Assurance, joy of the Holy Ghost
Gal. 6.16. Romans 14.17. These are not absolutely promised, but with limitations
to expediencie, according to the diverse tempers of men's inclinations, that none
may be puffed up, 2 Cor. 12.7. nor any too much dejected and cast down, that
are of a more tender disposition. Secondly, with power reserved to chasten
scandalous sins of his Children, as in David* Psalm. 51. and 88.15 16. Psalm. 51.
and 88.15, 16.
and with Liberty to make good, by way of exchange, as Fear and Humility, etc.
or peace and comfort. Thus learn to understand the Promises rig tly.

In the next place, learn how to entertain, and with what assurance to expect
them; and that is with a confident, and obedient heart. Confident, because he
is faithful and true, that has promised, yea he has bound himself by two
immutable things, Heb. 6.18.
wherein it is impossible that he should lie, Heb. 6.18. his Word is assurance
enough; but to that he has added his Oath; not of any necessity, in regard of
the weakness of the truth, of his Promise; but out of superaboundant good will,
to have us assured, and have that way, consolation: so that we shall be
inexcusable, if we doubt of the fulfilling of them.

Secondly, as with a confident, so with an obedient heart, observing and
performing the Conditions, which we have covenanted: otherwise, we may well
fear, lest a Promise being left us, through disobedience, and unbelief, we
shall come short of it, Heb. 4, 1. Heb. 4.1.


For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him
that knocks it shall be opened. Text. Verse. 10.


The former Promise of Audience, is here further amplified from the large
extent of the grant: it reaches to every one that asks, seeks knocks, in
the right manner (as has been before showed) and the truth hereof is confirmed
from Experience: It is a known case, when was it otherwise? Did ever any seek
to God by faithful prayer (be they of what Sex, Calling, or Condition of Life
soever) that have not sped? Wherefore, doubt not, but you shall speed as others
have done, if you ask etc.

And here (by the way) take notice how our Blessed Savior, albeit he had
spoken very fully and comfortably to the Point (before) yet he fetches it
about again, and repeats the same thing, that before he had said, (with some
little variation of words). It must be granted then, That

The Gemination, Reduplication, or Repetition of Divine Truths, is useful, and
warrantable.

It is warrantable, Act. 13.42. and 17.9. Math. 5.2. compared with Luke 6.20.
Luke 6.20. Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.
in Preaching, Act. 13.42. and 17.9. Three Sabbath days together, the Apostle
handled one and the same Doctrine: so Math. 5.2. compared with Luke 6.20. Our
Savior himself made twice use of the same Sermon-Notes.

It is warrantable in Writing, as well as in Preaching, Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1*
12, 13.

It is warrantable in Praying, Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19. Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19. Psalm.
115.1. Psalm. 38.5.
David's Psalms are full of Rhetor^cal Repetitions; sometimes the same words
are repeated together immediately in the same sentence. So Psalm. 115.1. Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us.

Sometimes the same words, wherewith a sentence is ended, Psalm. 135.19, 20.
begins the next: as Psalm. 38.5. Sing unto the Lord with the Harp; with the
Harp, and the voice of a Psalm.

Sometimes the same words are repeated in the beginning of several Sentences,
Bless the Lord, O house of Israel, etc. Psalm. 135.19, 20.

Sometimes the same words are repeated in the end of several sentences; as
Psalm. 136. His mercy endures for ever. Psalm. 136.1. to the end. Psalm. 81.9.
Psalm. 47.6.


Sometimes the same words are repeated in the beginning, and in the end, Psalm.
8.^, 9.

Sometimes the same words are repeated in the beginning, midst, and end, Psalm.
47.6. Sing praises to our God, sing praises; sing praises to our King, sing
praises. And yet in none of the^e places are they used idely or superfluously.

Math. 6.7.

Math. 6.7. Luke 18.38, 39. Math. 26.44.
is condemned; but all Repetitions are not superfluous Tautologies. There are
Repetitions that are not vain, in prayers and praises, Luke 18.38, 39. Math.
26.44. They have respect sometimes to the matter urged, or Point that is spoken
of; and sometimes they respect the Persons, either speaking, or spoken unto.

As they concern the Point repeated and pressed, so they note;

First, the infallible truth of it, Genesis 41.32. and 2.17. Genesis 41.32. and 2.17.
Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 136.1, 2. Joh. 3.3, 5. Luke 13.3, 5.


Secondly, the excellency of it: so Psalm. 24.7, 8, 9, 10.

Thirdly, the profitable use thereof, Psalm. 136.1, 2.

Fourthly, the absolute necessity of the thing, Joh. 3.3, 5. Luke 13.3, 5.

As they respect the Persons; First, that repeareth the Point; so it imports,

First, Certainty of that which was uttered, so that he dares say it again,
Gal. 1.8, 9. Gal. 1.8, 9.


Secondly, earnest desire, that heed should be given thereunto, and not
suffered to slip, Heb. 7.1. Heb. 7.1.


In respect of the Persons to whom the Repetition is made, it implies, and
argues: First, their need thereof, in regard of their dullness, Heb. 5.11. 2 Timothy 2.14. 2 Pet. 1.12. Isa. 28.10. Phil. 3, 1. Eccles. 12.11.
in hearing, Heb. 5.11. Secondly, weakness in remembering, 2 Pet. 1.12. Thirdly,
backwardness in practicing, Isa. 28.10.

Secondly, it is for their good, Phil. 3.1. it leaves a surer print, and
deeper stamp in the mind. Doctrine delivered is like a Nail driven; but
Doctrine repeated, is as a Nail rivetred: so shows Solomon, Eccles. 12.11.

good Scribe (says Christ) brings out of his Treasury things both new and old.
Math. 13.52.
Old, for the matter: New, for the method: and yet the Attention of an Auditory
may sometimes be discouraged with too tedious Repetitions (as some do, who,
like the Clock, tell all that they told before, and but one more): This would
be avoided, as tedious to the Hearer.

Yet it is a supercilious, and fastidious delicacy of those, who cannot endure
to have their Attention guided into the ensuing Discourse, by the Repetition of
Heads formerly delivered; albeit it may fall out (as oftentimes it does) that
as in the payment of some Debt, what was overseen in the first telling, comes
to be made up in the second: what slipped the Memory upon the first delivery, is
upon the Repetition recalled. When God's Minister returns to you, Genesis 43.15.
as Joseph's Brethren did to him, with double money in their Sacks mouth: Why
find you fault?

It should not be grievous to any of us, to hear the same Doctrine more then
once; as it was to Peter, when he heard our Savior ask him the third time,
Joh. 21.23.
Peter love thou me? but esteem it a high favor from God, to afford us many
excitations to Holy Duties. 1 Samuel 30.1.
It may be Samuel knows not God's first Call, nor his second, nor his third:
yet, at last, he may be fully awaked, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears. 1 Samuel 3.10. Math. 26.75. Act. 10.16,
The third Crow of the Cock may awaken Peter: We read Act. 10.16. upon the
first and second speaking, Peter excuses himself with, Not so Lord: but upon
the third speaking, he is better resolved about God's Work. The third time, we
may mind that, which before was neglected: Come we now to the Extent or
Universality of the Grant whereby the Promise is enlarged.

[For] is a Particle of Argumentation: our Savior seems to reason thus. If God
be ready to hear all that call upon him (of what quality or degree soever they
be) and liberal in giving and supplying the wants and necessities of all that
seek unto him, Then you being his friends, and in special favor with him, need
not doubt of Audience: But the former is true, therefore doubt not of the
other. We begin with the Antecedent: The Position is,

God is of a bountiful and liberal disposition; willing and ready to
communicate his favors, and dispense his blessings in a plentiful manner to
all those that seek unto him, Romans 10.12. Jam. 1.5.
be they of what degree or quality soever, Romans 10.12. Jam. 1.5.

For Explication, and further confirmation of the Point, take we distinct
notice of these Particulars: First, to whom he gives: Secondly* what he gives.
Thirdly, the measure. Fourthly, the manner of his giving.

First, to whom he gives; and so our Text shows, Psalm. 145.9. Psalm. 33 5.
Psalm. 104.27. Psalm. 145.15, 16.
he gives to every one that asks, Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all and
his tender mercies are over all his works: And Psalm. 33.5. The whole Earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord; all Creatures living taste of his bounty,
Psalm. 104.27. and 145.15, 16. He feeds all living Creatures with his hand:
Every day he clothes the Earth, and plants it every year, with more cunning
Ornaments, then the Robes of Princes.

He is liberal to all men, just and unjust, Romans 10.12. Math. 5, 44, 45. Psalm.
8.5, 6. Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.
Romans 10.12. Math. 5.44, 45. He has great Treasures in the world, which he
has appointed to be con^mon, both Riches, Honor, long life, Posterity: by
these things no man can discern of love, or hatred; as it falls to the godly
so does it to the wicked; to the black-mouthed Blasphemer, as to him that
fears an Oath.

Albeit, to the Elect, he is bountiful in a more special manner, in their
Redemption, Sanctification, Salvation, etc.

Secondly, consider his Liberality in the things that he gives, 1 Timothy 6.17. 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 84.11. 2 Pet. 1.3.
He gives us all things that are good, both Indumenta, covering for our
nakedness; and Ornamenta, clothing for our comeliness: he gives Alimenta,
nourishment for our emptiness; and Delectamenta, delicious fare for our
daintiness: he gives us for this life, and for a better: Turn your eyes which
way you can, you may see God's bounty: Look without you, or about you, that
Earth, that Air, that Fire, that Water, that Food, that Fruit, that Beast, all
is from God's bounty; yea, that Heaven he has prepared for you, to receive you
in the end. Look within you that Und^rstanding, that Will, that Memory, those
Affections, that Conscience, that Soul, all is his largess; and therefore we
must conclude that God is liberal.

Thirdly, take notice of the measure of his Bounty: he does not only give, but
give us richly and plentifully, with a full hand, 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 81.10. and
145.16, 17. and 33.5.
and in a full measure. So 1 Timothy 6.17. he fills us to the full, Psalm. 81.10.
and 145.16, 17. and 33.5. and gives more then we ask oftentimes. So to Solomon,
Jacob, David, Hezekiah (as has been showed before) exceeding liberal he is to
all, though not to all alike: to some he gives more to some less: to some
Creatures he gives Being: to others, Life: to others, Sense; to others Reason:
to every one as he pleases, manifesting therein his Wisdom, Power, and
Providence.

Fourthly, Optat dare qui praecipit potere, Aust Deuteronomy. 5.29. Isa. 55.1, 2.
and lastly, Consider we the manner of his giving, and we must confess him
liberal: For,

First, he gives willingly, calling on us to call on him; asking us, that we
would ask him: he sues to us, that we would seek to him, Isa. 55.1, 2.

Secondly, he gives us readily: many times preventing us with his Blessings;
giving us, whilst the thought is in our nearts, before the words be in our
mouths, 2 Samuel 16.17. Luke 15.22. Act. 10.34. Romans 10.12. Psalm. 107.4,
10.23.39.
2 Samuel 16.17. or out of our mouths, Luke 15.22.

Thirdly, in giving indifferently, without respect of persons, Act. 10.34. Romans
10.12, 13. Psalm. 107.4, 10.23.39. All these, God hears and succors.

Fourthly, in giving freely, without respect either of former merits, Romans
11.35. or of future gain. Job 35.7. Revel. 22.17. Romans 11.35. Job 35.7. Rev.
22.17. Jam. 1.5. 1 Samuel 12.28.


Fifthly, in giving without upbraiding any, Jam. 1.5. Sinners he upbraids; as 1 Samuel 12.28. but not Suitors: for sinning against him, but never for seeking to
him. Thus it has been proved that God is liberal.

Goodness cannot but communicate it self; Bonum est sui diffusivum.
the Sun gives light, and heat, and influence to all Creatures: So God above
all, he exceeds all, in goodness; being essentially good, good without goodness
(as one speaks); originally, Austin. Math. 19.17.
and absolutely, the only good: so as there is none good but him, Math. 19.17.
He is so good, as that he is Causa bonorum et quae in nos, et quae in nobis,
the cause of all good, either received by us, or conceived in us. No wonder
then, if he exceeds in Liberality and Bounty.

Secondly, as he is good, so he is All sufficient, Act. 17.25.
and stands in need of nothing that he gives, Act. 17.25. Earthly Princes are
fain to measure their gifts, because their store is not infinite, the more they
give, the less they have, but God's goodness suffers no diminution: his hand is
ever full, though it ever dispense; and the filling of many Cisterns, is no
abatement to his ever-running Fountain. Innumerable are the drops of the Sea;
yet if one be taken out, it has (though insensibly) so much the less: but
though we receive never so much from this Fountain, we leave nothing the less
behind.

Thirdly, he is large in his love and affection to mankind, Prove. 8.31.
Prove. 8.31. His delights were with the sons of men. As it was the goodness of
God's works, that caused him to take contentment in them; so man, being the
chiefest of his Works, his chiefest delights were with them. What makes a man
liberal and bountiful, but a large heart? As our love is, such is our bounty.
Isa. 55.
Now as God's thoughts are above man's, so is his affection above man's; and so
(consequently) his Liberality and Bounty. It is said of Tiberius, the Emperor,
that he never denied his Favorite Sejanus any thing: oftentimes he prevented
his Requests; so that he needed but ask, and give thanks. All God's people are
his Favorites; so that they may have what heart can wish, or need require.

Fourthly, 2. Sam. 24.23. Jam. 1.5.
He is great in Might and Majesty, and no small gift can fall from such a hand,
Jam. 1.5. His hand is manus Regalis, and so he gives munus regale: his bounty
is as himself, and his gifts suit with his greatness (as before has been
showed you.)

Bohemia; ask Germany, what they thought of us: Would not they say, Happy art
thou O England, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord? That which
Moses said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Deuteronomy. 4 7.
might be made ours, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What Nation is there so great, who has God so
nigh to them as the Lord our God is, in all things we call upon him for. But
what use made we of this our Master's Liberality? Surely, whilst we should
have been recounting mercies, we were finding faults, and spying flaws in out
State and Government: The Civil was Tyrannical: the Ecclesiastical, Papistical,
etc. Nothing pleased; not the Hedge, not the Wine Press, not the Watchtower,
not the Watchmen; these we trample down with our own feet, pluck down with our
own hands: Isa. 5.4, 7.
When God looked for grapes, behold wild-grapes, for Judgment and
Righteousness, sin and wickedness. Hellish Atheism and Profaneness, horrid
Oaths and Blasphemies, contempt of God's Word and Ordinances, violation of
God's Sabbaths, Rebellion against Governors, Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Lying
etc. and what not?

So that we seemed to enter into a contention with God, whether he should be
more bountiful, or we more sinful. Never any Nation that was more beholding to
Divine Majesty, then this of ours: nor ever was there Nation more wicked and
ungrateful, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
than this of ours. Do you so requ^te the Lord, O foolish people and unkind?
yea surely thus, and no whit better. K. Philip branded one of his Soldiers on
the forehead with Ingratus hospes, for begging the Lands of one that had
kindly entertained him: so may God brand us with this ignominious note of
Ungrateful Nation. This was that which caused God to pull up the hedge, etc. to
lay us even with other distressed Churches, and make us know what we had, by
what we have not. Thank we unthankefulness, for what we have lost, for God
takes no forfeiture, but what unthankfulness makes.

But pass we from generals, to particulars; has not each Soul of us tasted of
our Masters bounty? besides our private interests in public mercies, has he
not cast upon thee and me blessings, not only undeserved, but undesired? and
been better to us then our prayers, than his promises, than our hopes: Psalm.
40.5.
may we not truly say with David, Psalm. 40.5. Many, O Lord my God, are the
wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward,
they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee; if I would declare and speak of
them, they are more then can be numbered. Yet consider, I beseech you, (as you
are able) the marvailous goodness and bounty of the Lord toward each
particular Soul of us: Can we cast our eyes any ways, but we see bounty? What
is our Body compounded of, but of blessings? What our Houses, Barns, Shops,
full of, but of God's bounty? The Cup runs over, which he has put into our
hands; from him we have Life, Health, soundness of Limbs, and Senses; Food,
Raiment, Deliverance, etc. And for Spiritual mercies, what tongue is able to
reach them? in his giving of his Son to dye for us, Tertul.
following us with the means to reclaim us, continuing his grace and goodness
to us. Now what does all this do? Surely it emboldens us to continue in sin, so
that (as one says) God loses much of his credit with us by his liberality and
bounty: yea, Romans 2.^.
we despise it, and turn his Grace into wantonness, when it should lead us to
true Repentance.

Should a Servant reason thus from his Masters bounty: He has dealt thus, and
thus with me, raised me from nothing to this estate, wherein now I am:
therefore I care not for pleasing him, etc. Would we not cry shame of such a
one, and deem him a very Miscreant? And yet how frequent are such reasonings?
Oh bewail this, lament it, humble your Souls for it, and do no more so
wickedly; but for the future look forward.

ingenuous acknowledgment thereof, and be affected with it to his prai^e, Psalm.
106.1. and 107.1. and 111.1, 2. Psalm. 106.1. and 107.1. and 111.1, 2.
In many places David does urge this Use vehemently. We use to extol bountiful
persons to the Skies; but God's bounty far excels: First, being the Springhead:
man is bountiful but by Participation; as Heat is in the Water, Light in the
Air: in man, Liberality is a Quality, but a Nature in God. Whence it is, that
God is never weary of his Bounty; but man is quickly tired in any act of
Charity or Liberality.

Secondly, in measure there is difference: the Creature proves but as a dry
brook, or Cistern; but God is a full Sea, never to be drawn dry: man's hand is
closed, or but one open at a time; but God's Hand is extensum, or expansum, no
man can do so much with both hands, as God with one: yet both God's hands are
giving, Prove. 3.16. Prove. 3.16.


Thirdly, in the Object, Man's Bounty extends but to a few, now to one, then to
another, they cannot give to all: but God's Liberality extends to all his
Creatures, yea to his very enemies.

Fourthly, in extent: man's Bounty is but in a few things, he may supply out
want of money, but not health: if health, yet not peace of Conscience: but God
blesses us in all manner of blessings.

Fifthly, nor can man give so effectually as God does; for they cannot make us
to enjoy what they give: but God gives us all things to enjoy: he gives comfort
with the Creature, and strength to it, to serve our turns too, so that his
Bounty exceeds. And therefore our Tongues ought to run over, in speaking of his
praises: therein we cannot Hyperbolize, we cannot exceed.

Secondly, Take heed of abusing God's Bounty: see that it lead you to
Repentance, Romans 2.4, 5. Reason as Joseph did, Genesis 39.8, 9. Romans 2.4, 5. Genesis
39.8, 9.
My Master has dealt thus kindly with me, committed all things to my trust,
advanced me to highest dignity, giving me command and rule over all his
Family, how can I then commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? God
has done thus and thus for me, shall I offend him? Surely a gracious heart
will thus reason.

Thirdly, be ambitious of the service of God, who is so liberal and bountiful:
every one desires to serve a liberal Master, they conceive their gifts will be
more then their earnings. No service like God's. Can the Son of Issai give you
Gardens and Vineyards (said Saul to his Courtiers;) so may I say of the service
of the World, Flesh, or Devil, these make large Offers, as the Devil did to
Christ, Math. 4. Munera magna quidem praebet, sed praebet in hamo, he puts
forth large Baits, but he hides damnable Hooks in them; And call you that
Bounty?

Fourth^y, frequently resort unto him by Prayer, seeing he is so liberal: It
was the Answer of a great Courtier to Qu. Elizabeth, who asked him, when he
would leave begging? When your Majesty (said he) leaves giving. The gates of
bountiful person^ never want Supplicants; and shall the gate of Heaven? Grace
sometimes seems over-modest, through Conscience of unthankfulness and
unworthiness, Say not, Were I as Abraham, David, etc. then God wou^d hear me
and I might boldly ask; but I am an unworthy Creature, full of infirmities,
this discourageth me, etc. But let not that: there is in our good God a
se^f-propension* to deal bountifully with us; and the oftener Suitors come to
him, the better welcome.

Fifthly, like good Children, see that you tread in the steps of your Heavenly
Father; and as you taste of God's bounty, so let others taste of yours. Isa.
32.8. Isa. 32.8.
The liberal man devises liberal things and by liberal things shall stand: He
is a great Devi^er, or Projector: he considers wi^h himself, what liberal
things are to be done; and* upon thi^ determines and concludes, that he will do
it* and then really and actually does it. He casts about with himself, where he
may do a noble action, where he may place a benefit, how he may do go^d, ^ither
to the Pub^ique, or else to private persons and accordingly does it. Th^s to
communicate that good we have to ot^ers is ^iberality; and in nothing can a man
be so like God as in this (says Naz^anzen), but then we must be careful that
our liberality be made up of true matter, and true form, else we are not like
God in it: he gives of his own, so must we: otherwise, the Receiver is but a
Receiver of stolen goods: Math. 12.43.
He gives largely, so must we, which may be done in a penny, as well as in a
pound, Mark 12.43. He gives freely, without any hope of requital, so should we.
If we give, that we may receive again: it is not Liberality rightly performed,
but a Bargain well made. If we thus give, thus communicate that we have, (be it
little* be it much) we are like God, and tread in his steps; and by liberal
things we shall stand; that is, prosper, multiply and be established the better
for it, 2 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10.
2 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10.

Sixthly, and lastly, in our obedience to God, let us measure the same measure
to him. that we have from him. The Lord gives to us not only beyond our
deserts, but beyond our desires: above that which we are able to ask or think,
Ephesians. 3.20.
Ephesians. 3.20. and shall we deal illiberally, and pinchingly with him? It is
true, that we can do nothing, but what is our duty, and what God has required
of us: but yet we ought to be so affected toward God, as that rather then we
would do less, (if it were possible) we would do more; as our Savior says in
another case, so may we say in this, Math. 6.40.
Math. 6.40. If he require thy Coat, be content he should have thy Cloak also,
if he require thee to go one mile, go for him two: if he require Prayer twice a
day, pray thrice rather then fail. But of this, we have before spoken.

This Universal Proposition, he proves from Experience; as if Christ should
say, It is a known case, common experience makes it good, that God is good to
all that seek unto him, and call upon him. All that ever asked him, have
obtained; all that ever sought, have found; all that ever knocked, have had it
opened unto them Search the Scriptures, look back to former times, and
instance, if if you can, in any one that has asked, sought, knocked, and has
not sped (if he sought, as he ought, and in whom there was not some lawful
impediment, by which he made himself unworthy of receiving) (for with that
double limitation is this Universal Grant, Jansen. Concord. Evang. c. 43.
or general Rule, to be understood). In that our Savior, by this Argument,
confirms the Doctrine he had taught; Observe,

Arguments drawn from Experience, are strong confirmations of Faith, and good
ground of hope for the future.

Experience is that Knowledge, which a man g^ts of any thing, by Proof and
Trial, and it is twofold: First, such as our selves have had: of which Moses
speaks, Deuteronomy. 1.29, 31. Secondly, Deuteronomy. 1.29, 31.
of such things as we have observed other men to have; and that is a ground of
hope, in applying their examples and successes to our own encouragement: as
Deuteronomy. 3.21. Deuteronomy. 3.21.
From Experience either way, we may ground our Hope and Confidence, and
strongly reason from what God has done, to what he will do. Upon no Premises
does and Conclusion follow more Logically, or more undeniably, then upon this.

nothing more ordinary in Scripture, then thus to Reason: so did the Wife of
Manoah argue it out with her Husband, Judge. 13.23.
Judge. 13.23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a
Burnt-offering, and a Meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed
us all these things, nor would, as at this time, have showed us such things as
these. David, 1 Samuel 17.37.
from his youth, had learned this Divine Art of Argumentation, 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, Psalm. 3.4, 5. and 6.9.
and 23. the whole.
and out of the paw of the Bear, he will delivere me out of the hand of this
Philistine; and in the whole course of his life he had made use of it, Psalm.
3.4, 5. and 6.9. and Psalm. 23. from v. 1. to the end.

The like Reasoning used St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.10.
he often made use of the same Medium; as 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so
great a death, and will deliver us. A great death it was, that he (with others)
was delivered from. All death in it self is of one size; but the wages of
Death, and the dangers of Death are of different dimensions: they gave
themselves up for dead men, their dangers seemed to be inevitable; but God has
delivered us (says he) and does deliver us. Well (...) what of that? Thence he
infers, and we trust that he will yet deliver us. He turns that experience into
confidence, and makes it a ground of hope for the future. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.
The like we have, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. He was delivered from the rage of that
cruel Tyrant Nero, and concludes thereupon; that God shall deliver him from
every evil work; that is, of evil men, conspiring against him, before the time
that he had finished his course. Romans 5.4.
And thus the same Apostle makes Experience the Nur^e of Hope: Tribulation
works Patience; and Patience, Experience; and Experi^^ce, Hope, Romans 5.4.

Heb. 13.8. Jam. 1.17. Numb. 23.19. Joh. 13.1. 2 Samuel 23.5.
his Power and Will are never weakened: his Truth and Promise shall abide
forever. Whom he once loves, he loves to the end: his Covenant remains the
same, and his Children are as dear to him as ever.

Sense, and that easily errs not, in its proper object; whereas the Discourse
of Reason is subject to err in discoursing and concluding of things. Hence it
is, that Experimental Knowledge is preferred to Intellectual; that, without
this, profits a Christian nothing. Experimental Know^edge is all in all: It
seals Intellectual: that it is true, Philosophy teaches me, that fire will
burn: but if I put my finger into it, the truth is infallible, for that I have
felt what I have heard. Hence a^ose our English Proverb, that seeing is
believing. This was verified in Thomas, when he put his fingers into the wounds
of Christ, Joh. 20.25, 26.
Joh. 20.25, 26.

Thomas was reproved for, and they pronounced Blessed, Joh. 20.27, 29.
that have not seen, yet have bel^eved Joh. 20.27 29.

founded on Sense but on the Scripture; albeit, it be by Sense strongly
confirmed. Thomas was blamed for his sullen incredulity, in that he gave no
credit to the report of his Fellow Disciples (ten against one) who had both
seen and heard more then he; and for venting his incredulous thoughts in such a
bo^d and peremptory style, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails:
nay* that is not enough, Except I put my finger into the print of the na^ls:
n^y, yet more, Except I thrust my head into his side: Except with hand and
finger I measure his wounds* and find by due proportion, that they are the
same, which he received on the Cross: I cannot* na^, the truth is, Sermon. of
Repent.
I will not believe. Ah wil^u^ Thomas, said Mr. Bradford, thus to add obstinacy
to thy Incredulity. And for this he i^ blamed. N^r does our S^^iour deny Thomas
to be blessed in saying Blessed are they that have not seen, yet have believed;
but one^y prefers others that h^v^ not s^en, and yet have believed: Both sorts
are blessed: they that ^ee not, and ve^ be^i^ve, are surely blessed; but they a
e not blessed alone: those that believed, and see, are bl^ssed as well ^s they
though no^ so much as they: All Faith is blessed, but that most, which has
east means and helps. But the Faith of the best is but weak, and like Moses's
hands, it soon becomes weak: and God is well pleased (in such a case) that
Sight and Sense, like Hur, and Aaron, should support it: Exodus 17.12.
It is one thing to live by Faith, and another thing to live by sight: but we
are all generally inclined to walk by Sense, rather then by Faith. And the more
we see, and feel, and taste, of the goodness of God, the more confident we are
to rely on God: for that which is yet, we neither see nor feel: God considering
our mould, condescends to our infirmity, and therefore calls on us to taste and
see, that we may learn to trust, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3.
Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3.

Experience, and esteem it, although a Mistress, yet of none but fools? A
Mistress of Fools it is indeed, even of such fools, as will learn no wisdom,
but what is beaten into them with rods, through a torn skin: a man may buy
Experience too dear (as we say of gold), so Adam bought his experimental
knowledge, of good and evil, by eating the forbidden fruit: and Solomon by his
dear-bought experience, found all worldly delights under the Sun, to be vanity,
and vexation: woeful is that Experience, which is gotten by sin and misery. And
the Mistress of fools, it may be said to be, for that it teaches men wisdom,
and makes fools wise, if they be not besotted: blockish Scholars are they,
whom Experience does not teach. It is of force, to set Reason it self to
School, and to convince the best Wisdom of the Schools, of Folly. But the
wisest that are, may learn of Experience, and be taught many things by it. It
is God only, that is not taught by Experience, to whose knowledge all things
are present, at all times, and before all times. But there is no Creature so
perfect in Wisdom and Knowledge, but may learn some things for the present, and
for time to come, by Experience of what is past. The day following (says
Seneca) is a Scholar to that which went before; and the time past, reads
useful Lectures to the present time: He that would see what shall be, let him
consider what has been.

There are many particulars, the knowledge whereof makes for our good, which no
Wit, Art, nor Study, nor Counsel, of others, could teach us, had we not learned
them from Experience. The Physician finds out many secrets by Experience, which
he could never attain unto by reading and study. And this was (as is thought by
Josephus) one end, why God gave to those that lived in the first Age of the
World, so long life; that by Experience and Observation they might learn the
skill and art of sundry courses, (especially of the Stars) the knowledge
whereof otherwise, would hardly, if at all (without miracle) have been attained
unto.

And in diverse doubtful Cases, Experience will afford us better help for
direction, then any other ordinary Rule. As a man in the dark, can better find
the way, or door, to which he has been used, then another that never went it,
can do by the best Instructions, that can be given him. So that man who is
reading in a book, to which he was used, when the twilight surprizeth him can
longer, and better read in that book, then he who never read in it before.
Thus; through Experience, we shall better walk in the dark of Tribulation, then
others that want it, and go about our Duties of Obedience with more facility,
and more readily, then others that are not acquainted with it. Therefore, let
Experience have her due praise, she is a good Mistress, and is able to make
fools wise, and those who are wise, wiser then they are: If commendable, by
Experience, they shall become admirable.

Prudence, to learn by Experience, how to relieve your spirits; when they begin
to droop and faint, then gather upon God from former experiments of his
goodness to you, or others: which that you may the better do, take these things
into consideration.

The work of experience, (even of civil things) is of great use, (and of no
less in divine and spiritual matters) it makes us bold with God, as men are
with an experienced friend: such a one is my old friend, my tried friend, he
never denied me, I Will to him, I dare say he will not fail me: So says an
experienced Christian; God did hear me at such a time, and such a time, I Will to
him again. It was the saying of a godly man, upon the accomplishment of a great
request that he made to God, I have tried God often now I will trust him, he
never denied me. We ought, indeed, to trust God, upon his bare word, although
we had never tried him; but when he stoops so low, as to help our Faith upon
former experiments, this should strengthen our confidence, and put us on to go
to God the more cheerfully, as to a tried Friend, Psalm. 63.7. Psalm. 63.7.


Secondly, It is of great use, to quell those distrustful fears, which much
distract us. A fresh water Soldier is afraid of every shot, and thinks it will
cost him his life, when an experienced soldier is fearless, and more valorous:
so it is with an unexperienced Christian, he fears many times, where no fear
is, he dares not look sickness in the face, poverty in the face, persecution in
the face; but the experienced man is as bold as a Lion; Psalm. 53.5. Prove. 28.
Romans 8.38, 39.
he fears none of all these things, Romans 8.38, 39. Experience makes a man a
daring man: where read you of two such Champions as David and Paul? and where
of two that made more use of their experiments then they?

Thirdly, It quiets the heart in God's absence; and in time of desertion, it
waits, with patience, for his approach again: should one, born in a Dungeon
(that never in his lifetime saw the Sun) be brought forth, and showed it;
would he not, when he saw it set, think it to be quite lost? But Experience
teaches us, that the next morning it will appear again, and causes us
patiently to wait for the rising of it: So is it with the experienced
Christian, he knows that Goo's concealing of himself is but a wise Discipline
for a time; and that he will not always hide himself, Psalm. 42. and 43.5. and
77.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 42. and 43 5. and 77.7, 8, 9.
So said that Martyr to his Friend Austin, He is come Austin, he is come:
albeit, for a time, he had no sense of comfort. When I want feeling and sense
of Goo's favor, yet by former workings in my soul, which I have had experience
of, I may be sure that I am God's Child. As a woman that has felt the Babe in
the Womb quick and stirring, albeit it lie still for a while, yet she knows
that she is with child, by that which she has formerly felt.

Fourthly, it sweetens Gods Promises and mercies to us: As he that has tasted
honey, knows the sweetness of it, better then any man can do by the reading of
it: So he that tastes how good God is in an experimental way, finds more
sweetness therein, then in all that he hears, or reads thereof. The best
Minister on Earth cannot teach so much of God's love and favor, as Experience
does. There is far more sweetness to be found in the performance of Promises,
then can be conceived, in holding the Promises themselves. As one that has
possession of an inheritance, finds more sweetness therein, then he could find
whilst it was his only in reversion, and expectation. And he that sees the
beauty of the Sun, takes far more delight in it, then a blind man from his
birth that hears the Theory of the Sun read unto him. The meditation of
Divines upon the joys of Heaven, are able to ravish the soul of the reader
with much delight, yet they are nothing to that which St. Paul found in his
rapture into the third Heaven, 1 Cor. 12.2.
2 Cor. 12.2.

Fifthly and lastly; It is experience, and observation that does make a man to
be a wise Christian; what makes old men to be wiser then the younger sort, Job.
12.12.
as Elihu speaks, but experience (which youth wants)? breathed Deer, are not so
quickly caught; nor experienced Christians so soon entangled with the worl'ds
deceits, and Satan's snares. It is only this experimental knowledge that makes
a man expert in the trade and warfare of a Christian. Take a man that has only
read much of Husbandry, Physic, Merchandise, and Martial affairs, and gotten
into his head the notion of all these; yet one that has not read half so much,
but has been of long practice, and good experience in these, will go as far
beyond the other; as he does that has read much, and wants experience, beyond
one that is a mere novice in them.



observe Gods dealing with you or others, both in Temporal, and Spiritual
matters: take notice and observe diligently all the special favors of God,
and experiments you receive of his Justice, Mercy, Providence, Truth, Goodness
to your selves or others from time to time. There lives not a man on earth but
tastes of all these in his own person, from day to day, yet how few are there
that observe them as they ought?

Call to mind, and keep in mind the many favors God has bestowed on thee,
from thy Childhood, in providing meat for thy mouth, cloth for thy back, etc.
Have you forgotten (says Christ) how I fed you with a little bread and a few
fishes: Luke 22.35.
and when I sent you forth without money in your purse, meat in your scrip,
wanted you any thing, they answered no Lord, Oh forget not this his goodness,
be mindful of it daily.

Call to mind the many dangers, from which he has delivered thee, and let
those preservations never be forgottten by thee, Psalm. 116.8.
Psalm. 116.8.

Above all, consider how God has dealt with thee in soul-businesses, observe
how he deals with thee in the use of his Ordinances, what power the word has
had in working upon thy soul, to the convincing, humbling, and converting of
thee; observe what answer God has made unto thy Prayers, Psalm. 3, 4. and 5.3
Psalm. 3.4.

Call to mind, and keep a record of the passages of Gods prodence toward
others; whether of Justice, or of mercy. Consider the days of old, what God
has done, Psalm. 44.1, 2.8. and of later times what mervailous things he has
done for his Church: Psalm. 44.1, 2.8,
run through the acts and stories of holy writ; Conferr with experienced
Christians, Psalm. 66.16.
they will tell thee what God has done for their soul: thus keep a record of
Gods works in thy mind, and memory.

Secondly; then plead them unto God; bring them out of thy treasury, and make
use of them, as occasion requires. Thus did David frequently, Psalm. 4.1.4. and
27.9, 10. and 22.9. and 139.13. Psalm. 4.1.4. and 27.9, 10. Psalm. 22.9.10. Psalm.
56.13. and 71.6.9.17, 18. Psalm. 86.13.16. and 139.13. Genesis 32.10, 11. Numb.
14.19. Isay. 51.9, 10, 11.
So did Jacob, Genesis 32.10, 11. So Moses pleads for a pardon of course, when God
was enraged against Israel, upon this ground, because he had pardoned them many
times before, Numb. 14.19. And see what answer God makes unto it, verse 20. Lo
I have pardoned them according to thy word. And so the Church uses this as an
argument that God would preserve them from their enemies, Isay. 51.9, 10, 11.
This is no good argument with man; Sir, you have helped me often, therefore
help me still; but with God it is a prevayling argument: we want not arguments
of this kind, there is none of us but can say to God now this hour; Lord thou
have preserved me this day hitherto, and brought me hither, now Lord enable me
to hear: Lord thou do that too, therefore enable me to understand, and thou
do that for me too, now enable me to believe: and seeing thou have given me
grace to believe, give me strength that I may practice: and if all that be
granted, desire grace to persevere unto the end. Thus labor for the first
Grace, and never rest till thou feel the addition of the second grace: and
to that, a third. The surest and safest way to lay hold on God is the
consideration of what God has done; and the pleading of it from thy
experience, and thus you shall get much profit by it.

See then that you Register God's favors, and pass not heedlesly by God's
dealings with you, or others; for in so doing, you fling that staff out of your
hands which should stay you, and support you. Did we treasure up Experiments
the former part of our life would come in to help the latter: had we done this
long ago, we might have been wiser then our Teachers.



Providence, but a Promise joined with a Providence; and the distillation that
comes from both these, make up that Christian experience, which we must trust
unto: unless the cause be good and warranted by the Word, and have a Promise to
attend it, our Confidence may come bleeding home, notwithstanding former good
success had. In the former, the Children of Benjamin failed, they had a bad
cause in hand, and yet from the good success they had in two former Battails
against Israel; they grew confident that they should prevail a third time,
Judge. 20.32. In the latter, Sampson failed, when he encouraged himself in his
former experience, that he would go out, as in former times, Judge. 16.20.
after that Dalilah had clipped off his Locks, but the Lord was departed from
him. Let the cause we undertake be good, and our Calling to the undertaking
warrantable, and so we may safely reason from Experience, and strengthen our
Faith thereby. And thus we have spoke to the Antecedent of the Proposition; God
is liberal to all that call upon him, proved from Experience: Now we come to
the Consequent, then much more will he give you Audience, who are his Friends
and Children, etc. Observe from thence, that

General Acts of Grace are to be made our own by particular Application.



Thus generals are particularly to be applied. The Lord, in assenting to
Solomon's Prayer, made a general promise to all the people, that what Prayer or
Supplication soever should be made toward his Temple, he would hear in Heaven,
and forgive, 1 King. 8.37, 40. Jehosaphat afterward being in distress, made
use of that general Promise, and applied it to his own present condition, 2 Chronicles. 2.8, 10.

And as generals are particulars, so particularly are generally, applyable
where the ground is general. The Lord encouraged Josua to go on where Moses
left, upon this ground; As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee, I will
never fail thee, nor forsake thee, Jos. 1.5. And St. Paul applies that Promise
to all the Faithful, in any strait or distress of life (as the Lord himself had
applied it before from Moses to Josua) Heb. 13.5. So Psalm. 34.5. They looked
unto him, and were lightened, etc. and the ground that these good men had to be
heard, was David's particular example, ver. 6. This poor man cried, etc.

And thus David encourages himself to call on God from God's gracious dealings
with others, Psalm. 22.4. and propounds his own example for a President to
others, in point of Confession, Psalm. 32.6. And St. Paul's obtaining mercy, is
propounded for a Pattern to all penitent sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13, 16.



Ratio Formalis, the Reason of the Blessing is general, it firmly holds
according to the Rule of Reason, and such reasoning is frequent in Scripture;
as Romans 3.28. all that are justified, are justified by Faith. How proves the
Apostle that, why Abraham was so justified, Romans 4.1. Was the reasons of
Abraham's Justification his Faith? then it follows, that wheresoever is true
Faith, there is also Justification.

Heb. 13.

Gal. 3.29. and 4.28. Heb. 6.17. and 11.9.

Nor is God any Respecter of Persons, Act. 10.34. Romans 2.11. It is a wonder
then, why Papists should, on this ground, reject particular Faith, because we
lack a particular wo^d; when as generals delivered in Scripture, either of
promise, blessing, comfort, are intentionally meant to particulars rightly
qualified: what need particular nameing? Shall no more be believed nor applied,
then that which is commended to us by name? where is it written that any man by
name shall rise at the last day? is it not therefore sure that they shall,
because they are not named? With other such like questions, we might quit them:
but I come nearer home.

Abraham David Joshua, etc: what gracious promises he has made to his Saints,
and Servants, they are ready to reply; God indeed has made such promises, don
great things for his, but those Consolations did personally belong to them,
that had them, and were to be applied by them, to whom they were directly
spoken, and were particularly directed, when indeed Gods intent is that his
dealings should be exemplary, 1 Timothy 1.16. Romans 4.23, 24.
1 Timothy 1.16. Romans 4.23.24. and that every humbled penitent and believing soul
should hold themselves as much interested in them, as if they had been named in
particular, Genesis 3.7.9. Mark 13.37.
Genesis 3.7.9. Look what our Savior says to his Disciples in matter of Duty,
what I say unto you, I say unto you all; So we may say in matters of mercy,
what I have promised to one, I have promised to you all (in an equal estate.)

we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have Hope, Romans 15.4.



Practical Syllogism, thus. Every one that asks receives and every one
that seeks, finds, etc. But I ask, seek, and knock, and therefore shall be
heard, etc. The proposition is from the general promise of Christ, the
assumption from our own practice; The Conclusion is Confidence to be heard;
which necessarily follows. So in other particulars, where the promise is
universal.

But here, some Cautions must be given, and they are these: first, distinguish
general from personal privileges, Numb. 12.6, 7.8.
as Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. If there be a Prophet (says God) I will speak to him by
dream or vision, the two usual and ordinary means, whereby I am wont to
impart my self unto them: but my servant Moses is not so, he is none of the
ordinary rank of Prophets, and I have thought good to grace him with an
especial favor, and entirenesse; and to speak to him in a more familiar
manner then to others. To be instructed in all things thou may expect, that
is a general favor to all the godly; but to have God speak to thee face to
face, as he did to Moses, may not be expected by us, Isay. 8.20.
Isay 8.20. that is the Rule we must be guided by.

Again, where the favor is General, yet the manner and means of conveyance
may be Personal; To be fed in famine, is a general promise, Psalm. 37. and is
to be applied to thy self: Psalm. 37.
but to be fed as Eliah was by a Raven, or as the Widow of Sareptha was,
miraculously, was their personal Privilege; So for deliverance, God will
still deliver effective, but the same in specie, in kind, we cannot be assured
of; As to be delivered from the fire by quenching it, etc: but, that God will
be with us to support us in fire and water, we may conclude.

Secondly; in the Application of those General promises to thy self, which God
has made to others; see thou bring like Qualifications, and then spare not to
infer according to the latitude thereof, God will receive all Penitents into
favor, and forgive their sins, Ezekiel. 18. but see that thou be a true Penitent,
if thou would'd comfortably apply that promise to thy self. Observe these
Cautions, and then thou may comfortably apply Generals to thy own
particular, for thy encouragement, and strengthening.

Psalm. 40.10. and 60.16. So David promises to do, Psalm. 40.10. and 60.16.
Psalm. 51.12. John 4.28, 29.
Psalm. 51.12. So John 4.28, 29. And this may be one reason why God brings us
through so many troubles, to furnish us with a body of experimental Doctrine.

These are like those Mandrakes the Spouse speaks of, Cant. 7.13. they give a
sweet smell: powerful in the provocation of others: they should be at our
gates, Cant. 7.13.
not far to seek. New and Old must be laid up, and not spent lavishly; but
preserved and brought out again, as occasion is offered. When thou art
converted strengthen thy Brethren (said Christ to Peter) Luke 22.32, that is,
Luke 22.32. 2 Cor. 1.4,
comfort and revive them by thine own experience. So St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.4. He
assures us, that for this cause God comforted him in his affliction that he
might be able to comfort others in any trouble, with the same comfort wherewith
he had been comforted.

In visiting of a sick friend, of some Disease, out of which we our selves have
been recovered, we are still prescribing medicines, upon our own experience, Oh
that we could, or would thus play the Physicians to our Neighbors Soul, and
tell him what we have found to be good by our own experience, and how good God
has been unto us. In so doing, the profit and benefit would be greater then we
are aware.

Thus I have, by God's gracious Assistance, carried you through the Exposition
of this excellent Parable, of a Friend coming to his Friend at Midnight,
wherein you have had the Exercise of Prayer opened; and by sundry Arguments
pressed the efficacy and power of faithful Prayer manifested; Audience from our
Blessed Saviors own mouth assured: And if notwithstanding all that has been
said, our hard and Earthly Hearts are not wrought upon, to fall upon the Duty;
We have another Parable propounded in the words following, wherein our Savior
comes closer to us; of which we shall speak (God willing) in the next place: I
shall conclude this, and what has been said of t^is, with the words of David;

Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107.43.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index or Table for the readier finding out of the most
material things the handled and enlarged in foregoing Exposition upon that
Parable, Luke 11.5- 11.
A.
ABility is in God to help us, page 219 Abundance of outward things is no sure
note of Gods special love, page 78 Yet they are fruits of Gods common love,
page 79 Abundance is pernicious to the wicked, ibid. Accommodation and
Mutuation how they differ, page 140 Affections corrupt blind the judgment,
page 265 Affections, inordinate, condemned, page 266 Affections, when they
exceed their bounds page 266 Affections, how to be limited, page 267
Afflictions not absolutely to be prayed against, page 181 Affliction, a good
Schoolmaster and many ways profitable, page 208 Afflictions necessary, page
211 Afflictions are a part of our portion and may not prodigally be wasted,
page 213 Afflictions are not profitable to the wicked, page 207 They cause the
wicked to blaspheme, page 135 Alienation of goods, the several kinds, page 140
Alms, we all live by, page 396 Amen; why Christ is so styled, page 318 Why St.
John always doubl's it, and not the other Evangelists, page 318 Anger
distinguished of, page 46 In Gods Anger love may be seen, page 247 Angry-men,
make no friendship with, page 46 God Answers such as Ask, page 401 How God
Answers us and when, page 232, 233 Prayer is the holy Anchor, page 436
Appetite, how to get to our spiritual food, page 175 Application to be made of
doctrine, page 320, 321 And of promises, page 460 In Applying general promises
some cautions given, page 463 Spare to Ask and spare to speed, page 401
Assurance of God's love to us may be gathered from Gods dealing with others,
page 462 Author^ty humane, of what use i^ is. page 316
B.
BAnckrupts, notable Thieves, page 152 How God is said to be in Bed, page 269
339 When God is in Bed, no creature is up, page 269 The Grave is a Bed, page
274 A good Conscience is a soft Bed page 271. 273 Beggars a Corporation of
them, page 77 They are the Vermin of the Commonwealth, page 77 We are all a
nest of Beggars, page 396 Street- Beggary condemned, page 399 We must pray like
Beggars, page 395 We have a license to Beg, page 399 The Godly may be put to
Beg Bread, page 78 Blessings Temporal, how far they are promised, page 76
Temporal Blessings are but lent us, page 55 A different manner in Gods
dispensation of Blessings temporal and spiritual, page 157 We must willingly
part with them when God calls for them, page 158 We may not be proud of them,
ibid. Not abu^e them, ibid. Bread what it notes, page 163 Want of Bread, a
great Judgment, page 88 That especially causes Famine, page 90 Bread made of
se^erall things, page 89 Three sorts of Bread mentioned in the Scriptures, page
172 Bread of life the best Bread, page 175 Books are the dead to whom we may
resort in trouble, page 105 Borrowers of three sorts, page 149 What Borrowers
may not be lent unto, page 148 None should Borrow without great need, page 151
Duties of Borrowers, page 152 What Borrowers should do that are not ab^e to
par, page 154 Bounty of God toward us is very great, page 448 Gods Bounty is
much abused, page 449 His Bounty many ways exceeds man's, page 450 If should
encourage us to seek to him, page 451 As we taste of his Bounty, so should he of
ours, page 451 A Churl may sometimes seem Bountiful page 351 It is a fault
to overburthen a Friend, page 160
C.
MUch wickedness is committed by Candlelight. page 128 Catechized Familyes,
the best Familyes, page 17 Catechizing used by Christ himself, page 31 A good
Catechism for Inferiors, page 11 In works of Charity what to be respected by
us, page 336 Christ to be believed on his bare word, page 318 Godly Familyes
are little Churches, page 18 Church Government to be set up in our Familyes,
page 23 The Church suffers much by her Watchmen, page 282 The Churches peace
disquieted by many, page 277 The Church troubled by her own Children, page 280
The Church scandalized by her distractions, page 288 God is highly offended
with the Churches disturbers, page 289 Many blessings attend on the Churches
peace, page 287 The Church militant, like a ship on the Sea, page 341 God will
arise for his Churches succor, page 340 Company, if good, comfortable in our
journey, page 200 Complements not altogether to be condemned, page 137
Conditions required in both Covenants, yet with a difference page 437 God
performs the Condition for us, that he requires of us, ibid. The benefit of a
good Conscience, and horror of an i^l conscience, page 272 Covetous persons no
sure Friends, page 46 No Creature can comfort us whilst the Creator hides his
face, page 270
D.
DAngers are to be prevented, page 247 Under the greatest Darkness seek for
light, page 135 Dead should not be di^quieted, page 276 The Devil may enter
into a Dead Corpse and move it, page 275 A double dealer not to be trusted, page
47 Decree when past, all hope is past, page 259 Delays whet desires, page 227
God may Delay us, and yet hear us, page 224 Why God Delays before he answers,
page 225 Means to sustain our hearts under Delays, page 229 What to do when
God Delays us, page 231 Denyals how to be made, page 216 Depopulatours like
Caterpillars, page 93 Desires should be kept within bounds, page 176 Rules
given to that purpose, ibid. Desires in some cases should reach beyond our
abilityes, page 181 God is better to us then our Desires, page 349 He does not
always answer our Desires in the same degree nor kind, page 345 Gods gracious
denyalls are better then his angry yieldings, page 355 Discipline, no family
may be without, page 25 Discouragements should not keep us from seeking to God,
page 302 Dogs their fidelity to their Masters page 193 Door, Heaven has two
leaff'd, page 425, 426. It stands not always open, page 427 No entrance into
Heaven but by the Door, ibid. When the Door may be said to be shut, page 259
The Door is open whilst means are continued, page 260 When the Door is shut,
Prayer is not speeding, page 259 All Doors fly open to Prayer, page 433
Drunkenness brings to beggary, page 94 The Drunkard not to be trusted, page 47
It is a sign of Drunkenness to forget what we heard at a Sermon, page 13
E.
Earliness twofold, page 422 Earnest we must be for small things as well as
great; yet not with the like degree, page 362 Eloquence of superiors is in
Action, page 12 Enemy reconciled, hard to trust, page 48 Endeavors must second
our Prayers, page 415 Enough is a language few can speak, page 178 Epicurism
one of England's sins, page 164 Evil, of two sorts, page 181 How of two Evils
we may choose the less, page 184 Example of Christ is our Samplar, page 10. 15.
The force of the Rule lies in the Example, page 11. Excuses sinful, manifold,
page 236 Experience what, page 453 What is required to make Christian
Experience, page 460 It is good reasoning from Experience, page 453 In what
sense it is said to be the Mistress of fools, page 455 None so wise but may
learn by it, page 455 Experience teaches what reading cannot, page 456
Experience may be bought too dear, page 455 The benefit that comes by
Experience is great, page 456 How to make a right use of Experience. page 458
Our Experiments to be pleaded to God, page 459 It is not always safe to ground
our confidence upon former Experiments, page 460 Others should be acquainted
with our Experiences, page 463 Eye of God is healing, page 185 God sees through
his Eyelids. page 342
F.
FAith of a Christian not grounded on sense, yet confirmed by it, page 454
Family, the Foundation of all societyes, page 16 Familyes to be instructed by
Governors, page 15 It is a great honor to a family to be Godly, page 18 The
sad complaint that untaught familyes will one day make against Governors, page
19 Neglect of instructing Families, whence it arises, page 20 Familyes should
have Church Government, page 24 All that offer themselves may not be admitted
into our Familyes, page 23 In good Familyes may be some bad, page 28
Familiarity with God in a humble way God admitts of, page 399 Famine, the sad
face of it discovered, page 96 The effects of it showed, page 97 Sin causes
God to send it, page 100 Fare, homely, contented former times, page 164 Feast,
not to be judged of by full cupps, page 168 Some Feasts made not for laughter,
but for slaughter, page 168 Rules for Feasting, given, page 170 Fervency
wherein it consists, page 358 Flattery, all smooth language is not, page 137
Food of the soul is to be sought after, and motives thereunto, page 175
Counterfeit Friends of diverse sorts, page 37 Friends, true, very few, page 35
The world is a Time-serving Friend, page 59 The flesh a Table-Friend, page 60
The Devil a Treacherous Friend, ibid. No Creature stands in such need of a
Friend as man, page 44 The sad condition of a Friendlesse man, page 103 What
Friends to make choice of, page 46 The bad ways that some take to procure
Friends, page 51 The best way to obtain them, page 52 To find Friends when
there is no need, and to want them when there is need, are both alike easy,
page 105 A true Friend was borne for his Friend, page 107 Earthly Friends are
subservient to God, page 108 Earthly Friends fail us, page 109 Praying Friends
are best Friends, page 205 Earthly Friends not to be confided in, page 72
Difference amongst Friends may arise, page 69 Such differences are hardly
composed, page 42 Adversity tryes Friends, page 64 No change of state can cause
any alteration in a Friends affections, page 102 A Friend may be in want, page
71 A Friend may deny his Friends request and yet remain a Friend, page 214 A
Faithful Friend a great treasure, page 41 A Friend will judge his Friends case
to be his own, page 187 Friends love not to be suspected, page 66 Two sorts of
Friends to make use of in the time of Affliction, page 103 Three sorts of
living Friends, page 104 Dead Friends to whom we may resort in our distress,
page 105 Some would make the Devil their Friends, page 111 Friend Paramount,
God only is, page 108 He is generally a Friend to all, page 56 But to the Godly
in a more special manner, ibid. A high honor to have God for our Friend, page
59 How to be assured that God is our Friend, page 64. 112 Gods Friends cleave
close to him in trials, page 64 Gods Friends love his Friends, page 65 A great
encourgement to come to God in that he is our Friend, page 113 God only can be-
Friend us at all times, in all places, and in all our wants, page 108. 109 He
communicates his purposes to his Friends, page 57 And is very Familiar with
them, page 58 Friendship of three kinds, page 48 True Friendship what it is,
page 36 It is to be Found only in the Communion of Saints, page 50 It is
resembled to marriage, page 51 Friendship is degenerated in these days, page
43 Some Heathens have excelled Christians in point of Friendship, page 43 One
may be preferred before another Christian in point of Friendship, page 50 Self
ends disclaimed in true Friendship, page 65 The Love of Friendship ties faster
then the Love of nature, page 102 Duties of Friendship, reciprocal, page 190
Friendship had need sometimes to be awakened, page 335 That Friendship be
continued where it is, what must be done, page 41 Friendship should digest small
injuryes, page 42 Friendship with God, how obtained, page 61 What must be done
to preserve it, page 67 How to recover it being lost, page 69 How to imp ove
Gods Friendship to to us, page 114 Gods Friendship is lasting, page 66
G.
SAtan is a foul Gamster, page 114 All we have is of free Gift, page 409 God
gives sometimes unask't, page 400 In the first Grace he is a giver, but in the
second Grace a Helper, page 417 God gives bountifully, page 445 Rules to be
observed in our Giving, page 337 How by Gifts we may procure Friends, page 51.
52 Glory of God to be preferred to man's Salvation, page 123 Gluttony the vice
of the English, page 165 Arguments against Gluttony, page 166 God, how
represented to us in Scripture, page 385 God is Almighty, page 220 Good should
be considered in the degrees of it, page 258 A less Good may no^ crow'd out
the greater, nor an uncertain good exclude a certain, page 257, 258
Governors; Bishops in their own houses, page 26 They must oversee their
Familyes, page 27 They must not be Non resident, page 28 No Governor too great
for that duty. page 21 They have charge of Souls, page 21 And must give account
to God thereof, page 18 Grace not absolutely to be desired in every degree
thereof, page 181 Our Salvation lies in the positive degree of Grace, but much
of our Consolation in the comparative, page 182 What degree of Grace may
absolutely be desired, page 182 Grace, that is our house, page 198 A good Guide
is to be gotten in our journey, page 200
H.
HAnds, both must be used in kno^king at the Gate of Heaven, page 429 Pure
Hands are fittest to knock at that Gate, page 430 The right Hand (which is the
working Hand) God stands at, with a Blessing, page 417 Faith is the Hand of the
Soul, page 4^0 God is ready to Hear us calling, page 218 Heaven is Gods
Habitation, page 217 How God is there, page 217 Hell; How God is said to be
there, ibid. Heret^ques disturb the peace of the Church, page 279 Hindrances
in doing good whence they ari e page 332 Hoarders up of Corn resemble the
Locust, page 92 Humility, one of the paths of peace, page 285 Hunger is a
delicate Cook, page 107 Hunters no good Friend to the Husbandman, page 91
Husbandry, highly to be respected, page 90 Four Creatures great enemies to
Husbandry, page 91 Hypocrites disquiet the Church, page 281
I.
Idleness brings want, page 95 Idle Persons want no shift, page 236 Ignorance
in the Superior is the calamity of the Inferious, page 20 Image of God wherein
it consisted, page 412 Imitation of Christ, how far lawful, page 15
Importunity a powerful Orator, page 356 Importunacy in Prayer, wherein it
stands, page 357 Importunity, twofold, page 362 Importunacy has something in
it of that we call Impudency, page 361 Some kind of Importunity God likes not,
page 362 Infirmityes what they are, page 327 Interrogations, the use of them,
page 32 Journey, we are all in, page 199 Our Journey to be provided for, page
200
K.
Key of Heaven, Prayer is, page 433 It is the Key that opens Gods treasury,
page 404 The keys at the Popes girdle will not unlock heaven, page 427
Kindness is to be returned, page 192 The bruit Creatures are kind in their
kind, page 193 Knocking what it imports, page 425 Many knock at Heaven that
shall not be admitted, page 432 Knowledge, experimental is all in all, page
454
L.
LAndlords that are cruel, are like the Cankerworme, page 92 Lending; what it
is, page 239 How it differs from other Contracts, page 141 It is the part of a
Friend to Lend, page 143 It is an act of Charity, page 144 which mercenary
lending overthrowes, ibid. How a man may receive recompense for what he lends,
page 146 It is Gods command to lend freely, page 147 A geater sin, not to lend,
than to take Usury, page 148 In what Cases it is unlawful to lend, page 150
Difference betwixt God and Satan in lending, page 156 Leveller; a horned
worm, page 95 Liberality, of all sorts not commendable, page 353 It must be
made up of matter and form, page 453 A vile person may seem Liberal, page
351 The Devil would be thought to be so, page 352 Some Liberal of what is not
their own, page 353 Some men's Liberality tends to sin, page 354 Lost, we are
all by nature, page 411 A man may be a Loser in spiritual things many ways,
page 413 Love is a substantive, page 126 Loves paces that she takes, page 124
The print of her feet hardly discerned, page 125 Love is one of the paths of
Peace, page 286 Love seeks not her own, page 121 Love our Neighbors as our
selves, how to be understood, page 122 Self- Love the bane of Religion, page
124 Persecutors pretend Love in all their Persecutions, page 278 God is to be
loved, who first loved us, page 295 Our hearts may be enlarged in love, to one
Christian more then to another, page 50
M.
MArkets; God sets, page 99 Gods Markets are well furnished, yet it has not
for all Comers, page 405 Marriage and Friendship compared, page 51 Means to
be used, but not trusted unto, page 114 Means to be used for supply of our
wants, page 116 It is dangerous to contemn the Means, page 262 Whilst the
Means are continued there is hope, page 260 Means must be used which God has
rescribed, page 418 Prayers psanctifies the Means, page 418 We May neither
trust in them nor slight them, page 419 Many failings in works of mercy, page
337 Merit confuted, page 408 What is required to make an act Meritorious, ibid.
Gods Mercy is man's Merit, page 410 Ministers are to set an edge on their
Doctrines, page 32 The public Ministry, why so unfruitful, page 21 A
like-mindedness to be endeavored, and how it may be comfortably effected, page
284 Money, Prayer is like unto, page 406 How it answers all things, page 404
N.
NEcessity, twofold, page 179 It is a powerful Goddess and prevails much,
page 183 In our Requests to God or man it may be pressed, page 184 Many plead
Necessity where is none, page 184 Things Necessary may be desired, but not
things superfluous, page 180 The Necessityes of our Brethren should be
regarded, page 336 The Necessityes of others should move us, page 185 Night,
what it signifies, page 126 Night-Vigils what to think of them page 133
Nigardlinesse becomes not a Friend's Table, page 170 Number of three do
oft-times teach the mystery of the Trinity, page 171
O.
OPportunity to be made good use of, page 253 Want of an Opportunity is often
pretended for the neglect of duty, page 249 The first Opportunity offered of
doing good, to be laid hold on, page 256 The danger of neglecting Opportunity,
page 253 Oppressors resembled to the Palmer-Wormes, page 91
P.
PArables, whereunto resembled, page 6 Patience, the way of Peace, page 285
Pawnes or Pledges may be taken, and of whom, and when, page 150 Peace of the
Church to be sought page 283 We are called to Peace, page 287 The means of
restoring the Churches Peace, page 284 Pray for the Churches Peace, page 286
Much good follows the Churches Peace, page 287 Persecutors hinder the Churches
peace, page 277 Gods Judgments on Persecutors, page 260 Petitions, to be
practiced as well as prayed, page 415 Poor, of two sorts, page 77 The Godly
Poor in better case then the worldly rich, page 80 None so Poor but some are
poorer, page 85 The rich proved by the Poor man's poverty, page 74 The Poor
should be made our Friends, page 52 The Poor may make Friends to themselves,
page 53 Poverty works to humility, page 74 Politicians not too far to be
trusted, page 47 Power of God distinguished, page 295 It is dangerous to tempt
God concerning his Power, page 298 Prayer, what it is, page 395 Many ways we
may address our selves unto it, page 372 Saints not to be prayed unto, page
220 How God is to be conceived of in Prayer, page 373. 385 In all our Prayers,
see a fulness in God of those things we crave, page 221 Prayer to be put up
in Christ's name page 222 The Spirit of Prayer pray for, page 383 Prayer to be
prefaced with such Attributes of God as may best strengthen Faith, page 138
True Prayer is the Prayer of Faith, page 307 All must pray, page 369 The wicked
stand charged with the duty, page 370 They may be encouraged thereto, page 371
Children should be taught to Pray, page 369 Others are to be Prayed for, page
201 We may be too private in Prayer, page 203 Praying Friends are best Friends,
page 204 A wicked man cannot Pray well, nor one that can Pray well live
wickedly, page 384 The Heads of Prayer, what they are, page 381 The Lords
Prayer to be used, page 2 Set Prayer is lawful, page 1. 387 Public Prayer,
what, page 130 Private Prayer, what, page 131 All times and places are
sanctified for Prayer, page 130 What times most seasonable for Prayer, page 131
The Morning is necessary, and the Night seasonable page 132 Prayer prevents
God, page 129 Error in the matter frustrates Prayer, page 374 We are to be
furnished with matter for Prayer, and whence, page 380 Care must be had of the
manner of Praying, page 374 The heart may not be rash in Praying, page 374
Sudden Praying without meditation, not commendable, page 379 We must be
frequent in Prayer, page 358 And fervent in Prayer, page 358 And earnest for
small things as well as great, page 363 Formality in Prayer, hateful. page 368
Lukewarm Prayer God respects, as he does Lukewarm Persons, page 359 To Pray
Prayer is more then to say Prayer, page 378 We must Watch and Pray page 383 And
Persevere in Prayer, page 359 And do Prayer as well as pray Prayer, page 430
The Power of Faithful Prayer, page 434 It is after a short Omnipotent, page
404. 433 It commands God, and how, page 398 It lets us into Gods treasury, page
404 It quickens all Ordinances, page 402 It is the holy Anchor, page 436
Prayers, are our Ambassadors, page 360 They are the Cannon that God charge
and discharges on himself, page 360 It is a scourge to the Devil, page 435 The
Gates of Heaven stand open to it, page 129 It is the best remedy, and to be
preferred, page 119 God is ready to hear our Prayers, page 224 God Answers our
Prayers many ways, page 230 He may be silent to our Prayers, and long delay
us, page 224 Why God delays long before he answers; See before, Delay, page
225 How God hears the Prayers of wicked men, and why, page 229 Reasons why
Prayer is not ever heard, page 405 Many lets that hinders Prayer, both from
within us, and from without us, page 376 Our Hearts never more fugitive then in
Prayer, page 376 ^he Devil is most busy when we go about that Duty, page 376
Worldly distractions interrupt our Prayers, page 377 ^n stops the passage of
our Prayers, page 382 ^e must be sensible of the want of what we Pray for, page
391 A threefold want we must be sensible of in Prayer, page 392 Words are
requisite in Prayer, page 390 Yet the voice not absolutely necessary, page 387
The Godly sometimes want words in Prayer, and whence that is, page 386 God
hears broken Prayers, page 387 What must be done when words are wanting, page
387 Wandering thoughts in Prayer of two sorts, page 387 Wandering thoughts in
Prayer to be prevented, page 388 In short Prayers our thoughts are less apt to
wander then in long, page 389 Some thoughts of wordly things may lawfully be
admitted in Prayer, page 383 Those Prayers are not always best pleasing unto
God, wherein we best please our selves, page 388 No other duty requires more
strong abilityes then Prayer, page 375 No discouragement should keep us from
that duty, page 304, 308 Fear of man should not cause us to neglect it, page
367 None dispensed with for omission of it, page 371 God lays out our Prayers
for our best advantage, page 347 Praise, must be added to Petitions, page 410
Preaching, the best method in it, page 10 How a Minister is to Preach himself,
page 11 Pride the mother of Heresy, page 285 Promises, of two sorts, page
438.440. Evangelicall Promises, conditional, page 437 Yet free, and how, ibid.
Some Promises, Absolute, page 438 Promises concerning temporal things how made,
and to be understood, page 76.440 Promises concerning spiritual blessings, how
made unto us, page 441 How to entertain the Promises, page 442 Prayer must be
grounded on a promise, page 222
Q.
QUare, why, is a dangerous monosyllable, page 297 Some Questions Christ
answered not, page 310 All Questions about substantialls are to be decided by
the Scriptures, page 311 Never did any prove good Scholar that was not a
Questionist, page 311
R.
REason, there is for all that God wills, page 297 Reformation, must begin at
home, page 22 Remedy, may be had in all distresses page 120 Repetitions,
warrantable, page 442 Repetitions, what they note, page 443 Repetitions, should
not be grievous to a Hearer, page 444 Repetitions, tedious, to be avoided, page
444 Reprooff, of sin, like fishing for the Whale, page 209 Requests, to God
should be Christian and modest, page 161 Some Request that of God which will not
stand with his honor to give, page 162 Some Requests unto a Friend may be
denied, page 215 Rest, in this life threefold, page 274 The Dead are at Rest,
page 274 An eternal Rest in Heaven, page 275 How the Godly may be disquieted
of their Rest, page 275 Four sorts of persons disquiet the Church of her Rest,
page 277 Right, civil, wicked have to the things of this life, but not
spiritual, page 80
S.
SAints, in Heaven not to be sought unto, page 110 Schism, what it is, page
279 Schismatiques, disturb the Church, ibid. Scoffers, at Religion reproved,
page 22 Scriptures, abound with fair expressions, page 136 Why Christ
alleged Scripture, page 314 Christ was a speaking Scripture, page 313
Secrets, God communicates to his, page 57 Seeking what it is, page 411 A
twofold Seeking, page 421 A double act in it, page 415 We may Seek too late,
page 263 Whence it is that some who Seek, find not, page 420 Three ways men
may be frustrated in Seeking, page 421 Infallibility of finding depends upon
faithful Seeking, page 420 Self is the Bias of most men's actions, page 125
Separatists of two sorts, page 280 Sermon, not done till it be practiced, page
13 Servants faithful to God, will be so to man, page 17 A great fault in
chosing Servants, page 23 Wicked Servants not to be suffered in the family,
page 26 One good Servant better then many bad, page 29 The way to get good
Servants, page 29 Servants are to submit to a Religious Government, page 30
Service of God; Be ambitious of page 451 Sleep God is to be awakened out of,
page 343 Soul stands in need of nourishment, page 173 It is dangerous to starve
it, page 176 Spirit how it illuminates us, page 312 Want of present Success, no
warrant to Surcease a duty. page 232 Superfluous things not to be desired, page
186
T.
TEaching, such shall not want as are willing to learn, page 14 Temperance
commendable, page 164 Temptations not absolutely to be prayed against, page 181
Testimony that Christ gave of himself was true, page 315 His Testimony is
undervalued by the Church of Rome, page 315 The Churches Testimony, of what use
it is, page 316 Text of a Minister is his Auditory, page 320 Thankfullness is
due to God for what we have, page 159 What is won by Prayer must be worn by
Thanks, page 411 Time allotted for all things, but not to sin, page 250 God is
the disposer of Time, page 252 Time is to be redeemed, page 254 How it is
lawful to serve the Time, page 255 The grace of an action is in the right
timing of it, page 251 Some good duties may be done out of Time, page 250 How
to find out the fittest Time for an action, page 256 God takes his own Time for
the payment of his debts. page 232 Travelers we are all, in a double respect,
page 198 Troubles of diverse sorts, page 237 It is a Trouble to an unwilling
mind, to be called upon to do good, page 237 Troubles may not discourage us
from good duties, page 241 How Troubles may be overcome, page 242 Troublesome
they are many times esteemed that are not, page 238 How to live, so as that we
be not Troublesome, page 242 Trust, twofold, page 110 Difference betwixt Trust
in man, and Trust in God, page 109 God alone is to be Trusted in, page 114 The
wicked Trust to vain helps, page 111. Truth goes with a scratched face, page
318 Those call for Truth that cannot endure to hear the Truth, page 317
Trials of the Godly, many. page 244
V.
VIolence; too much of it in the world, page 431 Heaven to be got with
Violence, page 429 Hell suffers Violence, page 430 Visiting of Friends
commendable, page 188 Unthankfullness may be thanked for all our miseryes, page
449 Usurers what they are, page 145 Why Usury is tolerated in some States, page
148
W.
WAiting on God, nothing lost by it, page 232 Want of two sorts, page 53 It is
threefold, page 336 Our Wants are many, page 394 Of outward Wants there is
two degrees page 336 A threefold Want be sensible of, in coming to God, page
392 Spiritual Wants of two sorts, page 54 The Godly are often in Want, page
72.85. Those in Want should be releeved, page 54 The paths that lead to Want,
page 55 Want causes us to prize blessings, page 74 Two sorts of persons that
are in Want, page 77 To the Godly Want is a Cross, but no Curse, page 77
Want should not too much deject us, page 82 The Godly in Want, more happy
then the wicked in fulness, page 83 In our greatest Wants be thankful that
it is no worse with us, page 84 Want comes from the Lord, page 85 Wants of
the Godly, many ways supplied, page 85 In all Wants seek out for supply, page
116 Diligence in our calling will supply our Wants, page 128 Spiritual Wants;
Be most sensible of, page 174 Our Wants lay open to God, page 184 Some good
comes by Want, page 196 Spiritual Wants are the greatest, page 392 Though God
know our Wants, yet we must lay them open before him, page 394 We must spell
our Wants out of the Crosserow, page 393 Some correspondency should be betwixt
the Want and the gift, page 336 Wastfullnesse brings want, page 95 Ward-roabes
of sin many, page 236 Ways of sin many, page 199 The best Way is to be gone in,
ibid. Weightiest works are to have the precedence, page 257 Will of God the
cause of all causes, page 297 God can do more then he Will, page 298 It is his
Will that sets his power on work, page 299 Gods Will distinguished, page 300
Yet it is but one, page 301 There are degrees of Gods Willing, page 301 Gods
revealed Will is to be enquired into, ibid. Will of man how governed by the
understanding, page 325 The Will is the grand Rebel, ibid, The greatest Want
is in the Will, page 292, 325 Gods people are a Willing people, page 329
Difference betwixt the Willing of a regenerated and unregenerated person, page
327 The Will regenerated goes beyond performance, page 326 A Willing mind
overcomes difficultyes, page 323 No further is the Will right, then it puts us
upon the use of the means page 328 Willingness is the fat of the Sacrifice,
page 330 What must be done that we may be willing, ibid. The Godly may find an
unwillingnesse at sometimes to some duty, page 331 Carnal wit ever attends
upon carnal Will, page 235 Word of God, every Word was, which Christ spoke,
page 313 Worthynesse, twofold, page 407 How we may be said to be Worthy, page
407 The most unworthy in their own sense, speed best, page 410 Works must
accompany Faith, page 4^1
FINIS.

