GREAT BRITAINS Bitter Lamentation OVER THE DEATH OF THEIR Most Valiant, and
Most Puissant GENERAL George Lord Monck, Lord Duke of Albemarle, etc.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North door. 1670.

Great Britains Bitter Lamentation, etc.
GReat DVKE, the Wonder of these later Times!
When, since the Judges ruled long dead and gone,
We were, as Judah, punished for our Crimes,
He, like to Jephtha, Sampson, Gideon,
Was raised Deliverer us to restore,
When men afflicted, did Gods aid implore.
Moses face did shine
So bright, that Israel durst not come near,
Till with a Vail he hid those Rays Divine,
That struck the Rebels with a pannick fear;
Our Leader was by Nature veiled, which Hue,
He removed, when he Rebellion slew.

Others, himself unseen; and for a space,
When that he pleased, he would the Curtain draw,
Opening the Casement, the Amnion of's Face:
And wise men say, Great Honors win he shall,
That Is born with his Face wrapped in his Mothers Caul.
Gyges Ring, 'twas he,
To walk invisible, and not be seen;
Yet his just Actions did with Light agree,
As if that Masque he wore had never been;
He used it not works wicked to conceal,
But secret Plots of Rebels to reveal.

Our fair Andromeda sought to devour,
This Dragon was at last by him destroyed,
Bringing in again the Lawful Power,
Freeing the Captive-People from their Chains,
And will be famous whilst the World remains.

And many years we sought for help in vain;
'Twas not an easy Task he undertook,
To bring three Kingdoms dead, to Life again;
Great Britains Bars and Bolts rent in sunder,
No man bore the weight Lord Monck stood under.

Our Woe or Weal stood on that Days Success,
Lord Monck's the Umpire by whom all is decided,
On him then lay three Kingdoms Happiness;
He held the Balance, and next under God,
He then had leave to keep, or burn the Rod.

Some boldly ask the Question, Who is this!
That stormy Winds, and boisterous Seas obey,
On whom depends our chiefest Earthly Bliss?
This is Lord Monck never to be forgotten,
His Name shall live when we are dead and rotten.
Epicaeds and Threnodies have room
Within your Archives, always to be found,
And let his Statue to the Day of Doom,
With Kings and Princes stand on equal ground;
That as the ungrateful World does flit away,
These may be Witnesses another day.

When this stout Heroes for us bravely drew
His Conquering Sword, which past through thick and thin,
Till all our Enemies he did subdue,
Yet by his Prudence made the Conquest good,
The like never heard, scarce spilt one drop of blood.

And then at Anchor would he safely ride,
Nor Sylla, nor Carybdis did he fear,
He left them both sometimes on either side;
Keeping an even Trace, as he thought meet,
As wise as Daedalus that fled from Creet.
Rhomb,
Like to the South, the North-west Passage found,
Which proved to be the shortest Loxodrome,
To all that were for his long Voyage bound;
He chose one Point i'th'Compass, that did bend
Directly to the Port he did intend.

The Current ran too strong for to prevail,
When others sunk, he kept himself alive,
He fetched a Compass, and let fall his Sail;
Like Jason and his Arganauts of Greece,
That sailed to Colchis for the Golden Fleece.
Sun within the Zodiac,
By the First Mover forced another away;
At the same time he did two Motions make,
And by Degrees got forward every day;
Though the diurnal Waft did him confine,
He mounts to the Tropic by a Spiral Line.

Stamped on the Georges by Royal Command,
Religio Protestantium, Salus Regni,
Libertas Populi Anglicani.
For which our Sovereign Charles did spend his Blood,
To keep down Anarchy with his sacred Hand;
Preferring always before his own Health,
The Kingdoms, Churches, and the Peoples Wealth.

True Valor's always faithful to the Crown,
From hence let all men learn Fidelity,
Kings never want Subjects to pull Rebels down;
We love his Memory most for this thing,
He made three Kingdoms say, God save the King.

Its hard to find a Man can please them all;
Such was his Merit whilst he lived here,
He was beloved of both in general;
Maugre all malice, and his Foes despite,
He was the Kings, and Subjects Favorite.
Monck, Lord General,
In Peace a true Monastique Life he lead,
Sequestered from the world, scarce named at all;
As not alive, but dead and buried:
The day he made our Peace, he rang his Knell,
First did our work, then bid us all farewell.
Hercules, yet refusing Praise,
For when the Soldiers gave him praise was due,
He strove for to divide the Crown of Bays;
Part of that Praise, says he, belongs to you.
Debetur Gloria vobis, Non solus vici.
Moses for Meekness, and in setting forth,
The mildest Esteemer of his own worth.

As if not willing that the world should know.
The deepest Rivers ever stillest run,
The shallow Streams do murmur as they go;
All things he did, the reason may be gest,
Were forged within the Shop of his own Breast.
Sword-Fish that came posting in,
To bring sad News of what should shortly fall,
Told us that God was angry for our sin,
Would take from us our Worthy General;
Whose Death three Nations ought to lament,
We pray God send us grace for to repent.

Nor should we want, scarce for to find his like,
When things were out of order turned and tossed,
Then was the Iron hot for him to strike;
His Valor and his Wisdom jointly stand,
It Is hard to say which had the upper-hand.

The oppressed Subjects Helper to their Right,
Rebuilder of Collapsed Hierarchy,
The plundered Lawyers Advocate by might;
Thus all Degrees, as I pay mine in Verse,
Owe something as a Tribute to his Hearse.

Restorer of the Breach; what shall we say?
Great Britains Paladium, sent from God,
Whose valiant Acts no Time can wash away:
He was both loved and feared, and knew full well,
Were it in Peace, or War, for to excel.

Search all the Monuments that you can find,
Count all the famous Stories that are told,
Call the Nine Worthies, and the rest to mind;
Those that most dear to them their Countries held,
Our Loss is more than can be paralleled.

Saying, As much some other might have done,
He doubtless was the Man ordained by Fate,
None prosper'd like him since the Wars begun;
St. George for England men were wont to call,
With him compared, was St. George Typical.
George should come,
To whom most Subjects should due Homage pay;
At last St. George succeeded in his room,
Whom cruel Death has lately snatched away;
Let all true Hearts lament with doleful cries,
Let Tears like Rivers trickle from your eyes.

When we began his Death for to bemoan;
Great fear there was should it continue long,
All men, like Niobe, would freeze to stone,
Because we were of him we loved bereft,
Resolved to weep till there is no moisture left.

Ninety 's the Elevation of our Pole,
Or else our Sun is some Degrees gone back,
To give the People leave for to condole
Our Loss; no Drapers can supply our Needs,
That all that would be clad in Mourning-weeds.

A general Mortality we dread;
The Choice he made, soon after him was gone,
Living no longer, when her Lord was dead;
The Stars that are deprived of the Suns light,
Do lose their luster, waxing dark as Night.

A hopeful Plant to stand up in his room,
To keep his Grace's Virtues still in mind,
A richer Monument than any Tomb
Of Brass or Marble; the Just cannot die,
Just men are in Eternal Memory.

Pyramides of Brass, and place them thus
With rich Inscriptions, men may never forget
What our Tutelar Saint has done for us,
Uniting Hearts divided, settling Peace,
As when the Winds are laid, the Billows cease.

And Gentry from Pageantry were not known;
When most men seemed to be what they were not,
And no man living knew what was his own,
He pulled their Vizards off, and did decree
Who had the Right, no Blepharo but he.

The Conquered Scotch extol him in the North,
The beaten Dutch will be the Eastern Story,
The South his Life and Worthy Deeds set forth.
The East, the West, the North, the South remain
Debtors to his strong Heart, and prudent Brain.
Sampson did by Night, when he by Day,
Pulled down the City Gates with might and main,
They feared he would have carried them away;
He pulled them down, to set them up again:
For which they claim, as he obliged them all,
To be Chief Mourners at his Funeral.

For they that die, to Life again shall rise,
And therefore was Moses dead Body hid,
Lest the unbelieving Jews should idolize
Funeral Pomps for great Thanksgiving,
The Dead gain nothing by it, but the Living.
George was famous long before,
As if there lay some Virtue in that Name,
Say but St. George, you need to say no more
To scare the Rebels, and Fanatics tame:
George Duke of Buckingham, whose Fame loud rings,
Was most beloved of subjects, by two Kings.

Of Famous Georges, both in Church and State,
For their good Deeds, 't is the last Recompense,
That mortal men may have immortal Date:
We must forbear, it cannot be expressed
The Joys they find in Everlasting Rest
Gustavus Honors did confer
On Warlike Persons that deserved it best,
Noble Lord Craven then he did prefer,
Giving him Honor far above the rest;
In such like words, Sword flourisht over his head,
Rise up best Soldier ever England bred.

Or stanch the Wound that yet so fiercely bleeds?
The Land is filled with Jealousies and Fears,
Till one for Valor like his GRACE succeeds;
Whilst the world lasts, let such men never cease,
To fight our Battles, and preserve our Peace.
Vivat Rex Maximus Carolus Secundus, and Illustrissimus Jacobus Dux
Eboracensis, and tota Inclytissima Progonies Regalis,
Insignissimi Caroli Richmondiae and Lenoxii, Ducis, Capellanus humilimus, and
Rector Parochiae de Fotes-Cray, in Comitatu Kantij. Johannes Rowland.

FINIS.

