ANOTHER SPEECH OF Sr. BENJAMIN RVDYER in the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
Mr. Speaker,
I Do verily believe, that there are many of the Clergy in our Church, who do
think the simplicity of the Gospel, too mean a vocation for them to serve-in:
They must have a spescious, pompous, sumptuous, Religion, with Additionalls of
Temporal greatness, Authority, Negotiation: Notwithstanding, they all know
better then I, what Fathers, Schoolmen, Counsels are against their mixing
themselves in secular affairs.

This Roman Ambition will at length bring in the Roman Religion, and at last
a haughty Insolence even against supreme power it self, if it be not timely
and wisely prevented.

They have amongst them an Apothegm of their own making, which is, No Miter, No
Scepter; when we know by dear experience, that if the Miter be once in danger,
they care not to throw the Scepter after, to confound the whole Kingdom for
their Interest.

And Hystories will tell us, that whenever the Clergy went high, Monarchy
still went lower: If they could not make the Monarch the head of their own
Faction, they would be sure to make him less: witness one example for all,
The Popes working the Emperor out of Jtaly.

Some of ours, as soon as they are Bishops, adepto fine, cessant Motus, They
will Preach no longer, their office then is to govern, But in my opinion they
govern worse then they Preach, though they Preach not at all; for we see to
what pass their government has brought us.

In conformity to themselves, They silence others also, though Hierom in one of
his Epistles says, that even a Bishop, let him be of never so blameless a
life, yet he does more hurt by his license, then he can do good by his example.

Mr. Speaker, It now behooves us, to restrain the Bishops to the duties of
their Function, as they may never-more hancker-after heterogeneous extravagant
employments: Not be so absolute, so single and solitary in Actions of Moment,
as Excommunication, Absolution, Ordination, and the like: but to join some of
the Ministry with them, and further to regulate them according to the usage of
Ancient Churches, in the best times, that by a well-tempered Government, they
may not have power hereafter, to corrupt the Church, to undo the Kingdom.

When they are thus circumscribed, and the Public secured from their
Eruptions, then shall not I grudge them a liberal plentiful subsistence else
I am sure, they can never be given to Hospitality.

Although the calling of the Clergy be all glorious within, yet if they have
not a large considerable, outward support, they cannot be freed from vulgar
Contempt.

It will always be fit, that the flourishing of the Church, should hold
proportion with the flourishing of the Commonwealth wherein it is. If we dwell
in Houses of Cedar, why should they dwell in skins? And I hope I shall never
see a good Bishop left worse then a Parson without a Gleab.

Certainly Sir, the superintendencie of eminent Men, Bishops over diverse
Churches, is the most Primitive, the most spreading, the most lasting
Government of the Church. Wherefore whilst we are earnest to take away
Innovations, let us beware we bring not in the greatest Innovation that ever
was in England.

I do very well know, what very many do very fervently desire. But let us
well bethink our selves whether a popular Democraticall Government of the
Church (though fit for other places) will be either suitable or acceptable, to a
Regal, Monarchical Government of the State.

Every man can say (It is so common and know a Truth) that sudden and great
changes both in natural and Politic bodies have dangerous operations: and
give me leave to say, that we cannot presently see to the end of such a
consequence, especially in so great a Kingdom as this, and where Episcopacie
is so wrapped and involved in the Laws of it.

Wherefore Mr. Speaker, my humble Motion is, that we may punish the present
offenders, reduce and preserve the Calling for better men hereafter. Let us
remember with fresh thankfulness to God, those glorious Martyr-Bishops who
were burned for our Religion, in the times of Popery, who by their learning,
zeal, and constancy, upheld and conveyed it down to us.

We have some good Bishops still, who do Preach every Lords Day, and are
therefore worthy of double Honor; they have suffered enough already in the
Disease: I shall be sorry we should make them suffer more in the Remedy.

FINIS.

