PRINCE RUPERTS DECLARATION TO THE KING OF PORTVGALL.

WITH The ANSWER thereunto, in Defense of the Parliaments Proceedings With a
Relation of what passed between the two Fleets on the River of LISBURNE.

Sent up in a Letter from Captain Thorowgood Captain of the ADMIRAL.

LONDON, Printed for George Whittington at the Blew-Ancor, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1650.

The DECLARATION of Prince Rupert, to the KINGDOM of PORTUGAL. Concerning the
coming in of the English Fleet, of the Parliament of England into the River and
Port of LIX.
ALthough the most insolent, and horrid proceedings of the Rebels party in
England, commonly known by the name or notion of Parliamentarians; whereas (in
truth) they are nothing else, but tumultuous, factious and seditious Soldiers,
and other disorderly, disobedient and refractory persons conspiring together,
and reteining nothing of the ancient form and Government of lawful Parliaments,
might be a sufficient notice to awaken all Christian Princes, seriously to
attend the aims and designs of those pernicious Conspirators, least the fire
now kindled in England may (perchance in a short time) come to their own doors;
especially if these circumstances following be duly reflected on.

That these persons have not only from time to time for many years past,
taken up Arms, and in a hostile manner made War upon their Sovereign Lord
and King; but having by certain Wiles, and false devices got him into their
possession by an unheard of, and unparalled example, (under color of
Justice) cut off his Head, as if he had been a person subject to the Orders and
Decrees of an enraged multitude.

That after the death of their Sovereign Lord and King, they have by public
vote, and so far as in them lies, dethroned his undoubted Son Heir, and
Successor, of all access to his hereditary right in the Crown, and by an Act
of Engagement, do daily enforce the People to abjure Kingly Government.

That they are sworn and professed enemies to all civil and settled
Government, both in Church and Commonwealth, and do labor to bring all to a
party in both, for that these persons having laid the foundation of their
greatness of their power, upon these and such like detestable principles in
their own Country, what (may we think) may they attempt in neighboring
Nations, when time and occasion shall serve: yet that which is of a more near
relation and concernment to the Kingdom of Portugal, may be sufficiently
gathered from other Circumstances here ensuing.

1. That this Fleet of the Rebels was procured by the solicitation of the
Spanish Ambassador now residing in London, and is to remain here, or upon
these Coasts, until another Fleet come to join with it, and (whatsoever may
be pretended) their design is not merely against our person; and his Majesty
the King of great Britain his Fleet under our Command, but to join with the
Castillian, and to go with him into the straits against the French, and then to
come against this Country, as by the confession of the Spanish Ambassador his
Secretary, and some of the Council of State of England, to some persons of
quality in England it has been discovered: so although it should so fortune,
they should have their ends upon us, and his Majesty the King of great
Britains Fleet under our Command, now remaining in this Harbor of Lisborne,
yet there is not any likelihood of an end of their designs against this
Kingdom and People; for who will not presume and infer, that this
solicitation and Agency, of the Spanish Ambassador, is not to oppose and
overthrowe his Majesty's Enemies, and who will not believe, but there is some
great design, between these people and the Castilians in hand, against the
peace and tranquillity of this Kingdom, whereas it is certain, that there came
an Agent from the Rebels for Castile, in the Admiral of their fleet, who (if
not gone away with the Merchantmen bound for St. Lucas, that came in company
with the Fleet) is still aboard the same Ship. If it be replied, that likewise
by this Fleet they have sent an Agent to his Majesty the King of Portugal,
which may be an argument of their desire to keep an equal Amity with both
these Princes. It is answered, that this Agent which now comes to Portugal,
was not thought of 3 weeks before the Fleet put to Sea, and was procured by
the Merchants of London, as was made known by a Petition they addressed to the
pretended Parliament in that behalf; in contriving of which Petition, there
was principle actors, two Brothers that lived here (called Bushells) and that
still have a Brother living here, who is a person notoriously interressed in
the behalf of the Rebels, this Agent is likewise to be maintained by the same
Merchants, and the public body of the pretended Parliament, or those who have
now the supreme sway of England, (whatsoever further orders may be pretended)
have no further Interest in the Agent, then thereby to make his Agency, a
Cloak to cover and conceal their designs.

2. It does appear by div^rs Letters written froe London to Merchants in this
Town, that it was publicly voted in the pretended Parliament, and by the
Council of State now ruling in England, that if his Majesty the King of
Portugal should receive his Majesty the King of great Britain his Fleet
commanded by us, or give liberty for the sale of any goods (surprised by us at
Sea) in the Ports of his dominions, they would make War against him, so that
if this resolution stand, to what end can their sending of an Agent hither be?
unless it be that he may serve as a spy, to hold correspondency with his
Brother Agent, that is gone for Spain, and to give him intelligence of such
advantages as may be taken for the supplanting of this Realm.

3. The manner of the coming of this Fleet does much augment the suspicion of a
design in the business, for whereas our being here with a Fleet of his
Majesty's the King of great Britain, who is an Ally and confederate of this
Crown does by the Laws of the whole world, in all reason and equity challenge
a safety and protection, as long as we continue in the Port. For these People
to come into the Port with so many Ships of so great strength, under the
pretense of assailling us, and to advance in that manner as they did, wanting
leave or silence, obtained from his Majesty the King of Portugal for the same,
was so highly an audacious Act, as if they held the Law of Nations, and the
right of all foreign Princes in as great contempt, as they have held the
Laws of their own Country, and the rights of their native King. And it is to
be feared, that if the Forts and Castles belonging to his Majesty the King of
Portugal, had permitted them to enter, and to have spoiled the Fleet under our
Command, there rage would not have ended there, but would have attempted
something of the City, and his Majesty the King of Portugal his Ships now
lying in the Harbor, that so an entrance might be made for the Spaniard, who
now lies upon the Frontiers with an Army, or the Kings preparation of shipping
to defend his Rights in Brazeele against Hollanders, might be disappointed and
beaten down, and perhaps it has not been without some mystery or design, that
at their first entrance, the Lieutenant of their Admiral was sent ashore, and
had private meetings and consultations in Bushells house, and that Mr. Taytam
and Mr. Ell, and other Masters of English Ships, entertained in the service of
the King of Portugal, should go to and from the Rebels Ships in the night and
other times without the leave or privity of the King, or any Minister of state
under him.

4. Notwithstanding the audacious and insolent attempts of these People (before
resited) were repulsed by the Forts and Castles of his Majesty, then King of
Portugal: yet what have they since done? they have only retired a little out
of the reach of the Castles, and do now block up the very port it self,
whereby we do not only loose the privilege and liberty of the Port, (for as
long as free ingresse and egresse is denied, we cannot be said to enjoy the
liberty of the Port) but a high affront is done to the whole Nation, in that
the principle port of their Kingdom in the very sight of the King and his
Court, is thus abused by a Company of declared Rebels, who have not any ri^ht
or privilege in Law to make War, and thereby not only that Petition which
is due to the Forces of his Majesty the King of great Britain (their Ally and
Confederate) is violated, but the Trade and commerce of their own Country in
consequence of reason, must needs be dissolved and undone: A thing which the
Law of Nations does not permit to any Sovereign Prince or State in War, with
a just enemy in the Port of a common Friend, as by the stories and practice of
all Nations, both ancient and modern it may be made appear, and therefore we
have much reason to hope, that the Honor of the Portuguez Nation, will not
endure such insolency to be committed, by these People, who being Rebels to
their Prince, and having in Law no right or privilege in War, are to be deemed
and esteemed as Pirates and Sea Rovers, and whatsoever else worse may be, but
will heartily and seriously join with his Majesty, the King of Great
Britains Fleet under our Command, for the clearing of liberty of their Port,
they assuring to us, that just Protection which we claim, for the vindication
of their own Commerce and Trade, the prevention of the disigns of their and our
implacable enemies, and to give demonstration to the whole world, how little
the insolency of these People is to be endured, that so the peace, amity and
correspodency between the Crowns of England and Portugal, may in all things be
continued firm, and inviolable, according to the intent and meaning of the
Articles and capitulations of peace had and made between them.

THE ANSWER TO Prince Ruperts DECLARATION.
ALthough the Paper Entitled, The Declaration of His Highness Prince Rupert,
be so full of notorious lies false grounds and unprobable surmises, that it is
not likely to produce any other effect, upon serious and intelligent spirits,
that know any thing of the state of our affairs, then to move them to a further
discovery and contempt of his most Illustrious arrogance. Yet because there may
be many ingenuous men, as well of our own, as the other Nation, who merely
through ignorance in matter of fact, may have their judgments much dazzled, by
the Authority of such splendid and Majesticall impostures, and chiefly, because
the present drift of the Paper, is to raise jealousies between the most
renowned King of Portugal, and the Fleet of the Parliament of England; I shall
not think it time much misspent, to give some short animadversion upon it, not
taking much notice of his filthy and scurrelous Rhetoric, wherewith he
endeavors to disfigure the beauty, and actions of that great Council, upon
which the name of God is so gloriously written.

That the Parliament of England for many years past, has been in Arms against
the late King of England, contending for their own most just Rights, and the
native Liberties of the People entrusted with them, and which they are bound by
all Obligations both humane and devine to maintain and preserve against all
the efforts of Tyranny whatsoever, is famously known to the whole world, what
issue it has pleased God to put to that great difference, by delivering up the
power and Person of that King into their hands, and what has fithence been
done upon him, and declared against his Son, Heir apparent to those evil
Counsels which divided between the Head and Shouldiers of his Father, we are in
no wise afraid, or ashamed to hear of the most railing accusations that our
adversaries can bring against us, will unto us be matter of filling our mouths
with the praises of our God, who has done terrible things in righteousness,
for the good of his people, and has wrought out for them so great salvation,
by such unheard of and unparalleled ways. Neither do we take it for any
disparagement to us, our Parliament and Nation, that we are so vile in the
esteem of this vagabond German a Prince of Fortune, whose Highness is nothing
else, but haughtiness, his Principality mere Piracy, and the plurality of his
Person, an affectation so singular, that no real Prince can choose but smile
at, who after he was cudgel'd out of England from his Trade of plundering, did
in a short time after, set up at Sea, and was even now ready to put forth out
of this Harbor, and to take his pastime, (with the Leviathan) in the great
waters, had not this audacious Fleet of Rebels come in the very nick of time,
to put an Imbargo upon his Highness.

And truly it is no marvel that he has ever since been so exceedingly
transported with choler, and foames so beastly at the mouth, calling us
Rebels, thieves and professed enemies to all Government, hereby endeavoring
to render us (as much as in him lies) odious to all Nations and Princes;
especially to the most renowned King of Portugal, as by his whole discourse
may appear; the present scope thereof, being to possess his Majesty with
apprehensions of some strange design intended by this Fleet against the Peace
of his Kingdom.

To that end his way is, in the first place to make His Majesty believe, that
this Fleet was procured by the solicitation of the Spanish Ambassador in
London, to remain about this Coast, till another Fleet should come to join with
it, and having had their ends upon the sacred person of His Highness and his
fleet, to go with the Castilians into the Streits against the French, and then
to come against this Country. This likely tale (forsooth) is made good by the
confession of the Spanish Ambassadors Secretary, and by the discovery of some
of the Council of State, unto some persons of quality in England; and all this
must be taken for truth, because he (within whose principality there dwells
no lie) has said so. And yet it seems his Highness is loath to venture the
issue of this ground, upon the bare credit of that affirmation, and therefore
backs it immediately with an argument of congruity, that may not be denied. For
who will not believe there is some great design in hand, between us and the
Castillians, seeing in the same Fleet, there is come an Agent from the Rebels
in England to the King of Castile; and at the same time, another Agent unto his
Majesty the King of Portugal. Nay rather, who will believe this man to be in
his right wits, that thinks by such absurd and ridiculous inconsequencies as
this, to put two Nations of so ancient a Confederacy, together by the ears.
The folly of it himself eft-soon perceives, and so re-enforceth it with many
pretty devices of his own making; so that the whole Argument, with the
additionall strength, being put into a fighting posture, stands thus. An Agent
from England not thought on, till three Weeks before the coming out of this
Fleet, procured by some Merchants in London, among whom the two Bushels (who
have a Brother in Lixbon, a great friend of the Rebels) were chief, to be sent
thither, and there by them to be maintained, dis-interessed from the public
body of the Parliament, is arrived here at the same time that another Agent is
employed to the King of Spain; ergo, there is some great plot a contriving
between the Parliament of England and the Kingdom of Portugal: How true the
particulars of this are, I leave to the Gentlemen concerned in it, either to
refute, or make themselves merry with; as they think fit.

But who sees not that this wild Logic does stand in need of some bold lie at
hand to second it, and they never are without a reserve for such uses. It is
nothing with them to devise Letters, to frame Votes, to create Mysteries, and
if need be, to work Miracles, even to the transforming of King Taytam into a
Roundhead. Their study and care is not set much how their devices may be made
to look like truth, as how they may be fitted to their purpose. And to their
purpose, indeed, it would suit very well at this time, if he could make his
Majesty believe, that the Parliament of England is so near (as he most falsely
and maliciously affirms) unto terms of defiance, and of making war upon him.
But to leave him to his own ways (out of which he cannot walk) and to come to
a speedy close of this tedious discourse, the plain truth is thus:

His Highness being not long since beaten out of Ireland (where he had designed
the Seat of his Principality, and being now by Gods providence shut up in this
Harbor (whereby his hopes of making himself great (some where abroad in the
wide world) are so suddenly and extremely disappointed) is grown desperate,
bestirring himself on every side with his lies, as Ajax in the Tragedy did with
his whips, and is become as one that has altogether lost both his courage and
wit, else he would never have adventured to impose such silly gulleries (as he
has done) upon a King and Council so prudent and circumspect, nor would have
violated his own Honor so much, as to beg protection, and cry out for help, at
the fight of such an inconsiderable company of Roundheads, as we are, and as
in his jollity he is pleased to make of us: For what is it else, but an
impotency of Spirit, overwhelmed with desperation and fear, that has moved
him to such extreme impatience, to break out into such raving exclamations
against our audacious attempt to approach toward his Highness, with such
heinous and horrid aggravations of the manner of our advance; and most
importunate imprecations of justice and revenge upon us; as if to have assailed
his Person and Fleet, had been to trample under foot the Laws of Nations, to
over-turn the foundations of all rule and right, and to dissolve the very Bonds
of all humane society in the world: Whereas his Highness has most insolent and
outragiously affronted the power and honor of his Majesty, even within the
command of his Castles, as is well known; and yet thinks he has done nothing
therein, but what is agreeable to his greatness; yea, the excess and rage of
his impatiency and malice against us, is such, and so boundless, that he would
fain make his Majesty believe, what is scarce possible for a sober enemy to
imagine of us; That our design was not to end in the design of him, and his
Fleet; but to proceed on to the seizing of his Majesty's Fleet bound for
Brazeel; yea, upon the very City it self: But what ever it be, that the malice
or fear of our enemies, either has, or shall suggest against us, or what art
and insinuations soever shall be used by any, to make way to those their wicked
and scandalous suggestions, I am confident his Majesty is far from receiving
any such impressions, as by them are intended upon him. Neither doubt, but by
this time, he is most fully assured, both of the sincere and real affection,
and earnest desire of the Parliament of England, after a firm and perpetual
League of Amity, with him, and the Nation of Portugal. And also, of the
peaceable intentions of this Fleet, and of our innocent behavior, according to
our duty, in prosecution and conformity to the same. And if probabilities may
take place, I could wish all unprejudiced men, to consider whether the Portugal
may not with very good reason promise unto himself more advantage and security,
by confiding in us, who are sent out by the Commonwealth of England, for the
protection of trade, rather then in them, who make it their trade to spoil and
rob whomsoever they meet, almost without any discrimination; In us, who are
only English, the most ancient Allies, and affectionate friends of their
Nation, or in that Fleet, whose strength does most consist of Irish, who have
ever been, and still are most passionately, and superstitiously, devoted to the
Spanish Nation, and Party. And it is a thing which deserves their serious
consideration and examination; That there is among them one Mucknell, a most
malicious enemy to the Portugal Nation, who about five years since, being
Master of the Ship John, bound to the East Indies, did most wickedly, and
barbarously, betray a Portugal Governor sent for God, with his wife, and
kindred, and 60 servants, whom he had taken in at Moseabeck, and afterward
inviting him and a great part of his retinue to a feast a shore in the Isle of
Joanna, most perfideously left him there, ran away with his ship, and being two
leagues off in the Island, turned the remainder of his company (near about 35.
in number) most mercilesly into a small Boat to shift for themselves, having
first stripped them of all their gold and jewels, apparel and goods, to a great
value. It were easy upon this occasion, to abound in discoveries of that
horrid practice of this Generation of men from time to time, but that the world
is sufficiently full of the cry of them; and for my part, I take not so much
delight in ripping up the villainies of others, as in clearing up our own
innocence, together with the plain and honest simplicity of our intentions and
resolutions, in pursuance of those commands we have received, and to promote
(as much as in us lies) the honorable desires and affections of the Parliament
of England, toward the King and Kingdom of Portugal, which are so mainly
opposed by our Adversaries, as that, which they perhaps apprehend (if obtained)
may prove fatal unto them, and their declining party; but, in all likelihood,
cannot but be beneficial and advantageous unto both the Nations.

Ad. ult.
March, 1650. Bay of Cataline. SIR,
BEcause I conceive our Fleet is much looked upon, (though differently,) Some
wishing us good success, others contrary, and no doubt but you have various
Reports concerning us, as men's affections lead them; I thought good to give a
brief Account, what Condition we are in at present, and what has happened
since our Arrival, that so you might be able to report the Truth of our
Affairs to them that wish us well, and pray for us. The 10th instant, we
arrived in the road of Cascalis, which lies from the mouth of this River four
mile. When we came in, the General sent me ashore with a Merchant, that came
along with us, with a Letter to the Governor, giving him to understand from
whence we came, and what we were; So soon as I came ashore, I understood, that
Pirat Rupert was as yet in the River, any ready to sail, I made no delay, but
hasted aboard, to give notice hereof to the General, and Fleet; and before
night, the General dispatched my Lieutenant in company of that Merchant, with a
Letter to the King of Portugal, intimating our Arrival, and for what, desiring
admittance as a friend and Ally: This night came down to us Captain Richard
Ell, Commander of a Merchant ship in the River, who informed us of Rupert's
strength, consisting of Eleven sail; Their strength you will perceive by the
enclosed Scrole. The 11th, being the second day of the week, a Council of War
being called, after we had craved Direction from the great God, we fell upon
debate of what we should do, and it was quickly resolved on, (nemine
contradicente) that the wind favoring us, we should immediately go up to them,
and engage forthwith; to this effect, we weighed; our Ship being Admiral, led
the way, with the Bonadventure C. John Harris, who was to engage with us,
following us, and so the Vice Admiral in the midst, and the Rear-Admiral in the
rear; but as we drew near Julians Castle, which stands upon the Point (the
River going up) and has 100. pieces of Ordnance in it; and over against it, on
the South side the River, is another Castle called the Wooden Castle, of very
good Force; Julians Castle began to let fly at us, but we kept on our course,
until we came almost between the two Castles, where falling calm, we were
enforced to come to Anchor, Julians Castle having shot 11 Guns at us, and the
Wooden Castle four; yet through Gods blessing, they never struck us: we rode
there 7. days before we came up hither, ever and anon having Messengers from
the King, to treat with us about our going away, that so Rupert might get out.
But the General and Council of War, desired to know the Kings positive answer,
whether he would acknowledge us for his friends, or no; in case he would for
friends, we desired the privilege of friends, to enter into his Ports, that we
might be in safety with our Ships; at last, (not able to do otherwise) he
assented that seeing the General and Council of War would not agree to depart,
but upon his peremptory Command for us so to do, which he could not do (as
desiring to hold all fair correspondency with the Parliament) he was content we
should come in to St. Catalines Bay, if the wind should come out and blow; so
the 18. day of March we came into this place, having first engaged our Words,
not to use any Act of hostility against Rupert in this Port, unless provoked
first by him, or that we have the Kings Assent. The 23d day present, there came
a Gentleman from the King, intimating the Kings desire, to treat with some
Person of quality of our Fleet, about our affairs. Upon which, at a Council of
War, it was agreed on, That the Vice Admiral Capt. Moulton should be the man;
and to that purpose he had instructions given him, with certain Propositions
from the General and Council of War, from which he was not to Recide, viz.
First, to demand of the King, Rupert's Fleet, as the proper goods of the
Commonwealth, and the rest belonging to several Members of the same. Secondly,
in case he would not do this, then to give us leave to fall on them in the
Port; Or thirdly, to command both our Fleets out together at a prefixed time,
and that if he should neglect, or refuse to go out, that then it might be free
for us to come in, and fall on them within: Or fourthly, to give us the Liberty
of his Port, to ride where we pleased, for our most advantage, we upon the
confession of the 4th, engaging to use no hostile Act against them, unless
first provoked thereto by them: And lastly, to give him assurance of our honest
Intentions toward himself and Kingdom, notwithstanding the Enemies malicious
Calumnies set out in a Declaration of Rupert, upon our Entrance in; The Copy
whereof I have sent you, with an Answer to it, by a Gentleman in this Fleet;
This night the Vice Admiral had 4. hours conference with the Conde de Mica,
the Conde de Tores, and the Secretary of State, being those of his Council, he
had appointed to receive our Proposals, and to make them known to him,
insisting most upon the 2d, 3d, and 4th Proposals, but concluded nothing,
promising an Answer by Commissioners of their own, but to this day it is not
come. We find the Kings Council much for Rupert and his designs, being animated
thereto by the Merchants of our own Nation, who are all, except four or five of
his Party, and do not stick openly to wish our ruin; yet the King and his
Council are very much perplexed, not knowing what to resolve of, having
formerly engaged themselves for Rupert; notwithstanding they would seem to
satisfy both Parties in their desires, but they discover themselves by their
prastises, to adhere most to Rupert. We hope the Parliament will hasten out the
other Fleet after us, or some considerable part thereof; we being at present
but equal in strength to Rupert, as you may perceive by the enclosed note,
that so we may be enabled not only to encounter with the Revolters, but with
the French also, whom the Revolters expect here daily, to join with them
against us. Pray God there be none that hinder our Fleets coming to relieve us;
this is the Sum of our proceedings hitherto; thus not having else, I commit you
to God, and rest

Your assured loving friend, C. THOROWGOOD.
Remember my kind respects to your Father and Mother, and to Lieut. col.
Lilburn, etc.

Captain Allen my quondam prisoner came hither four or five days before us,
and brought Rupert and Maurice the Order of the Garter, and is now in the
Vice Admiral with Maurice, it may be our haps to meet with him again.



A List of Prince RVPERTS Fleet. Prince Rupert General. Guns. Captain Kittleby
Admiral, Constant Reformation, 52 Mr Fernes Master of Admiral. Prince Mawrice
[Convertine] Vice Admiral. 46 Sir John Mince [Swallow] Rear-Admiral. 40 Second
Charles, Capt. Marshall Captain. 40 Eustace Smiths Ship. Capt. Goulding, Black
Prince. 36 Capt. Langley [A Scot] 30 Capt. Barnily Burly [Rowbuck] Mr.
Hargroves ship. Capt. Michel, Capt. of the Ship that was Mr Jacksons. 30 Sir
John Mucknel, in the Mary. 24 The Blackamore Lady is said to be sold. 18 The
Black Knight. 14 Total 360

The Parliament of Englands Fleet. General Blake. Guns. Capt. Thorowgood,
Saint George. 57 Capt. Moulton senior [Leopard] Vice Admiral. 56 Capt.
Boddilow [Entrance] Rear-Admirall. 46 Capt. Harris, Bone-adventure. 42 Capt.
Baule [Adventure] Frigot. 40 Capt. Saltingstone, the John. 30 Capt. Benj.
Blake, the Assurance Frigot. 32 Capt. Moulton junior, Constant Warwick. 32
Capt. Peacock, the Tiger Frigot. 36 Capt. Pierce, the Providence Frigot. 30
Capt. Wheeler, the Expedition Frigot: 30 Capt. Rose [the Signet] a fire-ship.
3 The Whelp, a Fire-ship. 8 The two Katches. 12 Total 454

FINIS.

