SIR Benjamin Rudyerd HIS SPEECH IN THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT The 17. of
February, for a speedy Treaty of PEACE with His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for MICHAEL YOUNG, 1643.

Sir Benjamin Rudyerd his Speech in the High Court of Parliament, the 17. of
February, for a speedy Treaty of Peace with his Majesty.
Mr Speaker.
I Do verily That the Vote we have already passed, For the Disbanding the
Armies the first and tenth of March, will find us no farther on our way, then
where we now are, besides the ill Accidents that may happen, and so much
precious time spent, as till then.

Sir, The Main Business is, whether we shall have a present Treaty or no? and
this concerns us in all that we Have, and Are Since we Refused a Treaty at
Nottingham, I do not find that we have gotten much ground, although our Army
then was fresh, full, and full paid; the People erect, bountiful, and forward
to the war. Now, the Disposition of the Kingdom, for the greatest part,
stands bent toward a Peace: so that wheresoever the Refusal, or Delay of the
way to it shall be fixed, the Disadvantage will fall on that side. How clear
soever the Jntentions of the House are, yet abroad it will be taken but as a
show without Reality, and so it will be returned upon us.

For the Propositions, J have not known, nor heard, that all the Propositions
in any Treaty of Jmportance, were ever swallowed whole. Jf some be harsh and
rough, they may be wrought and suppled by wise Treaters, made fit for an
acceptable agreement. Jf other be unpassable, they may be totally rejected.
Those that are our unquestionable Rights, may be so claimed, and held.

Mr Speaker, We have already tasted the bitter bloody fruits of war, we are
grown exceedingly behindhand with our selves since we began it: if we persist,
there will such a confluence of Mischiefs break in upon us, as I am afraid will
ruin the King, the Kingdom, the Nation; unless God be merciful to us, and
do step in with a great Miracle, for a little one will not serve our turn.

I have long and thougtfully expected, that the cup of trembling which has
gone round about us to other Nations, would at length come in amongst us It is
now come at last, and we may drink the Dreggs of it, the worst; which God
divert.

There is yet some comfort left, that our Miseries are not likely to last long.
For, we cannot fight here as they do in Germany, in that great, large, vast
continent: where although there be war in some parts of it, yet there are
many other remote quiet places, for trade and tillage to support it. We must
sight as in a Cockpit, we are surrounded with the sea. We have no stronger
Holds, then our own Sculls, and our own Ribs, to keep out enemies; so that the
whole Kingdom will suddenly be but one flame.

It has been said in this House, that we are bound in conscience to punish the
shedding of innocent blood: but Sir, who shall be answerable for all the
innocent blood which shall be spilt hereafter, if we do not endeavor a Peace,
by a speedy Treaty? Certainly, God is as much to be trusted in a Treaty, as in
a war: it is He that gives wisdom to treat, as well as courage to fight, and
success to both, as it pleases Him. Blood is a crying sin, it pollutes a
land: why should we defile this land any longer?

Wherefore Mr Speaker, Let us stint Blood as soon as we can. Let us agree with
our Adversaries in the way, by a present, short, wary Treaty. God direct us.

FINIS.

