Upon the much Lamented Departure of the High and Mighty PRINCE, OLIVER LORD
PROTECTOR Of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, etc.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
IS the States Atlas dead, whose strongest Brain
Held it from Ruin, with his might and main?
Could not his Wisdom, Prudence, Prowess, Zeal,
And rich endowments for the Commonweal,
Nor Conquering hand, nor peoples Votes, nor Tears,
Nor Prayers for him to prevent their Fears
Prevail against the stroke of Destiny?
No, it is a Statute Law that all must dye.
Death is impartial, Kings, and Peasants must,
When Death knocks at their doors, lie in the dust
And fate wise Princes seldom so long spares
As common men, their heads are full of cares,
Which is the reason that by most is guest,
Why Joseph younger dyed before the rest.
Scepters and Crowns are oftentimes begirt
With thorny cares that lying in the dirt,
Few men would take them up, did they but know
The thoughts of heart they bring with grief and woe.
So Henry Bullingbrook on his deaths-bed,
Henry the Fifth his Son admonished.
Men oft-times strive for things they know not what,
Which being gained, they wish they had them not.
Crowns cannot respite time, nor hinder fate,
But are more likely for to antidate.
This Wise PROTECTOR that is lately dead,
How was He toiled with thoughts that filled His head
For to preserve from dangers that appeared
On every side most justly to be feared?
Would men lay this to heart I dare profess,
They Would never envy Princes happiness.
They watch when subjects sleep, and counsel take
For public good, and for the peoples sake.
The People pressed it, and the Parliament
On Him they thought most fit for Government;
And strove to crown Him, but He that refused,
And much ado He had to be excused.
Which shows, that He was loath to undergo
This burden, but that God would have it so:
Who heard the peoples voice up to the skies,
Sadly complaining for their Liberties.
Reflect on Him departed, whom, in vain,
With Sighs and groans you would call back again.
How did His great Achievements fill His soul,
Almost ubiquitary, to control,
And rule such multitudes, so divided
In minds and hearts, hardly to be guided*
How did His great Employments make Him sad;
Needing more eyes than ever Argus had!
To see in every corner, and descry
Men's private Plots, and hidden Treachery,
Which did retard, and laid on Him more load;
Yet could not stop His vast designs abroad.
Let England, Scotland, Ireland speak what He
Performed, by making One, these Countries Three.
Let France, and Holland, Portugal, and Spain,
Denmark, and Turkey send to us again
A true Report of Victories He got
Where er'e His Armies martch'd, almost where not?
Raising his Trophies not far from the Line;
Let but Jamaica speak His great design:
( Hispaniola, by Calumbus found,
Was first intended to be English ground:
But here refused; by the King of Castile
Accepted. Gold may yet be gained by steil,
Where that the cause is just, but private jarrs
Have often hindered great attempts in wars.)
The Indies, East and West will say no less;
His Name's Renoun'd with the Antipodes.
Each day brought a new Conquest, Flanders now
In part subdued, almost they knew not how:
Dint of his sword Dunkirk no sooner felt,
But all the peoples hearts like Ice did melt.
Nor Pompey, Caesar, great Alexander
Nor great Emperor, the worlds Comander
Prevailed so far, counting the time He steered
At Helm: yet by this haste 'twas to be feared
That these his noble Acts did much portend
He hasted drawing near unto his end.
All things did prosper that he undertook:
And if we nearly into causes look;
He never attempted any thing, but Cries
And Prayers made way for His Victories:
His Devotion may examples give
To Christian Princes that now do live;
That if they mean to speed, they must implore
Aid from above, and seek to God before.
Thus this Lands Gideon prosper'd always,
And, having settled Peace, ended his days.
At such a time, when as most things do stand
In a fair posture, both by Sea and Land,
On the same Day of Thanks, designed to be,
For Woster, and Dunbar's great Victory.
We wish that his Successor may excel,
And be the Son of great Jerubbaal.
Vivit post FVNERA VIRTUES.
JO. ROW. C. C. C.

FINIS.

