THE Royal Chronicle: Wherein is contained, An Historical Narration of His
Majesty's Royal Progress; The Princely Cabinet laid open, with an Emblem to
Great Britain; The Peoples Diadem, proceeding from the Ornament and Crown of
their gracious Lord and Sovereign; The incomparable Studies of His Majesty in
the Government of Kings, to the admiration of all foreign Princes; and His
Majesty's Liege People within these His Realms and Dominions; His great
Endowments and Experience, in Religion, Law, and Governments; His Mercy
rejoicing over Justice, and his Justice cutting out work for his Mercy; His
gracious Pardon to Offenders, and His Christian Speech to the London Ministers.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
C. R.

HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, living near the three Crowns in Barbican. 1660.

THE Royal Chronicle:
IF Violence and Time had conspired to wear out all the Memorials of former
Ages, give me leave to present you with a brief (but pleasant) Chronicle to all
Posterity, of his Royal Majesty's Birth, Education, and Progress; And should
modern worth be blotted out of all Records, a restored Charles suffices, in
whom the forlorn Virtue of our worst of Times took sanctuary: It Is his
Sovereign Graces, that delights the Souls of his loyal Subjects: And we need
not wonder, that Nature was 5 years meditating on the great piece that was to
result from such a Royal Conflux, both of Father and Mother; in whose Bed all
the Royal Families of Europe met: in his Father there was by his great
Grandmother the wife of James the Fourth British Majesty; by his Grandfather
he shared of the Saxon Royalty, by his Mother of the Danish, by his Father of
the Norman, by his Sister he was allied to the Elector Palatine; as he was
related to Denmark, so he was to Sweden and Po^and, and to most of the German
or Italian Princes; in our Sovereigns Mother there lodges all that is Sovereign
in the Bourbons of France, the Austrians of Spain, the Medices of Fl^rence, (so
true is it that God made all Nations of one blood.) It was after five years
mutual enjoyment of each other Charles the first King of England, etc. and Mary
Daughter to a great and Sister to a just King of France received this Son, the
sacred pledge to them of Heavens, and each others Love. For He was born the 29
Day of May, 1630. St. Augustines birthday, where we may hope this Nursing
Father of our Church will with his sword which He bears not in vain, prove as
great a Defender of the faith once delivered to the Saints, as the other Holy
Father did with his pen, and we made as happy in this Crown and Scepter, as the
Ancient Church was in that Miter and Crosier. May never knew a more hopeful
Flower then this that happily sprung up from the Roses of York and Lancaster
joined to the Lillies of France; a flower to whose composure it seems Nature
summoned its divided glories, as Zouxis did his several Beauties to make up one
Venus; well this May was then thought most happy until now, we have lived to
see another May, as much more happy, as it is to be brought to a Kingdom then
to be brought to the world, to be received as a Prince into the discreet
embraces of Nations, then as a Child into the fond Embraces of a Nurse; to be
crowned then to be cradled: Great was the remark of this Royal Infant through
each tender Line, relating to so worthy a Prince, as is fit to be consecrated
to Solemnities worthy a Chronicle. The Heavens seemed to congratulate his royal
birth, a Star appearing at midday over St. James, displaying its modest beams
in spite of Sunshine in the middle of the Air, (an emblem of his future
glory,) Thus did the Heavens express themselves in miracles and wonders; and it
is our duty to admire them, as the works of the Lord, and therefore wonderful
in our eyes: Yet the great Seldom attempted to interpret that Star thus: When
to Paul's Cross the greatful King drew near?
A shining Star did in the Heavens appear,
Thou that consult'st with Divine Mysteries,
Tell me what this bright Comet signifies?
Now is there born a valiant Prince in the West,
That shall eclipse the Kingdoms of the East.


The King our Sovereigns Father being sensible that Children to any man
especially to a Prince are an inheritance from the Lord, went solemnly to St.
Paul's, (once a Cathedral, since a stable; once a Church to entertain Christ in,
since a Manger for Rebels to revel in) and there acknowledged with the Emperor
Antoninus in St. Paul's phrase, that by God, and through God, and therefore to
Him, and the glory of his praise are all things.

This Bud of Majesty was committed to the care of the honorable Countess of
Dorset, to be by her tender hands, and softer care cherished to grow up a
Sovereign, where He sucked graces in with milk, and virtues as early as
nourishment; as appears by the most incomparable gifts and graces wherewith God
has bin pleased to endow his Majesty. To pass by his outward Man, comelier,
and with Saul higher then all the people, so that there is none like him among
all the people; so exactly formed, that with Absalon from the Crown of his head
to the soul of his foot the most curious eye could not discern an error or a
spot; the pleasing severity and soft rigorousness of that face which is both
Majestic and beautiful, solemn and comely; though of late he is grown leaner
with cares and age; the dark and night complexion of his face, and the
twin-stars of his quick and sharp eyes sparkling in that night; He is most
beautiful when he speaks, his black shining Locks naturally curled into great
Rings has hitherto been his Ornament and Crown; his motions easy and
graceful, and plainly Majestic! etc. I say to pass by these lower worths of
neat shaped dust and well framed earth, come we to his Mind which is indeed
himself; which you may guess noble by that body wherein it dwells, such Cabinets
were made only for the most precious Jewel: the pleasing parts and motions of
that body are emblems of his mind; beauty, comeliness, proportion, etc. the
gross Ornaments of the body, are so many refined virtues in his soul: 1. His
vast Understanding, as spreading, and as wide as the things to be understood;
three Nations put limits to his power, its the world only that confines his
thoughts. His Majesty understands Spanish and Italian, writes French correctly;
the French, Italian, Spaniards, (like those Parthians, Medes, and Elamites in
the Acts) are amazed to hear Him, replying to each of them in their own Tongue
wherein they were born. In these several Languages he peruseth such parts of
knowledge as may complete a Sovereign: Logic seems to be his Nature as well as
Reason, He cannot speak inconsequently. He has read diverse of the choicest
pieces of policy, and gathered the scattered wisdom and reason that run through
Politicians writings and actions in his own breast, and there digested them
into axioms of an entire and well framed policy; to policy He has added
ancient and modern History; whereupon he sees those things performed, that He
saw in policy contri^ed. When we have admired the gracious contents of any of
His Majesty's Writings, we cannot but admire also his excellent Rhetoric.

1. His Majesty being naturally averse from that lawless power he saw exercised
in the Countries where he sojourned; and resolved to Govern by Laws; he
proceeds to study the Law of Nations, and that of his own Country too; wherein
his Father so excelled, that few Gentlemen in England came near him; his skill
in Geography, what with his study, what with his Travels is admirable: Indeed
the useful parts of the Mathematics, the Globe, Fortification, etc. take him
up very much, in Navigation, what by his own Genius, what by converse with
Marinners, and his own Observations in the Downs, and elsewhere, he is so good
a Proficient, that expert Seamen have admired him, and dare promise that his
skill that way will be no small advantage to the Nation, whose Interest lies in
foreign Voyages and Trades; But Divinity is his Mistress, with whose wholesome
principles he has well stocked the great spirit of his mind, upon which his
Soul may rest; he searches that word of God which is able to make a man wise to
salvation, and perfect to every good work, in a word, he has all the
advantages of knowledge. 1 A clear apprehension to receive a right and distinct
notion of the things represented to him. 2 Solidity of Judgment to weigh the
particulars he apprehends. 3. Fidelity of Retention; for as Nature has given
to the bodies of men for the furtherance of Corporal strength, a Retentive
power to clasp and hold fast that which preserves it, until a thorough
concoction be wrought, so he has a Retentive faculty of Memory given to Reason
as a means to consolidate and enrich it.

2. His great wisdom, as of an Angel of God, as large a heart to know good and
evil, as great education, the difference of Nation and Factions he had to deal
with, his Enemies opposition, his Friends treachery, his personal converse with
men of all sorts, the variety of his experience from the distinct knowledge of
the Natures of the People of several Countries of their chief Ministers of
State Ecclesiastic and Civil, and all this as a noble Pen observes in
adversity, which opens the understanding, and confirms the judgment, could
make; he with his Grandfather of France carries a Council with him upon one
Horse.

3. But this wisdom were dangerous, were it not accompanied with justice, his
wisdom is not a crafty or sordid subtilty, nor devilish policy; but pure,
good, and just Judgment: He has a Justice that becomes the Throne, a constant
will to give every Man his due, as he has well or ill deserved: A person of
Honor who has spent 18 years in his Majesty's Court and service, does upon
distinct knowledge let the World know he can as confidently believe that his
Majesty is just as that he is a Man; he observes a Justice in his word, and in
his action, the one is an Oracle, and the other Law.

4. But he has a mercy that rejoices over his Justice, a mercy calculated for
our time and Nation, wherein Subjects were never so obnoxious to Justice, nor a
Prince so inclined to mercy; a People was hardly ever so guilty as we, and
hardly a Prince ever so gracious as himself, we are not more ready to offend
then he to pardon; with what tender Majesty does he pass by the guilty
prostrate? his Justice does but cut out work for his Mercy! what stubborn
Offenders that brings upon their knees, this stoops to bring them up again;
they that fall by his severity, rise up again by his favor; he is more
compassionate to Men then they are to themselves: It is but the least part of
his mercy that he can be merciful to others while they are most cruel to him,
he is exercising the highest charity toward them, while they are exercising
the greatest injuries toward him; this Nature taught him, then God, and
afterward his Father, in that incomparable advice to him.

5. A general goodness, (whereof that mercy is but a branch) familiar converse,
easiness of access, a readiness to communicate himself, his fair carriage
toward all, how unwilling he is to force men to do him right, how (when he who
fears not to do others justice) afraid is he to do it to himself? I know not
whether he be more good then great, more Charlebone then Charlemaine; I am sure
his virtues are esteemed by him more then his Kingdom, and he does not
exercise these virtues (as malice, as Hell once suggested) that he might
dissemble himself to his just Right; but he would obtain his Right that he
might be the more able to exercise his virtues; his Right will therefore please
him, because then he is able to forgive them that did him wrong.

6. His magnanimity, fortitude, and courage; he is as magnanimous in suffering
wrong, as he is valiant in attempting to recover his Right; his Innocence being
guilty of nothing, is afraid of nothing, the Righteous is as bold as a Lion,
fearing no Enemy, because he has justly provoked none; his Religion is not the
least support of his valor; He with David encourages Garrisons, and wraps up
himself in his God, where Reason leaves doubting, their Faith begins in hope
even against hope. In a word, God has endued His Majesty with those
incomparable Graces that are seldom poured forth any where below the Throne;
for whatsoever things are true, just, pure, and lovely, they are in Him; This
is the Person whom God and all Men think worthy of a Kingdom, but those over
whom He is a King; (meaning the Phanatique) these are the Virtues in whose
enjoyment other Nations hug themselves: These are the Princely Rays that shine
with Majestic Luster in most parts of Europe: And this is the great and
Christian Conqueror, who attributes not any thing to Himself, but with Holy
King David, gives the glory of all to the King of Kings, saying, I will not
trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword save me: But thou have saved us from
our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us; Or, as His Majesty
graciously expressed Himself in His short Speech to the Ministers, in his
passage through the City: The deliverance which God has wrought for me, I own
as the work of his own right hand, beyond humane contrivance, and desire that
all the glory of them may be ascribed to Him.

FINIS.

