Exploits Discovered, IN A DECLARATION Of some more proceedings of Sergeant
Major CHVDLEY, General of the Forces under the Earl of STAMFORD: AGAINST Sir
RALPH HOPTON.

Fully relating the great overthrow given to him* As it was sent in a Letter
from Exon, (April 29.) to a man of note in London.

ALSO A brief rehersall of the several Victories, which the Enemy, (to their
great discouragement) has of late received by the Parliament Forces.

Dan. 11. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall he corrupt
by flatteries: but the people that do know their God, shall be strong, and do
exploits.

Psalm. 60. 4. Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee: that it may be
displayed, because of the truth.

LONDON, Printed for B. Allen, and T. Underhill. May. 2. 1643.

Exploits Discovered: In a DECLARATION of some more proceedings of Sergeant
Major Chudley, etc.
SIR,
YOur good News was very welcome, but the Lord was pleased to ordain as good
for ud to return unto you: The Treaty ends with the Cornish on Saturday, at
which time our Army being at Liston 3 miles from Lanceston, and Sergeant Major
Chudley, lately a Captain in Ireland against the Rebels, who as then, so now,
is a Gallant stout Soldier, being Commander in chief, having present
intelligence that there were but 1200. in Lanceston, and that they had no great
Cannons, upon advice with his Council of War to resolved to set upon the
Town, it being very probable that he should carry it, which if it might be
gained, would prove of good consequence, both for inlet, and a place of
retreat: wherefore he resolved to set upon the Town on Sabath day in the
morning (his Army consisting of 1700. Horse and Foot,) they soon beat off the
Guard from the Bridge, which was done by Captain Drakes Troop: then they make
away with their Pioners to March toward the Town through the fields; the
enemy perceiving this, lined all the hedges with Musketeers, who were beaten
out by our men like Sheep: About 10 of the clock they began the fight.

Then they gathered into a Body, (I mean the CORNISH) when our men did much
execution upon them with their Ordinance, slew many men of note, among whom was
Captain Basset of Silley, and beat them home to the walls: but they having two
Regiments of fresh Men come into their supply, though our men fought very
valiantly and kept their ground, they with their multitudes had almost
surrounded them, and played upon them on every side, whereat our men began to be
dismayed, and about 400. shranke away from them; and those that had bin much
tired in the fight all day, supposed all would be lost: but it pleased God in
the very nick, that Sir John Merickes Regiment of the LONDON gray Coats (about
700. which were billeted at Tavistocke, about 10. miles off) were sent for, and
hearing the Fight made the more haft, they) came in about five of the clock in
the evening, led on courageously by a godly Minister, the Earl of Stamfords
Chaplain, in the absence of their Commander; and upon the first onset killed
12. of them, and caused them to retreat, (who if they had stayed but one
quarter of an hour, it is supposed our men would have given the day for lost:
but thus it pleased the Lord to rescue us, so that our men had liberty to make
an honorable retreat; Major CHVDLEY himself with 20. Horse fetching off a
great Gunne, which was in danger, which work was refused by Major Price an old
Soldier, who had command to do it, but he refused, saying, it was impossible;
yet it was brought off by him, and all their Ammunition, so that they lost
nothing they had; about seven Men slain, who were brought off also with about
40. hurt men, they killed above 100. (hurt as some Prisoners which were taken,
confessed) above 500. Thus GOD wrought for us, and fought for us at that time:
our men retreated that night to Listan, but because they could not quarter
there with convenience and safety, on Monday they Marched to Okeington, there
to Quarter.

On Tuesday the Cornish with 5000. Foot and 500. Horse came toward our Army
(having had intelligence that our Seamen were all sent to make good Bidford
and Bastable, and that we had not above 1200. Foot and four Troops of Horse)
so that they made no question of Vi^tory; and through the negligence or
perfidiousnesse of our Scouts they were come within 2 miles of Okeington,
before our men had any perfect intelligence, which put them to a great
straight, either to sorsake the Town and loose all their Guns and Ammunition,
(which might have undone the whole County) or else to hazard all the Horse by
adventuring to give them a bold charge, which being debated in a Council of
War, it was proposed by Major Chudleigh, to divide the Horse into six
Squadrons, who should keep a large distance between every Squadron, that they
might appear to compass more ground in their Front then all the Cornish Army,
which course was approved and followed: About 10. at night in this form, it
being very dark, they being come forth upon Swerton Downs, our Horse being in
all but 108. the Cornish Army very near, together with their Horse in the
Front; the first Squadron being but 19. Horse gave the Charge, and Routed their
Horse, who soon broke the Ranks of their Foot; and the rest of our Horse
following the Charge very close, broke through their whole Army and killed
many, doing execution forward and backward, and thus they did twice, and forced
the enemies to fly in much confusion, only there was a small body that kept
together and guarded their Ordnance, which was once taken, but at length
carried away by their own guard, which our men could not force, they rested not
running until they came to Lanceston: Thus God himself alone got the Victory:
they lost 500. Arms, which our men got, and the Country next morning had the
gleaning of much more; our men broke a multitude of their Pikes, which they
conceived not worth the carrying away: there were taken 12 Prisoners, two foot
Colors, one Coronet, and Colors, which was Sir Nicholas Slannings, 13 Drums;
Sir Ralph Hopton had his Headpiece taken from him, and was almost chokt
thereby, begged for his life, and so escaped unknown, but very narrowly: The
Lord Moon was taken and pillaged: but egrenesse to get more plunder, caused
the Trooper that took him, after he had his money, to let him escape, it being
so dark indeed that one could hardly discern another: It is supposed that Sir
Nicholas Slanning was pillaged also.

Many of the Troopers have gotten good store of Money and Pillage; an Irish man
wears the Lord Moons Cloak. There were slain above 100. upon the place. In
all this fight we lost not one man, though there were about 12. hurt, not above
2. that are dangerous. When our men gave the last charge, it being about 12. of
the clock, it came to extreme weather, Lightning and Thunder, and much Rain,
which beat into the enemies face, having neither hedge nor ditch; it stroke
much terror in to them, that some among them that had better dispositions then
the rest, betook themselves to Prayer, and said, That now they saw that the
Lord did fight against them. It is supposed that the most of them are spoiled,
for ever being Soldiers again, for they marched before they rested (besides
the time they fought, without having meat or drink) above 30. miles. The glory
is the Lords, which I desire still to acknowledge to his praise.

One thousand pound, and two brave Horses, were taken by Colonel Stroud in
Somersetshire. With my due respects unto you and my good Sister: I am

April 29. 1643. Yours H. R.

POSTSCRIPT.
There is a Cloak-bag of Sir Ralph Hoptons taken, and much Pillage upon
Pack-horses: It is reported that the Earl of Stamford should say, The
discovery in that Cloakbag was worth a million: There was found the Kings
Letter written with black lead, on white Tiffany, dated but last week; there
was also a Catalogue of all the Contributers (in Somerset, Devon and Cornwall,)
to their War. Certainly the things are of consequence, but they are kept
secret; only the Secretary Nicholas, and the Kings Letters got abroad: the
effect of which was, That he should hasten to Oxford, and take Exon by the way:
that for more ease and speed Horse all bis Foot, as he said the Rebels did, etc.

The Names of the Commanders of this 108. Horse, were,
Lieutenant General Chudley, Son to Baronet Chudley. Captain William Gould.
Captain Pym, Son to Mr. Pym of the House of Commons. Captain Drake.
All as Valiant Men I am persuaded as ever drew Sword, and did all of them
march in the Front, Fighting and coming on so furiously, that the Cornish-men
thought they had been Devils.

A brief rehersall of the several Victories, which the Enemy, (to their great
discouragement) has of late received by the Parliament Forces.
ALthough our sins deserve utter desolation, yet in regard God has
vouchsafed his presence and assistance to his people in stirring them up to
stand for his Cause willingly, and to pray unto him earnestly, and in giving
many Victories to those that fight his Battles; there is ground of hope that
God will go on in his own work for our good: which that he may do, we must
be thankful for what he has don already. For his goodness to us at Keynton
field, who by two Regiments Routed and put to slight the Kings Army. At
Brainford, who by two broken Regiments kept back and incountered with the Kings
whole Army. At Bradford, who by about 60. men overcame a great Army that came
against them. At Chichester and Winchester, delivering those places into the
hands of our Army, though greatly opposed. At Middlewich, for the great Victory
given there to Sir Will: Brereton. At Salt Heath near Stafford; for his good
hand with his people in Lancashire. For the good success of Sir William
Waller: and also of my Lord Fairefax; for preserving his Servants so strangely
at Lichfield-Close. I say, nor these, nor any of the mercies of God ought to be
forgotten, but thankfully remembered; and in especial manner we ought to be
thankful for the wonderful work of God wrought for his Servants in
Devonshire, as appears by the Letter before specified.

FJNJS.

