LVX VERITATIS. OR, CHRISTIAN JUDICIAL Astrology VINDICATED, AND Demonology
Confuted: In Answer to NATH. HOMES, D.D. Wherein his allegations of the
Learned, Reasons, Divine proofs, and Arguments, are particularly examined and
convinced.

With the legality of the Art maintained and warranted by Scripture.

Whereunto is annexed, a short Discourse of that Great Eclipse of the SUN,
March 29. 1652.

By WILLIAM RAMESEY Gent. Student in Astrology and Physic.

London, Printed by J. B. for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1651.

To all wel-willers and lovers of ART.
Gentlemen,
IT is true, I may look for (when I seriously consider my own insufficiency
and lack of good utterance and a pleasing oratorious phrase) many censures, and
be perplexed with doubts, whether I have or no chosen the better part; since
most, or the generality of men are carried away sooner with a pleasing and
deluding tongue, then truth, delivered in an homely or mean style: especially
since this most noble study that I undertake here to defend is so vulgarly
traduced, and commonly both ill spoken of: which indeed at the first, was some
disheartning to my undertakings; yet because my Antagonists Coat is such, as
that a word against Astrology sheltred under it, will by the vulgar be more
heeded, then an Oration from another; and this noble Art in danger hereby to
suffer (most falsely) an ill esteem in their opinions; for the well wishes I
owe both to it, the truth, and all ye the students therein, and lovers of
learning whatsoever. I thought good rather to incur the harsh censure of some,
then by my silence to give occasion to the ignorant, and enemies thereof to
vaunt themselves against it: and truly notwithstanding all this, I had not
thus taken him up; since neither he nor any one else can say ought against this
science but what has been formerly most fully answered: Look Pirovanu,
Goclenius, Bellantius, Maraseallettes and Sir Christoph. Heydon.
but for the Readers satisfaction, who perhaps would have concluded (had no
body undertaken to answer him) he had been past answering. I very much fear
there are many most gross faults and mistakes in this Treatise, it being penned
at that instant of time, I was more perplexed and troubled then in all my life
before; my occasions being such, that I had no time to study a better method,
or correct what has escaped; it being the fruits of what my weak Genius did
produce in every house and place I came in (in pursuance of my then occasions)
where I could happily meet with the least occasion. Yet my hope is, that in
what I have been defective (as I doubt not but your piercing judgments will
soon discover) you will both support, supply and amend, hoping also ye will
accept of the will for the deed: to whom I here Dedicate both my self and weak
labors to serve you to my weak power.

W. RAMESEY.
Die 4. Decembris, 1650.
To the unpartiall READER.
Courteous Reader,
AS there is nothing more ridiculous amongst the learned, then to conclude,
before a through understanding be, in the matter in question and controversy;
so is there nothing more worthy or commendable in a man, then to be patient,
and hear all, nay and indeed both tales, before judgment be given; for the old
saying is, one tale is good till the other be heard; and if this discourse be a
thing beyond thy knowledge, I should desire thee first Legere, perlegere, and
tunc judicare,: Read, and read it over and over, before thou judge.

This very same Art of Christian Judicial Astrology which I here defend,
being by the vulgar in general (some few years since) and also by some
otherwise knowing and discreet, condemned as Illegal, Diabolical, and indeed to
be little better then Witchcraft; I also as ignorant therein at that time as
themselves, concluded so too; yet upon an cccasion one day, I desired a
Gentleman that was extreme hot (in words only) against it, to do me the favor
as to acquaint me with his knowledge of the unlawfulness thereof; that so I
might have some ground for my then ill conceit thereof, as also to be better
able to uphold my opinion; but to be short, I could get nothing of consequence
out of him, that could any wise prejudice the validity of the Art; but only he
believed so; and how could any man tell him any thing that he knew not himself,
without dealing with the Devil, or being a Witch? which (me thoughts) was so
ill becoming a man of judgment and understanding, to have no better reasons
nor grounds for his high words, that I was even ashamed I was of his opinion,
and therefore thought it much more commendable to be silent thereafter in such
matters, which I understood not; then to condemn an Art only with words and no
sound argument.

Whereupon being very much desirous to be satisfied in the verity and legality
of this most famous Art of ASTROLOGY, The Authors first inducement to the
study of Astrology.
which so many discreet Gentlemen would sometime ignorantly condemn, I applied
my self to the study thereof, which after some expense of time and pains, I
found to be so apparently true and lawful, that these flashes of my friends
against it, was quickly manifest to me, proceeded merely from ignorance and
tradition.

Wherefore, Reader, that thou may not in the least be mistaken herein, as the
antagonists and enemies thereof are to condemn the Arts legality for the abuse
of the Artist, who will, out of vainglory and pride, often undertake to
predict impossible things, I mean which this Art cannot reach unto; and so for
their simplicity and abuse thereof, give occasion to condemn that which of all
studies is the most delectable, comfortable, true and lawful; not knowing
indeed what it is, they would condemn, and so deceive both themselves and
reader.

But that thou may not herein be deceived; I say, I will here declare unto
thee, the whole power and subject of Astrology; The whole power and subject of
Astrology.
and that first Negatively, and next Affirmatively.

Negatively, First that the Rules of Astrology does not meddle with vain
contingents, or such as have an indifferent respect to the opposites as
depending upon unknown, or indeterminate causes, which may happen one way or
other.

Secondly, man's will is not subject to the influence of the Stars, neither has
Astrology to do with it, but accidentally, so far as the soul with the
faculties thereof, follow the temperature of the body: neither does Astrology
meddle with the providence of God; Astrologers most falsely impeached to be
searchers of the secrets of God.
or show a cause of miracles, nor with the secrets of God; for they are past
finding out, says the Scripture, Ergo, Astrologers that are but men that
contemplate natural causes are falsely and most scandalously abused, when thus
impeached.

And thirdly, Astrology, or the influence of the Stars, have no fatal
necessity, except some contingency be mixed therewith; for this were to deny the
providence of God.

But contrariwise, Astrology deals with such things as are performed by Art
and nature, with the will of man indirectly and accidentally; and his
inclinations, temperature and dispositions, as also with his affections and
body, and with natural secondary causes, and general accidents and
contingencies; but if men will, contrary to the rules of Art, undertake to go
beyond it, and abuse both the Art and themselves, shall any one therefore
conclude positively it is unlawful, not efficacious or consistent with either
reason or truth? Sure thus to affirm, is as simple in any man, as for me to say
Religion is Diabolical, false, frivolous, inconsistent with reason and truth,
because there are heresies crept therein, Schisms, and Sects.

Wherefore I shall desire all to whom this my weak and small Treatise shall
come, that they would not so inconsiderately and rashly condemn what they
understand not; but first, thoroughly weigh every particular argument and reason
therein, before a censure proceed from their lips; yet I must be plain with
thee, I neither fear nor care for thy rash conclusions; for since I know it
will be acceptable to all impartial and judicious souls, I shall rest content,
since no man living can please all people. I shall be very glad if I have any
whit been servicable to the Students herein, to whom I wish all prosperity, and
could wish that all ingenious souls would apply themselves, to the study
thereof; which they may lawfully and safely do, for any hurt the antagonists
thereof has done it, for I do with all my heart love all those that apply
themselves to knowledge, and my misfortune is so much the more increased that I
am acquainted with so few of the students of this noble Art of Astrology; to
whom as also to thy self, I wish all happiness, and remain,

Thy loving friend, W. RAMESEY.
Die 4. Decembris, 1650.
The Contents of every Chapter and Section contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. IN Answer to his Distinctions, Descriptions, Observations and nature
of Astrology, wherein he is taught what Astrology is, and his Distinctions
and descriptions proved merely erroneous, and convinced as malicious, ignorant,
and inconsistent with reason or honesty: or to say, sus sacerdos. Page 1.
Section. I. Wherein is demonstrated and taught the definition of Astrology. p.
1. Section II. In answer to some cavils of Mr. Homes's, wherein he denies
Astrology to be warranted by Scripture, proved erroneous and false. p. 4.
Section III. Proving Astrology to be an Art. p. 13. Section IV. Proving the
lawfulness of Astrology, being not impugned by Scripture, nor Councels; but
allowed of by the wisest and greatest of men. p. 15. Section V. Demonstrating
the antiquity of Astrology p. 27. Section VI. Showing Astrology to be the
profitablest study revealed under the Sun to Mortals. p. 29.
CHAP. II. IN Answer to the opinions of the learned touching Astrology,
wherein is further shown the legality of Astrology, that the Stars are both
signs and causes; and that Mr. Homes his quoting the Fathers and learned, is
merely fallacious and envious, and no wise available to his intent and purpose.
p. 37. Section I. Wherein is farther shown, the legality of Astrology, p. 38.
Section II. Wherein is shown that the Stars are signs and causes. p. 39.
Section III. Wherein his Allegation against the ground of the Art is condemned,
and his bringing St. Austin and Galen against it, proved fallacious, injurious
and malicious; and how far we ought to attribute to the power of the Stars.
p. 46. Section IV. Wherein Astrology is defended against his Allegations, from
Mr. Perkins's words. p. 54 Section V. Wherein his cavilling Mr. Briggs, and
others, are convinced. page 56.
CHAP. III. WHerein his divine proofs against Astrology, are examined and
confuted. p. 59. Section I. Wherein his first Scripture proof, viz. Deuteronomy. 18.
verse 10. is convinced and cleared no wise condemn Astrology. p. 60. Section
II. Wherein his second proof is refelled, viz. Esaias 2.6. p. 69. Section III.
Wherein his third Text is convinced, viz. Esaias 44.25. p. 72. Section IIII.
Wherein his fourth proof is refelled, viz. Esaias 47.12, 13, 14. p. 77. Section
V. Wherein his fifth proof is proved weak, as to his purpose, viz. Ier. 10.2.3.
p. 85. Section VI. Wherein his sixth poof is refelled, viz. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. p. 91.
CHAP. IV. WHerein his reasons and arguments against Astrology, are
particularly examined and condemned, neither to consist with reason or truth.
p. 95. Section I. Wherein his first fourfold reason is convinced. ibid.
Section II. Wherein his objection touching the diversity of twins, is refelled,
as also some other quirks against Astrology examined and convinced. p. 101.
Section III. Wherein his endeavors to prove Astrology of no truth or
certainty, as also it is rules and principles, are themselves of less truth or
ground; nay, and indeed senseless. p. 113 Section IIII. Wherein he thinks the
ground of the Art wholly shaken and overthrown, by affirming it merely
imaginary, viz. the ninth and tenth sphere, and in them the Zodiac; therein
proves and shows his own ignorance the more apparently manifest. p. 129.
CHAP. V. Wherein the confutation of the objections that are brought for
Astrology are examined, and refelled. p. 130.
LVX VERITATIS. OR, Christian judicial Astrology VINDICATED, In Answer to
Doctor Nathaniel Homes.
CHAP. I. In answer to his Distinctions, Descriptions, Observations, and nature
of Astrology. Wherein he is taught what Astrology is, and his Descriptions
and Distinctions proved merely erroneous; and convinced as malicious,
ignorant, and inconsistent with reason or honesty; Or to say, Sus sacerdos.
Section. I. The Definition of Astrology.
THat the Reader may the better judge of the controversy between Doctor Homes
and my self, I think best here before I enter upon any part of his discourse,
to set down what this Art of Judicial Astrology is, which I undertake to
defend. Ptolomie Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Of his Quadripartite, defines it thus,
Astrology is that Art (joining it with Astronomy, as making no difference
between them, though Mr. Homes and other Adversaries thereunto do) which
teaches by the motions, Configurations and Influences of the Signs, Stars
and Celestial Planets, to judge and prognosticate of the natural effects and
mutations to come, in the Elements and inferior and Elementary bodies. And who
so takes Astrology to be any other thing, is altogether ignorant of the Art,
or guilty of inveterate malice in traducing so noble and admirable a science,
esteemed and allowed of in all ages, and that in great reverence and honor, as
well as the students thereof (as in it is due place shall be made to appear) by
the chiefest and noblest of the people. Though Doctor Homes would feign
persuade the vulgar and ignorant sort of people that it is a Doctrine of Devils,
and unlawful, which shall in it is due place be made to appear (as also the
rest of his weak arguments and cavils,) that they are merely malicious,
ignorant, weak, and inconsistent with reason or the thing in question; which
that he may not be ignorant of, as also for the better understanding of the
Reader, I do here more plainly rehearse by way of Quere, viz.

First, whether Astrology or foretelling, or Prognosticating by the Stars,
be a lawful Art, free from all Diabolical practices and devices.

Secondly, Whether Astrology may not lawfully be studied and practiced, by the
best of Gods people, without offense in the least, either to the law of God, or
man (if they concur with the rules of the Scripture) which is the full matter
in controversy, and to be in this following discourse discussed, handled and
cleared; and if so, then certainly the malicious ignorant condemners of this
Noble and most profitable Art studied by mortals, (as in it is due place shall
appear) ought to be severely punished, and that with examplary infliction,
that posterity may take warning how they condemn what they are ignorant of;
and likewise be encouraged to apply their minds to the contemplation and
knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, especially this most heavenly and divine
study of Astrology, or the language of the Stars.

Now you have heard the distinction of Astrology the subject intended, by it
you may not only see the causes which concur to the constitution of the nature
of the Art, but also the final cause, whereunto all the precepts of the Art
are to be referred; seeing then the knowledge of the effects of the Stars in
the Elements and their bodies, depends of the motions, Configurations, and
Influences of the Celestial bodies, Astronomy and Astrology both are one Art.
Astronomy or Astrology (for by the learned, there is made no distinction
between them as several Arts, but generally conclude them (as indeed they are)
one and the same Art) is divided into two parts, the first speculative or
theorical, which consists in the knowledge of the heavenly motions; the other
part is that which consists in the effects and properties of the former
motions, and without this (viz Astrology) the other is merely vain and of no
use, or to none or little purpose; the former viz. Astronomy furnishes the
Astrologer with matter and stuff wherein to exercise himself; the other viz.
Astrology disposes the matter, and accordingly judges as the case does
require, and therefore to be esteemed the more noble part of this Science.

SECT. II. In answer to some cavels of Mr. Homes his, wherein be denies
Astrology to be warranted by Scripture, proved erroneous and false.
HAving thus painted forth the matter and form of the thing intended to be
insisted on, I come now to show you what Mr. Homes his utmost power and malice
against it is: and first his blind zeal begins to show it self, in persuading
the Reader it is condemned by the Scripture, and no wise thereby tolerated;
his words are, It is no where allowed in the Scripture, under the notion of
Astrology, but every where spoken against as we shall see afterward: and all
that he can show us and make us see, is but six places of Scripture, which is
far from being worthy of the Title of a general condemnation, when there is
none but knows the extent of the Scripture to consist of many half dozen
Chapters, nay of books, Ergo not envy where condemned, and those places
neither, but imagined by him to condemn Astrology, when indeed they serve no
whit at all for his purpose, as in it is due place shall be made appear. But he
thinks these words to be of force enough, to astonish and discomfort the
ignorant, from the study thereof; and therefore as a warning piece, or that his
other windy reports may better take, and be more heeded and believed, he
prefixeth this slanderous and most false and wicked saying; and truly for his
policy he is worthy applause, for mistrusting his words should be little
regarded, he colors them with a preface (as it were) of Religion; Astrology
allowed of by Scripture.
yet this will not keep him from being ridiculous to the wiser and more
learned sort of people. But by the way, is it every where condemned? does not
the King and Prophet David say, The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm.
19.1. and in another place, The language of the Stars, (which is the
signification of the word Astrology (...) the language of the Stars; and is it
not allowed any where in Scripture under the notion of Astrology?) Is heard
over all the earth, or the utmost parts thereof, Psalm. 19.3. as if he had said,
there is no part free from the power of their Influences; for their power has
a general extent over all Nations, Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces, and
Languages. I pray, who can restrain the sweet influences of the Pleiades? Job
38.31. And did not the Stars in their courses fight against Sisera? Judge.
5.20. One of these places had been enough to have convinced him of great
wickedness, in denying the Scripture does any where allow of Astrology; for
if he never read these places, then he is wicked, and no less then wilfully
wicked, to conclude what he understands not; if he has perused them, then most
malicious to speak against truth; I may even as well say diabolically wicked,
Mr. Homes himself rather to be imputed a teacher of the Devils Doctrine, then
Astrologers.
and that he teaches rather the Doctrine of Devils, for the Devils Doctrine is
falsehood; and if he preaches such gross lies as these, he is the Devils
preacher, and not Astrologers, neither is Astrology a Doctrine of Devils (as
shall be made clear to him before the closure of my discourse) as he in his 160
page, line 21. is pleased to term it. So then, now I hope the Reader does
clearly see, these his first words of his discourse, to be merely envyous,
slanderous, and malicious, (or at the best) most ignorant; for it will puzzle
all his brains; and Mr. Raunces, nay and all that dare or will take their
parts, to make any one of those passages of Scripture (he brings to confute or
condemn Astrology) to serve in the least for his turn, as in it is due place
shall be cleared.

Then says Mr. Homes, as other things that are natural, which are brought to
countenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the Encyclopedia, and general
order and seals of all Arts and Sciences, within their own spheres, to be
accounted Astrology. For instance, First, (says he) Some urge that we know
the tides of the Sea, by the state of and tempests by other Stars, which I am
confident Mr. Homes cannot deny, but he will render himself more ridiculous
then already, which he endeavors to do thus; these and of the like nature, are
properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy, which we call
Meteorologie; and so likewise are all fiery Meteors, Comets, etc. and so by
consequence are made an integral part of Physics, for if you will say, because
of their external efficient cause, viz. the Stars; they are to be handled as
a part of Astrology, by the same reason there will be left no such Science as
natural Philosophy, because all inferior bodies below the Moon (as says the
great Philosopher Aristotle) depend upon the superior Celestial bodies of the
heavens. In all which he does but show his great mistake in the ground of
Astrology, and his envy thereto; for how can Mr. Homes prove this is a mere
urging, or an opinion of some, that the is the cause of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; or that it is rather to be attributed to that part of natural
Philosophy, which is called Meteorologie, and so consequently to be a part of
Physics, when all the world knows that has any experience or understanding in
Astrology, that he is as far from hitting the mark, as if he had mist the Butt.

Wherefore for his better instruction, (for I see he is not so well verst in
Astrology as he pretends, or as one that is to condemn it should be) I will
make it appear to him, that the is the absolute cause of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; and this is the opinion of all or most knowing and learned writers,
both in this Art and other Sciences; and not only so, but it is so clear to
all the learned, that his great friend Picus Mirandula, which was a stronger
Champion (or at least more knowing in the Art then he) against Astrology, does
confess the to be the positive and sole cause thereof.

And thus, The the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.
if he have any understanding in the Art (as by his writing, I must confess
(as I but now said) I see none) let him take the true time of the Seas flowing
first, and then observe in what part of heaven the is accidentally, placed by
her violent diurne motion, and he shall find it to flow till she come to an
absolute aspect of the place she was in at it is first beginning to flow; and
then will continue ebbing till she come to the direct or opposite place in the
heavens, etc. Still let him observe exactly when she comes to the or of the
place of her first beginning, and he shall never err in this point; this is
sufficiently well known to the learned Practitioners, and the sons of Art;
yet note that and other Stars may hasten, hinder and alter the influence, as
he may see at and of or the change and full, in spring tides, and neap tides,
at quarters and half quarters. I would he had not been ignorant of this, and
then perhaps, (this being the beginning of his discourse) he had not undertook
to lay pen to Paper against this most heavenly, most admirable, and most
contemplative, delectable study and science of the Stars and Celestial bodies.
So by this time he clearly sees how inconsiderate and rash this his sophistical
and false argument is.

Secondly, says Mr. Homes, others say that by Astrology we know Eclipses and
Changes of the Moon; but we say Astronomy does challenge this as belonging to
it, etc. My answer is, that I say, (what ever he tells me others may or do
say) he cannot but know that those that say so are not versed therein, and are
as ignorant to apply or attribute this part of the practick, viz. Astrology to
the Theoricall part, viz. Astronomy; as he is to make a distinction between the
one and the other, as two distinct Arts, when Ptolomie whom the most learned
follow, in his book, chap. 1. of his Quadripartite (as above said) defining
Astrology, makes no distinction between the one and the other, but that the
one is Theoricall, the other Practical. And thirdly, How does he define (by
all his rabble) the Art of Astrology?
says he, If any one urge that Astrology bandles of the qualities and effects
of the stars, we Reply, that so does Astronomy, of their qualities namely, of
their light and color, and natural Philosophy of their effects, in watery,
ayrie, and fiery meteors: as much as to say, Astrology is no Science at all,
but will give its property to another study; if this be not slanderous and
malicious, let the weakest in the world judge: he might as well then all this
while have called it, Natural Philosophy, as Astrology; and then he tells us,
if we admit of the Title Alsted gives to Astrology, viz. Astrologia
planetaria, or Planetary Astrology, and of Doctor Willets titles, viz.
Astromaney and Genethliaca; then says he for conclusion by all observe, that
there is no place left for Astrology; by which he clearly renders himself the
most malicious of all wretches, to deny that Art which above 298. The learned
and famous Sir Christopher Heydon records them, which you have verbatim by
and by.
of the most wise men of all ages have studied and practiced (their names you
shall have hereafter in its place;) both before and since Christ's time, whose
antiquity may be derived from our first father Adam: maintained by Princes and
Kings, reverenced by that greatest of worthies, Alexander the Great; and not
condemned by any of the Fathers, or the practice thereof prohibited by the
Church, farther then that they should not hereby be drawn from the study of
Divinity, as you shall see by and by; Mr. Homes me thinks being a wise man,
should not write against, (and that in such a zealous manner) a thing which is
not in rerum natura, or in posse, as in his first Section of his tenth Chapter,
he studies to make Astrology appear, to what purpose then are all his
arguments against Astrology, when he will not admit of any such thing in the
world: what does he write against then? and why does he so much condemn the
students thereof? because he knows not the validity thereof; because he knows
not the rules and fundamentals thereof; because indeed he is altogether
ignorant of the same; and let him not be angry I plainly tell him so, (plain
dealing is best among friends) for if he did, he would have been so far from
writing or speaking against it, that he would have been more furious and hot
with any one should have condemned it, then I am with him; for he that will
speak against what he knows not, and bring false, scandalous and sophistical
arguments to maintain his opinion; he I say, would certainly term that man no
better then a fool, or at the best a knave to write against what he knows, and
can also prove to be true; but I will not be so hot with him.

But now that he may see his error in offering to undertake to put men out of
conceit with this heavenly study, I will show him here (before I begin to
answer his second Section, in that which I have to say to it, though this will
sufficiently refel it.)

First, that Astrology is an Art.

Secondly, the lawfulness of it, being not impugned by Scripture nor councels,
but allowed of by the wisest and greatest men.

Thirdly, the antiquity of it.

Fourthly, that it is the profitablest study under the Sun.

SECT. III. Proving Astrology to be an Art.
ARistotle, lib. 2. chap. 2. Astrology is proved an Art.
Phys. affirms that Astrology is Scientia media, a Science between the
Mathematics and natural Philosophy, for the principles are merely
Mathematical, and in practice are applied to sensible matter as the Physical
subject thereof; moreover he ranks it also amongst the liberal sciences; and
annexeth it to Philosophy in such a sort, that he seems indifferent to use
the name of a Philosopher and an Astrologer for the same. So likewise Averroes
in his Commentary on the 12. of the Metaphysics, text 44. speaking concerning
the power of the heavenly bodies, in the procreation and conservation of all
worldly things, and in their mutual consent and and assisting one another in
their mutual operations, he resembles them to good governors in a
Commonwealth, that jointly concur in one unanimous consent for ordering the
same: His words are dispositio in juramento corporum coelestium ad invicem in
creando entia, quae sunt hic, and conservando ea, est sicut dispositio
regentium bonorum, qui juvant se ad invicem in regendo bonam civitatem. And in
his Commentary on the second book of Physics, his second Chapter, shows that
natural Philosophy and Astrology have one and the same subject, and yet are
distinguished by a diverse consideration; and in the third of the Metaph.
Comment, 7. he affirms the knowledge of the Stars to be a Mathematical Art;
and so it has ever in all ages by the most learned Philosophers been esteemed.
I believe Mr. Homes nor no man else that knows any thing, will deny that it
is one of the liberal sciences, and if he will condemn it as none, he must be
content to lose one of them, which were to render himself the eighth wise man;
what science I pray will he place in the room of it, since he thus endeavors
to excommunicate it, for he tells us it is as mere a fancy as Palmestry, and
yet Galen (one of his learned, that he brings to condemn Astrology with the
word Sophisticum, that it is Sophistical, page. 115. l. 11.) as Physicians
themselves report, teaches to know the temperature of the body by the palm of
the hand; and his reason is, because the mind commonly follows the
constitution of the body; thus you may see how he carpeth and catches at any
thing that he thinks will make in the least for his turn; as also of Alsted,
and Doctor Willets Titles of Astrology, when the question is, whether either of
them knew the common rules of the Art. So then, this being made clear to him
that it is an Art, and not only so, but a Science, and hat one of the liberal
Sciences; I come now to the second lesson I promised him. viz.

SECT. IV. Proving the lawfulness of Astrology, being not impugned by
Scripture, nor Councels; but allowed of by the wisest and greatest men.
WHat has already above been said, is clear to any judicious impartial eye,
The lawfulness of Astrology.
that this Art is lawful, where I say, The heavens declare the glory of God,
etc. But to clear it more plainly, the Psalmist in his very next words says,
The Firmament shows the works of his hands, Psalm. 19.1. which is clear to me
is meant thereby that he effects by them, (and no other thing) (though I must
confess there are diverse interpretations thereof) my reason is, that
otherwise, every thing which is created does declare the handy work of God; I
believe Mr. Homes will find Aquinas and Hierome of my opinion: He has heard
also, that there is no speech nor language, where the voice of the Stars are
not heard; Psalm. 19.3. which may serve here again very well for the purpose in
hand; God prohibiteth not the study of Astrology.
and to speak more plainly, that God does not prohibit mortals from the study
of them; you may see how the Holy Ghost by Stephen, in the 7. of the Acts,
verse 22. speaking in the commendation of Moses, gives him (over and above the
commendation that was aforesaid) that he was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds, which is clear to any rational
man, that if it had been any wise sinful, diabolical, or odious in the sight of
God, Moses would not have applied his study thereunto; or at least, it would
never have been recorded in his praise. I might instance here Daniel, Solomon,
and others, but this is so clear, that to insist longer hereon, were but vain,
since there is no one place in the Scripture that can be shown to speak
positively against Astrology, Astrology noe wise condemned by the word of God.
or the study thereof, more then to remember us not to give the glory of the
Creator to the Creature, etc. as in the answer to his divine proofs shall
appear. Wherefore then since it is warrantable and lawful out of Scripture to
study this Art, nay and as we see by experience, warranted by God, in the
showing of blazing Stars to Astrologers only (not to the vulgar and proficient
in other Arts) to forewarn his people of the danger and punishment to come;
Look my reply to Raunce his Declaration against Astrology
and if it were not so, he might as well show signs on earth to the illiterate,
by common vulgar things; as in heaven to the learned Astrologer, who only can
judge of their effects. Wherefore then I say, of necessity the Art must be
allowed of by Councels, being the wiser sort of people, especially by the
godlier sort of Councels, whose acts and determinations will be grounded on
piety and the word of God, Nota.
and if otherwise, I value not what their censure is; for they are but men, and
(guided by their own reasons and opinions, How far the Councels in former
ages has or may lawfully condemn Astrology.
) are but frail, subject to infirmity and error, humanum est errare, he
cannot but know also that even the palpablest truths have been condemned by
Councels, either for some self interest, or for abuse of the thing condemned;
as for instance, the Bacaran Councels (as well as the Roman Senate) has
condemned Astrologers, but how? not because they were students in that heavenly
science, but for trusting in Astrology (and who is so superstitious, may not
lawfully be termed an Astrologer, for Astrologers are in no sort hereof guilty)
the words of the Council is in the Cap. 9. of Bacaran Councels, Si quis animas,
and corpora humana fatalibus stellis credit astringi, sicut pagani and
priscillianus dixerunt, anathema sit. Who so trusts in the fatal necessity of
the Stars, as the heathens and Priscillianists do or say, let him be accursed;
to all which, there is no Astrologer, but will willingly condescend; for by
this, is not Astrology nor Astrologers in the least condemned, but the abuse
of the Art, to give that to it, which properly belongs to God the creator of
these heavenly bodies; the decree is against those that trust in them, or
believe a fatal necessity, not that study the knowledge of them, and make a
true use of them. So likewise the Council or Parliament in England, made a Law
against those that multiplied Gold and Silver, why? not because they condemned
that heavenly revelation, or practice of the most blessed Stone of the
Philosophers, This is the Anima mundi, Adrop. Philosophorum, leo veridus, the
life of the world, which that learned Agrippa says, is actual and animal,
created by nature, found every where, known by few, expressed by none under
it is proper name, but in figures and riddles.
but they forbad the multiplication of Gold and Silver, in that they thought it
too great a treasure for any private subject, and to prevent rebellion,
commotions and insurrections in the Commonwealth, like wise Pilots sitting at
the stern, did study to prevent the storm which was likely otherwise to
shipwreck the safety thereof. So that I say then, there is no Council, (if they
have any spark of Religion, learning or policy) that will show them selves so
ridiculous, as to decree-any thing in the least, against either Astrologers or
Astrology, taking it as it is in it self, and not abused; which is not the
fault in the Art, but the Artist in going beyond the Art; for if under the
color of Astrology, I study Necromancie, is Astrology therefore to be
condemned as unlawful, because together with it I study unlawful Arts? No, sure
since this is a thing so far different; therefore it is good to put the Saddle
on the right Horse.

And this my argument is thus confirmed, for that in former ages, both the
greatest and wisest sort of people were Practitioners and Students in
Astrology; The great estimation Astrology was in in former ages.
as first we may see by the Egyptians, amongst whom it was not lawful for any
man to take the function of priesthood on him, except he were an Astrologer;
nor could any be chosen King, except he were of the College, of Priests. And
Rodiginus reports that for the prevention of Treason, there was none borne
within that Kingdom, whose Nativity was not brought to the King to be judged
on. And Dion records the same to be practiced by Tiberius, and we see in
Daniel, that the Monarks of Babylon attempted nothing of importance, without
first asking Counsel of the Caldeans. And the Kings of Lacedaemonia had none in
their Councels, neither were any suffered to sit, but who were Astrologers: and
also among the Persians, none was admitted to the Crown, but who were
excellently skilled in Astrology; nay even at this day there is no King but
has his Mathematitian about him. So then, it is cleared, that there is no
Council but what is ignorant of Art and Religion, that will condemn or decree
any thing against Astrology, and how it has been esteemed amongst the wisest
and greatest of the people. And that ye may be the better confirmed in what
has been already said; I will give the names of most of the chiefest
Patriarks, Fathers, Kings, Emperors and Philosophers, (according as that
worthy and Noble Sir Christopher Heydon sets them down at the latter end of
his Book, in defiance of judicial Astrology) that have been students in this
noble Art.

Astronomers and Astrologers from the Creation, or our first Father ADAM.
Before CHRIST.
1 ADam. Anno 3032 2 Seth. Anno 2930 3 Enoch. Anno 2923 4 Kenan. Anno 2625 5
Mahalaleel. Anno 2617 6 Jared. Anno 2520 7 Henoch. Anno 2074 8 Zoroaster. Anno
2142 9 Methuselah. Anno 2366 10 Lamech. Anno 2311 11 Noah. Anno 2155 12 Sem.
Anno 1803 13 Arphaxad. Anno 1875 14 Sale. Anno 1835 15 Heber. Anno 1875 16
Peleg. Pheleg. Anno 1966 17 Regu. Anno 1935 18 Sarug. Anno 1922 19 Nachor. Anno
1965 20 Therach. Anno 1878 21 A raham. Anno 1839 22 Isaac. Anno 1731 23 Jacob.
Anno 1706 24 Albion Anglus. Anno 1704 25 Joseph. Anno 165^ 26 Ninus rex
assyriorum Anno 1679 27 Prometheus. Anno 1802 28 Orion. Anno 1802 29 Atlas.
Anno 1792 30 Mercurius Trismegistus. Anno 1532 31 Hyas Atlantis filius. Anno
1500 32 Aesculapius. Anno 1462 Annubis rex Aegypti. Anno 1457 34 Petoseris.
Anno 1420 35 Necepsus. Anno 1400 36 Melampus. Anno 1357 37 Orpheus. Anno 1300
38 Linus. Anno 1252 39 Aristeus. Anno 1250 40 Musaeus Eleusinus discipulus
Orphei. Anno 1250 41 Endymion Latmius. Anno 1240 42 Phineus Phaenicus. Anno
1220 43 Chirion. Anno 1202 44 Hercules. Anno 1185 45 Homerus Chius. Anno 1072
46 Phidon Arginus. Anno 812 47 Homerus. Anno 742 48 Hesiodus. Anno 642 49
Epimenides. Anno 592 50 Thales milesius. Anno 582 51 Solon. Anno 580 52
Anaximander milesius. Anno 572 53 Aristeus. Anno 552 54 Theognis Megarensis.
Anno 544 55 Xenophon. Anno 542 56 Pythagoras. Anno 520 57 Anaximenes milesius.
Anno 521 58 Democritus. Anno 506 59 Heraclitus Ephesius. Anno 503 60 Zamolxis
Seytha, Pythagorae discipulus. Anno 490 61 Lucippus. Anno 482 62 Anaxagoras.
Anno 480 63 Empedocles. Anno 458 64 Democritus Abderita. Anno 456 65 Empedocles
Agregentinus. Anno 452 66 Aristarchus. Anno 452 67 Archelaus. Anno 450 68
Melissus. Anno 442 69 Meton Atheniensis. Anno 432 70 Criton. Anno 432 71
Protagoras. Anno 430 72 Helicon Cizicenus. Anno 420 73 Euclides Megarensis.
Anno 420 74 Theetaetus Atheniensis. Anno 412 75 Antisthenes Atheniensis. Anno
412 76 Eudoxus. Anno 398 77 Polymarchus. Anno 398 78 Parmenides Eleates. Anno
382 79 Dicaearchus. Anno 342 80 Heraclides. Anno 340 81 Zenocrates. Anno 330 82
Conon Samius. Anno 330 83 Calippus Cydonius. Anno 330 84 Calisthenes. Anno 329
85 Theophrastus. Anno 320 86 Polemon. Anno 318 87 Timocharis. Anno 292 88
Euclides. Anno 292 89 Aristillus. Anno 290 90 Aratus. Anno 284 91 Cleostratus.
Anno 282 92 Ptolomeus Philadelphus. Anno 280 93 Callimachus. Anno 480 94
Theocritus. Anno 280 95 Bion. Anno 280 96 Pletades vel septempoetae. Anno 270
97 Aristarchus ut alii volunt hoc tempore floruit. Anno 267 98 Dionysius. Anno
261 99 Eratosthenes. Anno 213 100 Archimedes. Anno 210 101 Sulpitius gallus
Consul Romanus. Anno 160 102 Aristotherus. Anno 160 103 Colophonius. Anno 140
104 Nicander. Anno 140 105 Hipparchus Rhodius. Anno 126 106 Publius Nigidus.
Anno 58 107 Theodosius. Anno 56 108 Theagenes. Anno 50 109 Vitruvius. Anno 50
100 Lucius Tarucius. Anno 50 111 Achoreus. Anno 49 112 C. Julius Caesar. Anno
47 113 Sosigenes. Anno 47 114 Sulla. Anno 47 115 M. Flavius. Anno 47 116 M.
Manilius. Anno 30 117 Maternus Firmicus. Anno 5
Astronomers and Astrologers since the Incarnation of our Savior Christ,
according as Sir Christopher Heydon does record them.
1 C. Julius Higinus. Anno 5 2 Artemedorus. Anno 6 3 Germanius Augusti filius.
Anno 10 4 Thrasillus. Anno 17 5 Gamaliel Christi discipulus Astrologus
inclitus. Anno 34 6 Columella. Anno 50 7 Marinus Tyrius. Anno 60 8 Andromachus
Cretensis. Anno 67 9 Agrippa Agris in Bithynia. Anno 90 10 Menelaus Romanus.
Anno 90 11 Ascletarion. Anno 90 12 Proclus Licius. Anno 90 13 Mileus. Anno 96
14 Apollonius Tyraneus. Anno 98 15 Hermippus Beritius. Anno 120 16 Theon
Alexandrinus. Anno 130 17 Claudius Ptolomeus. Anno 139 18 Ammonius. Anno 135 19
Antigonus. Anno 135 20 Cornelius fronto, Anno 150 21 Abidas. Anno 170 22
Apollinaris. Anno 170 23 Plotinus. Anno 160 24 Amelius Apanteus, Anno 270 25
Porphyrius. Anno 280 26 Jamblicus. Anno 290 27 Sopater Apameus. Anno 290 28
Dorotheus. Anno 290 29 Julius firmicus. Anno 320 30 Syrianus Alexandrinus. Anno
320 31 Eusebius Caesariensis. Anno 320 32 Theon Alexandrinus. Anno 360 33 Theon
e Museo Aegyp. Anno 380 34 Apollonius Pergeus. Anno 380 35 Pappus. Anno 380 36
Procus Lycius. Anno 390 37 Isodorus. Anno 391 38 Ammonias. Anno 400 39
Heliodorus. Anno 400 40 Rufus festus Anienus. Anno 410 41 Cleomenes. Anno 427
42 Cyrillus. Anno 427 43 Possidonius Apher. Anno 470 44 Victorinus Aquitanus.
Anno 470 45 Phyloponus. Anno 490 46 Dionysius Abbas Romanus. Anno 532 47
Proclus Byzantius. Anno 500 48 Hero Mathematicus. Anno 500 49 Olimpiodorus.
Anno 500 50 Boethius. Anno 520 51 Marimes Neopolitanus. Anno 525 52 Victor
Campanes Anno 540 53 Artuillus Scotus. Anno 710 54 Adelmus Balduinus Anglus.
Anno 710 55 Beda. Anno 730 56 Albumaser. Anno 844 57 Albategnius. Anno 879 58
Arzahel Hispanus. Anno 879 59 Abbo floriacensis caenobii Abbas. Anno 1004 60
Campanus. Anno 1030 61 Hermanus Contractus. Anno 1040 62 Almeo Arabs. Anno 1048
63 Azophi Arabs. Anno 1061 64 Robertus Lotharingus Anglus. Anno 1091 65
Rodulphus Brughensis. Anno 1140 66 Abram Auenezre. Anno 1145 67 Aboali. Anno
1145 68 Jo. Hispalensis. Anno 1146 69 Thebit. Anno 1195 70 Hali Abanragel. Anno
1202 71 Alkindus. Anno 1235 72 Jo. de Sacrobusto Anglus. Anno 1240 73 Alphonsus
rex Castiliae Anno 1252 74 Vitellia. Anno 1274 75 Rogerus Bacon Anglus. Anno
1280 76 Guido Bonatus. Anno 1284 77 Guilielmus de S. Godialdo. Anno 1293 78
Michael Scotus Anglus. Anno 1293 79 Jo. de Dacia. Anno 1300 80 Jo. Dank de Saxo
ia. Anno 1300 81 Jo. de Ligneriis. Anno 1300 82 Rich. Walingforth S. Albani
abbas, Anglus. Anno 1326 83 Jo. Estuidi. Anglicus. Anno 1340 84 Leupoldus de
Austria. Anno 1340 85 Jo. Eligerus de Gondostenen. Anno 1350 86 Rober. de
Lecestria Anglicus. Anno 1350 87 Jo de ginunden. Anno 1400 88 Petrus de Aliaco.
Anno 1400 89 Henricus de Haffia. Anno 1400 90 Jo Blanchinus. Anno 1440 91
Georgius Purbachius. Anno 1462 92 Nicholaus de Cusa. Anno 1462 93 Io Iovinianus
Pontanus. Anno 1462 94 Jo. de Monte regio. Anno 1467 95 Eherhardus Schlusinger
Tygurinus. Anno 1470 96 Abraham Zacuti. Anno 1470 97 Georgius Trapezuntius.
Anno 1480 98 Marsilius Ficinus. Anno 1490 99 Bernardus Warterus. Anno 1490 100
Dominicus Maria Bononiensis. Anno 1490 101 Jo. Lucilius San tritte^. Anno 1500
102 Jo. Ganivetus. Anno 1500 103 Omer Astronomus. Anno 1503 104 Jo. Muniz. Anno
1503 105 Lucius Bellantius Senensis. Anno 1503 106 Jo. Schreterus. Anno 1504
107 Jo. Warnerus. Anno 1512 108 Jo. Angelus. Anno 1512 109 Jo. Esizer. Anno
1514 110 Jo Stopherus. Anno 1530 111 Jo. Carrion. Anno 1530 112 Lucas Gauricus.
Anno 1530 113 Joachimus Ringelber gensis. Anno 1530 114 Achille P. Gassarus.
Anno 1530 115 Aegidius Tischudus. Anno 1530 116 Orontius Fineus. Anno 1530 117
Andreas Stiborius. Anno 1534 118 Jo. Stabius. Anno 1534 119 P. Appianus. Anno
1534 120 Vitus Minshemius. Anno 1536 121 Albertus Pighius. Anno 1536 122
Hieronymus Fracastorius. Anno 1540 123 Jo. Virdungus Halfurtus. Anno 1540 124
Subastiames Mansterus. Anno 1540 125 Jo. Dryander. Anno 1540 126 Franciscus
Maurolicus. Anno 1540 127 Jo. Schonerus. Anno 1540 128 Georgius Joach Rheticus.
Anno 1540 129 Gualterus Riffe. Anno 1540 130 Nicholaus Copernicus. Anno 1540
131 Michael Angelus Blondus. Anno 1544 132 Nicholaus Sophianus. Anno 1458 133
Angerius Ferrerius. Anno 1548 134 Casparus Penserus. Anno 1551 135 Erasmus
Rheinholdus. Anno 1551 136 Jo. Roias. Anno 1551 137 Cyprianus Leovicius. Anno
1551 138 Jacobus Millichius. Anno 1551 139 Michael Nostradamus. Anno 1553 140
Nicholaus Simus. Anno 1553 141 Hier. Cardanus. Anno 1553 142 Genema Frisius.
Anno 1556 143 Christoph. Stathmio. Anno 1556 144 Chonradus Dasypodius. Anno
1556 145 Jo. Stadius. Anno 1560 146 Petrus Nonnius. Anno 1560 147 Thomas
Boderius. Anno 1560 148 Samuel Syderocrates. Anno 1560 149 Jo. Vrsus. Anno 1570
150 Joffrancus Officius. Anno 1570 151 Valentinus Nabod. Anno 1573 152 Jo.
Garcus. Anno 1573 153 Gerardus Mercator. Anno 1573 154 Erasmus Scieckenfussius.
Anno 1573 155 Nichodem. Frischrinus. Anno 1580 156 Cornelius Gemma. Anno 1580
157 Henricus Ranzovius. Anno 1582 158 Chistoph. Clevius. Anno 1582 159 Hier.
Wolfius. Anno 1582 160 Bartholom. Scultetus. Anno 1582 161 Blundevil. Anno 1582
162 Jacob. Christmannus. Anno 1582 163 Jo. Henricus Rothmannus. Anno 1582 164
Sextus ab Heminga. Anno 1482 165 Franciscus Iunctinus. Anno 1590 166 Gerardus
Mercator. Anno 1590 167 Peucerus. Anno 1590 168 Bartholomeus Petiscus. Anno
1600 169 Henricus Buntingus. Anno 1600 170 Adrianus Romanus. Anno 1600 171
Origanus. Anno 1600 172 Thomas Finxius. Anno 1602 173 Enerartus. Anno 1602 174
Tycho Brache. Anno 1602 175 Aslacius. Anno 1602 176 Jo. Maginus. Anno 1602 177
Wright. Anno 1602 178 Mestlin. Anno 1602
These are it seems, as many as this good man could hear of, before his time
that were remarkable; yet let us not forget learned Cornelius Agrippa, and
himself. Blagrave author of the Mathematical Jewel, Hartgil, reverent (both for
learning and industry) Argol of Rome, and many innumerable others there are,
which if I should undertake to express, this whole volume would not be able to
contain half of them, besides those that have privately studied it in all
ages, which never made their names vulgarly known.

And let us not forget those of our times, here in our own Nation, (though we
know not those that are in others.) viz. Mr Lilly who has put our Astrological
rules (for the better instruction of our Nation) into English. Doctor Phiske,
Mr. Booker, Capt. George Wharton, and Mr. Vin. Wing, and many others which for
brevity sake I omit, and hasten to show you the antiquity of the Art, since you
have already seen the lawfulness thereof, being allowed of by the Scripture,
and the wisest and religiousest of men.

SECT. V. Demonstrating the antiquity of Astrology
WE have seen already how Astrology has been proved lawful by the Scripture
and reason, not condemned by Councels, but admired and honored in all ages, by
the wisest of the ancients; we come now to show it is Antiquity, and from whence
it had it is first original; concerning this point, there has been much
controversy amongst Writers, but most hold, that it was first revealed to man
in the infancy of the world by God; Aristotle deriveth it from the Egyptians,
Tully from the Assyrians, other from the Sydonians, Caldeans, Persians,
Indians, Arabians and Greeks; but how ever it is most certain, if we will
believe the ancientest Historiographers, that the Priests and Kings amongst the
Egyptians, the Caldeans among the Babylonians, the Magicians among the
Persians, the Gymnosophists among the Indians, the chief Philosopers of Greece
and Italy, and the Druides of France were all Astrologers, and esteemed by
those Nations for the wisest men. The antiquity of Astrology.
But Josephus in his Antiquities, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. deriveth it from Adam and
Seth: and that they taught it to their posterity, and that Seth was so well
skilled therein, that foreseeing thereby the destruction of the world, first by
Water, then by Fire, lest the knowledge should perish by the Flood, engraved it
in two Pillars, the one of Stone, the other of Brick; and he farther witnesses
that of Stone to remain in Syria in his own time; and in the third Chapter of
the same book, he affirms, that man lived so long before the Flood (by the
permission of God) to learn Arts and Sciences, especially naming Astrology and
Geometry, the which (says he) Ediscere non potuissent, nisi sexcentis viverent
annis, could not be learned under six hundred years time, for these are
studyes that require much experience, and particular observation, which could
not be done on an instant. Again in his eight Chapter of the same first book
of his antiquities, he further affirms, that Abraham having learned this
knowledge in Chaldea being the place of his birth, when he came into Egypt, he
first taught the Egyptians the knowledge of Astrology and Arithmetic, How the
Egyptians learned Astrology.
and since the Egyptians have been most exquisite therein, so that some
Historians have believed Atlas King of Egypt to be the first inventer thereof,
others have thought Henoch and Atlas to be both one, but most Historiographers
hold Atlas to be after the Flood. It is vain longer here to remain, since
generally Astrology by most (especially the most judicious) Historyographers
hold it to be derived from God to Adam, and that it is the most ancient of all
Arts and Sciences, except Arithmetic; wherefore lest this discourse swel to a
bigger bulk then I would willingly have it, I hasten to the fourth and last
lesson I promised to show Mr. Homes, and that is to show him.

SECT. VI. That Astrology is the most profitablest study revealed under the
sun to mortals.
WHich I shall endeavor to make clear thus; first, That it is most profitable
for the knowledge of moral Philosophy, viz. of our selves and others.
Secondly, For natural Philosophy. Thirdly, For Physic. Fourthly, For
Health. Fifthly, For Husbanddry. Sixthly, For giving a reason for
Climactericall years (which other Arts cannot) and other things. Seventhly,
and lastly, For Miletary Discipline.

First, Astrology profitable for moral Philosophy.
that it is most profitable for the knowledge of moral Philosophy, Mr. Homes
will not deny (if he know any thing in the Art,) that the constitution of the
body, and the disposition of the mind is by Astrology known; so that hereby
we receive a double benefit, viz. First, admonition to refrain what may prove
obnoxious and hurtful to our health. Secondly, encouragement to apply our
selves to that whereunto we are born apt by nature, besides we may also be
warned hereby, of what may cause the mind by ill government to offend others.
And for felicity the chief end of moral Philosophy; no Art or Science can
compare with Astrology, for it teaches a man what pertaines to the goods of
the body and mind, and so also to moderate the unruly affections, whose
violence carries away the mind from that golden mean wherein virtue dwells
and keeps her place; so likewise in the external goods, it resolves a man what
hopes or likelihood by his own industry, or otherways he has to attain to
the riches of this world; and also teaches him how to increase the same, by
what means, at what time, and in what place it will be best for him, or most
profitable to this intent or purpose. So that then ye see Astrology to
comprehend more in one part, then all the Arts in the world put together, in
any or all parts.

For natural Philosophy.
Secondly, For natural Philosophy, it brings no less help hereunto, then to
the former, for hereby the Philosopher comes to know God the upholder and
immovable Creator of all things, by the constant inchangeable motion of the
heavens; and the corruption and generation of all things, by the motion of, and
other Planets in the Zodiac; and that there is a certain prefixed time of every
ones life that is born, allotted by the Stars, and that this is diverse
according to the nature of every constellation, and the measure of every proper
revolution; as also the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, by the
motion of. He comes also by Astrology to know the risings of Meteors, the
motion of Comets, and innumerable other things, much conducing to the
furtherance of his knowledge, experience and skill. But this is so clear, I
hasten to what is further to be said in the praise and utility of Astrology,
lest I spend too much time in confuting such weak stuff, as is this discourse
of Mr. Homes, against so apparent a Noble and excellent Art.

Thirdy, For Physic, for all that knows any thing in Astrology, can acquaint
Mr. Homes, Astrology profitable for Physic.
as also his great friend Gallen (as most falsely he accuses him (in his 115.
page) to condemn Astrology as Sophistical, when indeed he himself appears no
other at the best, to wrong so worthy a man.) That he that shall administer
Physic when the Sun comes to the equinoctial points, or in the Canicular or
Dog-dayes and the like, knows very little either in the one or other, viz.
Physic or Astrology; and is rather to be accounted a fool then a Physician;
and further, Gallen admonishes men not to trust themselves with that Physician
that is not versed in Astrology; and Hippocrates also says, that that
Physician which is ignorant in Astrology, is not fully, nor can he be
perfectly known in his Art; for without Astrology, he shall never be able to
give Physic safely, viz. when to purge by evacuation or vomit, or Phlebotomie,
or for what humors, or in what quantity, neither can he know or come to the
understanding of the chief Pillar of his Art, viz. The true cause of the Malady
without it, neither with it, (if well learned therein) can he err, besides
Gallen further affirms, that Physic given at unseasonable times, does not
only little avail or help, but often times prove very hurtful, even to the
indangering of the life of the Patient; and that these times are only to be
known and judged by the Stars. Fernelius (a learned Physician) does hereunto
also condescend, as also Ficinus; for there is nothing more certain, then that
Astrology does plainly deliver rules for all the parts of Physic abovesaid,
(which Mr. Homes I am confident (if any whit read therein) dare not but
confess) and not only so, but teaches also the critial days, without which
they cannot be known with any certainty; wherefore it is, that those Physicians
ignorant in Astrology, conclude the seventh and fourteenth days to be
dangerous, when most times they are deceived, and so consequently apply
contrary remedies to their Patients, much to their prejudice, The reason of
Critical days.
if not absolute destruction: The reason is, the by her various motion comes
sometimes sooner, and sometimes latter, to her and or quadrat and opposite part
of the place she was in at the beginning of the disease, viz. Sometimes she
comes to her in seven days, sometimes not till the eight or ninth day, other
times at the sixth days; and to her sometimes at the fourteenth day, sometimes
at the thirteen day, other times not till the sixteenth day. I would feign now
Mr. Homes, you would show what Art in the whole earth, is more beneficial to
Physic, then Astrology, etc. but I hasten to the remaining proofs.

Fourthly, For health, Astrology profitable for health.
which none but the most ignorant and malicious will deny, since the
constitution of the body the only ground, wise Physicians go upon and look
first too; that, that foundation being laid, they may then fall to the
rebuilding of the Patient, otherwise (as you have heard) destruction (like a
house founded on the sand) is to be expected. Then consequently the most
envious cannot but confess and acknowledge it to be the most profitable thing
for our health under the Sun. Wherefore then let us see whether the husbandman
will acknowledge it to be beneficial to him in his way of living, viz.
Husbandry.

Astrology profitable for Husbandry.
Fifthly, Husbandry, and first let me ask him, whether he lops his Trees from
the time the Sun declines from our Horizon, till he again reenters the
equinoctial point? or if he knows not (if he should) that it will not grow
again? or whether he use to sow Pease in the increase of? or if so, whether
they will then ever leave blooming or blossoming? or whether therefore he does
not observe and remember to set them in the waine, or decrease of. Nay, it is
reported of the women in the North, both of England and Scotland, that they
diligently observe a time of the Moon to set their Eggs, that they may all
come to good; and furthermore, let me ask the Husbandman, whether he
observes not a time to graffe, and prune his Trees? but this is so common,
that to spend more time hereunto, were to no purpose.

Sixthly, For rendrin a reason for Climacterical years
For rendering a reason for Climacterical years, it happening by the profection
of the Planets and Horoscope, ascendant or first House (as ye may call it) to
the or aspects or their places in Nativities, or by the motion of if he have
any power in the Nativity, for Ptolomie and the wisest in this Art, give as
much power in the decree several of years, as the Sun has in months, or the
in days; and if his course be observed, it will be found finished much about
the same number of years, as the Moons is in days; and further, that in every
seven years comes either to or of his place in the Radix of Nativities. And
further know, that if there be no danger (as we find by experience) of some
men's lives, at these years, they have either some of the beneficial Planets in
their eight House, or the direction of the ascendant, Look Ranzovius on this
subject.
or Aphetical places are free from all impediment and affliction, of the
interficient and malignant constellations.

Seventhly, and lastly, Astrology profitable for military affairs.
for military Discipline, History is full of examples herein, and for brevities
sake (because I will hasten to conclude this first Chapter, that I may proceed
to Mr. Homes his second Section) I will hear content my self with this one,
which the Indian Histories show forth unto us; which is, that Columbus having
the Art of Astrology, and being in a straight for want of Victual, together
with the whole Army of the King of Spain Ferdinand; and foreseeing an Eclipse
of the within few days to happen; threatened the Indians he would send infinite
plagues amongst them, if they speedily relieved them not; in token whereof,
they should at such a time see the light taken from them, which they at first
slighted, but when they saw according to the former words, that the Moon began
to be darkened, and grew so more and more, and being ignorant of the cause
thereof, did not only send them the victual they formerly retained from them,
but also threw themselves at Columbus feet, asking forgiveness: So then you
have had (as brief as may be) shown unto you, what Astrology is, that it is an
Art, and a lawful Art, allowed of by Scripture; the antiquity of it, and the
utility of it; there is it may be some Arts, that may be beneficial or helpful
to another; but you see both positively and conclusively, that Astrology is
generally helpful to all Arts and Sciences, nay what other study in the whole
world in this point is like it or able to compare with it? and seeing it is so,
very indiscreetly and unfitly, does Mr. Homes join it or compare it with
Augury, Auruspicie, Auspicie, Pullarie, Necromancy, Sortelegie, Onieromantie or
Palmestry, which are no Arts, as he clearly sees this is; and that by the
judgment of the wisest men and greatest Philosophers; wherefore if he will be
wiser then all these he has been shown, by my consent, he shall be elected the
8th wise man; wherefore seeing truth and authority of these, as well as
Scripture, stands with it, and distinguishes it from these sortelegies,
haphazards and chances; it mattereth not what either he does or can say, or do,
against it.

CHAP. II. In Answer to the opinions of the learned touching Astrology;
wherein is further shown, the legality of Astrology; that the Stars are both
signs and causes; and that Mr Homes his quoting the Fathers and learned, is
merely fallacious, and envious, and no wise available to his intent and purpose.
I Am come now to Mr Homes his second Section, wherein we shall see how he vents
his malice most invectively all along against Astrology; thinking he brings
the learned to condemn it, but what are the learned Schoolmen, or great
Philosophers to me, or their sayings in this matter, Truth and reason, the
touchstone whereby all controversies are decided.
further then they have truth and reason on their side? If they follow their
own opinions and conceits without sound reason and warrant, I see no warrant or
reason why I should regard either them, their words or their quoters.

SECT. I. Wherein is further shown, the legality of Astrology.
HIs first learned man (then) he begins with, is Tostatus, who he says in his
Commentary on Levit, 19. Quest. 28, 29, etc. has these words, the which Doctor
Willet gives him, viz. Of things which are (as to us) accidental, as the
success of business, or their causes internal, as men's will and free choice,
as to undertake a journey, or to build, or not build, predictions are not only
uncertain, but superstitious: and the same is to be said of casting of
Nativities by the conjunction of the Planets; but if he had considered what
reason or ground Tostatus has for these words, he had never thus laid them
open; and I much wonder he being a Divine, he had not first himself considered
and weighed the text, which that he may now do (Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores
via) I will here set it down: Regard not them that have familiar spirits,
neither seek after Wizards, to be defiled by them; I am the Lord your God,
Levit. 19.31. where we clearly see there is no part of the text, once in the
least mentions or means Astrology; it is against the seeking after those
that have familiar Spirits, and Wizards; Look what Astrology is, page 2.
now that Astrology does not in the least savor hereof, is clear in what has
been already said, and the definition thereof, see Ptolomies own words at the
beginning of my discourse in the second page: So that except the rest of his
learned men (as he calls them) can bring better proof or reason then this
first, he had better have been silent, then thus to be overshot.

SECT. II. Wherein is shown that the Stars are signs and Causes.
HE then brings Doctor Willet (to cast his squib also at this strong Tower,
viz. Astrology) in these words, all manner of conjecturing (which says he is
meant by Astrology) is not unlawful, whereof any Natural or Divine cause can
be yielded, as first there be Natural signs in the heavens and air, as of the
alteration of weather, of winds, of rain, etc. This does no whit hurt it, and
is only a flash that at the most does but whiz about it, and at the last after
a great crack, vanishes in smoke: mark but the words, all manner of
conjecturing is not unlawful, etc. and says Mr Homes, see he calls it
(meaning Astrology) but conjecturing only; but does Mr Homes conjecture it to
be no other? if he do, it is his ignorance; I hope the reader sees by this time
what Astrology is and begins to be as much in love with it again, as ever
before by him discouraged, as also out of love with his cavils; but this is not
all, when you see him stripped of his Scripture proofs, you will tell me
something then; when you see him as naked left, as my nail, of all his
sophistications, you will tell me then you are worse in love with him, (I Am
confident) when his ugly malice is discovered against this most apparent truth:
But let me not forget my self, and spend too much time about him, but return to
the discourse in hand; which is, that since there has been already shown, that
the Stars have the applause of power on the natural things of this world, as
also the great Ptolomie (whose word in this case I believe will be taken before
Doctor Willets, or Mr. Homes his) gives his word for it; Astrology no way
unlawful.
besides experience also, as above showed, (and you know experientia docet)
there is no more to be said, but that Astrology is not (as Doctor Willet
says) unlawful; neither does he in any wise condemn it, for in his following
words he tells us, There are natural signs in the heavens and air which cause
rain, wind, etc. The cause of which, is no other then the influence of the
Stars, which if he deny, all Writers on this Art are contradicted, as also the
Scripture to boot, if then this be not a strong Argument, let himself judge.

But to clear this point more fully, what says Mr. Homes, Nota. As anon shall
appear.
is the cause of Rain, alteration of Air, and the like? if his Master Doctor
Willet did not in these words show it, me thinks he should not have left the
Reader unsatisfied; and not only so, but have proved the Stars to have no
Influence thereon, nor to be causes of these alterations, and then his argument
had been good; but certainly he that will carpe at such trivial words as these,
would not have omitted that, could he but sufficiently have proved it, which
since he could not, or did not; he must give me leave to prove they are. The
Stars signs and causes.
And first let me give you Moses judgment herein, who plainly tells us, The
Stars are for signs and seasons, Genesis 1.14. which Mr. Homes will say is
fullfilled in the words following, viz. And God made two great lights, the one
to rule, the Day, and the other to rule the Night Genesis 1.16. To which then I
answer, by way of Quere, to what end then are these invincible, irresistible
and innumerable hosts of Heaven? were they made for no other use then to gaze
on? the and will sufficiently serve our turn for matter of light, if we look
no further into their uses; but the Scripture further puts this matter quite
out of doubt if we will believe Gods own word, Joh 28.31. For he speaking of
his Omnipotent power, asks his servant Job, whether he, or any one else Can
restrain the influence of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion: Saint
Austine on Job.
On which words St. Austine refers all men to the study of Astrology, for
the understanding of that place; and not only so, but shows us that under
these two constellations, the Lord does comprehend the influence of all the
Celestial host, figuratively expressing pars pro toto; and to show you by
experience the verity hereof, if you will neither believe Augustine, Moses, nor
God himself, except you see and feel; (not to insist long on this point, which
is cleared by such strong and invincible witnesses; one whereof is able to be
sufficient testimony against all Mr. Homes his learned Judges and condemners of
Astrology) For confirming and clearing hereof, then I might here again
instance that palpable experience we have of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,
by the influence of the (as abovesaid) but to manifest it yet further, let him
call to mind the increase and decrease of shelfish, the mutation and variation
of times, and innumerable other effects of the Stars, which (if time and
convenience would permit) might be recorded, and let him then study the cause
hereof, and he will then without doubt be of an other tenent; let him observe
also when and is in or, or when and is in or or and are so posited, and let him
tell me then, what alterations they produce in the air both by Rain, Snow,
Wind, Tempests, Thundering and Lightning, and the like according to their
several positions, the nature of signs and houses and mansions they are in;
(which if he be not altogether ignorant of the Art, he may daily see) these and
the like effects, are most vulgarly known by experience, so that therefore he
might even as well have confessed those signs he speaks of, to be the Stars,
and causes their influence, since he does not, nor cannot show me any other
thing they are, without wronging and slandering the Art; and contradicting the
most learned therein, as also the Fathers, St. Austine, Moses, nay and GOD
himself; and if this appears not then to all the judicious, an apparent Doctrine
of Devils; Mr. Homes proved rather to be a teacher of the Doctrine of Devils,
then Astrologers.
let the meanest of capacities judge, but who could indeed look for better
stuff in so vile a mean warehouse; or that beast not to be a monster, or at
least to be shunned as very obnoxious, that has HELL written in it is forehead?
for the title of his Bell and Dragon, (which he hops shall devour Astrology,
with other frivolous and indeed unlawful Arts, like an unconscionable judge,
condemns the good with the bad) is DEMONOLOGIE, OR THE DOCTRINE OR LANGUAGE OF
DEVILS; I say, is not this most wickedly, or else most ignorantly done of Mr.
Homes, to deny these effects and operations of the Stars abovesayed, to
proceed from the Stars? and seeing it is so, of necessity then must Mr. Homes's
Clerks in this point fail, who have so palpably the word of God against them;
he might as well then have left out that other addition of Doctor Willets; where
he says, that the Stars have not the same influence in summer, and in Winter,
Spring and Autumn, and so consequently will conclude them. First, not to be
signs (contradicting Moses, and the word of God, Genesis 1.14. as abovesaid.)
Secondly, Nor causes, quia ex unitate causae sequeretur similitudo effectus, of
the same cause there should follow the same effect; but there follows not the
same effect from the same signs, appears by experience. As much to say, the
Stars are neither causes nor signs, because they produce not fruits in Winter,
as well as in Summer, or because they cause not Snow in Summer, or Buds and
Blossoms in Winter. O rare cavil! but since he is already, by what is
abovesaid, confuted; I shall here add nothing but this, that since the question
is, whether they are causes and signs, because that passage in the first of
Genesis manifests they are signs, I will (if he will be convinced by the word of
God) here give him to know they are also causes, I will hear the heavens, and
the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth the corn and the wine, etc.
Hos. 2.2. And in another place, the increase of the earth is referred to the
Influence of the Sun and the Moon, Deuteronomy. 33.14. By all which we may clearly see
(unless blinded with malice and wilfulness) that they are both signs and
causes, of all our earthly enjoyments and happinesses; Et si scriptura, and
ipse deus nobiscum, quis contra nos.

SECT. III. Wherein his allegations against the ground of the Art is condemned;
and his bringing St. Augustine and Galen against it, proved fallacious,
injurious and malicious; and how far we ought to attribute to the power of the
Stars.
SEeing then it is most clearly so, that the Stars are signs and causes as
above said, what need these envious carpers or malicious gainsayers of the
truth be heeded or regarded; but let their perverse rags of paper perish with
themselves, not worthy the least remembrance; and indeed had it not been
rightly to inform the vulgar, and to make them see, that high language serves
not to condemn truth, I had buried both them and their filthy rags in perpetual
oblivion, but I hope since they must be remembered, it will be but for their
disgrace, not Chronicled for their worthiness, but perpetual infamy.

But this is not all, he comes next to condemn Astrology by Keckerman, and
that with as weak arguments as he did the rest, Keckerman (says he) a most
learned Philosopher, and Christian, although he favors some things which men
now a days call part of Astrology, did not in all his two great Volumnes in
fol. of Arts and Sciences, set forth any Astrology; a wise story indeed,
because Keckerman writes not of Astrology, therefore there is no such thing,
but if Keckerman has not, yet as wise and as learned and greater Philosophers
have, Look the second Chapter of this Treatise, Sect. 2.
as if the being of Astrology depended on his writing hereof, or a whit
farther from being an heavenly Science and a lawful Art, because he omitteth
it, fine Logic and rare reason, if rightly understood, and the depth thereof
thoroughly searched! because Aristotle knew not the reason of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, therefore no body else does, neither is there such a thing
in Nature; and because Moses writes not of the creation of Angels, Ergo, there
is none, O profound and invincible reason? but it savoureth so little of
reason, that it is rather rime-Dogril, Brains and Stairs, or hot and block, I
had almost said head, that I might make (at least) sense thereof, if neither
rhyme nor reason. But to proceed, (he says) he is sure he has these words
against it, Manent tamen, etc. the Stars abide, as of other sublunary effects,
so of effects in man, the common and remote cause which many ways may be
hindered, not only by the first cause, God, but also by particular causes,
partly in the Heavens, partly in the Air and other Elements; so that the
Predictions of Astrologers are with ifs and ands, etc. which is as much to the
purpose as comes just to nothing; for first, that God can alter the course of
the Stars there is no Astrologer but will confess (but whether he will or no,
or ordinarily uses so to do, is the question) so that Mr Homes gets little by
this querk since he affirms nothing that any Astrologer will deny: But if Mr
Keckerman makes it not appear what particular causes hinder the effects of the
Stars, me thinks for the strength of his argument Mr Homes should have done it;
for it stands not with any reason, that subordinate causes as are the Air
and other Elements, should predominate or rule over the first moving causes,
viz. the Stars; this the weakest capacity that understands the Art will
affirm, and you have but now heard that the effects of the Stars cause
alteration and mutation of the Air, as we also daily see by experience; and
therefore his assertion, that the principles of Astrology are not confirmed on
true principles, is here also condemned as erroneous, false and malicious;
Carelessness in Astrologers cause error.
for we see Astrologers seldom fail in their judgments, except when they
swerve from the rules of Art, wherefore Alsteds assertion also is here no less
simple then the rest, who says, Astrologers are also often deceived, and what
then, because a man that never was at London, misseth his way, once or twice,
shall he conclude there is no such place; sure it should rather teach him to
observe diligently his road, and not turn on the right hand nor the left, and
if the Astrologers would as warily observe their rules, this objection of the
ignorant had never been thought on. But Mr Homes, is Divinity false and no wise
to be heeded; because there is so many errors and schisms crept into the
Church? or because every one attaineth not to a full perfection of the Spirit?
or because humanum est errare, man is frail and subject to failings? no sure,
experience, reason and truth teaches us to the contrary: Wherefore he might
very well have omitted these slender reasons, as also that place of Galen,
where he says, sophisticum est, it is sophistical, but how? not as having no
verity therein, but in the superstitious abuse thereof, for you see clearly in
the first Chapter of his Treatise, Galen holds that man a fool, rather then a
Physician, that is not an Astrologer: and in all his works has Astrology in
great esteem and applause, and moreover testifies his own practice hereof,
especially, lib. 3. de diebus decret. chap 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. and the like: So
he brings St. Austin to condemn it, thus in these words in his Treatise De
Doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. chap. 21, 22. est magnus error, and magna
dementia, superstitio: Astrology is a great error madness, and superstition,
it is clear that St. Austin here speaks of the superstitious use thereof, as
in attributing fatal necessity thereto, and in too much trusting and confiding
therein, as may appear by what you have already heard St. Austin says of it;
but to clear it more fully, St. Austin confesses that before his conversion,
he followed the heresies of the Manichees, who maintained the Stars to be
adored and prayed unto, Lib. 5. chap. 4. and lib. 20. chapter 6. contra Faustum
Manichaeum.
and therefore to reclaim the multitude, which went thus a whoring after the
ways of the Heathen, this good man uses these words to recall them, and unite
them to the belief of God: But I hope Mr Homes will not say that Astrologers
are thus superstitious and wicked; he that says Astrology (as I said before)
is any other thing then what is delivered by Ptolomy, in the second page of
this Treatise, knows not what Astrology is; Neither will he affirm I hope,
that St. Austin condemns Astrology, but the superstitious abuse thereof, which
is clear, for he delivers five opinions concerning destiny.

First, that by destiny is understood the providence, Lib. 5. chap. 1. De
civitate Dei.
will and power of God, and therefore he warns the Astrologers, that they
continue their opinions, but correct their tongues, for through custom of
speech the vulgar commonly understood nothing by the word fate or destiny, but
the inevitable power of the Stars.

The second is quite contrary to the former, ascribing all to the absolute
power of the Stars, without the will of God: But this opinion derogating from
the omnipotent power of God, and his providence in all our actions, he says
ought to be rejected, not only by those that profess the true Religion, but
which serve or worship any gods at all, though never so false.

The third, so attributes to the decrees of the Stars, that yet they believe
them to have this power in such sort derived unto them from God, that thereby
they can, and do determine of us and our actions, as they will themselves:
which opinion he thinks is very wrongfully held of heaven, to maintain such
wickedness to be, as it were inacted in that most shining Senate, that were
the like acted in any Court or State on earth, were worthy to be subverted.

The fourth opinion is, that the Stars have neither power nor will to operate
on us at their own pleasures, but as they do necessarily execute that which God
imposes upon them; which St. Austin accounts more intolerable then the
other, for that it teaches us to conceive that of God, which they hold
unworthy to impute unto the Stars, Lib. 2. de Genesis cap. 17.
against such he sufficiently declares.

These opinions, St. Augustine renounceth, as they rather utterly deny the
power and providence of God, or, as they impute absolute rule and dominion of
the Stars immediately over the will of man, necessarily enforcing us in all our
actions; or as they throw all our sins upon God, whilst they make him by the
Stars inevitably to enforce us to evil: wherefore had Mr Homes (as it had besit
a learned man) first examined his Authors with good observation and
deliberation, and not so readily taken hold on every thing he finds delivered
by others, that he imagines will serve for his turn; I Am confident, he had
not thus inconsiderately alleged St Augustine against Astrologers, for (as I
defined before in the second page, what Astrology is) so the same Ptolomy
confesses the Stars not to have any fatality as working by or with a fatal
necessity on the will or soul of man, as much as St. Austine himself; giving
them no farther operation in these matters then the most orthodox and learned
Divines do.

The fifth opinion is, which neither esteems the Stars of their own wills, How
far we ought to attribute to the power of the Stars.
(as if they were living souls) to decree future events, nor necessarily to
usurp power over our minds, but only to signify the inclinations of the
elements, and of all things compounded of them.

Now that St. Austine meant not such Astrologers as deny necessity (as Mr Homes
would feign persuade the vulgar to believe;) but only ascribe power unto the
Stars to work upon sublunary bodies; is evident by his words, Non usque quaque
absurd dici possit, Lib. 5. cap. 6. De civitate Dei.
ad solas corporum differentias, afflatus quosdam valere sidereos, sicut in
solaribus accessibus, and recessibus, videmus etiam ipsius anni temporae
variari and lunaribus incrementis, and decrementis angeri and minui quaedam
genera rerum; sicut Echinos, and conchas, and mirabiles aestus oceani, non
autem, and animi voluntates positionibus syderum subdi: where we see nothing
exempted from subjection to the Stars that is bodily, but only our spiritual
part: St. Austine concurreth with Astrologers. lib. 2. cap. 5. De Genesis
And he ascribes not this power to the Stars in general, as that their
specifical virtues are not possible to be known to man, for he concurreth with
Astrologers, that the quality of is cold, etc. as you may farther see at the
beginning of this Chapter. So that you may see how falsely and injuriously he
brings in St. Augustine against Astrology; by which (I will only add this)
the Reader may clearly see the envy and malice of Mr. Homes, how he studieth
(by the learned and Fathers) to persuade his reader against this most apparent
truth, viz. ASTROLOGY.

SECT IV. Wherein Astrology is defended against his allegations, from Mr.
Perkins his words.
MAster Homes comes then to tell us Mr Perkins a learned man and famous, writ a
Treatise against it, so did Melancthon, a greater scholar then he, and as
knowing a Divine, write as much and more for it, then he ever did against it;
what if I should tell him of some that have writ against the Scripture, is the
Word of God therefore false and to be rejected? he says Mr Perkins calls it
profaneness, and idolatry; but let the Reader seriously and diligently but
observe what has been here already said, and he cannot but understand Mr
Perkins spoke only against the abuse of the Art, not as it is in its self;
against the superstitious confidence and trust in the Stars, not the searching
and studying of the influences and effects of the Stars on elementary bodies;
and as much as this comes to, all that study the Art will confess, Ergo, Mr
Homes is mistaken to think by these words of Mr Perkins to condemn Astrology,
since he says no more then all Astrologers themselves will say; wherefore to
dwell longer here, were but vain and superfluous; and to as little purpose as
to bring a man a bag-pudding when he has filled his belly with pie. We come
therefore now to his eighth learned man which condemns Astrology, which he
tells us is Mr Geree, who has (says he) written a Treatise against Astrology,
I could if need were, cite as many, and more that have written against the
Divine word of God, then he can make appear has written against Astrology;
shall any man be therefore so impudently wicked to conclude the word of God is
not true, or not to be credited, no sure, this were altogether as impudently
wicked as Mr Homes his sequel or conclusion is ridiculous, sophistical and
envious. Mr Chamber also writ a book against Astrology, which I wonder he
remembered not also, but that learned Sir Christopher Heydon returned him such a
repulse, as that none of the Antagonists or ill willers to the Art, ever durst
undertake to give a reply thereunto; for he does not only refute Mr Chamber,
but also Picus mirandula, Melton, Perkins, and Geree to boot; wherefore I
refer all those that would be further resolved herein, and desire to discern
between truth and falsehood, to the perusal of the discourse it self, it being a
piece of that exquisite wit and learning, that none can be able to surpass it,
if (in the whole world) be worthy to compare with it; it was never as yet
undertaken to be answered, neither I believe will it ever be attempted by any of
these cavilling punies, that gainsay indeed what they know not, but by
tradition or Theorically, and if practically, it is so slenderly known by them,
that they imagine the Art to be no better then mere Conjuration, and the
Artists Conjurers.

SECT. V. Wherein his cavilling Mr. Briggs, and others, are convinced.
WE now come (not to be too tedious) to hear what he can tell us of learned Mr.
Briggs, against Astrology, which is briefly thus much, That after an earnest
desire to attain the perfection thereof, he seriously applied himself unto
the study, but in conclusion, when he thought to have had joy of his weried
labors, he was satisfied with nothing but uncertainty, and meeting an other
Astrologer, told him how he had been deceived in the rules of the Art, (who
for his comfort) concluded also as he did, that there was no certainty therein,
upon which he left off further studying thereof. Now I would very feign know of
any man (which shall be all the answer I shall give to this sophistical cavil)
whether by these words Astrology, be convinced as uncertain, because Mr.
Briggs and another, or (suppose half a dozen more) could find no certainty
therein; when Ptolomy, Galen, Hippocrates, St. Austine, and thousands more,
found not only certainty therein, but concluded and agreed that it was the most
beneficial and pleasant Art under the Sun; and whereas he cites Phavorinus
against Astrology in these words, Aut adversa eventura dicunt, etc. which is,
They foretell either things of prosperity or adversity; if of prosperity, and
they fail, then thou shall be prosperous or happy in hoping for that good, if
of adversity, and hit not right, then thou were miserable in fearing in vain,
etc. which agrees with what he says Mr. Briggs would undertake to do, viz To
prove the rules of Astrology contradictory, viz. It shall be so, and it shall
not be so, which is the meerest cavil of all the rest, to say, Ergo Astrology
is uncertain. I will undertake then a greater matter then Mr. Briggs, for let
there be what Art or Science that Mr. Homes can devise nominated (though never
so true) I will undertake to speak as much, nay and with more proof against it,
then all these his learned men has done in this his Character of the present
times (he forgot to put in those that deny the truth; nay, and not only so,
but sophistically and maliciously maintain it to their utmost endeavors,
thinking the citing of St. Austine to be proof enough to terrify the Reader
from undertaking this study, or continuing therein, not observing the words of
his Author, Look the first Chapter of his treatise.
and together with the Fathers to include the Councels, but tells us not how and
upon what grounds and reasons they disallowed of the Art, lest then his malice
be discovered. Wherefore let me then for a conclusion, as well to this Chapter,
as his cavils, ask him these two questions; whether a man may not (if
enviously disposed) speak against the most manifest truths, nay against the
very word of God, and wrest the Scripture to their own inclinations and
intentions? And secondly, if he be proved hereof guilty, in the next Chapter,
to wrest the Scripture sense to confute Astrology; whether he be not more fit
to be brought under the lash of the Law, then Astrologers? so have you his
learned men against Astrology confuted; we come now to the maine point of all,
viz. whether Astrology be condemned by the word of God?

CHAP. III. Wherein his divine proofs against Astrology, are examined and
confuted.
BUt before I begin, I shall desire the Reader to have a special care to
remember what Astrology is, which is now in controversy, and either to be
confuted and condemned, or defended and cleared; the definition whereof you
have at the beginning of the first Chapter, for otherwise our pains and
arguments are but frivolous on either side; wherefore I commend Mr. Homes in
that he did not first set down the state of his question, before he began to
confute it; but thinking pleno ore, to condemn Astrology, will be enough to
scare the Reader from the study thereof, leaveing him to consider what it is he
condemns, although he be altogether ignorant of the same; that so his words
may have the more force, and take the deeper impression in the Readers heart to
believe what he would feign, and as much as in him lies, studies to maintain.

SECT. I. Wherein his first Scripture proof, viz. Deuteronomy. 18 verse. 10. is
convinced and cleared, no wise to condemn Astrology.
COncerning his first proof, Deuteronomy. 18.10. I have formerly in my reply to
Raunces Declaration against Astrology said something, and referred the
Reader, to that never to be enough honored and remembered, the learned Sir
Christopher Heydon, to be further satisfied in the rest of his divine proofs,
who in his answer to Mr. Chamber, has so excellently and learnedly handled,
that the wit of man is not able to perform better, and that so learned a piece
may not be kept from the knowledge of the vulgar, under the cloud of silence, I
will here along in the confutation of Mr. Homes his divine proofs, use his very
arguments and words (as near as I can) against the same places alleged by
Mr. Chamber.

His first proof of Scripture refelled.
His First proof then is Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be found among you any one
that uses Divination, or an observer of times; which words says he, by the
common consent of the learned of all sorts, Signify Astrology and
Astrologers; and for the which sins, Look the seventh page of my reply to
Raunce his Declaration against Astrology.
the Nations were driven out before the Children of Israel: Now that you shall
see how far Mr. Homes is mistaken to think hereby to persuade the world
against Astrology (as I said before) I will give you that (learned, and never
enough remembered) Gentleman's words, against Mr. Chamber hereon, viz. Sir.
Christopher Heydon Knight, Chap. 2. page 41. and forward of his piece in
defense of Astrology against Mr. Chamber.
where he says, Picus urges that Achinas understands the word in the
Original, to signify such, as observe lucky and unlucky hours, which our
English translate, a regarder of times, and Tremelius, Planetarius, and from
hence they think they have pregnant evidence to condemn Astrology by this Law.

I may reckon up here also Mr. Homes his Mercer, R. Kimchy, and Schindler, who,
says he, take the words in the worst sense (which I may very well say indeed,
and shall appear by and by) viz. The curious and Diabolical Arts, ^s Magi of
the Egyptians, In the second page of this treatise, you have it defined.
Ergo says Mr. Homes, Astrology is not lawful, but what affinity astrology
has with Diabolical practices; I desire the Reader to remember what Astrology
is. But to proceed with Sir Christopher Heydons discourse hereon, says he, But
notwithstanding all this, I will make it appear, that these Translations are of
small force; and being admitted, little or nothing impeach this Art.

And first, I encounter them with the authority of the Church, even from the
time of Moses until they wrote, being wholly against them. For to begin with
the Septuagint, They have Translated the word Gnonen, in this place (...) which
signifies Augurare, or to divine by the voice and flying of Birds; St. Hierome
and the vulga^ expounded it, of such as divine by observation by Dreams.
Pagnine in his Translation interprets it Hariolus, by a general name, or such
a one, as divineth at the Altar by sacrifices. Arias Montanus, uses the word
Praestigiator, that is (...) Jugler or Cosiner, All these interpretations Mr.
Homes himself confesses is given to the word.
that wi^^ Legerdemaine deceives the eyesight. (See that that (...) also
confessed by Mr. Hom^^ himself) So that besides a^^ antiquity, and consent of
the whole Church against him, we see that diverse men have diversely interpreted
the word; and therefore I leave it to the judgment of the Reader, whether we
are to give credit to the new Expositors, rather then to the ancient and
learned Hebrews themselves, who best understood their own Language, or to the
common understanding of the Fathers and the Church, even from the first, until
these men (which has been long since) expounded it otherwise then all that had
gone before them. And now to come to the English Translation, as we have it
expressed in our Bibles; see with what reason and sound arguments Mr. Homes is
silenced, who is not only thus mistaken in the signification of the word, but
most slanderously intrudeth Astrologers with, or at least makes them the same
with Wizards, and those that have familiar spirits, for says he, So that
indeed (as it is in Levit. 20.6.) to follow such kind of Arts, (speaking before
of Divination, by observation of times, and juggling which he all along
concludes to be Astrology, as his interpreters there have it) Is to go a
Whoring (spiritually) from Christ, and God will (says he) set his face against
such, and cut off such from among his people, weighty reasons against
Astrology (says he) when the words of the Text are merely wrested by him,
not having in the least any mention of this Art, or Artists; but of those that
have familiar spirits, and Wizards, and how he will prove Astrologers to be any
of these, I know not. Yet I can tell him when he will do it, though I never see
him, and that is when he can make the 18. of Deuteronomy. to condemn the legality of
Astrology; but to come to our english Translation, the same Sir Christopher
Heydon says, Concerning our english Translators, I find they rather leave us
in doubts, then resolved; for whereas here they take the word Gnonen for a
regarder of times, in other places they interpret it otherways, as in 2.
Chron. Chap. 33. verse. 6. for Witchcraft, and in the 5. of Micah For
South-sayers. So that in this inconstancy to themselves, they must either give
a better reason (then any thing I know they are able) why in this place of
Deuteronomy. it should not be interpreted as well a Witch, or a Sooth-sayer, as a
regarder of times, or else they must understand such a regarder of times, as
makes his election by Witchcraft and Sooth-saying, and not by Astrology.
Again, suppose the word be admitted as the English Translate it; yet neither
is all regarding of time prohibited, neither does it prove that regarding of
time by Astrology is unlawful. For Solomon (the wisest of men) says, That
the heart of the wise man knows time, and that to every purpose there is a
time, as to Plant, to pluck up, to slaie, to heal, to break down, to build,
to weep, to laugh, etc. which none but the fool neglects. As in
Ecclesiastes farther in the third Chap. and more at large: and he that
observes not time, but shall laugh when he should weep, and sow when he should
reap, is unseasonable and makes himself ridiculous, according to that of the
Poet Virgil.

"Multi ante occasum maia caepere, sed istos
"Expectata seges, vanis elusit aristis.
Wherefore if this be the true interpretation or signification of the word, he
must speak against that superstitious observation of times, which the Heathen
used, and that superstitious people at this present do use; the very same I may
say to Mr Homes, if he know any practitioner of the Art that makes any
superstitious use thereof, let him be brought forth and condemned, I Will assure
him, he shall see me as ready to assist him therein, and be as forward as
himself: But that it can be applied against observing of such times as depend
upon evident causes and reasons in nature, which only Astrology prescribes
(as abovesaid) none but that man that has no judgment can imagine: Look the
2 chapter of this Treatise where Astrology is helpful o husbandry.
And you have heard before Ptolomy himself as well as St. Augustine, and all
the best learned Astrologers do absolutely neglect the superstitious and
sortilegious elections of the Heathen: wherefore the Reader sees that this
text (were the interpretation admitted) impugneth them nothing at all.

But in answer to Mr. Homes his expositors, take the interpretation of the word
Gnonan, as the same Sir Christopher Heydon delivers it by Mr Edward Lively,
professor of the Hebrew in Cambridge to Queen Elizabeth; being a man (for his
singular knowledge in all kind of good learning, but especially in Divinity,
and the tongues) of great estimation and authority in that University; who was
solicited by Sir Christopher Heydon to deliver his opinion and judgment of the
Hebrew word, because it was objected by Mr Chamber, that Tremelius did
interpret it planetarius, wherefore for the Readers better satisfaction, I have
hear delivered it verbatim as that worthy Knight has it.

I have looked in all the Hebrew Scripture, wherein that word is used,
examining as well the judgments of the Hebrew Scoliastes in their
Commentaries, as also many of the best translations, Caldee, Greek, and
Latin, among whom for the signification of that word, I find this general
agreement, that it signifies an unlawful and forbidden Art of Soothsaying, or
Juggling, or Sorcery, or Witchcraft; but touching the certain and special
kind thereof, there is such dissension and disagreement among them, as thereby
it may sufficiently appear, the very proper and clear signification thereof in
specie, to be utterly unknown: for Aben Ezra in his Commentary upon the 19.
Chapter of Levit. ver. 26. deriving it from the word Gnonan, which signifies a
cloud; understood those thereby who by the forms and movings of the clouds,
foretold things to come: Avenarius from the same root understood Juglers which
cast a cloudy mist before their eyes, to cover and hide their deceitful
slights. R. Solomon on the same place refers it to a word Gnonah, which
notes time, supposing such to be meant, as took upon them to define times of
good or bad luck for the doing of things; others fetching it from the word
Gnanath, which signifies to answer, understood Soothsayers, which being asked
of secret matters, answered according to their skill; as by like reason barioli
were so called, quasi farioli, a fando, as some of the ancient learned have
observed: some from gnajin, signifying an eye, thought Juglers to be noted,
which do perstringere oculos, that their legerdemaine may not easily be espied:
here is great diversity of opinions, but none comes to Tremelius his mind,
for a planetary, ( or of Mr Homes his Arabrick versions, which it seems he is
loath or at least ashamed to nominate, yet he might as well have wronged them
as Moses, who, he says, brings five strong arguments against the
Astrological Art, when all the world cannot show that in all those verses, viz.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16. of the 18. of Deuteronomy. nor indeed in the whole
chap. that Astrology is so much as mentioned) yet some for a Jugler have
agreed with him, which signification of this word, even Tremelius himself
retains in the 19. Chap. of Levit. ver. 26. and in the 2. of Esaias, ver. 6.
and diverse other places, thereby showing the vanity of his own planetarius: for
if it properly and truly signifies Prestigiatorem in any place, I dare boldly
say, that it signifies Planetarium in no place; I may here omit anotable place
in the 57. chap. of Esaias, ver. 3. where this word is taken for Witchcraft, beni
gnonenah Witches children: So it is interprepreted in our Geneva translation;
so likewise expounded by the Hebrew Doctors on that place, Jarchi and Chimchi;
so translated by Mr Calvine (a man for understanding of the Scripture, endued
with an admirable gift of judgment) filii veneficae, which by Kimchy is proved
to be true by this reason, Yet Mr Homes affirms Kimchy makes mention of
attributing good to one time and bad to another.
that the word Gnonenah there used is for the foeminine gender, pertaining to a
Woman; because women (says he) for the most part are given to the practicing
of this devilish Art, it were madness to think women should have given
themselves to the study of Astrology, or Planetary aspects (a thing never used
in any Commonwealth that ever I heard of) but for Witchery, every where to be
found in them rife and common. Here therefore I end, for this matter
confidently affirming, that neither Tremelius if he were alive, nor Junius, nor
any for them can prove that Planetarius is the clear and sure signification of
Gnonen, in any place of Scripture. Thus far Mr. Lively. And I may conclude this
point with Sir Christopher Heydons words next ensuing, viz. Wherefore I do
conclude, that if that which is before spoken be indifferently considered,
there is no man able demonstratively to argue to the condemnation of Astrology
out of this text.

SECT. II. Wherein his second proof is refelled, viz. Esaias 2.6.
ANd if so, or rather, seeing it is so, then I may with more confidence affirm
his second passage of Scripture to be less material in all respects, for the
blindest of people may clearly see, it does no whit (by his own words, nay and
argument) so much as either hint or mean Astrology, Esaias 2.6. Therefore thou
have forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they are replenished from
the East, and are Soothsayers like the Philistims; where is Astrology in all
this? the text tells us God had forsaken his people because they were
Soothsayers, but as for their being Astrologers, I see nothing mentioned: is
not this a pretty scarecrow? thinking any passage of the Scripture enough to
condemn Astrology, whether it speaks of it or no? what does he think
Astrology to be Soothsaying? then he should prove it so, and I will assure him
I shall endeavor then to speak as much against it as he can; but if it be not
first proved so, this wrest of Scripture and sophistical cavil is already
refelled; but he begins to make up the matter with the interpretations of some
men, but all will not do, they are at least a mile short of the mark, yet if I
should see any of them within an inch thereof, I should conclude him to be as
fas from hitting it, as he that is a yard wide; but let us see but how he tugs
to bring this far fetched argument or proof to serve his turn; he shows us
first that the word clearly signifies Soothsayers, which is enough alone to
refell all his Interpreters therein, let them say what they will to the
contrary, Vatablus in his notes (says he) renders it Diviners; and Junius,
Praestigiators, that is (says he) that make show of that they cannot do: you
have heard Junius opinion but now, but what of this? Votablus says the word
imports Diviners, must this consequently and infallibly be Astrologers, why not
Necromancers, Auguries, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Auruspicers? do not all these
Divine? but I need not insist longer hereon, for, he answers this point in his
following words himself, the Septuagint (says he) renders it (...), that is
(says Budeus) says he, a kind of foretelling: as (...) (says they)
signifies Divination, and generally the Caldee, Syriacke, Arabicke, Arias
montanus, etc. renders it Augurers or Auguries, Ergo, not Astrologers, but
says he, farther because antiquities tell us that that the Augurers did Divine
as well by the aspects of the heavens as by flying Birds; Authors of late times
commonly use that word to express Divination in general: O brave reason!
because for brevity sake in Oration, or the like, Authors (as he calls them)
perhaps use this word, therefore he will use it (being as he confesses himself
general) to condemn particularly Astrology? and because the text speaks
against Augurers, and they know the aspects of the Planets; therefore, it also
condemns Astrology? all that believe shall be saved (says the Scripture) it
is clear the Devils believe and tremble; Ergo, I shall conclude them not
damned? rare logic indeed! which is as affirmative, I Am confident, as his
argument in every particular; so that you see then I hope by this time, the
infatigable pains Mr Homes takes to swim against the stream, and when reason
and truth will no wise support him, he lays hold just as he is sinking, on the
rushes and weak props and supporters of logic, which neither is sufficient to
save him, but together with him they sink down with perpetual shame and
silence, into the pit of forgetfulness: Alas poor Doctor Homes; I must
confess this would make any one Pity the poor Pastor. A pretty jest, of a
zealous Priest.


SECT. III. Wherein his third text is convinced, viz. Esaias 44.25.
THirdly, he produces the 44. Chapter of Esaias, verse 25, etc. I am the Lord
thy redeemer, which do frustrate the signs of Wizards, making the Soothsayers
mad, foiling their wise men, and making their skill foolish: This is to as
little purpose brought to condemn Astrology, as it is weakness in him to
allege it or affirm it: but before I begin to meddle with the words, I
think meet here first to remove his injurious wrong he does impose upon
Astrologers, to reckon them Soothsayers and Wizards, Diviners, or Augurers,
etc. But I desire here the reader to observe that Mr Homes in his book,
studieth to condemn those that profess Astrology here in England, and this
City of London, and yet he will needs intrude Astrology, or rather persuade
the vulgar, that Astrology is the same with these above named; from all which
Astrology is as far, as black from white, or Mary-stainings from Bred-street,
or as different as a A very Religious story (if rightly understood) of a Divine
and one that should with such zeal set forth the sins of the times.
sick body is from one that is well: which because he can bring some proof
against them, will therefore term Astrologers, by the same to be understood;
when all Astrologers will not deny to condemn (in as much as in them lies)
these aforesaid studies as well as he. But to the purpose, how can Mr Homes, or
any one living, prove Astrology to be signified by any of these names, when it
is clear (as abovesaid) it depends merely on the natural influences and
effects of the Stars? which is not to foretell by the flying or voice of Birds,
observation of the intrals of Beasts, and the like; nor indeed is it properly
to be termed Divination, for to divine is not, or does not naturally signify
the foretelling of future events by natural causes, but by some divine
instinct. Wherefore Mr. Homes might have discharged his duty much better both
to God and his Country, if he had employed his pen to vent all the Gall both in
his Inckhorn, heart and brain, against those enemies of the truth, that
maintain their own opinions, before the word of God, and make no Conscience of
perjury, professing the form of Godliness, but (in effect) denying the power
thereof. And not against Astrologers (nor the Art) who attribute all their
knowledge, and the power of the Stars to the Omnipotent Creator of them; and in
all points of Religion, show themselves conformable both to the discipline of
the Church, and obedient to the Laws of the Land.

But to come to the words in the Text, which he would needs enforce against
Astrology; the same Sir Christopher Heydon, further says upon these words.
That they are purposely uttered to advance the omnipotency of God, Page 32.
Chap. 2. of his defense of Astrology.
so greatly diminished by Idolatry, but to imagine that God would set forth the
greatness of his power, by opposing the same against that, which in it is self is
fruitless, infirm, and of no force at all, were not only against sense, but
in truth to frustrate the words and meaning of God himself; wherefore it does
necessarily follow, that so long as it pleases him to suffer the course of
nature to proceed without interruption, Astrological signs must be confessed
effectual, and not to be frustrated but by miracle, and by his omnipotent
power, to which that the Stars are subject, all our Astrologers do confess,
and none but an Atheist will deny. For as God is the Creator of all things, so
is he the first cause of all causes, to whom all causes are but his
instruments; and therefore as the instrument works not of it self, but when
it is employed by the Artificer, so the heavens being Gods instruments, do not
exercise their force upon these inferior things, but as God does use their
ministry in the Government of the world. And this he says is taught us by
the Prophet Hosea (as abovesaid) Chap. 2.21.22. where (says he) he says, not
simply, the heavens shall hear the earth, but first, I will hear the heavens,
to show them the power the heavens have over the earth, and that it depends
on God. In which sense, the Scripture says also, God works all in all
things, and that we live, move, and have our being in him. And therefore
whether we respect the natural course of things, or those accidents which
happen besides the order of nature, we are to acknowledge it to be the
supereminent power of God, as the first cause of every thing, which
nevertheless can be no impeachment to Astrology, because God does govern
ordinately, and therefore seldom perverteth or disturbeth that order, whereby
in his eternal providence, he does govern his workmanship.

Wherefore seeing he can not properly make the words abovesaid to signify
Astrology, and seeing the Text does not in the least express Astrologers, but
only Soothsayers, and Wizards; I may confidently affirm and conclude this
Text no whit at all to impeach Astrology; and then consequently his argument
to be merely sophistical, rash, and inconsiderate, malicious, weak, and
inconsistent with either reason, sense or honesty. This may sufficiently serve
to refel this his wrest of Scripture, but if the Reader desires further the
discussion hereof, and how it is in every point cleared and handled, let him
peruse the 2 Chapter of Sir Christopher Heydons defense of Astrology against
Mr. Chamber, to whom (for brevities sake) I refer him, where you shall not
only find these his own reasons and words, but likewise the opinions and
judgments of as well the Ancient as latter Divines; all which could never pick
any thing in the least, justly to be objected against Astrology. Ye see
clearly therefore Mr. Homes his palpable mistake, or at least wilful wrest of
the Text; to serve his own turn, to condemn Astrology, but all will not do,
which is a most pitiful case, and does almost persuade me also, to Pity the
poor Pastor.

SECT. IV. Wherein his fourth proof is refelled, viz. Esaias 47.12.13.14.
FOurthly, he brings the 47. of Esaias, 12.13.14. Stand now with thine
Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, Let now the Astrologers,
the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators, stand up and save thee, etc.
Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not
deliver themselves, etc. This very place (as I would have the Reader observe)
is enough to confute his former injury to Astrologers, in reckoning them no
other then Soothsayers, Wizards, Sorcerers and the like, when he sees clearly
the Lord here makes a particular distinction between the one and the other; for
you see, Astrologers, Monthly Prognosticators, Sorceries, and Inchanters,
particularly named, here I may also put the Reader in mind, Mr. Homes his craft
in wresting the Scripture.
that he take him as he is, viz. a Sophister, in wresting the Scripture to his
own purpose, and interpreting it to maintain these his arguments, which he
cannot otherwise in the least support with either reason or truth.

But to come now to the claring of the Text, which he thinks does absolutely
strike the fatal blow to Astrology; inferring from thence, that Astrology is
opposite to confidence in God, and that Astrologers are much of the same
abomination, with Inchanters and Soothsayers, (which you may see is false, and
as for Soothsayers they are not in the least mentioned in the Text, where you
see he again has his own interpretation) and that they are to be derided,
and no wise to be trusted in, etc. But as I said before, the wit of man is not
able to answer these his vain wrests and interpretations of the Scriptures,
better then by that Honorable Gentleman, Sir Christopher Heydon, I hear give
you, as he has it in his 2. Chapter, in answer to Mr. Chamber, bringing the
same place of Scripture, and indeed with the same conclusions as does Mr.
Homes. I will not deny that, because God and his Prophets were not believed by
the Chaldeans, (who reposed in their Magicians, Soothsayers, and
Mathematicians) the Prophet here in a scorning Sarcasmus, bids them save
their Empire from ruin, therein contemning their Power, and not their
Predictions, and expressly noting that it shall not be in them to save
themselves from the judgments to come. This I do plainly acknowledge, although
were I disposed to stand upon all advantages with Mr. Chamber, since both
Vatablus, and Mr. Calvin, in their Commentaries, confess that word Chabar,
does indifferently signify such observers of heaven as were Inchanters
thereof; I could easily avoid him as not disputing ad idem, since not
Astrologers simply, but such as withal joined Magic, seems here to be
mentioned. And it is manifest by the example of Moses, and the Egyptians, and
of Balaam and Balacke, that though they were Astrologers, yet they reposed
their safety against God and his people, only in their Magical power, by which
(as their Poets and others report) they profess themselves able to pull the
Moon and the Stars out of Heaven, and so does Diodorus Siculus testify, Lib.
2. Cap. 8. that though they were cunning in Astrology, yet they did only
prevent the evils which they did foresee, by Enchantments and Charms. For in
truth, Astrology professes only to foresee natural mutations and accidents,
and not power to prevent and save. Nota been.
But to return to that which he most expects, I will admit as much as Mr.
Chamber himself can desire, that the Prophet here derideth the trust which was
put in the skill of Astrologers, The true meaning of the Prophet in this fore
going Text.
(which is indeed Mr. Homes his chief drift also) now let him frame his
argument, and he shall never be able to bring the proposition of this Chap.
(which is, That Christianity and Astrology cannot stand together) (which
indeed is Mr. Homes his argument also concluding Astrology, to be opposite to
confidence in God) within his conclusion. For it follows not, that because
upon some circumstance a thing my be derided, that it is unlawful. If this were
any consequence, then because confidences in Princes, Psalm. 1.16. in Riches,
Psalm. 52. in Horses and Chariots, Esaias 31. in Cities, Jer. 5. in Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 16. in Negotiation or trade of Merchandise. In the last verse of this
same Chapter of Esaias, (where the very same words and phrase are used against
Merchants, that before were used against observers of heaven, or Astrologers,
as Arias Montanus and Tremelius Translate it) is prohibited, derided, and
punished; we must hold the permission of Princes, Riches, Horses, Chariots,
Cities, Physicians and Merchants, to be against Christianity, and unlawful. He
ought therefore first to have distinguished of the trust that is here derided,
and not thus to deceive by any elench, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter, as if all trust were taken away, because some trust is derided.
For in these places, and the like, only such a trust as excludes confidence
in God is understood, and no other. As in our case, where notwithstanding God
by his Prophets had threatened the destruction of the Babylonish Monarchy, it
was not believed; but these heathen presuming rather upon their own power and
skill, in contempt of God broke forth, as appears verse 10. into these
blasphemous speeches, None sees me. Quasi dieat (says Tremelius) ne deus
quidem novit rations meas, nay God himself knows not my ways, and again, I
am and none else, and verse 7. I shall not sit as a Widow, nor shall not know
the loss of Children: Thus denying both God and his power, while they presume
upon their own. But is this heathenish presumption and confidence to be
imputed as a fault to Astrology? or is it not truly to be reputed the impiety
of the professors, and others, with whom the Prophet deals? who denying that
to God which is due, and ascribing more then they ought to the Stars, and their
own knowledge and power, do that which Astrology never taught them, and
therefore is not guilty of their ungodliness. This had been well done of Mr.
Homes also.
He ought then to make a difference between the heathen, with whom the Prophet
has to do, and Christians against whom he writes; for though it be true that
Christian Astrologers do monthly prognosticate, as is mentioned in the Text, by
the consideration of the Stars; yet is he not able to tax any of them with that
derogation from God, or impiety, The difference between Astrologers and those
that are condemned in the Text.
which is here derided. For to place confidence in Stars, as in divine causes
and powers, is one thing, and to esteem them but as subordinate and second
causes in nature, is another; the one makes them Gods, the other but Gods
instruments, which (as our Astrologers do acknowledge with one consent) it is
in his power to alter, Nota been.
as best pleases his divine will; and therefore they are very far from that
heathenish presumption and confidence here taxed, whereby ye may see, that the
trust may be reproved, yet the Art unchecked. For I omit here to show, that
monthly prognostications grounded upon observation, deduced from causes in
nature, Nota.
have ever been permitted and suffered, in all well ordered and Christian
Commonwealths, so far as I know; and that not only the Fathers, and those
latter Divines by me before remembered, but even Mr. Calvin himself, in his
admonition, with others (that attribute as little as they may to this Art) do
allow thereof, so far forth as they extend to the state of the Weather, of
Health, Plagues, Plenty, Dearth, and to the direction of the Physician, when to
Purge by Pill, when by Potion, when by letting of blood; this being as far as
our prognostications proceed; Nota.
which nevertheless would not have been suffered, if God by his holy Prophet
had showed any detestation thereof, or reproved the same as unlawful, and
unchristian. Wherefore when these adversaries condemn the Art for the abuses of
Artists, it is clear that they do but play the sophisters, deceiving by a
plain fallacy, ab accidente. And lastly, if it be considered what St. Hierom,
Hugo, Aquinas, Lyra, Haymo, and other ancient Expositers, More you may read in
the second Chapter of his book.
have written upon this Text, it is most certain, that not one of them is so
sharp sighted as to epsy out any thing in this place that may prejudicate
Astrology, but they all defend the same as fully as my self. Wherefore if in
this proof of Scripture Mr Homes be not as far mistaken as in all the rest of
his foregoing cavils, and makes not himself appear to the eyes of the world
to be a mere sophister, let the impartial, judge: for I dare confidently
affirm, that by the conclusion of this his cavil concerning this text, he is
as ignorant in the Art of Astrology, as from the true sense and meaning of the
Prophet; or from the art of administering Physic to sick women, He is known to
be a spiritual Doctor.
nay I am most confident he is herein farther a great deal out of the way, then
it is from Mary-stainings to Bred-street, wherefore I cannot choose but Pity
the poor Paster, both for his mistake, and absolute miss of his plot and
purpose, both of the one, and the other: I proceed therefore to his next
Scripture proof.

SECT. V. Wherein his fifth proof is proved weak, as to his purpose, viz. Jer.
10.2, 3.
FIfthly, he strives to condemn Astrology by the 10. of Jer. v. 2, 3. but to
as little purpose as in all the rest, but with no less craft and deceit,
Juglar-like, he endeavors to cast the mist of error and mistake before the
eyes of his reader, that so he may carry on his design with more dexterity and
agility: the words are, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed
at the signs of heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them, etc. whereupon
he infers, Astrology not to be lawful, (because as he thinks God here by
the Prophet prohibiteth the Jews to give credit to the Star-gazers) but as I
said before, Astrologers hold no fatal necessity in the Stars.
Astrologers do not make the Stars gods, but Gods instruments; not in the least
attributing fatal necessity to be in their power: wherefore then consequently
he argues not against, nor contradicts, nor condemns Astrologers by these
his cavils, since they are as far from being guilty thereof as himself, nay and
I believe more; for certainly he that will wrest the Scripture to condemn what
he understands not, merely to show himself a Time-server, (as it is known
sufficiently Mr Homes is) is a hypocrite, and much to be feared whether he is
not altogether as ignorant of God, as of this Art: But for the farther clearing
of the text, and the manifesting of Mr Homes his mistake, if not wilful
malice, let us hear what the same Sir Christopher Heydon says in answer to the
same place of Scripture alleged by Mr Chamber also to condemn Astrology:
Whereupon Mr Chamber infers, that the Prophet wills the Jews to give no
credit to the Star-gazers, (and Mr Homes, trust or confidence, page 134,
opposite to the confidence and comfort in God:) But sure he that makes this
collection out of these words of the text, never (I think) either gazed or
looked upon them with half an eye: for the Prophet prohibiteth fear, Mr
Chamber, credit, (Mr Homes trust or confidence;) again the Prophet speaks of
the Stars themselves, Mr Chamber of the persons that observe them, (so Mr Homes
also) wherefore what difference there is between the one and the other, so far
ought we to be from giving Mr Chambers assertion any credit (and how shall Mr
Homes his then take?)

For if he will truly inform the reader, he knows there is nothing
prohibited in these words, but that the Jews should not learn the way of the
Heathen; The meaning of the text.
which when he wresteth against Astrology, he does both show himself to be out
of the way, and to seek to seduce others, for to the creature, as in these
words, fear, not the signs of heaven; where the word fear, is not simply
understood, but for Religious reverence, and Divine worship: for that it is
often taken in this sense, is no novelty to those that are acquainted with the
speech and phrase of the holy Ghost: As for example, Esaias chap. 29. verse 13.
And their fear toward me, was taught by the precept of men: where fear is (by
Christ himself, alleging this place of the Prophet, Mat. 15. v. 9.) expounded
for worship, saying, in vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's
traditions: As likewise the very same word is used in other places, for the
Idolatrous worship exhibited to false gods: as 2 Kings chap. 17. verse 7. when
the children of Israel sinned, etc. it is said, they feared other gods. I could
confirm this by infinite like testimonies, were it not superfluous in so clear
a case: But to prove that the Prophet even here, under this word, likewise
revoketh the Jews from worshipping the heavenly bodies, is yet more evident by
the words following: for after he has in the two next verses, expressed the
vain customs of the Heathen, in erecting and adoring those Images which they
worshipped; he likewise restrains them from this second Idolatry, ver. 5. in
the very same phrase, that he did at the first: fear them not, for they stand
up as the Palm tree, but they speak not, etc. whereby there is no color of
wrangling left to him, that disposes not himself to be obstinately perverse:
but of force it must be confessed, that the Jews are here only forbidden to
imitate the Heathen in both these kinds of Idolatry.

This may clearly satisfy any juditious impartial eye, for the clearing of
this proof of Scripture, and that notwithstanding it, Astrology does stand in
its full force no whit more eclipsed, (if so much) then the Sun, by being
overcast with a cloud: wherefore let all Astrologers proceed in their study in
this heavenly and most lawful Art, except there could be more palpable witness
against it, then has been hitherto produced. But to confirm what has been
already said concerning this text, let us hear what this worthy man further
says. To confirm this more fully, by the consideration of other places: the
Scripture gives us plentiful testimony, that the Jews did follow the Heathen
in their Idolatry to the Stars, but are never reprehended for learning
Astrology of them: Wherefore the Prophet Amos, chap. 5. prophesied to them
long before, even this captivity wherein the Israelites were held in Jeremies
time, because they had born (that is worshipped) the Images of Siccuth and
Chiun. Abenezra and and with him Montanus, understanding the Planet Saturn by
Chiun: and St. Hierome expounding this word Coeab, thinks it to be Venus whom
even the Saracens in his time did worship: But St. Luke, Acts 7. ver. 42. and
43. following the Greek does explain Amos, and says, then God turned himself
away, and gave them up to serve the host of heaven, as it is written in the
book of the Prophets: and you took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star
of your God Remphaim, figures which you made to worship them, therefore I will
carry you away beyond Babylon: and therefore not unaptly have some expositors
conceived the Images by which the Prophet does here exprobrate the Heathen, to
have been the Images of the Signs, and that not without reason; because that
after the Prophet has restrained them from this Heathenish fear of the Sgnes,
immediately he gives this reason, for the customs of the people are vain:
and declaring wherein, he adds, for one cutteth down a tree in the Forest,
etc. which should want sense, if this verse depended not on the former: thus
also 2 Kings chap. 17. verses 15, 16. the history says, they followed the
Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them,
that they should not do like them: But now if Mr Chamber would know, wherein
the Imitation of the Heathen offended God, the spirit of God himself resolves
him, that this was not in the study of Astrology, but in that they left the
Commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten Images, even two
Calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served
Baal: Wherefore in the 23. chap. 4, 5, 11. of the same book of the Kings, the
Jews are again particularly reproved for offering incense to the, and Planets,
and for dedicating horses and chariots to the Sun: and to return to our own
Prophet; does he not chap. 7. verse 18. expressly testify, that their children
gather wood, their fathers kindle the fire, their women knead the dough, to
make cakes for the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink-offeings to their
gods? and is it not for this defection, not for Astrology, that he does
likewise threaten, chap. 8. verse 2. that the bones of their Kings, Princes,
Prophets, Priests, and Inhabitants, shall be spread before the Sun and the
Moon, and all the host of heaven; whom they have followed, and whom they have
served, and whom they have followed, and whom they have sought, and whom they
have worshipped? to be short, the Prophet remembers their like Idolatry to the
host of heaven, chapter 19. ver. 13. and chapter 44.15. all which considered, it is
plain enough why the Prophet in this 10. chap. seeks to withdraw the Jews
from fearing the Signs of heaven, since in every place their Idolatry to
heavenly bodies, is reprehended; But their imitation of the heathen in the
study of Astrology no where. But for tediousness I might here give you the
expositions of the chiefest and best Expositors as he also sets them down, who
from all ages have interpreted the text in this sense, but these my labors
would then swell to a greater bulk, then I would willingly they should;
besides it would be in some sense superfluous, since what has been already said
may satisfy any one who does not willingly blind his eyes, and absolutely deny
satisfaction; wherefore I refer the curious reader to his most learned book,
chap. 2. and hasten to Mr Homes his remaining sophistications.

SECT. VI. Wherein his sixth proof is refelled, viz. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
HIs sixth wrest of Scripture is Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. where we read
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed a dream, and for to understand the interpretation and
meaning of the dream, he commanded to call all the Magitians, Astrologers,
Sorcerers, etc. before him, to tell him the signification of his dream; which
if they could not do, they should be cut in pieces, etc. upon which Mr Homes
infers, that because they could not show the King his dream, with the
interpretation thereof, Astrology is false, which I may say is a very false
assertion; for if he had known what Astrology is, he had never thus made
himself ridiculous to condemn Astrology by this assertion or place of
Scripture, the reader may remember what Astrology is, Page 2. it is defined.
and how far all Astrologers hold it effectual; as ye have also before. Now
that this place of Scripture does no wise condemn Astrology, I shall desire
him to observe, that God in his secret wisdom and counsel, Dan. 2.18. had
decreed what should happen in the latter days, and had revealed it to the King
by a dream, viz. the subversion of his Monarchy, and together with his, all
others whatsoever, and the coming of Christ which is the stone cut out without
hands, which afterward grew to a mountain which filled the whole earth, both
with his power and glory, by the clear Sunshine of the Gospel; by which I am
confident Mr Homes cannot prove then, Astrology to be condemned or to be
false, when it is not in its power to reveal the secrets of God, but only
extends to the knowledge of natural accidents and mutations, and their
causes; which was not (you clearly see) the Kings dream, but a revelation of
Gods secret will and intent by dream: wherefore since his argument will not
hold, his conclusion must needs fail him. Moreover you see, as the dream was
really a revelation, so was also the interpretation thereof, for you see in
that same second chap. that Daniel prayed to God to reveal it unto him, which
you see accordingly was in a vision by night, Daniel an Astrologer and Magician.
and thought he was as great an Astrologer and Magician as any of the wise men;
yet he knowing it was a secret beyond nature, Dan. 2.13, 14. applied himself to
God for the revelation thereof, not to the search thereof in any book of
natural causes, as of Astrology or Magic: wherefore you see how far Mr Homes
runs himself into an error, for want of knowing what Astrology is, and the
extent thereof. And then lastly, he as rashly concludes with his divine proofs,
as in all his progress before; intruding and falsely impeaching Astrologers to
be some of those that brought and burnt their books upon repentance of their
wicked practices, Acts 19.19.
which I must confess (were they as he also most rashly and inconsiderately
terms them to be, and as he says set forth in the 21. Revel. 8. to have
their parts in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone) they had at that
time done very well in burning their books, had they been worth a thousand
times as much again as they are there reputed or valued at; but since their Art
and study depends upon only the knowledge of the nature and influences and
motions of the Stars; I know not what reason he has to include them to be thus
penitent for studying Nature only, Ergo, not condemned under the word Sorcery
in the Revelation, 21.8. wherefore seeing this is so apparently false, I should
counsel him (and that speedily to) to burn his books that thus has lead him
into an error, and to contradict the Scriptures; for I find in that very 21.
of Revelation 8. Liars expressly nominated, and when he goes to the fire with
his books, let him remember to go by Bred-street, that so he may sorrow for all
together: that so the Lord may have mercy and Pity of the poor Pastor.

CHAP. IV. Wherein his reasons and arguments against Astrology, is
particularly examined and condemned, neither to consist with reason or truth.
SECT. I. Wherein his first fourfold reason is convinced.
HIs first reason then is, (to prove Astrology is false) that Astrologers
themselves confess, that either the prudence of a moral wise man, or the piety
of a Godly man, or the tutelarity of Angels, or the providence of God,
overruling all things, may prevent their predictions. Whereupon be concludes
that Astrology is false; for says he, what humane providence cannot do,
grace can; if not, Angels may; and wehre all fail, providence does order
according to the mind of God, etc. To answer this his most weak cavil, I shall
begin with what he sets down last, viz. The providence of God overruling all
things, which he says himself (as well as the other three clauses) is the
concession of Astrologers themselves, and if so, I would demand then what
advantage he has hereby, against Astrology; when he can say no more against
it, then what the Practitioners in the Art do confess themselves? there is
certainly none but wretched Atheists, that will deny, that God has not an
overruling, and a restraining power over all things, as well celestial, as
terrestrial; but whether his will and pleasure be to alter their natural
courses, is a question, but he has heard that Ptolomy himself, nay and all
Astrologers in general, do attribute nothing (farther then natural things,
which are in sublunary elementary bodies) to the power and influence of the
Stars; The Stars have power but on natural things.
he might then as well have said, the eye has no power to see, or distinguish
from black and white, (because by the power of sense, it may be closed) as
weakly to infer the Stars not to have power, because God can alter, or is able
to alter their motions, influences and effects, or the piety of a Godly man,
which neither is in the verge of nature, all Astrologers will condescend and
agree, that the Stars (as also Ptolomy himself) has no power of what is beyond
nature; and if piety be not as far beyond nature, as heaven is from earth, let
the weakest capacity judge. He might then as well have said, a fish is no
living creature, nor has any life, because it will not live on the Land; for
it is altogether as far out of the element (as I may say) of the Stars, or
their power to extend their influence to divine matters, as for a fish to fly,
or a stone to swim, or the like ridiculous things, (if affirmed) which is
contrary to nature. Wherefore his third clause also, is to as little effect, as
the two former, when all that knows any thing in divinity, will acknowledge the
tutelarity or guard of Angels, to be administered only to the elect; and if
this be not as far out of the bounds and confines of nature as the other, I
would desire Mr. Homes to make clear to the contrary; and for his fourth
clause, it is as witty an one, as if one should say, Mr. Homes is no Divine,,
because he is not as yet a Bishop, Inquire of Mr. Homes.
or that a man is not married, because he lives from his wife. The prudence of
a moral wise man, may alter or prevent the effects of the Stars. This is not
only confessed by all the learned in Astrology, but also sapiens dominabitur
astris, a wise man may rule the Stars; but they do not conclude therefore they
have no effects at all, as the ignorant in the Art do with Mr. Homes; but they
farther say, astra regunt homines, sed regit astra deus. The Stars rule men,
but God rules the Stars; this is the doctrine of Astrologers (I mean those
that are Astrologers indeed, and know the fundamentals and true ground of the
Art, not such ignorant Practitioners as Mr. Homes and Raunce) neither do they
mean, Astrologers hold no fatal necessity.
when they say, astra regunt homines, any fatal necessity to be attributed to
those heavenly bodies, nor to have power over men, further then such men are
guided only by sense as bruit beasts, and not by reason; for they further
affirm, that they nisi agunt, non cogunt, they act, or incline, but no wise
compel; but where grace or reason supports a man, there, or on such a man, the
Stars have no power; wherefore then (by the way) I may ask Mr. Homes or
Raunce, if they with all their pretended zeal, can find fault with this
Doctrine, or teach better themselves; or whether any Divine whatsoever, or all
put together, can in the least carp at this; or whether Astrology then be
Diabolical, Idolatrous, the Doctrine or Language of the Devils, or wicked, as
these two seeming zealous blades, most falsely, maliciously, inconsiderately,
and ignorantly traduce it? and then I demand, since as the Philosopher says,
ignorance is the enemy of all good learning, Ignorance the mother of vice.
whether they deserve not exemplary punishment, to condemn so noble, so
profitable to the Commonwealth, so excellent, so divine, and so pleasing a
study, as Astrology is, teaching and traducing their vile ignorance to the
world; and truly as one of them most wisely said, if he should make appear
what he knows of some Astrologers, the Parliament would make a Law against
it, as sometimes was done in the Senate of Rome; but would he be content all
Divines should be silenced, because some are Knaves, and prate nonsense, and
so consequently conclude no verity or truth in Divinity? Truly might I be
worthy to advise that High Court; in the stead of condemning and prohibiting
this most worthy study, they would do well to prohibit all such Pamphleters,
which without either fear or wit, undertake to condemn what they are ignorant
of; and that none should be suffered to condemn, or falsely undertake to
traduce any Art or Science whatsoever, without first before the publishing of
their writings, to make appear to the world, that they are thoroughly verst and
read in the Art they undertake to condemn. And this would not only be a
discouragement to the ignorant traducers of Arts, but also an encouragement to
all ingenious spirits, to apply themselves to knowledge, Knowledge, the only
distinction between a man and a beast.
which is the only thing that distinguishes men from bruit beasts. For I dare
confidently affirm, that if either of these two zealous time-servers, knew the
depth and ground of Astrology, they had never thus enviously carped at it; The
verity whereof, as also it is legality, I dare undertake to defend, not only
against what they can say against it; but also all the Divines in England (put
together to help them) can imagine or contrive to say. But to return to our
business in hand, Mr. Homes on his fourfold argument, brings this conclusion,
that God works not by the stars as secundary causes, but Ephe. 1.11. he
rules all things after the counsel of his divine will. O rare Divine! which
understands not the meaning of the Holy Ghost better in this place, then
because God rules all things after the counsel of his own will; he works not
by causes: then, to what purpose I pray you are Armies, and the success
sometime this way, sometime that, till in conclusion the victory is fully
obtained on one side or other? will he say, (notwithstanding the various
success of the business in time of the war) that it was not concluded in
the counsel of Gods own will, that the victory should be given on that side?
sure he will not be so impious: yet you see he works it by instruments. (Many
of the like instances might be here produced, but for brevities sake) but he
might understand this place of Scripture to speak of the Omnipotency, and
Omnisciency of the wisdom and power of God, in the Government of the world,
(as to any one that peruseth the Chapter will appear) will he therefore deny
that God works by causes or means? Sure this were obstinate wilfulness, or
absolute madness; but that he works by the Stars, what he preordained, Chap.
2. Sect. 2. of this discourse.
is clear from what has been already said, wherefore here again to rehearse,
would but increase this same volum to a larger size then my first intentions;
wherefore I leave you to look back to what has been hereon abovesaid, and
hasten to his second frivolous reason or argument.

SECT. II. Wherein his objection touching the diversity of Twins, is refelled.
As also some other quirks against Astrology examined and convinced.
HIs second Argument or reason against Astrology is, (says he) from clear
experience in Twins conceived at the same instant, and borne in the same hour
or less. Now Mr. Homes had done well to have made this his clear experience,
as clear to his Reader, by demonstration or example, and not to content
himself with his bare word, this is but one Doctors opinion; but will he say
that all Twins are conceived at the very same instant of time? sure he will
not; but admit some are, yet will he not affirm, they are therefore borne in
the same instant of time; I will appeal to any one of discretion and
understanding in such matters, if it hold with reason, that two Children should
be borne both together; and to make it more clear, that all Twins are not
conceived at one and the same instant of time, Aristotle, Pliny, Cardanus,
Dodoneus, Laurentius Gordonius and Paraeus.
I refer him to the perusal of those he finds in the Margent; but let me ask
him what he thinks of the story of Proconesia, who as the story goes, lying
with her Master, and his man her fellow servant both in one day; conceived by
both, and brought forth one Child like the Master, and the other like the man.
Wherefore the first part of his argument is not available; neither (upon good
consideration) will his following words; for he confesses himself that the
nearest time of their birth is, in the same hour or less, when all that knows
any thing in Astrology, knows that four minutes of time in the birth, gives
near upon a years time in directions; wherefore certainly when he made such
clear experience in the birth of Twins, they were not born at the same instant,
but at least four and four and four minutes difference, for the nearest time he
confesses, may be somewhat less then an hour; which certainly must breed very
much difference indeed; wherefore except he could have proved that they were
born both at an instant, or give us an example of any such that he has made
clear experience of, His argument concerning Twins, Merely sophistical.
his argument and reason is a mere sophistical cavil. And whereas he alleges
for this strength of his cavil, that Pharez and Zara did put forth themselves
interchangeably in one hour; but how he can prove it was in one hour, is I
believe too hard a task for him to do, he having no Warrant therefore, from
the word of God. But all this is nothing to the point, for though Zarah put
forth his hand first, and for distinction had a red thread tied about it, yet
be plucked it back again, and Pharez was born before him, Genesis 38. ver. 29.
Therefore I am confident he cannot affirm, that Zarah was a whit the nearer his
birth by putting forth his hand, for we see to the contrary; wherefore then how
this assertion makes against Astrology, let the weakest capacity judge. And
this is not so weak, but he can bring the example of Jacob and Esau to condemn
Astrology, The example of Jacob and Esau no wise equivalent.
which is far weaker (if possible) and serves as little for his purpose (when
he rightly considers it) he will say himself. For all that is acquainted with
that story in the Scripture, knows that Esau was borne first, and after him
came his brother Jacob; and that this is clear, the Scripture further says,
the younger shall serve the elder, Ergo, they were not born at one instant of
time, and therefore I may very well conclude, that this cavil serves no whit
to the condemnation of Astrology; since for ought he can prove to the
contrary, (or any one can tell) they were born many hours distant, and so
consequently they must needs have several significators at their birth, which
will cause very much diversity of manners, fortunes, form and shape, etc. but
if he will tell me there was so small difference in the time, as that Jacob had
hold on his brothers heel; I say that yet notwithstanding, does this prove them
to be borne at one and the same time; but that there was so much time betwixt
their births, as may cause much difference in most matters of their lives: but
admit this objection, any understanding man knows it could no wise stand either
with the safety of the Mother or Child, that he should be thus born with one
hand before all the body. His reason against Astrology, in the matter of
Twins, proved frivolous and inconsistent with either time or reason.
And again, since it is no wise possible in nature, that Twins should be born
both at the same instant of time; this his frivolous cavil is of no use,
unfitly brought for the matter in question; and altogether inconsistent with
reason.

But this by the way; we come to his example of Jacob and Esau, which he says,
by reason of their differences, confuteth Astrology: But who so would be
farther satisfied in the matter of twins, let him look Ranzovius in his book De
certitudine Astrologiae scientiae.
But wherein the difference appears, I believe he knows not; however, if he
could prove all the difference that possibly could be imagined, yet is not this
a sufficient ground for him to condemn Astrology, since it has nothing to do
with Divine providence, or matters beyond the common course of nature; which
may evidently appear, that this birth of Jacob and Esau is, by the story of
their conception, which you may see was absolutely a thing beyond the power of
nature; for their mother Rebecka (the Scripture tells us) was barren:
Wherefore this being so, this I say alone, is enough to silence all that he can
say against Astrology, by this example of Jacob and Esau. But sure,
notwithstanding, if one should particularly examine their lives, one should
hardly find such great difference between them as could justly be alleged to
condemn Astrology; for if we look to their qualities, they were both Princes,
if to the number of their Wives and Children, Philo his antiquities of the Jews.
look into the Antiquities of the Jews, and you will find their children were
alike in number within one, and we know that Jacob had Leah, Genesis 36.
Rachel, Billa and Zilpah, to his Wives, 4. and Esau, Bashemah, Mahalah Adah
and Aholibamach, 4. also; if we again look to their Riches or wealth, they
were both so abundantly wealthy, as that one Country was not able to contain
them both: but if any one say, they differed in the matter of their
birthright, I answer, that this simple objection is of no validity, Astrology
medleth not with Divine matters nor with the secret will of God.
for, Astrology is not to decide or premonstrate, or foreknow the cause of
Divine matters, neither the secret will of God, which that this was Gods secret
will, there is none but knows; for, as he was chosen to be the root or
foundation of Gods people; so by the obtaining of the birthright of his
brother, did clearly premonstrate, both this his election and the power of his
seed, to exceed the power of the others seed, being the elder: And here I may
also add, they were both roots and foudations of two great Nations; but as this
makes neither for, nor against Astrology, being a supernatural birth; yet it
may and does serve very fitly to show, that if Mr Homes be minded to cavil,
here is matter enough for him: Wherefore you see clearly, this reason (or
non-reason) and example of twins, against Astrology to be of all reasons and
examples the most weak, and inconsistent with the matter in question.

So that rather I may justly ask him here, where is the strength of his reasons
and arguments against Astrology? where is his victory over the Astrologians?
where is Astrology proved incertaine? where has he proved the incertainty
thereof? then for him to ask (upon these his bald reasons) where then is the
verity or certainty of Star predictions? where is the verity of Astrology? as
if he had obtained an absolute conquest, over Astrology and Astrologers: And
therefore concluding these his reasons to be most invincible, and not able to
be answered by Astrologers, he answers them himself his own way, in the
behalf of Astrologers. It may be (says he) they will read us a lecture of
difference from magnitudes and motions, which answer I must confess suits just
well enough with the question, neither of them both being fully to any purpose;
but to be farther satisfied herein, let him look Ptolomy, lib. 3. Look
Ptolomy, Lib. 3. cap. 7. of his Quadripartite, to know the reasons of the
differences in Twins.
chap. 7. of his Quadripartite, where he shall be clearly taught the reasons of
differences in Twins, and convinced of his erroneous cavil, that they are born
at the same instant of time; it is not from magnitudes or motions, though
somewhat might be said thereon, and that so much, as that I believe would
trouble him to answer; but let that pass, and hear how he questions and
answers for and against Astrolologers, if so (says he) if the be less then
the earth according to Keckerman at least twenty times, and the rest of the
Planets below the, as twenty seven times less then the Earth, and twenty two
times, how then shall these at any posture, at one and the same time effect or
signify any thing to all the world? it is the opinion indeed (and with very
much reason) of all the Mathematitians and Astrologers that ever writ, that
these three Planets under the Sun are less then the earth, See Ptolomy,
Albotegnius, Alfraganus, and Tycho.
but amongst the most learned of them there is much dispute of the certain
magnitude thereof; but how equivalent this querke is against Astrology, is
wonderful! A candle is not able to give light to a bowl, or any thing as big
as a peck, because it is so much bigger then the candle; when we know and
commonly see that it will give light to a great spacious room, a thousand
times bigger then it self; (a strong reason indeed) we know and see, that the
influence of a Planet extends it self ten thousand times beyond its visible
light to our sight; but to come closer to the matter, has not the, and,
their,, dexter and sinister, and, to all and every part or utmost parts of the
heavens (that are millions of times bigger then both them and the earth)
according to their several motions? and has not these aspects as much power
and influence, as a perpendicular? and whereas he asks, what is the
difference of natures in Twins? when the superior Planets are proportionably
bigger then the Earth, but sure he never read that part of Ptolomy, which I
before cited, concerning the several significators in Twins, which is the only
cause and reason that can be given for his frivolous quirke: but as he
questions to bring his bald arguments about; so he answers his own questions in
hopes to confirm them; If (says he) this is because of the swift external
violent motion of the Stars, why then I again demand, how the Stars can have
time to make any distinct impression by any particular influence on one borne,
especially on one who perhaps may lie in the mouth of the womb partly borne,
partly unborne; for a quarter or half an hour, or many hours; when the motion
of the Zodiac is 60 times 60 miles in an hour, which is 60 miles complete in
one minute.

But to answer to this weak cavil, I shall say no more, but that though the
Heavens be so swift, yet in comparison of us it is not so much as an inch is to
10000 miles; for we see by daily experience, that the (who is also by the same
violence (contrary to his own natural course) carried in like manner) does not
as to us move at all in two or three hours; for mark how small a thing in a
Dial gives this 60. miles in a minute, so that this does no whit at all hinder
the influence of the Stars, if they should be hurried ten times swifter; for
this great course is in relation to the circumference of the heavens, not of
the earth: besides we know that those signs that are of longer ascensions, as
are,,,,,,, are sometimes an hour and a half, nay perhaps two hours ascending,
or in the first House, and so consequently may be in any House.

And for his long continuance of the Infant in the mouth of the womb, this may
somewhat refell, but there is no Astrologer that will take that part of a
birth, or the beginning of the mothers travel, to be the ground or Radix of
the infants Nativity; When the Radix of a nativity is properly to be taken.
but that instant in which He or She is perfectly separated from the womb,
and entered this elementary world, since no man can properly call that a birth,
which is but half a expelled, or but half perfected, when also sometimes the
Infant may draw back again.

So that these frivolous kind of cavillings, is neither available nor indeed
any thing in the least to the controversy in dispute; yet Mr. Homes is willing
to help Astrologers to answer these his feeble questions, with far weaker
expressions; and to say the truth, ignorance it self, for says he, If
Astrologers will plead and thing to help themselves herein, from the slownesse
of other motions of the Stars, that are natural to them, viz. that the fixed
stars, move with so slow a motion from North to South back again, as that
their courses are not finished in less then 7000. years; Now I would very
feign know of any rational man, how this answer of his in the behalf of
Astrologers, is able to avail them a rush, or himself in his purpose, since
they are also hurried with the like violence as aforesaid, every 24. hours once
about the earth? but as all these his quirks are brought into his advantage (as
he thinks,) so the advantage he strives to gain hereby, he may brag of, as much
as of the former; for all this his gain is but the opportunity of this
question, viz. How then can any age since the beginning of the world have
experence, what the conjunction of the Stars may produce? This is a great
Conquest indeed, but how slender an Artist he herein renders himself, let the
judicious judge, since it is most certain that these stars we call fixed, move
not at all; Ergo, are nominated fixed, for they move unanimously together in
their sphere, which is about 7000. years finishing its course, not the Stars;
but suppose they do move, yet they move not by several motions, as the one
being flower or swifter then another, for they are all alike distant each from
other continually, and if these come not to aspect nor of the Planets; yet the
Planets come to configuration with them, as comes in configuration of them
once in 29. years some odd months and days; in 12 years, in three years, in
one year or twelve months; and in the like time or there abouts, the in 28
days and some odd hours. I hope then this experience may be learned in a far
shorter time then 7 or 8000 years, and if the motions of the Planets are not
exactly for ever calculated by Astronomers in former ages, and that of late to
our hands, I would feign Mr. Homes would do them better; and since these is so
apparently and vulgarly known, it is sufficient ground for any one to take the
exact position of the heavens, either in Twins births or any others, without
the error that these motions he speaks of can cause, which indeed is none at
all. Wherefore if these assertions of his, be not weaker then all his former
cavils, as also most apparently inconsistent with what he would feign prove, I
leave to the learned and judicious herein to judge, and hasten to his remaining
cavils.

SECT. III. Wherein his endeavors to prove Astrology of no truth or
certainty, as also it is rules and principles, are themselves of less truth, or
ground, nay and indeed senseless.
HIs third Argument against Astrology is, to prove the Maxims, Theorems,
Axioms and Canons of the Art, inconsistent with truth or foundation; but first
he denies absolutely any such ( viz. ground or principles) at all to be in the
rules of Astrology, but with what apparent falsehood, malice, and invective
wickedness, this is done, shall appear to the world by these examples
following, being some few questions and resolutions, which by my own experience
I can against all malicious adversaries affirm to be most punctually true;
wherefore I have thought good here to devulge them to the world, that such
envious carpers at this most true Art, may be for ever silenced, or at least
that their perverseness may be apparently and vulgarly known in their colors;
but see how inveterately they traduce it, notwithstanding milions of the like
examples, which they know not otherwise what to say for themselves, unanimously
(this surpassing the natural capacities of their profound judgments, when they
so clearly see themselves by experience convinced) they presently say, it is
impossible this should be true! sure this is very strange? nay I am confident
this could not be done by Art! this is a plain dealing with the Devil! it is
witchcraft! and the like simple and malicious censures, or rather scandals
hereon, but to the business intended.

Die 10. Ian. 1649 10. h. 0. m. P. M.. a... ad... Shall I receive my money? and
when?


A Gentleman a very good friend of mine (having expected some money from an
Uncle of his, a Fathers brother, and being disappointed two several returns of
the Post; being therefore doubtful of the receipt thereof) propounded unto me
this question. Whereupon I erected this Sceame, it being the punctual time of
his question.

I find here but two degrees ascending, and that of the sign, which according
unto the rules of some Astrologians, and indeed all that ever I met with) ought
not to be judged on; yet I agree not always with them in this point, nor in
many more besides this. The reason then I take this question to be sufficiently
radical, is, because it so exactly discribeth the Querents body, together with
his marks; besides, the question concerned not the ascendant, but the second
House, and there is 24. degrees ascending, etc.

But to be short, I find here significator of the Querents Uncle (from whom
this money in question is expected) as being lord of the third from the fourth,
yet the sixth in the figure, he is located in the Querents second, intimating
therefore his intention and willingness to perform the Querents desire; which
judgment was the more confirmed by being in with, Lady of the Querents second;
as also lord of the seventh, which is the Uncles second in a to the Querents
second House; and separating from a of and immediately applying to a of in the
second, both being friendly aspects and principle significators, (though she
separated not from and applied to, yet they being both fortunes, and her
application was to in the querents, 2d) I judged as abovesaid, that his Uncle
had a great willingness to perform his desire, and that he should receive the
money he expected, of the which I was the more confirmed, by reason I found
disposed of by and that within a fortnight after the time of the question; the
reason I nominated just that time, was, for that and lackt just two degrees of
the perfect aspect; indeed as she is in a moveable sign, might denote but
days; yet by reason is in a fixed sign, which might signify months, or
years (but as the ancients teach, a te et a scientia) I took the medium
therefore of these extremes, which was weeks; which accordingly happened, and
not till then: for on the 25th. day of the same month he received it,
notwithstanding by a Letter presently after the question, a sooner time was
nominated, and after that, not above four days before the day I nominated,
came a messenger from his Uncle, about other business to him, and yet brought
it not, which did seem very strange to the Querent. This Gentleman* viz. the
Querent, till his acquaintance with me, had but a weak belief of Astrologies
legality or verity; I believe he is at this present in this Town, and can
justify this for a truth.

But because some ignorant traducers of this Art, do affirm that Astrologers
will never undertake (nay and that they cannot) to resolve the querents doubts,
without he comes to them with a great belief of their skill, and of the power
of the Art; I will here give you my judgment on two figures, propounded not
only by unbelievers, but enemies of Astrology; which were propounded by way
of discourse, and in their arguing with me of the verity of Astrology.

The occasion of this Question was thus; upon some conference, of the verity of
this Art of Astrology we here undertake in this small Treatise to Vindicate: a
Gentlewoman of very long acquaintance with me, being then in company was very
invective against it, insomuch she would no wise believe any one could resolve
her any thing she should demand, and wondered I would maintain (in the least)
the verity thereof; whereupon I desired her to propound any question to me;
whereupon she told me that she was confident if there were any verity therein,
yet I could not resolve her question; her reason was, because no Astrologer
(she told me) would undertake to resolve an unbelieving querent: so that I
desired then the willinger to be demanded some Question, the rather, for that I
was desirous to convince her, of this weak opinion; but to be short, she at
length after much entreaty, propounded this Question, as follows.

. 19. December 1649. 4. h. 30. m. P. M. a... ad..


Shall I receive the money due from the Parliament?

I find here the significatrix of the querent in disposed of by and he lord of
the 11; whereupon I told her, she depended much upon a friend (or so in
pretense) which might happily be a soldier, which I was the more confident of,
by reason I saw going straight to the of, but because she separated last from
the of lord of the second; and so transferring the light of to, I told her I
feared her friend was not very faithful unto her, but did underhand seek to
defraud her of what she expected of the Parliament, or of as much as in him lay
he could do: I found also significator of the Parliament disposed of by, as
also lord of her second, separated from a of, I acquainted her they had lately
promised her fair, but still (I told her) I did believe her martial friend
did obstruct their good willingness unto her, and because I saw so very near
the aspect of, and that he was disposed of by, I told her I was confident
(notwithstanding all the fair promises (of which she confessed she did
plentiously abound) the Parliament had lately made unto her) he or some man or
men signified by would be her hinderance, so that she should no wise receive
the money she expected of them, which was the more certainly confirmed by his
being in to the cuspe of the second.

She thereupon confessed that the friend signified by (whom I described) was
indeed very forward (to outward appearance) to do for her, but she had indeed
(of late) found him very perfidious, but yet she said she could not be
persuaded but the intentions of the Parliament were real: but not long after (
viz. within three months, as wanted three days of the of) came forth the
Engagement, which her husband refusing to take, was forced to lose his debt:
and who was the authors of the Engagement? which when she also found so
marvellously to happen, she was so converted from being an antagonist or enemy
to Astrology, that she became a great lover and admirer thereof; often times
since blaming her former rashness in condemning what she was ignorant of.

But another example that the querents unbelief, is no whit material to the
perverting of the Artists judgment, I will also here give you; for if the
question be indeed radical, the Artist having any skill, and not deviating from
his rules, he shall seldom fail.

And this is of an incredulous Gentlewoman also; her Question was, of her
husband being absent.

. 17. Oct. 1648. 9. h. o. m. A. M.. a.. in.. ad..


Where is my husband? And when will he return?

This Question was propounded by a Lady very unbelieving in the Art of
Astrology, insomuch that if possible, she exceeded the former.

I find here significatrix of the absent husband, and located in the twelfth
house of the figure; whereupon I told her, her husband was in Prison (but
before (because ascended) I described his shape, as also the marks of his
body) who when she heard this, with much admiration began to tell me, he was
indeed in Prison, and was such a manner of man exactly as I had described him;
but she could never have believed this could have been told her, which was the
reason she would say nothing to me of his condition; whereupon she was very
desirous then to know farther, viz. when she should see him; but first I
finding separated from (by a aspect) lord of the ninth, yet the third, from the
seventh his ascendant; and in of lord of the tenth in the figure, and then
immediately transferring the light of both by a to, the absents significatrix,
I accquainted her that a brother or kinsman of his, should make means to some
officer in great authority, or the General (for it could not then be the King)
which should be the means of his enlargement, He was then himself a Prisoner.
and for that these aspects were so near the time, that the question was
demanded, I told the querent I was confident her husband was already or should
suddenly be enlarged, and be relieved also with money; which I saw also by his
being in combustion of he was in want of; as for the time when she should see
him, I find very near the ascendant, and the same time she comes to the cuspe
thereof, the comes to the same degree (or very near it) of the proper ascendant
of London, I told her I was confident when and came to these places, he would
be with her, which was the 25. day of the same month, being Wednesday, which
accordingly happened; and when I came to the speech of him, he confessed all
that I had related concerning him was to the letter true; viz. That he was in
Prison ten weeks, and was by the means of his brothers power with the General
(which was then Sir Thomas Fairfax) he had his liberty, and that his brother
did (for his necessary occasions) furnish him with 20. l. I could here insert
many the like examples, but since they are so frequently divulged in other
Treatises, I hold it here no wise necessary longer to insist; but Mr Homes I
pray, if one had asked whether a man had lived with his wife or no? or whether
he loved another man's wife? might not these questions have been resolved as
well as any of these above mentioned?

But let us see how he can prove the rules or principles of the Art groundless
and of no verity; and first (he says) because of the foresaid various
varieties and uncertainties of the Stars, both in their own motions, and in
comparison with others, but you have also before received a confutation of these
assertions of his, and therefore this his first reason is not one jot
equivalent to his purpose.

Secondly, Because no man knows the particular qualities of the Stars, but
this is but one Doctors opinion, and therefore I may as well, and with as good
reason and strength of argument deny his words, and not show him to the
contrary; but this were to deceive my Reader Homes like. And with this word
only he cannot be willing to content himself, but he must strive to confirm it
by his false allegations; No Artist yet ever undertook to speak of more then
the seven Planets, and some few nominated fixed stars, of some few several
magnitudes; with what slight expressions are these his scandalous allegations
vented, Look Ptolomeus Copernicus. etc.
when it is clear and apparent to the world, that all those Stars from the
first magnitude down to the sixth magnitude, and even to the cloudy and occult
Stars as they call them, are made clear unto us, and the whole world, And for
their natures, look Ptolomy, 1. Quadripartite, Cap. 8. Stadius, Sconerus, and
Lucas Gauricus
whose works are so apparently extant, and yet so openly traduced and
scandalized; what will he not then endeavor to hide that is not so apparent?
he does not only deny here neither so apparent a truth, but affirms as
palpable an untruth in his very next words; they leave out says he, or are
ignorant of millions of Stars, that are neither named nor known. What nonsense
and simplicity does this his hatred aganist Astrology cause him to be guilty
of? I would very fain know how he came to know these millions of Stars that he
says were never yet known or named? he knows that that was never known,
sure he did not learn this great skill in Bredstreet, truly these ridiculous
whimsies, makes me believe he is not well in his senses, since he was in the
street aforesaid, and causes me also extremely to Pity the poor Pastor.

Thirdly, Thousands of Stars cannot be so much as seen a minute together, as
the Philosophers confess in their discourse of Via lactea, the milkie way in
the heavens, to be seen in a most starry night, especially in Winter. Before
he was up with his millions, now he is come down to his thousands, I am
confident at the last he will descend to his unites; yet here also may his
Reader see how he strives to deceive and delude him with vain conceits, and to
take effect the better, he fathers them on the Philosophers, I believe his
Philosophers will descend to be some whimsical Poets. For the Poets indeed
fained that on a day Ganimedes who (as they say) was Jupiters Cup Bearer, Of
Via lactea; or the milkie way.
carrying his Lord a sack Posset or a cup of Milk, stumbled in in the way at
some great fixed Star (or at the paw of the Bear) and let fall all his liquor,
which ever since has caused the heavens to be in that place white or cloudish
even in the most clear nights, but perhaps if Canis major and minor had been
called on, Then M. Homes had not had this Via lactea to have prated on.
it had been otherwise; I may then with as good reason or ground conclude this
story, as true as his allegation, that they are an innumerable company of small
stars that cannot be discerned or distinguished; but I would very fain
understand this paradox, that they cannot be seen, and yet they are known to
be an innumerable company of Stars, sure he has a very discerning eye, and
rather one surpassing his judgment, for he but even now, knows more then all
people ever yet knew, and now he sees what was never yet seen: but these or
any such whimsical expressions or arguments, are enough to fright the ignorant
from the belief, either in the verity or legality of Astrology; he cares not
how little he troubles them with reason or truth.

Fourthly, Because all the Stars do shine on the earth at once jointly and
promiscuously, so that they that are under them cannot by any rule from nature
know what influences shall be predominant in their effects. But to answer this
frivolous objection in every particular by plain proof, were too tedious here
to relate, since for the instruction of the students herein, there has been
whole volumes writ, to whom I shall refer all that require farther satisfaction
then what I here do say, which is only thus, that to determine either general
or particular effects, it is not always necessary to consider all the Stars,
for some never are seen in our horizon, and of those that are, half are ever
under the earth, and of those that are above the earth, many are in such places
of the heaven, as they are of little or no use in our ordinary practice:
Wherefore he most weakly asserteth this reason, since as I said before, their
virtues and natures are so plainly delivered us by the learned; and thus with
such like frivolous and weak arguments and suppositions, he endeavors to
confirm his objection against Astrology and its rules, as also that the
complexions of people may be altered from their childhood to their manhood;
and that there are causes between us and the Stars to alter their influence;
and that Astrologers depend upon Clocks and Dials to know the ground of their
works, which Clocks and Dials may fail, and so consequently needs must the
Astrologer: and such simple cavils not knowing what indeed to object, for
certainly all that knows any thing in the world, must needs judge this kind of
arguing to be merely either for want of matter, or to patch up a simple
discourse: for what can hereby in the least, or all that he does farther rabble
hereon be said, to prove Astrologicall rules uncertain; surely this is no more
to the purpose, or to our dispute in hand, then for me to say I will, when one
asks me if Astrology be lawful or no? or any such ridiculous answer: But
since in the subject of this preceding discourse, all these, together with the
rest of his sophistications, are already answered; I hold it most vain longer
here to dwell, but hasten to his fourth and last argument against Astrology:
for our dispute is not to decide quicks and quillets, but answer those
objections that are brought to prove the vanity and falsenesse of Astrologicall
Predictions.

SECT. IV. Wherein he thinks the ground of the Art wholly shaken and
overthrown, by affirming it merely imaginary, viz. the ninth and tenth sphere,
and in them the Zodiac, therein proves and shows his own ignorance the more
apparently manifest.
BUt what does this sophistical cavil avail him, to the subversion of the
verity or certainty of Astrology, when the motions and effects of the Stars
are known? but even as well may he condemn the rules, and precepts of all Arts
which are also gathered by experience and reason, as Astrology, because the
signs of the Zodiac are devised by men; but the reason they attribute these
names, as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and the like, to the constellations of the
heaven is by reason of their forms and particular virtues expressed under
these figures; Ptolomie, 1. Quadripartite.
for Ptolomy has delivered the nature of the particular Stars in them by
themselves, as also their particular complexions and efficacies, as also the
Houses, exaltations, triplicities, terms and faces, and other dignities, of
the signs, as they follow the nature of the Planets: and since these are
known, to what end are all these his cavils whether there be a ninth or tenth
sphere? for let there be none at all (as he says) nor any thing called a
Zodiac (as he would feign persuade the world) yet since clear experience and
practice evinceth him, as also demonstration that there are such constellations
(call them what you will) his sophistical weak argument will no wise serve
his turn; for I may as well deny there is a Dog a Bear, both lesser and bigger
a Swan, a Crown, a Wagoner and the like, as he denies there is not a Bull a
Ram or a Lion in the heavens, when it is not desired literally (by any
Astrologer) to be understood. Wherefore I leave him here to bait Vrsa major
with Canis major and minor, till I am of his weak opinion, or till he can
persuade any judicious soul to believe this his doctrine: and hasten to
conclude this our discourse.

CHAP. V. Wherein the confutation of the objections that are brought for
Astrology is examined and refelled.
THere remains nothing more to be answered of Mr Homes his discourse, but his
confutations (as he calls them) of the objections that are brought for
Astrology; which indeed is already refelled in what has been already said;
having consideration to the definition of Astrology, and the Tenants of
Astrologers: but because I will not give him occasion to carpe or brag of my
leaving him here, I shall go along with him in every particular of his
remaining cavils; that so the reader may see on what small grounds he builds up
his tower of opposition against Astrology, and what small reason he has to
carpe thereat.

First he says Melancthon stands not for Astrology; Chap. 1. Sect. 6. Chap.
2. Sect. 2. of this discourse.
but you have heard before how he also thus falsely abused St. Augustine and
Galen; but admit neither of all these were one jot for it, but positively
against it; yet will not this (if granted) make a whit against Astrology;
since he will not deny but these are men, and humanum est errare, man is
subject to frailty and error, and therefore is not Astrology absolutely
condemned hereby; since already you have heard it no wise condemned by the word
of God, Chap. 3. of this Treatise.
but the effects of the Stars clearly thereby manifested; yet for the answer of
this his delusive quirke, I shall only send him to Melancthon to be better
perused, (which here to clear would be too too tedious) and then he will not
thus inconsiderately wrong him, as the other two St. Augustine and Galen, the
reason whereof was also a negligent perusal of them.

Secondly, to gainsay (as he thinks) Astrology, he says, that some make a
great matter of the Star that was seen at the birth of Christ: But I answer,
that this appearance of this Star makes neither for nor against Astrology,
since as before you have heard Divine matters are not to be judged by natural
causes; Chap. 4. Sect. 1 and Chap. 4. Sect. 2.
and all the world knows what manner of Birth Christ's was, viz. of a Virgin,
and without the help of a man, this is rather a Miracle then a Natural Birth,
and Miracles also are before excluded from the power of the Stars: Therefore
his quirkes of the nature of it, as also whether it be natural or
supernatural, or whether it belong to Meteorologie or Astrology, must needs
fall: and the wise men might well enough, (who could distinguish between a
natural and a supernatural Star) know it foretold the Birth of the Messiah;
when by all foregoing Prophesies the like and same was Predicted and pointed
out.

But to come to the objections Logical, which he says are brought in defense
of Astrology and his answers, the first is, that God made the Stars to be
signs, Genesis 1.14. therefore the knowledge of the signification of these signs
are lawful: his answer is, God made them to be signs of natural effects or
events, not of arbitrary and moral, that depend on man's will. Wherefore here
first the reader may take notice that Mr Homes does now (contrary to what he
has all this while denied) confess the Stars to be signs of natural effects
and events, Nota been.
and whereas he denies them to be signs of arbitrary and moral events
depending on the will, he gains little of the Astrologer, who as you have
already heard acknowledges the same. Where is then the confutation of
Astrology, or the objections brought for it? it is the abuse of Astrology he
means, yet me thinks a wise man should have distinguished between the
lawfulness of an Art, and the abuse thereof; shall any man be counted
rational that shall deny Religion to be, or that there is none lawful, because
there are abuses therein? this is a strange way of condemning an Art.

To handle here every particular objection and his answers hereon, would be too
tedious, and indeed but vain, and to little purpose, since he can say no more
then what has been already (if rightly understood) answered: for to insist
upon every vain quillet (as is most of his discourse) were an Herculean
labor, and to render my self more weak then the propounders or authors
thereof; wherefore with this text I conclude; Prove. 26.4. only I shall here
make some Queries to the judicious Reader.

My fist Quere is, whether the best of Arts and Sciences has not been in one
age or other ill thought on, and by some ignorant therein, most vildly
tratraduced, as also the very word of God it self?

Secondly, Whether the denying or writing against an Art, be a sufficient
condemnation thereof, or proof of the illegality of it? (which to conclude or
grant, were to deny the Scripture, since it also has by Atheists and such like
been censured.)

Thirdly, Whether the warrant from Scripture, the Fathers, the Learned, and
experience; be not a sufficient warrant for the lawfulness of an Art?

Fourthly, Whether Astrology be not thus (if with diligence thou have perused
this discourse) warranted and up-held.

Fifthly, Whether it may not then be practiced by the best of Gods people.

Sixthly, Whether an Art that has the word of God, experience and reason on
it is side, be a Doctrine of Devils or Diabolical?

And seventhly and lastly, whether such ignorant traducers of so noble and
worthy an Art, are not Diabolical teachers, and deserve exemplary punishment,
thus to deny and gainsay truth.

But whosoever is delighteed in such like discourses, let him peruse that exquisite
piece of Sir Christopher Heydon, lately published; wherein Astrology is
clearly proved by Mathematical Demonstrations.

And likewise to that short (but full) piece, of Magic and Astrology
Vindicated, newly published: Both sold at the Angel in Cornhill.

For truly I know not whether I have rendered my self more weak in the
Vindicating of so apparent a a truth, then these puny Antagonists thereunto
have in striving to Eclipse the glorious splendour thereof, in so much that let
them henceforward, (or any one else) persist in this vain way of condemning
truth; I shall take as slight notice thereof, as of a Dogs barking at a stranger
whom he knows not: for did they know what they condemn, they would not render
themselves so ridiculous.

I thought here to have concluded this Treatise, but as I was upon closing,
appears a Pamphlet from one John Raunce, who had formerly put out a
Declaration against Astrology, yet declared himself more simple therein then
at this time I will make known, yet because in my reply thereunto, he (as well
as some others that was not well acquained with his scope or intention therein,
or what small reason he had for the writing of his simple Pamphlet) found fault
with some words I had therein against him; I thought good here, both for his
and their better satisfaction, to give them the reasons of my expressions
against him. Yet in a Letter I sent him the same reasons which I here relate in
answer to a part of a Letter I received from him, wherein he has these words,
Your Pamphlet is nothing to the purpose, being so full of expressions of hatred
against me; to which I say, I returned him this answer, viz. that this was the
worst I was confident he could say of it, yet if he better considered it, he
would find it deserved not altogether this rash condemnation; A Vindication of
the Authors reply to Raunces Declaration against Astrology.
for, first I said nothing but what I proved: and secondly, I play with him at
his own weapon; I will begin with the latter, and would know of him, if I have
not as good liberty to call him an instrument and child of the Devil, as he
calls the professors of Astrology, instruments of the Devil, Page 1. line
11. of his scandalous Pamphlet, and if in any place I call him Idiot (as in the
third Page of my reply to his Declaration) it is for concluding his cavil as
granted, before he either brought proof or reason for it; and in so doing, let
any one or himself judge, what he rendereth himself to be: and in my sixth
Page perhaps I call him Dunce; I pray is it without cause, when he tells me
he was sometimes a Practitioner in Astrology, and yet he is so ignorant of
the rules thereof, as that he imagines them to be Diabolical? upon which
consideration (as I remember) in the same place, I call him Shallow-braines,
and also at the lower end of the Page Fool, to condemn what he neither
understood nor apprehended, which if he had, he would have showed by his
arguments (which was no wise to the purpose, but only his own conceits and
words) wherefore I thought good to acquaint the Reader herewith, that since
nothing is therein spoken without reason or proof, they might not be so
transported with negligence, to conclude or condemn my reply without better
consideration then a mere slight view thereof.

And since in that Letter he sent me, he challenges either my self or any, or
all that profess the Art of Astrology, to convince him by argument or reason;
he may perhaps expect I should say something to his latter discourse (which is
more weak and simple then his former) which since I have been of late
acquainted with his quality, I shall not trouble my self further, nor indeed my
Reader but with this word, I leave it to him self to make application or
interpretation.
Ne suitor ultra crepidam, let not the Cobbler go beyond the last, or let no man
meddle with what is beyond his reach or capacity; yet lest I should have given
the vaine-Coxcombe cause of boasting by my silence. Aliquid latet quod non
patet.
I have by the last Carrier sent him an answer (in a Box) to his simple paper,
with a Letter, a Copy of which that the vulgar may not be ignorant of, as also
that they may not be led away by the weak cavils of so sophistical a Jack; I
here commend unto their view. For indeed there is an old proverb yet true
(though a homely one) which causes me take no more notice of him, being of that
quality he is of, Stir in a -- and it will stinck the worse. For had I had the
relation of him before my Reply to his nonsense, I had never undervalued my
self to have appeared his Antagonist, but had buried both him and his brat in
perpetual silence; what he is and was, you shall here have, as was sent to Mr.
Lilly by a Gentleman that knows his former and present way of living.

A Copy of a Letter sent by me, to John Raunce.
Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. Nemo potest artem judicare, nisi
Artifex.

Ne suitor ultra crepidam. William Ramesey.
Die 4. December. 1650.
A Copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Lilly, by a Gentleman in the Country.
SIR,
I Doubt not but you have seen a tract written by one Raunce of Chippin Wickham
where I live, which Raunce did formerly profess himself to have been a servant
unto you, but you denied it before my self and some Aldermen which were with
me, at which he was much troubled; the tract is against Astrology, but it is
very wittily answered by one Mr. William Ramesey, and that you may the better
know this Raunce, I shall tell you what he has been, and what he is, he has
been a Shoemaker, and I think he did twice break, and had he not been of the
Gentlecraft, Mr. Ramesey had wronged him extremely in calling him Mr. Raunce;
he confesses he has often spoken with the Devil and that is very likely; for
oftentimes being at work he would suddenly hit shoe and tools out of the
window, and run the Devil knew whither for the space of one, two or three weeks
some times together, but not thriving by Cobling, he came to Wickham and taught
Children to write and read, and after that he practiced of a sudden Physic and
Chyrurgery, and so continues, but a pitiful ignorant sneaking fellow; a fellow
that goes not to Church, cried up by some sort of people, especially the weaker
and more factious sort, one of Sedgewicks tribe as Mr. Ramesey styles him; one
which to my knowledge, being to discourse of Astrology, could not give any
distinction of it, but only that it was a speaking of the Stars: some of his
Companions and he are about to answer Mr. Ramesey, if they do, I desire all
Artists should take notice what he is, and judge of him accordingly.

Thus with my hearty loving respects to you, I rest your loving friend. J. B.

FINIS.

