THE Armies Remembrancer.

WHEREIN They are presented with a Sight of their Sins and Dangers.

And also with a Scripture Expedient For their Preservation.

REVEL. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and Repent.

Bernard in Dedic. Ecclae. Sermon. 3. Non miremini fratres, si durius loqui
videor,
Quia Veritas, neminem palpat.
BY A Cordial Friend to the Kingdoms welfare. Rr.

LONDON, Printed for Stephen Bowtell. 1649.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS LORD FAIRFAX, General of the Parliaments Forces, and
to the General Council of War.
Much Honored Sirs,
HAving been a sorrowful observer of your Unworthy walking, both formerly and
of late; And taking notice of Gods displeasure against you for it, so as not to
be inhappied by a faithful Admonisher, or Remembrancer of your sinner and
dangers. I durst not, finding the Holy Ghost bringing this to my remembrance,
to become a Remembrancer to you, be disobedient unto that Heavenly Vision, by
consulting with flesh and blood.

Our blessed Savior tells us, that in some cases, if men should prove stones
and hold their peace, the stones should prove men and immediately cry out,
Luke, 19.40. And truly did you but know me, as well as I do my self, you
would look upon me as such a miraculous Monitor, One, the string of whose
tongue is unloosed, that never spoke in this kind before. But not upon the
sight of the murder of Craesus, but of the utmost crysis of danger, wherein
you have involved your selves and the Kingdom.

Though the Scene be altered, the Court turned into a Council of War, and
the Court Parasites vanished away, yet am I jealous over you with a Godly
jealousy, that it is your great unhappiness not to be so free from Flatterers
and Flatteries as I could wish. But not knowing how to give flattering titles,
least in so doing, my Maker should soon take me away. Job. 32.22. I have
declined in what I humbly present your Lordship, and your Council of War in
what follows (as your faithful Remembrancer.) Not only those affirmative
flatteries, which are too often sounded in your ears by way of encouragement
in this your present undertaking; but also that Negative flattery, consisting
in the silencing, or extenuating the sins and miscarriages of those whom by
the Law of Love we are bound to deal faithfully withal.

Your Lordship and Council well know, that in Fortifications that Engeneer is
a Traitor that conceales or lessens a places weakness, and he is no less to
be condemned that shall with a negative flattery, conceal or extenuate the
sins and miscarriages of such persons, as may endanger the public safety.

I have therefore, in the integrity and sincerity of my heart, for prevention
of those miseries and calamities that are like to come upon your selves and the
Kingdom, by your means, endeavored by a sound conviction to make you
sensible that there are in you, even in you, sins against the Lord your God,
of which you are guilty, either actually, or accessarily, 2 Epist. John. 11.
And because they are such as have been committed in the sight of the Sun,
before all; therefore I have remembered and reproved you before all, that others
may fear, 1 Timothy, 5.20. Wherein as I come not out against you, shod with
indignation and scorn, being pleased to pour contempt upon you, as you know
who, (Sedg) nor yet with Lilburnian language, but with a spirit of meekness
to restore you.

So do I hope for, and earnestly desire your favorable acceptance and candid
interpretation, Beseeching your patience to read over, and ponder, what I have
sincerely and seriously propounded for yours and the public good, and your
pardon for any un-intended failings of mine in my expressions. And having by
prayer put this blunt weapon into an Omnipotent hand, that can make it cut
indeed: I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus, that be would grant
you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with all might by
the spirit in the inward man, that so you may conquer your present temptations,
and be recovered out of Satan's snare, into which he has brought you by
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, even so prays, again and
again.

Your most humble Servant in the Lord, Rr

THE ARMIES REMEMBRANCER.
Being under a sad Apprehension, of the great indignation, and displeasure of
our God, who manifests himself to be a Consuming fire, not only by permitting,
the beginning, but the continuance of these cruel, and bloody civil Wars
amongst us. Being also much affected with a tender sense, of the glory of our
gracious God, and the honor of his blessed Gospel, which suffers much by
your present miscarriages, and being truly touched with an unfeigned desire of
yours, and the Kingdoms welfare, and preservation, which are exceedingly
endangered, by your unsaintlike practices, having also a clear vision of that
confusion, that is like to come upon you, and this miserable Kingdom by your
means, except speedily prevented.

I am compelled to break through many intrinsecall and extrinsecall
obstructions,, and though a very unable and unworthy instrument, to undertake
so great a service. Yet in the strength of the Lord Jesus Christ my Redeemer,
to lay before you in all humility, sincerity, and fidelity, what, I hope, he by
his holy spirit, has suggested unto my most sad and serious thoughts.

But before I begin, I must necessarily do these two things. First, endeavor
to remove, whatever may occasion any prejudice against me, or the ensuing
matter. And then Secondly, open my Commission before you, that gives me warrant
for this my enterprise.

That I may do the former, I must at this time walk rather by the President of
David, then the Precept of Solemon his Son. His precept is, Let another man
praise thee, and not thy self, Prove. 27.2. But his Father practices to prevent
a prejudice that was taken at his person, which was, to praise himself, and
boast of his valor, and magnanimity, 1 Samuel 19.36. whose example I must so
far follow, in the commendation of my self to you, being a stranger, as I may
present the integrity and sincerity of my affections toward your persons
(though not your sins) as you are Soldiers and Saints by profession, which I
have not only testified, before God and man in my prayers and Petitions for
your Modellizing, but could produce many comfortable evidences that I have upon
Record, of Gods hearing my prayers for you, when you have been engaged about
his work in the field. And that you may not look upon me as an Apostate
Roundhead, in referrence to your selves. I could produce witnesses, that could
testify, that I have not been wanting in showing my respects, and affections
even since your first grand disobedience (of which I shall humbly mind you by
and by) All which and more, I could speak to this end, that I might prepare
your hearts and ears to receive without prejudice, what I have to propound, as
coming from a Christian, a Friend one that loves you, and desires your welfare.

And now in the next place, that I may show you my Commission, to bear me out
in this my enterprise, besides that call that I have from your selves in your
Remonstrance p. 4. The public affairs in your hands being brought to the
utmost Crisis of danger, calls upon every man to contribute what help he can.

Behold I have it written in such a book, as is more authentic then yours.
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise, rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin, on him. The morality of which
precept in regard of its equity and necessity, being of more force under the
Gospel, as the bonds of the Brotherhood, are now more strong and spiritual.
Besides which, I find in the Gospel, that we are not only to mourn for other
men's sins, Philip. 3.18. but to reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. And that by the
communion of Saints, we are not only to exhort and admonish one another, Romans
15.14. But that it is the duty of all that are spiritual, to restore those
that are overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6.4. That they may be set in joint again
after a dislocation.

Now that you may be restored, and set in joint again, I shall present you with
a Scripture expedient, by which you may be recovered out of that dangerous
condition in which you have involved your selves and the whole Kingdom, in
walking by providence without a precept.

And because that it is more then evident, that by those great Victories and
Successes wherein God has used you to be instruments for the Kingdom. Your
hearts with Vzziahs, are lifted up to your own destruction, (2 Chronicles. 26.16.)
and of the Kingdom: Meddling with those matters and affairs, for which you have
no more Commission, then he had for the Priests Office.

I shall present you with a History out of the truest Chronicle, wherein, if
you will but weigh it, as I have done, you shall find, That which may cure you
of your spiritual Tympany. As first, That success in Civil war, to
prevail over our Brethren by the Sword, is not always a sign of the
Conquerours Saintship.

Secondly, That Conquerours that have found good success in the field, are
very backward to believe that they are Sinners, And

Thirdly, That a sound Conviction of it, that there are sins in a prevailing
party over their Brethren, is an excellent expedient, to alter cruel purposes
and intentions, and beget a brotherly union.

Now because that I desire nothing more then that you may parallel that Army
in the History, both in the change of your purposes, and desisting from your
practices, as they did upon a sound Conviction. I shall a little amplify the
following History, and become not only your Remembrancer, but Observator also,
for want of a Better: Because that our Odeds, our Prophets that should come to
you with the Message I now bring you; are like to have but little acceptance;
Because you are not only apt to question their Commission, whether lawful
Ministers, but musing as you use, to conclude, it might come from
self-interests, and by-respects.

To detain you no longer therefore from this story; you shall find it, 2 Chronicles.
28.6. There we read of a cruel war which ended in a bloody slaughter, made
upon the people of Judah, by Pekah the King of Israel (who all came out of the
loins of Jacob, and were all one Kingdom, till through sin separated and rent
asunder) by whom was slain in Judah, one hundred and twenty thousand in one
day, which were all valiant men, because they had forsaken the Lord God of
their fathers, verse. 6. At which time the Kings Son was slain, and two of his
Counselors, and two hundred thousand women, sons and daughters, were plundered,
and brought captive to Samaria: But in the midst of this great victory, and
conquest over their brethren, had they an Euge from their Master? was it looked
upon as that which called for a solemn day of thanksgiving? No such matter,
for behold, a Prophet of the Lord was there whose name was Oded, and he went
out before the Host that came unto Samaria, and said unto them; Behold,
because the Lord God of your fathers was wrath with Judah, he has delivered
them into your hands, and ye have slain them with a rage that reaches up to
heaven, verse. 10. and now you purpose to keep under the children of Judah and
Jerusalem for bondmen and bond-women unto you.

Now if you will consult with the story, you shall there see by what argument he
diverts them from this cruel purpose of theirs, to prosecute this victory with
a cruel captivity; Says he, But are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God?

This interrogation begot a sound conviction, that they notwithstanding their
successes, were sinners as well as their brethren.

But how? by a particular application of sin unto them with a double
interrogation; Are there not with you, even with you, implying how hardly those
which are victorious and successful will be convinced of their sinfullnesse.

Had not the Prophet Oded come with this seasonable conviction, they might have
been puffed up with pride and self-conceitednesse at their success, and have
looked upon their conquered and captivated brethren, as those Jews did upon
the Galileans whose blood Pilat had mingled with their sacrifices, to be
greater sinners then themselves. They would have said, oh, these vile wretches,
these cursed Apostates, these having forsaken the Lord God of their fathers,
are therefore justly delivered as a prey into our hands, who are more righteous
then they, Their King would have introduced idolatry, Or at leastwise
innovations in the worship and service of God, and therefore when he went unto
Damascus to strengthen himself by the King of Assiria, 2 Kings 16.1. he there
saw an alter, with which he was enamored, and by it corrupted the worship and
service of God, And Vrijah his Chief Priest was as forward in adulterating the
same as he, v. 16. And all the people were like their Priest, all had forsaken
the Lord God of their Fathers, and turned Apostates. But it appears that upon
this sound conviction, by Odeds interrogation, the pride of their spirits, upon
this mighty success was much abated, their cruel purposes and intentions were
changed. And therefore we read of no reply made unto it, no studying for
evasions to keep off the blow, not a word in the aggravation of their brethrens
wickedness, or by way of extenuation of their own rage and cruelty with which
they were charged by the Prophet. But to show the tractability of convinced
sinners, the Heads of the people instead of arguing, they fell to acting, and
that in opposition to the Army, that had been so victorious, and were now
returned with such a numerous company of prisoners. They use no carnal
reasonings, they consult not with flesh and blood, We must not discourage the
Soldiery, they will not engage for us another time. No, But in the 12. v.
certain of the Heads of the people (whose names are upon record to their
eternal honor) stood up against them, that came from the war, and said, you
shall not bring in the Captives hither. But yet to teach us, that as they which
are convinced of sins themselves will valiantly oppose sin in others. So they
are tender of giving any ground of just offense, or showing wilfulness in
their opposition; therefore they do here give them a reason of it, which
contains an ingenious confession of their own sins, ver. 13 Intimating
further, That a sound conviction of sin, is accompanied with an ingenious
confession of sin, And therefore say they, ver. 13. For whereas we have
offended against the Lord already, you intend to add more unto our sins and
our trespasses. Concluding with all, that The cruelties of an Army toward
their brethren by Nation or Profession, shall be charged not only upon
themselves, but those that raised them. And therefore said the Princes, and the
Governors, you will add unto our sins, and our trespasses. And let me but
observe one thing more that these Heads of the children of Ephraim, or Israel,
they were not the Heads of the Army, for it is said expresty, that these four
Governors, they stood up against them that came from the War, And therefore Mr.
Will. Sedgwicks new Doctrine in his New view of the Army, etc. That when a
State or Kingdom puts arms into Soldiers bards, they divest themselves of
their power and authority, and consequently by it become the peoples
Representatives: which he does endeavor to prove in several Propositions. Are
all answered by this Scripture instance, and the obedience of these Armed men
that had no such Chaplain, and by which is evident that in this point Mr.
Sedgwick is as sound in his judgment, as he was upon the day of Judgment it
self. It appearing I say in this story, that the Governors and Head of the
people, when the Army acted cruelly, and sinfully, to provoke the Lord to
anger, withstood them, and opposed them in such away, as declared they had not
divested themselves of their authority, and therefore not as unto their Equals
do they fall a praying and beseeching them. Nor as to their Superiors in power
to Petition them. But as to those that were still under their command, they
speak in the Imperative Mood: You shall not bring in the Captives hither, for
whereas we have offended against the Lord already, you do intend to add more
unto our sins, and our trespasses, for our trespass is great, and there is
fierce wrath against Israel.

Now follow the effects of this sound Conviction, both upon the Army and the
Princes, for they are distinguished by the Holy ghost.

First observe the success of it upon this successful Army to whom by Oded
it was directed, v. 9, 10. But are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God, v, 11. with which the Civil Magistrate concurring,
as I have showed you, so prevailed upon the Army, that they neither pretend to
Salus populi, they affirm not, all their Brethren have is theirs, that they
have conquered them, they say not, have we not adventured our lives to get all
this spoil and plunder, No, but they deny themselves in that which is a
Soldiers joy, to devide the spoil; and as a President for all Soldiers to be
at the command of those that raised them, they submit themselves, verse. 14. So
the armed men left the Captives, and the spoil before the Princes, and all the
Congregation.

The Lord being intended to put a period unto the troubles of his suffering
people, works a happy conformity in the Army to the commands of the Princes.

And now to give us also a resemblance to the life, of the sincerity of that
sorrow that was in the Princes for what they had done amiss also, though they
could not show it by putting life again into the dead carkases of their
slaughtered Brethren, yet they not only decline the intended cruelty of the
Army: But v. 15. they arise up, and with the spoil cloth all that were naked
of their captived Brethren, and having comfortably resteshed them, they return
them home again in peace and liberty. And I do not find after this
Reconciliation, by the aforesaid expedient applied unto them that were the
Conquerors, that there were ever after any more Civil wars between Israel and
Jadah.

And thus now having presented you with a Story which does in part gratify
your desire, Remon. p. 27. of a people given up unto a preposterous and
self-deserting way, so as to part with their Prisoners and plunder, and be
diverted from a cruel design; But does fully present you with a Scripture
Expedient not only for the composing of our Divisions and ending this civil
War, but in particular most useful to stay you in this your sinful progress,
and to alter your purposes and intentions declared in your Remonstrance. To
which end I shall as your Remembrancer, remember you from whence you are
fallen, and into what condition, and by propounding Odeds Interrogation,
endeavor to bring you to a sound conviction. That there are in you, even in
you, sins against the Lord your God.

Are there not with you, even with you, That do profess your selves to be the
Saints of the LORD, and the children of the most High; The Illuminated ones of
the LORD, and the children of the light, such as are called with a holy
calling; to be conformable unto your head, in humility, meekness, self
denial, contempt of the world, and saithfullnesse in your trust. Upon which
your aforesaid profession, you were concluded to be such as would prove the
only faithful ones in your trust, and without all question be obedient unto
the Authority of those that raised you, and put the sword into your hands. But
are there not (...) with you, you, (...) Sins. Conscience-wasting, and
land-desolating sins, as the same root is used, Psalm. 34.23. (...) they shall
not be desolate: Against the Lord your God, against him in whom you profess so
much propriety, and speak with so much boasting of his presence with you, and
your intimate familiarity, communion, and acquaintance with him: Are there not
with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God; against him
Absolutely, and against him Relatively?

Absolutely, and Immediately, against his holiness, against his truth, against
his free grace, against his glory, against his Gospel, against his mercies,
and against his Providence.

And Relatively are there not in you, even in you sins against the Lord your
God, in Relation to 1. the King, 2. the Parliament, 3. the Kingdom, 4. the
Ministry, 5. the City, 6. all that do profess Godliness; 7. and lastly, in
relation to your own selves, and souls?

That there are in you, even in you, sins against the Lord your God; under
all these considerations (That so you may be brought unto a sound conviction,
and may be restored, and set in joint again,) I shall endeavor by hard
arguments, and soft words, to convince you from your own Papers, your
practizes, and declared purposes, by all which it will appear, (that though by
many you have been most miserably flattered; yet besides those manifest fruits
of the flesh, which are predominant in many of you, as Wrath, Strife, Sedition,
Heresy, Gal. 5.20. There are likewise many other sins to be found amongst
you, that will declare that the Spots that are upon you, are not the spots of
Gods Children.

But before I begin, besides what I have already said in my Preamble, to take
off all prejudice, and that you might see into my heart, and behold the Rise of
this conviction, which is the truest love that can be manifested.

I do in the Bowels of Christ, not only desire your patience to read over
and over, what I am now to lay before you, (though it may seem to be expense
of time, and a diversion from your weighty employments) Because (if effectual)
may save you a great deal of time, which otherwise you are like to spend, in
the undoing of your selves, and the Kingdom.

But as I desire your patience to read it; so to be Patients: And if to
restore you, and set you in joint again: I should handle you hard to your
feeling. Consider I beseech you, it is not intended to hurt you, but to help,
and heal you: If the Lord Jesus by the ligament of his convincing Spirit; be
but pleased to bind on, that which I only can apply to your dislocations.

I begin therefore with Oded, to ask you this question: Are there not with
you, even with you sins against the Lord immediately?

Are not you who do express so much bitterness of spirit, against others as
Apostates? Are not you guilty of Apostasy, both Dogmaticall and Moral? Have
you not been so far from walking worthy of that liberty the Lord has given
us from Prelaticall Persecution, by holding fast the form of sound Doctrine of
Faith and Love. 2 Timothy 1.13. and that faithful word you have been taught; As
not only to be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, to bring the
Mysteries of faith unto the Bar of shallow and corrupt reason, that
incompetent Judge; And to disgust and dislike those Ancient Truths of
Humiliation for sin, and mortification of the same; but also from these
beginnings of Dogmaticall Apostasy, into small errors, proceeding unto such as
do race those very Fundamental Points, and Principles of Religion, which have
the greatest influence into practical Holiness: Therein verifying Mr. John
Goodwins assertion, in his book of justification, in his Preface to the Reader
Page 13. (says he) Lots plea for Zoar, is it not a little one, is at no hand
to be admitted for the sparing of any error? A small error cannot lightly be
favored, or connived at; but that great errors will be comprehended in the
Indulgence: Oh Brethren I beseech you be but serious in a self reflection in
this particular, who by Satan's subtlety and sophestry are so beguiled, as that
though your Gold be turned into Tynne, your Silver into Dross, Truth into
Error, Verity into Here is; yet to conclude, your condition was never better,
and therefore do account those Ministers, or Christians your greatest Enemies
that do oppose you: Especially in your endeavored for Act of Tolleration.
Indemnity, for all Apostates, that shall depart from the truth.

I shall forbear in this place interrogating whether there are not in you sins
against the Lord your God; Not only by your misbeleefe, in point of Error and
Heresy, but by your unbeleefe, the universal Cause or Mother of that Moral
Apostasy you are guilty of, because I shall have occasion to mind you, both of
that and your abuse of the mercies, and providence of God by and by.

And not to mind you at large of your grand, and Original disobedience, unto
the Commands of the Parliament, in Refusing to disband May 1647. your
surprising and removing the Kings Person from Holdenby, without and against the
Parliaments pleasure or privity, and after that your marching up against the
House, accusing their Members, presenting the House with Messages, so full of
arrogance as was altogether inconsistent with humble Saints; prescribing them a
time, with menacing expressions to answer you before night, as is to be seen,
in some of your printed Letters and Messages which are upon record to the
scandal of Religion.

I say not to mention or remember you of these any further then to bring you
unto a sound conviction of your unconformity unto the Rule of the word, and the
example of your Savior.

Oh the sins that are with you, even with you against the Lord your God: Even
since as it was reported, (to the gladding of the hearts of many that were
truly godly) that you did keep a day of Humiliation for those forementioned
offenses: Yea, even since you have found the Lord graciously preserving you
from being devoured by a fire of your own kindling, from ruin and
destruction, through those late Insurrections both in England, and Scotland, of
both which you were the occasion by your not disbanding.

I beseech you ask your selves this Question: Are there not with you, even
with you, sins against the Lord your God? Have not you abused the late mercies
of God to your selves, and this Kingdom; those great Victories, and speedy
successes with which God had crowned you for the Kingdoms good? Have not you
crossed that providence of his, by which as with a Sun beam he writ his
gracious intentions toward this Kingdom, in ending their troubles by a
Treaty, having from so low a condition suddenly raised up our Representatives
to a capacity of Treating upon Terms, both Honorable, safe, and profitable
for themselves, and the Kingdom? Have not you abused all by your practices,
and purposes, declared in your Remonstrance? That you have so; I shall only be
your Remembrancer, to remember you, of an objurgation, and expostulation with
you, of a Prophet of your own, Mr. William Sedgwick, who though a very
unlikely instrument; yet in his Justice upon your Remonstrance, in many places,
God has opened his mouth, as once he did Baalams Ass to reprove you: Though
now in his New view, he would like that Prophets Animal carry you himself,
lest you should not move fast enough into those courses, that are like to prove
so destructive to your selves, and the Cause of God.

But by the light he then had hear him, from the quick stirrings of his own
conscience, who professes intimate acquaintance with your designs from the
beginning, page 23. Remon. I say, nay I pray hear his expostulation with you,
page 17. God has been gracious unto you, and reprieved you for a while from
destruction, do you thus abuse it to harden your hearts to pride, malice, and
wicked insulting over your Brethren? Is this the use of your Victories to have
opportunities to do more mischief, and so treasure up wrath for your selves,
for all that you lay upon others you provide it, and store it up for your
selves.

But besides this abuse of Mercies, Victories, and successes, are there not
with you, even with you sins against the Lord? Are you not distrustful of
his powerful and providentiall care for you? Is it not your unbelief, (that
gathers strength in Christ's absence) that has set your sinful fears on
work, your corrupt self-love, and carnal policy? Why else have you taken
hold of such ungodly means, as now you use; though covered with specious
pretenses in your Remonstrance? You there pretend unto justice, and that
against the Kings Person, as the most Capital Offender: But let me be your
Remembrancer, of what is said to it by a Prophet of your own. Justice on Rem.
p. 42. It Is not Justice you desire, it appears so to your blind and deceived
hearts; but in the face of God it appears far otherwise: But the searcher of
hearts will deal otherwise with you, and show you what is within you, and
discover the falsehood and injustice of your spirits. 43. Your Justice, it is
but a bare name, or a Heathen covering borrowed from men to hide your shame,
your malice, your unbelief, fear, and such like monstrous lusts, A cunning
way to remove adversaries, to take away those that stand in your way, and paint
them over with the names of Justice, security to the Public Interest, and so
Act them in the face of the Sun. For the Lords sake ponder this seriously,
with his instance following, and be not deceived, for God will not be mocked.
Oh take heed you that profess the knowledge of God in his Attributes, and
should hold forth a conformity unto him in your conversations, to those that
are communicable, as his justice and truth, how you plead justice for a cloak
of maliciousness, and to sin so against his providence, as to make it to be
the Father, not only of your former perfidiousnesse and treachery against the
Person of the King; but of your present intentions to do justice upon him,
which will appear, page 24. where you say, God has given him so clearly into
your hands to do justice upon him; when the world knows you have perfideously,
and treacherously taken him in a snare: will you make the righteous Lord such a
one as your selves; in whose essence, or providence there is no iniquity. Did
God give him into your hands, when you without the consent of both Houses took
him away from Holdenby, and after your tampering with him at Hampton Court, and
possessing him with a false, and notorious lie, to make him in a wet and
tempestuous night, to leave that place to run into your Mouse-trap, in which
very act, was such a concurrence of falsehood, and perfideousnesse, as never
was committed, by any Professors, and yet this must be fathered by you upon
your God who loves truth in the inward parts. You saying God having given him
so clearly into your hands, when as the world knows you have taken him, worthy
Sirs, I beseech you consider this, least God say unto you; These things have
you done, and I kept silence, you thought that I was altogether such a one as
your selves, But I will reprove you, and set your sins in order before your
eyes, Psalm. 50.21.

Having thus propounded Odeds question, are there not with you, even with you,
sins against the Lord your God, against his truth, against his mercies, and
against his providence; immediately, or absolutely.

I shall but propound. Odeds interrogation: Are there not with you, even with
you, sins against the Lord your God Relatively, And that first in relation to
the King.

I speak not of any thing here, that you have done as Soldiers in the
subduing of his forces, for which you were raised; and in which had you rested,
you had been the most renowned Champions in Christendom. But in referrence
unto what you have acted out of your places, and so without Commission, and
under this consideration in relation unto the King.

1 Ask your Consciences this question, are there not with you, even with you
sins against the Lord in relation to the King, who are the Causes of hardening
his heart? but your selves when you permitted his Chaplains to be about him,
with the Service in its superstitious formality to be in use, after so long a
weaning from them, by the wisdom of the Rarliament; who has hardened his
heart against all that do profess Religion, and strengthened him in his own
way? But you with whom he has conversed, and has found to be so treacherous,
perfideous and unconstant; At one time crying Hosanna, another time crucifige.
At one time moving for the Restitution, of his Majesty's Person, his Queen and
Royal issue to a condition of Safety, Honor and Freedom, Proposal 14. 1647
July 2. Another time moving for the execution of his Person, that he may be
brought to trial for his life, when some of you perfideously got him under
your power, under the pretense of the preservation of his life from the
Levellers, Oh, Christians will not this be required at your hands.

2 But in the next place, Are there not with you, even with you, Sins against
the Lord your God in relation to the Parliament, if your Consciences be tender,
they will accuse you to purpose.

Not to speak largely of your former violence offered to the Parliament which
you made to vote and unvote at your pleasure in those days, Oh blush and be
ashamed, at the comparing of the preface to your Remonstrance, and your
following practices. You there profess, your tender regard to the Privileges,
and Freedoms of Parliament, on which your hopes of common Freedom, and right
do so much depend: And yet your practices immediately declare, the greatest
breach of both, that ever was under the Sun.

Oh dear Sirs, consider this seriously; are there not with you, even with you,
sins against the Parliament, who put the Sword into your hands. What is the
Kings abuse of trust to yours. For first you not only by your expressions in
your Remonstrance make this War for which they raised you to be offencive, page
27. When as the Parliament, by several Declarations, and in particular in a
Covenant; which they took, and engaged me, with others in it, do propound this
as that which we should be persuaded; or believe in our Consciences, That the
Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for
their just defense of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the
Subject against the forces raised by the King. But this is not all the wrong
you have done them, for as you would pervert their sense in raising you: so
likewise their End, which was to subdue the forces raised by the King, but not
to force, and subdue themselves, and to bring them under the power of the
Sword, and that in such a way, as the Sun never saw, nor would, those dismal
days of the 6 and 7 December. being as dark and gloomey as the work it self.

But besides that execrable force and open violence upon many of the most
cordial and truly Godly Members of the House of Commons, by which, the
Privileges and Freedom of Parliament were transcendently broken by you.
Besides this I say, and your intentions by force to put a speedy period unto
this Parliament. I beseech you search into your Consciences, and seriously
examine your selves, whether you have not a more sinful and sacrilegious design
against the Parliament (having forced them) to rob and ravish them of their
Coercive power in spiritualls, in things pertaining to Religion, though you do
pretend that you have faithfully remonstrated your Grievances with the
Remedies: yet your dissimulation is without comparison, in that, though not a
word in your Remonstrance, concerning Tolleration, as declaring it to be the
rise or ground of these your present Commotions, yet is it evident, by your
present agitations; That the Magistrates of your making shall neither have
Coercive, or Restrictive power in matters of Religion; and that by Club-law you
would deprive this present Parliament of the fame which I beseech you to weigh
seriously, and consider the guile and the guilt of this design which is
aggravated by what you do acknowledge, page 20. Your Remonstrance: That it is
the Parliaments interest; in plain english that which does belong to them, To
protect and countenance Religions men, and godliness in the power of it, to
give freedom and enlargement unto the Gospel, to take away those corrupt
forms of an outside Religion, and Church Government. All which by the abuse of
that power they have put in your hands, you would now wrest out of their
shires; which with many other sins against the Parliament, in that horible
contempt, that you have cast upon them: If but brought home by a sound
conviction, must needs make you acknowledge in this respect, there are with
you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God in relation to the
Parliament.

3. But thirdly, are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord
your God in relation to the whole Kingdom? Besides the miseries contracted upon
the Kingdom since your refusal to disband, at the command of the Parliament,
in the extreme expenses, and charges you have drawn upon them, by taxes and
free quarter: wherein you have showed but little publick-spiritednesse, or love
unto the Common wealth. Though you have pretended to a great deal of bleeding
of soul, that you should be forced to take Free quarter, for want of pay. But
that your dissimulation is great in this particular, and so your sin answerable
against the Kingdom. You have almost doubled the burden even upon those that
would willingly have paid you the States pay, per diem, either for horse or
man, to be freed from such troublesome and uncomfortable Guests.

But alas! what is this to what you have done against the whole Kingdom in
your late transactions? How does this Remonstrance, demonstrate that there are
with you, even with you, sins against the whole Kingdom? You do pretend unto
Salus Populi, and that extremity of publich danger, has put you upon these
extraordinary ways you have taken. But has the Kingdom, sensible of this
their Public danger, invested you with any power, to stir up these commotions
in their behalf? Are you in the condition of Representatives for the Kingdom?
Why then do you so deceitfully pretend unto public danger, when as that by
your walking, out of Gods way, you are like to be the only instruments of
danger unto the Public as well as your selves? Has the Kingdom called upon
you, in their Names, to cry out for Jastice, to interrupt the Treaty, to muster
up so many Arguments against the goodness and safety of it, which you have
presented in so many sheets of paper, in your Remonstrance, containing more of
the Serpents Subtlety, then the Doves Innocence? Are your Proposals therein for
the altering the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, are these
injunctions laid upon you by the Original of all power, as you pretend, the
People of the Kingdom? Alas, they know none of these things, so as to approve
of them, not one of a hundred will own what you do set down for the Public
Interest, Nor subscribe unto that Agreement that you speak on, page 66. And yet
such is your Arrogance, Injustice, and sublimed Tyranny, that though but an
inconsiderable part of the Kingdom, and that a diseased one, but a Member of
the body Politic, in comparison of the whole, and that a dislocated one, yet
how cruelly would you endeavor to force the whole body of the Kingdom, to an
agreement with your dis-joynted part, to rack and torture their consciences,
with a subscription unto your intended Tolleration, and Confusion; And yet
without this Subscription, though none can take away the Kingdoms liberties,
without their personal, or represertatives consent, yet have you so proposed
or rather imposed it upon the Parliament in your remonstrance, that none shall
either elect their Representatives, who shall not join in agreement to this
settlement. page 66. or be Elected unto any office, or place of public trust
without express accord, and subscriptions to the same, page 67.

Certainly Sirs, your injustice and cruelty to the Kingdom will cry loud in
the ears of God against you. Especially considering the aggravations of it,
even in relation to the Kingdom that you deal so injuriously withal.

That when a Kingdom by the first Remonstrance of their Representatives in
Parliament, made sensible of their danger, both in regard of Spiritual and
Secular Interests, and withal assured in the same, of the reallity of their
intentions to prevent it, without the change of the frame of the civil
Government, or letting loose the golden reins of the Ecclesiastical, and upon
satisfaction given by the Magistracy and Ministry, of the lawfulnes of
opposing the Kings Arbitrary power, without the breach of the Oath of
Allegiance unto his Person, as is evident by the first Protestation, May 5.
1641 the chief Subject of it being to maintain and defend Religion, his
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, according to the duty of our
Allegiance, as also the power and privileges of Parliament, with the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject. And the ground of it being but a suspicion
of endeavors to subvert the fundamental Laws, and to introduce the exercise
of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical government, by most pernicious and wicked
counsels and plots, amongst which is instanced, their jealousy of being
forced by that English Army then on foot.

Which were then strong Arguments to encourage the Kingdom generally to enter
into that engagement, and after that to proceed further, to the opposition of
the Kings forces in a defensive wat, which in the second vow was clearly
expressed to be their intent of raising Forces, Viz. For the defense of the
true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the Subject, against the Forces
raised by the King.

That now the Forces so raised by the Parliament for the Kingdoms good, should
after crowned with success by the Lord of Hoasts, not only refuse to disband,
but as aforesaid march up, and bring that evil upon the Parliament which by
their own and the Kingdoms Protestation they feared from the Northern Army; Viz
A Rape and Force upon them.

And that by your continuance in Arms, should occasion, as through the
Activity of Malignant Spirits, so generally, through the sense the Countries,
and the Kingdom had of their unsupportable burden by your means, to be again
imbroyled in a New War.

Wherein as you are not guiltless, as in the occasion of the war: So chiefly,
in the interruption of that peace so generally desired.

And therefore when as the poor Kingdom torn and rent with civil wars, weary
of its burden, seeing no hopes of ending by the Sword, but that one extremity
did daily beget another, had prevailed by their Petitions to the Parliament for
a Treaty which was obtained, and in it such a progress made, as that the
Parliament notwithstanding your Remonstrance, voted The Kings last Answer to be
a good foundation for a Peace and settlement.

Yet who has disappointed the Kingdoms hopes but you, not only inveighing
against the Treaty as just, or safe for the Parliament to manage, though you
durst when time was presume to Treat with him your selves, when it was
unquestionably unjust for you, having no delegation from the Kingdom, or its
Representatives, but also by the power of the Sword to interrupt it, without
and against the consent of the oppressed Kingdom, whose cry I fear is gone up
to heaven against you.

Besides which with your interposition in the affairs of the Kingdom, in
taking the work out of the hand of the Kingdoms Representative. Have you not by
your late practices not only endeavored, but acted those iniquities which you
were only raised to prevent in the forces raised by the King. namely, the
subverting of the fundamental Laws of England, the power and privileges of
the Parliament, and the lawful Liberties of the Subject?

And all under the color of laying new foundations for freedom, which in the
language of Justice Sedgwick; have little of right, freedom, or common safety
in them, being framed with restect to your own private interest, why therefore
(says he) do you dissemble with men holding forth a foundation to settle the
Kingdom, when that you do profess your selves, to be appointed and called for
breaking in pieces the powers of the world, page 48.

But if there be any real intentions in you of a settlement, (which your
intimate friend does much question) that you may see what your private spirits,
confident of their Abillity and Judgment for greatest matters of State Policy,
have produced to impose upon the Kingdom; I shall give you the description of
your intended Government, by Justice Sedg. Not in his New View, but in his True
View of the Army, p. 22. For your present form of Government, it is such a
headless Monster, such a boddy doddy, such an all breech, so different from
the Majesty of God, and the Wisdom of men, that it would fright solid and
serious men to their Arms: If I should fight against any thing, I should fight
against this.

But more seriously, hoping that God will never permit you to erect, and set up
a second Fabric, that falling so short of the glory of the first Temple of our
Government, should fill all Spectators with watery eyes, and yet extremely
fearing, lest that under all your pretenses for justice, instead of any kind
of Government; you are laying the foundation of perpetual misery unto this
Kingdom, both by intestine, and Foreign troubles. Oh let Odeds interrogation
take hold of your hearts; are there not with you, even with you sins against
the Lord your God, not only in Relation unto the King and Parliament, but in
Relation unto the whole Kingdom?

But in the fourth place, let me be your Remembrancer a little further, And
with Oded ask you: Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the
Lord your God, not only in relation to King, Parliament, and Kingdom; but
also in relation to the Metropolis of the Kingdom, the Famous City of London,
the great assistant of the Parliament, Famous for its encouragement to the
Parliament, in maintaining it, as was acknowledged by Mr. John Pym in his
Speech to them, November. 10. 1641.

Not to speak of its sufferings in common with the Kingdom, by the means of
your former disobedience to the Parliament: Or to mind you at large of the
contempt you poured upon the City shortly after, when you marched through the
City as Conquerours, with Bays in your hats, your possessing your selves of
the Tower of London, casting out their Lieutenant, put in by the Parliament at
their request, impeaching, and imprisoning by your means, some of their
Aldermen, that were known to be of Public Spirits, not enriching themselves
with the ruins of the Kingdom, together with some of the Common Council,
both for piety and stability to their Principles, Protestation, Vow, and
Covenant, without exception, charging the whole City with defection, and
Apostasy from the Parliament: I beseech you seriously consider, cannot they
tax you with unfaithfulness, as well as King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

Peruse but your Letter sent to them from Royston, June 10. 1647. Wherein you
profess you desire no alteration of the Civil Government, nor that you seek
to open a way unto licentious liberty, under pretense of obtaining ease for
tender consciences, page 5. and do not you profess that when the State has
once made a settlement, you have nothing to say but to submit, or to suffer. Do
but compare your practices with this profession made unto the City, and
consider, whether you have not much cause to be humbled; are not all your
present practices in opposition to the Parliament, Kingdom, and City, made our
of measure sinful by acting so contrary unto your profession. But besides
all this. Consider I pray you, the fears and the dangers, which you have
exposed them unto in this your last expedition against the Parliament; not to
speak of your unreasonable demands for moneys in such vast sums, your
menacing pressing for your arreares, even for those twelve months service
past, since the Vote of your disbanding; Is not your possessing your selves of
the gates of the City, planting Ordinances against them, as in Blackfriars and
other places; your violent seizing upon the person of their Shreive, Major
General Brown. Are not these most injurious and unchristian carriages to the
City.

And besides the unconceivable damage you have brought unto it by the decay of
trade, and merchandising, who knows what further danger may arise by
quartering the Army thus amongst them, These things thus laid together and well
weighed, must needs bring you to a sound conviction, that there are with you,
even with you, sins against the Lord your God in relation to the City.

Again, are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Gedly, learned,
and sound Ministers in the Kingdom. Are you not such, as show your selves to
be despisers of Christ, by despising his Messengers and Ministers. Are not you
such as by your mockings and scorning of the Prophets, have provoked the Lord
even till there be no remedy. What means the horrible contempt you have cast
upon them, both by your words and actions. I speak not of the Prelaticall
Clergy, but of the Ministers, who have now suffered both from them, and your
selves, and find their last wounds deepest, because received in the house of
their friends, Do not you show your selves to be apostatized from them both
dogmatically and morrally, both in your judgments and affections? How are
those Ministers in which many of you delighted, and rejoiced in their light,
now fleighted by you? are you not being puffed up with spiritual pride and
conceitednesse, ready to think your selves so full of knowledge, so rich in
gifts and parts, that you can reign as Kings without them. 1 Cor. 4.8. and are
you not so taken with the Priests of your own making of the lowest of the
people, and so enamered with your own Buffe-coate Chaplains, that the
Black-coates, the Priests as you frequently in dirision call them (such as have
the truth of their calling sealed by the conversion of souls, are now decryed
by you as Antichristian.

Oh that you could but see how woefully Satan has beguiled you by this
Stratagem, and brought you to bite the breasts that have suckled you, and being
bewitched as were the foolish Galuthians, like foolish children, know not your
own spiritual Fathers, by whom you first believed; Oh that the sinfulness of
the cause, and the sadness of the effects might affect your hearts, for from
this corruption in your judgments concerning the lawfulness of their calling,
you who formerly could have plucked out your eyes for them, are now ready to
pluck out theirs; not only forsaking but opposing them, and that the more they
show their zeal for Christ, and love to you in opposing you in your Errors, and
these your ungodly and unchristian courses.

I beseech you Sirs, pardon me if I cry out for my Fathers; the charets of
Israel and the horsemen thereof, when you would snatch them away from me, and
the whole Kingdom in a fiery charet, I mean in your burning zeal against
Tithes to paid any more, which that judicious Patriot in his Reasons against
the agreement says himself, p. 12. I believe that taking away the Ministry of
the Gospel with their maintenance, lies at the bottom of it. But admit this
should not be the bottom of it, this should not lie at the root, to root them
out, as being Antichristian; yet this will lie at the top as a visible design
to starve them out of their Ministerial employment, and either expose them
with their, Families to beggary, or else to do more, then leave the Word of
God and serve Tables, (which the Apostles, though they could preach extempore,
did account a great diversion from their Ministry) and to go dig for their
living, and get it by the sweat of their brows.

Oh friends weigh these things seriously and consider whether from the
aforesaid premises you give not them occasion to conclude that you are very
unkind, and that you walk not as becomes Saints in relation to them, and
withal from what they may fear (by the Students you put into Sion College,
and other of your carriages toward them) may bring up the Rear against them,
for their non conformity to their new Metropolitans: Think seriously whether
you have not given them occasion sadly to complain, That they have nourished
and brought up spiritual children, but they have rebelled against them.

But to charge on, are there not with you, even with you sins against the Lord
your God in relation unto all that do profess godliness, that are now
divided into Independents, Presbiterians, and Interpendents.

Have not you cause with that Primitive Penitent, having offended the Church of
God, to cast down your selves in your thoughts at the feet of all Professors of
Religion, saying with him, Calcate me salem incipidum, Tread upon me unsavory
Salt, Oh that God would but give you humble apprehensions of your selves under
this consideration as having in you sins against the Lord your God in relation
to the Saints indeed, that not only those Professors of Religion that dissent
from you, but even against those of your own party who are not grossly
corrupted in their judgments, and blinded with self-interests, as being in
great places of honor and profit, but do all look upon themselves as extremely
injured by your unwarantable walkings, and must needs withdraw from you, as
brethren that walk inordinatly.

It was David's prayer, that none that trusted in God might be ashamed because
of him. But have not you filled the faces of Professors of Religion with shame
and blushing. Because that finding necessity for sinning but a sinful plea,
they know not how to use it to their upbraiding adversary, either in your
behalf, or their own; and therefore because of you must hang down their
heads: But is this all, no, you have not by your aforesaid miscarriages, filled
their faces with shame, but made them stink, Genesis 34.30. they may truly say
with Jacob, you have troubled me, and made me to stinck amongst the inhabitants
of the land, and being few in number they shall gather themselves together
against me, and slay me. Oh sirs! let this take hold on your hearts, the wrong
you have done to your brethren, by exposing them to danger.

I do confess that formerly the opposition that was made against professors
was for their holiness indeed, because that they were such, as by their
frequent attendance upon the Ordinances, their care to worship God in them,
according to his own will, their mortification and contempt of the world, their
sobriety and not conformity to the vain fashions of the time; and their not
daring to do evil that good might come of it, did judge, and condemn the
world even by their actions, and therefore though they were persecuted and
opposed, yet their persecutors either by hand or tongue, could not from their
exact and innocent walking, but be convinced in their consciences, that those
whom they did persecute were more righteous then themselves, and never did them
any personal injury. But is not in these times, the natural enmity of the
world exasperated through the iniquities of many professors, when instead of
those gracious effects of the power of godliness, which did imbellish and adorn
Religion: Contrary lusts are more visible, such as a liberty to follow the
vain fashions of the times, to be free and liberal in the use of the
creature, feeding without fear as Jude speaks, to be self seekers in time of
calamatie, unfaithful in promises and trust, and yet for all this to be
exceeding proud and censorious, concluding themselves to be the only Saints,
and therefore are to have the high places of the earth, as the only fit men for
places of Government, and none so zealous for the execution of justice; whilst
they break out into such courses, as are full of unrighteousness; and tend to
the ruin of others as well as themselves?

I beseech you Sirs weigh this seriously and consider, whose case this is that
I have propounded, whither there be not in you, even in you sins against the
Lord your God in relation to all that are godly, who upon the grounds aforesaid
are exposed unto the irritated enmity of the men of the world though M. Peter's
say it is only for a little holiness, etc. And though I hope that God will take
care of those professors, that shall profess their present dislike of your
present practices and mourn for them, so as that they may be preserved, if (God
see it good for them) from that calamity that shall come upon you, yet assure
your selves, that without repentance you shall feel the justly exasperated
rage of the men of the world, and be brought into a suffering condition, as
evil doers; and where then will the spirit of glory be to rest upon you? you
may peradventure by this argument think that I am too great a legalist, and may
think your selves to be above all these fears, because that you are Saints,
and have your sins forgiven you. But know that Aaron the Saint of the Lord,
with Moses and Samuel though God forgave their sins, yet he took vengeance of
their inventions, Ps. 90.8. and therefore be not high minded but fear, least
God to vindicate his glory, to let the world know, that he stands not in need
of the sins of men, to preserve his Church, or Cause, But that he is the Lord
that loves judgment, and hates robbery for a burnt offering Isa. 61.8.
should take vengeance on your inventions, by exposing you unto a suffering
condition, as evil doers that have invented, and do so strongly urge and act
for it, a Toleration, that you might keep your selves from a suffering
condition, in relation to what you hold forth as truth, we have a memorable
example in the book of Martiers of one, that could not burn for Christ, and yet
to save some goods, his house being on fire was burnt and consumed by it. The
Lord give you in this your day to know the things that do belong unto your
peace; and that you may prevent that danger and destruction which these
practices will produce. For as there are in you sins against the Lord your God
as in relation to others, so unto your own selves; these your unwarrantable
ways and actions if they should not bring destruction upon the Kingdom, yet
as I have already intimated, will without making your repentance as public as
your offense, bring you unto ceraine ruin and destruction.

And that you may see the danger you have brought your selves in, as by all
those sins of which I have been your Remembrancer: so in particular, by your
intended change of the Government both of Church and State, in opposition to
King, Parliament and Kingdom. I shall commend unto your view, Mr. Henry Burtons
two Sermons for God and the King, I shall only give you his text with some
part of its explication leaving it to your own application.

Prove. 24.21, 22. My son fear thou the Lord and the King. And meddle not with
them that are given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both.

I shall only remember you of the admonition, with his reason explicated in his
own words.

Meddle not with them which are given to change.

Meddle is not meant here that we may not meddle at all, by way of reproof,
detection, conviction, impeading, or impeaching their wicked courses and
practices that are given to change. But not meddle, that is, have no
fellowship, side not, countenance not, approve not, applaud not such men in
their evil ways; But who are these men we are admonished of? Such as are
given to change, the best Interpreters expound it of Innovations of Religion,
or of the Republike. So Mercer and Lavater, and Pagnin renders it; Such as
change and break the commandments of God, and of their Princes, and fall away
from the fear of God and the King in their rebellious lives; but we need go
no further then our own translation which is very full, meaning it of all such
as are factious, seditious, given to change the Laws of God and the King. page
6. 7.

Now is the reason of the admonition annexed, which is taken from the dangerous
condition that those that are given to change are obnoxious unto, the matter of
their danger calamity and ruin set down in its suddenness in its certainty.
It shall rise, that is although they seem to be so high, that are given to
change, as to surmount all fear of dangers as trampling all under their feet,
yet calamity shall rise above them, and bring them to ruin as the Lord says,
Ier. 37.10. page 8. 2. It shall arise suddenly, and unexpectedly, that is,
though there be no outward appearance of ruin to these men, but that all
things prosper and seem to be on their side, page 5. Yet who knows the ruin
of them both; this is subject to sundry interpretations, the gloss and Lyra
(to both) to Archheriticks, and those that are seduced by them: Mercenus and
Lavater, understand ruin of them both in an Active sense, referring the ruin
of those that are given to change, to God, and the King, who both shall bring
ruin upon those that are given to change. So that those ringleaders with
their adherents and accomplices shall both fall and perish together, and both God
and the King, that is, the justice of Gods law, and man's law shall conspire
together to root them out. page 8.

And thus now having laid before you that from Mr Burtons explication of the
Text, which if but mixed with faith, and applied, must needs be energeticall in
its operation to change your purposes.

I shall go on as your Remembrancer, having with Odeds interrogation
endeavored to convince you, that there are in you, even in you, sins against
the Lord your God, both absolutely and relatively, in relation to King,
Parliament, Kingdom, Ministry, City, with all that profess godliness. I
shall proceed to mind you of some aggravating circumstances with which some of
your most public sins are clothed, and also with some sad effects of them,

As first, do not you profess in your Remonstrance, page 4. You are not
ignorant that rule of salus populi suprema lex, is of all others most opt to be
abused or misapplied; and indeed you show wherein it may be abused, and how,
most truly. But does it not aggravate your guilt that you should abuse it in
all those kinds? The Lord give you tender consciences, and then you will
confess that you have as truly abused it, as you have described how it may be
done. For do not your practices since the publishing of your Remonstrance,
together with what is in agitation by you, declare page 4. That notwithstanding
your pretenses of public danger, and the extremity thereof, that yet from
evil intentions and an inordinate temper of spirit, you would break those
bonds of law and Magistracy which you find to restrain you. Besides which,
are not you (...) condemned of your selves, even out of the words of your own
mouths, as being defective; as in that which you your selves do propound, must
concur to their full justification that shall plead Salus populi, for you say
he that ingageth, page 5. Upon such pretenses, must do it really for public
ends, and but upon public necessity, or extremity, and with a sober spirit.
But whether you are not unquallified in all these, I leave it to God, the
World, and your own Consciences when awakened, to judge whether in your
pleading of Salus populi, and your actings upon it, instead of real public
ends, private interest, carnal fears, ambition, pride, an apprehension of
your neglect in the Treaty; no assurance of pardon for your forementioned
practices against the King and Parliament, without and contrary unto commission
are not really your public ends that put you upon this plea of Salus populi.

That it is not for public necessity and extremity, (except to beget it) you
have the cry of the whole Kingdom against you for it, and if you have the
quallification of the agent, a sober spirit for your justification, let your
actions upon it, in the violent seizing upon the persons of so many grave godly
and public Patriots of the Kingdom, with horrible indignity by turning them
into Hell, with such unheard of taunts and reproaches, as are upon record in
your Moderate Intelligencer that came out the tuesday following, plead for you.
These things I say do cry loud in the ears of God to whom you have appealed,
and as you acknowledge has appeared as a severe avenger against such
pretenders. page 5. and without repentance will be a swift witness against
you, there being in you, even in you sins against the Lord your God committed
with this and many other aggravating circumstances.

For the Lords sake if you be Saints, such as should be grieved at the least
rise of corruption in your souls, that should avoid all appearances of evil;
Oh let what I have propounded stay you in this your sinful progress, that
you proceed not to fill up the measure of your iniquities.

Methinks it should move you, if I should be your Remembrancer, but of those
miserable effects that are, or may be the products of your abused trust, and
your unwarrantable walking by providence without a precept.

Should not the glory of God, the honor of his great name be dear unto you?
Oh my soul thou have heard the reproach of the adversary, how are they
confirmed in their profaneness and superstition? in their opposition unto the
Reformation that has cost so dear, See, See, say they, how all your
hypocrisy is discovered, and rather then they shall go unpunished for their
rebellion against their King, those who were raised up to be their saviors,
shall be executioners of Gods vengeance upon them, and though the Kings Party
with his Cavaliers could not be avenged on this City the nursery of all this
Rebellion, yet it shall be done by an Army of their own raising. What is more
common then such reproaches in the day of our calamity, which you have brought
upon us, And is this nothing unto you?

Oh where I say is your zeal for God and his cause, which you profess unto?
How is the name of God blasphemed amongst Atheists, Papists, Malignants,
profane and carnal persons, by your forementioned practices, which has
opened their mouths against you? how are your friends upbraided to the peircing
of their souls, when they say unto them, Lo are these your Saints, your godly
and religious party, which held forth nothing but justice, and Righteousness,
who were raised for the preservation of the fundamental Laws, and of the
privileges of the Parliament, and the liberty of the Subject, and are now
risen up in arms to ruin the King and his posterity, to destroy the
Parliament, and give laws unto the Kingdom; did ever the profanest Officers
or soldiers, under Essex, Waller or Massey, attempt any of those things which
they have effected,

Oh Sirs should not this be for a lamentation, that instead of putting to
silence, 1 Pet. 2.15. the ignorance of foolish men, by a conformity unto those
Gospel precepts, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, You
should open their mouths by your evil works that they behold. Oh Sirs
consider at the last these true taunts of the adversary, by which God is
dishonored, and let them not only pierce your ears, but your hearts.

Let me further I pray you be your remembrancer of another effect, and a sad
one too, of these your present practices, and that is this.

That you are not only thereby cast out of the esteem of Moral men, as
walking in such ways that by their light do look of an ill complexion. But
also out of the approbation of very many tender conscienced Christians, who as
they dare not say unto you in this your way, we wish you will in the name of
the Lord, or bid you God speed, least they should be partakers of your evil
deeds, 2 John ver. 11. So they cannot remember you unto God in their prayers,
except it be that he would restrain you, and hedge up your way with thorns;
and is not this a sad effect indeed. Oh pray Sirs let this consideration take
hold of your hearts, and like Jeromes Surgite emortuis be ever sounding in your
ears, both in your Counsels, and the execution of them. That the arm of
flesh being broken, on which they trusted, that staff (your selves) on which
they leaned: having peirced them and gone into their hands, they have betaken
themselves unto the old and never failing weapons of the Church, praeces and
lachrimae, prayers and tears; the mouths of which Cannons being turned against
you. Which I think though you are good soldiers, should somewhat affright you,
and will, if you are spiritual, because they are spiritual weapons.

Besides which, I pray let me remember you of another effect, of your
unwarrantable ways in relation unto the public, (now it comes in my mind)
and that's this, you have justified all the jealousies and fears, that many
dissenting from you, had of you in your minority before moddellizing. That if
the power of the sword were wholly put into Independents hands, they would
abuse it for their own self interest against the public; have not you
justified the Cities Remonstrance, and their fears in this respect, have not
you made many supposed scandals in the Gangrend to be but true predictions.

But besides your justification of the fears of many which might fill your
faces with shame.

As another effect of your miscarrages. Have not you blasted the reputation of
some eminent persons amongst you, that have engaged for you, either in the
House of Commons to our Representatives, That you would rather suffer and lay
down your arms at their feet, then break out into acts of disobedience. Or
in very public, and promiscuous Congregation, where there were too many
hearers that came for news, or to make themselves merry with Mr. Peter's mimick
gestures, and Pulpit-scurilities now Plays are down. I say have not you by
your forementioned practices made Mr. Peter's a Liar or worse, who so often
professed in your names in the Pulpit, your readiness to lay down your necks,
lives, and to live under rocks and Caves in America, rather then not disband,
at the least intimation of the Parliament, or to do any act impeaching their
Privileges or proceedings. I beseech you all seriously to consider this. But
especially you Mr. Peter's to whom I have spoken all this while in general as
one of the Army, though now in particular, as to one that notwithstanding, your
former engagements for the Armies obedience, are now the greatest hardner of
them in this way, not only by leading them by providence into these impious
and preposterous courses, by perverting the example of Phineas, encouraging
them in that, for ever to be abhorred force of the Parliament, by the frequent
use of your rustie similitude of a key, made bright again by your often use of
it, which before would not open the door, and therefore must be forced, but
also persuading them, that all the opposition that is made against them in this
way, is but for a little holiness, a little of Christ in you, Oh Mr. Peter's.
is this good pasture for the Lambs of Christ, which he would have you feed as
you love him. May not I well say unto you, Oh Archippus, Col. 2.17. Take heed
unto the ministry that thou have recived, not only that thou fulfill it. But
that thou fill it not full, with such corrupt abuses of providence, Scripture
presidents, and the partial urging of some Scripture precepts, for carnal
ends, as to expose the followers of your doctrine, to that ruin and calamity,
which as Mr. Burton has observed, shall rise over them that are given to
change, and yet through your unministeriall levitie, and Pulpit scurilitie in
your gestures and jeans, making your poor seduced hearers, like those that are
stung with the Tarantula to die laughing. But verbum sapienti, hoping this
digression will be pardoned, being led unto it by providence. But to return.

Besides your justification of the fears and jealousies of many of the godly
concerning you. There is a justification like to be produced as the effect of
your present practices; namely a justification of the wicked, which is an
abomination unto the Lord, Prove. 17.15. Even to justify all the Sons of
Bellal; not only such as have been before you in former times, but those that
shall come after you, to whom you may be a sinful President.

Do but think with your selves whether or no, Jack Cade, and his confederates
traitorous forcing of the Parliament in former times upon Popular pretenses.
Henry Jermines, Percies and Gorings Treason in practicing to bring up the
Northern Army toward London to overawe and force the Paliament soon after its
commencement, and the Kings coming to the Commons House with an armed Train of
Cavaliers to demand the five Members. Jan. 4. 1641. voted to be a Treasonable
Act, and an high breach of the privilege of Parliament, are not only justified
but exceeded, by that force and violence offered to the Parliament by you,
December. 6, 7.

And yet besides all this, to be the justification as a President for any that
shall perpetrate the like wickedness for the future.

There is this likewise to be weighed as a sad effect, that danger that other
States and Kingdoms may be exposed unto by your Example, either to be brought
under by the Souldierie, that they shall raise, or else to be kept under by
Tyranny which they shall rather choose, then put a Sword into the hands of any
to help them, lest it should be turned against them when they have done their
work, as you have done.

You seem to have a little sense page 34. Remon. what will be the judgment
and the sense that will be aptly made, by intelligent Spectators of this and
neighbor Nations, and ages to come, of some kind of defect in the Treaty in
regard of the Kings restraint in the Isle of Wight. But dear Christians, you
forget that there are intelligent Spectaters of this and neighbor Nations, yea
and ages to come, that will have your perfidious practices upon record, and by
accident you may be the inslaving of other free people as well as we, that will
rather with Issachar couch down between their burdens, and become servants
unto illegal Tribute, then run the hazard of having them trebled by those whom
they trusted to take them off.

I beseech you therefore if there be any fellowship of the Spirit, if there be
in you any bowels of mercy, any pity in you, toward your selves, your
families, your friends, this dying Kingdom, if any zeal for Gods glory, any
sense of his dishonor, any love to his people, any true tenderness of
conscience.

Make your repentance for your gross miscarriages, as eminent, and as public,
as your sint. Let but Odeds convincing Interrogation get within your
consciences, that there are with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your
God, under all these considerations, whereof I have bin your faithful
remembrancer, and I doubt not but there will be as evident fruits, in the
changing of your purposes and intentions, as was in those Soldiers in the
History, and your subjection unto the Princes being answerable with theirs, may
put a speedy end to our troubles, turning our preposterous zeal of executing of
justice upon one another, into the execution of those king-like lusts within us
that war against our souls.

And to this purpose I shall go on to be your Remembrancer, of that counsel
that Oded exhibited unto the Army, having prepared them for it by his
convincing Interrogation, 2 Chronicles. 28.11.

Now hear me therefore, and deliver the Captives again which you have taken of
your Brethren, for the fierce wrath of God is upon you.

Hearken unto me I beseech you to whom I have directed my discourse, that God
may hearken unto you, it was the speech of Iotham upon a violent change of
government, through the effusion of blood, Judge. 9.7. Oh hear me, and deliver
the Captives again which you have taken, show that God has touched your hearts
with a sense of your sins, by a speedy embracing of this counsel I now tender
unto you.

I do not call upon you to deliver up any of your prisoners of war, which are
of your Brethren English or Scots, although here is a good call somewhat like
it, the Lord himself teaching you how to be differenced in your carriage in a
time of war toward Brethren and Forrainers.

But deliver those Captives that you have taken without any Commission, but the
abuse of that power put into your hands.

Set the King at liberty, deliver him up into those hands, out of which you
took him.

I know that this may be recented as a Malignant motion, but having given you
my ground for it, and answered yours against it, it will appear otherwise.

As for your arguments against the Covenant in that part of it, as not
perpetually obliging the taker to endeavor the preservation of the Kings
Person and authority: I must confess that having seriously weighed them, I
find them to be but as broken reeds, that will pierce those with perjury, that
lean upon them, and therefore I dare not.

Whereas you say that this Covenant as it is drawn has not left the takers
without an honest way out, page 54. I grant it, if you mean only of this
Article in relation to the preservation of the Kings person, with the
restriction that is expressed in the same Covenant, to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion and liberties of the Kingdom. But not to preserve and defend the
Kings person and Authority, when he is in the way to all these, as was employed
in the last free vote of the House, in reference to his last Message, but
rather to make him vile, and seek the destruction of his Person; Is such a
breath of Covenant, and dis-loyalty, that the (world) that we call to witness
with our Consciences of our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts, and
intentions to diminish his just power and greatness, must needs take notice of
our perfideous treachery, as men to be abhorred.

But now as you affirm, p. 54. that if the Covenant had not been drawn up that
yet through the providence of God the snare is broken, and they may escape.
Though it be a very strange thing, yet I do not much wonder, that you ascribe
perjurie unto Gods providence. Saying the snare is broken by the providence of
God, or as God has ordered the business page 51. it does not now obliege you
before God or Man. I say I do not much wonder, that you should grant a
dispensation for perjurie, calling it an honest way to get out of an oath,
which is the maine pillar of human society, with security and safety, when
that to procure a Toleration for sins as grieving to the spirit of truth, you
care not for shaking the pillars of the land, and breaking the beautiful
staves of magistracy and ministry asunder.

As for your argument of nulling the Covenant, as to the preservation of the
Kings person, upon his refusal to take it, there being no mutual agreement,
It may have an easy inervation.

If it were as you suppose, nay confidently affirm it to be a Covenant between
man and man in the civil parts of it, page 57. there were some strength in
your argument, but it is clear, that the Covenant is between God and man, for
it was with a hand lifted up to the most high God that we did swear, and not
unto man, that we did engage our selves, and therefore there is more in it
then the calling of God to witness the truth of our intentions page 59. For it
is not said, that we did swear with our hands lifted up before the most high
God; but to the most high God: he it was to whom we did swear, and with whom
we did enter into Covenant, and that in the civil parts of it, that we might
be the more strongly engaged by Covenant to do what we were bound unto by the
law of God, which warrants every article in it, and this of the preservation of
the Kings Person with the restriction, And therefore the Kings not taking the
Covenant, or agreement with it, is of no more force to absolve the taker of it
from perjury, and breach of Covenant with God, Then if a person sencible of
strong temptation to take away his fathers life, should therefore make a Vow
and Covenant that he would (according to his duty) preserve it, and yet after
the same to conclude dis-ingagement in the sight of God, upon his fathers not
agreement with him in the same.

Which I humbly conceive is the case of our pater patriae, de jure though not
de facto. And that the state in the drawing up of that part of the said
Covenant were not, either without a sense of some strong temptation to
disloialtie, Or more then ordinary careful to prevent the scandal of it from
the world is evident, therefore did so draw it up, as more solemnly to engage
the taker to the preservation of the Kings Person, and authority with the
restriction, then to anyother part of the Covenant, and they add that by
keeping the Covenant in this point, according to the restriction, we may
satisfy the world, which they imply was jealous of them, and therefore in the
Covenant it runs, that although the world be not called to witness for us in
relation to any other article in the Covenant, yet to this of the preservation
and defense of the Kings Majesty's person, and authority, in the preservation
of the true Religion, and the liberties of the Kingdom, we appeal to the
whole world, That the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our
loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to deminish his Majesty's
just power and greatness.

Now before I leave the Covenant, I shall only be your Remembrancer once
again, of your own Chaplains opinion in this point of breach of Covenant,
who having charged you with it, in relation unto the Kings person, page 39.
hear what he says of you, just Remon. page 41. That you are not only (...)
accusers, and at this you are exquisite. But Truce Breakers (...) against
accommodation, no Treaty nor agreement, or breakers of Covenant. and he adds
Solemn Oaths and Covenants are able to hold most men's consciences, but men
heightened by Religion into the forms of the spirit, doing things by immediate
direction from God, carrying a glorious presence of God before them, affirming
that they are called by God to do some especial work, in the world, these can
easily mount above the highest sorts of oaths: Men that have tasted of these
high things, and begin to make them serviceable to worldly ends, they are such
cunning Pick-locks that they can find the way through any doors, to come to
the treasures of power and authority. And then he goes on in the same page,
lines 30. Such wicked spirits are now abroad like those, Ezekiel. 21.31. Brutish
men, skillful to destroy. Brutish, spare not the holiest nor honourablest
things, Kings, Lords, Ministers, Scripture-Ordinances, Oaths, Covenants, lay
all waste, and yet in the greatest brutishness. Skillfull, though there be the
most sensual, and beastly Confusion, yet they shall do it artificially,
skilfully, say it is for God, Justice, Religion, and that they do it by the
power of Christ, and the power of God in Religious zeal. And because that he
has another aphorism which may well be referred without any independencie to
this common place that I am now upon, as you shall find written, Printed I
should say, for your instruction, page 37. Just Remon. See how abominable
Religion is when once corrupted, there are no kind of men can be such
complete, and new knaves, as a Jesuit, a Pharisee, an old well studied
professor of Religion, when once men's Consciences are defiled, and they begin
to trade in the world, with a pretense that it is for God, they are so cunning,
that no bonds of honesty, or faith can possibly hold them.

But ceasing to remember you any further of your Chaplin, of whom I shall take
my leave, with this Encomium, that had he bin as infallible in his opinion of
the general day of Judgment, as he will be taken to be in those quotations
that do concern you, we had not then seen those sorrows that are like to
come upon the Kingdom by your means.

I return to the occasion of my discourse upon the Covenant, with which one
bush I hope I have stopped two gaps.

By the way answering what you have alleged to the enervation of that article
in the Covenant, the preservation of the Kings person and authority, and
consequently evincing that, for me to move it, or you to follow it, namely to
set the Kings person at liberty, to treat with his Parliament. That so your
great fears: of nulling all his grants, and concessions upon the plea of his
restraint may be taken away, is no malignant motion or breach of covenant.

I know that you do anticipate this motion by a representation very large in
your Remonstrance, of the unjustnesse and safenesse of a Treaty with him,
(which is already answered in short.) But in the stead thereof that rather his
Person should be brought to justice. For which you have two strong arguments,
the one you often use, God having given him so clearly into your power to do
justice, page 24. and several other places. But I hope if you do but consider
seriously how you came by him (of which I have remembered you already,) you will
use that argument no more.

The other because that you find that his heart which in a more especial
manner is in the hand of God is not changed, page 24.56. Therefore you will cut
off his head, as strange a cure for a hard heart, as are your conclusions from
the premises aforesaid. But I wonder not much at them, when you make a
profession of the light you go by, viz. reason, or experience the ordinary
lights men are in humane things to walk by, Remon. page 45. 46. But does not
this show that you are carnal and walk as men, for our reason and experience,
even in humane things are to be denied, if we walk as Saints, rather then run
upon an appearance of evil.

And to clear it, I shall give you an instance of a Saint, who in your
judgment was given up unto a preposterous and self deserting course, page 27.
walking not by carnal reason or experience, no nor yet by providence without
precept, 1 Samuel 24.3. King Saul was by the providence of God put into David's
hand, and that so clearly, as that his soldiers led by reason, told him in
effect, that God had delivered him into his hand to do justice on him, ver. 4.
But did David make use of his carnal reason. If I now cut him off, I shall be
secure and safe from his further pursuit of me for my life, and I shall
attain unto the Crown, a strong temptation? No, his tender conscience smote
him but for cutting off the Kings garment, though but to convince his enemy
that he might as easily have cut off his head, ver. 11. and not only so, but
from the same tenderness of conscience he would not be accessory unto the
sin of his servants, who it seems being ruled only by their carnal reason,
were ready to rise up against Saul, had not this Saint by arguments impeded
them, ver. 7. And so David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered
them not to rise against Saul. But what were those words, ver. 6. and he said
to his men, the Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master the
Lords anointed to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed
of the Lord.

But yet further, as you see he would not walk by reason as a man, so neither
would he walk by his experience against the rule; for though he had found by
experience, that the King being set at liberty did still pursue his life, as
you find, 1 Samuel 7.26. Yet when providence had brought him into his hand
again, though Abishai told him, God has delivered thine enemy into thy hand
this day, now therefore let me smite him, providence has presented me with a
weapon, his own Spear. But did David as a man walk by his experience, he
finds by experience Saul still thirsting after his blood, and might not he have
reasoned so. I find no inward conviction, remorse, or change of heart and
principles, rationally appearing in him, page 56. he is so far from being
sorry for what he has done already, notwithstanding my ingenuity in sparing
his life before, that he is resilesse in his pursuit of me, and therefore it
would not only be full of visible danger and unsafe, but it may prove
certainly destructive to me, if I should go against my experience and let him
go. I will now therefore be led by reason, experience, and by providence, and
execute justice upon my implacable adversary. But if you consult with the
story, you shall find that he would neither do it himself, or encourage any
other. But rather staieth and diverts Abishai from the same, by this divine
prohibition, which the Lord bring home to your hearts. ver. 9. And David said
unto Abishai, destroy him not; in your language, execute not justice upon him,
and what is his reason, who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed and be guiltesse, ver. 10. David said furthermore, as the Lord lives,
the Lord he shall smite him, Or his day shall come to dye, Or he shall descend
into battle and perish, ver. 11. the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth
my hands against the Lords anointed. Let me be your Observator here I beseech
you, what diverted him, either as a principal, or accessory, from walking at
this time by the ordinary light of reason and experience? do but peruse his
Arguments, and you shall find in them that though his fear and sense of guilt
was in the front, yet his faith and confidence in God brought up the rear, for
you shall find him there, not using his sense but his faith, which he did act
upon the justice and righteousness of God with most admired confidence,
concluding that though he use no such sinful means for selfe-preservation,
yet he solemnly asserts as the Lord lives, that either the Lord would smite
him immediately, or if not, he should shortly end his days according to the
course of nature, or that he should come to a casual end. Oh Sirs, you that
do profess your selves to be Saints as David, walk not by reason, or
providence without or against a precept; behold his consident persuasion, that
God had ways enough to free him from his potent Adversary, but by no sinful
shifts or pretenses would he free himself; Ambition and self-love were both
mortified in him, let them be so in you if you are Saints indeed. His faith did
subjugate his carnal reason and experience. Oh show that, that precious grace
is not dead at the root in you, but stir up those sparks of it that are
ready to go out, that it may break out into a flame, and walk by the light
of that, and not of reason and experience, the ordinary lights that men walk
by. That so you who are but private persons, that were never called or chosen
for those services in which you are now so sedulous, nor to cry for justice
upon the grounds already mentioned by Mr. Sedgwick; may desist from these
conscience-wasting, and land- desolating courses of yours, and putting your
trust in the Lord, you lean no more unto your own understanding.

I conclude therefore the Counsel given in relation to the King, with a point
of Doctrine Collected by Master Henry Burton, who being dead yet speaks in
his book for God and the King, p. 44. where from his aforesaid Text he raises
this point of Doctrine. That the true fear of a King, as it is a filial fear,
so it is a fear of adherency, a fear full of loyalty and fidelity, which makes
a true Subject to stick so close to his Prince at all times, and in all
conditions, as nothing shall make a separation.

But then secondly, as I would desire you to hear me, and deliver up your
Captived King. So likewise I beseech you hear me now, and deliver up again
your Captives of the Parliament men, for if to retain prisoners of war that
are brethren as Captives, may expose an Army unto the fierce wrath of God, as
appears in this history, 2 Chronicles. 28.21. Now hear me therefore, and deliver
the Captives again; which you have taken captive of your brethren, for the
fierce wrath of God is upon you. For this (was spoken to the Army, that
successful Army) Oh what divine vengeance? and fiery indignation is like to
fall upon you, without repentance for the violence you offered unto the persons
of so many godly, and sincere assertors of the Subjects liberty, and the
Kingdoms good. If to offend but one of Christ's little ones may expose a person
to a condition more eligible then to have a millstone hanged about his neck,
and be drowned in the depth of the Sea, Mat. 18.6. I say, if to offend but one
little one may prove so dreadful to the offender, what then to offend an
eminent Sufferer for the Public, a strong man in Christ, that could suffer 8
years imprisonment (4 of them close, 3 in exile) three Pillories, with the
loss of ears, calling, and estate, for the public good both in relation to
Church and State. And I beseech you consider, do you think that you did not
offend him, when you seized forcibly upon his person going to the House to
discharge his duty, haled him violently thence into the Queens Court,
notwithstanding his protestation of breach of privilege, and a double demand
of the House (that raised you) for his present enlargement. Do you think you
did not offend him when you carried him prisoner to Hell, and there shut him up
all night without any lodging or other accommodations, keeping him still
prisoner, deprived of his liberty and calling, without objecting the least
cause for this your unjust restraint? Oh that God would but convince you both
of your sin and danger. Not only in relation to that most eminent Martyr and
true Philopater, who has solemnly declared this and more then I have charged
upon you, before the most just and righteous God of Heaven and Earth, the
searcher of all hearts, the whole Kingdom, English Nation, and the World, in
his declaration subscribed William Prynne, December. 26. 1648. But also in
relation to the violence and offense offered unto, not that one, but many godly
and sincere Patriots; for I cannot think but that there are many such amongst
those imprisoned and secluded Members, being (above one hundred in number)
which I beseech you let not seem a small sin, no sin in your sight. If
that you call the Kings attempt in his proceedings against the Members be
impeached, that appeared to assert common liberties, against his interest to
witness his revenge, page 31 Oh what may be said not only for your bold
attempt, but unparalleled execution of that violence upon the persons of many
that appeared in the House, to stick fast unto their first principles or the
public, against your interest of Anarchy and Tolleration, laden with
unchristian reproaches of rotten Members, Apostates, and such as drive private
designs.

But do you think the searcher of all hearts can be blinded, as you would do
the Kingdom, who now see into the ground of that violence offered unto the
persons of their Representatives, and secluding them from the House, That so
those whom you have thought fitting to set there, may vote and unvote what you
would have them, and do you think that the righteous judge of the whole world
will not declare against you by some visible tokens of his displeasure for
these things, was the fierce wrath of God upon the Soldiery in this History,
for their cruel intentions toward their brethren, and shall you escape?
Assure your selves if that God loves you, he will rebuke and chasten you: and
will make you know that it is an evil thing and a bitter to walk in such ways as
are so unwarrantable, and unsuitable to your profession.

And therefore now I beseech you hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto
you, Set the members at liberty that you have restrained, declare your hearty
sorrow and repentance, for those sins that are in you, even in you against
the Lord your God, of which I have bin your Remembrancer. Publish your unfeined
purposes and resolutions to meddle no more out of your calling with the
affairs of the Kingdom, with which you were never entrusted. But that you
with other Subjects will acquiesse, with what shall be concluded between King
and Parliament: And no question but upon your desire of pardon for what has
been done against them, you shall find that according to the injunction given
them by our Savior, they will be as willing to forgive and forget, as you
shall be to desire it, Luke 17.2.3.

I confess this motion may seem to Carnal Politicians to be very rediculous,
and like the maker of it, very weak and simple. But if ever you would enter
upon a work without consulting with flesh and blood, next to your salvation,
do it now, to save the Kingdom; if you debate this motion in the Court of
carnal reason, it will be cast over the bar, and want of its due recentment
and acceptance. But if the Lord by his convincing spirit, through those
convincing interrogations which I have propounded, shall but awaken your
consciences, as he wrought upon those armed men in the History, by Odeds
unexpected coming out to meet them. I should then hope all carnal and fleshly
reasonings being denied, you would prove as imitable a president to future
generations, as I desire that army in the History may prove a convincing
pattern to you.

Upon a sound conviction that army was changed in their purposes, delivered up
their Captives, forsook their spoil, and submitted to their Princes. Oh that
God by what I have propounded to work this sound conviction, would make it
effectual. Then would you deliver up your Captives, submit to your Princes,
and that black and bloody cloud of rain and confusion that is like to come
upon you and the Kingdom, would be scattered.

And let me add thus much further, that if to what has been propounded the
Lord shall graciously incline your hearts: As you shall thereby revive the
hearts of this dying Kingdom, with hopes of a joyful accommodation between
the King and Parliament, which for the present is only interrupted by your
means. I make no question but as you shall find the Lord accomplishing his
promise to you, that when a man's ways please the Lord he will make his enemies
to be at peace with him. So likewise stirring up the hearts both of King and
Parliament to grant you that liberty of conscience that Christ has purchased
for you; and not only so, but giving you such favor in their eyes, as still to
be continued in such numbers, and for such time as shall be thought convenient
for the public safety; and that for your maintenance the people will
chearefully pay their Taxes, when they are but in some hopes of a comfortable
end of all their troubles.

Weigh this I beseech you, and consider that there are many thousands, that
although they cannot close with you or approve of your sinful ways, yet would
be exceeding sad, to see any of you that are the eminent Officers and
Commanders of this Army, or the Soldiery either, That have done such gallant
service as Soldiers, exposed unto such a miserable condition as this course
you are in, does inevitably tend unto: We would willingly save you and pluck
you as firebrands out of the fire, rescue you from that sentence of death, that
your unwarrantable actions have possed upon you. We would say of you who are
the Jonathans, the Worthy Commanders of the Army, Shall Jonathan dye that has
wrought this great salvation in Israel, God forbid, 1 Samuel 14.15. But Oh do not
you by shutting your ears against the counsel now given you, destroy your
selves and become your own executioners, expose the Kingdom to perpetual wars
both sorreign and intestine: Which that it may be prevented, do not study how
to evade any Arguments that I have presented before you for your conviction,
that there are in you, even in you sins against the Lord your God. But follow
the example of these Worthies here in the History, leave arguing against them,
and fall to acting; and let me but humbly add one thing more. That if you
shall but find your hearts inclining to the counsel and advice that I have
laia before you; and that this Scripture Expedient has taken hold of your
hearts.

That you as Saints and Christians, as plainly and lovingly would administer
the same Physic to the City. There is no question but you with Oded may say
unto them: Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your
God, and that not only absolutely but in relation to your selves, and that the
City with humility and due respects may tender the same expedient unto the
Parliament to whom no doubt it may be said, as unto the Soldiers and
Governors in this History, Are there not with you, even with you sins against
the Lord your God, and they likewise may present it unto the King who stands in
need of a convincing Interrogation also.

Which Scripture Expedient being sincerely and cordially laid before each other
out of Principles of Love, and an unfeigned desire of Reconciliation, that there
may be no more disterences amongst us that are Brethren by so many bonds. We
according to the Gospel-precept, Confessing our sins one unto another, and
praying one for another, James 5.16. We who have so woefully wounded one
another, with wounds of all sorts and kinds, we may be healed and may find the
Lord graciously returning unto his Jerusalem, healing us with revealing
abundance of Peace and Truth.

And thus hoping by what I have presented before you, I shall administer
occasion to you to make use of David's benediction, 1 Samuel 25.32. Blessed be the
Lord, which has sent thee this day to meet us, and blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou which have kept us this day from coming to shed blood, from
avenging our selves with our own hands. And that I shall receive as comfortable
an Answer from you, as did that weak instrument, verse. 15. Go up in peace to
thy house, for we have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted of thy person.
We look not upon the weakness or the unworthiness of the Instrument, nor any
failings of his in the delivery of his mind in the discharge of his Conscience.

Which aforesaid favor I do the more importunately desire, being conscious to
my self of my own weakness and dis-abillity for this Service, which though I
might have bin helped against by consulting with some of the godly and learned
Ministry in it, yet I purposely declined the same, knowing your prejudice
against them, as those which trouble your Babel. Thus humbly beseeching the
Lord to give the Comforter to be your Convincer. I leave you to the serious
consideration of what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding.

Jer. 13.17. But if you will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret for your
pride.

FINIS.

