GODS VENGEANCE Upon the Rebels in IRELAND:

BEING A true Relation how upon the 7, day of December they slew Two and twenty
of the Protestant Shepherds, and drove away the greatest part of their Cattle.

^lso how upon the 8. day of December, the Rebels having made themselves
drunk, afterward each man slew his friend, to the number of three thousand, it
being the Birthday of the Great Lord Don Makertodough, chief Rebel in
Ireland.

^^kewise how the protestants ceazed upon their Cattle, and other spoil, to
the great overthrow of all the Rebels in Ireland.

^^nt in a Lettet from Colonel Rouse to Sir John Sampson, Knight and Baronet,
December. 14. 1641.

London, Printed for William Bowden, 1641.

C R
royal insignia
GODS REVENGE Upon the REbELS IN IRELAND,
December the 8. 1641.
Jehovah, the Almighty, the Alpha and Omega is known to be a God of mercy, as
well as judgment: many times does he suffer his Children to be afflicted, and
to groan unper the yoke of their enemies, as he did the Israelites, but at
length sent he a Moses to deliver them, and to the terror of the Egyptians
broke their bonds in sunder, drowning Pharoh and his Host in the red Sea.

David having offended in the matter of Vriah, God sent the Prophet Nathan to
bid him take his choice of three things, either of the Lword, Pestilence, or
Famint: now David very wisely made this answer, that it was better to fall in
the hauds of God than man; for with God there is mercy, with men none:
wherefore God sent the pestilence, which destroyed many thousands, but yet in
the abundance of his tender mercy, at length he bid the Angel to put up his
sword, saying it is enough.

God in the time of Queen Mary suffered the protestants to be bloudily
persecuted: insomuch as they might have cried out, See and consider, good God,
how for thy sake, we are dilled all the day long; nay her own sister endured
unpartiall prisonment, but yet it pleased God of his infinite goodness at
length, to redeem that miracle of piety, Queen Elizabeth: for so she was
happily afterward brought from captivity; and the Gospel had its free
passage, by the death of Qu. Mary.

Also in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth did God suffer the Spaniards to mahe an
invasion: but yet out of his mercy did cut them off before they could bring to
effect their intended bloody Designs.

In the time of King James, God suffered the Papists to plot and invent the
destruction of the Blood royal, Noble and Common, but yet revealed their
mischievous purpose before the fatal blow.

Now in the Reign of our religious King Charles, god has suffered many to do
what mischief they could possibly invent, but yet that which they were so long
time hatching, the final destruction of our souls I mean, god gave them not
strength to bring forth.

How of late have the Papists in Ireland insulted over protestants, insulted
said I, that word is not able to express their villainy, and Tragical Actions,
as is too well already known amongst us.

But yet that we may know, that God has not forgot his servants in Ireland:
mark the Relation, mark the just Judgment, which God upon the 8. of December
powered upon the heads of the rebellious papists.

Upon the 7. day of the same month, the rebels slew 22. shepherds belonging to
the proteantsts and drove away their Cattle into the woods, where the rest of
the rebels kept their abode: there did they slay the greater part of the
cattle, which they had violently the day before taken away, and cut down very
much of the wood to roast the aforesaid meat.

In the mean while it being the birthday of that great rebel Don
Makertodough, having barrels of wine and beer, they betook themselves to
drunkning very profanely, as to the confusion of all protestants, and the like.

Until that they drunk themselves to such a pass, as that they were void of
reason, and had lost their senses: insomuch that each men quarrel'ed with his
companion, and quarrelling, fought, each running of his sword into his
companions breast, each starting, as being amazed, not knowing from whence their
wounds came, some cried out, we are undone, the Heretics have entrenched us
round, others cursed most bitterly, but no man being able to fight, would not
forbear killing of his aext man: which grew to such a bloody skirmish, that
there fell that day above three thousand Rebels, slain by one another.

The Protestants hearing of it, adjoining to those parts, came and ceased upon
the meat, which was ready dressed unto their hands.

The living Cattle they drove away, and took that spoil which was left by the
Rebels, which there lay slain.

Thus has God, thus does God, and so will God, at all times revenge the cause
of his Servants, although not on the sudden, yet when it shall seem good in
his own sight, and when we stand in most need of his aid,

A true Relation of that bloody skirmish, fought betwixt the Lord Moore and Sir
Hugh Oneale.
Upon the 13 day of December. 1641. the rebels having Intelligence that my L.
More intented to bring in provision for the protestants in Belturbit, they
therefore gathered their forces together, Oneale being their chief Commander:
about two miles from the aforesaid city, they saluted each other, not with
friendly words but with fiery bullets, the rebels being in number 9000. the
protestants but 4000. but the Lord Moore behaved him self so valiantly, that
he disordered their troops, and took prisoner Sir Hugh Oneale, and slew 300.
of his men, of the protestants side were slain 100. This fight lasted for the
space of two hours, to the great disheartning of the rebels.

FINIS.

