A DECLARATION FROM Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice,
Directed to both Houses of PARLJAMENT, With their intentions: AS ALSO Their
Desires to the Parliament.

Sent from Oatlands, and delivered on Tuesday last, the 30. of June. 1646.

These are true Copies, and printed and published according to Order.

July 4. 1646.


LONDON, Printed by Jane Coe. 1646.

A Declaration from Prince RUPERT and Prince MAURICE.
SIR,
WE received upon Saturday, the 27. of this month, two votes passed by the
House of Commons, the one, a Declaration, that we had broken the Articles upon
the surrender of Oxford. The other, that we should within ten days repair to
the Sea side, and forthwith depart the Kingdom. Our desire to you is, that you
would be pleased to acquaint the House with this our clear profession, That we
were very far from any intention in our coming to, or being in this place, of
giving offense to the Parliament, with whom we intended and hoped by the best
means we could possibly use, to be better understood. And, Sir, we were very
far from any thought that by our coming hither, we should break and lose the
benefit of those Articles, by which we conceived we had good furtherance and
access, for the gaining that peace we much desired. Our apprehension
concerning our liberty by those Articles, stood thus. The third Article
particularly naming us, gives us, in the former part thereof, a liberty of
repairing toward London: but with a limitation of not coming within 20 miles
of the same: and the later part of that Article gives us the benefit of the
ensuing Articles that may concern us. The limitation in the former part of the
Article, was set down when it was not known what liberty would be given to
other persons: and because it was foreseen, that possibly a further liberty,
and other benefit might be obtained in the following Articles, (which after
came to pass) this clause was asked and granted, That we should have the same
liberty and benefit with others. And we are confident there was not an
expression or thought, of putting us into a worse condition then all others:
but we are sure of very many expressions to the contrary. And therefore, Sir,
looking upon the 11. Article, whereby all persons in Oxford are comprised in
this capitulation, (saving persons excepted) having estates real or personal
liable to sequestration, shall have liberty and the Generals Pass and
protection, to go to London, to attend their compositions; or elsewhere upon
their necessary occ^sions. And upon the twelft, that no persons included in
this capitulation, (except persons before mentioned to be excepted) shall be
molested or questioned for any thing said or done, concerning this war,
submitting to composition: and the persons excepted shall have the benefit of
this Article during six months; and after, if they be admitted to, and agree
for composition. And upon the thirteenth, That the persons excepted shall have
liberty to repair to London, to make their peace. And upon the ninth Article,
if we should be looked upon as strangers, we are to have the benefit of the
Articles. And upon our Pass from the General, giving express liberty to any
place without any Limitation, or Restraint, we did not doubt but that we had
the liberty of this place: the benefit of our accommodation for the Horse, came
more into our thoughts, th^n the distance or number of miles from London, of
which we had no doubt at all. Sir, our earnest desire is, we may be understood
to off^r all this, not by way of disputing with the Parliament, but as a most
clear evidence, that the u^termost of what we have done in this, is very far
from any wilfulness or purpose to offend the Parliament, and from any thought
that we could thereby have prejudiced ourselves, having firmly resolved to our
best power to assist and advance the peace of this kingdom, and to give that
regard that is just and due, to those that represent it. Having thus truly
represented our own apprehensions, and not knowing the motives that induced the
Parliament to those votes, we are not able (to our trouble) to know the way to
give them further satisfaction; until they be pleased to give us time and
means that we may endeavor it; which we cannot doubt to find from them that
never faild to hear, before they finally judge, if they be asked it. Sir, you
will do us a favor, if you will let us hear timely of this, being resolved
not to cont^nue where the Parliament may have any thought we should not be
longer, then the first m^nute of our possible remov^ng. This Bearer will
conveigh your favor unto us.

Your lovind friends, RUPERT, MAURICE.


A Declaration from Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice.
My Lord,
OUR earnest desire to your Lordship is, that you will be pleased to represent
the House of Lords, that upon the clear apprehension that we had of the sense
of the Articles, concerning the surrender of Oxford, and our Pass from the
General; we repaired to Oatlands, as in our way, and for some time, a
convenient distance for our address to the Parliament. That as soon as we had
received the Votes of the House of Commons, declaring that by our coming
thither, we had broken the Articles, and commanding us within 10. days to
repair to the Sea side, and forthwith to depart the Kingdom, we did instantly
resolve to remove from this place as soon as in any possibility we could, and
to apply our selves to give them satisfaction concerning our coming thither, we
beseech your Lordship to make it known to the Lords in Parliament that if we
could have conceived it would have given any offense, we would not have come
thither, and now upon knowledge that it has, we are removiing, though we do
not know wheither; your Lordships have taken our coming thither into
consideration, yet have we ventured to offer your and their Lordships this
trouble for prevention of any apprehension they may have of any thoughts in us
to do any thing that we could conceive might offend the House of Parliament, or
hinder our selves from the happiness of receiving benefit or favor from them,
which we value too much to loose, and which we will not fail to keep, by our
utmost best endeavors* my Lords we are

Your Lordships Rupert. Maurice.



