An Exact and full RELATION Of the great VICTORY OBTAINED. Against the Rebels
at Dungons-Hill in IRELAND, August 8. 1647.

By the Forces under the Command of Colonel Michael Jones.

With a Letter from the said Colonel, to the right Honorable, The Committee at
Derby-house.

Together with a perfect LIST of all that were slain, and taken Prisoners.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to
the Honorable House of Commons. Aug. 19. 1647.

To the Right Honorable, The Committee at Derby-House.
Right Honorable,
I Have herewithal given your Lordships an account of passages in our late
advancing against the Rebels; the observations therein given, drawn up by
others, have been perused and approved for true by such as were upon the place
and action: It is much from my disposition to take notice, much less thus to
publish matters of this kind, wherein I am so concerned; But at this time I
have been thereunto enforced, in the over-forwardness of some who have taken
upon them to give out Relations of this Service, not only short, but far from
truth, and of much disadvantage to the Public. This Victory had been well
leading to a perfect Conquest of this Kingdom, were we thereunto enabled by
supplies of Men, Moneys, and other Provisions necessary for the Service. In the
very noise of what is now done, I might (by Gods assistance) have advanced far
into the enemies chiefest strengths, and well nigh at once shut up what of this
work were to be done in this Province, had I been furnished with Carriages,
Provisions and Pay for the Soldiers, for want of which I have been enforced to
march home, whereby time and means may be given to the Enemy for recruiting, to
our further disadvantage: for we had not provisions of Victuals in the field
for one day, and Money there was not here for one weeks Pay. That of greatest
value seized on, was the Train of Artillery, and particularly Sixty four Oxen,
worth 16. l. the yoke: These were the Soldiers due, who possessed themselves of
them; yet I have gathered them in from several hands for the public service,
promising recompense out of the public Treasure, which I desire may there be
thought upon, and satisfaction therein given: Our loss was not in men (not
twenty being found missing) but in horse, many whereof were killed, and rendered
unserviceable; the Riders are cast off from present service, if not again
mounted, which I humbly desire may be there thought of, for the speedy and
vigorous prosecution of the War, which is to be done principally by Horse and
Dragooners, the Foot not being able to march in winter. I am

Your Lordships most humble Servant, MICHAEL JONES.
Dublin, 12 Aug. 1647.
A DIARY and Relation of passages in and about Dublin, from the first of
August, 1647. until the tenth of the same.
AUGUST I.
FOr relieving of Trim (a considerable garrison of ours, 20. miles distant from
Dublin, besieged by Col. Preston, the Rebels General of Leynster with his whole
strength, Col. Michael Jones Commander in chief of the Leynster Forces, marched
from Dublin, Aug 1. 1647. with about 3800. foot, and two Regiments of horse,
two Demiculverings, one Saker and four Sakaruts. That night the Army quartered
at a village called Swords, six miles from Dublin, being something out of the
rode to Trim, but leading toward the Rendezvous appointed for meeting with the
Droghedah and Dundalk Forces, joined with a party of horse and Foot expected
out of the North of Ireland.

AUGUST II.
Monday the 2. they marched to Ballirouthery, six miles from Swords.

AUGUST III.
Tuesday the 3. They marched over the Hills of Hollywood, a mountainous
country, to a place called the Naal, and that night to Garishtown, where Col.
Jones received Intelligence of the advancing of the expected supplies.

AUGUST IV.
Wednesday the 4. The Army marched to the Hill of Skreen, where they met with
Sir Henry Titchborn, with the Droghedah Forces, Col: Moor, with those of
Dundalk, Newry and Carlingford, and Col: Conway with a party of the Northern
old British, all making up about 700. Horse and 1200. Foot, and two pieces of
Ordnance: Thither came from Trim, Major Cadogan and Captain Arthur Graham,
informing that the Enemy had that morning burnt his camp about Trim, and
retired to the old lurking place called Portleister, a great and secure
fastness, about five miles westward from Trim. The same day our Army marched to
the Hill of Tarra, where they were drawn up and mistered 1500 Horse, and about
5000. Foot. That night they quarterd at the foot of the Hill of Tarra, at a
place called Dodestown; here Col. Jones called a counsel of war.

AUGUST V.
Thursday the 5. The Army marched to a place called Skurlockstown, within one
mile of Trim, where they quartered that night.

AUGUST VI.
Friday the 6. They marched through Trim, to a place called Trimbleston,
wherein the Enemy had a garrison; this place Col: Jones surrounded in view of
the Enemy, then encamping at Portleister two miles off, thereby to draw him
forth, if possibly it might be, to engage himself to fight.

AUGUST VII.
Saturday the 7. A party of fifty horse of ours was commanded out for
discovering of the Enemy, and observing his motion; about ten a clock that day
the Enemy was observed to move, and rising from Portleister to cross the
country, and march toward Maynouth, a place within ten miles of Dublin; this
confirmed the intelligence formerly given us, of the Rebels intending to come
betwixt us and home, and marching to Dublin for surprising of that place in
absence of our forces engaged at the siege of Trimbleston. Whereupon Col: Jones
resolved to rise with the Army and to follow the Enemy, and had scarcely spoken
the word for Drums to beat, but (by especial providence) at the same instant
did the Castle beat a Parley, offering to surrender, if permitted to march away
with Bag and Baggage, and Colors flying; which with advice of a Council of War,
was assented unto, We receiving the place, and placing therein a garrison. That
night our Army marched back through Trim, and quartered at Skurlockstown
aforesaid therein, in four hours marching, as far as before they had done in a
whole day: That night a convoy, with some provisions, came from Droghedah to
the Army: That night a commanded party of 500. Horse was sent out from our
Army, with Orders to follow the Enemy, and beat up his quarters if enquartered,
otherwise to follow him to Dublin if marching forward, the body of our Army
being to follow after with all possible expedition: This commanded party found
the enemy quartered behind a very great Bog, so as no approach could be made
to him; whereof Col: Jones being certified, he the next morning advanced
toward the Enemy with the whole Army.

AUGUST VIII.
The Army marched through the strong fastnes of Dennigan belonging unto Westy,
wherein was a garrison of the Enemies that shot at our men in their passing by,
the village we fired, but the Castle held out: That day about ten a clock our
army came to a place called Lynchesknock, within one mile whereof the Enemy was
drawn up on Dungon hill, a place to him of all advantages, being an high
ground, whereunto adjoined a Wood and a Bog (their usual refuge in distress)
The Enemy also stood possessed of great ditches, within which he was as in so
many strong works entrenched; hereunto may be added the advantages of wind and
Sun.

The Enemy had lately before mustered 7300 Foot, and 1047 Horse; which number
of Horse appears by a Muster-Roll after found in these words: viz.

Mustered the 5 of August 1647.
The Lo. Generals Troop besides Officers 52 Colonel Fitz Gerald 49 The Major
General 50 Lieutenant Col. Finglas 45 Major Butler 50 Captain Fitz Gerald 42
Colonel Cullin 34 Sir James Dyllon 36 Captain Davies 47 Major Dungan 44 Cap.
John Fitz Patrick 35 Colonel Preston 35 Captain Aylmer 36 Cap. Plunket 28 Cap.
Harpoole 38 Earl of Fingall 41 Lord of Primbleston 36 Earl of Westmeath 41 Cap.
James Barnwell 35 Cap. John Butler 39 Sir Walter Butler 40 Cap. Grase 47 Cap.
Edward Butler 34 Cap. Walsh 44 Cap. Bagnall 45 Cap. Nugent 44
This List of 26 Troops amounts to 1047 Horse: whereunto is to be added the
Lord Costologh's party of about 300 Horse, and two of the Nugents with two
Troops more, which came to the Enemy the night before the Battle.

Under the hill our Army was drawn up; the Enemies Canon played hot at us, but
with little loss other then two men, and one horse.

About 12 of the clock the Armies joined the Battle, continuing about two
hours: our two Wings of Horse with some Foot having broken both Wings of the
Enemy, our main Body advanced, and broke theirs: whereupon about 3000 of the
Rebels betaking themselves to the Bog, they there drew up into a Body: But
Colonel Jones commanding the Bog to be surrounded with Horse and Foot, our
Foot followed into the Bog, where they put to the sword all not admitted to
quarter; such of the Rebels as lest the Bog fell into the power of our Horse.

Of the slain there were upon the place reckoned 5470, besides those after
gleaned up, which were very many: of the enemies Foot there could not escape
above 500, they being as they were environed. Amongst those slain were 400 of
Kilketto's men; there were also put to the sword without mercy all formerly of
our party, now found amongst the Rebels, and all English, though never of our
party.

The number of the Prisoners (as appears in the annexed Schedule) is, of
Colonels five, whereof is the Lieutenant General of Leinster, and the Earl of
Westmeath; four Lieutenant Colonels, six Sergeant Majors, thirty two Captains,
twenty three Lieutenants, twenty seven Ensigns, two Cornets, twen-two
Sergeants, two Quartermasters, two Gunners, the Clerk of the Stores, thirteen
Troopers, and 228 common Soldiers; Preston their General hardly escaped with
the Horse: he left his Carriages and Canon, being four Dem-Culverings, each
carrying 12 pound bullet, and sixty four fair Oxen attending the Train, which
are to us of very great use, we being till now in that kind very short
provided: there was also taken Prestons Cabinet of Papers, much valued in
discoveries therein made. All their Colors we have, which Colonel Jones
could not be persuaded to be brought into Dublin with triumph, as savouring
(said he) of ostentation, and attributing unto man the glory of this great work
due to the Lord alone.

Of ours were some wounded, but not twenty slain; of note we lost only two
Coronets, and one Captain Gibbs, who being overheated in the Service, dyed in
drinking ditch-water.

Herein to give every hand in this glorious Action the honor due, were more
then many more lines could suffice unto; in the general, never did men carry
themselves with more resolution and gallantry then did ours both Officers and
Soldiers, deserving much more encouragement then hitherto they have found,
most of them having scarce meat to eat, or clothes to put on.

All done, Colonel Jones commanded throughout the Army thanksgiving to be
given to the Lord of Hosts, who did that day wonderfully for his people;
appointing Tuesday the seventeenth of August for a day of public Thanksgiving
in all the Churches of Dublin.

On the place where the Battle was fought did the Army that night quarter.

August 9.
Monday August the ninth, Colonel Jones called a Council of War, and
commanded Colonel Fenwick Governor of Trim to place Garrisons in Dennigan and
Kilbrue.

That day the Army marched to Maynouth, a strong Castle belonging to the Earl
of Kildare, which was summoned, and surrendered by the Rebels, and by us
garrisoned.

After this Victory the Enemy quit and burnt diverse of their Garrisons, viz.
the Naas, Piggingstown, Harristowne, Collanstown, Castle-Warding, and Moyglare,
and much more had been gained of them, had there been pay and provision for the
Army, whereby the Victory had been prosecuted. But in the want of both they
were enforced to take homewards unexpectedly.

August 10.
Tuesday the tenth, Colonel Jones dismissed the Northern Forces that had joined
with him, engaging himself for their satisfaction as soon as Treasure should
come over.

He also dismissed to their several Garrisons the Forces of Droghedah, Dundalk,
Newry and Carlingford, commanding Sir Henry Titchburne in his return to summon
the Nobber, and other places near Droghedah possessed by the Rebels; promising,
if occasion required, and that provision could be made for the Army, to advance
with his Strength to their assistance.

That day the rest of the Army marched to Dublin, where wanting what might
content our hungry and wearied Soldiers, by the providence of God, as our Army
was ready to enter the City, they were met with news of 1500 l. brought by
Captain Rich into the Harbor, borrowed by Alderman Walley, therein much
meriting of the Public. This small sum, though otherwise very inconsiderable,
was yet something in the present distress, and is to be valued as an earnest
of the Lords care of his people, to whom he will in his good time appear in a
full deliverance.

There was little considerable pillage gained from the Enemy in this Victory:
That of best value was the Artillery and Oxen, which at last Colonel Jones
purchased for the public use from those hands whereinto they fell, unto whom
he stands engaged for satisfaction. As for pillage of greater value, little
was found, howsoever some have been pleased to speak of it largely and
ridiculously: and if any thing had been in that kind gained more then
ordinary, it could not be imagined it should be of public advantage, coming in
(and that of due) into private hands.

This was the most signal Victory with greatest loss to the Rebels that ever
was gained in Ireland since the first Conquest thereof by the English; For
which the Lord make us truly thankful.

Matt. Row.

A List of the Prisoners taken at the Battle of Dungan Hill, Aug. 8. 1647.
Colonels.
The Earl of Westmeath Lieutenant General Byrue Colonel Warren Colonel Brown
Colonel Butler 5.
Lieutenant Colonels.
Lieutenant Colonel Synnott Lieutenant Colonel Fitzgerald Lieutenant Colonel
Gavanagh Lieutenant Colonel Cruise 4.
Sergeant Majors.
Major Taaffe Major Laler Major Cusacke Major Gaffegan Major Synnot Major Byrne
6.
Captains.
Michael Byrne Arthur Cavanagh Danby Tool Martin Wolverstowne Edward Tirrel
Christopher Nugent Edward Nugent Baltazer Nugent. James Dempsy William Tirrel
Roger Darcey James Fitzgerald Thomas Geoghegan Charles Conner Henry Warren
Patrick Notterveile Teige Connor Thomas Plunket Lawrence Fitz-Patrick Thomas
Gawly Richard Nash Dominick Shortaile John Comerford William Furlonge Arthur
Dillon Lawrence Tuite Robert Preston Captain of Horse Randel mac Alexander
Captain Geoghegon Captain mac Donnel Captain Taaffe Captain Rochfad 32.
Lieutenants.
Nicholas Tirrel James Casey Garrot Floyd Edm. Bermingham Thomas Darcey
Christopher Geoghegan Walter Mooney Donnogh Dempsy Leonard Shortayle
Christopher Darcy Michael Gaynor Rosse Geoghegan Thomas Quyn Henry Dotton Henry
Neale Bryan Ravanagh Tirlagh Tool Robert Byrne Walter Fitz-Harris John Rech
Theobald Tool Rosse Dempsie James Barry alias Gerrald 23.
Ensigns.
James Fitz-Symons James Tyrrel Teige Kelly Francis Fox James mac o Kyre
Christopher Nugent Lawrence Dempsy Philip Cusacke George Warren Andrew
Geoghegan Oliver Lynacke James Warren John Butler James Fitz-Harris Victor
White Jeffry Fitz Symons Owen o Heveran Edward Fitzgerald Robert Fitzgerald
Lawrence mac Donnel Phelim Notane Patrick Kahore Anthony o Bryan Donnel Cowran
Tirlagh mac Nully Enos mac Alexander Nicholas Quayhell 27.
Cornets.
Richard Talbot James Fitzgerald. 2.
Quartermasters.
James Walsh Richard Jones 2.
Gunners.
Michael Walsh Philip Stafford 2.
Clerk of the Store.
John Hadger 1.
Sergeants.
Donogh Mynom John o Meaghan Moyle Murry Ravanagh Pierce Synnot Teige Gaffney
James Purcel Patrick Rowland Calure Ravanagh Morogh Ravanagh Garrot Tool Neill
o Royrke Neale o Dolane John Darcey Patrick Farrily Thomas Congan Richard
Murphey Garrot Tirrel Mamis o Leadan. William o Moran Owen mac Caffery John mac
Scallin Dudley Byrne 22.
Troopers.
13.
Common Soldiers.
228.
FINIS.

